THE CHRISTIAN IN Complete Armor, Or, a TREATISE OF THE Saints War against the
Devil, wherein a Discovery is made of that grand enemy of God and his People,
in his Policies, Power, Seat of his Empire, Wickedness, and chief design he
has against the Saints.

A Magazin opened: FROM Whence the Christian is furnished with Spiritual Arms
for the battle, helped on with his Armor, and taught the use of his Weapon,
together with the happy issue of the whole War.

The First Part.

By William Gurnall, Minister of the Gospel at Lavenham*

Imprimatur,

EDMUND CALAMY.



LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1655.

Gurnalls CHRISTIAN- ARMOVR, I. P.

To my Dearly Beloved Friends and Neighbors, the Inhabitants of LAVENHAM.
My Dear Friends,
SOlomon says, The desire of a man is his kindness, and a poor man is better
then a liar, Prove. 19.22. If you be of his mind, I dare promise these Notes,
(which I here devote to your service) a kind acceptance at your hands. You
will find me to be the poor man, by the mite I present you with; but the
hearty desire of your eternal happiness from which it comes, will (I hope)
clear me from being the liar. I never could be so serviceable to you, as many
Ministers are to their people, having been with you in much weakness, and
still it is the good pleasure of God, I should be staked down to a short tedder
of strength and other abilities; I have reason therefore, (that I may, though
not recompense that want, yet express my deep sense thereof) to crowd the more
love into the little I can do for you. And truly my heart is enlarged to you,
and to God for you. If any thing makes me loath to be gone into another world,
(which my dropping house bids me above many prepare for) it is not the least,
to think I shall leave no more of you walking in the way to eternal life, and
you who are on your way thither, in no closer Gospel Order for your mutual help
and comfort in your journey: yea, while I am among you, little do you think how
much of your poor Ministers life lies at your mercy. If I should measure my
life by the joy of it, (as indeed who does not?) Then in some uprightness I
can say with Paul, I live as I see any of you stand fast in the Lord, and die
as I see others stand fast in their sins, not to be moved with all the
entreaties of the Gospel which have wooed you. And why (my dear friends) should
not the life of your souls be much more precious in your own sight then mine?
But I forbear, I would not willingly be thought, as some husbands are, to be
kinder to you abroad before strangers, then I am at home.

What I present you with in this Treatise, is a dish from your own table, and
so (I hope) will go down the better. You cannot despise it (though the fare be
mean) except you will blame your selves who chose the Cook. I cannot be earnest
with others, to bestow so much time as to read over these plain Sermons, lest
it should be to their loss; it were but to call them from gathering sheaves in
the more fruitful labors of others, to glean a few ears, and those but thin
also in mine; yet with you, my people, I may be a little bold. Physicians say,
the mothers milk though not so weighty as another, if no noxious humor be
tasted in it, because natural, is more proper for the child then a strangers.
And, I think, it would not be an error, if I should say it held in the milk
which the Minister gives to his flock. A people conscienciously lying at the
breasts of their own Minister, (if the milk he gives be wholesome) may expect
the blessing of God for their nourishment, though it has not so much
lusciousnesse to please the curious taster as some others. Well, whatever these
Sermons were, some of those few spirits which you found in hearing, will be
missing in the reading of them. It is as easy to paint fire with the heat, as
with pen and ink to commit that to paper, which occurres in preaching. There is
as much difference between a Sermon in the Pulpit, and printed in a book, as
between milk in the warm breast, and in a sucking bottle, yet what it loses
in the lively taste, is recompensed by the convenience of it. The book may be
at hand when the Preacher cannot; and truly, that is the chief end of printing,
that as the bottle and spoon is used when the mother is sick or out of the way;
so the book, to quiet the Christian and stay his stomach in the absence of the
Ordinance. He that reads Sermons and good books at home to save his pains
of going to hear, is a thief to his soul in a religious habit: he consults for
his ease, but not for his profit; he eats cold meat when he may have hot: He
hazards the losing the benefit of both by contemning of one. If the Spouse
could have had her beloved at home, she needed not to have coursed the streets
and waited on the public. O what need we offer sacrilege for sacrifice, rob
God of one duty to pay him another? He has laid our work in better order, one
wheel would not interfere with another, if we did more regularly. A chief part
of David's Arithmetic of numbering our days, lies in that which we call
division, as to cast the account of this our short life so, as to divide the
little whole sum thereof into the several portions of time due for the
performing of every duty in. An Instrument is not in tune, except it have all
the strings, and those will not make good music, if the Musician has not
wisdom to cause every string to speak in its due time; The Christian is not in
tune, except he takes in all the duties of his place and calling, neither will
the performance of them be harmonious in Gods ear, if every one be not done in
its proper season. O my friends, labor not only to do the duty of your place,
but that duty in its own place also. Hear when you should hear. Know your rhyme
for closet, and time for shop: and when your retiring hour comes, a few
minutes now and then spent in taking a repetition of what formerly you heard,
shall not (I hope) another day be reckoned with your lost time. The Subject of
the Treatise is solemn, A War between the Saint and Satan, and that so bloody a
one, that the cruellest which ever was fought by men, will be found but sport
and childs play to this. Alas, what is the killing of bodies to destroying of
souls? It Is a sad meditation indeed, to think how many thousands have been
sent to the grave in a few late years among us by the sword of man; But far
more astonishing, to consider how many of those may be sent to hell by the
sword of Gods wrath. It Is a spiritual war you shall read of, and that not a
history of what was fought many ages past and is now over; but of what now is
doing, the Tragedy is at present acting, and that not at the furthest end of
the world, but what concerns thee and every one that reads it. The stage
whereon this war is fought, is every man's own soul. Here is no Neuter in this
war, the whole world is engaged in the quarrel, either for God against Satan,
or for Satan against God. It was a great question some years past, Who are you
for? The not giving a good account to which has cost many a life. O my dear
friends, think solemnly what answer you mean to give to God and conscience,
when they in a dying hour shall ask every one of you, Who art thou for? It Is
an incomparable mercy, that you are yet where you may choose your side: It will
not be ever so, may be not a day to an end. If once in another world, you must
then stand to your colors, yet you may run from the Devils quarters, and be
taken into Christ's pay. The Drum beats in the Gospel for Volunteers. O, the
Lord make you willing in the day of his power. I know you all would be on the
surest side. O what can you be sure of, while under the devils Ensign, but
damnation? The curse of God cleavs to him and all that takes part with him O
let not the little plunder and spoil of sinful pleasures and pelf, bewitch you
still to follow his Camp. What is that soldier better for his booty he gets in
a fight, who before he can get off with it, is himself slain upon the place?
(so many have been served in these wars, if reports be true.) It Is that thou
must certainly look for. The piece is charged, and aim taken at thy breast,
which will be thy eternal death if thou persistest. Gods threatenings will go
off at last and then where art thou? where, but in hell, where thy wedge of
gold and Babylonish garment, thy wages of unrighteousness will do thee little
stead? O Neighbors, I am loath to leave you in the way where Gods bullets
fly; but I must have a word for you, my Christian friends, who have espoused
Christ's quarrel, and are in the field against Satan. My heart is toward you,
who have thus willingly offered your selves among the Lords people to his help
against the mighty. He can destroy him without you, but he takes your love as
kindly as if he could not. God has sent me (as Jesse did David) with this
little present to you and the rest of my Brethren that are in his Camp. May it
be but to the strengthening of your hearts and hands in fighting the Lords
battles, and I shall bless God that put it into my heart thus to visit you. O
hold on, dear friends, in your Christian warfare, let none take the crown from
you. Whet your courage at the throne of grace, from whence all your recruits of
soule-strength come. Send faith often up the hill of the Promise, to see and
bring you the certain news of Christ's coming to you, yea, for you, and assured
victory with him. Read the exploits, which Christ's Worthies by faith have
done, and in their Conquests read your own, for in them he spoke with us, as
the Prophet of Jacob. Be thankful for every victory you get, and let not the
houling wilderness, yet before you, put the song of your praises for
temptations past out of tune, yet rejoice with trembling, as those who are
still in your enemies country, and must keep by the sword what you get by the
sword: Be sure you stand in close order amongst your selves; These times give
us too many sad examples of such, who first fell from communion with their
Brethren, and then into the devourers hand; straglers are soon snap't; you will
find you are safest in a body. Take heed of a private spirit; let not only
your particular safety, but of the whole Army of Saints be in your eye and
care, especially that company in which you march, (Congregation I mean;) that
soldier which can see an enemy in fight with his brethren, and not help them,
he makes ^t but the more easy for the enemy to slay himself at last; Say not
therefore, Am I my brothers Keeper? God would not keep him that cared not to
keep his brother. Watch over one another, not to play the Critics on your
brothers failings, and triumph when he halts, but to help him up if he falls,
or if possible, to keep him from falling by a timely rescue, as Abishai came to
David's succor. Keep your rank and file. We see what advantage Satan has got
in these loose times, since we have learnt to fight him out of order, and the
private soldier, (Christian I mean) has taken the officers work out of his
hands. Harden your selves against the scandals, which the cowardice and
treachery of false brethren has given you. He is the right soldier that is
not discouraged by those that run from, or that are slain in the battle; but
still presses on to victory, though he goes to it over the backs of others
that are killed upon the place. In a word, Disintangle your hearts what you can
from the love of, and distracting cares for this present world. No man that
warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier, 2 Timothy 2.4. If it
behooves any to have their Will ready made, and their worldly interests set at
some stay, then surely the soldier: if any soldier, then the Christian. Get
but once your hearts mortified to the world, and care rolled upon God, for
name, estate, and relations here, and then you are fit to march wherever
Christ will lead you. The want of this has made many run home to save their
own private stake there, when they should have been in the field for Christ.
And now, my Christian friends, march on, not in the confidence of your Armor,
but in the power of his might, who has promised shortly to subdue Satan under
your feet. I have done, only I must crave pardon of you, for rending this part
of the Treatise from the other, which neither my little strength or leisure
would suffer me to grasp at once.

But this having first put forth its hand in preaching, can make no great
breach upon that, though it get the start a little in printing. Let me
therefore, dear friends, (if God shall make this imperfect birth any way
serviceable to your faith,) humbly desire, that you would as continue to strive
at the throne of grace for a blessing on my poor Ministry among you, so also
lift up a prayer, that strength may be given, to bring forth what of this yet
is undeliver'd. I do not send you thither where I intend not to meet you, but
shall desire grace to be found faithful in striving with you, and for you, that
amongst those who find any spiritual advantage from my weak labors, you to
whom they are chiefly devoted may not receive the least.

Lavenham, Jan. 1, 1655. So prays your affectionate, though unworthy
Minister, WILLIAM GURNALL.

The CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS.
VERSE 10. Be strong in the Lord, etc.
Chap. 1. OF Christian Courage and Resolution, wherefore necessary, and how
obtained. page 4 Chap. 2. Of the Saints strength, where it lies, and wherefore
laid up in God. p. 13. Chap. 3. Of acting our faith on the Almighty Power of
God. p. 23 Chap. 4. Of acting our faith on the Almighty Power of God, as
engaged for our help. p. 28 Chap. 5. An answer to a grand objection that some
disconsolate souls may raise against the former discourse. p. 43
VERSE 11. Take to you the whole Armor of God.
Chap. 1. Shows that the Christless and graceless soul is a soul without
Armor, and therein his misery. p. 54 Chap. 2. The Armor we use against Satan,
must be divine in the Institution, such only as God appoints. p. 61 Chap. 3.
This Armor must not only be divine by Institution, but Constitution also. p.
67 Chap. 4. Of the entirenesse of our furniture, it must be the whole Armor of
God. p. 72 Chap. 5. Of the use of our spiritual Armor, or the exercise of
grace. p. 81
That ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil.
Chap. 1. OF Satan's subtilty, to choose the most advantageous seasons for
tempting. p. 93 Chap. 2. Of Satan's subtilty in managing his temptations, where
several stratagems used by him to deceive the Christian, are laid down. p. 98
Chap. 3. Of Satan's subtilty in making choice instruments fit for his turn, to
carry on his tempting design. p. 103 Chap. 4. This Point of Satan's subtilty as
a tempter to sin, is briefly applied. p. 110 Chap. 5. Of the subtilty of Satan,
as a troubler and an accuser for sin, where many of his wiles and policies to
disquiet the Saints spirits are discovered. p. 114. Chap 6. A brief Application
of Satan's subtilty, as a troubler and accuser for sin. p. 125 Chap. 7.
Directions to fortify the Christian against the assaults and wiles of Satan as
a troubler. p. 128 Chap. 8. Of the Saints victory over their subtle enemy, and
whence it is that creatures so overmatch's should be able to stand against
Satan's wiles. p. 138 Chap. 9. An account is given how the All wise God does
out-wit the devil in his tempting Saints to sin, wherein are laid down the ends
Satan propounds, and how he is prevented in them all, with the gracious issue
that God puts to these his temptations. p. 142 Chap. 10. The Application of the
Point in two branches. p 152
VERSE 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, etc.
Chap. 1. Showing the Christians life here to be a continual wrestling with sin
and Satan, and how few are true wrestlers, as also how they should manage their
combat. 157 Chap. 2. What is meant by flesh and blood, and how the Christian
does not, and how he does wrestle against the same. 171 Chap. 3. Satan's
Principality, how he came to be such a Prince, and how we may know whether we
be under him as our Prince or not. 182. Chap. 4. The great power Satan has,
not only over the elementary and sensitive part of the world, but intellectval
also, the souls of men. 196 Chap. 5. Of the time when, the place where, and
the subjects whom Satan rules. 208 Chap. 6. Of the spirituality of the devils
nature, and their extreme wickedness 250 Chap. 7. Of Satan's plot to defile the
Christians spirit with heart-sins. 259 Chap. 8. How Satan labors to corrupt
the Christians mind with error. 267 Chap. 9. Of pride of gifts, and how Satan
tempts the Christian thereto. 273 Chap. 10. Of pride of Grace. 285 Chap. 11. Of
pride of Privileges. 299 Chap. 12. What the prize is, which believers wrestle
against these Principalities, Powers and spiritual wickednesses for. 306 Chap.
13. An Exhortation to the pursuit of heaven and heavenly things. 321
VERSE 13. Wherefore take to you the whole Armor of God, etc.
Chap. 1. THe reason why the Apostle renews the same Exhortation, as also what
truths Ministers are often to preach to their people. 330 Chap. 2. The best of
Saints subject to decline in grace, and why we are to endeavor a recovery of
decays in grace. 334 Chap. 3. A cautionary direction from what we may not, as
also from what we may judge our graces to be in a declination. 337 Chap. 4. A
word of counsel for the recovery of declining grace. 343 Chap. 5. What is meant
by the evil day. 349 Chap. 6. The day of affliction is evil, and in what
respects, as also unavoidable, and why to be prepared for. 352

ERRATA.
Reader,
Though all the mistakes in printing be not here presented to thee, yet these
thou will find to be the most unhappy in perverting the sense, therefore thou
art desired for thy better progress to correct them.

PAge 9. line 17. the lightsome, blot out the, p. 10. l. 15. blot out are p.
12. l. 27. for barely r. basely. p. 13. l. 17. for information, r. reformation.
p. 42. l 25. for encourage r. discourage. p. 163. l. 5. for rock r. rot. p.
168. l. 3. for best r. worst. ib. l. 8. r, called not them, etc. p. 192. l. 2.
blot out it is p. 193. l. 17. for we r. were. p. 201. l. 11. for prisoner r.
prison. p. 214. l. 25. for judiciously r. judicially. p. 215. l. 15. r.
florescentem. p. 220. l. 25. r. burrow. p. 264. l. 4. for company r. camp. p,
268, l. 2. for double 1. threefold. p. 306, l, last, r. (...), p, 308, l, 24,
r, miles, p, 319 l, 22, for imported r, interpreted, p, 333, l, 23, for by r,
his. p. 356. l. 17. for the last wedge r. the greatest wedge. p. 365. l. 35.
for a shell r. ashes.

Mistakes in the pointing.
Page 80. line 4. after then blot out, and after thus write: p. 149. l. 33.
after worth make a full stop. p. 315. l. 13. after of write. ibid. after God
blot out.

A TREATISE Of the whole Armor Of God.
THE INTRODUCTION.
EPHESIANS 6.10. Finally, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might.


PAul was now in bonds, yet not so close kept as to be denied pen and paper:
God (it seems) gave him some favor in the sight of his enemies: Paul was
Nero's prisoner; Nero was much more Gods. And while God had work for Paul, he
found him friends both in Court and prison. Let persecutors send the Saints to
prison, God can provide a Keeper for their turn.

But how does this great Apostle spend his time in prison? not in publishing
invectives against those, (though the worst of men) who had laid him in; a
piece of zeal which the holy sufferers of those times were little acquainted
with: Nor in politic counsels how he might wind himself out of his trouble,
by sordid flattery of, or sinful compliance with the great ones of the times.
Some would have used any pick-lock to have opened a passage to their liberty,
and not scrupled, (so escape they might) whether they got out at the door or
window: But this holy man was not so fond of liberty or life, as to purchase
them with the least hazard to the Gospel. He knew too much of another world, to
bid so high for the enjoying of this, and therefore he is at a point what his
enemies can do with him, well knowing he could go to heaven whether they would
or no; No, the great care which lay upon him was for the Churches of Christ: as
a faithful Steward he labors to set this House of God in order before his
departure. We read of no dispatches sent to Court to procure his liberty, but
many to the Churches to help them to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
had made them free. There is no such way to be even with the devil and his
instruments for all their spite against us, as by doing what good we can,
wherever we become. The devil had as good have let Paul alone; for he no sooner
comes into prison, but he falls a preaching, at which the gates of Satan's
prison fly open, and poor sinners come forth. Happy for Onesimus that Paul was
sent to Jaile; God had an errand for Paul to do to him and others, which the
devil never dreamed of. Nay, he does not only preach in prison, but that he may
do the devil all the mischief he can, he sends his Epistles to the Churches;
that tasting his Spirit in his afflictions, and reading his faith, now ready to
be offered up, they might much more be confirmed, amongst which Ephesus was not
least in his thoughts, as you may perceive by his abode with them two years
together, Acts 19.10. as also by his sending for the Elders of this Church as
far as Miletus, in his last journey to Jerusalem, Acts 20.17. to take his
farewell of them, as never to see their face in this world more. And surely the
sad impression which that heartbreaking departure left upon the spirits of
these Elders, yea, the whole Church, (by them acquainted with this mournful
news,) might stir up Paul, now in prison, to write unto this Church, that
having so much of his Spirit, yea, of the Spirit of the Gospel left in their
hands to converse with, they might more patiently take the news of his death.

In the former part of this Epistle, he soars high in the mysteries of faith.
In the latter, according to his usual method, he descends to Application; where
we find him contracting all those truths, as beams together in a powerful
exhortation, the more to enkindle their hearts, and powerfully persuade them to
walk worthy of their vocation, chap. 4.1. which then is done, when the
Christians life is transparent, that the grace of the Gospel shines forth in
the power of holiness on every side, and from all his relations, as a candle
in a Crystal glass, not in a dark Lanthorn, lightsome one way, and dark
another: and therefore he runs over the several relations of Husband, Wife,
Parents, Children, Master and Servants, and presses the same in all these.

Now having set every one in his proper place, about his particular duty: as a
wise General after he has ranged his Army, and drawn them forth into rank and
file: he makes this following speech at the head of this Ephesian Camp, all in
martial phrase, as best suiting the Christians calling, which is a continued
warfare with the world, and the Prince of the world. The speech it self
contains two parts;

First, a short, but sweet and powerful encouragement, ver. 10.

Secondly, the other part is spent in several directions, for their managing
this war the more succesfully, with some motives here and there sprinkled among
them. To begin with the first.

1. The word of encouragement to battle. With this he begins his speech;
Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord: the best way indeed to prepare
them for the following directions. A soul deeply possessed with fear, and
disspirited with strong impressions of danger, is in no posture for counsel. As
we see in an Army when put to the run with some sudden alarm, and apprehensions
of danger; it is hard rallying them into order while the scare and fear is
over; therefore the Apostle first raises up their spirits, Be strong in the
Lord: as if he should say, perhaps some drooping souls find their hearts
fail them, while they see their enemies so strong, and they so weak; so
numerous, and they so few; so well appointed, and they so naked and unarmed; so
skilful and expert at arms, but they green and raw soldiers; Let not these or
any other thoughts dismay you, but with undaunted courage march on, and be
strong in the Lord; on whose performance lies the stresse of the battle, and
not on your skill or strength: It is not the least of a Ministers care, and
skill in dividing the Word, so to press the Christians duty, as not to
oppress his Spirit with the weight of it, by laying it on the creatures own
shoulders, and not on the Lords strength, as here our Apostle teaches us.

My brethren.

Be strong.

In the Lord.

And in the power of his might, or in his mighty power.

CHAP. I. Of Christian Courage and Resolution, wherefore necessary, and how
obtained.
WE shall wave the Compellation, and begin with the Exhortation: Be strong,
that is, be of good courage, so commonly used in Scripture Phrase; 2 Chronicles.
32.7. Be strong and courageous. So, Isa. 35.4. Say to them that are of a
fearful heart, Be strong: or, unite all the powers of your souls, and muster up
your whole force, you will have use of all you can make or get. From whence the
Point is this.

Doct.
The Christian of all men needs courage and resolution. Indeed there is nothing
he does as a Christian, or can do, but is an act of valor: A cowardly spirit
is beneath the lowest duty of a Christian: Josh. 1.7. Be thou strong and very
courageous, that thou may: what? stand in battle against those warlike
Nations? No, But that thou may observe to do according to all the Law, which
Moses my servant commanded thee. It requires more prowess and greatness of
spirit to obey God faithfully, then to command an Army of men, to be a
Christian then to be a Captain. What seems less, then for a Christian to pray?
yet this cannot be performed aright, without a Princely Spirit; As Jacob is
said to behave himself like a Prince, when he did but pray: for which he came
out of the field Gods Bannarite. Indeed if you call that prayer, which a carnal
person performs, nothing more poor and dastard-like. Such a one is as great a
stranger to this enterprise, as the craven soldier is to the exploits of a
valiant Chieftain. The Christian in prayer comes up close to God, with an
humble boldness of faith, and takes hold of him, wrestles with him, yea, will
not let him go without a blessing, and all this in the face of his own sins,
and divine justice, which let fly upon him from the fiery mouth of the Law;
while the others boldness in prayer is but the child, either of ignorance in
his mind, or hardness in his heart; whereby not feeling his sins, and not
knowing his danger, he rushes upon duty with a blind confidence, which soon
quails, when conscience awakes and gives him the alar^m, that his sins are upon
him, as the Philistines on Samson; alas, then in a fright the poor-spirited
wretch throws down his weapon, flies the presence of God with guilty Adam, and
dares not look him on the face. Indeed there is no duty in a Christians whole
course of walking with God, or acting for God, but is lined with many
difficulties, which shoot like enemies through the hedges at the Christian,
whilst he is marching toward Heaven: so that he is put to dispute every inch
of ground as he goes. They are only a few noble-spirited souls, (who dare take
Heaven by force) that are fit for this calling. For the further proof of this
Point, see some few pieces of service that every Christian engages in.

First, the Christian is to proclaim and prosecute an irreconcilable war
against his bosome-sins; those sins which have layen nearest his heart, must
now be trampled under his feet: So David, I have kept my self from my iniquity;
Now what courage and resolution does this require? you think Abraham was tried
to purpose, when called to take his son, his son Isaac, Genesis 22 1^
his only son whom he loved, and offer him up with his own hands, and no other,
yet what was that to this? Soul, take thy lust, thy only lust, which is the
child of thy dearest love, thy Isaac, the sin which has caused most joy and
laughter; from which thou have promised thy self the greatest return of
pleasure or profit: as ever thou look to see my face with comfort, lay hands
on it, and offer it up: pour out the blood of it before me, run the
sacrificing knife of mortification into the very heart of it, and this freely,
joyfully, (for it is no pleasing sacrifice that is offered with a countenance
cast down,) and all this now, before thou have one embrace more from it. Truly
this is a hard chapter, flesh and blood cannot bear this saying; our lust will
not lie so patiently on the Altar, as Isaac, or as a Lamb that is brought to
the slaughter, which is dumb, but will roar and shreek, yea, even shake and
rend the heart with their hideous outcries. Who is able to express the
conflicts, the wrestlings, the convulsions of Spirit the Christian feels,
before he can bring his heart to this work? or who can fully set forth the Art,
the Rhetorical insinuations, which such a lust will plead with for its life?
one while Satan will extenuate and mince the matter, It is but a little one, O
spare it, and thy soul shall live for all that: Another while he flatters the
soul with the secrecy of it, Thou may keep me and thy credit also; I will
not be seen abroad in thy company to shame thee among thy neighbors: shut me
up in the most retired room thou have in thy heart, from the hearing of others
(if thou will,) only let me now and then have the wanton embraces of thy
thoughts and affections in secret; if that cannot be granted, then Satan will
seem only to desire execution may be stayed a while, as Jephtha's daughter of
her father; Let me alone a monthor two, Judge. 17. v. 2, 37.
and then do to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy mouth:
well knowing few such reprieved lusts, but at last obtain their full pardon;
yea, recover their favor with the soul. Now what resolution does it require
to break through such violence and importunity, and notwithstanding all this,
to do present execution? Here the valiant Swordmen of the world, have showed
themselves mere cowards, who have come out of the field with victorious
banners, and then lived, yea, died slaves to a base lust at home. As one could
say of a great Roman Captain, (who as he rode in his triumphant Chariot
through Rome, had his eye never off a Courtizan that walked along the street)
Behold, how this goodly Captain that conquered such potent Armies, is himself
conquered by one silly woman.

Romans 12.2. we are commanded not to be conformed to this world, that is, not to
accommodate our selves to the corrupt customs of the world. The Christian must
not be of such a complying nature, to cut the coat of his Profession according
to the fashion of the times, or the humor of the company he falls into, like
that Courtier, who being ask't how he could keep his preferment in such
changing times, which one while had a Prince for Popery, another while against
Popery? answered, he was Esalice, non ex quercu ortus: he was not a stubborn
oak, but bending osier, that could yield to the wind: No, the Christian must
stand fixed to his principles, and not change his habit, but freely show what
Countryman he is by his holy constancy in the truth. Now, what an odium, what
snares, what dangers does this singularity expose the Christian to? Some will
hoot and mock him, as one in a Spanish fashion would be laugh't at in your
streets. Thus Michal flouted David. Indeed the world counts the Christian for
his singularity of life the only fool; which I have thought gave the first
occasion to that nickname, whereby men commonly express a silly man or a
fool: Such a one (say they) is a mere Abraham, that is, in the worlds account a
fool. But why an Abraham? because Abraham did that which carnal reason (the
worlds idol) laughs at as mere folly; he left a present estate in his fathers
house, to go he know not whither, to receive an inheritance he knew not when.
And truly luch fools all the Saints are branded for, by the wise world. You
know the man and his communication, said Jehu to his companions, asking what
that mad fellow came for, who was no other then a Prophet, 2 Kings 9.11. Now
this requires courage to despise the shame, which the Christian must expect to
meet withal for his singularity. Shame is that which proud nature most
disdaines, Joh. 7.13.
to avoid which many durst not confess Christ openly; many lose heaven,
because they are ashamed to go in a fools coat thither. Again, as some will
mock, so others will persecute to death, merely for this nonconformity in the
Christians principles and practices to them. This was the trap laid for the
three children; they must dance after Nebuchadnezzars pipe, or burn. This was
the plot laid to ensnare Daniel, who walked so unblameably, that his very
enemies gave him this testimony, that he had no fault, but his singularity in
his Religion, Dan. 6.5. It Is a great honor to a Christian, yea, to Religion it
self, when all their enemies can say is, they are precise, and will not do as
we do. Now in such a case as this, when the Christian must turn or burn; leave
praying, or become a prey to the cruel teeth of bloody men; how many politic
retreats, and self-preserving distinctions would a cowardly unresolved heart
invent? The Christian, that has so great opposition had need be well locked
into the saddle of his Profession, or else he will be soon dismounted.

Asahel, 2 Samuel 2.22.
) not knowing whether they may venture any further in their Profession. Seeing
such (whose gifts they so much admired) lie before them, wallowing in the blood
of their slain Profession: of zealous Professors to prove, perhaps, fiery
persecutors; of strict Performers of religious duties, irreligious Atheists: no
more like the men they were some years past, then the vale of Sodom, (now a
bog and quagmire) is, to what it was, when for fruitfulness compared to the
garden of the Lord. We had need have a holy resolution to bear up against such
discouragements, and not to faint: as Joshuah, who lived to see the whole Camp
of Israel (a very few excepted) revolting, and in their hearts turning back to
Egypt, and yet with an undaunted Spirit maintained his integrity, yea, resolved
though not a man beside would bear him company, yet he would serve the Lord.

Isa. 50, v. 10. Let him that walks in darkness, and sees no light, trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. This requires a holy boldness of
faith indeed to venture into Gods presence, as Esther into Ahashuerus, when no
smile is to be seen on his face, no golden scepter of the promise perceived by
the soul, as held forth to embolden it to come near, then to press in with
this noble resolution; If I perish, I perish. Nay more, to trust not only in a
withdrawing but a killing God; Job 13.15.
not when his love is hid, but when his wrath breaks forth: Now for a soul to
make its approaches to God by a recumbency of faith, while God seems to fire
upon it, and shoot his frowns like envenomed arrows into it. This is hard
work, and will try the Christians metal to purpose. Yet such a masculine
spirit we find in that poor woman of Canaan, who takes up the bullets Christ
shot at her, and with an humble boldness of faith sends them back again in her
prayer.



Israel came joyfully out of Egypt under Moses his conduct, yea, and a mixed
multitude with them, but when their bellies were a little pinched with hunger,
and their greedy desires of a present Canaan deferred, yea, instead of peace
and plenty, war and penury, they (like white-liver'd soldiers) are ready to
fly from their colors, and make a dishonorable retreat into Egypt. Thus the
greatest part of those who profess the Gospel, when they come to push of pike,
to be tried what they will do, deny, endure for Christ, grow sick of their
enterprise: alas, their hearts fail them, they are like the waters of
Bethlehem; but if they must dispute their passage with so many enemies, they
will even content themselves with their own Cistern, and leave heaven to others
that will venture more for it. O how many part with Christ at this crosse-way!
like Orpah they go a furlong or two with Christ, while he goes to take them off
from their worldly hopes, and bids them prepare for hardship, and then they
fairly kiss and leave him, loath indeed to lose heaven, but more loath to buy
it at so dear a rate. Like some green heads, that childishly make choice of
some sweet trade (such as is the Confectioners) from a liquorish tooth they
have to the junkets it affords, but meeting with sour sauce of labor and
toil that goes with them, they give in, and are weary of their service; the
sweet bait of Religion has drawn many to nibble at it, who are offended with
the hard service it calls to; It requires another spirit then the world can
give or receive to follow Christ fully.

The fearful are in the forelorne of those that march for hell, Rev. 21. the
violent and valiant are they, which take heaven by force: Cowards never wan
heaven. Say not, thou have royal blood running in thy veins, and art begotten
of God, except thou can prove thy pedigree by this heroic spirit, to dare to
be holy in spite of men and devils. The Eagle tries her young ones by the Sun,
Christ tries his children by their courage, that dare look on the face of death
and danger for his sake, Mark 8.34, 35. O how uncomly a sight is it; a bold
sinner and a fearful Saint; one resolved to be wicked, and a Christian wavering
in his holy course; to see guilt put innocence to flight, and hell keep the
field, impudently braving it with displayed banners of open profaneness; and
Saints to hide their colors for shame, or run from them for fear, who should
rather wrap themselves in them, and die upon the place, then thus betray the
glorious Name of God, which is called upon by them to the scorn of the
uncircumcised. Take heart therefore, O ye Saints, and be strong: your cause is
good, God himself espouseth your quarrel, who has appointed you his own Son,
General of the field, called The Captain of our salvation. He shall lead you on
with courage, Heb. 2.
and bring you off with honor. He lived and died for you, he will live and die
with you: for mercy and tenderness to his soldiers, none like him. Trajan,
it is said, rent his clothes to bind up his soldiers wounds; Christ poured out
his blood as balm to heal his Saints wounds, tears of his flesh to bind them
up. For prowess, none to compare with him: he never turned his head from
danger: no, not when hells malice and heavens justice appeared in field against
him; Knowing all that should come upon him, went forth and said, Whom seek ye?
John 18.4. For success insuperable; he never lost battle even when he lost his
life: he wan the field, carrying the spoils thereof in the triumphant chariot
of his Ascension to heaven with him: where he makes an open show of them to the
unspeakable joy of Saints and Angels. You march in the midst of gallant
spirits, your fellow soldiers, every one the Son of a Prince: Behold, some
(enduring with you here below a great fight of afflictions and temptations,)
take heaven by storm and force: Others you may see after many assaults,
repulses and rallyings of their faith and patience, got upon the walls of
heaven Conquerours; from whence they do, as it were, look down, and call you
their fellow-brethren on earth, to march up the hill after them, crying aloud,
Fall on, and the city is your own, as now it is ours; who for a few days
conflict, are now crowned with heavens glory, one moments enjoyment of which
has dried up all our tears, healed all our wounds, and made us forget the
sharpness of the fight, with the joy of our present victory. In a word,
Christians, God and Angels are Spectatours, observing how you quit your selves
like children of the most High; every exploit your faith does against sin and
Satan, causes a shout in heaven; while you valiantly prostrate this
temptation, scale that difficulty, regain the other ground you even now lost,
out of your enemies hands. Your dear Savior, (who stands by with a reserve
for your relief at a pinch) his very heart leaps within him for joy, to see the
proof of your love to him, and zeal for him in all your combats; and will not
forget all the faithful service you have done in his wars on earth: but when
thou come out of the field, will receive thee with the like joy, as he was
entertained himself at his return to heaven of his Father. Now, Christian, if
thou meanest thus courageously to bear up against all opposition, in thy march
to heaven, as thou should do well, to raise thy spirit with such generous
and soul-ennobling thoughts, so in an especial manner look thy principles be
well fixed, or else thy heart will be unstable, and an unstable heart is weak as
water, it cannot excel in courage. Two things are required to fix our
principles.

Those that know their God shall be strong, and do exploits, Dan. 11.32. The
Angel told Daniel who were the men that would stand to their tackling, and bear
up for God in that hour, both of temptation and persecution, which should be
brought upon them by Antiochus; not all the Jews, some of them should be
corrupt barely by flatteries, others scared by threats out of their Profession,
only a few of fixed principles, who knew their God whom they served, and were
grounded in their Religion, these should be strong, and do exploits, that is,
to flatteries they should be incorruptible, and to power and force
unconquerable.

end of his Profession, when he is pinch't on that toe where his corn is: I
mean, called to deny that his naughty heart aimed at all this while, now his
heart sails him, he can go no further. O take heed of this squint eye to our
profit, pleasure, honor or any thing beneath Christ and heaven; for they will
take away your heart, as the Prophet says of wine and women, that is, our
love, and if our love be taken away, there will be little courage left for
Christ. How courageous was Jehu at first, and he tells the world it is zeal
for God: but why does his heart fail him then, before half his work be done?
his heart was never right set, that very thing that stirred up h^s zeal at
first, at last quenched and cowed it, and that was his ambition; his desire of
a Kingdom made him zealous against Ahabs house, to cut off them (who might in
time justle him besides the throne) which done, and he quietly settled, he dare
not go through-stitch with Gods work, lest he should lose what he got by
provoking the people with a thorough information. Like some soldiers, when
once they meet with a rich booty at the sacking of some town, are spoiled for
fighting ever after.

CHAP. II. Of the Saints strength, where it lies, and wherefore laid up in God.
THe second Branch of the words follows, which contains a cautionary
direction. Having exhorted the Saints at Ephesus, and in them all believers to
a holy resolution and courage in their warfare; lest this should be mistaken,
and beget in them an opinion of their own strength for the battle, the Apostle
leads them out of themselves for this strength, even to the Lord; Be strong in
the Lord. From whence observe,

That the Christians strength lies in the Lord, not in himself. Doct.
The strength of the General in other hosts lies in his troops; he fl^es, as a
great Commander once said to his soldiers, upon their wings; if their feathers
be clipped, their power broken, he is lost; but in the Army of Saints, the
strength of every Saint, yea, of the whole host of Saints lies in the Lord of
hosts. God can overcome his enemies without their hands, but they cannot so
much as defend themselves without his arm. It is one of Gods names, The
strength of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.19. He was the strength of David's heart, without
him this valiant Worthy (that could, when held up in his arms, defy him that
defied an whole Army) behaves himself strangely for fear, at a word or two
that dropped from the Philistines mouth. He was the strength of his hands, He
taught his fingers to fight, and so he is the strength of all his Saints in
their war against sin and Satan. Some propound a question, whether there be a
sin committed in the world, in which Satan has not a part? but if the question
were, whether there be any holy action performed without the special assistance
of God concurring? that is resolved, John. 15.5. Without me you can do nothing.
Thinking strength of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves,
to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. We
Apostles, we Saints that have habitual grace, yet this lies like water at the
bottom of a Well, which will not ascend with all our pumping, till God pour
in his exciting grace, and then it comes. To will is more then to think, to
exert our will into action, more then both; these are of God, Phil. 2.13. It is
God that works in you to will, and to do of his good pleasure. He makes the
heart new, and having made it fit for heavenly motion, setting every wheel (as
it were) in its right place, then he winds it up by his actuating grace, and
sets it on going, the thoughts to stir, the will to move, and make toward the
holy object presented; yet here the chariot is set, and cannot ascend the hill
of action, till God puts his shoulder to the wheel, Romans 7. To will is present
with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not. God is at the
bottom of the ladder, and at the top also, the Author and Finisher, yea,
helping and lifting the soul at every round, in his ascent to any holy action.
Well, now the Christian is set on work, how long will he keep close to it?
Alas, poor soul, no longer then he is held up by the same hand, that empowered
him at first. He has soon wrought out the strength received, and therefore to
maintain the tenure of a holy course. there must be renewing strength from
heaven every moment, which David knew, and therefore when his heart was in as
holy a frame as ever he felt it, and his people by their free-will-offering
declared the same: yet even then he prays, that God would keep this for ever
in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of his people, and establish
their hearts to him, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. He adored the mercy that made them
willing, and then he implores his further grace to strengthen them, and tie a
knot, that these precious pearls newly strung on their hearts, might not slip
off. The Christian, when fullest of divine communications, is bu^ a glass
without a foot, he cannot stand, or hold what he has received any longer, then
God holds him in his strong hand. Therefore Christ, when bound for heaven, and
ready to take his leave of his children, bespeaks his Fathers care of them in
his absence; Father, keep them; as if he had said, they must not be left alone,
John 17.
they are poor shiftlesse children, that can neither stand nor go without help;
they will lose the grace I have given them, and fall into those temptations,
which I kept them from while I was with them, if they be out of thy eye or
arms but one moment; and therefore, Father, keep them.

Again, Consider the Christian, as addressing himself to any duty of Gods
worship, still his strength is in the Lord; Would he pray? where will he find
materials for his prayer? alas, he knows not what to pray for as he ought. Let
him alone, Romans 8.
and he will soon pray himself into some temptation or other, and cry for that
which were cruelty in God to give; and therefore God puts words in our mouths;
Take words with you, and say, Hos. 14.2. Well, now he has words put into his
mouth; alas, they will freeze in his very lips, if he has not some
heart-heating affections to thaw the tap: and where shall this fire be had? not
a spark to be found on his own hearth; except it be some strange fire of
natural desires, which will not serve: whence then must the fire come to thaw
the icenesse of the heart, but from heaven? The Spirit, he must stretch himself
upon the soul, (as the Prophet on the child) and then the soul will come to
some kindly warmth, and heavenly heat in his affections; the Spirit must
groan, and then the soul will groan, he helps us to these sighs and groans,
which turn the sails of prayer. He dissolves the heart, and then it bursts
out of the heart by groans, of the lips by heavenly Rhethorick, out of the eyes
as from a floodgate with tears: yet further now the creature is enabled to
wrestle with God in prayer; what will he get by all this? suppose he be weak in
grace, is he able to pray himself strong, or corruption weak? no, this is not
to be found in prayer, as an act of the creature: this drops from heaven also.
In the day that I cried, Ps. 138.2.
thou answeredst me, and gave me strength in my soul. David received it in
duty, but had it not from his duty, but from his God. He did not pray himself
strong, but God strengthened him in his prayer. Well, cast your eye once more
upon the Christian, as engaging in another Ordinance of hearing the Word
preached. The souls strength to hear the Word is from God, Act 16.14.
he opens the heart to attend, yea, he opens the understanding of the Saint to
receive the Word, so as to conceive what it meant. It is like Samsons riddle
which we cannot unfold without his Heifer: He opens the womb of the soul to
conceive by it, as the understanding to conceive of it, that the barren soul
becomes a joyful mother of children. David sat for half a year under the
public Lectures of the Law, and the womb of his heart shut up, till Nathan
comes and God with him, and now is the time of life, he conceives presently,
yea, and brings forth in the same day, falls presently into the bitter pangs of
sorrow for his sins, which went not over till he had cast them forth in that
sweet Psalm 51. Why should this one word work more, then all the former, but
that God now struck in with his Word, which he did not before? He is therefore
said to teach his people to profit; Isa. 48.17.
he sits in heaven that teaches hearts When Gods Spirit (who is the
Head-master) shall call a soul from his Usher to himself, and say, Soul, you
have not gone the way to thrive by hearing the Word, thus, and thus conceive of
such a truth, improve such a promise, presently the eyes of his understanding
open, and his heart burns within him, while he speaks to him. Thus you see the
truth of this Point, That the Christians strength is in the Lord. Now we shall
give some demonstrations.

SECT. I.
Inesse est de esse creaturae. It Is in the very nature of the creature, to
depend on God its Maker, both for being and operation. Can you conceive an
accident to be out of its subject, whiteness out of the wall, or some other
subject? it is as impossible that the creature should be, or act without
strength from God: This, to be, act in and of himself, is so incommunicable a
property of the Deity, that he cannot impart it to his creature: God is, and
there is none besides him: when God made the world, it is said indeed he ended
his work, that is, of Creation: he made no new species and kinds of creatures
more; but to this day he has not ended his work of Providence; Hitherto my
Father works, says Christ, John. 5.17. that is, in preserving and empowering
what he has made with strength to be and act, and therefore he is said to hold
our souls in life. Works of Art, which man makes, when finished may stand some
time without the Workmans help, as the house, when the Carpenter that made it
is dead; but Gods works both of nature and grace are never off his hand, and
therefore as the Father is said to work hitherto for the preservation of the
works of nature, so the Son, to whom is committed the work of Redemption, he
tells us he works also. Neither ended he his work, when he rose again, any
otherways then his Father did in the work of Creation. God made an end of
making, so Christ made an end of purchasing mercy, grace and glory for
believers by once dying; and as God rested at the end of the Creation, so he,
when he had wrought eternal Redemption, and by himself purged our sins, sat
down on the right hand of the Majesty on High, Heb. 1.3. But he cease not to
work by his intercession with God for us, and by his Spirit in us for God,
whereby he upholds his Saints, their graces, and comforts in life, without
which they would run to ruin. Thus we see as grace is a creature, the
Christian depends on God for his strength. But further,

weak creature, conflicting with enemies stronger then it self, and therefore
cannot keep the field without an auxiliary strength from Heaven. The weakest
goes to the wall, if no succor comes in. Grace in this life is but weak, like
a King in the Cradle, which gives advantage to Satan to carry on his plots more
strongly, to the disturbance of this young Kings reign in the soul, yea, he
would soon make an end of the war in the ruin of the believers grace, did not
Heaven take the Christian into protection. It Is true indeed, grace wherever it
is, has a principle in it self, that makes it desire and endeavor to
preserve it self according to its strength, but being overpowered must perish,
except assisted by God, as fire in green wood, (which deads and damps the part
kindled) will in time go out except blown up, or more fire put to that little;
so will grace in the heart. God brings his grace into the heart by Conquest:
now as in a conquered City, though some yield and become true subjects to the
Conqueror; yet others plot how they may shake off this yoke; and therefore it
requires the same power to keep, as was to win it at first. The Christian has
an unregenerate part, that is discontented at this new change in the heart, and
disdains as much to come under the sweet government of Christ's Scepter, as the
Sodomites that Lot should judge them. What, this fellow, a Stranger, control
us? And Satan heads this mutinous rout against the Christian: so that if God
should not continually reinforce this his new-planted Colony in the heart, the
very natives (I mean corruptions) that are left, would come out of their dens
and holes where they lie lurking, and eat up the little grace the holiest on
earth has, it would be as bread to these devourers.





Saints should have all their ability for every step they take in the way to
heaven, will soon appear.



Your heavenly Father knows you have need of these things, and you shall have
them. He knows you need strength to pray, hear, suffer for him, and in ipsa
hora dabitur.

streamings forth of his strength, and a leaking vessel under a cock gets what
it loses. Thus we have our leakage supplied continually. This was the
provision God made for Israel in. the wilderness; He clave the rock, and the
rock followed them. They had not only a draught at present, but it ran in a
stream after them; so that you hear no more of their complaints for water;
This rock was Christ. Every believer has Christ at his back, following him
with strength as he goes, for every condition and trial. One flower with the
root is worth many in a posie, which though sweet yet do not grow, but wither
as we wear them in our bosoms. Gods strength, as the root keeps our grace
lively, without which though as orient as Adams was, it would die.

Ephesians. 1.4, 12. which is fully attained in this way of empowering Saints, by a
strength not of their own, but of their God his sending, as they are put to
expense. Had God given his Saints a stock of grace to have set up with, and
left them to the improvement of it, he had been magnified indeed, because it
was more then God did owe the creature, but he had not been omnified as now,
when not only the Christians first strength to close with Christ is from God,
but he is beholden still to God for the exercise of that strength, in every
action of his Christian course. As a child that travels in his fathers
company, all is paid for, but his father carries the purse, not himself: so the
Christians shot is discharged in every condition; but he cannot say this I did,
or that I suffered, but God wrought all in me and for me. The very comb of
pride is cut here, no room for any self exalting thoughts. The Christian cannot
say, that I am a Saint is mercy, but being a Saint that my faith is strong,
this is the child of my own care and watchfulness. Alas, poor Christian! who
kept thine eye waking, and stirred up thy care? was not this the offspring of
God as well as thy faith at first? No Saint shall say of Heaven when he comes
there, This is Heaven which I have built by the power of my might. No,
Jerusalem above is a City, whose builder and maker is God, Every grace, yea,
degree of grace is a stone in that building, the topstone whereof is laid in
glory, where Saints shall more plainly see, how God was not only Founder to
begin, but Benefactour also to finish the same. The glory of the work shall not
be crumbled, and piece-meal'd out, some to God, and some to the creature, but
all entirely paid in to God, and he acknowledged all in all.

SECTION. 2.
When we were without strength in due time Christ died for the ungodly, Romans
5.6. And as Christ found the lump of mankind covered with the ruins of their
lapsed estate, (no more able to raise themselves from under the weight of Gods
wrath which lay upon them, then one buried under the rubbish of a fallen house,
is to free himself of that weight without help) so the Spirit finds sinners
in as helpless a condition, as unable to repent, or believe on Christ for
salvation, as they were of themselves to purchase it. Confounded therefore for
ever be the language of those sons of pride, who cry up the power of nature, as
if man with his own brick and slime of natural abilities were able to rear up
such a building, whose top may reach heaven it self. It is not of him that
wills or runs, Romans 9.16
but God that shows mercy. God himself has scattered such Babel-builders in
the imaginations of their hearts, who raises this spiritual Temple in the
souls of men, not by might, nor by a power of their own, but by his Spirit,
that so grace, grace, might be proclaimed before it for ever. And therefore if
any yet in their natural estate would become wise to salvation, let them first
become fools in their own eyes, and renounce their carnal wisdom, which
perceives not the things of God, and beg wisdom of God, who gives and
upbraideth not. If any man would have strength to believe, let them become
weak, and die to their own, for by strength shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2.9.

Nemo prodiget quod mendicat. Who will waste what he begs? or who will give
that beggar that spends idly his alms? when thou have most thou can not be
long from thy God his door. And how can thou look him on the face for more,
who have imbezell'd what thou have received?

CHAP. III. Of acting our faith on the Almighty Power of God.
THe third Branch follows, which contains an encouraging Amplification
annexed to the exhortation in these words; And in the Power of his might, where
a twofold enquiry is requisite for the explication of the phrase. First, what
these words import, The Power of his might? Secondly, what it is to be strong
in the Power of his might?

For the first, the Power of his might: It is an Hebraism, and imports nothing
but his mighty Power; like that phrase, Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of
his grace, that is, to the praise of his glorious grace. And his mighty Power
imports no less then his Almighty Power; sometimes the Lord is styled mighty
and strong, as Ps. 24.8. sometimes most mighty, sometimes Almighty, no less is
meant in all, then Gods infinite Almighty Power.

For the second, to be strong in the mighty Power, or Power of the Lords might,
implies these two acts of faith.

Be strong in the Power of his might, that is, be strongly rooted in your
faith, concerning this one foundation-truth, that God is Almighty.

defend himself and offend his adversary; so the Apostle bids the Christian be
strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his might, that is, Soul, away to thy
God, whose mighty Power is all intended and devoted by God himself for thy
succor and defense. Go strengthen and entrench thy self in it by a steadfast
faith, as that which shall be laid out to the utmost for thy good. From whence
these two Notes, I conceive, will draw out the fatness of the words.

1. That it should be the Christians great care and endeavor in all
temptations and trials, to strengthen his faith on the Almighty Power of God.

2. The Christians duty and care is not only to believe that God is Almighty,
but strongly by faith to rest on this Almighty Power of God, as engaged for his
help and succor in all his trials and temptations.

Doct.
First, it should be the Christians great care in all temptations and trials, to
strengthen his faith on the Almighty Power of God. When God holds forth
himself as an object of the souls trust and confidence in any great strait or
undertaking; commonly this attribute of his Almighty power is presented in the
promise, as the surest hold fast for faith to lay hold on; as a Father in
rugged way, gives his child his arm to lay hold by, so does God usually reach
forth his Almighty power for his Saints, to exercise their faith on. Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, whose faith God tried above most of his Saints before or
since, for not one of those great things which were promised to them, did they
live to see performed in their days; and how does God make known himself to
them for their support, but by displaying this Attribute? Exodus 6.3. I appeared
unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob by the Name of God Almighty. This was all they
had to keep house with all their days: with which they lived comfortably, and
died triumphantly, bequeathing the promise to their children, not doubting
(because God Almighty had promised) of the performance. Thus, Isa. 26. where
great mercies are promised to Judah, and a Song penned beforehand to be sung
on that gaudie day of their salvation: yet because there was a sharp Winter of
Captivity to come between the Promise, and the Springtime of the promise;
therefore to keep their faith alive in this space, the Prophet calls them up to
act their faith on God Almighty, v. 4. Trust ye in the Lord Jehovah, for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. So when his Saints are going into the
furnace of persecution, what now does he direct their faith to carry to prison,
to stake with them but this Almighty power? 1 Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer,
commit the keeping of their souls to him, as to a faithful Creator Creator is
a name of Almighty Power, we shall now give some. Reasons of the Point.

Moses himself, a star of the first magnitude for grace, yet see how his
faith blinks and twinkles, till he wades out of the temptation, Numb. 11.21.
The people among whom I am are six hundred thousand, and thou have said, I will
give them flesh that they may eat a whole month, shall the flocks and the
herds be slain for them to suffice them? This holy man had lost the sight for a
time of the Almighty Power of God, and now he is projecting how this should be
done; as if he had said in plain terms, How can this be accomplished? for so
God interprets his reasoning, v. 23, And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lords
hand waxed short? So Mary, John 11.32. Lord, if thou had been here, my
brother had not died. And her Sister Martha, v. 39. Lord, by this time he
stinketh. Both gracious women, yet both betrayed the weakness of their faith
on the Almighty Power of Christ, one limiting him to place; If thou had been
here he had not died; as if Christ could not have saved his life absent as well
as present, sent his health to him as well as brought it with him. The other to
time, Now he stinketh. As if Christ had brought his Physic too late, and the
grave would not deliver up its prisoner at Christ's command; and have thou such
an high opinion of thy self, Christian, that thy faith needs not thy utmost
care and endeavor for further establishment on the Almighty Power of God, when
thou see such as these dash their foot against this kind of temptation?

The second Reason may be taken from the absolute necessity of this act of
faith above others, to support the Christian in the hour of temptation. All
the Christians strength and comfort is fetched without doors, and he has none
to send of his errand but faith; This goes to heaven and knocks God up, as he
in the parable, his neighbor at midnight for bread: Therefore when faith
fails, and the soul has none to go to market for supplies, there must needs
be a poor house kept in the mean time. Now faith is never quite laid up, till
the soul denies, or at least questions the Power of God. Indeed, when the
Christian disputes the Will of God, whispering within its own bosom, will he
pardon? will he save? this may make faith go haltingly to the throne of grace,
but not knock the soul off from seeking the face of God: even then faith on
the Power of God, will bear it company thither: If thou will, thou can make
me clean; Mat. 8.2.
if thou will, thou can pardon, thou can purge: But when the soul concludes
he cannot pardon, cannot save, this shoots faith to the heart, so that the
soul falls at the foot of Satan, not able more to resist. Now it grows
listlesse to duty, indifferent whether it pray or not, as one that sees the
Well dry, breaks or throws away his Pitcher.

and call him by his creatures name, which he will not answer to. Now the
tenderness that God shows to this Prerogative of his, appears in three
particulars.

Isa. 8. 12, 13. Fear ye not their fear, but sanctify the Lord of hosts
himself: that is, in this sad posture of your affairs, when your enemies
associate, and you seem a lost people to the eye of Reason, not able to contest
with such united Powers, which beset you on every side: Now I charge you
sanctify me in giving me the glory of my Almighty Power; believe that your God
is able of himself, without any other, to defend you, and destroy them.

Zacharias did but ask the Angel, How shall I know this, because I am an old
man, and my wife stricken in years; yet for bewraying therein his unbelief,
had a sign indeed given him, but such a one as did not only strengthen his
faith, but severely punish his unbelief, for he was struck dumb upon the place.
God loves his children should believe his Word, not dispute his power; so true
is that of Luther, Deus amat curristas nonquaeristas. That which gave accent to
Abraham's faith, Romans 4.21. was that he was fully persuaded, that what God had
promised, he was able to perform.

Cor. 1.9. We received the sentence of death in our selves, that we might not
trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. Christ stayed while
Lazarus was dead, that he might draw the eyes of their faith more singly to
look on his power, by raising his dead friend, rather then curing him being
sick, which would not have carried so full a conviction of Almightinesse with
it. Yea, he suffers a contrary power many times to arise in that very juncture
of time, when he intends the mercy to his people, that he may rear up the more
magnificent pillar of remembrance to his own power, in the ruin of that which
contests with him. Had God brought Israel out of Egypt in the time of those
Kings which knew Joseph, most likely they might have had a friendly departure
and an easy deliverance, but God reserves this for the reign of that proud
Pharaoh, who shall cruelly oppress them, and venture his Kingdom, but he will
satisfy his lust upon them. And why must this be the time? but that God would
bring them forth with a stretched-out arm: The magnifying of his power was
Gods great design, Exodus 9.16. In very deed for this cause have I raised thee
up, to show in thee my power, and that my Name may be declared throughout the
earth.

Moses had to his bow, when he begged the life of Israel, Numb, 14.16. The
Nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, Because the Lord
was not able, etc. And, v. 17. Let the Power of my Lord be great; And with this
he has their pardon thrown him,

The Application of this Point will fall in under the next, which is

CHAP. IV. Of acting our faith on the Almighty Power of God, as engaged for our
help.
Doct.
THat it is the Saints duty, and should be their care, not only to believe God
Almighty, but also strongly to believe that this Almighty Power of God is
theirs, (that is, engaged for their defense and help) so as to make use of it
in all straits and temptations.

SECT. I.
First, I shall prove that the Almighty Power of God is engaged for the
Christians defense, with the grounds of it. Secondly, why the Christian should
strongly act his faith on this.

Israel out of Egypt with an high hand, but did he set them down on the other
side the Red Sea, to find and force their way to Canaan, by their own policy
or power? When he had opened the iron gate of their house of bondage, and
brought them into the open fields, did he vanish as the Angel from Peter, when
out of prison? No, as a man carries his son, so the Lord bare them in all the
way they went, Deuteronomy. 1.31. This does lively set forth the Saints march to
heaven: God brings a soul out of spiritual Egypt by his converting grace, that
is the day of his power, wherein he makes the soul willing to come out of
Satan's clutches. Now when the Saint is upon his march, all the country rises
upon him. How shall this poor creature pass the pikes, and get safely by all
his enemies borders? God himself infolds him in the arm of his everlasting
strength. We are kept by the Power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet.
1.5. The Power of God is that shoulder, on which Christ carries his sheep home,
rejoicing all the way he goes, Luke 15.5. These everlasting arms of his
strength are those Eagles wings, upon which the Saints are both tenderly and
securely conveyed to glory, Exodus 19.4. There is a five fold tie or engagement
that lies upon Gods power, to be the Saints lifeguard.

He said, They are my people, so be became their Savior, Isa. 33.8. As if God
had said, Shall I sit still with my hand in my bosom, while my own people are
thus misused before my face: I cannot bear it. The Mother as she sits in her
house hears one shreek, and knows the voice, cries out, O it is my child,
away she throws all, and runs to him. Thus God takes the alarm of his childrens
cry; I heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, says the Lord, his cry pierced his
ear, and his ear affected his bowels, and his bowels called up his power to
the rescue of him.

John 17.26.

Zech. 3.
(as Christ prays for Joshua their representative will rebuke Satan and all
their enemies.

not be easily lost. He that was willing to expend his Sons blood to gain them,
will not deny his power to keep them.

For thy sake we are slain all the day long: and if the quarrel be Gods, surely
the Saint shall not go forth to war at his own cost.

Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me. There is a League offensive
and defensive between God and his Saints, he gives it under his hand, that he
will put forth the whole power of his Godhead for them, 1 Chronicles. 17.24. The
Lord of Hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel. God does not parcel
himself out by retaile; but gives his Saints leave to challenge whatever a God
has as theirs, and let him whoever he is, sit in Gods throne, and take away
his crown, that can fasten any untruth on the Holy One; as his Name is, so is
his Nature, a God keeping Covenant for ever. The Promises stand as the
mountains about Jerusalem, never to be removed; the weak as well as the strong
Christian is within this line of Communication. Were Saints to fight it out in
open field by the strength of their own grace, then the strong were more likely
to stand, and the weak to fall in battle, but both castled in the Covenant are
alike safe.

Psalm. 57.3. At what time I am afraid, says David, I will trust in thee! He
tells God he will make bold of his house to step into, when taken in any
storm; and does not question his welcome. Thus when Saul hunted him, he left a
city of gates and bars to trust God in open field. Indeed all the Saints are
taught the same lesson, to renounce their own strength, and rely on the Power
of God, their own policy, and cast themselves on the wisdom of God; their own
righteousness; and expect all from the pure mercy of God in Christ which act
of faith is so pleasing to God, that such a soul shall never be ashamed, Psalm.
9.18. The expectation of the poor shall not perish. A Heathen could say, when a
bird (scared by a Hawke) flew into his bosom, I will not betray thee unto thy
enemy, seeing thou come for Sanctuary unto me. How much less will God yield
up a soul unto its enemy, when it takes Sanctuary in his Name, saying, Lord, I
am hunted with such a temptation, dogged with such a lust, either thou must
pardon it, or I am damned; mortify it, or I shall be a slave to it; take me
into the bosom of thy love for Christ's sake; castle me in the arms of thy
everlasting strength; it is in thy power to save me from, or give me up into
the hands of my enemy: I have no confidence in my self or any other: Into thy
hands I commit my cause, my life, and rely on thee; This dependence of a soul
undoubtedly will awaken the Almighty Power of God, for such a ones defense: he
has sworn the greatest oath that can come out of his blessed lips, even by
himself, that such as thus fly for refuge to hope in him shall have strong
consolation, Heb. 6.17. This indeed may give the Saint the greater boldness of
faith to expect kindly entertainment, when he repairs to God for refuge,
because he cannot come before he is looked for, God having set up his Name and
Promises as a strong Tower, both calls his people into these Chambers, and
expects they should betake themselves thither.

John 17.15. Neither does Christ take upon him this work of his own head, but
has the same appointment of his Father, for what he now prays in heaven, as
he had for what he suffered on earth: He that ordained him a Priest to die for
sinners, did not then strip him of his Priestly garments (as Aaron,) but
appoints him to ascend in them to heaven, where he sits a Priest for ever by
Gods Oath. And this office of intercession, was erected purely in mercy to
believers, that they might have full content given them for the performance of
all that God had promised; so that Jesus Christ lies Lieger at Court as our
Ambassador, to see all carried fairly between God and us according to
agreement: And if Christ follows his business close, and be faithful in his
place to believers, all is well; and does it not behove him to be so, who
intercedes for such dear relations? Suppose a Kings Son should get out of a
besieged City, where he has left his wife and children; (whom he loves as his
own soul,) and these all ready to die by sword or famine, if supply come not
the sooner, could this Prince, when arrived at his fathers house please himself
with the delights of the Court, and forget the distress of his family? or
rather would he not come post to his father, (having their cries and groans
always in his ears) and before he eat or drink, do his errand to his father,
and entreat him if ever he loved him, that he would send all the force of his
Kingdom to raise the siege, rather then any of his dear relations should
perish? Surely (Sirs) though Christ be in the top of his preferment, and out of
the storm in regard of his own person, yet his children left behind in the
midst of sins, Satan's, and the worlds batteries are in his heart, and shall not
be forgotten a moment by him. The care he takes in our business appeared in
the speedy dispatch he made of his Spirit to his Apostles supply, when he
ascended, which as soon almost as he was warm in his seat, at his Fathers right
hand, he sent, to the incomparable comfort of his Apostles and us, that to this
day, yea, to the end of the world do, or shall believe on him.

SECT. 2.
The second Branch of the point follows: that Saints should eye this Power of
God as engaged for them, and press it home upon their souls till they silence
all doubts and fears about the matter; which is the importance of this
exhortation: Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his might; Fortify and
entrench your souls within the breast-work of this attribute of Gods mighty
Power made over to you by God himself.

Walk before me, says God to Abraham, I am God Almighty; set on this as thy
portion, and live upon it; The Apostle, Heb. 13.6. teaches us what use to make
of promises, verse 5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, there is the
promise, and the inference, which he teaches us to draw by faith from this,
follows, ver. 6. So we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper. We, that is,
every believer may boldly say, that is, we may conclude God will help: not
sneakingly, timorously, perhaps he will; but we may boldly assert it in the
face of men and devils, because he that is Almighty has said it. Now for a
Christian not to strengthen his faith on this incomparably sweet attribute, but
to sit down with a few weak unsettled hopes, when he may, yea, ought to be
strong in the faith of such promises, what is it but to undervalue the blessing
of such promises? as if one should promise another house and land, and bid him
make them as sure to himself as the Law can bind, and he should take no care
to effect this, would it not be interpreted as a sleighting of his friends
kindness? Is it a small matter that God passes over his Almighty power by
promise to us, and bids us make it as sure to our selves as we can by faith,
and we neglect this, leaving the Writings of the promises unsealed on our
hearts.



Abraham being strong in faith, what an heroic act of obedience did he perform
in offering up his Son? his faith being well set on the Power of God, he
carries that without staggering, which would have laid a weak faith on the
ground. No act of faith more strengthens for duty, then that which eyes Gods
Almighty power engaged for its assistance, Go in this thy might, said God to
Gideon, have not I called thee? as if he had said, Can I not, will I not carry
thee through thy work? Away goes Gideon in the faith of this and does wonders.
This brought the righteous man from the East to Gods foot, though he knew not
whither he went, yet he knew with whom he went, God Almighty. But take a soul
not persuaded of this how uneven and unstable is he in his obediential course?
every threat. from man if mighty dismayes him, because his faith not fixed on
the Almighty, and therefore sometimes he will shift off a duty to comply with
man, and betray his trust into the hands of a sorry creature, because he has
fleshly eyes to behold the power of man, but wants a spiritual eye to see God
at his back, to protect him with his Almighty power; which were his eyes open
to see, he would not be so routed in his thoughts at the approach of a weak
creature: Should such a man as I flee? said good Nehemiah, Nehem. 6.11. He was
newly come from the throne of grace, where he had called in the help of the
Almighty, verse 9. O God, strengthen my hands. And truly now he will rather die
upon the place, then disparage his God with a dishonorable retreat.

Chambers taken up for him, Isa. 26. Come my people, enter into thy Chambers.
God calls them his, and it were foolish modesty not to own what God gives, Isa.
45.24. Surely shall a man say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength,
that is, I have righteousness in Gods righteousness, strength in his
strength, so that in this respect Christ can no more say that his strength is
his own, and not the believers, then the husband can say my body is my own,
and not my wives. A soul persuaded of this may sing merrily with the sharpest
thorn at its breast; so David, Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, my heart is
fixed, I will sing and give praise. What makes him so merry in so sad a place
as the Cave where now he was? he will tell you, verse 1. where you have him
nestling himself under the shadow of Gods wings, and now well may he sing care
and fear away. A soul thus provided, may lie at ease on a hard bed. Do you not
think they sleep as soundly who dwell on London Bridge as they who live at
White Hall or Cheap Side, knowing the waves that roar under them cannot hurt
them? Even so may the Saints rest quietly over the floods of death it self,
and fear no ill.

SECT. 3.
Job out of his trench, his hedge down, before he would fall on; but so
desperate are men, they will try the field with the Saints, though incircled
with the Almighty power of God. What folly were it to attempt or sit down
before such a City, which cannot be block't up so as no relief can get in: the
way to heaven cannot. In the Churches straitest siege, there is a river which
shall make glad this City of God, with seasonable succors from heaven. The
Saints fresh-springs are all from God, and it is as feasible for sorry man to
stop the watercourse of the clouds, as to dam up those streams, which
invisibly glide like veins of water in the earth, from the fountainhead of his
mercy into the bosom of his people: the Egyptians thought they had Israel in a
trap, when they saw them march into such a nook by the seaside; They are
entangled, they are entangled; and truly so they had been irrecoverably, had
not that Almighty power which led them on, engaged to bring them off with
honor and safety; well, when they are out of this danger; behold, they are in
a wilderness, where nothing is to be had for back and belly, and yet here they
shall live forty years, without trade or tillage, without begging or robbing
of any of the Neighbour-nations, they shall not be beholden to them for a penny
in their way; what cannot Almighty power do to provide for his people? what can
it not do to protect them against the power and wrath of their enemies?
Almighty power stood between the Israelites and the Egyptians, so that (poor
creatures) they could not so much as come to see their enemy: God sets up a
dark cloud as a blind before their eyes, and all the while, his eye through
the cloud is looking them into disorder and confusion; And is the Almighty
grown weaker now a days, or his enemies stronger, that they promise themselves
better success? No, neither; but men are blinder then the Saints enemies of
old, who sometimes have fled at the appearances of God among his people, crying
out, Let us flee, for the Lord fights for them. Whereas there be many now a
days will rather give the honor of their discomfitures to Satan himself, then
acknowledge God in the business; more ready to say the devil fought against
them, then God? O you that have not yet worn off the impressions which the
Almighty power of God has at any time made upon your spirits, beware of having
any thing to do with that generation of men, whoever they are. Come not near
their Tabernacle, cast not thy lot in amongst them, who are enemies to the
Saints of the most High, for they are men devoted to destruction. God so loves
his Saints, that he makes nothing to give whole Nations for their ransom. He
rip't open the very womb of Egypt, to save the life of Israel his child, Isa.
43.3.

for another coast, it belongs to the Saints into whose bosom this truth
unlades all her comfort: see God shutting the door upon you, when he sets his
children to feast themselves with such dainties, Esaias 65.13. My servants shall
eat, but ye shall be hungry; my servants shall drink; but ye shall be thirsty.
God has his set number, which he provides for; He knows how many he has in
his family: these and no more shall sit down. One chief dish at the Saints
board is the Almighty power of God; This was set before Abraham, and stands
before all his Saints, that they may eat to fullness of comfort on it; But
thou shall be hungry; He is Almighty to pardon, but he will not use it for thee
an impenitent sinner; thou have not a friend on the bench, not an attribute in
all Gods Name will speak for thee: Mercy it self will sit and vote with the
rest of its fellow-attributes for thy damnation. God is able to save and help
in a time of need, but upon what acquaintance is it that thou art so bold with
God, as to expect his saving arm to be stretched forth for thee? Though a man
will rise at midnight to let in a child, that cries and knocks at his door,
yet he will not take so much pains for a dog, that lies howling there. This
presents thy condition, sinner, sad enough, yet this is to tell thy story
fairest; for that Almighty power of God which is engaged for the believers
salvation, is as deeply obliged to bring thee to thy execution, and damnation.
What greater tie then an oath? God himself is under an oath to be the
destruction of every impenitent soul. That oath which God swear in his wrath
against the unbeleeving Israelites, that they should not enter into his rest,
concerns every unbeleever to the end of the world. In the Name of God
consider, were it but the oath of a man, or a company of men, that like those
in the Acts, should swear to be the death of such a one, and thou were the
man, would it not fill thee with fear and trembling night and day, and take
away the quiet of thy life, till they were made friends? What then are their
pillows stuffed with, who can sleep so soundly without any horror or amazement,
though they be told, that the Almighty God is under an oath of damning them
body and soul, without timely repentance? O bethink your selves, sinners, is it
wisdom, or valor to refuse terms of mercy from Gods hands, whose Almighty
power if rejected, will soon bring you into the hands of justice? and how
fearful a thing that is, to fall into the hands of Almighty God, no tongue can
express, no not they who feel the weight of it.



There is yet more with me then against me. One Almighty is more then many
Mighties. All these mighty sins and devils, make not one Almighty sin, or
an Almighty devil. Oppose to all the hideous charges brought against thee by
them this only attribute. As the French Ambassador once silenced the
Spaniards pride in repeating his Masters many titles, with one that drowned
them all. God himself, Hosea 11.9. when he had aggravated his peoples sins to
the height, then to show what a God can do, breaks out into a sweet promise: I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, and why not? I am God, and not
man. I will show the Almightinesse of my mercy. Something like our usual
phrase; when a child or a woman strikes us, I am a man, and not a child, or
woman, therefore I will not strike again. The very considering God to be God,
supposes him Almighty to pardon as well as to avenge, and this is some relief;
But then to consider it is Almighty power in bond and Covenant to pardon, this
is more; As none can bind God but himself, so none can break the bond himself
makes: and are they not his own words, that he will abundantly pardon? Isa. 55.
he will multiply to pardon, as if he had said, I Will drop mercy with your sin,
and spend all I have, rather then let it be said my good is overcome of your
evil. It fares with the gracious soul in this case as with a Captain, that
yields his Castle upon gracious terms of having his life spared, and he safely
conveyed to his house, there to be settled peaceably in his estate and
possessions, for all which he has the Generals hand and Seal, on which he
marches forth; but the rude soldiers assault him, and put him in fear of his
life, he appeals to the General, (whose honor now is engaged for him) and is
presently releeved, and his enemies punished: Thou may poor soul, when
accused by Satan, mollested by his terrors, say, It is God that justifies; I
have his hand to it, that I should have my life given me as soon as I laid down
my arms and submitted to him, which I desire to do; behold, the gates of my
heart are open to let the Prince of peace in, and is not the Almighty able to
perform his promise? I commit my self to him as unto a faithful Creator.

Secondly, improve this Almighty power of God, and thy interest therein, in
temptations to sin, when thou art overpowered, and fliest before the face of
thy strong corruption, or fear thou shall one day fall by it, make bold to
take hold of this attribute, and reinforce thy self from it again to resist,
and in resisting, to believe a timely victory over it. The Almighty God stands
in sight of thee while thou art in the valley fighting, and stays but for a
call from thee when distressed in battle, and then he will come to thy rescue:
Jehoshaphat cried, when in the throng of his enemies, and the Lord helped him,
much more may thou promise thy self his succor in thy soul-combates: Betake
thy self to the throne of grace with that promise; Sin shall not have dominion
over you: and before thou urgest it (the more to help thy faith,) comfort thy
self with this, that though this word Almighty is not expressed, yet it is
implied in this and every promise, and thou may without adding a title to
the Word of God read it in thy soul; sin shall not have dominion over you,
says the Almighty God, for this and all his attributes are the constant seal
to all his promises. Now soul put the bond in suit, fear not the recovery,
it is debt, and so due: He is able whom thou suest, and so there is no fear of
losing the charge of the suit, and he that was so gracious to bind himself
when he was free, will be so faithful (being able) to perform now he is bound:
only while thou expectest the performance of the promise, and the assistance of
this Almighty power against thy corruptions, take heed that thou keep under the
shadow of this attribute, and condition of this promise. Psalm 91.1.
The shadow will not cool except in it; what good to have the shadow, though of
a mighty rock, when we sit in the open Sun? To have Almighty power engaged for
us, and we to throw our selves out of the protection thereof by bold salleys
into the mouth of temptation? The Saints falls have been, when they run out of
their trench and hold; for like the conies, they are a weak people in
themselves, and their strength lies in the rock of Gods Almightinesse, which is
their habitation.

Jonas to run from it; encourage thy self with that of God to Gideon, whom he
called from the flaile to thresh the mountains, Go in this thy might, has not
God called thee? fall to the work God sets thee about, and thou engagest his
strength for thee. The way of the Lord is strength. Run from thy work, and thou
engagest Gods strength against thee, he will send some storm or other after thee
to bring home his runaway servant. How often has the Coward been killed in a
ditch, or under some hedge, when the valiant soldier that stood his ground and
kept his place got off with safety and honor? Art thou called to suffer?
flinch not because thou art afraid, thou shall never be able to bear the
cross; God can lay it so even, thou shall not feel it; though thou should
find no succor till thou come to the prison-door, yea, till thou have one
foot on the ladder, or thy neck on the block, despair not. In the Mount will
the Lord be seen. And in that hour he can give thee such a look of his sweet
face, as shall make the blood come in the ghastly face of a cruel death, and
appear lovely in thy eye for his sake. He can give thee so much comfort in
hand, as thou shall acknowledge God is aforehand with thee, for all thy shame
and pain thou can endure for him; And if it should not amount to this, yet so
much as will bear all thy charges thou can be put to in the way, lies ready
told in that promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thou shall have it at sight, and this may
satisfy a Christian, especially if he considers, though he does not carry so
much of heavens joy about him to heaven as others, yet he shall meet it as soon
as he comes to his Fathers house, where it is reserved for him. In a word,
Christian, rely upon thy God, and make thy daily applications to the throne of
grace, for continual supplies of strength: you little think how kindly he takes
it, that you will make use of him, the oftener the better, and the more you come
for, the more welcome; else why would Christ have told his disciples, Hitherto
ye have ask't nothing; but to express his large heart in giving, loath to put
his hand to his purse for a little, and therefore by a familiar kind of
Rhetoric puts them to rise higher in asking, as Naaman when Gehazi asks one
talent, entreats him to take two; such a bountiful heart thy God has, while
thou art asking a little peace and joy, he bids thee open thy mouth wide, and
he will fill it, Go and ransack thy heart, Christian, from one end to the other,
find out thy wants, acquaint thy self with all thy weaknesses, and set them
before the Almighty, as the Widow her empty vessels before the Prophet, had
thou more then thou can bring, thou may have them all filled. God has
strength enough to give, but he has no strength to deny, here the Almighty
himself (with reverence be it spoken) is weak; even a child, the weakest in
grace of his family, that can but say Father, is able to overcome him; and
therefore let not the weakness of thy faith encourage thee. No greater motive
to the bowels of mercy to stir up Almighty power to relieve thee, then thy
weakness, when pleaded in the sense of it. The pale face and thin cheeks (I
hope) move more with us, then the canting language of a stout sturdy beggar.
Thus that soul that comes laden in the sense of his weak faith, love,
patience, the very weakness of them carries an argument along with them for
succor.

CHAP. V. Wherein is answered a grand Objection, that some disconsolate souls
may raise against the former Discourse.
Zerviah are so strong, that I am ready to say, all the Preachers do but
flatter me, that do pour their oil of comfort upon my head, and tell me I
shall at last get the Conquest of these mine enemies, and see that joyful day
wherein with David, I shall sing to the Lord, for delivering me out of the
hands of all mine enemies. I have prayed for strength for such a duty, and
find it come off as weakly and dead-heartedly as before. If God be with me by
his mighty power to help me, why then is all this befailen me?

thou layest down this sad Conclusion against thy God or self, see whether he
has not conveyed in some strength by another door: Perhaps thou have not
strength to conquer it so soon as thou desire, but has he not given further
praying strength against it? Thou prayedst before, but now more earnestly, all
the powers of thy soul are up to plead with God; Before thou wast more
favorable and moderate in thy request, now thou have a zeal, thou can take
no denial, yea, welcome any thing in the room of thy corruption; Would God but
take thy sin and send a cross, thou would bless him: Now, poor soul, is
this nothing, no strength? Had not thy God reinforced thee, thy sin would have
weakened thy spirit of prayer, and not increased it. David began to recover
himself, when he began to recover his Spirit of prayer. The stronger the cry,
the stronger the child, I warrant you. Jacob wrestled, and this is called his
strength, Hos. 12. It appeared, there was much of God in him that he could take
such hold of the Almighty, as to keep it, though God seemed to shake him off;
If thus thou art enabled, soul, to deal with the God of heaven, no fear but
thou shall be much more able to deal with sin and Satan. If God has given thee
so much strength, to wrestle with him above and against denials, thou have
prevailed with the stronger of the two: overcome God, and he will overcome the
other for thee. Again, perhaps thou have been praying for further strength to
be communicated to thee in duty, that thou might be more spiritual,
vigorous, united, sincere, and the like therein, and yet thou find thy old
distempers hanging about thee, as if thou had never acquainted God with thy
aile; Well, soul, look once again into thy bosom with an unprejudiced eye,
though thou do not find the assisting strength thou prayedst for, yet have
thou no more self-abasing strength? perhaps the annoyance thou have from these
remaining distempers in duty, occasion thee to have a meaner opinion of all thy
duties then ever, yea, they make thee abhor thy self in the sense of these, as
if thou had so many loathsome vermein about thee. Jobs condition on the
dunghill, with all his botches and running sores on his body, appears desirable
to thee, in comparison of thine, whose soul thou complainest is worse then his
body. O this afflicts thy soul deeply, does it not? that thou should appear
before the Lord with such a dead, divided heart, and do his work worst that
deserves best at thy hands, and is all this nothing? Surely, Christian, thine
eyes are held as much as Hagars, or else thou would see the streamings forth
of divine grace in this frame of thy heart; surely others will think God has
done a mighty work in thy soul; What harder and more against the hair, then
to bring our proud hearts to take shame for that, whereof they naturally boast
and glory? And is it nothing for thee to tread on the very neck of thy duties,
and count them matter of thy humiliation and abasing, which others make the
matter of their confidence and self-rejoycing? Good store of virtue has gone
from Christ, to dry this issue of pride in thy heart, which sometimes in
gracious ones runs through and through their duties, that it is seen or may be
by those that have less grace then themselves.



of a souls weakness, is an especial means to excite it into a further care
and diligence: One that knows his weakness, how prone he is in company to
forget himself, in passion how apt he is to fly out, if there be a principle
of true grace, this will excite him to be more fearful and watchful, then
another that has obtained greater strength against such great temptations. As
a child that writes for money to his father, none comes presently, this makes
him husband that little he has the better, not a penny now shall be laid out
idly; Thus when a Christian has prayed against such a sin again and again, and
yet finds himself weak, prone to be worsted, O how careful will this, should
this make such a one of every company, of every occasion? Such a one had not
need give his enemy any advantage.

David, Psalm. 116.11, 12. I said in my haste, All men are liars. What shall I
render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? As if David had said,
notwithstanding all the comfortable messages I had from God by his Prophets
concerning this matter, my own prayers, and those remarkable providence, which
carried in them a partial answer to them, and performance of what was promised,
yet I betrayed much unbelief, questioning the truth of the one, and the return
of the other; and has God notwithstanding all my infirmities fulfilled my
desire, and performed his promise? O what shall I render unto the Lord? Thus
David reads Gods mercy through the spectacles of his own weakness and
infirmity, and it appears great, whereas if a mercy should come in, as an
answer to a duty managed with such strength of faith, and height of other
graces, as might free him and his duty from usual infirmities, this might prove
a snare, and occasion some self-applauding, rather then mercy-admiring thoughts
in the creature.

babes, out of whose mouth God is perfecting his praise, by ordaining such
strength for thee, that thou a babe in grace, shall yet foil a giant in wrath
and power.



duty, to mortify corruption and the like? perhaps thou will say, Yes, I have
waited on those Ordinances, which are the way in which he has promised to give
out strength. But is this all? thou may come to them, and not wait on God in
them. Have thou not carnally expected strength from them, and so put the
Ordinance, as she her husband in Gods stead? Has not the frame of thy spirit
some affinity with theirs in James 4.13. We will go into such a city, and buy,
and sell, and get gain: Has not thy heart said, I will go and hear such a
man, and get comfort, get strength? and do thou wonder thou art weak, barren
and unfruitful? Are Ordinances God, that they should make you strong or
comfortable? Thou may hear them answer thee, poor soul, as the King to the
woman in the siege of Samaria: Help, O prayer, say thou, or, O Minister; How
can they help except the Lord help: These are but Christ's servants: Christ
keeps the Key of his wine-cellar, they cannot so much as make you drink, when
you come to their Masters house; and therefore, poor soul, stay not short of
Christ, but press through all the crowd of Ordinances, and ask to speak with
Jesus, to see Jesus and touch him, and virtue will come forth.

David's army attained not to be equal with his few Worthies in prowess and
honor, and yet did not cashiere themselves: thou have reason to be thankful
for the meanest place in the army of Saints, the least communications of Gospel
mercy and grace must not be over-look't. As Soon as ever Moses with his army was
through the sea, they strike up before they stir from the bank-side, and
acknowledge the wonderful appearance of Gods power and mercy for them, though
this was but one step in their way; a howling wilderness presented it self to
them, and they not able to subsist a few days with all their provision, for
all their great victory, yet Moses, he will praise God for this handsel of
mercy. This holy man knew the only way to keep credit with God, so as to have
more, was to keep touch, and pay down his praise for what was received. If thou
would have fuller communications of divine strength, own God in what he
has done. Art thou weak? bless God thou have life. Do thou through
feebleness often fail in duty, and fall into temptation? Mourn in the sense
of these: yet bless God, that thou do not live in a total neglect of duty,
out of a profane contempt thereof, and that in stead of falling through
weakness, thou do not lie in the mire of sin through the wickedness of thy
heart. The unthankful soul may thank it self, it thrives not better.

Peter's sin, by which he was drawn to engage further then became an humble
faith, running into the devils-quarters, and so became his prisoner for a
while. The good man, when in his right temper, had thoughts low enough of
himself, as when he ask't his Master, Is it I? but he that feared at one time,
lest he might be the traitor, at another cannot think so ill of himself, as to
suspect he should be the denyer of his Master. What he? No, though all the rest
should forsake him, yet he would stand to his colors; Is this thy case,
Christian? Possibly God has given thee much of his mind, thou art skilful in
the Word of life, and therefore thou dare venture to breath in corrupt air,
as if only the weak spirits of less knowing Christians, exposed them to be
infected with the contagion of error and heresy; Thou have a large portion of
grace, or at least thou think so, and venturest to go where an humble-minded
Christian would fear his heels should slip under him. Truly now thou temptest
God to suffer thy lock to be cut, when thou art so bold to lay thy head in the
lap of a temptation. Secondly, pride appears in the neglect of those means,
whereby the Saints graces and comforts are to be fed when strongest. May be,
Christian, when thou art under fears and doubts then God has thy company,
thou art often with thy pitcher at his door, but when thou have got any measure
of peace, there grows presently some strangeness between God and thee: thy
pitcher walks not as it was wont to these Wells of salvation. No wonder if thou
(though rich in grace and comfort) go behinde-hand, seeing thou spendest on
the old stock, and drivest no trade at present to bring in more: Or if thou
do not thus neglect duty, yet may be thou do not perform it with that
humility, which formerly beautified the same: then thou prayedst in the sense
of thy weakness to get strength, now thou prayest to show thy strength, that
others may admire thee. And if once (like Hezekiah) we call in Spectators to
see our treasure, and applaud us for our gifts and comfort, then it is high
time for God, if he indeed love us, to send some messengers to carry these away
from us, which carry our hearts from him.

Luke 24.49. Stay ye in Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power from on High.
Thus he says to thee, stay at Jerusalem, wait on him in the means he has
appointed, till thou be endued with further power to mortify thy
corruptions, etc. And for thy comfort know



Secondly, assure thy self when thou art at the greatest pinch strength shall
come: They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength: when the last
handful of meal was dressing, then is the Prophet sent to keep the Widows
house. When temptation is strong, thy little strength even spent, and thou
ready to yield into the hands of thine enemies, then expect succors from
heaven to enable thee to hold out under the temptation: Thus to Paul, My grace
is sufficient, or power from heaven to raise the siege, and drive away the
tempter; thus to Job, when Satan had him at an advantage, then God takes him
off. Like a wise Moderatour, when the Respondent is hard put to it by a subtle
Opponent, takes him off, when he would else run him down. James 5.11. Ye have
heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord
is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

EPHESIANS 6.11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.


THis verse is a Key to the former, wherein the Apostle had exhorted believers
to encourage, and bear up their fainting spirits on the Lord, and the power of
his might. Now in these words he explains himself, and shows how he would have
them do this, not presumptuously come into the field without that armor, which
God has appointed to be worn by all his soldiers, and yet with a bravado to
trust in the power of God to save them. That soul is sure to fall short of
home, (heaven I mean) who has nothing but a carnal confidence on the Name of
God, blown up by the ignorance of God and himself: No, he that would have his
confidence duly placed on the Power of God, must conscienciously use the means
appointed for his defense, and not rush naked into the battle, like that
fanatic spirit at Munster, who would needs go forth, and chase away the whole
army, then besieging that city, with no other cannon, then a few words charged
with the Name of The Lord of hosts, (which he blasphemously made bold to use)
saying, In the Name of the Lord of hosts depart. But himself soon perished; to
learn others wisdom by what he paid for his folly. What foolish braving
language shall you hear drop from the lips of the most profane and ignorant
among us? they trust in God, hope in his mercy, defy the devil and all his
works, and such like stuff, who yet are poor naked creatures, without the
least piece of Gods armor upon their souls. To cashiere such presumption from
the Saints Camp, he annexeth this Directory to his exhortation, Put on the
whole armor of God, etc. So that the words fall into these two general parts.

First, a Direction annex't to the former Exhortation, showing how we may in a
regular way come to be strong in the Lord, that is, by putting on the whole
armor of God.

that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. In the Direction
observe,

Armor.

Armor of God

whole Armor of God.

Put on the whole Armor of God.

To begin with the first, the furniture which every one must get that would
fight Christ's battles. The question here will be, What is this Armor?

First, by armor is meant Christ; we read of putting on the Lord Jesus, Romans
13.14. where Christ is set forth under the notion of Armor. The Apostle does
not exhort them for rioting and drunkenness, to put on sobriety and
temperance; for chambering and wantonness, put on chastity; (as the
Philosopher would have done) but bids, Put on the Lord Jesus Christ; implying
thus much till Christ be put on, the creature is unarmed. It Is not a man's
morality and Philosophical virtues, that will repel a temptation, sent with a
full charge from Satan's cannon, though possibly it may the pistol shot of some
less solicitation; so that he is the man in Armor, that is in Christ. Again,
the Graces of Christ these are Armor, as the Girdle of truth, the breast plate
of righteousness, and the rest. Hence we are bid also put on the new man, Ephesians.
4.24. which is made up of all the several graces, as its parts and members. And
he is the unarmed soul, that is the unregenerate soul. Not excluding those
duties and means which God has appointed the Christian to use for his defense,

The phrase thus opened; the Point is,

CHAP. I. Shows the Christlesse and graceless soul, to be the soul without
Armor, and therein his misery.
Observe.
THat a person in a Christlesse, graceless state is naked and unarmed, and so
unfit to fight Christ's battles against sin and Satan. Or thus, A soul out of
Christ is naked and destitute of all armor to defend him against sin and
Satan. God at first sent man forth in complete armor, being created in
righteousness and true holiness; but by a wile the devil stripped him, and
therefore as soon as the first sin was completed, it is written, Genesis 3.7. They
were naked, that is, poor weak creatures, at the will of Satan a subdued
people, disarmed by their proud Conqueror, and unable to make head against
him. Indeed it cost Satan some dispute to make the first breach, but after that
he had once the gates opened to let him in as Conqueror into the heart of man,
he plays Rex: behold, a troop of other sins crowd in after him, without any
stroke or strife, in stead of confessing their sins, they run their head in a
bush, and by their good will would not come where God is, and when they cannot
fly from him, how do they prevaricate before him? They peale one of another,
shifting the sin rather then suing for mercy. So quickly were their hearts
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. And this is the woeful condition of
every son and daughter of Adam, naked he finds us, and slaves he makes us,
till God by his effectual call delivers us from the power of Satan into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, which will further appear, if we consider this
Christlesse state in a fourfold notion.

Ephesians. 2.12. Ye were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, strangers from the Covenant of Promise, etc. Such a one has no more to
do with any Covenant-promise, then he that lives at Rome has to do with the
Charter of London, which is the birthright of its own Denisons, not Strangers.
He is without God in the world, he can claim no more protection from God, then
an out-lawed subject from his Prince; If any mischief befalls him, the mends is
in his own hands, whereas God has his hedge of special providence about his
Saints, and the devil, though his spite be most at them, dares not come upon
Gods ground to touch any of them, without particular leave. Now what a deplored
condition is that, wherein a soul is left to the wide world, in the midst of
legions of lusts and devils, to be rent and torn l^ke a silly hare among a
pack of hounds, and no God to call them off? Let God leave a people, though
never so warlike, presently they lose their wits, cannot find their hands; A
company of children or wounded men may rise up, and chase them out of their
fenced Cities, because God is not with them; which made Caleb and Joshuah
pacify the mutinous Israelites at the tidings of giants and walled cities with
this; They are bread for us, their defense is departed from them. How much more
must that soul be as bread to Satan, that has no defense from the Almighty?
Take men of the greatest parts, natural or acquired accomplishments, who only
want an union with Christ, and renewing grace from Christ: O what fools does
the devil make of them, leading them at his pleasure, some to one lust, some to
another; the proudest of them all is slave to one or other, though it be to the
ruining of body and soul for ever, Where lies the mystery, that men of such
parts and wisdom, should debase themselves to such drudgery work of hell? even
here, they are in a state of alienation from God, and no more able of
themselves to break the devils prison, then a slave to run from his chain.

Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord. Ye
were darkness, not in the dark, so one that has an eye may be. A child of
light is often in the dark, concerning some truth or promise, but then has a
spiritual eye, which the Christlesse person wants, and so is darkness. And
this darkness cannot be enlightened, but by its union with Christ, which is
expressed in the following phrase; But now are ye light in the Lord. As the eye
of the body once put out, can never be restored by the creatures Art, so
neither can the spiritual eye, lost by Adams sin, be restored by the teaching
of men or Angels. It is one of the diseases which Christ came to cure, Luke
4.18. It Is true, there is a light of reason, which is imparted to every man by
nature, but this light is darkness, compared with the Saints. As the night is
dark to the day, even when the moon is in its full glory. This night-light of
Reason may save a person from some ditch or pond, great and broad sins, but it
will never help him to escape the more secret corruptions, which the Saint sees
like atoms in the beams of spiritual knowledge. There is such curious work the
creature is to do, which cannot be wrought by candlelight of natural
knowledge. Nay more, where the common illumination of the Spirit is superadded
to this light of nature, yet that is darkness compared with the sanctifying
knowledge of a renewed soul, which does both discover spiritual truths, and
warm the heart at the same time with the love of truth, having like the Sun a
prolifical and quickening virtue, which the other wants; so that the heart lies
under such common illuminations cold and dead. He has no more strength to
resist Satan, then if he knew not the command; whereas the Christians
knowledge, even when taken Prisoner by a temptation, pursues and brings back
the soul as Abraham his Nephew, out of the enemies hands; which hints the third

Romans 5. When we were without strength, Christ came to die for the ungodly.
What can a disarmed people that have not sword or gun do to shake off the yoke
of a conquering enemy? Such a power has Satan over the soul, Luke 11.21. he
is called the strong man that keeps the soul as his Palace: If he has no
disturbance from heaven, he need fear no mutiny within; he keeps all in peace
there. What the Spirit of God does in a Saint, that in a manner does Satan in a
sinner. The Spirit fills the heart of his with love, joy, holy desires, fears;
so Satan fills the sinners heart with pride, lust, lying: Why has Satan filled
thy heart, says Peter? And thus filled with Satan (as the drunkard with wine)
he is not his own man, but Satan's slave.



against its command set open the City gate to the enemy, and so deliver
traitorously their conscience prisoner to their lusts: But when Christ comes to
demand the soul, he meets a scornful answer: Depart from us, we desire not the
knowledge of the most High. We will not have this man to reign over us. With
one consent they vote against him, and rise up as the Philistines against
Samson whom they called the Destroyer of the country. Ye will not come, unto
me, says Christ. O how true are poor sinners to the devils trust! They will
not deliver the Castle they hold for Satan, till fired over their heads.
Pharaoh opposes Moses on one hand, and Israel cry out upon him on the other.
Such measure has Christ both at Satan's hand, and the sinners. That which
lessened Alexanders Conquests, was, he overcame a people buried in barbarism,
without arms or discipline of war; and that which heightened Cesars, (though
not so many) he overcame a people more warlike and furnished. Satan's victories
are of poor ignorant, graceless souls, who have neither arms, nor hands, nor
hearts to oppose; but when he assaults a Saint, then he sits down before a city
with gates and bars, and ever rises with shame; unable to take the weakest
hold, to pluck the weakest Saint out of Christ's hands; but Christ brings souls
out of his dominion with a high hand, in spite of all the force and fury of
hell, which like Pharaoh and his host pursue them.

Tower of David, Cant. 4.4. built for an Armourie, wherein there hang a
thousand bucklers; all the shields of mighty men. Hence the Saints have ever
had their armor, and the preaching of the Gospel unlocks it. As Gospel Light
ascends, so Satan's shady Kingdom of darkness vanishes. Rev. 14.6. there one
Angel comes forth to preach the everlasting Gospel, and another Angel follows
at his back, verse 8. crying Victoria, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. The very
first charge the Gospel gave to the Kingdom of darkness, shook the
foundations thereof, and put the legions of hell to the run. The seventy, whom
Christ sent out, bring this speedy account of their embassage; Lord, even the
devils are subject unto us through thy Name: and Christ answers, I beheld Satan
as lightning fall from heaven. As if he had said, it is no news you tell me, I
beheld Satan falllng when I sent you: I knew the Gospel would make work where
it came; and therefore no wonder Satan labors to dispossess the Gospel, which
dispossesseth him; he knows that army is near lost, whose magazine is blown
up; It Is true indeed, under the very Gospel the devil rages more in such
swinish sinners, as are given over of God to be possessed of that fiend, for
rejecting of his grace; but he is cast out of others, who before the loving
kindness of God to man appeared in the Gospel, were commanded by him, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures; But now by the light of the Gospel they see their
folly, and by the grace it brings are enabled to renounce him. This, this is
that which torments the foul spirit, to see himself forsaken of his old
friends and servants, and this new Lord to come and take his subjects from him:
and therefore he labors either by persecution to drive the Gospel away, or by
policy to persuade a people to send it away from their coasts, and was he ever
more likely to effect it among us? What a low esteem has he brought the
preaching of the Gospel unto? the price is fallen half in half to what it was
some years past, even among those that have been counted the greatest
Merchants upon the Saints Exchange. Some, that have thought it worth crossing
the seas, even to the Indies (almost as far as others fetch their gold) to
enjoy the Gospel, are loath now to cross the street to hear it at so cheap a
rate; And some that come, (who formerly trembled at it) make it most of their
errand to mock at, or quarrel with it. Nay, it is come to such a pass, that
the Word is so heavy a charge to the squeamish stomachs of many Professors,
that it comes up again presently, and abundance of choler with it against the
Preacher, especially if it fall foul of the sins and errors of the times, the
very naming of which is enough to offend, though the Nation be sinking under
their weight. What reproaches are the faithful Ministers of the Gospel laden
withal? I call heaven and earth to witness, whether ever they suffered a
hotter persecution of the tongue, then in this apostatizing age. A new
generation of Professors are started up, that will not know them to be the
Ministers of Christ, though those before them, (as well in grace as time, more
able to derive their spiritual pedigree, then themselves) have to their death
owned them for their spiritual fathers. And must not the Ark needs shake, when
they that carry it are thus struck at, both in their person and office? what
are these men doing? alas, they know not, Father, forgive them: They are
cutting off their right hand with their left; they are making themselves and
the Nation naked, by despising the Gospel, and those that bring it.

Russia, where their poor (through extreme necessity) have this desperate
manner of begging in their streets; Give me and cut me, give me and kill me?)
and can thou let Satan come and cut thy throat in thy bed of sloth, rather
then accept of clothes to cover, yea, Armor to defend thee? (I mean Christ and
his grace, which in the Gospel is tendered to you.) And do not lightly believe
your own flattering hearts, if they shall tell you, you are provided of these
already. I am afraid many a gaudy Professor will be found as naked in regard
of Christ, and truth of grace, as drunkards and swearers themselves; Such there
are, who content themselves with a Christ in Profession, in gifts, and in
duties, but seek not a Christ in solid grace, and so perish; those indeed are
an ornament to the Christian, as the scarf and feather to the soldier, but
these quench not the bullet in battle, it is Christ and his grace does that,
therefore labor to be sound rather then brave Christians. Grace embellisht
with gifts is the more beautiful, but these without grace only the richer
spoil for Satan.

The second Branch of the first general part of the words follows; and that
is, the quality or kind of that Armor, the Christian is here directed to
provide. It is not any trash will serve the turn, better none then not Armor
of proof, and none such, but Armor of God. In a twofold respect it must be of
God. First, in institution and appointment. Secondly, in constitution.

CHAP. II. Shows, that the Armor we use against Satan, must be divine in the
Institution, such only as God appoints.
FIrst, Observe.
the Christians Armor which he wears must be of divine Institution and
appointment. The soldier comes into the field with no arms, but what his
General commands, it is not left to every ones fancy to bring what weapons he
please, this will breed confusion. The Christian soldier is bound up to Gods
order, though the army be on earth, yet the Council of War fits in Heaven; This
duty ye shall do, that means ye shall use; and to do more or use other then God
commands, though with some seeming success against sin; such shall surely be
called to account for this boldness. The discipline of war among men is strict
in this case. Some have suffered death by a Council of war, even when they have
beaten the enemy, because out of their place, or beside their order. God is
very precise in this point, he will say to such as invent ways to worship him
of their own, coin means to mortify corruption, obtain comfort in their own
mint; Who has required this at your hands? this is truly to be righteous
overmuch, (as Solomon speaks) when we will pretend to correct Gods Law, and
add supplements of our own to his rule. Who will pay that man his wages that
is not set on work by God? God tells Israel, Jer. 23.32.
the false Prophets shall do them no good, because they come not of his errand;
so neither will those ways and means help, which are not of Gods appointing;
Gods thoughts are not as man's, nor his ways as ours, which he uses to attain
his ends by. If man had been to set forth the Israelitish army, now to march
out of Egypt; surely his wisdom would have directed rather to have plundered
the Egyptians of their horse and arms, (as more necessary for such an
expedition) then to borrow their jewels and eare-rings, but God will have them
come out naked and on foot; and Moses keeps close to his order; yea, when any
horses were taken in battle, because God commanded they should be houghed, they
obeyed, though to their seeming disadvantage. It was Gods war they waged, and
therefore but reasonable they should be under his command, they encamp't and
marched by his order; as the Ark moved or rested, they fought by his command,
the number appointed by him, the means and weapons they should use, all
prescribed by God, as in the assault of Jericho: and what is the Gospel of all
this? (for surely God had an eye in that to our marching to heaven, and our
fighting with these cursed spirits and lusts that stand in our way) but that we
should fight lawfully, using those means, which we have from his mouth in his
Word?



First, those that fight Satan in Armor, that has no divine Institution, as



Cor. 10.3. the Apostle speaks there of warring after the flesh, that is, with
weapons or means, which man's carnal wisdom prompts to, and not God commands,
and so are weak. How few are clad with other in the day of battle; First, when
Satan tempts to sin, if he has not presently a peaceable entrance; yet the
resistance commonly made is carnal; the strength carnal they rest on, their
own, not Gods; the motives carnal, as the fear of man more then of God. Where
one says, How shall I do this and sin against God? many in their hearts say,
How shall I do this and anger man, displease my Master, provoke my Parents, and
lose the good opinion of my Minister? Herod feared John, and did many things:
had he feared God, he would have labored to have done every thing. The like
may be said of all other motives, which have their spring in the creature, not
in God; they are armor which will not out-stand shot. If thy strength lie in a
creature-lock, it may be soon cut off; if in God it will hold, as his command;
It is written: I cannot do it, but I must set my foot on the Law of my Maker.
Or the love of Christ; I cannot come at my lust, but I must go over my bleeding
Savior, and therefore away, foul Tempter, I hate thee and thy motion. This
foundation is rock, and will stand; but if it be some carnal respect that
balanceth thee, another more weighty may be found of the same kind, which will
cast the scales another way. She that likes not the man because of his dress
only, may soon be gained when he comes in another habit. Satan can change his
suit, and then thy mouth will be stopped when thy carnal argument is taken off.
Secondly, when the Word or Conscience rebuke for sin, what is the armor that
men commonly cover their guilty souls withal? truly no other then carnal. If
they cannot evade the charge that these bring, then they labor to mitigate it,
by extenuating the fact. It Is true, will they say, I did (I confess) commit
such a fault, but I was drawn in; The woman gave me, and I did eat, was Adams
fig-leaf armor: it is but once or twice, and I hope that breaks no such
squares, was this such a great business? I know jolly Christians will do as
much as this comes to; I thank God, I cannot be charged for whore or thief:
This is the armor that must keep off the blow. But if Conscience will not be
thus taken off, then they labor to divert their thoughts, by striking up the
loud music of carnal delights, that the noise of one may drown the other, or
with Cain, they will go from the presence of the Lord, and come no more at
those Ordinances which make their head ache, and hinder the rest of their raving
consciences. If yet the ghost haunts them, then they labor to pacify it, with
some good work or other, which they set against their bad; their alms and
charity in their old age, must expiate the oppression and violence of their
former days: as if this little frankincense were enough to air and take away
the plague of Gods curse, which is in their ill gotten goods. Thus poor
creatures catch at any sorry covering, which will not so much as hide their
shame, much less choke the bullet of Gods wrath, when God shall fire upon
them; this must he Armor of Gods appointing. Adam was naked for all his
fig leaves, Genesis 3.21.
while God taught him to make coats of skins, covertly (as some think)
shadowing out Christ the true Lamb of God, whose righteousness alone was
appointed by him to cover our shame, and arm our naked souls from the sight
and stroke of his justice.





our weapons are only mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10. The Ark was the means of
the Jews safety, but carnally applauded and gloried in, hastened their
overthrow: so duties and Ordinances, gifts and graces in their place, are means
for the souls defense; Satan trembles as much as the Philistines at the Ark, to
see a soul diligent in the use of duty, and exercise of grace; but when the
creature confides in them, this is dangerous. As some, when they have prayed,
think they please God for all day, though they take little heed to their steps.
Others have so good an opinion of their faith, sincerity, knowledge, thut you
may as soon make them believe they are dogs, as that they may ever be taken in
such an error or sinful practice. Others, when assisted in duty, are prone to
stroke their own head with a Been fecisti Bernarde, and so promise themselves
to speed, because they have done their errand so well. What speak such passages
in the hearts of men, but a carnal confidence in their armor to their ruin?
Many souls (we may safely say) do not only perish praying, repenting and
believing after a sort, but they perish by their praying and repenting etc.
while they carnally trust in these. As it falls out sometimes, that the
soldier in battle loses his life by means of his own Armor, it is so heavy
he cannot fly with it, and so close buckled to him, that he cannot get it off,
to fly for his life without it. If we be saved, we must come naked to Christ
for all our duties, we will not fly to Christ while confiding in them, and
some are so locked into them, that they cannot come without them, and so in a
day of temptation are trampled under the feet of Gods wrath, and Satan's fury.
The poor Publican throws down his arms, (that is, all confidence in himself)
cries for quarter at the hands of mercy; God be merciful unto me a sinner, and
he comes off with his life, he went away justified: but the Pharisee, laden
with his righteousness, and conceited of it, stands to it, and is lost.



for his blessing. Did thou eye Gods appointment in the means, thou would
say, Soul, if there come any good of thy present service, it must drop from
heaven, for it is Gods appointment, not man's: And can I profit whether God will
or no? or think to find and bring away any soul-enriching treasure from his
Ordinance without his leave? had I not best look up to him, by whose blessing I
live more then by my bread?

Jordan that I should wash in it? what is this preaching that I should attend
on it, where I hear nothing but I knew before? what these beggarly elements of
water, and bread, and wine? Are not these the reasonings of a soul that forgets
who appoints these? Did thou remember who commands, thou would not
question what the command is; what though it be clay, let Christ use it, and it
shall open the eyes, though in it self more like to put them out. Had thou
thy eye on God, thou would silence thy carnal reason with this; It Is God
sends me to such a duty, whatsoever he says unto me I will do it, though he
should send me (as Christ them) to draw wine out of pots filled with water.



CHAP. III. Shows that the Armor we use for our defense against Satan, must
not only be divine by Institution, but constitution also.
who has begotten us to a lively hope. Jude 20. 1 Pet. 1.3.
Faith that is another principal piece in the Christians furniture, but it must
be the faith of Gods Elect. He is to take righteousness and holiness for his
breast plate: Tit. 1.1.
but it must be true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. Thus you see, Ephesians. 4.24.
it is not armor as armor, but as armor of God, that makes the soul
impregnable. That which is borne of God overcomes the world. A faith borne of
God, a hope borne of God, but the spurious adulterous brood of duties and
graces, being begot of mortal seed, cannot be immortal.

Must the souls armor be of Gods make? Use
be exhorted then to look narrowly, whether the armor ye wear, be the
workmanship of God or no. There is abundance of false ware put off now adays:
little good armor worn by the multitude of Professors: it is Satan's
after-game he plays, if he cannot please the sinner with his naked state of
profaneness; then to put him off with something like grace, some slighty
stuff, that shall neither do him good, nor Satan hurt; thus many like
children, that cry for a knife or dagger, and are pleased as well with a bone
knife, and wooden dagger, as with the best of all? so they have some armor, it
matters not what. Pray they must, but little care how it be performed: Believe
in God? yes, they hope they are not infidels: but what it is, how they come by
it, or whether it will hold in an evil-day, this never was put to the question
in their hearts. Thus thousands perish with a vain conceit, they are armed
against Satan, death and judgment, when they are miserable and naked, yea,
worse on it then those who are more naked, (those I mean) who have not a rag of
civility, to hide their shame from the worlds eye; and that in a double respect.

profane person; the one has but his lusts, his whores, his swill and draffe;
but the other has his duties, his seeming graces. O how hard is it to persuade
such a one to light, and hold Christ's stirrup, while he and his duties are made
Christ's footstool.



Therefore (I beseech you) look to your armor, David would not fight in
armor, he had not tried though it was a Kings; perhaps some thought him too
nice: What? is not the Kings armor good enough for David? Thus many will say,
Art thou so curious and precise? such a great man does thus and thus, and hopes
to come to heaven at last, and dare not thou venture thy soul in his armor?
No, Christian, follow not the example of the greatest on earth; it is thy own
soul thou venturest in battle, therefore thou can not be too choice of thy
armor. Bring thy heart to the Word, as the only touchstone of thy grace and
furniture; the Word (I told you) is the Tower of David, from whence thy armor
must be fetched, if thou can find this Tower-stamp on it, then it is of God,
else not. Try it therefore by this one Scripture-stamp. Those weapons are
mighty, which God gives his Saints to fight his battles withal, 2 Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God. The sword of
the Spirit has its point and edge, whereby it makes its way into the heart and
conscience, through the impenitency of the one, and stupidity of the other,
(wherewith Satan, as with buffe and coat of male, arms the sinner against God)
and there cuts and slashes, kills and mortifies lust in its own Castle, where
Satan thinks himself impregnable. The Breast Plate which is of God, does not
bend and break at every pat of temptation, but is of such a divine temperament,
that it repels Satan's motions with scorn on Satan's teeth. Should such a one as
I sin, as Nehemiah in another case? and such are all the rest. Now try whether
your weapons be mighty or weak: what can you do or suffer more for God, then an
hypocrite that is clad in fleshly armor? I Will tell you what the world faith,
and if you be Christians, clear your selves, and wipe off that dirt which they
throw upon your glistering armor: they say, These Professors indeed have God
more in their talk then we, they are oftener in the mount of duty then we, but
when they come down into their shops, relations and worldly employments, then
the best of them all is but like one of us; they can throw the Tables of Gods
Commandments out of their hands as well as we, come from a Sermon, and be as
covetous and griping, as peevish and passionate as the worst; they show as
little love to Christ as others, when it is matter of cost, as to relieve a
poor Saint, or maintain the Gospel, you may get more from a stranger, an
enemy, then from a professing brother. O Christians, either vindicate the Name
of Christ, whose Ensign you seem to march after, or throw away your seeming
armor, by which you have drawn the eyes of the world upon you. If you will
not, Christ himself will cashiere you, and that with shame enough ere long.
Never call that Armor of God, which defends thee not against the power of
Satan. Take therefore the several pieces of your armor, and try them, as the
soldier before he fights, will set his helmet or headpiece, as a mark at
which he lets fly a brace of bullets, and as he finds them so will wear them
or leave them; but be sure thou shootest Scripture-bullets. Thou boastest of a
breast plate of righteousness, ask thy soul, Did thou ever in thy life
perform a duty to please God, and not to accommodate thy self? Thou have prayed
often against thy sin, a great noise of these pieces have been heard coming
from thee by others, as if there were some hot fight between thee and thy
corruption, but can thou indeed show one sin thou have slain by all thy
praying? Joseph was alive, though his coat was brought bloody to Jacob and so
may thy sin be for all thy mortified look in duty, and out cry thou make
against them. If thou would thus try every piece, thy credulous heart would
not so easily be cheated with Satan's false ware.

But is all armor that is of God thus mighty? we read of weak grace, little
faith, how can this then be a trial of our armor, whether of God or not?



Peter, that it has offended so good a God. Speak, O ye hypocrites, can ye
show one tear that ever you shed in earnest for a wrong done to God? Possibly
ye may weep to see the bed of sorrow which your sins are making for you in
hell, but ye never loved God so well, as to mourn for the injury ye have done
the Name of God. It is a good gloss Augustine has upon Esau's tears, Heb.
12. Flevit quod perdidit, non quod vendidit. He wept that he lost the blessing,
not that he sold it. Thus we see an excellency of the Saints sorrow above the
hypocrites. The Christian by his sorrow shows himself a Conqueror of that sin,
which even now overcame him, while the hypocrite by his pride shows himself a
slave to a worse lust, then that he resists. While the Christian commits a sin
he hates it; whereas the other loves it while he forbears it.

O God, remember me, says Samson, this once I pray thee, and strengthen me,
that I may be at once avenged on the Philistines, for my two eyes, Judge. 16.27.
Thus prays the gracious soul, that God would but spare him a little, and
strengthen him but once before he dies, that he may be avenged on his pride,
unbelief, and those sins whereby he has most dishonored his God; but a false
heart is so far from studying revenge, that he rather swells, like the sea,
against the Law which banks his lust in, and is angry with God who has made
sin such a leap, that he must hazard his soul if he will have it.

CHAP. IV. Of the entirenesse of our furniture, It must be the whole Armor of
God.
The whole Armor of God. The Christians Armor must be complete, and that in a
threefold respect.

SECT. 1.
cap-a-pe, soul and body, the powers of the one, and senses of the other, not
any part left naked. A dart may fly in at a little hole, (like that which
brought a message of death to Ahab, through the joints of his harness) and
Satan is such an Archer, who can shoot at a penny breadth. If all the man be
armed, and only the eye lest without, Satan can soon shoot his fireballs of
lust in at that loophole, which shall set the whole house on flame. Eve looked
but on the tree, and a poisonous dare struck her to the heart. If the eye be
shut, and the ear be open to corrupt communication, Satan will soon wriggle in
at this hole; If all the outward senses be guarded, and the heart not kept with
all diligence, he will soon by his own thoughts be betrayed into Satan's hands.
Our enemies are on every side, and so must our armor be, on the right hand and
on the left, 2 Cor. 6.7. The Apostle calls sin (...), an enemy that surrounds
us. Heb. 12.1
If there be any part of the line unguarded or weakly provided, there Satan
falls on; we see the enemy often enter the city at one side, while he is beat
back on the other, for want of care to keep the whole line. Satan divides his
temptations into several squadrons, one he employes to assault here, another to
storm there. We read of fleshly wickedness and spiritual wickedness; while
thou repellest Satan tempting thee to fleshly wickedness, he may be entering
thy city at the other gate of spiritual wickedness. Perhaps thou have kept thy
integrity in the practical part of thy life; but what armor have thou to
defend thy head, thy judgment? If he surprise thee here, corrupting that with
some error, then thou will not long hold out in thy practice. He that could
not get thee to profane the Sabbath among Sensualists and Atheists, will under
the disguise of such a corrupt principle as Christian liberty prevail. Thus we
see what need we have of universal armor, in regard of every part.

SECT. II.
hang together like links in a chain, stones in an arch, members in the body;
prick one vein, and the blood of the whole body may run out at that sluice;
neglect one duty, and no other will do us good. The Apostle Peter, in his
second Epistle, chap. 1. ver. 5, 6, 7. presses the Christian to a joint
endeavor, to increase the whole body of grace; indeed, that is health when the
whole body thrives. Add (says he) to your faith virtue; Faith is the
file-leading grace. Well, have thou faith, add virtue: True, faith is of a
working stirring nature; without good works it is dead or dying. Fides
pinguescit operibus, Luther. It Is kept in plight and heart by a holy life, as
the flesh which plasters over the frame of man's body, though it receives its
heat from the vitals within, yet helps to preserve the very life of those
vitals; thus good works and gracious actions have their life from faith, yet
are necessary helps to preserve the life of faith; thus we see sometimes the
child nursing the Parent that bare it, and therein performs but his duty.
Thou art fruitful in good works, yet thou art not out of the devils shot,
except thou addest to thy virtue knowledge. This is the candle without which
faith cannot see to do its work. Art thou going to give an alms? if it be not
oculata charitas, if charity has not this eye of knowledge to direct when,
how, what, and to whom thou art to give, thou may at once wrong God, the
person thou relievest, and thy self. Art thou humbling thy self for thy sin?
for want of knowledge in the tenor of the Gospel, Satan may play upon thy
ignorance, and either persuade thee thou art not humbled enough, when, God
knows, thou art almost quackled with thy tears, and even carried down by the
impetuous torrent of thy sorrow into despair, or else showing thee thy
blubbered face, may flatter thee into a carnal confidence of thy humiliation.
Perhaps thou see the Name of God dishonored in the place where thou live,
and thy spirit is stirred within thee, (as Paul's at Athens) now if knowledge
sits not in the saddle to reine and bridle in thy zeal, thou will be soon
carried over hedge and ditch, till thou fallest into some precipice or other by
thy irregular acting. Neither is knowledge enough, except thou be armed with
Temperance, which here (I conceive) is that grace, whereby the Christian (as
Master of his own house) so orders his affections (like servants to reason and
faith,) that they do not irregularly move, or inordinately lash out into
desires of, cares for, or joy in the creature comforts of this life, without
which Satan will be too hard for thee. The Historian tells us, that in one of
the famous battles between the English and French, that which lost the French
the day was a shower of English arrows, which did so gall their horse, as put
the whole army into disorder, their horse knowing no ranks, did tread down
their own men: The affections are but as the horse to the Rider, on which
knowledge should be mounted, if Satan's barbed arrows light on them, so that thy
desires of the creature prove unruly, and justle with thy desires of Christ,
thy care to keep thy credit or estate, put thy care to keep a good conscience
to disorder, and thy carnal joy in wife and child trample down, or get before
thy joy in the Lord, judge on which side victory is like to fall. Well, suppose
thou marchest provided thus far in goodly array toward heaven, while thou art
swimming in prosperity; most thou not also prepare for foul way and weather, I
mean, an afflicted estate? Satan will line the hedges with a thousand
temptations, when thou come into the narrow lanes of adversity, where thou
can not run from this sort of temptation, as in the Champaigne of prosperity:
Possibly, thou that did escape the snare of an alluring world, may be
dismounted by the same when it frowns; though temperance kept thee from being
drunk with the sweet wines of those pleasures, yet for want of patience thou
may be drunk with the wine of astonishment, which is in afflictions hand:
therefore, says the Apostle, to temperance add patience; either possess thy
self in patience, or else some raving devil of discontent will possess thee.
An impatient soul in affliction is a bedlam in chains, yea, too like the devil
in his chains, that rages against God, while he is fettered by him. Well,
have thou patience? an excellent grace indeed, but not enough; thou must be a
pious man as well as a patient. Therefore says the Apostle, to patience? add
godliness. There is an atheistical stupid patience, and there is a godly
Christian patience: Satan numbs the conscience of the one, and no wonder he
complains not that feels not; but the Spirit of Christ sweetly calmes the
other, not by taking away the sense of pain, but by overcoming it with the
sense of his love. Now godliness comprehends the whole worship of God, inward
and outward. If thou be never so exact in thy morals, and not a worshipper
of God, then thou art an Atheist. If thou do worship God, and that devoutly,
but not by Scripture-rule, thou art an idolater. If according to the rule, but
not in Spirit and truth, then thou art an hypocrite, and so fallest into the
devils mouth. Or if thou do give God one piece of his worship, and denyest
another, still Satan comes to his market. Prove. 28.9 He that turns back his
ear from hearing the Law, his prayer is an abomination to the Lord. Yet
(Christian) all thy Armor is not on. Thy godliness indeed would suffice, were
thou to live in a world by thy self, or had nothing to do but immediate
communion with God; But (Christian) thou must not always dwell on this mount of
immediate worship, and when thou descendest, thou have many brethren and
servants to thy Father, who live with thee in the same family; and thou must
comport thy self becomingly, or else thy Father will be angry. First, thou have
brethren, heirs of the same promise with thee, therefore you must add to
godliness brotherly kindness. If Satan can set you at odds, he gives a deep
wound to your godliness. You will hardly join hearts in a duty, that cannot
join hands in love. Secondly, there are not only brethren, but servants, a
multitude of profane carnal ones, who though they never had the names of sons
and daughters, yet retain to Gods family, and thy heavenly Father will have
thee walk unblameably, yea, winningly to those that are without, which that
thou may do, thou must add to brotherly kindness charity; by which grace
thou shall be willing to do good to the worst of men; when they curse thee,
thou must pray for them, yea, pray for no less then a Christ, a heaven for
them. Father, forgive them, said Christ, while they were raking in his side for
his heart-blood. And truly, I am persuaded the want of this last piece of
armor, has given Satan great advantage in these our times. We are so afraid
our charity should be too broad, whereas in this sense, if it be not as wide as
the world, it is too strait for the command which bids us do good to all. May
not we Ministers be charged with the want of this? when the strain of our
preaching is solely directed to the Saints; and no pains taken in rescuing
poor captived souls, yet uncalled, out of the devils clutches, who may hale
them to hell without any disturbance, while we are comforting the Saints, and
preaching their privileges; but in the mean time let the ignorant be ignorant
still, and the profane profane still, for want of a compassionate charity to
their souls, which would excite us to the reproving and exhorting of them,
that they might also be brought in to the way of life, as well as the Saints
encouraged, who are walking therein. We are stewards to provide bread for the
Lords house; the greatest part of our hearers cannot, must not have the
childrens bread, and shall we therefore give them no portion at all? Christ's
charity pitied the multitude, to whom in his public preaching he made special
application, as in that famous Sermon, most part of which is spent in rowsing
up the sleepy consciences of the hypocritical Pharisees, by those thunderclaps
of woes and curses, so often denounced against them, Mat. 23. Again, how great
advantage has Satan from the want of this charity in our families? Is it not
observed, how little care is taken by professing Governors of such Societies,
for the instructing their youth? Nay, it is a principle which some have drunk
in, that it is not their duty. O where is their charity in the mean time, when
they can see Satan come within their own walls, and let him drive a child, a
servant in their ignorance and profaneness to hell, and not so much as sally
out upon this enemy by a word of reproof or instruction, to rescue these silly
souls out of the murderers hand? We must leave them to their liberty forsooth,
and that is as fair play as we can give the devil; give but corrupt nature
enough of this rope, and it will soon strangle the very principles of God and
Religion in their tender years.

SECT. III.
to faith; he is ever to be completing of his grace. It is that which is
frequently pressed upon believers, Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect. And purify your selves, as God is pure. Where we have an
exact copy set, not as if we could equallize that purity and perfection which
is in God, but to make us strive the more, when we shall see how infinitely
short we fall of our copy, when we write the fairest hand. So James 1.3. Let
patience have its perfect work, that you may be entire, wanting nothing, or
wanting in nothing. Thou who make a hard shift to carry a little burden with
thy little patience, would sink under a greater, therefore there is need
that patience should be ever perfecting, lest at last we meet a burden too
heavy for our weak shoulders. Take a few reasons why the Christian should thus
be completing of his grace.

Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to sift you; he knew they were at that time
weakly provided, (Christ their Captain now to be taken from the head of their
troop, discontents among themselves, striving who should be greatest, and their
recruits of stronger grace, which the Spirit was to bring, not yet come.) Now
he has a design to surprise them: and therefore Christ carefully to prevent
him, promises speedily to dispatch his Spirit for their supply, and in the
mean time sends them to Jerusalem, to stand as it were in a body in their joint
supplications, Acts 1.4.
upon their guard, while he comes to their relief, showing us in the weakness
of our graces what to do, and whither to go for supply.

the more fury he shows. And therefore we who are to grapple with him, now his
time is so short, had need come well appointed into the field.

purge, Ioh. 15.2. Romans 5.3
that they may bring forth more fruit (that is, fuller and fairer?) Tribulation
works patience; It Is Gods appointment for that end: It works, that is, it
increases the Saints patience, it enrageth indeed the wicked, but meekens the
Saints. It Is his design in the Gospel preached to carry on his Saints, from
faith to faith, Romans 1.17. And accordingly he has furnished his Church with
instruments, and those with gifts, for the perfecting of the Saints, and for
the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.14. Wherefore does the Scaffold
stand, and the Workman on it, if the building go not up? For us not to advance
under such means, is to make void the counsel of God: Therefore the Apostle
blames the Christian Jews, Heb. 5.12. for their non-proficiency in the School
of Christ. When for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one
teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God.

O how few are there who endeavor thus to promove in their spiritual state,
Use.
and labor to perfect what is yet lacking in their knowledge, patience, and
the rest. First, tell some of adding faith to faith, one degree of grace to
another, and you shall find they have more mind to join house to house, and
lay field to field; their souls are athirst, ever gaping for more, but of what?
not of Christ, or Heaven: It is earth, earth they never think they have enough
of, till death comes and stops their mouth with a shovel-full, dug out of
their own grave. What a tormenting life must they needs have, who are always
crying for more weight, and yet cannot press their covetous desires to death?
O Sirs, the only way, (if men would believe it) to quench this thirst to the
creature, were to enkindle another after Christ and Heaven. Get but a large
heart vehemently thirsting after these, and the other will die alone. As the
Fevourish thirst does when nature comes to her temper. Secondly, others labor
not thus to perfect grace, because they have a conceit they are perfect
already, and upon this fancy throw away praying, hearing, and all other
Ordinances, as strings for those babes in grace, to be carried by, who are not
arrived to their high seize. O what fools does pride make men! Truly
Heaven were no such desirable place, if we should be no more perfect, then,
thus a sort of people that are too high for this world, and too low for
another. The way by which God cures this frenzy of pride, we have in these
days seen to be something like that of Nebuchadnezzar, To give them a heart of
a beast, (I mean) for a time, suffer them to fall into beastly practices, by
which he shows them how far they are from that perfection they dreamed of so
vainly. Thirdly, others who have true grace, and desire the advancement of it,
yet are discouraged in their endeavor for more, from too deep a sense of their
present penury. Bid some such labor to get more power of corruption, more
faith on, and love to God, that they may be able to do the Will of God
cheerfully, and suffer it in the greatest afflictions patiently, yea,
thankfully; and they will never believe, that they whose faith is so weak, love
so chill, and stock so little in hand, should ever attain to any thing like
such a pitch: You may as well persuade a beggar with one poor penny in his
purse, that if he will go and trade with that, he shall come to be Lord Major
of London before he die: But why, poor hearts, should you thus despise the day
of small things? Do you not see a little grain of mustard seed spread into a
tree, and weak grace compared to it for its growth at last as well as
littleness at first? Dare thou say thou have no grace at all? If thou have
but any, (though the least that ever any had to begin with) I dare tell thee,
that he has done more for thee in that, then he should in making that which is
now so weak, as perfect as the Saints grace is now in heaven. First, he has
done more, considering it as an act of Power. There is a greater gulf between
no grace and grace, then between weak grace and strong, between a Chaos and
nothing, then between a Chaos and this beautiful frame of heaven and earth. The
first days work of both Creations is the greatest. Secondly, consider it as an
act of grace, it is greater mercy to give the first grace of conversion, then
to crown that with glory. It is more grace and condescent in a Prince to marry
a poor Damosel, then having married her to cloth her like a Prince; he was free
to do the first or not, but his relation to her pleads strongly for the other.
God might have chose whether he would have given thee grace or no, but having
done this, thy relation to him and his Covenant also do oblige him, to add
more and more till he has fitted thee as a Bride for himself in glory.

CHAP. V. Of the use of our spiritual Armor, or the exercise of grace.
Put on the whole Armor of God. Briefly what is this duty, put on? These being
Saints, (many of them at least) he writes to, it is not only putting on by
Conversion, what some of them might not yet have; but also, he means they
should exercise what they have. It is one thing to have armor in the house,
and another thing to have it buckled on: to have grace in the principle, and
grace in the act; so that the instruction will be,

It is not enough to have grace, but this grace must be kept in exercise. The
Christians Armor is made to be worn; Doct.
no laying down, or putting off our Armor, till we have done our warfare, and
finished our course. Our Armor, and our garment of flesh go off together; then
indeed will be no need of watch and ward, shield or helmet. Those military
duties and field-graces, (as I may call faith, hope, and the rest) they shall
be honorably discharged. In heaven we shall appear, not in armor, but in
robes of glory; but here they are to be worn night and day: we must walk,
work, and sleep in them, or else we are not true soldiers of Christ: this Paul
professes to endeavor, Acts 24.16 Herein do I exercise my self, to have
always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward man. Here we have
this holy man at his arms, training and exercising himself in his postures,
like some soldier by himself handling his pike, and inuring himself before the
battle. Now the Reason of this is,

SECT. 1.
Luke 12.35. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. Christ
speaks, either in a martial phrase as to soldiers, or in a domestic as to
servants: If as to soldiers, then let your loins he girded, and your lights
burning, is, that we should be ready for a march, having our armor on, (for
the belt goes over all,) and our match light, ready to give fire at the first
alarm of a temptation. If as to servants, which seems more natural, then he
bids us (as our Master that is gone abroad) not through sloth or sleep put off
our clothes, and put out our lights, but stand ready to open when he shall
come, though at midnight. It Is not fit the Master should stand at the door
knocking, and the servant within sleeping; indeed there is no duty the
Christian has in charge, but implies this daily exercise; 1 These. 5.16, 17. 1
Pet. 1.13
Pray, but how? without ceasing: Rejoice, but when? evermore: Give thanks, for
what? in every thing. The shield of faith, and helmet of hope, we must hold
them to the end. The sum of all which is, that we should walk in the constant
exercise of these duties and graces. Where the soldier is placed, there he
stands, and must neither stir nor sleep, till he be brought off. When Christ
comes, that soul shall only have his blessing, whom he finds so doing.

He departed for a season, Luke 4.13
as if in his shameful retreat he had comforted himself with hopes of
surprising Christ unawares, at another season more advantageous to his design;
and we find him coming again, in the most likely time indeed to have attained
his end, had his enemy been man, and not God. Now if this bold fiend did thus
watch and observe Christ from time to time, does it not behove thee to look
about thee, lest he take thy grace at one time or other napping? what he
misseth now by thy watchfulness, he may gain anon by thy negligence. Indeed he
hopes thou will be tired out with continual duty: Surely, says Satan, (when he
sees the Christian up, and servent in duty) this will not hold long. When he
finds him tender of conscience, and scrupulous of occasions to sin, This is
but for a while, ere long I shall have him unbend his bow, and unbuckle his
armor, and then have at him. Satan knows what orders thou keep in thy house
and closet, and though he has not a key to thy heart, yet he can stand in the
next room to it, and lightly hear what is whispered there: He hunts the
Christian by the sent of his own feet, and if once he does but smell which way
thy heart enclines, he knows how to take the him; if but one door be unbolted,
one work unmann'd, one grace of its carriage here is advantage enough.

I have put off my coat, says the Spouse, Cant. 5.3. She had given way to a
lazy distemper, was laid upon her bed of sloth, and how hard is it to raise
her? her beloved is at the door, beseeching her by all the names of love, which
might bring to her remembrance the near relation between them: My Sister, my
Love, my Dove, open to me, and yet she rises not; he tells her, his locks are
filled with the drops of the night; yet she stirs not. What is the matter? her
coat was off, and she is loath to put it on; she had given way to her sloth,
and now she knows not how to shake it off, she could have been glad to have her
Beloveds company, if himself would have opened the door; and he desired as much
hers, if she would rise to let him in; and upon these terms they part. The
longer a soul has neglected duty, the more ado there is to get it taken up:
partly through shame, the soul having played the truant, now knows not how to
look God on the face; and partly from the difficulty of the work, being double
to what another finds, that walks in the exercise of his grace; here is all
out of order. It requires more time and pains for him to tune his instrument,
then for another to play the lesson. He goes to duty as to a new work, as a
Scholar that has not looked on his book some while, his lesson is almost out
of his head, whereas another that was but even now conning it over, has it ad
unguem. Perhaps it is an affliction thou art called to bear, and thy patience
unexercised, little or no thoughts thou have had for such a time; (while thou
were frisking in a full pasture) and now thou kickest and flingest, eeven as a
bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, Jer. 31.18. whereas another goes meekly and
patiently under the like cross, because he had been stirring up his patience,
and fitting the yoke to his neck. You know what a confusion there is in a town,
at some sudden alarm in the dead of the night, the enemy at the gates, and
they asleep within, O what a cry is there heard! one wants his clothes, another
his sword, a third knows not what to do for powder; thus in a fright they run
up and down, which would not be, if the enemy did find them upon their guard,
orderly waiting for his approath; Such a hubbub there is in a soul that keeps
not his armor on, this piece and that will be to seek when he should use it.

Paul had this in his eye when he was exercising himself to keep a good
conscience, that he might not be a scandal to others. The Cowardice of one may
make others run; the ignorance of one soldier that has not skill to handle
his arms, may do mischief to his fellow soldiers about him; some have shot
their friends for their enemies; the unwise walking of one Professor makes many
other fair the worse. But say, thou do not fall so far as to become a
scandal, yet thou can not be so helpful to thy fellow-brethren as thou
should; God commanded the Reubenites and Gadites to go before their brethren
ready armed, until the land was conquered: Thus, Christian, thou art to be
helpful to thy fellow-brethren, who have not (it may be) that settlement of
Peace in their spirit as thy self, not that measure of grace or comfort; Thou
art to help such weak ones, and go before them (as it were) armed for their
defense; now if thy grace be not exercised, thou art so far unserviceable to
thy weak brother. Perhaps thou art a Master or a Parent who have a family under
thy wing, they fare as thou thrivest; if thy heart be in a holy frame they fare
the better in the duties thou performest, if thy heart be dead and down, they
are losers by the hand. So that as the Nurse eats the more for the Babes sake
she suckles, so should thou for their sake, who are under thy tuition, be
more careful to exercise thy own grace, and cherish it.

SECT. 2.


Ps. 122.1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the
Lord. His heart leap't at the motion. When any occasion diverts him from
communion with God, though he likes it never so well, yet it is unwelcome and
unpleasing to him, as you who are used to be in your shops from morning to
night, how tedious is it for you to be abroad some days, though among good
friends, because you are not where your work and calling lies? A Christian in
duty is one in his calling, as it were in his shop where he should be; yea,
where he would be, and therefore far from being tedious. Religion is burdensome
to none, as to those who are infrequent in the exercise of it. Use makes heavy
things light, we hardly feel the weight of our clothes, because fitted to us,
and worn daily by us, whereas the same weight on our shoulder would trouble
us: thus the grievousnesse of religious duties to carnal ones, is taken away in
the Saints, partly by the fitness of them to the Saints principles, as also by
their daily exercise in them. The disciples, when newly entered into the ways
of Christ, could not pray much or fast long; the bottles were new, and that
wine too strong, but by that time they had walked a few years, they grew
mighty in both; do thou complain that heaven-way is rugged? be the oftener
walking in it, and that will make it smooth.



The diligent hand makes rich. A provident man counts that lost which might
have been got, not only when his money is stole out of his chest, but when it
lies there unimproved. Such a commodity (says the Tradesman) if I had bought
with that money in my bags, would have brought me in so much gain, which is
now lost; so the Christian may say, My dawning knowledge, had I followed on to
know the Lord, might have spread to broad day; I have more understanding, says
David, then all my teachers. How came he by it? he will tell you in the next
words, for thy testimonies are my meditation. Ps. 119.99
He was more in the exercise of duty and grace. The best wits are not always
the greatest Scholars, because their study is not suitable to their parts;
neither always proves he the richest man, that sets up with the greatest
stock. A little grace well-husbanded by daily exercise will increase, when
greater neglected shall decay.

might have known before, if thou would have oftener stirred up and
exercised thy grace.

Up and be doing, and the Lord be with you. He sets a soul a reading as the
Eunuch, and then joins to his chariot a praying, and then comes the messenger
from heaven, O Daniel greatly beloved. The Spouse, who lost her Beloved on her
bed, finds him as she comes from the Sermon, Cant. 3.4. It was but a little
that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loved.

SECT. 3.
David to Adonijah) do not so much as say to their souls, Why do thou so?
why art thou so proud, so covetous, so profane? They spend their days in
making provision for these guests: as at some Innes, the house never cooles,
but as one guest goes out, another comes in, as one lust is served, another is
calling for attendance; as some exercise grace more then others, so there are
greater traders in sin, that set more a work then others, and return more wrath
in a day then others in a month; Happy are such (in comparison of these) who
are chained up by Gods restraint upon their outward man or inward, that they
cannot drive on so furiously as these, who by health of body, power and
greatness in place, riches and treasures in their coffers, numbnesse and
dedolency in their consciences, are hurried on to fill up the measure of their
sins. We read of the Assyrian, that he enlarged his heart as hell, stretching
out his desires as men do their bags that are thrack't full with money to hold
more, Hab. 2.5. Thus the adulterer, as if his body were not quick enough to
execute the commands of his lust, stirs it up by sending forth his amorous
glances, which come home laden with adultery, blows up this fire with unchaste
sonnets and belly-chear, proper fuel for the devils kitchen; and the malicious
man, who that he may lose no time from his lust, is a tearing his neighbor in
pieces as he lies on his bed, cannot sleep unless some such bloody sacrifice
be offered to his ravening lust. O how may this shame the Saints: how often is
your zeal so hot, that you cannot sleep till your hearts have been in heaven,
as you are on your beds, and there pacified with the sight of your dear
Savior, and some embraces of love from him?

Michal she could not but flout David to see him dancing before the Ark. He
that commended the Preacher for making a learned discourse of zeal, will raise
on a Saint, expressing an act of zeal in his place and calling; now grace comes
too near him. A naughty heart must stand at some distance from holiness, that
the beams thereof may not beat too strongly on his conscience, and so he likes
it. Thus the Pharisees, the Prophets of old, these were holy men in their
account, and they can lavish out their money on their Tombs, in honor of
them: but Christ, (who was more worth then all of them) he is scorned and
hated: what is the mystery of this? the reason was, these Prophets are off the
stage, and Christ on* Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit.

species then thy self, and disdainest them, and as for heaven thou think
not of it. Like that wicked Prince, that said, He would lose his part in
Paradise rather then in Paris. Art thou poor, why do not exercise grace in
that condition? Art thou contented, diligent? may be in stead of contentation
thou repinest, can not see a fair lace on thy rich brothers cloth, but
grudgest it in stead of concurring with Providence by diligence to supply thy
wants, thou art ready to break through the hedge into thy neighbors fat
pasture, thus serving thy own turn by a sin, rather then waiting for Gods
blessing on thy honest diligence; if so, be not angry we call thee by thy right
name, or at least question whether we may style thee Christian, whose carriage
is so cross to that sacred name, which is too holy to be written on a rotten
post.

Peter saw it necessary to have the bellows always in his hands, 2 Pet. 1.12.
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things,
though ye know them, and be established in the present truth; (that shall not
take him off) as long as he is in this Tabernacle, he says he will stir them
up, and be putting them in remembrance, v. 13. There is a sleepy disease we are
subject to in this life; Christ though he had roused up his disciples twice,
yet takes them napping the third time. Either exercise thy grace, or Satan will
act thy corruption, as one bucket goes down, the other rises; there is a body
of sin within, which like a malignant party watches for such a time to step
into the saddle, and it is easier to keep them down then to pull them down: Thy
time is short, and thy way long, thou had best put on, lest thou meanest to
be overtaken with night, before thou gettest within sight of thy Fathers house.
How uncomfortable it is for a traveller in Heaven-road (above all other) to go
potching in the dark, many can with aching hearts tell thee. And what have thou
here to mind like this? Are they worldly cares and pleasures? Is it wisdom to
lay out so much cost on thy tenement, which thou art leaving, and forget what
thou must carry with thee? Before the fruit of these be ripe which thou art now
planting, thy self may be rotting in the grave. Time is short, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29, (...). The world is near its Port, and therefore God has
contracted the sails of man's life but a while, and there will not be a point
to choose, whether we had wives or not, riches or not, but there will be a vast
difference between those that had grace, and those that had not; yea, between
those that did drive a quick trade in the exercise thereof, and those that were
more remiss; 2 Pet. 1.11.
the one shall have an abundant entrance into glory, while the other shall
suffer loss in much of his lading, which shall be cast overboard as
merchandise that will bear no price in that heavenly country; yea, while thou
art here others shall fare the better by thy lively graces. Thy cheerfulness
and activity in thy heavenly course, will help others that travel with thee; he
is dull indeed that will not put on, when he sees so much metal for God in thee
who leadest the way. Yea, thy grace will give a check to the sins of others,
who never stand in such awe, as when grace comes forth and sits like a Ruler in
the gate, to be seen of all that pass by. The Swearer knows not such Majesty
is present, when the Christian is mealy-mouthed, and so goes on and fears no
colors, whose grace had it but her dagger of zeal ready, and courage to draw
it forth in a wise reproof, would make sin quit the place, and with shame run
into its hole. Job 29.8. The young men saw me and bid themselves, the Princes
refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth. And does not God deserve
the best service thou can do him in thy generation? Did he give thee grace to
lay it up in a dead stock, and none to be the better? or can you say that he is
wanting to you in his love and mercy? are they not ever in exercise for your
good? Is the eye of providence ever shut? No, he slumbers not that keeps thee,
or is it one moment off thee? No, The eye of the Lord is upon the righteous; He
has fixed it for ever, and with infinite delight pleases himself in the
object. When was his ear shut, or his hand, either from receiving thy cries,
or supplying thy wants? nay, does not thy condition take up the thoughts of
God, and are they any other then thoughts of peace, which he entertains? A few
drops of this oil will keep the wheel in motion.

That ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
THese words present us with the reason, why the Christian soldier is to be
thus completely armed, That he may be able to stand against the wiles of the
devil. The strength of which argument lies in these two particulars.

First, the danger, if unarmed, the enemy is no mean contemptible one, no less
then the devil, set out as a cun^ing Engineer by his wiles and stratagems.

Secondly, the certainty of standing against all his wits and wiles, if we be
thus armed, That ye may be able to stand. As no standing without armor, so no
fear of falling into the fiends hands if armed.

To begin with the first, the Saints enemy, the devil described by his wiles
(...), properly the methods of Satan, (...) of (...), which signifies, that Art
and order one observes in handling a point; we say such a one is methodical;
Now because it shows ingenuity and acuteness of wit so to compose a discourse,
therefore it is transferred to express the subtilty of Satan in laying of his
plots and stratagems, in his warlike preparations against the Christian.
Indeed, the expert soldier has his order as well as the scholar, there is
method in forming of an army, as well as framing an argument. The Note which
lies before us is,

Doct.
The devil is a very subtle enemy. The Christian is endangered most by his
policy and craft; he is called the old Serpent. The serpent? subtle above other
creatures, an old Serpent above other serpents; Satan was too crafty for man in
his perfection, much more now in his maimed estate, having never recovered that
first crack he got in his understanding by the fall of Adam. And as man has
lost, so Satan has gained more and more experience; he lost his wisdom indeed
as soon as he became a devil, but ever since he has increast his craft; though
he has not wisdom enough to do himself good, yet subtilty enough to do others
hurt. God shows us where his strength lies, when he promises he will bruise
the head of the Serpent; his head crush't and he dies presently. Now in
handling this Point of Satan's subtilty, we shall consider him in his two main
designs, and therein show you his wiles and policies. His first main design is
to draw into sin. The second is to accuse, vex and trouble the Saint for sin.
First, let us consider the devil as a tempter to sin, and there he shows his
wily subtilty in three things.







CHAP. I. Of Satan's subtilty to choose the most advantageous seasons for
tempting.
FIrst, he shows his subtilty in choosing the most proper and advantageous
seasons for tempting. To every thing there is a season, Solomon says, Eccl.
3.1. that is, a nick of time, which taken gives facility and speedy dispatch to
a business; And therefore the same Wise man gives this reason why man
miscarries so frequently, and is disappointed in his enterprises, because he
knows not his time, Eccl. 9.11. He comes when the bird is flowen. A hundred
soldiers at one time may turn a battle, save an army, when thousands will not
do at another: Satan knows when to make his approaches, when (if at any time)
he is most likely to be entertained. As Christ has the tongue of the learned
to speak a word in season of counsel and comfort, to a doubting drooping soul,
so Satan shows his black Art, and hellish skill, in speaking words of seduction
and temptation in season, and a word in season is a word on its wheels. I shall
give you a view of his subtilty in special seasons, which he chooses to tempt
in.

Egyptians but some of his own craft, when he taught them that bloody and cruel
baptism, which they exercised upon the Israelitish babes, in throwing them
into the river as soon as they were borne. The first cry of the new creature,
gives all the legions of hell an alarm; they are as much troubled at it, as
Herod and Jerusalem were, when Christ was borne; and now they sit in Council to
take away the life of this new born King. The Apostles met with more opposition
and persecution in their latter days, when endued with larger portions of the
Spirit, but with temptations from Satan in their former when young Converts; as
you may observe in the several passages recorded of them. Satan knew grace
within was but weak, and their supplies promised at the Spirits coming, not
landed; and when is an enemy more like to carry the town then in such a low
condition? and therefore he tries them all. Indeed the advantages are so many,
that we may wonder how the young Convert escapes with his life; knowledge weak,
and so soon led into an error, especially in divided times, when many ways
are held forth, one saying, Here is Christ; another, There is Christ, and the
Christian ready to think every one means honestly, that comes with good words,
as a little child who has lost his way to his fathers house, is prone to
follow any that offer him their conduct. Experience of what he knows little;
and if Adam whose knowledge so perfect, yet was soon cheated, (being assaulted
before he was well warm in his new possessions,) how much more advantage has
Satan of the new Convert? in whom he finds every grace in so great an
indisposition to make resistance, both from its own weakness, and the strength
of the contrary corruption, (which commonly in such is much unmortified) which
makes it act with more difficulty and mixture, as in a fire newly kindled where
the smoke is more then the flame, or like beer newly tunn'd which runs thick;
so that though there appear more strength of affection in such, that it works
over into a greater abundance of duty then in others, yet with more dregs of
carnal passions, which Satan knows, and therefore chooses to stir what he sees
troubled already.

Job in his estate, children, health and other comforts he had, and now tempts
him to impatience, and what not? he lets Christ fast forty days before he
comes, and then he falls to his work; as an army stays till a Castle be
pinch't for provision within, and then sends a parley, never more likely to be
embraced then in such a strait. A temptation comes strong when the way to
relief seems to lie through the sin that Satan is wooing to; when one is poor
and Satan comes, What wilt starve rather then step over the hedge and steal for
thy supply? this is enough to put flesh and blood to the stand.

an Adder in the path, that biteth his horse-heels, so that his Rider shall
fall backward. Thus he stood at Joshua's right hand to resist him. The right
hand is the working hand, and his standing there implies his desire to hinder
him in his enterprise. Indeed the devil was never friend to Temple-work, and
therefore that work is so long a doing. What a handsome excuse does he help the
Jews unto, The time is not come: Gods time was come, Ezekiel. 1.2, 6, 8.
but not the devils, and therefore he helps them to this poor shift, perverting
the sense of Providence as if it were not time, because they were so poor,
whereas they thrive no better because they went no sooner about the work, as
God tells them plainly. Paul and Barnabas had a holy design in their thoughts,
to go visit the brethren in every City, and strengthen their faith; the devil
knew what a blow this might give to his Kingdom, their visiting might hinder
him in his Circuit, and he stirs up an unhappy difference between these two
holy men, who grow so hot that they part in this storm, Acts 15.30. There were
two remarkable periods of Christ's life, his Intrat and Exit, his entrance into
his public Ministry at his Baptism, and his finishing it at his passion, and
at both we have the devil fiercely encountering him. The more public thy place,
Christian, and the more eminent thy service for God, the more thou must look
that the devil will have some more dangerous design or other against thee, and
therefore if every private soldier needs armor against Satan's bullets of
temptation, then the Commanders and Officers, who stand in the front of the
battle, much more.

Eve when she is near the tree, and had it in her eye while he should make the
motion, that assaulting two Ports at once, it might be the harder for her to
hinder the landing of his temptation; and if Eves eye did so soon affect her
heart with an inordinate desire, then much more now is it easy for him by the
presence of the object, to excite and actuate that lust which lies dormant in
the heart. As Naomi sent her daughter to lie at Boaz his feet, knowing well, if
he endured her there, there were hope he might take her into his bed at last;
If the Christian can let the object come so near, Satan will promise himself
his suit may in time be granted. Therefore it should be our care if we would
not yield to the sin, not to walk by, or sit at the door of the occasion; Look
not on that beauty with a wandering eye, by which thou would not be taken
Prisoner; parley not with that in thy thoughts, which thou meanest not to let
into thy heart; conversation begets affection: some by this have been brought
to marry those, whom at first they thought they could not have liked.

English Nation, Totam nec pati potest libertatem nec servitutem; It cannot
well bear liberty nor bondage in the height: So neither can the soul, if God
smile and opens himself a little familiarly to us, then we are prone to grow
high and wanton, if he frown, then we sink as much in our faith; thus the one
like fair weather and warm gleams, bring up the weeds of corruption; and the
other, l^ke sharp frosts, nip and even kill the flowers of grace; the Christian
is in danger on both hands, therefore Satan takes this advantage, when the
Christian is flush of comfort, even as a cheater, who strikes in with some
young heir, when he has newly received his rents, and never leaves till he
has eased him of his money: thus Satan lies upon the catch, then to inveigle a
Saint into one sin or other, which he knows will soon leak out his joy. Had
ever any a larger testimony from Heaven then Peter? Matthew. 16.17. where Christ
pronounces him blessed, and puts a singular honor upon him, making him the
Representative for all his Saints. No doubt this favor to Peter, stirred up
the envious spirit the sooner to fall upon him. If Joseph's party-colored coat
made the Patriarchs to plot against him their brother, no wonder malice should
prompt Satan to show his spite, where Christ had set such a mark of love and
honor; and therefore we find him soon at Peter's elbowe, making him his
instrument to tempt his Master, who soon espied his cloven foot, and rebukes
Peter with a Get thee behind me Satan. He that seemed a Rock even now, through
Satan's policy, is laid as a stone of offense for Christ to stumble at. So
David, when he had received such wonderful mercies, settled in his throne with
the ruin of his enemies, yea, pardoned for his bloody sin, now ready to lay
down his head with peace in the dust: Satan chops in to cloud his clear
evening, and tempts him to number the people; so ambitious is Satan, then
chiefly to throw the Saint into the mire of sin, when his coat is cleanest.

Nunquam nisi moriens producitur in longum: he never is seen at his length till
dying: so this mystical serpent never strains his wits and wiles more, then
when his time is thus short. The Saint is even stepping into eternity, and now
he treads upon his heel, which if he cannot trip up so as to hinder his
arrival in heaven, yet at least to bruise it, that he may go with more pain
thither.

CHAP. II. Satan's subtilty in managing his temptations, where several
stratagems used by him to deceive the Christian, are laid down.


First, he hangs out false colors, and comes up to the Christian in the
disguise of a friend, so that the gates are opened to him, and his motions
received with applause, before either be discovered; therefore he is said to
transform himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. Of all plots it is most
dangerous when he appears in Samuels mantle, and silvers his foul tongue with
fair language. Thus in point of error, he corrupts some in their judgments,
by commending his notions for precious Gospel Truths, and like a cunning
Chapman puts off his old ware, (errors I mean that have layen long upon his
hand) only turkening them a little after the mode of the times, and they go for
new light, under the skirt of Christian liberty; he conveys in Libertinisme, by
crying up the Spirit; he decries and vilifies the Scripture by magnifying
faith: he labors to undermine repentance, and blow up good works; by bewailing
the corruption of the Church in its administrations, he draws unstable souls
from it, and amuseth them, till at last they fall into a vertigo, and can see
no Church at all in being. And he prevails no less on the hearts and lives of
men by this wile, then on their judgments. Under the notion of zeal, he
kindles sometimes a dangerous flame of passion and wrath in the heart, which
like a rash fire makes the Christians spirit boil over into unchristian
desires of, and prayers for revenge where he should forgive; of which we have
an instance in the disciples, Luke 9.55. where two holy men are desiring that
fire may come down from heaven. Little did they think from whence they had
their coal, that did so heat them, till Christ told them, Ye know not what
Spirit you are of. Sometimes he pretends pity and natural affection, which in
some cases may be good counsel, and all the while he desires to promote
cowardice and sinful self-love; whereby the Christian may be brought to fly
from his colors, shrink from the truth, or decline some necessary duty of his
calling; this his wile Christ soon spied, when he got Peter to be his
spokesman, saying, Master, pity thy self: who stopped his mouth with that sharp
rebuke, Get thee behind me, Satan. O what need have we to study the
Scriptures, our hearts and Satan's wiles, that we may not bid this enemy
welcome, and all the while think it is Christ that is our guest.

David knew how the squares went at Court, Jonathans arrows carried him the
news, and accordingly he removed his quarters, and was too hard for his great
enemy Saul. Satan is the greatest Intelligencer in the world, he makes it his
business to enquire into the inclinations, thoughts, affections, purposes of
the creature, that finding which humor abounds, he may apply himself
accordingly, which way the stream goes, that he may open the passage of
temptation, and cut the channel to the fall of the creatures affections, and
not force it against the torrent of nature. Now if we consider but the piercing
apprehension of the Angelical nature, how quick he is to take the sent which
way the game goes by a word dropped, the cast of an eye or such a small matter
(signal enough to give him the alarm) his experience in heart-anatomy, having
inspected, and (as it were) dissected so many in his long practice, whereby his
knowledge is much perfected, as also his great diligence to add to both these,
being as close a Student as ever, considering the Saints, and studying how he
may do them a mischief, as we see in Jobs case, whom he had so observed that he
was able to give an answer ex tempore to God what Jobs state and present
posture was, and what might be the most probable means of obtaining his will of
him; and besides all this, the correspondence that he has with those in and
about the Christian, from whom he learnes much of his state, as David by Hushai
in Absaloms counsel: all these considered, it is almost impossible for the
creature to stir out of the closet of his heart, but it will be known whither
he enclines; some corrupt passion or other will bewray the soul to him, as
they did David to Saul, who told him where he might find him, 1 Samuel 24 1.
in the wilderness of Engedi. Thus will these give intelligence to Satan, and
say, If thou would surprise such a one, he is gone that way, you shall have
him in the wood of worldly employments, over head and ears in the desires and
cares of this life, see where another sits under such a bower, delighting
himself in this child, or that gift, endowment of mind, or the like; lay but
the lime-twig there, and you shall soon have him in it. Now Satan having this
intelligence, lets him alone to act his part; he sure cannot be at a loss
himself, when his scholars, (the Jesuits I mean) have such agility of mind,
to wreath and cast themselves into any form becoming the persons they would
seduce. Is ambition the lust the heart favors? O the pleasing projects that he
will put such upon! how easily having first blown them up with vain hopes, does
he draw them into horrid sins? Thus Human, that he may have a monopoly of his
Princes favor, is hurried into that bloody plot (fatal at last to himself)
against the Jews. Is uncleanness the lust after which the creatures eye
wanders? Now he will be the Pander, to bring him and his Minion together. Thus he
finding Amnon sick of this disease, sends Jonadah a deep-pated fellow, 1 Samuel
13.3*
to put this fine device into his head of feigning himself sick whereby his
Sister fell into his snare.

the depth of his plot; these like Scouts go before, while his whole body lies
hid as it were in some swamp at hand. Thus he wrigled into Eves bosom, whom he
does not at first dash bid Take and eat, no, he is more mannerly then so, this
would have been so hideous, that as the fish with some sudden noise, by a stone
cast into the river, is scared from the bait, so would she have been affrighted
from holding parley with such a one: no, he propounds a question which shall
make way for this, Has God said? art not mistaken? could this be his meaning
whose bounty lets thee eat of the rest to deny thee the best of all? Thus he
digs about and loosens the roots of her faith, and then the tree falls the
easier the next gust of tempta^ion. This is a dangerous policy indeed. Many
have yielded to go a mile with Satan, that never intended to go two; but when
once on the way, have been allured further and further, till at last they know
not how to leave his company. Thus Satan leads poor creatures down into the
depths of sin by winding stairs, that let them not see the bottom whither they
are going; First he presents an object that ocasions some thoughts, these set
fire on the affections, and these fume up into the brain, and cloud the
understanding, which being thus disabled, now Satan dares a little more declare
himself, and boldly solicit the creature to that it would even now have
defied. Many who at this day lie in open profaneness, never thought they
should have rolled so far from their Profession but Satan beguiled them, poor
souls, with their modest beginnings. O Christians, give not place to Satan, no
not an inch in his first motions; he that is a beggar and a modest one without
doors, will command the house if let in; yield at first, and thou give away
thy strength to resist him in the rest, when the hem is worn, the whole
garment will ravel out, if that be not mended by timely repentance.

as to fast forty days, and no supplies heard of; No sooner had Christ
quenched this dart with that, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
Mat. 4 4, 5
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, but he has another
on the string which he let fly at him, tempting him to presumption, v. 5. Then
the devil takes and sets him on a pinnacle, and bids, Cast thy self down
headlong, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc. As
if he had said, If thou have such confidence on God and his Word, as thou
pretendest, show it by casting thy self down, for thou have a Word between thee
and the ground, if thou dare trust God; and truly, though Christ had his
answer ready, and was prepared to receive his charge on the right hand and on
the left, being so completely armed that no temptation could come amiss, yet
note we, Satan's temptations on Christ, were like the Serpents motion on a rock,
(of which Solomon speaks) that makes no impression, no dint at all, but on us
they are as a Serpent on sand or dust, Pro. 30.19
that leaves a print, when not in the heart, yet in the fancy, colors that
which is next door to it, and so the object there is ready to slip in, if great
care be not observed, especially when he does thus change his hand, as when we
have resisted one way, fall on afresh another, yea, plant his succeeding
temptation upon our very resistance in the former. Now it requires some
readiness in our postures, and skill at all our weapons to make our defense,
like a disputant, when he is put out of his road, and has a new question
started, or argument unusual brought, now he is tried to purpose. And truly
this is Satan's way when he tempts the Christian to neglect of duties of Gods
worship (from his worldly occasions, the multitude of them or necessity of
following them) and this takes not, then he is on the other side, and is
drawing the Christian to the neglect of his worldly calling, out of a seeming
zeal to promote his other in the Worship of God. Or first, he comes and
labors to dead the heart in duty, but the Christian too watchful for him
there, then he is puffing of him up with an opinion of his enlargement in it,
and ever he keeps his sliest and most sublimated temptations for the last.

Joshua's wile, by which he caught the men of Ai in a trap, Josh. 3.8. We read
not only of Satan's being cast out, but of the unclean spirits going out,
(voluntarily) yet with a purpose to come again, and bring worse company with
him, Matthew. 12.43. Satan is not always beat back by the dint and power of
conquering grace, but sometimes he draws off, and raises his own siege, the
more handsomely to get the Christian out of his fastnesses and trenches, that
so he may snap him on the plains, whom he cannot come at in his works and
Fortifications. Temptations send the Saint to his Castle, as the sight of the
dog does the coney to her Borough; Now the soul walks the rounds, stands upon
its guard, dares not neglect duty, because the enemy is under its very walls,
shooting in his temptations continually; but when Satan seems to give the soul
over, and the Christian finds he is not haunted with such motions as formerly,
truly now he is prone to remit in his diligence, fail in his duty, and grow
either infrequent or formal therein; As the Romans, whose valor decayed for
want of the Carthaginian troops to alarm them; let Satan tempt or not tempt,
assault or retreat, keep thou in order, stand in a fighting posture, let his
flight strengthen thy faith, but not weaken thy care. The Parthians do their
enemies most hurt in their flight, shooting their darts as they run, and so may
Satan do thee, if thy seeming victory makes thee secure.

CHAP. III. Of Satan's subtilty, in choosing instruments fit for his turn to
carry on his tempting design.
may be carried on better by others, when he appears not aboveboard himself.
Indeed there is not such a suitableness between the Angelical nature and man's,
as there is between one man and another, and therefore he cannot make his
approaches so familiarly to us, as man can do to man; and here (as in other
things) he is Gods Ape; you know this very reason was given, why the Israelites
desired God might not speak to them, but Moses, and God liked the motion; Deuteronomy.
18.17.
They have well said, says God, I will raise up a Prophet from the midst of
them like unto thee. Thus Satan, he uses the Ministry of men like our selves,
by which as he becomes more familiar, so he is less suspected, while
Joab-like, he gets another to do his errand. Now it is not any will serve his
turn for this employment, he is very choice in his instruments he pitcheth on;
it is not every soldier is fit for an Embassage to treat with an enemy, to
betray a town and the like. Satan considers who can do his work to his greatest
advantage; and in this he is unlike God, who is not at all choice in his
instruments, because he needs none, and is able to do as well with one as
another; but Satan's power being finite, he must patch up the defect of the
Lions skin with the Foxes. Now the persons Satan aims at for his instruments
are chiefly of four sorts.

First, persons of place and power. Secondly, persons of parts and policy.
Thirdly, persons of holiness, or at least reputed so. Fourthly, persons of
relation and interest.

Paul to Elymas, when he would have turned the Deputy from the faith; O full of
all subtilty, thou child of the devil! Asts 13.8 As if he had said, you have
learned this of your father the devil, to haunt the Courts of Princes, wind
into the favor of great ones. There it a double policy Satan has, in gaining
such to his side. First, none have such advantage to draw others to their way:
corrupt the Captan, and it is hard if he bring not off his troop with him. Numb.
16 2, 19.
When the Princes, men of renown in their tribes, stood up with Corah,
presently a multitude are drawn into the conspiracy. Let Jeroboam set up
idolatry, and Israel is soon in a snare; it is said the people willingly walked
after his Commandment, Hos. 5.11. Secondly, should the sin stay at Court, and
the infection go no further, yet the sin of such a one, (though a good man) may
cost a whole Kingdom dear. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David to number the people. He owed Israel a spite, and he pays them
home in their Kings sin, which dropped in a fearful plague upon their heads.
Secondly, such as are in place and office in the Church. No such way to infect
the whole town, as to poison the Cistern at which they draw their water; who
shall persuade Ahab that he may go to Ramoth-Gilead and fall? Satan can tell, I
will be a lying spirit in the mouth of his Prophets, 2 Kings 22.21. How shall
the profane be hardened in their sins? let the Preacher sow pillows under
their elbowes, and cry peace, peace, and it is done. How may the worship of God
come to be neglected? let Hophni and Phineas be but scandalous in their lives,
and many both good and bad will abhor the sacrifice of the Lord.

Not many wise. Indeed, God will not have his Kingdom, either in the heart or
in the world, maintained by carnal policy, it is a Gospel-command that we walk
in godly simplicity, sine plicis; though the Serpent can shrink up into his
folds, and appear what he is not, yet it does not become the Saints to juggle
or shuffle with God or men; and truly when any of them have made use of the
Serpents subtilty, it has not followed their hand; Jacob got the blessing by a
wile, but he might have had it cheaper with plain dealing. Abraham and Sarah
both dissemble to Abimelech, God discovers their sin, and reproves them for it
by the mouth of an Heathen. Asa out of State Policy joins league with Syria,
yea, pawns the vessels of the Sanctuary, and all for help, and what comes of
all this? Herein thou have done foolishly, says God, from henceforth thou
shall have wars. Sinful policy shall not long thrive in the Saints hands well,
but Satan will not out of his way, he enquires for the subtilest-pated men, a
Balaam, Achitoph^l, Haman, Sanballat, men admired for their counsel and deep
plots, these are for his turn. A wicked cause needs a smooth Orator, bad ware
a pleasing Chapman, as in particular, his instruments he uses to seduce and
corrupt the minds of men are commonly subtile-pated men, such, that if it were
possible should deceive the very elect. This made the Apostle so jealous of the
Corinthians, whom he had espoused to Christ, lest as Eve by the Serpent, so
their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. He must
be a cunning devil indeed, that can draw off the Spouses love from her beloved,
yet there is such a witchery in Satan's instruments, that many have been brought
to fly on the face of those truths and ordinances, yea, Christ himself to whom
they have seemed espoused formerly. Now in three particulars this sort of
Satan's instruments show their Masters subtilty.

Corah, Dathan and Abiram, to charge Moses and Aaron, Ye take too much upon
you, seeing all the Congregation is holy; they would make the people believe,
that it was the pride of their heart, to claim a monopoly to themselves, Numb.
16 3, 19
as if none but Aaron and his fraternity were holy enough to offer incense, and
by this subtle practice they seduced (for a while) in a manner, the whole
Congregation to their side. So the lying Prophets (that were Satan's Knights of
the post to Ahab,) fell foul on good Micaiah. Our Savior himself was no better
handled by the Pharisees and their Confederates, and Paul the chief of the
Apostles, his Ministry undermined, and his reputation blasted by false
teachers, as if he had been some weak sorry Preacher, 2. Cor. 10.10.
His bodily presence is weak, say they, and his speech contemptible; and is
this your admired man?

Arrius himself, and other dangerous instruments of Satan were too wise to
stuff their discourses with nothing but heterodoxe matter, precious truths
dropped from them with which they sprinkled their corrupt principles, yet with
such Art as should not easily be discerned. This (as one observes) our Savior
warns his disciples of, when he bids them beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, (that is, of their errors.) But why leaven? for the secret mixture
of it with the wholesome bread; you do not make your bread all of leaven, none
would then eat it, but crumble a little into a whole batch, which sowers all:
thus Christ does tell the disciples, that the Pharisees among many truths mix
their errors, and therefore it behooves them to beware, lest with the truth the
error goes down also. Again, leaven is very like the dough, of the same grain
with it, only differs in age and soreness: thus Christ intimates the
resemblance of their errors to the truth, scraped, as it were, out of the
Scriptures, but sowered with their own false glosses. This indeed makes it
easy for Christ's sheep to be infected with the scab of error, because that
weed which breeds the rot is so like the grass that nourishes them.





such a beam is good, and such a sparre may stand; a little cost will serve the
turn: it were no wonder that you should listen to him that would put you to
least cost and trouble: the faithful servants of Christ tell sinners from the
Word, that man in his natural state is corrupt and rotten, that nothing of the
old frame will serve, and there must needs be all new; but in comes an Arminian
and blows up the sinners pride, and tells him he is not so weak or wicked as
the other represents him, if thou will thou may repent and believe, or at
least by exerting thy natural abilities, oblige God to superadde what thou have
not. This is the Workman that will please proud man best.

Belial, without yoke; and if he must wear any, that will please best, which
has the softest lining, and pincheth the flesh least, and therefore when the
sincere teachers of the Word will not abate of the strictness of the command,
but press sincere obedience to it, then come Satan's instruments and say, these
are hard taskmasters, who will not allow one play-day in a year to the
Christian, but tie him to continual duty, we'll show you an easier way to
heaven: Come, says the Papist, confess but once a year to the Priest, (pay
him well for his pains) and be an obedient son of the Church, and we'll
dispense with all the rest. Come, says the Familist, the Gospel-Charter allows
more liberty then these legal Preachers tell you of; they bid you repent and
believe, when Christ has done all these to your hand. What have you left to do
but to nourish the flesh? something sure is in it, that Impostors find such
quick return for their ware, while Truth hangs upon the log; and is it not
this? that they are content to afford heaven cheaper to their disciples, then
Christ will to his. He that sells cheapest shall have most customers, though at
last best will be best cheap; Truth with self-denial, a better pennyworth,
then error with all its flesh-pleasing.

a live bird to draw other birds into the net. But is it possible that such
should do this work for the devil? yes, such is the policy of Satan, and the
frailty of the best, that the most holy men have been his instruments to seduce
others, Abraham he tempts his wife to lie, Say thou art my Sister. The old
Prophet leads the man of God out of his way, 1 Kings 13. the holiness of the
man, and the reverence of his age, it is like, gave authority to his counsel. O
how should this make you watchful, whose long travel and great progress in the
ways of God have gained you a name of eminency in the Church, what you say,
do; or hold, because you are file-leading men, and others look more on you:
then their way.

David would not have received that from Nabal, which he took from Abigail, and
thanks her. Satan sent the apple by Eves hand to Adam. Delilah does more with
Samson, then all the Philistines bands, Jobs wife brings him the poison, Curse
God and die. Some think Satan spared her life, when he slew his children and
servants, (though she was also within his Commission) as the most likely
instrument, by reason of her relation and his affection, to lead him into
temptation. Satan employes Peter a disciple to tempt Christ, at another time
his friends and kinsfolk. Some Martyrs have confessed, the hardest work they met
withal, was to overcome the prayers and tears of their friends and relations.
Paul himself could not get off this snare without heartbreaking: What mean ye
to weep, and to break my heart? Acts 21.13.

CHAP. IV. Wherein this Point of Satan's subtilty, as a Tempter to sin, is
briefly applied.
The Serpents eye (as one says) does well only in the Doves head.

wise to do evil, Jer. 4.22. Masters of this craft, who can as they lie on
their beds, cast their wicked designs into an artificial method, showing a
kind of devilish wit therein, as the Egyptians who dealt wisely (as they
thought) with the Israelites and Jezabel, who had printed her bloody design in
so fair a letter, that some might read her Saint while she was playing the
devil. This is the black Art indeed, and will make the soul black as hell that
practices it. It is not hard for any (though a fool) to learn. Be but wicked,
and the devil will help thee to be witty; Come but a while to his school, and
thou may soon be a cunning man. No sins speak a higher attainment in
wickedness, then those which are the result of deliberate counsel and deep
plottings. Creatures, as they go longer with their young, so their birth is
more strong and perfect, as the Elephant above all others. The longer a sin is
a forming and forging within, and the oftener the head and heart meet about it,
the compleater the sin. Here are many litters of unformed sins in one, such I
mean, that are conceived and cast forth in the hurry of an extemporary passion,
such sudden acts show weakness, these other deep wickedness.

bloody coat? Joseph's Mistress to prevent a charge from Joseph, accuses him
for what she is guilty, like the Robber who escaped by crying Stop the Thief.
God taught man to make coats to cover his naked body, but the devil learnt him
to weave these coverings to hide the nakedness of his soul; the more subtle
thou seem in concealing thy sin, the more egregiously thou playest the fool.
None so shamed as the liar when found out, and that thou art sure to be. Thy
covering is too short to hide thee from Gods eye, and what God sees, (if thou
do not put thy self to shame) he will tell all the world of hereafter)
however thou escapest in this life.

Ier. 17.11. At his end he shall be a fool. It Is lawful to love our estate,
life, liberty, but beware of sinful policy to save them. It Is no wisdom to
shuffle with God, by denying his truth, or shifting of our duty to keep
correspondence with men; he is a weak fencer that lays his soul at open guard
to be stabbed and wounded with guilt, while he is lifting up his hands to save
a broken head, Our fear commonly meets us at that door by which we think to run
from it. He that will save his life shall lose it As you love your peace,
Christians, be plain-hearted with God and man, and keep the Kings highway; go
the plain way of the command to obtain thy desire, and not leap over hedge and
ditch to come a little sooner to the journeys end; such commonly either meet
with some stop that makes them come back with shame, or else put to venture
their necks in some desperate leap. He is sure to come safer (if not sooner)
home, that is willing to go a little about to keep God company. The Historians
observation is worth the Christians remembrance: Consilia callida prima specie
laeta, tractatu dura, eventu tristia, Livius. Crafty counsels promise fair at
first, but prove more difficult in the managing, and in the end do pay the
undertaker home with desperate sorrow.



Paul takes it for granted, that every Saint does in some measure understand
them; We are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. He is but an ill fencer
that knows and observes nothing of his emies play; many particular stratagems I
have laid down already, which may help a little, and for thy direction in this
study of, and enquiry into Satan's wiles, take this threefold counsel.

God at any time can tell thee, what plots are hatching there against thee.
Consider Satan as he is Gods creature, so God cannot but know him. He that
makes the Watch, knows every pin in it. He formed this crooked Serpent, though
not the crookedness of this Serpent, and though Satan's way in tempting is as
wonderful as the way of a Serpent on a rock, yet God traceth him; yea, knows
all his thoughts together. Hell it self is naked before him, and this destroyer
has no covering. Again, consider him as Gods Prisoner, who has him fast in
chains, and so the Lord, who is his Keeper, must needs know whither his
Prisoner goes, who cannot stir without his leave. Lastly, consider him as his
messenger, for so he is, An evil spirit from the Lord vexed Saul, and he that
gives him his errand, is able to tell thee what it is. Go then and plough with
Gods heifer, improve thy interest in Christ, who knows what his Father knows,
and is ready to reveal all that concerns thee to thee, Joh. 15.15. It was he
who descried the devil coming against Peter and the rest of the Apostles, and
faithfully revealed it to them, Luke 22. before they thought of any such
matter. Through Christ's hands pass all that is transacted in heaven and hell.
We live in days of great actions, deep counsels, and plots on all sides, and
only a few that stand on the upper end of the world know these mysteries of
State, all the rest know little more then Pamphlet-Intelligence: Thus it is in
regard of those plots which Satan in his infernal Conclave is laying against
the souls of men, they are but a few that know any thing to purpose of Satan's
designs against them; and those are the Saints from whom God cannot hide his
own counsels of love, but sends his Spirit to reveal unto them here, what he
has prepared for them in heaven, 1 Cor. 2.10. and therefore much less will he
conceal any destructive plot of Satan from them.



Lastly, be careful to read the Word of God with observation. In it thou have
the History of the most remarkable battles that have been fought by the most
eminent Worthies in Christ's Army of Saints, with this great Warrior Satan;
Here thou may see how Satan has foiled them, and how they have recovered
their lost ground. Here you have his Cabinet-counsels opened, there is not a
lust which you are in danger of, but you have it descried, not a temptation
which the Word does not arm you against. It is reported that a certain Jew
should have poisoned Luther, but was happily prevented by his picture which was
sent to Luther, with a warning from a faithful friend, that he should take heed
of such a man when he saw him, by which he knew the Murderer, and escaped his
hands. The Word shows thee, O Christian, the face of those lusts, which Satan
employes to butcher thy precious soul; By them is thy servant warned, says
David, Psalm. 19.11.

CHAP. V. Wherein is showed the subtilty of Satan, as a Troubler and an Accuser
for sin, where many of his wiles and policies to disquiet the Saints spirits
are discovered.
THe second General in which Satan appears such a subtle enemy; is in
molesting the Saints peace, and disquieting the Saints spirit. As this holy
Spirits work is not only to be a Sanctifier, but also a Comforter, whose fruits
are righteousness and peace, so the evil spirit Satan is both a seducer unto
sin, and an accuser for sin, a Tempter and a Troubler, and indeed in the same
order. As the Holy Ghost is first a Sanctifier, and then a Comforter; so Satan
first a Tempter, then a Troubler. Joseph's Mistress first tries to draw him to
gratify her lust, that string breaking she has another to trounce him and
charge him, and for a plea she has his coat to cover her malice, nor is it
hard for Satan to pick some hole in the Saints coat, when he walks most
circumspectly. The proper seat of sin is the Will, of comfort the Conscience;
Satan has not absolute knowledge of, or power over these, (being locked up
from any other but God; and therefore what he does, either in defiling
temptations, or disquieting, is by wiles more then by open force, and he is not
inferior in troubling, to himself in tempting. Satan has as the Serpent, away
by himself; other beasts, their motion is direct, right on, but the Serpent
goes a skue (as we say) winding and wreathing its body, that when you see a
serpent creeping along, you can hardly discern which way it tends; thus Satan
in his vexing temptations has many intricate policies, turning this way and
that way, the better to conceal his design from the Saint, which will appear
in these following methods.

SECT. I.
not prostitute it selt to his lust otherways, therefore to haunt it and scare
it with those imps of blasphemy; As he served Luther to whom he appeared, and
when repulsed by him, went away and left a noisome stinch behind him in the
room. Thus when the Christian has worsted Satan in his more pleasing
temptations, being madded, he belcheth forth this stinch of blasphemous motions
to annoy and affright him, that from them the Christian may draw some sad
conclusion or other; and indeed the Christians sin lies commonly more in the
conclusion, which he draws from them (as that he is not a child of God) then in
the motions themselves. All the counsel therefore I shall give thee in this
case, is to do with these motions, as you use to serve those vagrants and
rogues that come about the country, whom, though you cannot keep from passing
through your town, yet you look they settle not there, but whip them and send
them to their own home: Thus give these motions the Law, in mourning for them,
resisting of them, and they shall not be your charge, (yea, it is like you shall
seldomer be troubled with such guests,) but if once you come to entertain them,
and be Satan's nurse to them, then the Law of God will cast them upon you.

SECT. II.
on heavily, and can neither eat nor sleep for grief, here is a real trouble
begot from a false and imaginary ground: Thus Satan observes how the squares go
between God and his children, such a Saint he sees tardy in this duty, faulty
in that service, and he knows the Christian is conscious of this, and that the
Spirit of God will also show his distaste for these, both which prompts Satan
to draw a charge at length, raking up all the bloody aggravations he can think
of, and give it in to the Saint as sent from God. Thus he taught Jobs friends
to pick up those infirmities, which dropped from him in his distress, and shoot
them back in his face, as if indeed they had been sent from God to declare him
an hypocrite, and denounce his wrath for the same.

But how should we know the false accusations of Satan from the rebukes of God
and his Spirit?

Yea and Amen for ever. Indeed when the Saint plays the wanton, he can chide,
yea, will frown and tell the soul roundly of its sin, as he did David by
Nathan, Thou art the man, this thou have done, and paints out his sin with such
bloody colors, as made David's heart melt, as it were, into so many drops of
water: but that shall not serve his turn, he tells him what a rod is steeping
for him (that shall smart to purpose,) one of his own house, no other then his
darling son shall rise up against him, that he may the more fully conceive how
ill God took the sin of him, a child, a Saint, when he shall know what it is
to have his beloved child traitorously invade his Crown, and unnaturally hunt
for his precious life; yet not a word all this while is heard from Nathan
teaching David to unsaint himself, and call in question the work of God in his
soul. No, he had no such commission from God, he was sent to make him mourn
for his sin, not from his sin to question his state which God had so often put
out of doubt.

Hic se aperit diabolus: this comes from that foul liar. The Holy Spirit is
Christ's Spokesman to commend him to souls, and to woo sinners to embrace the
grace of the Gospel, and can such words drop from his sacred lips, as should
break the match, and sink Christ's esteem in the thoughts of the creature? you
may know where this was minted. When you hear one commend another for a wise or
good man, and at last come in with a but that dasheth all, you will easily
think he is no friend to the man, but some sly enemy that by seeming to
commend, desires to disgrace the more: Thus when you find God represented to
you as merciful and gracious, but not to such a great sinner as you, to have
power and strength, but not able to save thee, you may say, Avaunt Satan, thy
speech bewrays thee.

SECT. III.
how he may commence a suit against thee from thy duty; like those that come to
Sermons to carp and catch at what the Preacher says, that they may make him an
offender for some word or other mis-placed; or like a cunning Opponent in the
Schools, while his adversary is busy in reading his position, he is studying
to confute it; and truly Satan has such an Art at this, that he is able to
take our duties in pieces, and so disfigure them that they shall appear formal,
though never so zealous, hypocritical, though enricht with much sincerity. When
thou have done thy duty, Christian, then stands up this Sophister to ravel out
thy work, there (will he say) thou playedst the hypocrite, zealous, but serving
thy self, here wandering, there nodding; a little further puffed up with pride,
and what wages can thou hope for at Gods hands, now thou have spoiled his
work, and cut it all out into chips? Thus he makes many poor souls lead a
weary life, nothing they do but he has a fling at, that they know not whether
best pray or not, hear or not; and when they have prayed and heard, whether it
be to any purpose or not: Thus their souls hang in doubt, and their days pass
in sorrow, while their enemy stands in a corner, and laughs at the cheat he
has put upon them; as one, who by putting a counterfeit spider into the dish,
makes those that sit at table either out of conceit with the meat, that they
dare not eat, or afraid of themselves if they have eaten, lest they should be
poisoned with their meat.

What will you have us do in this case to withstand the cavils of Satan, in
reference to our duties?

First, let this make thee more accurate in all thou do: Answ. 1.
it is the very end God aims at in suffering Satan thus to watch you, that you
his children might be the more circumspect, because you have one over-looks
you, that will be sure to tell tales of you to God, and accuse thee to thy own
self. Does it not behove thee to write thy Copy fair, when such a Critic
reads and scans it over? Does it not concern thee to know thy heart well, to
turn over the Scriptures diligently, that thou may know the state of thy
soule-controversie in all the cases of conscience thereof, when thou have such
a subtle Opponent to reply upon thee?

do! God suffers sometimes the infirmities of his people to be known by the
wicked, (who are ready to check and frump them for them) for this end, to
humble his people, how much more low should these accusations of Satan, which
are in a great part too true, lay us before God?



Abraham's sacrifice, but comfort thy self with this, that if thou find a
party within thy bosom pleading for God, and entering its protest against
these, thou and thy services are Evangelically perfect. God beholds these as
the weaknesses of thy sickly state here below, and pities thee, as thou
would do thy lame child; how odious is he to us that mocks one for natural
defects, a blear eye, or a stammering tongue? such are these in thy new nature.
Observable is that in Christ's prayer against Satan, Zech. 3.3. The Lord said
unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?
As if Christ had said, Lord, will thou suffer this envious spirit to twit thy
poor child with, and charge him for those infirmities that cleave to his
imperfect state? he is but new plucked out of the fire. No wonder there are
some sparks unquencht, some corruption unmortified, some disorders unreformed
in his place and calling, and what Christ did for Joshuah, he does uncessantly
for all his Saints, apologizing for their infirmities with his Father.

of gratitude. He that will not accept of broken money, or half the sum for
payment of a debt: the same man, if his friend sends him, though but a bent six
pence, in token of his love, will take it kindly. It Is true (Christian) the
debt thou owe to God must be paid in good and lawful money, but (for thy
comfort) here Christ is thy Play Master; send Satan to him, bid him bring his
charge against Christ, who is ready at Gods right hand to clear his accounts,
and show his discharge for the whole debt; but now thy performances and
obedience come under another notion, (as tokens of thy love and thankfulness
to God,) and such is the gracious disposition of thy heavenly Father, Pro. 19.22
that he accepts thy mite: Love refuses nothing that love sends. It Is not the
weight or worth of the gift, but the desire of a man is his kindness.

SECT. IV.
We are not ignorant (says he) of his devices. (...), his Sophistical
reasonings. 2 Cor. 2.11
Satan sets much by this slight; no weapon oftener in his hand: where is the
Christian that has not met him at this door? here Satan finds the Christian
easy to be wrought on, the humors being stirred to his hand, while the
Christian of his own accord complains of the hardness of his heart, and is
very prone to believe any, who comply with his musing thoughts; yea, thinks
every one flatters him, that would persuade him otherwise. It Is easier to die
that soul into black, which is of a sad color already, then to make such a one
take the lightsome tincture of joy and comfort.

But how shall I answer this subtle enemy, when he thus perplexeth my spirit,
with not being humbled enough for sin, etc?



First, Satan argues thus: There ought to be a proportion between sin and
sorrow: But there is no proportion between thy sins and thy sorrow: Therefore
thou art not humbled enough. What a plausible argument is here at first blush?
For the major, that there ought to be a proportion between sin and sorrow, this
Satan will show you Scripture for. 2 Chro. 33 12.
Manasseh was a great sinner, and an ordinary sorrow will not serve his turn;
He humbled himself greatly before the Lord. Now (says Satan) weigh thy sin in
the balance with thy sorrow; art thou as great a Mourner as thou have been a
sinner? so many years thou have waged war against the Almighty, making havoc
of his laws, loading his patience till it groaned again, raking in the sides
of Christ with thy bloody dagger (while thou did grieve his Spirit, and
reject his grace*) and do think a little remorse (like a rolling cloud
letting fall a few drops of sorrow) will now be accepted? no, thou must steep
in sorrow as thou have soak't in sin. Now to show you the fallacy, we must
distinguish of a twofold proportion of sorrow.

First, an exact proportion of sorrow to the inherent nature and demerit of sin.

Secondly, there is a proportion to the Law and Rule of the Gospel. Now the
first is not a thing feasible, because the injury done in the least sin is
infinite, because done to an infinite God; and if it could be feasible, yet
according to the tenor of the first Covenant it would not be acceptable;
because it had no clause to give any hope for an after-game by repentance; but
the other which is a Gospel-sorrow, Acts 5.31. Zech. 12.10.
this is indeed repentance unto life, (both given by the Spirit of the Gospel,
and to be tried by the Rule of the Gospel.) This is given for thy relief. As
you see sometimes in the highway (where the waters are too deep for
travelers,) you have a foot-bridge or Causey, by which they may escape the
flood, and safely pass on; so that none but such as have not eyes, or are
drunk, will venture to go through the waters, when they may avoid the danger.
Thou art a dead man, if thou think to answer thy sin with proportionable
sorrow, thou will soon be above thy depth, and quackle thy self with thy own
tears, but never get over the least sin thou committedst; go not on therefore
as thou love thy life, but turn aside to this Gospel-path, and thou escapest
the danger. O you tempted souls, when Satan says you are not humbled enough,
see where you may be relieved; I am a Roman, (says Paul,) I appeal to Caesar.
I am a Christian, (say) I appeal to Christ's law; and what is the Law of the
Gospel concerning this? Heart-sorrow is Gospel-sorrow; They were pricked in
their heart, Acts 2.37
and Peter (like an honest Surgeon) will not keep these bleeding Patients
longer in pain with their wounds open; but presently claps on the healing
plaster of the Gospel; Believe in the Lord Jesus. Now a prick to the heart is
more then a wound to the conscience. The heart is the seat of life. Sin wounded
there lies a dying. To do any thing from the heart makes it acceptable, Ephesians.
6.6. Now* 2 Co. 5.11
poor soul, had thou sat thus long in the devils stocks, if thou had
understood this aright? does thy heart clear or condemn thee, when in secret
thou art bemoaning thy sin before God? if thy heart be false I cannot help you,
no, not the Gospel it self, 1 John 3.21
but if sincere, thou have boldness with God.

A second argument Satan uses, is this: He whose sorrow falls short of theirs,
that never truly repented, he is not humbled enough: But, soul, thy sorrow
falls short of some, that never truly repented; Ergo. Well, the first
Proposition is true, but how will Satan prove his minor? Thus, Ahab he took on
for his sin, and went in sackcloth. Judas he made bitter complaint. O (says
Satan) did thou not know such a one that lay under terror of conscience,
walking in a sad mournful condition so many months, and every one took him for
the greatest Convert in the country? and yet he at last fell foully, and
proved an Apostate; but thou never did feel such smart, pass so many weary
nights and days in mourning and bitter lamentation as he has done, therefore
thou fallest short of one that fell short of repentance. And truly this is a
sad stumbling block to a soul in an hour of temptation. Like a ship sunk in
the mouth of the harbor, which is more dangerous to others then if it had
perished in the open sea. There is less scandal by the sins of the wicked, who
sink (as it were) in the broad sea of profaneness, then in those who are
convinced of sin, troubled in conscience, and miscarry so near the harbor,
within sight, as it were, of saving grace. Tempted souls can hardly get over
these without dashing. Am I better then such a one that proved naught at last?
Now to help thee a little to find out the fallacy of this argument, we must
distinguish between the terrors that accompany sorrow, and the intrinsecal
nature of this grace. The first which are necessary may be separated from the
other, as the raging of the sea, which is caused by the wind from the sea,
when the wind is down. From this distinction take two Conclusions.



John before meek Jesus. But as John went down when Christ went up, his
increase was John's decrease; so as true godly sorrow goes up, these terrors go
down. As the wind gathers the clouds, but those clouds seldom melt into a set
rain, until the wind falls that gathered them: so these terrors raise the
clouds of our sins in our consciences, but when these sins melt into godly
sorrow, this lays the storm presently; indeed, as the loud winds do blow
away the rain, so these terrors do keep off the soul from this
Gospel-sorrow. While the creature is making an outcry, it is damned* it is
damned, it is taken up so much with the fear of hell, that sin as sin, (which
is the proper object of godly sorrow) is little looked on or mourned for. A
Murderer condemned to die, is so possessed with the fear of death, and thought
of the gallows, that there lies the slain body (it may be) before him,
unlamented by him: but when his pardon is brought, then he can bestow his
tears freely on his murdered friend; They shall look on him whom they have
pierced, and mourn. Faith is the eye, this eye (beholding its sin piercing
Christ, and Christ pardoning its sin) affects the heart, the heart affected
sighs, these inward clouds melt and run from the eye of faith in tears: and
all this is done when there is no tempest of terror upon the spirit, but a
sweet serenity of love and peace: and therefore, Christian, see how Satan
abuses thee, when he would persuade thee thou art not humbled enough, because
thy sorrow is not attended with these legal sorrows.

CHAP. VI. A brief Application of the second Branch of the Point, viz. Of
Satan's subtilty as a Troubler and Accuser for sin.


First, such as rake up the Saints old sins, which God has forgiven and
forgotten, (merely to grieve their spirits and bespatter their names,) these
show their divellish malice indeed, who can take such pains to travel many
years back, that they may find a handful of dirt to throw on the Saints face.
Thus Shimei twitted David, 1 Samuel 16.7
Come out thou bloody man. When you that fear God meet with such reproaches,
answer them as Beza did the Papists, who for want of other matter charged him
for some wanton Poems penned by him in his youth, Hi homunciones invident mihi
gratiam Dei. These men (said he) grudge me the pardoning mercy of God.

Amaleks, the remembrance of whose name, Deuteronomy. 25.19.
God threatened to blot from under heaven; why, what had Amalek done to deserve
this? they smote the hindermost, those that were feeble, and could not march
with the rest. And was it so great a cruelty to do this? much more to smite
with the edge of a mocking tongue the feeble in grace.

Thirdly, such who father their sins upon the Saints, thus Ahab calls the
Prophet the Troubler of Israel, when it was himself and his fathers house. What
a grief was it, think you to Moses his spirit, for the Israelites to lay the
blood of those that died in the wilderness at his door? whereas (God knows) he
was their constant Bail, when at any time Gods hand was up to destroy them:
and this is the charge which the best of Gods servants in this crooked
generation of ours lie under: We may thank them (say the profane) for all our
late miseries in the Nation: we were well enough till they would reform us. O
for shame, blame not the good Physic that was administered, but the corrupt
body of the Nation that could not bear it.

Rabshakeh blasphemed, and when desired to speak in another language, he goes
on the more to grieve them. Sometimes you shall have a profane wretch (knowing
one to be conscientious, and cannot brook to hear the Name of God taken in
vain, or the ways of God flouted,) will on purpose fall upon such discourse as
shall grate his chaste ears, and trouble his gracious spirit, such a one
strikes father and child at one blow, think it not enough to dishonor God,
except the Saint stands by to see and hear the wrong done to his heavenly
Father.

David? Psalm. 77.
yet he at a loss sometimes learning to spell his evidences, as if he could
never have read them. The sense of Gods love comes and goes with the present
taste. He that is in the dark (while there) sees not the more for former light.
O bless God for that light which shines in at thy window; Satan is plotting to
undermine thy comfort every day. This Thief sees thy pleasant fruits as they
hang, and his teeth water at them, but the wall is too high for him to climb;
thy God keeps this Serpent out of thy Paradise. It Is not the grace of God in
thee, but the favor of God, as a shield about thee, defends thee from the
wicked one.



CHAP. VII. Containing some Directions, tending to entrench and fortify the
Christian against the assaults and wiles of the devil, as a Troubler of the
souls Peace.


SECT. I.
Answ. 1.
First, if thou would be guarded from him as a Troubler, take heed of him as
a seducer. The have of Satan's hatchet, (with which he lies chopping at the root
of the Christians comfort) is commonly made of the Christians wood: First, he
tempts to sin, and then for it. Satan is but a creature, and cannot work
without tools, he can indeed make much of a little, but not any thing of
nothing (as we see in his assaulting of Christ, where he troubled himself to
little purpose, because he came and found nothing in him. Joh. 14.30
Though the devil throws the stone, yet it is the mud in us which royles our
comforts. 'Twas in vain for the Philistines to fall on Samson till his lock
was cut: take heed therefore of yielding to his enticing motions; these are the
stumbling block, at which he hopes thou wilt break thy shins, and bruise thy
conscience, which once done, let him alone to spin out the cure. Indeed a
Saints flesh heals not so easily as others: drink not of the devils wassel,
there is poison in the cup, his wine is a mocker, look not on it as it sparkles
in the temptation; what thou drinkest down with sweetness, thou will be sure
to bring up again as gall and wormwood. Above all sins, take heed of
presumptuous ones, Ps. 19.13.
thou art not out of the danger of such. Sad stories we have of Saints falls,
and what follows? then, Take him Jailor, (says God,) Deliver such a one unto
Satan; and if a Saint be the Prisoner, and the devil the Keeper, you may guess
how he shall be used. O how he will tear and rend thy conscience! Though that
dreadful Ordinance is not used (as it should be) in the Church, yet Gods Court
sits, and if he excommunicate a soul from his presence, he falls presently
into Satan's clutches. Well, if through his subtilty thou have been overtaken,
take heed thou stayest not in the devils quarters: shake the viper off thy
hand, ply thee to thy Surgeon: green wounds cure best, but if thou
neglectest, and the wind get to it, thy conscience will soon fester. 1 Kings
22.35.
Ahab (we read) was wounded in battle, and was loath to yield to it, (it is
said) he was held up in his chariot, but he died for it: when a soul has
received a wound, committed a sin, Satan labors to boulster him up with
flattering hopes, holds him up, as it were, in his chariot against God; what
yield for this? afraid for a little scratch, and lose the spoil of thy future
pleasure for this? O take heed of listening to such counsel, the sooner thou
yieldest, the fairer quarter thou shall have. Every step in this way sets thee
further from thy peace. A rent garment is caught by every nail, and the rent
made wider. Renew therefore thy repentance speedily, whereby this breach may be
made up, and worse prevented, which else will befall thee.

SECT. II.
2ly, study that grand Gospel Truth of a souls justification before Romans 3.24
with all the sweet privileges that flow from it. An effectual door once
opened to let the soul into this truth, would not only spoil the Popes market
(as Gardner said) but the devils also; when Satan coms to disquiet the
Christians peace, (for want of a right understanding here) he is soon worsted
by his enemy: as the silly hare which might escape the dogs in some covert or
borough that is at hand, but (trusting to her heels) is by the print of her
own feet and sent, which she leaves behind, followed, till at last (weary and
spent) she falls into the mouth of them. In all that a Christian does, there is
a print of sinful infirmity, and a sent by which Satan is enabled to trace and
pursue him over hedge and ditch, this grace and that duty, till the soul, not
able to stand before the accusation of Satan, is ready to fall down in despair
at his feet: whereas here is a hiding place, whither the enemy durst not come,
the clefts of the rock, the hole of the stairs, which this truth leads unto.
When Satan charge thee for a sinner, perhaps thou interposest thy repentance
and reformation, but soon art beaten out of those works, (when thou art shown
the sinful mixtures that are in them) whereas this truth would choke all his
bullets, that thou believe on him who has said, Not unto him that works,
Romans 4.5.
but unto him that believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
imputed for righteousness. Get therefore into this tower of the
Gospel Covenant, and roll this truth, (as she that stone on the head of
Abimelech) on the head of Satan.

SECT. III.
Egyptians hoped they had the Israelites in, when they cried, They are
entangled, they are entangled. There are three kinds of straits wherein he
labors to entrap the Christians; Nice Questions, obscure Scriptures, and dark
Providence.

doubtful disputations. Romans 14.1
Sometimes Satan will be asking the soul, how it knows its election: and where
he finds one not so fully resolved, as to dare to own the same, he frames his
Argument against such a ones closing with Christ and the promise; as if it were
presumption to assume that, (which is the only portion of the Elect) before we
know our selves of that number. Now, Christian, keep the Plains and thou art
safe. It Is plain; we are not to make Election a ground for our faith, but our
faith and calling a medium or argument to prove our Election. Election indeed
is first in order of divine acting. God chooses before we believe; yet faith
is first in our acting. We must believe before we can know we are elected, yea,
by believing we know it. The Husbandman knows it is Spring by the sprouting of
the grass, though he has no Astrology to know the Position of the Heavens;
thou may know thou art Elect, as surely by a work of grace in thee, as if
thou had stood by Gods elbowe when he writ thy name in the book of life. It
had been presumption for David to have thought he should have been King, till
Samuel anointed him, but then none at all; when thou believe first, and
closest with Christ, then is the Spirit of God sent to anoint thee to the
Kingdom of Heaven: this is that holy oil which is poured upon none but heirs
of glory; and it is no presumption to read what Gods gracious purpose was
toward thee of old, when he prints those his thoughts, and makes them legible
in thy effectual calling; here thou do not go up to heaven, and pry into
Gods secrets, but heaven comes down to thee, and reveals them. Again, he will
ask the Christian what was the time of his Conversion; Art thou a Christian
(will he say) and do thou not know when thou commencedst? now keep the
Plains, and content thy self with this, that thou see the streams of grace,
though the time of thy Conversion be like the head of Nylus, not to be found.
God often comes betimes, before gross sins have deflowered the soul, and steals
into the creatures bosom without much noise. In such a case Satan does but
abuse thee when he sends thee on this errand; you may know the Sun is up,
though you did not observe when it rose. Again, what will become of thee (says
Satan) if God should bring thee into such an affliction on trial, when thou
must burn or turn, or when all thy outward estate shall be rent from thee, no
meal in the barrel, no money in the purse; dare thou have so good an opinion
of thy self, as to think that thy faith will hold out in such an hour of
temptation? It thou have but half an eye, Christian, thou may see what Satan
drives at: this is an ensnaring question; by the fear of future troubles he
labors to bring thee into a neglect of thy present duty, and indispose thee
also for such a stare whenever it falls. If a man has much business to do on
the morrow, it is his wisdom to discharge his mind thereof, (when composing to
sleep) lest the thoughts thereof break his rest, and make him the more unfit in
the morning. The less rest the soul has in God and his promise concerning
future events, the less strength it will find to bear them when the pinch
comes. When therefore thou art molested with such fears, pacify thy heart
with these three plain Conclusions.

First, every event is the product of Gods Providence, not a sparrow, much
less a Saint falls to the ground by poverty, sickness, persecution, etc. but
the hand of God is in it.

Secondly, God has put in caution he will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
Heb. 13.5.
He that enables thee in one condition, will in another. God learns his
servants their whole trade. Grace is an universal principle. At the first
moment of thy spiritual life suffering grace was infused as well as praying
grace.

Thirdly, God is wise to conceal the succors he intends in the several
changes of thy life, that so he may draw thy heart into an entire dependence on
his faithful promise. Thus to try the metal of Abraham's faith he let him go
on, till his hand was stretched forth, and then he comes to his rescue. Christ
sends his disciples to sea, but stays behind himself, on a design to try
their faith, and show his love. Comfort thy self therefore with this, though
thou see not thy God in the way, yet thou shall find him in the end.

Heb. 6.7. Heb. 10.26. (which pass the understanding, as a swift stream the
eye, so that the sense is not perceived without great observation,) till their
heads have turned round, and they at last (not able to untie the difficulties,)
have fallen down into despairing thoughts and words of their own condition,
crying out, O they have sinned against knowledge of the truth, and therefore no
mercy remains for them; who if they would have refreshed their understandings
by looking off these places, (whose engraving is too curious to be long pored
on by a weak eye,) they might have found that in other Scriptures plainly
expressed, which would have enabled them, as through a glass, more safely to
have viewed these? Therefore, Christian, keep the Plains; thou may be sure
it is thine enemy that gives thee such stones to break thy teeth, when thy
condition calls rather for bread and wine, such Scriptures, I mean, as are most
apt to nourish thy faith, and cheer thy drooping spirit. When thou meetest
such plain Scriptures which speak to thy case, go over where it is fordable,
and do not venture beyond thy depth. Art thou afraid because thou have sinned
since the knowledge of the truth, and therefore no sacrifice remains for thee?
See David and Peter's case, how it patterns thine, and left upon record that
their recovery may be a Key in thine hand to open such places as these; may
thou not safely conclude from these, this is not their meaning, that none can
be saved that sin after knowledge? Indeed in both those places, it is neither
meant of the falls of such as ever had true grace, nor of a falling away in
some particular acts of sin, but of a total universal falling away from the
Faith, (the doctrine of it as well as seeming practice of it.) Now if the root
of the matter were ever in thee, other Scriptures will first comfort thee
against those particular apostasies into which thou have relapsed, by sweet
promises inviting such to return, and Precedents of Saints, who have had peace
spoken to them after such folly, and also they will satisfy thee against the
other, by giving full security to thy faith, that thy little grace shall not
die, being immortal, though not in its proper essence, because but a creature,
yet by Covenant, as it is a child of Promise.

Job of his temporal estate, and bereave him of his chilchildren, and then
labors to make him question his spiritual estate and sonship: his wife would
have him entertain hard thoughts of God, (saying, Curse God and die,) and his
friends as hard thoughts of himself, (as if he were an hypocrite) and both upon
the same mistake, as if such an afflicted condition and a gracious state were
inconsistent. Now (Christian) keep the Plains, and neither from this charge
God foolishly for thine enemy, nor thy self as his. Read the saddest
Providence with the Comment of the Word, and thou can not make such an harsh
interpretation. As God can make a straight line with a crooked stick, be
righteous when he uses wicked instruments; so also gracious when he dispenses
harsh Providence. Joseph kept his love, when he spoke roughly to his brethren.
I do not wonder that the wicked think they have Gods blessing, because they are
in the warm Sun: Alas, they are strangers to Gods counsels, void of his
Spirit, and sensual, judging of God and his Providence, by the report their
present feeling makes of them; like little children, who think every one loves
them that gives them plums. But it is strange, that a Saint should be at a loss
for his afflicted state, when he has a Key to decipher Gods character:
Christian, has not God secretly instructed thee by his Spirit from the Word,
how to read the shorthand of his Providence? do not thou know that the
Saints afflictions stand for blessings? Every son whom he loves he corrects;
and prosperity in a wicked state, must it not be read a curse? does not God
damn such to be rich, honorable, victorious in this world, as well as to be
tormented in another world? God gives them more of these then they seem to
desire sometimes, and all to bind them faster up in a deep sleep of security,
as Jael served Sisera, Judge. 5.25
he shall have milk though he asked but water, that she might nail him the
surer to the ground. Milk having a property (as some write) to incline to sleep.

SECT. IV.
days, and Jubilee-like Festivals, when God comes forth clothed with the robes
of his mercy, and holds forth the Scepter of his grace more familiarly to his
children then ordinary, bearing witness to their faith, sincerity, etc. and
then the firmament is clear, not a cloud to be seen to darken the Christians
comfort. Love and joy are the souls repast and pastime, while this feast
lasts. Now when God withdrawes, and this cheer is taken off, Satan's work is how
he may deface and wear off the remembrance of this testimony, which the soul
so triumphs in for its spiritual standing, that he may not have it as an
evidence when he shall bring about the suite again, and put the soul to
produce his writings for his spiritual state, or renounce his claim. It behooves
thee therefore to lay them up safely; such a testimony may serve to nonsuit
thy accuser many years hence; one affirmative from Gods mouth for thy pardoned
state, carries more weight (though of old date) then a thousand negatives from
Satan's. David's Songs of old spring in with a light to his soul in his
midnight-sorrowes.



long ago passed between God and him, though sometimes even these are of great
use. As God can make a sinner possess the sins of his youth, as if they were
newly acted to his terror in his old age; so God can present the comforts and
evidences which of old the Saint received, with those very thoughts he had then
of them, as if they were fresh and new.

Job the Devils hypocrite, whom God vouch't for a non-such in holiness, and
proved him so at last? If he knew thou were a Saint, would he tell thee so? if
an hypocrite, he would be as loath thou should know it; turn thy back
therefore on him, and go to thy God: fear not, but sooner or later he will
give his hand again to thy Certificate. But look thou do not rashly pass a
censure on thy self, because a satisfactory answer is not presently sent at thy
desire; the Messenger may stay long, and bring good news at last.

then say thou believe God is able to work these in thee, yea, has promised
such a mercy to poor sinners, it is his Covenant, ( He will give a new heart, a
clean heart, a soft heart,) and here I wait, knowing, as there was nothing in
the creature to move the great God to make such Promises; so there can be
nothing in the creature to hinder the Almighty his performance of them, where
and when he pleases. This act of faith, accompanied with a longing desire
after that grace thou can not yet find, and an attendance on the means,
though it will not fully satisfy all thy doubts, (may be) yet will keep thy
head above water, that thou despairest not; and such a shore thou need'st in
this case, or the house falls.



CHAP. VIII. Of the Saints victory over their subtle enemy, and whence it is
that creatures so overmatch't should be able to stand against Satan's wiles.
THe second Branch of the Apostles Argument follows, to excite them the more
vigourously to their arms; and that is from the possibility, yea, certainty of
standing against this subtle enemy, if thus armed, That ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil. So that this gives the Apostles argument
its due temperament: for he meant not to scare them into a cowardly flight, or
sullen despair of victory, when he tells them their enemy is so subtle and
politic: but to excite them to a vigourous resistance, from the assured hope
of strength to stand in battle, and victoriously after it; which two I conceive
are comprehended in that phrase, (standing against the wiles of Satan.
Sometimes to stand implies a fighting posture; so verse 14. Sometimes a
conquering posture, Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. That earth which was the field,
where all the bloody battles were fought betwixt him and Satan, on it shall he
stand, when not an enemy shall dare to show his head. So that taking both these
in: the Observation is,

Doct.
Satan with all his wits and wiles shall never vanquish a soul armed with true
grace; nay, he that has this armor of God on, shall vanquish him. Look into
the Word, you shall not find a Saint, but has been in the list with him,
sifted and winnowed more or less by this enemy, yet at last we find them all
coming off with an honorable victory: as in David, Job, Peter, Paul, who were
the hardest put to it of any upon record, and lest some should attribute their
victory to the strength of their inherent grace, above other of their weaker
brethren, you have the glory of their victories appropriated to God, in whom
the weak are as strong as the strongest. We shall give a double Reason of this
truth, why the Christian who seems to be so over-match't, 2 Cor. 12.9 Jam.
5.11.
is yet so unconquerable.

First, the curse that lies upon Satan and his cause. Pe^s. 1.
Gods curse blasts wherever it comes. The Canaanites with their
neighbour-Nations were bread for Israel, though people famous for war; and
why? They were cursed Nations. The Egyptians a politic people; Let us deal
wisely, (say they) yet being cursed of God; this lay like a thorn at their
heart, and was at last their ruin; yea, let the Israelites themselves, (who
carry the badge of Gods Covenant on their flesh) by their sins once become the
people of Gods curse, and they are trampled like dirt under the Assyrians feet.
Isa. 10.5.
This made Balak beg so hard for a curse upon Israel, Now there is an
irrevokeable curse cleaves to Satan from Genesis 3.14, 15. And the Lord said to
the Serpent, Because thou have done this, thou art cursed, etc. which place,
though partly meant of the literal serpent, yet chiefly of the devil and the
wicked, (his spiritual serpentine brood) as appears by the enmity pronounced
against the Serpents seed and the woman's, which clearly holds forth the feud
between Christ with his seed, against the devil and his. Now there are two
things in that curse which may comfort the Saints. First, the curse prostrates
Satan under their feet: Upon thy belly shall thou go, which is no more then is
elsewhere promised, that God will subdue Satan under our feet. Now this
prostrate condition of Satan assures believers, that the devil shall never lift
his head (that is, his wily policy) higher then the Saints heel. He may make
thee limp, but not bereave thee of thy life, and this bruise which he gives
thee shall be rewarded with the breaking of his own head, that is, the utter
ruin of him and his cause. Secondly, his food is here limited and appointed.
Satan shall not devour whom he will. The dust is his food, which seems to
restrain his power to the wicked, who are of the earth earthy, mere dust; but
for those who are of a heavenly extraction, their graces are reserved for
Christ's food, Cant. 7.13. and their souls surely are not a morsel for the
devils tooth.

The second reason is taken from the wisdom of God, who as he undertakes the
ordering of the Christians way to heaven, Ps. 37.24. so especially this
business of Satan's temptations. We find Christ was not led of the evil spirit
into the wilderness to be tempted, but of the Holy Spirit, Mat. 4.1. Satan
tempts not when he will, but when God pleases: and the same Holy Spirit which
led Christ into the field, brought him off with victory. And therefore we find
him marching in the Power of the Spirit (after he had repulsed Satan) into
Galilee, Luke 4.14. When Satan tempts a Saint, he is but Gods messenger, 2 Cor.
12.7. There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to
buffet me. So our Translation. But rather as Beza, who will have it in casu
recto, the Messenger Satan, implying that he was sent of God to Paul; And
indeed the errand he came a- was too good and gracious to be his own, Lest I
should be exalted above measure; The devil never meant to do Paul such a good
office: but God sends him to Paul, as David sent Vriah with letters to Joab,
neither knew the contents of their message. The devil and his instruments both
are Gods instruments, therefore the wicked are called his sword, Ps. 17.13.
Isa. 10.15.
his axe: now let God alone to wield the one and handle the other. He is but a
bungler that hurts and hackles his own legs with his own axe; which God should
do, if his children should be the worse for Satan's temptations. Let the devil
choose his way, God is for him at every weapon. If he will try it by force of
arms, and assault the Saints by persecution, as the Lord of Hosts, he will
oppose him. If by policy and subtilty, he is ready there also. The devil and
his whole counsel are but fools to God. Nay, their wisdom, foolishness.
Cunning and Art commend every thing but sin. The more artificial the watch,
the picture, etc. the better; but the more wit and Art in sin, the worse,
because it is employed against an All-wise God, that cannot be outwitted, and
therefore will in the end but pay the workmen in greater damnation. The
foolishness of God is wiser then men, yea then the wisdom of men and devils,
that is, the means and instruments which God opposes Satan withal. What
weaker then a Sermon? who sillier then the Saints in the account of the wise
world? yet God is wiser in a weak Sermon, then Satan is in his deep plots
(wherein the State-heads of a whole Conclave of profound Cardinals are knocked
together:) wiser in his simple ones, then Satan in his Achitophels and
Sanballats; and truly God chooses on purpose to defeat the policies of hell
and earth by these, that he may put such to greater shame, 1 Cor. 1.21. How is
the great Scholar ashamed to be baffled by a plain Countrey-mans argument? thus
God calls forth Job to wrestle with Satan and his Seconds, (for such his three
friends showed themselves in taking the devils part) and sure he is not able to
hold up the cudgels against the fencing-Master, who is beaten by one of the
scholars. God sits laughing while hell and earth sit plotting, Psalm. 2.4. He
disappointeth the devices of the crafty, he breaks their studied thoughts and
plots, as the words import, Job 5.12. in one moment pulling down the labors of
many years policy. Indeed as great men keep wild beasts for game and sport,
(as the fox, the boar, etc.) so does God Satan and his instruments, to
manifest his wisdom in the taking of them. It is observed, that the very
hunting of some beasts affords not only pleasure to the Hunter, but also more
sweetness to the eater. Indeed God by displaying of his wisdom in the pursuit
of the Saints enemies does superadde a sweet relish to their deliverances at
last. He brake the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to his
people. After he had hunted Pharaoh out of all his forms and burrowes, now he
breaks the very brains of all his plots, and serves him up to his people, with
the garnishment of his wisdom and power about.

CHAP. IX. An Account is given, how the All-wise God does out-wit the devil in
his tempting of Saints to sin, wherein are laid down the ends Satan propounds,
and how he is prevented in them all, with the gracious issue that God puts to
these his temptations.
But how does God defeat Satan, and out-wit his wiles in tempting his Saints?

Patriarchs helped to fulfill Joseph's dream, while they are thinking to rid
their hands of him. To instance in a few particulars.

SECT. I.
black soap with which God washes his Saints white.

First, God uses the temptations of Satan to one sin, as a preventive against
another; to Paul's thorn in the flesh to prevent his pride. God sends Satan to
assault Paul on that side where he is strong, that in the mean time he may
fortify him where he is weak. Thus Satan is befooled, as sometimes we see an
army sitting down before a town, where it wastes its strength to no purpose, and
in the mean time gives the enemy an advantage to recruit; and all this by the
counsel of some Hushai, that is a secret friend to the contrary side: God, who
is the Saints true friend, sits in the devils Council, and overrules
proceedings there to the Saints advantage; He suffers the devil to annoy the
Christian with temptations to blasphemy, atheism, and by these, together with
the troubles of spirit they produce; the soul is driven to duty, is humbled in
the sense of these horrid apparitions in its imagination, and secured from
abundance of formality and pride, which otherwise God saw invading him. As in a
family, some business falls out, which keeps the Master up later then
ordinary, and by this the thief, who that night intended to rob him, is
disappointed; had not such a soul had his spirit of prayer and diligence kept
awake by those afflicting temptations, it is likely Satan might have come as a
seducer, and taken him napping in security.

Peter never had such a conquest over his self-confidence, never such an
establishment of his faith, as after his foul fall in the High Priests hall.
He that was so well persuaded of himself before, as to say, Though all were
offended with Christ, yet would not he, how modest and humble was he in a few
days become, Joh. 21.15.
when he durst not say he loved Christ more then his fellow-brethren, to whom
before he had preferred himself? what an undaunted Confessor of Christ and his
Gospel does he prove before Councels and Rulers, who even now was dash't out of
countenance by a filly maid? and all this the product of Satan's temptation
sanctified unto him. Indeed a Saint has a discovery by his fall, what is the
prevailing corruption in him, so that the temptation does but stir the humor,
which the soul having found out, has the greater advantage to evacuate, by
applying those means, and using those ingredients which do purge that malady
cum delectu. Now the soul sure will call all out against this destroyer? Paul
had not took such pains to buffet his body, had he not found Satan knocking at
that door.

David overcome with one sin, renewes his repentance for all, Psalm. 51. A
good husband when he sees it rain in at one place, sends for the Workman to
look over all the house. This indeed differenceth a sincere heart from an
hypocrite, whose repentance is partial, soft in one plot, and hard in another.
Judas cries out of his treason, but not a word of his thievery and hypocrisy.
The hole was no wider in his conscience then where the bullet went in, whereas
true sorrow for one, breaks the heart into shivers for others also.

SECT. II.


Moses provoked to anger, what watch and ward have thou need keep over thy
unruly heart? though loud winds do some hurt by blowing down here a loose tyle,
and there a turret, (which was falling before,) yet the common good surmounts
the private damage of some few; these being as a broom in Gods hand to sweep
and cleanse the air: so though some (that are wicked) are by Gods righteous
judgment for the same hardened into further abominations by the Saints falls,
yet the good which sincere souls receive by having their formality and
security in a further degree purged does abundantly countervaile the other, who
are but sent a little faster, whither they were going before.

(when the passage seems so stopped, that no comfort can be got down otherwise)
to drop a little hope into the soul, to keep the creature alive from falling
into utter despair; some have been revived with this, when next door to hell in
their own fears. David's sin was great, yet found mercy; Peter fell foully, yet
now in heaven. Why sit thou here, O my soul, under the hatches of despair?
up and call upon thy God for mercy, who has pardoned the same to others.

to speak a word in season to the weary soul: it is not serving out an
Apprenticeship to humane Arts will furnish a man for this: great Doctors have
proved very dunces here, knowing no more how to handle a wounded conscience
then a Rustic the Chirurgions instrument in dissecting the body when an
Anatomy-Lecture is to be read. It Is not the knowledge of the Scripture (though
a man were as well acquainted with it, as the Apothecary with his pots and
glasses in his shop, able to go directly to any promise on a sudden,) will
suffice. No, not grace it self, except exercised with these buffetings and
soul-conflicts. Christ himself we find trained up in this school, Isa. 50.4.
He wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. Even as the Tutor calls up his
Pupil to read to him; and what is the Lecture which is read to Christ, that he
may have the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to the weary
soul? see, verse. 5. The Lord has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned I away my back, I gave my back to the smiters, etc. His
sufferings (which were all along mingled with temptations,) were the Lecture
from which Christ came out so learned, to resolve and comfort distressed
souls. So that the devil had better have let Christ alone, yea, and his Saints
also, who do him but the greater disservice in comforting others; none will
handle poor souls so gently as those, who remember the smart of their own
heart-sorrowes; none so skilful in applying the comforts of the Word to wounded
consciences, as those who have layen bleeding themselves; such know the
symptoms of soul-troubles, and feel others pains in their own bosoms, which
some that know the Scriptures, (for sack of experience) do not, and therefore
are like a novice Physician, who perhaps can tell you every plant in the
Herbal, yet wanting the practick part, when a Patient comes, knows not well
how to make use of his skill: The Saints experiences help them to a sovereign
treacle made of the Scorpions own flesh, (which they through Christ have slain)
and that has a virtue above all other to expel the venom of Satan's
temptations from the heart.

SECT. III.


Adam to eat the forbidden fruit, he thought now he had man in the same
predicament with himself, as unlikely ever to see the face of God, as those
Apostate spirits; but (alas!) this was by God intended to usher in that great
Gospel-plot of saving man by Christ, who (as soon as this Prologue of man's fall
is done) is brought upon the stage in that grand Promise of the Gospel made to
Adam, and at Gods command undertakes the charge of recovering lost man out of
Satan's clutches, and re-instating him in his primitive glory, with an access
of more then ever man had at first, so that the meanest lilly in Christ's field,
exceeds Adam in all his native Royalty. And as Satan sped in his first
temptation, so he is still on the losing hand: what got he by all his pains
upon Job, but to let that holy man know at last how dearly God loved him? When
he foiled Peter so shamefully, do we not find Christ owning Peter with as much
love as ever? Peter must be the only disciple, to whom by name the joyful news
of his resurrection is sent: Go tell my disciples and Peter. As if Christ had
said, Be sure let his sad heart be comforted with this news, that he may know
I am friends with him for all his late cowardice.

But does not this seem to countenance sin, and make Christians heedlesse,
whether they fall into temptation or no? If God do thus show his love to his
Saints after their falls and foiles, why should we be so shy of sin, which ends
so well at last?



Moses spoke unadvisedly, but the devil had his instruments to provoke him,
quite against the good man's temper. David numbers the people, but see how the
devil dogged and hunted him, till at last he got the better, 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
Satan stood up and provoked David to number Israel. How bravely did Job repel
Satan's darts? no wonder if in such a shower some one should get between the
joints of his armor. And for Peter, we know (good man) with what a loyal
heart, yea, zealous he went into the field, though when the enemy appeared his
heart failed him.

David was led into temptation first, he must be clad in sackcloth and
mourning, and then God takes it off, and puts on the garment of joy and praise,
1 Chronicles. 21.10, 15. Job, though he expressed so much courage and patience, yet
(bewraying some infirmities after he was baited long by so many fresh dogs, men
and devils) he must cry peccavi, and abhor himself in dust and ashes, before
God will take him into his arms, Job 42.6. and the same way God takes with all
his children. Now to his Saints in such a posture, God may with safety to his
honor and their good, give a larger draught of his love then ordinary; their
fears and sorrow which their sin has cost them, will serve instead of water
to dash this strong wine of joy, and take away its headiness, that it neither
fume up into pride, nor occasion them to reele backward into Apostasy.

But why does God now communicate his love?

You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that
the Lordis very pitiful, and of tender mercy. God loves not to rake in bleeding
wounds, he knows a mourning soul is subject to be discouraged. A frown or an
angry look from God, whom the Saint so dearly loves, must needs go near the
heart, therefore God declares himself at hand to revive such, Isa. 57, 15. and
he gives the reason, verse 16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I
be always wreth, for the spirit should fail before me. Whose spirit is there
meant? not of the presumptuous sinner; he goes on, and never blunks; but of the
contrite and humble ones. As the father observes the disposition of his
children, one commits a fault and goes on rebelliously, despising his fathers
anger, another (when offending him) lays it to heart, refuses to eat, gets
into some corner to lament the displeasure of his father; the father sees it,
and his bowels yerne toward him. Indeed should he not put his child out of
fear by discovering his love, the spirit of such a one would fail; it is not
possible there should be a long breach between such a father and such a son,
the one relenting over his sin, the other over his mourning son.

Herod and Pilate were made friends, and can it go well with Satan to see all
well between God and his children? If Esther be in favor, Haman her enemy
shall have his face covered. Indeed, this covers Satan's face with shame, to see
a poor Saint even now his prisoner, whom he had leave to rob and plunder, tempt
and disquiet, now sitting in the Sunshine of Gods love, while he like a
ravening Lion takes on for the loss of his prey.

Secondly, Satan's aim is to weaken the Saints faith on God, and cool his love
to God, but befooled in both; for, first God turns their temptations, yea,
their falls, to the further establishment of their faith, which (like the tree)
stands stronger for its shaking, or like the Giant Anteus, who in his wrestling
with Hercules is feigned to get strength by every fall to the ground. False
faith indeed once foiled, seldom comes on again; but true faith rises and
fights more valiantly, as we see in Peter and other Scripture-examples.
Temptation to faith is as fire to gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. The fire does not only
discover which is true gold, but makes the true gold more pure; it comes out
may be less in bulk and weight, (because severed from that soil and dross
which embased it) but more in value and worth, when Satan is bound up, and the
Christian walks under the shines of divine favor, and encouragement of divine
assistance; his faith may appear great, if compared with another under the
withdrawings of God, and buffetings of Satan, but this is not equal judging;
as if to try who is biggest of two men, we should measure one naked, and the
other over his clothes; or in comparing two pieces of gold, weigh one with the
dross and dirt it contracts in the purse, with the other purged from these in
the fire; faith before temptation has much heterogeneal stuff that cleaves to
it, and goes for faith; but when temptation comes, these are discovered. Now
the Christian feels corruption stir, which lay as dead before, now a cloud
comes between the soul and the sweet face of God, (the sense of which latter,
and the little sense of the other bore up his faith before) but these bladders
pricked, he comes now to learn the true stroke in this heavenly Art of
swimming on the promise, having nothing else to beat him up but that; and a
little of this carries more of the precious nature of faith in it, then all the
other; yea, is (like Gideons handful of men) stronger, when all these
accessaries to faith are sent away, then when they were present; and here is
all the devil gets: in stead of destroying his faith which he aims at, he is
the occasion of the refining of it, and thereby adding to its strength.

Secondly, the love of tempted Saints is enkindled to Christ by their
temptations, and foiles in their temptations. Possibly in the fit there may
seem a damp upon their love, as when water is first sprinkled upon the fire,
but when the Conflict is a little over, and the Christian comes to himself, his
love to Christ will break out like a vehement flame; First, the shame and
sorrow which a gracious soul must needs feel in his bosom for his sinful
miscarriage, while under the temptation, will provoke him to express his love
to Christ above others, as is sweetly set forth in the Spouse, who when the
cold fit of her distemper was off, and the temptation over, bestirs her to
purpose, her lazy sickness is turned to love-sicknesse: she finds it as hard
now to sit, as she did before to rise: she can rest in no place out of her
Beloveds sight, but runs and asks every one she meets for him; and whence came
all this vehemence of her zeal? all occasioned by her undutiful carriage to
her husband: she parted so unkindly with him, that (bethinking what she had
done) away she goes to make her peace. If sins committed in unregeneracy have
such a force upon a gracious soul, that the thought of them, though pardoned,
will still break and melt the heart into sorrow, (as we see in Magdalen) and
prick on to show zeal for God above others, (as in Paul) how much more will the
sins of a Saint, who after sweet acquaintance with Jesus Christ, lifts up the
heel against that bosom where he has layen, affect, yea, dissolve the heart
as into so many drops of water, and that sorrow provoke him to serve God at a
higher rate then others? No child so dutiful in all the family, as he who is
returned from his rebellion. Again secondly, as his own shame, so the
experience which such a one has of Christ's love above others will increase his
love. Christ's love is fuel to ours. Ex iisdem nutrimur quibus constamus; as it
gives its being, so it affords growth: It is both Mother and Nurse to our love.
The more Christ puts forth his love, the more heat our love gets, and next to
Christ's dying love, none greater then his succouring love in temptation. The
Mother never has such advantage to show her affection to her child, as when
in distress, sick, poor or imprisoned; so neither has Christ to his children
as when tempted, yea, worsted by temptation. When his children lie in Satan's
prison, bleeding under the wounds of their consciences, this is the season he
takes to give an experiment of his tender heart in pitying, his faithfulness
in praying for them, his mindfulnesse in sending succor to them, yea, his dear
love in visiting them by his comforting Spirit. Now when the soul has got off
some great temptation, and reads the whole history thereof together, (wherein
he finds what his own weakness was to resist Satan, nay, his unfaithfulness
in complying with Satan, which might have provoked Christ to leave him to the
fury of Satan) now to see both his folly pardoned, and ruin graciously
prevented, and that by no other hand, but Christ's coming in to his rescue (as
Abishai to David, 2 Samuel 21.
when that giant thought to have flaine him.) This must needs exceedingly
endear Christ to the soul. At the reading of such records the Christian cannot
but enquire, (as Ahashuerus concerning Mordecai, who by discovering a treason
had saved the Kings life,) what honor has been done to his sweet Savior for
all this. And thus Jesus Christ, whom Satan thought to bring out of the souls
favor, and liking, comes in the end to sit higher and surer in the Saints
affections then ever.

CHAP. X. A brief Application of the Point in two Branches.
Israelites are bid remember all the way that God led them in the wilderness
for forty years, Deuteronomy. 8.2. The History of these wars (Christian) will be
pleasant to read in heaven, though bloody to fight on earth. Moses and Elias
talked with Christ on Tabor, (an Emblem of the sweet communion which shall
pass between Christ and his Saints in glory,) and what was their talk, Luke
9.30. but of his death and sufferings? It seems a discourse of our sufferings
and temptations, are not too low a subject for that blisseful state. Indeed
this left out, would make a blemish in the fair face of Heavens glory. Could
the damned forget the way they went into hell, how often the Spirit of God was
wooing, and how far they were overcome by the conviction of it; in a word, how
many turns and returns there were in their journey forward and backward, what
possibilities, yea, probabilities they had for heaven, when on earth; were but
some hand so kind as to blot these tormenting passages out of their memories,
it would ease them wonderfully. So were it possible glorified Saints could
forget the way, wherein they went to glory, and the several dangers that
intervened from Satan, and their own backsliding hearts, they and their God
too would be losers by it, I mean in regard of his manifestative glory. What is
the glory wherein God appears at Zions deliverance? those royal garments of
salvation, that make him so admired of men and Angels? but the celebration of
all his Attributes, according to what every one has done toward their
salvation. Now wisdom being that which the creature chiefly glories in, (and
chosen by Satan for his first bait, who made Eve believe she should be like God
in knowledge and wisdom) therefore God, to give Satan the more shameful fall,
gives him leave to use his wits and wiles in tempting and troubling his
children, in which lies his great advantage over the Saints, that so the way to
his own Throne (where his Wisdom shall at last, as well as his mercy sit in
all its Royalty) may be paved with the sculls (as I may so speak) of devils.

Ark, lest that should fall into the enemies hand, (and when this Palladium is
taken, the City of God (his Church,) be trod under the feet of pride,) I
confess Satan seems to get ground daily; he has strangely wrigled into the
bosoms and principles of many, who by the fame of their Profession and zeal,
had obtained in the opinion of others, to be reckoned among the chief of
Christ's Worthies in their generation. He has sadly corrupted the truths of
Christ, brought a dis-esteem on Ordinances, (that by this, and as a judgment
for this, the womb of the Gospel is become in a great measure barren, and her
children which hang upon her breasts, thrive not in love and holiness as of
old, when the milk was not so much nor that so spiritfull) he has had
advantage by the divisions of the godly, to harden those that are wicked into a
further disdain of Religion, and by the bloody wars of late years, to boil up
the wrath of the Popish and profane crew to a higher pitch of rage and fury
against Christ's little remnant then ever: so that if ever God should suffer the
sword to fall into their hand, they are disciplined and fitted to play the
bloody butchers on Christ's sheep above their forefathers, (neither are they so
crest-fallen, but that they can hope for such a day, yea, take up some of those
joys upon trust aforehand to solace themselves, while the rest follow.) And
now (Christian) may be their confidence, together with the distracted state of
Christ's affairs in the world, may discompose thy Spirit, concerning the issue
of these rolling Providence that are over our heads, but be still, poor heart,
and know that the contest is not between the Church and Satan, but between
Christ and him. These are the two Champions. Stand now, O ye Army of Saints,
still by faith, to see the All-wise God wrestle with a subtle devil. If you
live not to see the period of these great confusions, yet generations after you
shall behold the Almighty smite off this Geliah's head with his own sword, and
take this cunning hunter in the toil of his own policies, that says which
ascribes greatness and wisdom to God, will shrink up Satan's subtilty into a
nigrum nihil, a thing of nothing. Incredulitiment diabolum, quasi leonem, qui
fide fortes despiciunt quasi vermiculum. Bern. Unbelief fears Satan as a Lion,
faith trends on him as a worm Behold therefore thy God at work, and promise
thy self that what he is about, will be an excellent piece. None c^n drive him
from his work. The Pilot is beaten from the helm, and can do little in a
storm, but lets the ship go a drift. The Architect cannot work, when night
draws the curtain, yea, is driven off the Scaffold with a storm of rain,
such Workmen are the wisest Counselors and mightiest Princes on earth. A
pinch may come, when it is as vain to say, Help O King, as, Help O beggar; man's
wisdom may be levelled with folly, but God is never interrupted. All the plots
of hell and commotions on earth, have not so much as shook Gods hand, to
spoil one letter or line that he has been drawing. The mysteriousnesse of his
Providence may hang a curtain before his work, that we cannot see what he is
doing, but then when darkness is about him, righteousness is the seat of his
Throne for ever. O. where is our faith (Sirs!) let God be wise, and all men and
devils fools. What though thou see a Babel more likely to go up, then a
Babylon to be pulled down, yet believe God is making his secret approaches, and
will clap his ladders on a sudden to the walls thereof: Suppose truth were
Prisoner with Joseph, and error the Courtier, to have its head lift up by the
favor of the times, yet do not remember that the way to truths preferment
lies through the prison? yea, what though the Church were like Jonah in the
Whales belly, swallowed up to the eye of reason by the fury of men, yet do
not remember the Whale had not power to digest the Prophet? O be not too quick
to bury the Church before she be dead. Stay while Christ tries his skill before
you give it over: bring Christ by your prayers to its grave, to speak a
Resurrection-word. Admirable has the Saints faith been in such straits: as
Joseph's, who pawned his bones that God would visit his brethren, willing them
to lay him where he believed they should be brought; Jeremiah purchases a
field of his Uncle, and pays down the money for it, and this when the Caldean
army quartered about Jerusalem, ready to take the Cisy, and carry him with the
rest into Babylon: And all this by Gods appointment, Jer. 22.6, 7, 8. that he
might show the Jews by this, how undoubtedly he (in that sad juncture of time)
did believe the performance of the Promise for their return out of captivity.
Indeed God counts himself exceedingly disparaged in the thoughts of his people,
(though at the lowest ebb of his Churches affairs) if his naked word, and the
single bond of his Promise will not be taken as sufficient security to their
faith for its deliverance.

VERSE 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in high places.


THe words are coupled to the Precedent with that causal particle For, which
either referres to the two foregoing verses, and then they are a further
reason, pressing the necessity of Christian fortitude in the tenth verse, and
furniture in the eleventh: or else to the last words of the eleventh verse,
where the Apostle having descried the Saints grand enemy to be Satan, and
described him in one of his attributes, his wily subtilty, he in this further
displayes him in his proper colors, not to weaken the Saints hands, but waken
their care, that seeing their enemy marching up in a full body, they might
stand in better order to receive his charge. Where by the way we may observe
the Apostles simplicity and plain dealing; he does not undervalue the strength
of the enemy, and represent him inconsiderable, as Captains use to keep their
soldiers together, by slighting the power of their adversary; no, he tells
them the worst at first. If Satan had been to set out his own power, he could
have challenged no more then is here granted him. See here the difference
between Christ dealing with his followers, and Satan with his. Satan dares not
let sinners know who that God is they fight against; this were enough to breed
a mutiny in the devils camp. Silly souls they are drawn into the field by a
false report of God and his ways, and are kept there together with lies and
fair tales, but Christ is not afraid to show his Saints their enemy in all his
Power and Principality, the Weakness of God being stronger then the powers of
hell.

CHAP. I. Shows, the Christians life here to be a continual wrestling with
sin and Satan, and the paucity of those who are true Wrestlers, as also how the
true Wrestlers should manage their combat.
THe words contain a lively description of a bloody and lasting war between the
Christian and his implacable enemy; in which we may observe; First, the
Christians state in this life, set out by this word wrestling.

Secondly, the Assailants that appear in arms against the Christian, who are
described; First, Negatively, Not flesh and blood: Or rather comparatively, not
chiefly flesh and blood. Secondly, Positively, but against Principalities,
Powers, etc.

SECT. I.
First, for the first, the wrestling or conflicting state of a Christian in
this life, is rendered observable here by a threefold circumstance.

First, the kind of combat which the Christians state is here set out by,
(...), which though it be used sometimes for a wrestling of sport and
recreation, yet here to set out the sharpness of the Christians encounter;
there are two things in wrestling that render it a sharper combat then others.
First, wrestling is not properly fighting against a multitude, but when one
enemy singles out another, and enters the list with him, each exerting their
whole force and strength against one another, as David and Goliath, when the
whole Armies stood as it were in a ring to behold the bloody issue of that
duel. Now this is more fierce then to fight in an army, where though the battle
be sharp and long, the soldier is not always engaged, but falls off when he
has discharged, and takes breath a while: yea, possibly may escape without
hurt or stroke, because there the enemies aim is not at this or that man, but
at the whole heap, but in wrestling one cannot escape so, he being the
particular object of the enemies fury, must needs be shaked and tried to
purpose. Indeed the word (...) signifies such a strife, as makes the body shake
again, quia corpus (...). Satan has not only a general malice against the army
of Saints, but a spite against thee John, thee Joane: he will single thee out for
his enemy. We find Jacob, when alone, a man wrestled with him. As God delights
to have private communion with his single Saints, so the devil to try it hand
to hand with the Christian, when he gets him alone. As we lose much comfort,
when we do not apply the Promise and Providence of God to our particular
persons and conditions, God loves me, pardons me, takes care of me: the water
at the town-conduit does me no good, if I want a pipe to empty it into my
cisterne; so it obstructs our care and watchfulness, when we conceive of
Satan's wrath and fury, as bent in general against the Saints, and not against
me in particular. O how careful would a soul be in duty, if as going to Church
or Closet he had such a serious meditation as this, Now Satan is at my heels to
hinder me in my work, if my God help me not!



Saint in the Congregation; great and small, Minister and people, all must
wrestle: Not one part of Christ's Army in the field, and the other at ease in
their quarters, where no enemy comes, here are enemies enough to engage all at
onee.

Paul's bonds,) abides us wherever we become. So that these particulars summed
up will amount to this Point:

SECT. II.
The Christians life is a continual wrestling. Doct.
He is as Jeremy said of himself, borne a man of strife, or what the Prophet to
Asa, may be said to every Christian; From hence thou shall have wars, from thy
spiritual birth to thy natural death, from the hour when thou first did
set thy face to heaven, till thou shall set thy foot in heaven. Isreal's march
out of Egypt was in Gospel-sense our taking the field against sin and Satan,
and when had they peace? not till they lodged their colors in Canaan. No
condition wherein the Christian is here below is quiet. Is it prosperity or
adversity, here is work for both hands, to keep pride and security down in the
one, faith and patience up in the other: no place which the Christian can call
priviledg'd ground. Lot in Sodom wrestled with the wicked inhabitants thereof,
his righteous soul being vexed with their unclean conversation. And how fares
he at Zoar? do not his own daughters bring a spark of Sodoms fire into his own
bed, whereby he is inflamed with lust? Some have thought if they were but in
such a family, under such a Ministry, out of such occasions: O then they
should never be tempted as now they are; I confess change of air is a great
help to weak nature, and these forenamed as vantage-ground against Satan; but
think thou to fly from Satan's presence thus? No, though thou should take
the wings of the morning he would fly after thee, these may make him change
his method in tempting, but not lay down his design; so long as his old friend
is alive within, he will be knocking at thy door without. No duty can be
performed without wrestling; The Christian needs his sword as much as his
trowel. He wrestles with a body of flesh; this to the Christian in duty is as
the beast to the traveller; he cannot go his journey without it, and much ado
to go with it. If the flesh be kept high and lusty, then it is wanton and will
not obey; if low, then it is weak and soon tires: Thus the Christian rids but
little ground, because he must go his weak bodies pace. He wrestles with a body
of sin as well as of flesh, this mutters and murmures when the soul is taking
up any duty. Sometimes it keeps the Christian from duty, so that he cannot do
what he would. As Paul said, I would have come once and again, but Satan
hindered me. I would have prayed may the Christian say at such a time, and
meditated on the Word I heard, the mercies I received at another, but this
enemy hindered. It Is true indeed, grace swayes the Scepter in such a soul, yet
as Schoolboyes taking their time when their Master is abroad do shut him out,
and for a while lord it in misrule, though they are whip't for it afterward:
thus the unregenerate part takes advantage when grace is not on its watch to
disturb its government, and shut it out from duty, though this at last makes
the soul more severe in mortifying, yet it costs some scuffle before it can
recover its throne, and when it cannot shut from duty, yet then is the
Christian woefully yok't with it in duty; it cannot do what it does as it would;
many a letter in its copy does this enemy spoil, while he joggs him with
impertinent thoughts; when the Christian is a praying, then Satan and the flesh
are a prating; he cries, and they louder, to put him out or drown his cry. Thus
we see the Christian is assailed on every side by his enemy; and how can it be
other, when the seeds of war are laid deep in the natures of both, which can
never be rooted up till the devil cease to be a devil, sin to be sin, and the
Saint to be a Saint? Though wolves may snarle at one another, yet soon are
quiet again, because the quarrel is not in their nature; but the Wolf and the
Lamb can never be made friends. Sin will lust against grace, and grace draw
upon sin whenever they meet.

SECT. III.
Isa. 45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker. It Is easy to tell which
of these will be worsted. What can he do, but break his shins that dasheth them
against a rock? A goodly battle there is like to be, when thorns contest with
fire, and stubble with flame. But where live those giants, that dare enter the
list with the great God? what are their names that we may know them, and brand
them for creatures above all other unworthy to live? Take heed O thou who
ask, that the wretched man whom thou seem so to defy, be not found in
thy own clothes it self. Judas was the Traitor, though he would not answer to
his name, but put it off with a Master is it I? and so may thou be the
fighter against God. The heart is deceitful. Even holy David, for all his anger
was so hot against the rich man, that took away the poor man's ewe-Lamb, that he
bound it with an oath, the man should not live who had done it, yet proves at
last to be himself the man, as the Prophet told him, 2 Samuel 12.

Now there are two ways wherein men wrestle against God; First, when they
wrestle against his Spirit. Secondly, when they wrestle against his Providence.

Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive with man. Where the striving is
not in anger and wrath to destroy them, (that God could do without any stir or
scuffle) but a loving strife and contest with man. The old world was running
with such a cariere headlong into their ruin, he sends his Spirit to
interpose, and by his counsels and reproves to offer, as it were, to stop them
and reclaim them. As if one seeing another ready to offer violence on himself,
should strive to get the knife out of his hand, with which he would do the
mischief. Or one that has a purse of gold in his hand to give, should follow
another by all manner of entreaties, striving with him to accept and take it.
Such a kind of strife is this of the Spirits with men. They are the lusts of
men, (those bloody instruments of death, with which sinners are mischieving
themselves) that the holy Spirit strives by his sweet counsels and entreaties
to get out of our hands. They are Christ's, his grace and eternal life he
strives to make us accept at the hands of Gods mercy; and for repulsing the
Spirit thus striving with them, sinners are justly counted fighters against
God: Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, Acts 7.51
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost. Now there is a twofold striving of the
Spirit, and so of our wrestling against it. First, the Spirit strives in his
messengers with sinners. They coming on his errand, and not their own, he
voucheth the faithful counsels, reproofs and exhortations which they give as
his own act. Noah, that Preacher of righteousness, what he said to the old
world, is called the Preaching of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.19. The pains that
Moses, Aaron and other servants of God took in instructing Israel, is called
the instruction of the Spirit, Nehem. 9.20. so that when the Word, which Gods
Ministers bring in his Name, is rejected, the faithful counsels they give are
thrown at sinners heels and made light of; then do they strive with the Spirit,
and wrestle against Christ as really, as if he visibly in his own person had
been in the Pulpit, and preached the same Sermon to them. When God comes to
reckon with sinners, it will prove so; then God will rub up your memories, and
mind you of his striving with you, and your unkind resisting him. They,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, Ezekiel. 2.5.
shall know they had a Prophet among them. Now men soon forget whom and what
they hear; ask them what was pressed upon their conscience in such a Sermon, they
have forgot; what were the precious truths laid out in another, and they are
lost: and well were it for them if their memories were no better in another
world: it would ease their torments more then a little. But then they shall
know they had a Prophet among them, and what a price they had with him in their
hands, though it was in fools keeping. They shall know what he was, and what
he said, though a thousand years past, as fresh as if it were done but last
night. The more zealous and compassionate, the more painful and powerful he was
in his place, the greater shall their sin be found, to break from such holy
violence offered to do them good. Surely God will have something for the sweat,
yea, lives of his servants which were worn out in striving with such
rebellious ones. May be yet, sinners, your firmament is clear, no cloud to be
seen that portends a storm; but know (as you use to say) winter does not rock
in the clouds, you shall have it at last: every threatening which your faithful
Ministers have denounced against you out of the Word, God is bound to make
good. He confirms the Word of his servant, Isa. 44.25.
and performs the counsel of his messengers, and that in judgment against
sinners, confirming the threatenings, as well as in mercy performing the
promises, which they declare as the portion of his children. But it will be
time enough to ask such on a sickbed, or a dying hour, whether the words of
the Lord delivered by their faithful Preachers have not taken hold of them.
Some have confessed with horror they have, as the Jews, Zech. 1.6. Like as
the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, so has he dealt with us. Secondly,
the Spirit strives with men more immediately, when he makes his inward
approaches to the consciences of men, debating in their own bosoms the case
with them; one while he shows them their sins in their bloody colors, and
whether they will surely bring them, if not looked to timely, which he does so
convincingly, that the creature smells sometimes the very fire and brimstone
about him, and is at present in a temporary hell; another while he falls a
parlying and treating with them, making gracious overtures to the sinner, if he
will return at his reproof, presents the grace of the Gospel, and opens a door
of hope for his recovery, yea, falls a wooing and beseeching of him to throw
down his rebellious arms, and come to Christ for life, whose heart is in a
present disposition to receive and embrace the first motion the returning
sinner makes for mercy. Now when the Spirit of God follows the sinner from
place to place, and time to time, suggesting such motions, and renewing his old
suit, and the creature shall fling out of the Spirits hands thus striving with
him re infecta, as far from renouncing his lusts, or taking any liking to
Christ as ever: This is to resist the Spirit to his face, and it carries so
much malignity in it, that (even where it has not been final) poor humbled
souls have been so over-set with the horror of it, that they could not for a
long time be persuaded, but that it was the unpardonable sin. Take heed
therefore sinners, how you use the Spirit when he comes, knocking at the door
of your hearts: Open at his knock, and he will be your guest, you shall have
his sweet company; repulse him, and you have not a Promise he will knock again.
And if once he leave striving with thee, unhappy man, thou art lost for ever;
thou lie like a ship cast up by the waves upon some high rock, where the tide
never comes to fetch it off. Thou may come to the Word, converse with other
Ordinances, but in vain. It Is the Spirit in them, which is both tide and wind,
to set the soul afloat, and carry it on, or else it lies like a ship on dry
ground which stirs not.

Secondly, we wrestle against God when we wrestle with his Providence, and that
two ways; First, when we are discontented with his providential disposure of
us. Gods carving for us does not please us so, but that we are objecting
against his dealings toward us, at least muttering something with the fool in
our hearts, which God hears as lightly as man our words. God counts then we
begin to quarrel with him, when we do not acquiesce in, and say Amen to his
Providence whatever it is. He calls it a contending with the Almighty, Job.
40.1. yea, a reproving of God. And he is a bold man sure that dare find fault
with God, and article against heaven. God challenges him, whoever he is that
does this, to answer it at his peril. He that reproves God, let him answer it,
v. 2. of the chapter forementioned. It was high time for Job to have done,
when he hears what a sense God puts upon those unwary words, which dropped from
him in the anguish of his Spirit, and paroxysme of his sufferings; contend with
the Almighty? reprove God? Good man, how blank he is, and cries out, I am vile,
what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Let God but pardon
what is past, and he shall hear such language no more. O Sirs, take heed of
this wrestling above all other. Contention is uncomfortable, with whomsoever it
is we fall out. Neighbors or friends, wife or husband, children or servants:
but worst of all with God. If God cannot please thee, but thy heart rises
against him, what hopes are there of thy pleasing him, who will take nothing
kindly from that man who is angry with him? And how can love to God be
preserved in a discontented heart, that is always muttering against him? Love
cannot think any evil of God, nor endure to hear anyspeak evil of him, but it
must take Gods part, as Jonathan David's, when Saul spoke basely of him, and
when it cannot be heard, will like him arise and be gone. When afflicted, love
can allow thee to groan, but not to grumble. If thou will ease thy encumbered
spirit into Gods bosom by prayer, and humbly wrestle with God on thy knees,
love is for thee, and will help thee to the best arguments thou can use to
God; But if thou will vent thy distempered passions, and show a mutinous spirit
against God, this stabs it to the heart.

Secondly, we wrestle against Providence, when uncorrigible under the various
dispensations of God toward us. Providence has a voice, if we had an ear;
mercies should draw, afflictions drive; now when neither fair means nor foul
do us good, but we are impenitent under both; this is to wrestle against God
with both hands. Either of these have their peculiar aggravations. One is
against love, and so dis-ingenuous; the other is against the smart of his rod,
and therein we slight his anger, and are cruel to our selves in kicking against
the pricks. Mercy should make us ashamed, wrath afraid to sin. He that is not
ashamed, has not the spirit of a man. He that is not afraid when smitten, is
worse then the beast, who stands in aw of whip and spur. Sometimes mercy
(especially these outward mercies, which have a pleasing relish to the carnal
part in a Christian) has proved a snare to the best of men, but then
affliction uses to recover them; but when affliction makes men worse, and they
harden themselves against God, to sin more and more while the rod is on them,
what is like to reclaim them? few are made better by prosperity, whom
afflictions make worse. He that will sin, though he goes in pain, will much
more if that once be gone. But take heed of thus contesting with God. There is
nothing got by scuffling with God, but blows, or worse. If he say he will
afflict thee no more, it is even the worst he can say; it is as much as if he
should say he will be in thy debt till another world, and there pay thee
altogether. But if he means thee mercy, thou shall hear from him in some
sharper affliction then ever. He has wedges that can rive thee, were thou a
more knotty piece then thou art. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness,
and the scant measure that is abominable? ( Mic. 6.9
says God to Israel) what uncorrigible, though the Lords voice cries unto the
City, bidding you hear the rod, and him that has appointed it? See what course
God resolvs on, v. 13. Therefore will I make thee sick in smiting of thee. As
if he had said, my other Physic I see was too weak, it did not work or turn
your stomach, but I will prepare a potion that shall make you sick at heart.

Tim. 2.5. If a man also strive for Masteries, yet is he not crowned except he
strive lawfully. He alludes to the Roman games, to which there were Judges
appointed to see that no foul play were offered contrary to the Law for
wrestling; the prize being denied to such, though they did foil their
adversary, which the Apostle improves to make the Christian careful in his war,
as being under a stricter Law and Discipline, that requires not only valor to
fight, but obedience to fight, by order and according to the Word of Command:
Now few do this that go for great Wrestlers.

diverse, Tit. 3.3. and it is hard to please many Masters, especially when their
commands are so contrary; when pride bids lay on in bravery, lavish out in
entertainment; covetousness bids lay up, when malice bids revenge; carnal
policy says, conceal thy wrath, though not forgive. When lust sends to his
whores, hypocrisy pulls him back for shame of the world. Now is he Gods
Champion that resists one sin at the command of another, it may be a worse.

Hypocrites themselves are afraid to burn. In such Combats the Will at last
prevails, either by bribing the understanding to present the lust it desires in
a more pleasing dress, (that conscience may not be scared with such hideous
apparitions of wrath) or by pacifying conscience with some promise of
repentance for the future, or by forbearing some sin for the present, which it
can best spare, thereby to gain the reputation of something like a reformation;
Or if all this will not do, then (prompted by the fury of its lust) the Will
proclaims open war against conscience, sinning in the face of it, like some
wild horse, (impatient of the spur which pricks him, and bridle that curbs
him) gets the bit between his teeth, and runs with full speed, till at last he
eases himself of his Rider; and then where he sees fattest pasture, no hedge
or ditch can withhold him, till in the end you find him, starving in some
pound for his trespass: Thus many sin at such rate, that conscience can no
longer hold the reins, nor sit the saddle. but is thrown down and laid for
dead; and then the wretches range where their lusts can have the fullest meal,
till at last they pay for their stolen pleasures most dearly, when conscience
comes to it self, pursues them, and takes them more surely by the throat then
ever, never to let them go till it brings them before Gods Tribunal.

Jerome excellently, Vnus amor extinguit alium. This heavenly fire will indeed
put out that flame of hell, which he illustrates by Ahashuerus his carriage to
Vashti his Queen, who in the first Chapter makes a decree in all haste, that
she comes no more before him; but when his passion is a little down, chap. 2.
v. 1. he begins to relent toward her, which his Council perceiving, presently
seek out for a beautiful Virgin, on whom the King might place his love, and
take into his royal bed, which done, we hear no more of Vashti, then and not
till then will the souls decree stand against sin, when the soul has taken
Christ into his bosom.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, to the Saints, seeing your life is a continual wrestling here on
earth, it is your wisdom to study how you may best manage the combat with your
best enemy, which that you may do, take these few directions.

First, look thou go not into the field without thy Second; my meaning is,
engage God by prayer to stand at thy back; God is in a league offensive and
defensive with thee, but he looks to be called. Did the Ephraimites take it
ill, that Gideon called them into the field, and may not God much more? as if
thou meanedst to steal a victory before he should know it. Thou have more
valor then Moses, who would not stir without God, no, though he sent an Angel
for his Lieutenant. Thou art wiser then Jacob, who to overcome Esau, now
marching up, turns from him, and falls upon God; he knew if he could wrestle
with God, he might trust God to deal with his brother. Engage God and the
backdoor is shut, no enemy can come behind thee, yea, thine enemy shall fall
before thee. God turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, says
David, Heaven says Amen to his prayer, and the wretch hangs himself.

Secondly, be very careful of giving thine enemy hand-hold. Wrestlers strive to
fasten upon some part or other, which gives them advantage more easily to throw
their adversary; to prevent which, they used, First, to lay aside their
garments. Secondly, to anoint their bodies. For the first, Christian, labor to
put off the old man which is most personal, that corruption, which David calls
his own iniquity, Psalm. 18.23. This is the skirt which Satan lays hold of,
observe what it is, and mortify it daily, then Satan will retreat with shame,
when he sees the head of that enemy upon the wall, which should have betrayed
thee into his hands. Secondly, the Roman wrestlers used to anoint their
bodies; so do thou, bathe thy soul with the frequent meditation of Christ's
love. Satan will find little welcome, where Christ's love dwells, love will
kindle love, and that will be as a wall of fire to keep off Satan, it will make
thee disdain the offer of a sin, and as oil supple thy joints, and make
agile to offend thy enemy. Think how Christ wrestled in thy quarrel, sin, hell
and wrath had all come full mouth upon thee, had not he coped with them in the
way. And can thou find in thy heart to requite his love, by betraying his
glory into the hands of sin, by cowardice or treachery: say not thou love
him, so long as thou can lay those sins in thy bosom, which plucked his
heart out of his bosom. It were strange if a child should keep, and delight
to use no other knife, but that wherewith his father was stabbed.

Ahab, for letting go this enemy now in thy hands, whom God has appointed to
destruction. Learn a little wisdom of the Serpents brood, who when they had
Christ under their foot, never thought they had him sure enough; no, not when
dead, and therefore both seal and watch his grave. Thus do thou to hinder the
resurrection of thy sin, seal it down with stronger purposes, solemn covenants,
and watch it by a wakeful circumspect walking,

Gideon, in regard of outward enemies,) If God be with me, why is all this
befallen me? why do I find such struglings in me, provoking me to sin, pulling
me back from that which is good? Why do ask? The Answer is soon given,
because thou art a Wrestler, not a Conqueror. Thou mistakest the state of a
Ch^istian in this life: when one is made a Christian, he is not presently
called to triumph over his slain enemies, but carried into the field to meet
and fight them. The state of grace is the commencing of a war against sin, not
the ending of it; rather then thou shall not have an enemy to wrestle with, God
himself will come in a disguise into the field, and appear to be thine enemy.
Thus when Jacob was alone, a man wrestled with him until breaking of the day,
and therefore set thy heart at rest if this be thy scruple: Thy soul may
rather take comfort in this, that thou art a wrestler; This struggling within
thee, if upon the right ground, and to the right end, does evidence there are
two Nations within thee, two contrary natures, the one from earth earthly, and
the other from heaven heavenly; yea, for thy further comfort know, though thy
corrupt nature be the elder, yet it shall serve the younger.

Bonner would do their bodily.) What is it, Christian, which takes away the joy
of thy life, but the wrestlings and combats which this bosome-enemy puts thee
to? Is not this the Peninnah, that vexing and disturbing thy Spirit, has kept
thee off many a sweet meal, thou might have had in communion with God and
his Saints? or if thou have come, has made thee cover the Altar of God with
thy tears and groans? and will it not be a happy hand that cuts the knot, and
sets thee loose from thy deadness, hypocrisy, pride, and what not, wherewith
thou were yoak't? It Is life which is thy loss, and death which is thy gain.
Be but willing to endure the rending of this veil of thy flesh, and thou art
where thou would be, out of the reach of sin, at rest in the bosom of thy
God. And why should a short evil of pain affright thee more, then the
deliverance from a continual torment of sins evil ravish thee? Some you know
have chose to be cut, rather then to be ground daily with the stone, and yet,
may be, their pain comes again, and can thou not quietly think of dying, to
be delivered from the torment of these sins, never to return more? And yet that
is not the half that death does for thee: Peace is sweet after war, ease after
pain; but what tongue can express what joy, what glory must fill the creature
at the first sight of God, and that blessed company? none but one that dwells
there can tell. Did we know more of that blisseful state, we Ministers should
find it as hard a work to persuade Christians to be willing to live here so
long, as now it is to persuade them to be willing to die so soon.

CHAP II. Wherein is showed what is meant by flesh and blood, how the Christian
does not, and how he does wrestle against the same.
SECT. I.
NOw follows the description of the Saints enemies, with whom he is to wrestle;

First, described Negatively, Not with flesh and blood.

Secondly, Positively, But against Principalities and Powers, etc.

First, for the Negative part of the Description; we are not to take it for a
pure negation, as if we had no conflict with flesh and blood, but wholly and
solely to engage against Satan; but by way of comparison, not only with flesh
and blood, and in some sense not chiefly. It is usual in Scripture such manner
of phrase, Luke 14.12. Call not thy friends to dinner, but the poor; that is,
not only those, so as to neglect the poor. Now what is meant here by flesh and
blood? there is a double interpretation of the words.

First, by flesh and blood may be meant our own bosome-corruptions; that sin
which is in our corrupt nature so often called flesh in the Scripture; The flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and sometimes flesh and blood, as Matthew. ^6.17.
Flesh and blood has not revealed this, that is, this Confession thou have made
comes from above; thy fleshly corrupt mind could never have found out this
supernatural truth, thy sinful Will would never have embraced it. So, 1 Cor
15.20. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, that is, sinful
mortal flesh, as it is expounded in the words following. So, Gal. 1.21. I
consulted not with flesh and blood, that is, carnal reason. Now this
bosome-enemy may be called flesh, partly from its derivation, and partly from
its operation; from its derivation, because it is derived and propagated to us
by natural generation; thus Adam is said to beget a son in his own likeness,
sinful as he was, as well as mortal and miserable; yea, the holiest Saint on
earth having flesh in him, derives this corrupt and sinful nature to his
child, as the circumcised Jew begat an uncircumcised child; and the wheat
cleans'd and fanned (being sown) comes up with a husk, John 3.6. That which is
borne of the flesh is flesh.

Secondly, its called flesh from the operations of this corrupt nature, which
are fleshly and carnal; The reasonings of the corrupt mind fleshly, therefore
called the carnal mind, incapable indeed of the things of God, which it
neither does nor can perceive: As the Sun does obsignare superiora dum
revelat inferiora; hide the Heavens which are above it from us, while it
reveals things beneath; so carnal reason leaves the creature in the dark
concerning spiritual truths, when it is most able to conceive and discourse of
creature-excellencies, and carnal interests here below. What a childish
question, for so wise a man did Nicodemus put to Christ? though Christ to help
him did wrap his speech in a carnal phrase. If fleshly reason cannot understand
spiritual truths when thus accommodated, and the notions of the Gospel
translated into its own language, what skill is it like to have of them, if put
to read them in their original tongue? I mean, if this garment of carnal
expression were taken off, and spiritual truths in their naked hue presented to
its view. The motions of the natural will are carnal, and therefore, Romans 8.5.
They that are after the flesh, are said to mind the things of the flesh. All
its desires, delights, cares, fears, are in and of carnal things; it savours
spiritual food no more then an Angel fleshly. Omnis vita gustu ducitur: What we
cannot relish we will hardly make our daily food. Every creature has its
proper diet, the Lion eats not grass, nor the horse flesh; what is food to the
carnal heart, is poison to the gracious; and that which is pleasing to the
gracious, is distastful to the carnal. Now according to this Interpretation the
sense of the Apostle is not, as if the Christian had no combat with his
corrupt nature, (for in another place it is said, the Spirit lusts against the
flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit, and this enemy is called, (...), Heb
12.1^.
the sin that besets the Christian round) but to aggravate his conflict with
this enemy by the access of a foreign power, Satan who strikes in with this
domestic enemy. As if while a King is fighting with his own mutinous subjects,
some outlandish troops should join with them, now he may be said not to fight
with his subjects, but with a foreign power. The Christian wrestles not with
his naked corruption, but with Satan in them; were there no devil, yet we
should have our hands full in resisting the corruptions of our own hearts, but
the access of this enemy makes the battle more terrible, because he heads them
who is a Captain so skilful and experienced. Our sin is the engine, Satan is
the Engineer; lust the bait, Satan the Angler; when a soul is enticed by his
own lust, he is said to be tempted, James 1.14. because both Satan and our own
lust concur to the completing the sin.

First, let this make thee, Christian, Use.
ply the work of mortification close; it is no policy to let thy lusts have
arms, who are sure to rise and declare against thee when thine enemy comes.
Achish his Nobles did but wisely, in that they would not trust David in their
army, when to fight against Israel, lest in the battle he should be an
adversary to them; And dare thou go to duty, or engage in any action, where
Satan will appear against thee, and not endeavor to make sure of thy pride,
unbelief, etc. that they join not with thine enemy?

Adam, though he went so well appointed into the field, because left to
himself, much more easily will he foil thee; cling therefore about thy God for
strength, get him with thee, and then though a worm, thou shall be able to
deal with this Serpent.

SECT. II.
periphrasis of man. We wrestle not with flesh and blood, that is, not with
man, who is here described by that part which chiefly distinguishes him from
the Angelical nature; Touch me, says Christ, and handle me, a Spirit has not
flesh. Now according to this Interpretation observe;



Secondly, where he lays the stresse of the Saints battle, not in resisting
flesh and blood, but Principalities and Powers; where the Apostle excludes not
our combat with man, for the war is against the Serpent and his seed. As wide
as the world is, it cannot peaceably hold the Saints and wicked together; but
his intent is to show, what a complicated enemy (man's wrath and Satan's
interwoven together) we have to deal with.

First, for the first, how meanly does the Spirit of God speak of man, calling
him flesh and blood? Man has a Heaven-borne soul, which makes him a kin to
Angels, yea, to the God of them who is the Father of Spirits; but this is
passed by in silence, as if God would not own that which is tainted with sin,
and not the creature God at first made it, or because the soul, though of such
noble extraction, yet being so immerst in sensuality, deserves no other name
then flesh, which part of man levels him with the beast, and is here intended
to express the weakness and frailty of man's nature. It Is the phrase which the
Holy Ghost expresses the weakness and impotency of a creature by, Isa. 31.3.
They are men, and their horses are flesh; that is, weak; as on the contrary,
when he would set out the power and strength of a thing, he opposes it to
flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3. Our weapons are not carnal, but mighty; and so in the text,
not flesh and blood, but Powers. As if he should say, Had you no other to fear
but a weak sorry man, it were not worth the providing arms or ammunition; but
you have enemies that neither are flesh, nor are resisted with flesh; so that
here we see what a weak creature man is, not only weaker then Angels, as they
are Spirit, and he flesh, but in some sense beneath the beasts, as the flesh of
man is frailer then the flesh of beasts, therefore the Spirit of God compares
man to the grass, which soon withers, Isa. 40.6. and his goodlinesse to the
flower of the field. Yea, he is called vanity, Psalm. 62.9. Men of low degree
are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie, both alike vain; only the rich
and the great man, his vanity is covered with honor, wealth, etc. which are
here called a lie, because they are not what they seem, and so worse then plain
vanity, which is known to be so, and deceives not.

May-buds, will tread on Decembers heel; thy marrow dry in thy bones, thy
sinews shrink, thy legs bow under the weight of thy body, thy eye-strings
crack, thy tongue not able to call for help; yea, thy heart with thy flesh
shall fail; and now thou, who art such a giant, take a turn if thou can in
thy chamber, yea, raise but thy head from thy pillow if thou art able, or call
back thy breath, which is making haste to be gone out of thy nostrils, never to
return more; and dare thou glory in that which so soon may be prostrate?

Is it wisdom? the same grave rhat covers thy body, shall bury all that, (the
wisdom of thy flesh I mean) all thy thoughts shall perish, and goodly plots
come to nothing. Indeed, if a Christian, thy thoughts as such shall ascend with
thee, not one holy breathing of thy soul lost. Is it thy blood and birth?
whoever thou art, thou art base-borne till borne again, the same blood runs in
thy veins, with the beggar in the street, Asts 17.26. All Nations there we
find made of the same blood, in two things all are alike, we come in and go
out of the world alike; as one is not made of finer earth, so not resolved into
purer dust.

Cursed be he that makes flesh his arm. Not the mighty man; robes may hide and
garnish, they cannot change flesh, Psalm. 146. Put not your trust in Princes;
alas, they cannot keep their crowns on their own heads, their heads on their
own shoulders, and look thou for that which they cannot give themselves? Not
in wise men, whose designs recoile often upon themselves, that they cannot
perform their enterprise. -- Amphora coepit institui currente rot a cur urceus
exit. Man's carnal wisdom intends one thing, but God turns the wheel, and
brings forth another. Trust not in holy men, they have flesh, and so their
judgment not infallible, yea, their way sometimes doubtful. His mistake may
lead thee aside, and though he returns, thou may go on and perish. Trust not
in any man, in all men, no not in thy self, thou artflesh. He is a fool, (says
the Wise man) that trusts his heart. Not in the best thou art or do, the
garment of thy righteousness is spotted with the flesh; all is counted by
Saint Paul, confidence in the flesh, besides our rejoicing in Christ, Phil. 3.3.

David's resolv, Ps. 56.4. I will not fear what flesh can do unto me; thou
need'st not thou ought not to fear. Thou need'st not. What, not such a great
man, not such a number of men, who have the keys of all the prisons at their
girdle, who can kill or save alive, no, not these, only look they be thy
enemies for Righteousness sake. Take heed thou make not the least child
thine enemy, by offering wrong to him, God will right the wicked even upon the
Saint. If he offends, he shall find no shelter under Gods wing for his sin.
This made Jerome complain that the Christians sins made the arms of those
barbarous Nations which invaded Christendom victorious: Nostris peccatis
fortes sunt barbari. But if man's wrath finds thee in Gods way, and his fury
take fire at thy holiness, thou need not fear, though thy life be the prey
he hunts for. Flesh can only wound flesh, he may kill thee, but not hurt thee,
why should thou fear to be stripped of that which thou have resigned already
to Christ? it is the first lesson thou learnest, if a Christian, to deny thy
self, take up thy cross, and follow thy Master; so that the enemy comes too
late; thou have no life to lose, because thou have given it already to Christ,
nor can man take away that without Gods leave; all thou have is ensured; and
though God has not promised thee immunity from suffering in this kind, yet he
has undertaken to bear thy loss, yea, to pay thee a hundred fold, and thou
shall not stay for it till another world. Again, thou ought not to fear
flesh. Our Savior, Mat. 10. thrice in the compass of six verses, commands us
not to fear man; if thy heart quails at him, how will thou behave thy self in
the list against Satan, whose little finger is heavier then man's loins? The
Romans had arma praelusoria; weapons rebated or cudgels, which they were tried
at before they came to the sharp. If thou can not bear a bruise in thy flesh
from man's cudgel and blunt weapon, what will thou do when thou shall have
Satan's sword in thy side? God counts himself reproached when his children fear
a sorry man; therefore we are bid, Sanctify the Lord, and not to fear their
fear. Now if thou would not fear man who is but flesh; Labor,

First, to mortify thy own flesh. Flesh only fears flesh: when the soul
degenerates into carnal desires and delights, no wonder he falls into carnal
fears. Have a care, Christian, thou bring'st not thy self into bondage:
perhaps thy heart feeds on the applause of men, this will make thee afraid to
be evil spoken of, as those who shuffled with Christ, John 12.42. owning him in
private when they durst not confess him openly, for they loved the praise of
men; David says, the mouth of the wicked is an open Sepulcher; and in this
grave has many a Saints name been buried; but if this fleshly desire were
mortified, thou would not pass to be judged by man, and so of all carnal
affections. Some meat you observe is aguish; if thou set thy heart on any
thing that is carnal, wife, child, estate, etc. these will incline thee to a
base fear of man, who may be Gods messenger to afflict thee in these.

Secondly, set faith against flesh. Faith fixes the heart, and a fixed heart
is not readily afraid. Physicians tell us we are never so subject to receive
infection as when the spirits are low, and therefore the antidotes they give
are all cordials: When the spirit is low through unbelief, every threatening
from man makes sad impression. Let thy faith take but a deep draught of the
Promises, and thy courage will rise.



First, in point of affliction, Psalm. 103.14. He knows our frame, he
remembers that we are but dust. Not like some unskilful Emperick, who has but
one receipt for all, strong or weak, young or old, but as a wise Physician
considers his Patient, and then writes his bill: men and devils are but Gods
Apothecaries, they make not our physic, but give what God prescribes. Balaam
loved Bal^ks see well enough, but could not go an hairs breadth beyond Gods
Commission. Indeed God is not so choice with the wicked, Isa. 27.7. Has he
smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? In a Saints cup the poison of
the affliction is corrected, not so in the wickeds, and therefore what is
medicine to the one is ruin to the other.

Secondly, in duty; he knows you are but flesh, and therefore pities and
accepts thy weak service, yea, he makes apologies for thee; The Spirit is
willing, says Christ, but the flesh is weak.

Thirdly, in temptations he considers thou art flesh, and proportions the
temptation to so weak a nature: it is called (...), such a temptation as is
common to man, a moderate temptation (as in the margin) fitted for so frail a
creature. Whenever the Christian begins to faint under the weight of it, God
makes as much haste to his succor, as a tender mother would to her swooning
child; therefore he is said to be nigh, to revive such, lest their spirits
should fail.

SECT. III.
The second thing follows: The conjuncture of the Saints enemies; We have not
to do with naked man, but with man led on by Satan; not with flesh and blood,
but Principalities and Powers acting in them. There are two sorts of men the
Christian wrestles with, good men and bad. Satan strikes in with both.

First, the Christian wrestles with good men. Many a sharp conflict there has
been betwixt Saint and Saint, scuffling in the dark through misunderstanding
of the truth, and each other: Abraham and Lot at strife. Aaron and Miriam
justled with Moses for the wall, till God interposed and ended the quarrel by
his immediate stroke on Miriam. The Apostles even in the presence of their
Master, were at high words, contesting who should be greatest. Now in these
Civil wars among Saints, Satan is the great kindle-coale, though little seen,
because, like Ahab, he fights in a disguise, playing first on one side, and
then on the other, aggravating every petty injury, and thereupon provoking to
wrath and revenge: therefore the Apostle dehorting from anger, uses this
argument, Give no place to the devil; as if he had said, Fall not out among
your selves, except you long for the devils company, who is the true soldier
of fortune (as the common phrase is.) living by his sword, and therefore hastes
thither where there is any hope of war. Gregory compares the Saints in their
sad differences to two cocks, which Satan the Master of the pit sets on
fighting, in hope, when killed to sup with them at night. Solomon says, Prove.
18.6. The mouth of the contentious man calls for strokes. Indeed we by our
mutual strifes give the devil a staff to beat us with; he cannot well work
without fire, and therefore blows up these coals of contention, which he uses
as his forge, to heat our spirits into wrath, and then we are malleable, easily
hammered as he pleases. Contention puts the soul into disorder, and inter arma
silent leges. The Law of grace acts not freely, when the Spirit is in a
commotion; Meek Moses provoked, speaks unadvisedly. Me thinks this (if nothing
else will) should sound a retreat to our unhappy differences, that this Joab
has a hand in them, he sets this evil spirit betwixt brethren, and what folly
is it for us to bite and devour one another to make hell sport? we are prone
to mistake our heat for zeal, whereas commonly in strifes between Saints, it is
a fire-ship sent in by Satan to break their unity and order; wherein while they
stand they are an Armado invincible, and Satan knows he has no other way but
this to shatter them: when the Christians language which should be one, begins
to be confounded, they are then near a scattering; it is time for God to part
his children, when they cannot live in peace together.

Because you are not of the world, says Christ, the world hates you. The
Saints nature and life are Antipodes to the world, fire and water, heaven and
hell, may as soon be reconciled as they with it. The Heretic is his enemy for
truths sake, the profane for holiness, to both the Christian is an
abomination, as the Israelite to the Egyptian; hence come wars* the fire of
persecution never goes out in the hearts of the wicked, who say in their hearts
as they once with their lips, Christiani ad leones. Now in all the Saints wars
with the wicked, Satan is Commander in chief, it is their fathers work they do,
his lusts they fulfill. The Sabeans plundered Job, but went on Satan's errand.
The Heretic broacheth corrupt doctrine, perverts the faith of many, but in
that the Minister of Satan, 2 Cor. 11.15. they have their call, their wiles and
wages from him. Persecutors their work ascribed to hell; is it a persecution of
the tongue? it is hell sets it on fire; is it of the hand? still they are but
the devils instruments, Rev. 2.10. The devil shall cast some of you into prison.

Augustine in his Epistle to Lycinius, one of excellent parts, but wicked, who
once was his Scholar, speaks thus pathetically to him: O how I could weep and
mourn over thee, to see such a sparkling wit prostituted to the devils
service! If thou had found a golden chalice, thou would have given it to
the Church, but God has given thee a golden head, parts and wit, and in this
propinas teipsum Diabolo, thou drinkest thy self to the devil. When you see men
of power or parts, using them against God that gave them, weep over them;
better they had lived and died, the one slaves, the other fools, then do the
devil such service with them.

Anselme, who compares the heretic and persecutour to the horse, and the devil
to the Rider. Now, says he, in battle, when the enemy comes riding up, the
valiant soldier, Non irascitur equo, sed equiti, and quantum potest agit ut
equitem percutiat, equum possideat; sic contra malos homines agendum, non
contra illos, sed illum qui illos instigat, ut dum Diabolus vincitur,
infoelices quos ille possidet liberentur: He is angry not with the horse but
horseman, he labors to kill the man that he may possess the horse for his
use: Thus must we do with the wicked, we are not to bend our wrath against
them, but Satan that rides them, and spurs them on laboring by prayer for them
as Christ did on the Cross, to dismount the devil, that so these miserable
souls hackneyed by him may be delivered from him. It Is more honor to take one
soul alive out of the devils clutches, then to leave many slain upon the
field. Erasmus says of Augustine, that he begged the lives of those heretics,
at the hands of the Emperors Officers, who had been bloody persecutours of the
Orthodox; Cupiebat, says he, amicus medicus superesse, quos art sua sanaret:
Like a kind Physician he desired their life, that if possible he might work a
cure on them, and make them sound in the faith.

CHAP II. Wherein is shown, what a Principality Satan has, how he came to be
such a Prince, and how we may know whether we be under him as our Prince, or
not.
VERSE 12. But against Principalities and Powers, etc.


SECT. I.
THe Apostle having shown what the Saints enemies are not, flesh and blood,
frail men, who cannot come but they are seen, who may be resisted with man's
power, or escape by flight; now he describes them Positively, against
Principalities, against Powers, etc. Some think the Apostle by these diverse
names and titles, intends to set forth the distinct orders, whereby the devils
are one subordinate to another, so they make the Devil, verse 11. to be the
Head or Monarch, and these, verse 12. so many inferior orders, as among men
there are Princes, Dukes, Earls, etc. under an Emperor. That there is an
order among the devils cannot be denied. The Scripture speaks of a Prince of
devils, Matthew. 9. and of the Devil and his Angels, who with him fell from their
first station, called his Angels as it is probably conceived, because one above
the rest (as the head of the faction) drew with him multitudes of other into
his party, who with him sinned and fell. But that there should be so many
distinct orders among them, as there are several branches in this description,
is not probable; too weak a notion to be the foundation of a Pulpit-discourse,
therefore we shall take them as meant of the devil collectively. We wrestle not
with flesh and blood, but devils, who are Principalities, Powers, etc. and not
distributively, to make Principalities one rank, Powers another; for some of
these branches cannot be meant of distinct orders, but promiscuously of all as
spiritual wickednesses; it being not proper to one to be spirits or wicked, but
common to all.

First, then the devil or whole pack of them are here described by their
Government in this world, Principalities.

Secondly, by their strength and puissance, called Powers.

Thirdly, by their nature in its substance and degeneracy, Spiritual
wickednesses.

Fourthly, in their Kingdom or proper Territories, Rulers of the darkness of
this world.

Fifthly, by the ground of the war, In heavenly places, or about heavenly
things.

Principalities; (...), the abstract for the concrete, that is, such as have a
Principality; So, Titus 3.1. we are bid to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, that is, Princes and Rulers, so the vulgar reads it. We wrestle
against Princes, which some will have to express the eminency of their nature
above man's, that as the state and spirit of Princes is more raised then others,
great men have great spirits, as Zeba and Zalmunna to Gideon, asking who they
were they slew at Tabor; As thou art, (say they) so were they, each one
resembled the children of a King, that is, for Majesty and Presence beseeming a
Princely race; so they think, the eminent nature of Angels here to be intended,
who are as far above the highest Prince, as he above the basest peasant; but
because they are described by their nature in the fourth branch, I shall
subscribe to their judgment, who take this for their Principality of
Government, which the devil exercises in this lower world; and the Note shall
be,

That Satan is a great Prince, Doct.
Christ himself styles him the Prince of the world, John 14. Princes have their
thrones where they sit in state; Satan has his, Rev. 2.13. Thou dwell where
Satan has his throne; and that such a one as no earthly Prince may compare;
few Kings are enthroned in the hearts of their subjects, they rule their
bodies, and command their purses, but how often in a day are they pulled out of
their thrones by the wishes of their discontented subjects: But Satan has the
heart of all his subjects. Princes have their homage and peculiar honor done
to them; Satan is served upon the knee of his subjects, the wicked are said to
worship the devil, Rev. 13.4. No Prince expects such worship as he, no less
then religious worship will serve him, 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Jeroboam there is said
to ordain Priests for devils, and therefore he is called not only the Prince,
but the god of this world, because he has the worship of a god given him.
Princes such as are absolute have a Legislative Power, nay, their own will is
their law, as at this day in Turkey, where their Laws are writ in no other
Tables, then in the proud Sultans breast; thus Satan gives law to the poor
sinner, who is bound and must obey, though the Law be writ with his own blood,
and the creature has nothing but damnation for fulfilling the devils lust;
it is called a Law of sin, Romans 8.2. because it comes with authority; Princes
have their Ministers of State, whom they employ for the safety and enlargement
of their Territories: So Satan his, 2 Cor. 11.15. who propagates his cursed
designs, therefore we read of doctrine of devils. Princes have their Arcana
Imperii, which none knows but a few Favorites in whom they confide: thus the
devil has his mysteries of iniquity, and depths of Satan we read of, which
all his subjects know not of, Rev. 2.24* these are imparted to a few
Favorites, such as Elymas, whom Paul calls full of all subtilty, and child of
the devil; such, whose consciences are so debauched, that they scruple not the
most horrid sins, these are his white boys. I have read of a people in
America, that love meat best when it is rotten and stinks. The devil is of their
diet, the more corrupt and rotten the creature is in sin, the better he
pleases his tooth; some are more the children of the devil then others. Christ
had his beloved disciple; and Satan those that lie in his very bosom, and know
what is in his heart. In a word, Princes have their Vectigalia, their tribute
and custom; so Satan his. Indeed he does not so much share with the sinner in
all, but is owner of all he has, so that the devil is the Merchant, and the
sinner but the broker to trade for him, who at last puts all his gains into
the devils purse: time, strength, parts, yea, conscience and all spent to keep
him in his throne.

SECT. II.
But how comes Satan to this Principality?



First, he obtained it by Conquest, as he won his crown; so he wears it by
power and policy. But conquest is a cracked title. A thief is not the honester,
because able to force the traveller to deliver his purse; and a thief on the
throne is no better then a private one on the road, or Pyrate in a Pinnace, as
he boldly told Alexander. Neither does that prove good with process of time,
which was evil at first: Satan indeed has kept possession long, but a thief
will be so as long, as he keeps his stolen goods; He stole the heart of Adam
from God at first, and does no better to this day. Christ's Conquest is good,
because the ground of the war righteous, to recover what was his own, which
Satan cannot say of the meanest creature, It Is my own.

Ye are of your father the devil, says Christ, and his lusts ye will do. But
this also has a flaw in it, for man by law of Creation is Gods subject, and
cannot give away Gods right; by sin he loses his right in God, as a
Protector; but God loses not his right as a Sovereign. Sin disabled man to
keep Gods Law, but it does not enfranchise or dis-oblige him that he need not
keep it.

Prince of the world, Luke 4.5, 6. He showed unto him all the Kingdoms of the
world, saying, All this will I give thee, for that is delivered unto me, and to
whomsoever I will I give it. Where there was a truth, though he spoke more then
the truth, (as he cannot speak truth, but to gain credit to some lie at the end
of it.) God indeed has delivered in a sense this world to him, but not in his
sense to do what he will with it, nor by any approbatory act given him a
Pattent to vouch him his Viceroy, not Satan by the grace of God, but by the
permission of God Prince of the world.

But why does God permit this Apostate-creature, to exercise such a
Principality over the world?

Because ye would not serve me with gladness in the abundance of all things,
therefore ye shall serve your enemies in hunger, etc. Satan is a King given in
Gods wrath. Chams curse is man's punishment, a Servant of servants. The devil is
Gods slave, man the devils. Sin has set the devil on the creatures back, and
now he hurries him without mercy, (as he did the swine) till he be choked with
flames, if mercy interpose not.

Secondly, God permits this his Principality, in order to the glorifying of his
Name in the recovery of his Elect from the power of this great Potentate. What
a glorious Name will God have when he has finished this war, wherein at first
he found all possessed by this enemy, and not a man of all the sons of Adam to
offer himself as a Voluntier in this service, till made willing by the day of
his Power? this, this will gain God a Name above every name, not only of
creatures, but of those by which himself was known to his creature. The
workmanship of heaven and earth gave him the Name of Creator, Providence of
Preserver, but this of Savior, wherein he does both the former, preserve his
creature which else had been lost, and create a new creature, I mean the Babe
of Grace, which, through God, shall be able to beat the devil out of the field,
who was able to drive Adam (though created in his full stature) out of
Paradise, and may not all the other works of God empty themselves as rivers
into this sea, losing their names, or rather swelling into one of Redemption?
Had not Satan taken Gods Elect prisoners, they would not have gone to heaven
with such acclamations of triumph. There are three expressions of a great joy
in Scripture; the joy of a woman after her travel, the joy of harvest, and the
joy of him that divides the spoil: the exultaton of all these is wrought upon
a sad ground, many a pain and tear it costs the traveling woman, many a
fear the husbandman, perils and wounds the soldier, before they come at their
joy, but at last are paid for all, the remembrance of their past sorrows
feeding their present joys. Had Christ come and entered into affinity with our
nature, and returned peaceably to heaven with his Spouse, finding no
resistance; though this would have been admirable love, and that would have
afforded the joy of marriage, yet this way of carrying his Saints to heaven
will greaten the joy, as it adds to the nuptial Song, the triumph of a
Conqueror, who has rescued his Bride out of the hands of Satan, as he was
leading her to the chambers of hell.

SECT. III.
Nero's Court; so the devil his servants in the outward Court of his visible
Church. Thou must therefore have something more to exempt thee from his
Government, then living within the pale, and giving an outward conformity to
the Ordinances of Christ, Satan will yield to this, and be no loser: As a King
lets his Merchants trade to, yea, live in a foreign Kingdom, and while they
are there learn the language, and observe the customs of the place; this
breaks not their allegiance, nor all that thy loyalty to Satan. When a Statute
was made in Queen Elizabeth's reign, that all should come to Church, the Papists
sent to Rome to know the Popes pleasure, he returned them this answer, (as it is
said) Bid the Catholics in England give me their heart, and let the Queen take
the rest. His subject thou art whom thou crownest in thy heart, and not whom
thou flatterest with thy lips.

But to bring the trial to an issue, know thou belongest to one of these, and
but to one, Christ and Satan divide the whole world; Christ will bear no equal,
and Satan no Superior, and therefore hold in with both thou can not. Now if
thou say Christ be thy Prince, answer to these Interrogatories.

First, how came he into the throne? Satan had once the quiet possession of thy
heart: thou wast by birth as the rest of thy neighbors, Satan's vassal, yea,
have often vouch't him in the course of thy life to be thy Liege Lord, how then
comes this great change? Satan surely would not of his own accord resign his
Crown and Scepter to Christ; and for thy self thou were neither willing to
renounce, nor able to resist his, power: this then must only be the fruit of
Christ's victorious arms, whom God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior,
Asts 5.31. Speak therefore, has Christ come to thee, as once Abraham to Lot,
when prisoner to Kederlaomer, rescuing thee out of Satan's hands, as he was
leading thee in chains of lust to hell? Did thou ever hear a voice from
heaven in the Ministry of the Word calling out to thee, as once to Saul, so as
to lay thee at Gods foot, and make thee face about for heaven, to strike thee
blind in thine own apprehension, who before had a good opinion of thy state,
to tame and meeken thee; so as how thou art willing to be led by the hand of a
child after Christ? Did ever Christ come to thee, as the Angel to Peter in
prison, rowsing thee up, and not only causing the chains of darkness and
stupidity to fall off thy mind and conscience, but make thee obedient also,
that the iron gate of thy Will has opened to Christ before he left thee? then
thou have something to say for thy freedom: But if in all this I be a
Barbarian, and the language I speak be strange, thou know no such work to
have passed upon thy spirit, then thou art yet in thy old prison; can there be
a change of Government in a Nation by a Conqueror that invades it, and the
subjects not hear of this? one King unthroned, and another crowned in thy
soul, and thou hear no scuffle all this while? The regenerating Spirit is
compared to the wind, John 3.8. His first attempts on the soul may be so
secret, that the creature knows not whence they come, or whither they tend; but
before he has done, the sound will be heard throughout the soul, so as it
cannot but see a great change in it self, and say, I that was blind, now I
see; I that was as hard as ice, now relenting for sin; now my heart gives, I
can melt and mourn for it. I that was well enough without a Christ, yea, did
wonder what others saw in him, to make such a do for him, now have changed my
note with the Daughters of Jerusalem; and for what, is your Beloved (as I
scornfully have ask't) I have learned to ask where he is, that I might seek him
with you. O soul! can thou say it is thus with thee, thou may know who has
been here; no less then Christ, who by his victorious Spirit has translated
thee from Satan's power into his own sweet Kingdom.

Secondly, whose law do thou freely subject thy self unto? the laws of
these Princes are as contrary as their natures; the one a law of sin, Romans 8.2.
the other a law of holiness, Romans 7.12. and therefore if sin has not so far
bereaved thee of thy wits, as not to know sin from holiness, thou may,
(except resolve to cheat thy own soul) soon be resolved; confess therefore and
give glory to God, to which of these laws does thy soul set its seal? When
Satan sendes out his Proclamation, and bids sinner go, set thy foot upon such
a command of God, observe what is thy behavior, do thou yield thy self, as
Paul phraseth it, Romans 6.16. (...), a metaphor from Princes servants or others,
who are said (...), to present themselves before their Lord, as ready and at
hand to do their pleasure, by which the Apostle elegantly describes the
forwardness of the sinners heart to come to Satan's foot, when knock or call;
Now does thy soul go out thus to meet thy lust, (as Aaron his brother) glad to
see its face in an occasion? thou art not brought over to sin with much ado,
but thou likest the command: Transgress at Gilgal, (says God) this likes you
well, Hos. 4.5. As a Courtier, who does not only obey, but thank his Prince
that he will employ him. Need'st thou be long in resolving whose thou art? did
ever any question, whether those were Jeroboams subjects, who willingly
followed his command? Hos. 5.11. Alas, for thee, thou art under the power of
Satan, tied by a chain stronger then brass or iron; thou love thy lust. A
Saint may be for a time under a force, sold under sin, as the Apostle bemoans,
and therefore glad when deliverance comes, but thou sellest thy self to work
iniquity. If Christ should come to take thee from thy lusts, thou would
whine after them, as Micah after his gods.

Judge. 9.15. If in truth ye anoint me King, then put your trust under my
shadow. Now who has thy confidence? Dare thou trust God with thy soul, and
the affairs of it in well-doing? Good subjects follow their calling, commit
State-matters to the wisdom of their Prince and his Council; when wronged, they
appeal to their Prince in his Laws for right; and when they do offend their
Prince, they submit to the penalty of the Law; and bear his displeasure
patiently, till humbling themselves they recover his favor, and do not in a
discontent fall to open rebellion. Thus a gracious soul follows his Christian
calling, committing himself to God as a faithful Creator, to be ordered by his
wise Providence. If he meets with violence from any, he scorns to beg aid of
the devil to help him, or be his own Judge to right himself; No, he acquiesceth
in the counsel and comfort the Word of God gives him. If himself offends, and
so comes under the lash of Gods correcting hand, he does not then take up
rebellious arms against God, and refuse to receive correction, but says, Why
should a living man complain? a man for the punishment of his sin; whereas a
naughty heart dares not venture his estate, life, credit, or any thing he has
with God in well-doing, he thinks he shall be undone presently, if he sits
still under the shadow of Gods promise for protection; and therefore he runs
from God as from under an old house that would fall on his head, and lays the
weight of his confidence in wicked policy, making lies his refuge, like Israel,
he trusts in perverseness, when God, tells him, In returning and rest he shall
be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be his strength: he has not faith
to take Gods Word for his security in ways of obedience. And when God comes to
afflict him for any disloyal carriage, in stead of accepting the punishment for
his sin, and so to own him for his Sovereign Lord, that may righteously punish
the faults of his disobedient subjects, his heart is filled with rage against
God, and in stead of waiting quietly and humbly, (like a good subject) till God
upon his repentance receives him into his favor, his wretched heart
(presenting God as an enemy to him) will not suffer any such gracious and
amiable thought of God to dwell in his bosom, but bids him look for no good at
his hand. This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait on the Lord any longer?
whereas a gracious heart is most encouraged to wait from this very
consideration that drives the other away; Because it is the Lord afflicts, Micah
7.6.

in thy own bosom, or abroad in the world. What says thy soul, when God
hedgeth up thy way, and keeps thee from that sin which Satan has been
soliciting for? If on Christ's side thou will rejoice when thou art delivered
out of a temptation, though it be by falling into an affliction; as David said
of Abigail, so will thou here: Blessed be the Ordinance, blessed be the
Providence which kept me from sinning against my God; but if otherwise thou will harbor a secret grudge against the Word which stood in thy way, and be
discontented, thy design took not. A naughty heart (like Amnon) pines while
his lust has vent, Again, what music do the achievements of Christ in the
world make in thy ear? when thou hear the Gospel thrives, the blind see,
the lame walk, the poor gospellized, does thy spirit rejoice in that hour? If
a Saint, thou will, as God is thy Father, rejoice thou have more brethren
borne; as he is thy Prince, that the multitude of his subjects increase; so
when thou see the plots of Christ's enemies discovered, powers defeated, can
thou go forth with the Saints to meet King Jesus, and ring him out of the field
with praises? or do thy bells ring backward, and such news make thee haste
like Haman, mourning to thine house, there to empty thy spirit swollen with
rancour against his Saints and truth? or if thy policy can master thy passion,
so far as to make fair weather in thy countenance, and suffer thee to join
with the people of God in their acclamations of joy, yet then art thou a close
mourner within, and likest the work no better then Haman his office in holding
Mordecai's stirrup, who had rather have held the ladder; this speaks thee a
certain enemy to Christ, how handsomely soever thou may carry it before men.

Adam did his wife, Chavah, the mother of all the living; every mercy rises up
and calls this blessed; this is thy birthday, thou were before, but beganst to
live, when Christ began to live in thee, the father of the Prodigal dated his
sons life from his return; This my son was dead, and is alive. It is It is thy
marriage-day; I have married you to one husband, even Christ Jesus, said Paul
to the Corinthians. Perhaps thou have enjoyed this thy husbands sweet company
many a day, and had a numerous offspring of Joys and comforts by thy
fellowship with him, the thought of which cannot but endeare him to thee, and
make the day of thy espousals delightful to thy memory; It Is thy manumission,
then were the Indentures cancelled, wherein thou were bound to sin and Satan;
when the Son made thee free, thou becamest free indeed: Thou can not say
thou wast borne free, for thy father was a slave, nor that thou boughtest thy
freedom with a sum; By grace ye are saved. Heaven is settled on thee in the
promise, and thou not at charge so much as for the writings drawing. All is
done at Christ his cost, with whom God indented, and to whom he gave the
promise of eternal life before the world began, as a free estate to settle upon
every believing soul in the day they should come to Christ, and receive him for
their Prince and Savior; so that from the hour thou did come under Christ's
shadow, all the sweet fruit that grows on this tree of life is thine; with
Christ all that both worlds have falls to thee: All is yours, because you are
Christ's. O Christian, look upon thy self now, and bless thy God to see what a
change there is made in thy state, since that black and dismal time, when thou
were slave to the Prince of darkness; how could thou like thy old Scullions
work again? or think of returning to thy house of bondage? now thou know the
privileges of Christ's Kingdoms. Great Princes, who from baseness and beggary
have ascended to Kingdoms and Empires, (to add to the joy of their present
honor) have delighted to speak often of their base birth; to go and see the
mean cottages where they were first entertained, and had their birth and
breeding, and the like. And it is not unuseful for the Christian to look in at
the grate, to see the smokie hole where once he lay, to view the chains
wherewith he was laden, and so to compare Christ's Court, and the devils prison;
the felicity of the one, and the horror of the other together. But when we do
our best to affect our hearts with this mercy by all the inhancing aggravations
we can find out. Alas, how little a portion of it shalwe know here? this is a
nimium excellens, which cannot be fully seen, unless it be by a glorified eye;
how can it be fully known by us, where it cannot be fully enjoyed? thou art
translated into the Kingdom of Christ, but thou art a great way from his
Court. That is kept in heaven, and that the Christian knows, but as we far
countries which we never saw, only by map, or some rarities that are sent us as
a taste of what grows there in abundance.

Gideon, Come thou and rule over us, for thou have delivered us from the hand,
not of Midian, but of Satan. Who so able to defend thee from his wrath, as he
who broke his power? who like to rule thee so tenderly, as he that could not
brook another tyranny over thee? In a word, who has right to thee besides
him, who ventured his life to redeem thee? that being delivered from all thine
enemies, thou may serve him without fear in holiness all the days of thy
life. And we it not pity that Christ should take all this pains to lift up thy
head from Satan's house of bondage, and give thee a place among those in his own
house, who are admitted to minister unto him, (which is the highest honor the
nature of men or Angels is capable of,) and that thou should after all this
be found to have a hand in any treasonable practice against thy dear Savior?
surely Christ may think he has deserved better at your hands, if at none
besides. Where shall a Prince safely dwell, if not in the midst of his own
Courtiers; and those such who were all taken from chains and prisons to be thus
preferred, the more to oblige them in his service? Let devils and devilish men
do their own work, but let not thy hand (O Christian) be upon thy dear Savior.
But this is too little to bid thee not play the traitor. If thou have any loyal
blood running in thy veins, thy own heart will smite thee when thou rendest
the least skirt of his holy Law; thou can as well carry burning coals in thy
bosom, as hide any treason there against thy dear Sovereign. No, it is some
noble enterprise I would have thee think upon, how thou may advance the Name
of Christ higher in thy heart, and world too as much as in thee lies. O how
kindly did God take it, that David (when peaceably set in his throne) was
casting about, not how he might entertain himself with those pleasures, which
usually corrupt and debauch the Courts of Princes in times of peace, but how he
might show his zeal for God, in building a house for his worship, that had
reared a throne for him, 2 Samuel 7. And is there nothing (Christian) thou can
think on, wherein thou may eminently be instrumental for God in thy
generation? He is not a good subject that is all for what he can get of his
Prince, but never thinks what service he may do for him. Nor he the true
Christian, whose thoughts dwell more on his own happiness then the honor of
his God. If subjects might choose what life stands best for their own enjoyment,
all would desire to live at Court with their Prince: But because the Princes
honor is more to be valued then this: therefore noble spirits (to do their
Prince service) can deny themselves the delicacies of a Court, to jeopard their
lives in the field, and thank their Prince too for the honor of their
employment. Blessed Paul upon these terms was willing to have his day of
coronation in glory prorogued, and he to stay as companion with his brethren in
tribulation here, for the furtherance of the Gospel. This indeed makes it opera
pretium vivere, worth the while to live, that we have by it a fair
opportunity, (if hearts to husband it) in which we may give a proof of our real
gratitude to our God, for his redeeming love in rescuing us out of the power of
the Prince of darkness, and translating us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
And therefore (Christian) lose no time, but what thou meanest to do for God, do
it quickly: Art thou a Magistrate? now it will be soon seen on whose side thou
art; if indeed thou have renounced allegiance to Satan, and taken Christ for
thy Prince, declare thy self an enemy to all that bear the name of Satan, and
march under his colors. Study well thy commission, and when thou understandest
the duty of thy place, fall to work zealously for God. Thou have thy Princes
sword put into thy hand, be sure thou use it, and take heed how thou usest it;
that when called to deliver it up, and thy account also, it may not be found
rusty in the sheath through sloth and cowardice, besmeared with the blood of
violence, nor bent and gap't with partiality and injustice. Art thou a Minister
of the Gospel? thy employment is high, an Ambassador, and that not from some
petty Prince, but the great God to his rebellious subjects. A calling so
honorable, that the Son of God disdained not to come in extraordinary from
heaven to perform it, called therefore the messenger of the Covenant; Mal. 3.1.
yea, he had to this day stayed on earth in person about it, had he not been
called to reside as our Ambassador and Advocate in heaven with the Father: and
therefore in his bodily absence he has entrusted thee and a few more to carry
on the Treaty with sinners, which when on earth himself began. And what can you
do more acceptable to him, then to be faithful in it, as a business on which
he has set his heart so much? As ever you would see his sweet face with joy,
(you that are his Ambassadors) attend to your work, and labor to bring this
Treaty of Peace to a blessed issue between God and those you are sent to. And
then if sinners will not come off, and seal the Articles of the Gospel, you
shall (as Abraham said to his servant) be clear of your oath. Though Israel he
not gathered, yet you shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord. And let not
the private Christian say he is a dry tree, and can do nothing for Christ his
Prince, because he may not bear the Magistrates fruit or Ministers. Though thou
have not a commission to punish the sins of others with the sword of justice,
yet thou may show thy zeal, in mortifying thy own with the sword of the
Spirit, and mourn for theirs also: though thou may not condemn them on the
bench, yet thou may, yea, ought by the power of a holy life to convince
and judge them. Such a Judge Lot was to the Sodomites. Though thou art not sent
to preach and baptize, yet thou may be wonderful helpful to them who are.
The Christians prayers whet Magistrates and Ministers sword also. O pray,
Christian, and pray again, that Christ's Territories may be enlarged; never go
to hear the Word, but pray, Thy Kingdom come. Loving Princes take great
content in the acclamations and good wishes of their subjects as they pass by.
A vivat rex, Long live the King, coming from a loyal breath, though poor, is
more worth then a subsidy from those who deny their hearts while they part with
their money. Thou servest a Prince (Christian) who knows what all his subjects
think of him, and he counts it his honor, not to have a multitude feinedly
submit to him, but to have a people that love him and cordially like his
government, who if they were to choose their King, and make their own laws they
should live under every day would desire no other then himself, nor any other
laws then what they have already from his mouth. It was no doubt great content
to David, that he had the hearts of his people so, 2 Samuel 3.26.
as Whatever the King did, pleased them all. And surely God took it as well,
that what he did pleased David; for indeed David was as content under the rule
and disposure of God as the people were under his; witness the calmnesse of
his Spirit in the greatest affliction that ever befell him, 2 Samuel 15.26.
Behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. Loyal soul! he
had rather live in exile with the good Will of God, then have his throne, if
God will not say it is good for him.

CHAP. IV. Of the great power Satan has not only over the elementary and
sensitive part of the world, but intellectual also, the souls of men.
SECT. I.
THis is the Second Branch of the Description, wherein Satan is set forth by
his might and Power. This gives weight to the former, were he a Prince, and not
able to raise a force that might dread the Saints, the swelling name of Prince
were contemptible; but he has power answerable to his dignity, which in five
particulars will appear.

First, in his names; Secondly, his nature; Thirdly, his number; Fourthly, his
order and unity; Lastly, the mighty works that are attributed to him.

strong man, Luke. 11.21. so strong that he keeps his house in peace in
defiance of all the sons of Adam, none on earth being able to cope with this
giant: Christ must come from Heaven to destroy him and his works, or the field
is lost. He is called the roaring lion, which beast commands the whole forest;
If he roares all tremble, yea, in such a manner, as Pliny relates, that he goes
amongst them, and they stand exanimated while he chooses his prey without
resistance; such a lion is Satan, who leads sinners captive at his will, 2 Timothy
3.26. He takes them alive, as the word is, as the Fowler the bird, which with a
little scrap is enticed into the net; or as the Conqueror his cowardly enemy,
who has no heart to fight, but yields without contest. Such cowards the devil
finds sinners, he no sooner appears in a motion, but they yield; They are but a
very few noble spirits and those are the children of the most High God, who
dare valiantly oppose him, and in striving against sin resist to blood. He is
called the great red dragon, who with his tail, wicked men his instruments,
sweeps down the third part of the stars of Heaven. The Prince of the power of
the air, because as a Prince can muster his subjects, and draw them into the
field for his service, so the devil can raise the posse coeli aerii. In a word,
he is called the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. because sinners give him a
God-like worship, fear him as the Saints do God himself.

Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in strength, Psalm. 103.20. Strength
is put for Angels, Psalm. 78.25. They did eat Angels food, Heb. the food of the
mighty. In two things the power of Angelical nature will appear; In its
Superiority, and in its Spirituality.

First, its Superiority, Angels are the top of the Creation; man himself made a
little lower then the Angels. Now in the works of Creation, the Superior has
a power over the Inferior; the beasts over the grass and herb, man over the
beasts, and Angels over man.

Secondly, the Spirituality of their nature. The weakness of man is from his
flesh: his soul made for great enterprises, but weighed down with a lump of
flesh, is forced to row with a strength suitable to its weak Partner; but now
the devils being Angels have no such encumbrance, no sumes from a fleshly part
to cloud their understanding, which is clear and piercing; no clog at their
heel to retard their motion, which for swiftness is set out by the wind and
flame of fire. Yea, being spiritual they cannot be resisted with carnal force,
fire and sword hurt not them. The Angel which appeared to Manoah, went up in
the fire that consumed the sacrifice, though such has been the dotage, and is
at this day of superstitious ones, that they think to charm the devil with
their carnal exorcismes; hence the Romish Relics, Cross, holy water, yea,
and among the Jews themselves in corrupter times, who thought by their
phylacteries and Circumcision, to scare away the devil, which made some of them
expound that, Cant. 3.8. of Circumcision, Every man has his sword on his
thigh, because of fear in the night. By sword on the thigh, they expound
Circumcision, which they will vainly have given as a charm against evil
spirits that affright them in the night. But alas, the devil cares for none of
these, no, not for an Ordinance of God, when by fleshly confidence we make it a
spell: he has been often bound with these fetters and chains, (as is said of
him in the Gospel) and the chains have been plucked asunder by him, neither
could any man thus tame him. He esteems, as Job says of the Leviathan, iron as
straw, and brass as rotten wood. It must be a stronger then the strong man
must bind him, and none stronger but God the Father of spirits. The devil lost
indeed by his fall much of his power, in relation to that holy and happy estate
in which he was created, but not his natural abilities, he is an Angel still,
and has an Angels power.

Mark 5. and if so many can be spared to attend one, to what a number would the
muster-rolle of Satan's whole army amount if known? And now tell me, if we are
not like to find our march difficult to heaven, (if ever we mean to go
thither) that are to pass through the very quarters of this multitude, who are
scattered over the face of all the earth. When armies are disbanded and the
roads full of debautch't soldiers, wandering up and down, it is dangerous
traveling: we hear then of murders and robberies from all quarters: These
powers of hell are that party of Angels, who for their mutiny and disobedience
were cashiered heaven, and thrust out of that glorious host, and ever since
they have stragled here below, endeavoring to do mischief to the children of
men, especially traveling in heavens road.

Satan fights not against Satan. Did you ever hear of any mutiny in the devils
army? or that any of those Apostate Angels did freely yield up one soul to
Christ? They are many, and yet but one spirit of wickedness in them all. My
name, said the devils, (not our name,) is legion. The devil is called the
Leviathan, Isa. 27.1. The Lord with his strong sword shall punish Leviathan,
from their cleaving together of (...) compact or joined together, used for the
Whale, Jeb 4. whose strength lies in his scales, which are so knit, that he is,
as it were, covered with armor. Thus these cursed spirits do accord in their
machinations, and labor to bring their instruments into the same league with
them, not contented with their bare obedience, but where they can obtain it do
require an express oath of their servants to be true to them, as in witches.

Caryl says on Job 1.) go to Gods storehouse, and make use of these in such a
sort, as no man can stand before him; he can hurl the sea into such a
commotion, that the depths shall boil like a pot, and disturb the air into
storms and tempests, as if heaven and earth would meet. Jobs children were
buried in the ruins of their house by a puff of his mouth, yea, he can go to
Gods magazine, (as the former Author says) and let off the great ordnance of
heaven, causing such dreadful thunder and lightning, as shall not only
affright, but do real execution, and that in a more dreadful way then in the
ordinary course of nature. If man's Art can so sublimate nature, as we see in
the invention of powder, that has such a strange force, much more able is he
to draw forth its power. Again, over the sensitive world his power is great,
not only the beasts, as in the herd of swine, hurried by him into the deep; but
over the bodies of men also, as in Job, whose sore boiles were not the
breakings out of a distempered nature, but the print of Satan's sangs on his
flesh, doing that suddenly, which in nature would have required more time to
gather and ripen: and the demoniacks in the Gospel grievously vexed and
tormented by him. But this the devil counts small game, his great spite is at
the souls of men, which I call the Intellectual world, his cruelty to the body
is for the souls sake. As Christ's pity to the bodies of men, (when on earth)
healing their diseases, was in a subserviency to the good of their souls,
bribing them with those mercies suitable to their carnal desires, that they
might more willingly receiv mercies for their souls, from that hand which was
so kind to their bodies, as we give children something that pleases them, to
persuade them to do something that pleases them not, go to school, learn their
book: so the devil who is cruel, as Christ is meek, and wishes good neither to
body nor soul, yet shows his cruelty to the body, but on a design against the
soul, knowing well that the soul is soon discomposed by the perturbation of
the other, the soul cannot but lightly hear, (and so have its peace and rest
broken by the groans and complaints of the body) under whose very roof it
dwells; and then it is not strange, if as for want of sleep the tongue talk
idly, so the soul should break out into some sinful carriage, which is the
bottom of the devils plot on a Saint. And as for other poor silly souls, he
gains little less then a God like fear and dread of them by that power he
puts forth (through divine permission) in smiting their goods, beasts and
bodies, as among the Indians at this day. Yea, there are many among our selves
plainly show what a throne Satan has in their hearts upon this account, such
who, as if there were not a God in Israel, go for help and cure to his
Doctors, wizzards I mean. And truly had Satan no other way to work his will on
the souls of men, but by this vantage he takes from the body, yet considering
the degeneracy of man's state, how low his soul is sunk beneath its primitive
extraction, how the body which was a lightsome house is now become a prisoner
to it, that which was its servant is now become its Master; it is no wonder he
is able to do so much. But besides this, he has as a spirit a nearer way of
access to the soul, and as a superior spirit, yet more over man a lower
creature. And above all, having got within the soul by man's fall, he has now
far more power then before; so that where he meets not resistance from God he
carrries all before him: As in the wicked, whom he has so at his devotion,
that he is (in a sense) said to do that in them, which God does in the Saints.
God works effectually in them, Gal. 2.8. 1 These. 2.13. Satan works
effectually in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. (...), the same word
with the former places, he is in a manner as efficacious with them, as the holy
Spirit with the other. His delusions strong, 2 These. 2.11. They return not re
infecta. The Spirit enlightens, he blindes the minds of those that believe
not, 2 Cor. 4.4. The Spirit fills the Saints, Ephesians. 5.18. Why has Satan
filled thy heart, says Peter to Ananias, Acts. 5.3. The Spirit fills with
knowledge, and the fruits of righteousness; Satan fills with envy and all
unrighteousness. The holy Spirit fills with comfort; Satan the wicked with
terrors: As in Saul vexed by an evil spirit; and Judas, into whom it is said he
entered, and when he had satisfied his lust upon him, (as Amnon on Tamar) shuts
the door of mercy upon him, and makes him that was even now Traitor to his
Master, Hangman to himself. And though Saints be not the proper subjects of
his power, yet they are the chief objects of his wrath, his foot stands on the
wickeds back, but he wrestles with these, and when God steps aside, he is far
above their match: He has sent the strongest among them home, trembling and
crying to their God, with the blood running about their consciences. He is
mighty, both as a tempter to and for sin, knowing the state of the Christians
affairs so well, and able to throw his fire-bals so far into the inward senses,
(whether they be of lust or horror) and to blow up these with such unwearied
solicitations, that if they at first meet not with some suitable dispositions
in the Christian, at which (as from loose corns of powder) they may take fire,
(which is most ordinary) yet in time he may bring over the creature by the
length of the siege, and continued volleys of such motions, to listen to a
parley with them, if not a yielding to them. Thus many times he even wearies
out the soul with importunity.

SECT. II.
Adam ever had, yet what were all that to the power of these Angels? Is it the
strength of thy body thou gloriest in? Alas, what is the strength of frail
flesh, to the force of their spiritual nature? thou art no more to these then a
child to a giant, a worm to a man: who could tear up the mountains, and
hurl the world into a confusion, if God would but suffer them. Is it the
strength of thy parts above others? do thou not see what fools he makes of
the wisest among men? winding them about as a Sophister would do an Idiot,
making them believe light is dark, bitter is sweet, and sweet bitter; were not
the strength of his parts admirable, could he make a rational creature as man
is, so absurdly throw away his scarlet, and embrace dung: I mean, part with God
and the glorious happiness he has in him, in hope to mend himself, by
embracing sin? Yet this he did when man had his best wits about him in
innocence. Is it the power of place and dignity got by warlike achievement?
Grant thou were able to subdue Nations, and give laws to the whole world, yet
even then without grace from above thou would be his slave. And he himself
for all this his power is a cursed spirit, the most miserable of all Gods
creatures, and the more because he has so much power to do mischief; had the
devil lost all his Angelical abilities, when he fell, he had gained by his
loss. Therefore tremble (O man) at any power thou have, except thou usest it
for God. Art strong in body? who has thy strength? God, or thy lusts? some are
strong to drink, strong to sin, Thy bands shall therefore be stronger, Isa.
28.22. Have thou power by thy place to do God and his Church service, but no
heart to lay it out for them, but rather against them? thou and the devil shall
be tried at the same bar, it seems thou meanest to go to hell for something,
thou will carry thy full lading thither. No greater plague can befall a man
then power without grace. Such great ones in the world, while here, make a
brave show, like chief Commanders and field-Officers at the head of their
Regiments, the common soldiers are poor creatures to them; but when the Army
is beaten, and all taken prisoners, then they fling off their scarf and
feather, and would be glad to pass for the meanest in the army. Happy would
devils be, Princes and great ones in the world be, if then they could appear in
the habit of some poor sneaks to receiv their sentence as such, but then their
titles, and dignity, and riches shall be read, not for their honor, but
further shame and damnation.

Jerusalem. Yet it is plain many think otherwise by the provision they make for
their march. If you should see a man walking forth without a cloak, or with a
very thin one, you will say, Surely he fears no foul weather, or one riding a
long journey alone and without arms, you will conclude he expects no thieves
on the road. All (if you ask them) will tell you they are on their way to
heaven, but how few care for the company of the Saints, as if they needed not
their fellowship in their journey? Most go naked, without so much as any thing
like armor, have not enough to gain the name of Professors at large; others,
it may be, will show you some vain slighty hopes on the mercy of God, without
any Scripture-bottom for the same, and with these content themselves, which
will like a rusty unsound pistol fly in their own face, when they come to use
it, and is it any wrong to say these make nothing of getting heaven? Surely
these men, (many of whom thrive so well in the world) never got their estates
with so little care as they think to get heaven. Ask them why they follow their
trade so close, they will tell you estates are not got by sleeping, families
are not provided for with the hands in the pocket, they meet with many rooks
and cheaters in their dealing, who should they not look to themselves would
soon undo them: and are there none that thou need fear will put a cheat on
thy soul, and bereave thee of thy crown of glory if they can? thou art blinder
then the Prophets servant, if thou see not more devils encompassing thee then
he saw men about Samaria. Thy worldly trade they will not hinder, nay, may be
help thee to sinful tricks in that to hinder thee in this: but if once thou
resolvest to seek out for Christ and his grace, they will oppose thee to thy
face; they are under an oath, as Paul's enemies were, to take away the life of
thy soul if they can; desperate creatures themselves, who know their doom is
irrecoverable, and sell their own lives they will as dear as they can. Now what
folly is it to betray thy soul into their hands, when Christ stands by to be
thy convoy? out of him thou art a lost creature, thou can not defend thy self
alone against Satan, nor with Satan against God. Close with Christ, and thou
art delivered from one of thy enemies, and him the most formidable, God I mean:
yea, he is become thy friend, who will stick close to thee in thy conflict with
the other.

Bernard says) of some beasts in the forest, Plerunque superant leonem
ferientem, quae non sustinent rugientem: Though they are too hard for the Lion
in fight, yet tremble when he roares, Thus the Christian* when he comes to the
pinch indeed, is able through Christ to trample Satan under his feet, yet
before the conflict stands trembling at the thought of him. Labor therefore to
get a right understanding of Satan's power, and then this Lion will not appear
so fierce, as you paint him in your melancholy fancy. Three considerations will
relieve you, when at any time you are beset with the fears of his power.

All powers are of him, whether on earth or in hell. This truth subscribed in
faith would first sccure thee (Christian) that Satan's power shall never hurt
thee. Would thy Father give him a sword to mischief thee his child? I have
created the Smith (says God) that blows the coals, I have created the
waster to destroy, and therefore assures them, that no weapon formed against
them shall prosper, Isa. 54.16, etc. If God provides his enemies arms, they
shall (I warrant you) be such as will do them little service. When Pilate
thought to scare Christ, with what he could do toward the saving or taking
away of his life, he replies, that he could do nothing except it were given
from above, John 19.10. as if he had said, Do your worst, I know who sealed
your commission,

The Lord (says David) bids him curse. The Lord (says Job) has given, and
the Lord has taken. This kept the Kings peace in both their bosoms. O
Christian, look not on the Jayler that whips thee, may be he is cruel, but
read the warrant, who wrote that, and at the bottom thou shall find thy
Fathers hand.



If I live (says Christ) you shall live also. You are engraven on the table of
his heart, if he plucks one away, he must the other also. Again, as he cannot
hurt the being of God, so he cannot pry into the boseme of God. He knows not
man's, much less the thoughts of God. The Astrologers nor their Master could
bring back Nebuchadnezzars dream. As men have their closets for their own
privacy, where none can enter in but with their Key: so God keeps the heart as
his withdrawing room, shut to all besides himself, and therefore when he takes
upon him to foretell events: if God teach him not his lesson, nor second causes
help him, he is beside his book; so to save his credit, delivers them
dubiously, that his text may bear a gloss suitable to the effect whatever it
is. And when he is bold to tell the state of a person, there is no weight to be
laid on his judgment. Job was an hypocrite in his mouth, but God proved him a
liar. Again, thirdly, he cannot-hinder those purposes and counsels of God he
knows. He knew Christ was to come in the flesh and did his worst, but could not
hinder his landing, though there were many devices in his heart, yet the
counsel of the Lord concerning him did stand, yea, was delivered by the
midwifery of Satan suggesting, and his instruments executing his lust as they
thought, but fulfilling Gods counsel against themselves. Fourthly, he cannot
ravish thy will, Diabolus non est jussor vitiorum, sed incentor. He cannot
command thee to sin against thy will; he can motum agere, make the soul go
faster, that is, on its way, as the wind carries the tide with more
swiftness, but he cannot turn the stream of the heart contrary to its own
course and tendency.

This would always be a Song of praise in his mouth. Has Satan power to rob
and burn, kill and slay, torment the body, distress the mind? whom may I
thank that I am in any of these out of his hands? does Satan love one better
then Job? or am I out of fight, or beside his walk? is his courage cooled, or
his wrath appeased, that I escape so well? no, none of these, his wrath is not
against one, but all the Saints; his eye is on thee, and his arm can reach
thee; his spirit is not cowed, nor his stomach stayed with those millions he
has devoured, but keen as ever; yea, sharper, because now he sees God ready to
take away, and the end of the world drawing on so fast. It Is thy God alone whom
thou art beholden to for all this, his eye keeps thee; when Satan finds the
good man asleep, then he finds our good God awake; therefore thou art not
consumed, because he changes not. Did his eye slumber or wander one moment,
there would need no other flood to drown thee, yea, the whole world, then what
would come out of this dragons mouth.

Assyrian,) be weaneth not so, neither does his heart think so; Isa. 10.7.
but it is in his heart to destroy those he tempts: but no matter what he
thinks: as Luther comforted himself, when told what had passed at the diet at
Noremburg against the Protestants, that it was decreed one way there, but
otherwise in heaven; so for the Saints comfort, the thoughts which God thinks
to them are peace, while Satan's are ruin to their graces, and destruction to
their souls; and his counsel shall stand in spite of the devil. The very
mittimus which God makes, when he commits any of his Saints to the devils
prison, runs thus, Deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5.
so that tempted Saints may say, we had perished if we had not perished to our
own thinking. This Leviathan, while he thinks to swallow them up, is but sent
of God, (as the whale to Jonah) to waft them safe to land. Some of them of
understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge them, and to make them
white, Dan. 11.35. This God intends when he lets his children fall into
temptation, as we do with our linen, the spots they get at our feasts are
taken out by washing, rubbing and laying them out to bleech. The Saints spots
are most got in peace, plenty and prosperity, and they never recover their
whiteness to such a degree as when they come from under Satan's scouring. We do
too little, not to fear Satan, we should comfort our selves with the
usefulness and subserviency of his temptations to our good. All things are
yours, who are Christ's. He that has given life to be yours, has given death
also. He that has given heaven for your inheritance, Paul and Cephas, his
Ministers and Ordinances to help you thither; has given the world with all the
afflictions of it, yea, the Prince of it too, with all his wrath and power in
order to the same end. This indeed is love and wisdom in a riddle, but you who
have the Spirit of Christ can unfold it.

CHAP V. Of the time when, the place where, and the subjects whom Satan rules.
Against the Rulers of the darkness of this world.
THese words contain the third Branch in the Description of our great enemy the
devil; and they hold forth the proper seat of his Empire, with a threefold
boundary; he is not Lord over all, that is, the incommunicable title of God,
but a Ruler of the darkness of this world, where the time, place, and subjects
of his Empire are stinted.

1. The time when this Prince has his rule, In this world, that is, now, not
hereafter.

2. The place where he rules, In this world, that is, here below, not in heaven.

3. The subjects or persons whom he rules, not all in this lower world neither:
and they are wrapped up in these words: The darkness of this world. First, of
the first boundary.

SECT.
present world. Tit. 2.12
On this stage of time this mock-King acts the part of a Prince, but when
Christ comes to take down this scaffold at the end of this world, then he shall
be degraded, his crown taken off, his sword broke over his head, and he hist
off with scorn and shame; yea, of a Prince become a close prisoner in hell; no
more then shall he infest the Saints, no nor rule the wicked: but he with them,
and they with him, shall lie under the immediate execution of Gods wrath, for
this very end Christ has his Pattent and Commission, which he will not give
up, till he shall have put down all rule, 1 Cor. 15.24.25.
then and not till then will he deliver up his Oeconomical Kingdom to his
Father, when he shall have put down all rule; for he must reign till he has
put all enemies under his feet. Satan is cast already, his doom is past upon
him, as Adams was upon his first sin, but full execution is stayed till the end
of the world. The devil knows it, it is an Article in his Creed, which made him
trembling ask Christ why he came to torment him before his time.

All this will I give thee; Am not I able to promote thee, says Balak to
Balaam? O it is strange, (and yet not strange, considering the degeneracy of
man's nature) to see how Satan carries sinners after him with this golden hook.
Let him but present such a bait as honor, pelf or pleasure, and their hearts
skip after it, as a dog would at a crust; he makes them sin for a morsel of
bread: O the naughty heart of man loves the wages of unrighteousness, (which
the devil promises) so dearly, that it fears not the dreadful wages which the
great God threatens. As sometimes you shall see a Spaniel so greedy of a bone,
that he will leap into the very river for it, if you throw it thither, and by
that time he comes with much ado thither, it is sunk, and he gets nothing but a
mouth-full of water for his pains; Thus sinners will after their desired
pleasures, honors and profits, swimming through the very threatenings of the
Word to them, and sometimes they lose even what they gaped for here. Thus God
kept Balaam, (as Balak told him) from honor, Numb. 24.11. But however they
speed here, they are sure to lose themselves everlastingly without repentance.
They that are resolved they will have these things, are the men that fall into
the devils snare, and are led into those foolish and hurtful lusts, which will
drown them in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. O poor sinners! were it
not wisdom before you truck with the devil, to enquire what title he can give
you to these goodly vanities? will he settle them as a free estate upon you?
can he secure your bargain and keep you from suits of law? or is he able to put
two lives into the purchase, that when you die, you may not be left destitute
in another world? Alas, poor wretches! you shall ere long see what a cheat he
has put on you, from whom you are like to have naught but Caveat emptor, Let
the buyer look to that; yea, this great Prince that is so brag, to tell what he
will give you, must down himself: and a sad Prince must needs make a sad Court;
O what howling will there then be of Satan and his vassals together! O but,
says the sinner, the pleasures and honors sin and Satan offer are present,
and that which Christ promises we must stay for: This indeed is that which
takes most. Demas, says Paul, forsook me, having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. It Is present indeed (sinners,) for you cannot say it will be yours
the next moment; your present felicity is going, and the Saints (though
future,) is coming never to go; and who for a gulpe of pottage, and sensual
enjoyments at present, would part with a reversion of such a Kingdom? except
thou art of his mind, who thought he had nothing, but what he had swallowed
down his throat. Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque exaturata libido
-- Hausit.
which Cicero could say, was more fit to be writ on an oxes grave then a man's.
Vile wretch, that think it is not better to deal with God for time, then the
devil for ready pay. Tertullian wonders at the folly of the Romans ambition,
who would endure all manner of hardship in field and fight, for no other thing
but to obtain at last the honor to be Consul, which he calls unius anni
volaticum gaudium, a joy that flies away at the years end. But O what desperate
madness is it of sinners then, not to endure a little hardship here, but
entaile on themselves the eternal wrath of God hereafter, for the short feast,
and running banquet their lusts entertain them here withal: which often is not
gaudium unius horae, a joy that lasts an hour.



SECT. II.
place as well as time: he is the Ruler of this lower world, not of the
heavenly. The highest the devil can go is the air, called the Prince thereof,
as being the utmost marches of his Empire, he has nothing to do with the upper
world. Heaven fears no devil, and therefore its gates stand always open;
never durst this fiend look into that holy place since he was first expelled,
but rangeth to and fro here below as a vagabond creature, excommunicated the
presence of God, doing what mischief he can to Saints in their way to heaven;
but is not this matter of great joy, that Satan has no power there, where the
Saints happiness lies? What have thou (Christian) which thou need value
that is not there? Thy Christ is there, and if thou love him, thy heart also,
which lives in the bosom of its beloved. Thy friends, and kindred in Christ
are there, or expected; with whom thou shall have a merry meeting in thy
Fathers house, notwithstanding the snare on Tabor, the plots of Satan which lie
in the way. O friends get a title to that Kingdom, and you are above the
flight of this Kite. This made Job a happy man indeed, who when the devil had
plundered him to his skin, and worried him almost out of that too, could then
vouch Christ in the face of death and devils to be his Redeemer, whom he should
with those eyes, that now stood full with brinish tears, behold, and that for
himself as his own portion. It is sad with him indeed, who is robbed of all he
is worth at once, but this can never be said of a Saint. The devil took away
Jobs purse, (as I may say) which put him into some straits, but he had a God in
Heaven that put him into stock again. Some spending money thou have at present
in thy purse, in the activity of thy faith, the evidence of thy sonship, and
comfort flowing from the same, enlargement in duty and the like, which Satan
may for a time disturb, yea, deprive thee of but he cannot come to the rolls,
to blot thy name out of the book of life; he cannot null thy faith, make void
thy relation, dry up thy comfort in the Spring, though dam up the stream; nor
hinder thee a happy issue of thy whole war with sin, though worst thee in a
private skirmish; these all are kept in Heaven, among Gods own Crown-Jewels,
who is said to keep us by his power through faith unto salvation.

SECT. III.
the darkness of this world, that is, such who are in darkness. This word is
used sometimes to express the desolate condition of a creature in some great
distress, Isa 150. He that walks in darkness, and sees no light; sometimes to
express the nature of all sin; so, Ephesians. 5.1. sin is called the work of
darkness; sometimes the particular sin of ignorance; often set out by the
darkness of the night, blindness of the eye, all these I conceive may be
meant, but chiefly the latter; for though Satan makes a foul stir in the
soul; that is, in the dark of sorrow, whether it be from outward crosses or
inward desertions; yet if the creature be not in the darkness of sin at the
same time, though he may disturb his peace as an enemy, yet cannot be said to
rule as a Prince. Sin only sets Satan in the Throne; so that I shall take the
words in the two latter Interpretations.

First, for the darkness of sin in general.

Secondly, for the darkness of ignorance in special; and the sense will be,
that the devils rule is over those that are in a state of sin and ignorance,
not over those who are sinful or ignorant, so he would take hold of Saints as
well as others; but over those who are in a state of sin, which is set out by
the abstract, Ruler of the darkness, the more to express the fullness of the
sin and ignorance that possesses Satan's slaves; and the Notes will be two.

First, Every soul in a state of sin is under the rule of Satan.

Secondly, Ignorance above other sins enslaves a soul to Satan, and therefore
all sins are set out by that which chiefly expresses this, viz. darkness.

Every soul in a state of sin is under the rule of Satan; Doct. 1.
under which point these two things must be enquired.

First, the reason why sin is set out by darkness.

Secondly, how every one in such a state appears to be under the devils rule.
For the first,

for a song,) the glorious amiable nature of God and his holy ways, the
matchless love of God in Christ, the poisonfull nature of sin, and all these
not by a sudden beam darted into the window at a Sermon, and gone again, like a
flash of lightning, but by an abiding light; this would spoil the devils
market, and poor creatures would not readily take this toad into their bosoms;
sin goes in a disguise, and so is welcome.

Secondly, it is darkness, because it brings darkness into the soul, and that
naturally and judicially.

First Naturally. There is a noxious quality in sin offensive to the
understanding, which is to the soul what the eye and palate are to the body;
It discernes of things, and distinguishes true from false, as the eye white
from black: It tries words as the mouth tastes meats. Now as there are some
things bad for the sight, and others bad for the palate vitiating it, so that
it shall not know sweet from bitter; so here sin besots the creature, and makes
it injudicious, that he who could see such a practice absurd and base in others
before, when once he has drunk of this enchanting cup himself, (as one that
has for done his understanding) is mad of it himself, not able now to see the
evil of it, or use his reason against it. Thus Saul before he had debauched his
conscience, thinks the Witch worthy of death; but after he had trodden his
conscience hard with other foul sins, goes to ask counsel of one himself.

Again, sin brings darkness judiciously; such have been threatened, whose ear
God has been trying to open and instruct, and have run out of Gods school into
the devils, by rebelling against light, that they shall die without knowledge,
Job 36.10, 12. What should the candle burn wast, when the creature has more
mind to play then work?

damnable Heresies privily, like those who sell bad ware, loath to come to the
Market, where the Standard tries all; but put it off in secret: so in moral
wickedness, sinners like beasts go out in the night for their prey, loath to
be seen, afraid to come where they should be found out. Nothing more terrible
to sinners then light of truth, John 3.19. because their deeds are evil. Felix
was so netled with what Paul spoke, that he could not sit out the Sermon, but
flings away in haste, and adjourns the hearing of Paul till a convenient
season, but he never could find one. The Sun is not more troublesome in hot
Countries, then truth is to those who sit under the powerful preaching of it;
and therefore as those seldom come abroad in the heat of the day, and when
they must, have their devices over their heads to skreene them from the Sun; so
sinners shun as much as may be the preaching of the Word; but if they must go
to keep in with their relations, or for other carnal advantages, they, if
possible, will keep off the power of truth, either by sleeping the Sermon away,
or prating it away with any foolish imagination which Satan sends to bear them
company and chat with them at such a time: or by choosing such a cool Preacher
to sit under, whose toothlesse discourse shall rather flatter then trouble,
rather tickle their fancy then prick their consciences; and then their sore
eyes can look upon the light. Froreseentem amant veritatem qui non
redarguentem: they dare handle and look on the sword with delight when in a
rich scabbard, who would run away to see it drawn.







the cares and fears of the day sink so deep, as makes their rest troublesome
and unquiet in the night. The wicked has no peace, but when his conscience
sleeps, and that sleeps but brokenly, awaking often with sick fits of terror:
when he has most prosperity, he is scared like a flock of birds in a
corn-field at every piece going off He eats in fear, and drinks in fear; when
afflicted, he expects worse behind, and knows not what this cloud may spread
to, and where it may lay him; whether in hell or not he knows not, and
therefore trembles (as one in the dark) not knowing but his next step may be
into the pit.



John 3.10. and who rules the child but the Father? they are slaves; who rules
the slave but the Master? they are the very mansion house of the devil; where
has a man command, but in his own house? I will go to my house, Mat. 12.44. As
if the devil had said, I have walked among the Saints of God, to and fro,
knocking at this door and that, and none will bid me welcome, I can find no
rest; well. I know where I may be bold; I Will even go to my own house, and there
I am sure to rule the roste without control; and when he comes, he finds it
empty, swept and garnished; that is, all ready for his entertainment. Servants
make the house trim and handsome against their Master come home, especially when
he brings guests with him, as here the devil brings seven more. Look to the
sinner, there is nothing he is or has, but the devil has dominion over it: He
rules the whole man, their minds blinding them. All the sinners apprehension
of things are shaped by Satan: he looks on sin with the devils spectacles: he
reads the Word with the devils comment: he sees nothing in its native colors,
but is under a continual delusion. The very wisdom of a wicked man is said to
be devilish, James 3.15. (...), or devil-like, because taught by the devil,
and also such as the devils is, wise only to do evil. He commands their Wills,
though not to force them, yet effectually to draw them. His work (says Christ)
ye will do. You are resolved on your way, the devil has got your hearts, and
him you will obey: and therefore when Christ comes to recover his throne, he
finds the soul in an uproare, as Ephesus at Paul's Sermon, crying him down,
and Diana up. We will not have this man reign over us, what is the Almighty
that we should serve him? He rules over all their members, they are called
weapons of unrighteousness, all at the devils service; as all the arms of a
Kingdom, to defend the Prince against any that shall invade. The head to plot,
the hand to act, the feet swift to carry the body up and down about his
service; He rules over all he has. Let God come in a poor member, and beseech
him to lend him a penny, or bestow a morsel to refresh his craving bowels; and
the covetous wretch his hand of charity is withered, that he cannot stretch it
forth; but let Satan call, and his purse flies open and heart also. Nabal that
could not spare a few fragments for David and his followers, this churl could
make a feast like a Prince, to satiate his own lust of gluttony and
drunkenness. He commands their time, when God calls to duty, to pray, to hear,
no time all the week to be spared for that; but if the sinner hears there is a
merry meeting, a knot of good fellows at the Alehouse; all is thrown aside to
wait on his Lord and Master; calling left at six and sevens, yea, wife and
children crying, (may be starving) while the wretch is pouring out their very
blood, (in wasting their livelihood) at the foot of his lust. The sinner is in
the bond of iniquity, and being bound he must obey. He is said to go after his
lust, as the fool to the stocks, Prove. 7.22. The pinioned malefactor can
as soon untie his own arms and legs, and so run from his Keeper, as he from his
lusts. They are servants, and their members instruments of sin: even as the
Workman takes up his axe and it resists not; so does Satan dispose of them,
except God says nay.

See here the deplored condition of every one in a state of sin. Use.
He is under the rule of Satan, and government of hell, What tongue can utter,
what heart can conceive the misery of this state? It was a dismal day which
Christ foretold, Matthew. 24. When the abomination of desolation should be seen,
standing in the Holy place; then (says Christ) let him that is in Judea flee
into the mountains. But what was that to this? they were but men, though
abominable; these devils. They did but stand in the material Temple, and defile
and deface that: but these display their banners in the souls of men, pollute
that throne, which is more glorious then the material heaven it self, made for
God alone to sit in. They exercised their cruelties at furthest on the bodies
of men, killing and torturing them: here the precious souls of men are
destroyed. When David would curse to purpose the enemies of God, he prays,
that Satan may be at their right hand. It Is strange sinners should no more
tremble at this, who should they see but their swine, or a beast bewitch't and
possessed of the devil run headlong into the sea, would cry out as half undone:
and is not one foul more worth then all these? what a plague is it to have
Satan possess thy heart and spirit, hurrying thee in the fury of thy lusts to
perdition? O poor man! what a sad change have thou made? Thou who would not
sit under the meek and peaceful Government of God thy rightful Lord, art paid
for thy rebellion against him, in the cruelty of this Tyrant who writes all his
Laws in the blood of his subjects, and why will you sit any longer, (O
sinners) under the shadow of this Bramble, from whom you can expect nothing but
eternal fire, to come at last and devour you? Behold, Christ is in the field,
sent of God to recover his right, and your liberty. His royal Standard is
pitched in the Gospel, and Proclamation made, that if any poor sinners, weary
of the devils Government, and heavy laden with the miserable chains of his
spiritual bondage, (so as these irons of his sins enter into his very soul to
afflict it with the senfe of them) shall thus come, and repair to Christ: he
shall have protection from Gods justice, the devils wrath, and sins dominion;
In a word, Mat. 11.28. I^.11.10.
he shall have rest, and that glorious. Usually when a people have been ground
with the oppression of some bloody Tyrant, they are apt enough to long for a
change, and to listen to any overture that gives them hope of liberty, though
reached by the hand of a stranger, who may prove as bad as the other, yet
bondage is so grievous, that people desire to change, (as sick men their beds)
though they find little ease thereby. Why then should deliverance be unwelcome
to you, sinners? Deliverance brought not by a stranger whom you need fear,
what his design is upon you; but your near Kinsman in blood, who cannot mean
you ill, but he must first hate his own flesh; Heb. 2.14, 15.
and whoever did that? To be sure not he, who though he took part of our flesh,
that he might have the right of being our Redeemer: yet would have no kindred
with us in the sinfulness of our nature. And it is sin that makes us cruel,
yea, to our own flesh. Heb. 4.15.
What can you expect from him but pure mercy, who is himself pure? They are the
mercies of the wicked which are cruel. Believe it (Sirs) Christ counts it his
honor, that he is a King of a willing people, and not of slaves. He comes to
make you free, not to bring you into bondage; to make you Kings, not vassals.
None give Christ an evil word, but those who never were his subjects. Enquire
but of those who have tried both Satan's service and Christ's; they are best able
to resolve you what they are. You see when a soul comes over from Satan's
quarters unto Christ, and has but once the experience of that sweetness which
is in his service, there is no getting him back to his old drudgery, as they
say of those, who come out of the North, (which is cold and poor) they like the
warm South so well, they seldom or never go back more. What more dreadful to
a gracious soul then to be delivered into the hands of Satan? or fall under the
power of his lusts? It would choose rather to leap into a burning furnace, then
be commanded by them. This is the great request a child of God makes, that he
would rather whip him in his house, then turn him out of it to become a prey
to Satan. O sinners, did you know (which you cannot till you come over to
Christ and embrace him as your Lord and Savior) what the privileges of
Christ's servants are, and what gentle usage Saints have at Christ's hands, you
would say those were the only happy men in the world, which stand continually
before him. His laws are writ, not with his subjects blood, (as Satan's are)
but with his own. All his commands are acts of grace; Phil. 1.29.
it is a favor to be employed about them. To you it is given to believe, yea, to
suffer. Such an honor the Saints esteem it to do any thing he commands, that
they count God rewards them for one piece of service, if he enables them for
another. This I had, (says David) because I kept thy Precepts, Psalm. 119.56.
what was the great reward he got? see, v. 55. I have remembered thy Name, O
Lord, in the night, and kept thy Law; then follows, This I had: He got more
strength and skill to keep the Law for the future, by his obedience past, and
was he not well paid (think you for his pains? There Is fruit even in holiness,
the Christian has in hand, which he eats while he is at work, that may stay
his stomach until the full reward comes, which is eternal life, Romans 6.22.
Jesus Christ is a Prince that loves to see his people thrive, and grow rich
under his Government. This is he whom sinners are so afraid of, that when he
sets open their prison, and bids them come forth, they choose rather to bore
their ears to the devils post, then enjoy this blessed liberty. It is no
wonder that some of the Saints have indeed) when tortured, not accepted
deliverance, Heb. 11.3.
that they might obtain a better resurrection. But what a riddle is this, that
forlorn souls bound with the chains of their lusts, and the irresistible
decree of God for their damnation, (if they believe not on the Lord Jesus,)
should, as they are driving to execution, refuse deliverance? This may set
heaven and earth on wondering. Surely, dying in their sins, they cannot hope for
a better resurrection then they have a death. I am afraid rather, that they do
not firmly believe they shall have any resurrection; and then no wonder they
make so light of Christ's offer, who think themselves safe, when once earth't in
this borough of the grave. But let sinners know, it is not the grave can hold
them, when the day of Assize comes, and the Judge calls for the prisoners to
the bar. The grave was never intended to be a Sanctuary to desend sinners from
the hand of justice, but a close Prison to secure them against the day of
trial, that they may be forthcoming. Then sinners shall be dug out of their
buroughs, and dragged out of their holes to answer their contempt of Christ
and his grace. O how will you be astonished to see him become your Judge, whom
you now refuse to be your King? to hear that Gospel witness against you for
your damnation, which at the same time shall acquit others for their salvation?
what think you to do, sinners, in that day? will thou cry and shream for mercy
at Christ's hands? Alas, when the sentence is past, thy face will immediately be
covered: condemned prisoners are not allowed to speak: tears then are
unprofitable, when no place left for repentance, either in Christ's heart or
thine own. Or meanest thou to apply thy self to thy old Lord, in whose service
thou have undone thy soul, and cry to him, as she to Ahab, Help, O King: Alas,
thine eye shall see him in the same condemnation with thy self. Had thou not
better now renounce the devils rule, while thou may be received into Christ's
Government? pour out thy tears and cries now for mercy and grace when they are
to be had, then to save them for another world to no purpose?

How may I that am a home-borne slave to sin, yea, who have lived so many
years under his cursed rule, get out of his dominion and power, and be
translated into the Kingdom of Christ?

David was in the field, it is said, 1 Samuel 22.2. Every one that was in
distress, in debt, or in discontent gathered themselves to him, and he became
a Captain over them. And so will Christ be to every one that is truly
discontented with Satan's Government, and upon an inward dislike thereof repairs
to him. But the maine business will be to take thee off from thy engagements
to thy lusts and Satan, till which be done, Christ will not own thee as a
subject, but look on thee as a Spy. It fares with sinners as with servants.
There may be fallings out between them and their Masters, and high words pass
between them, that you would think they would take up their pack and be gone in
all haste: but the fray is soon over, and by next morning all is forgot, and
the servants are as hard at their work as ever. O how often are sinners taking
their leave of their lusts, and giving warning to their old Masters, they will
repent and reform, and what not? but in a few days they have repented of their
repentance, and deformed their reformings, which shows they were drunk with
some passion, when they thought or spoke this; and no wonder they reverse all
when they come to their true temper. Now because Satan has many policies, by
which he uses to keep his hold of sinners; I shall discover some of them,
which if thou can withstand, it will be no hard matter to bring thee out of
his power and rule.

Israel stirred not, while Moses came, and had some discourse with them about
their woeful slavery, and the gracious thoughts of God toward them; and then
they begin to desire to be gone. Pharaoh soon bethought him what consequence
might follow upon this, and cunningly labors to prevent by doubling their
task: Ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say, Let us go, and do sacrifice
to the Lord. Go thorefore and work, Exodus 5.17, 18. As if he had said, Have you
so much spare time to think of gadding into the wilderness, and have you your
seditious Conventicles, ( Moses and you) to lay your plots together? I Will break
the knot, give them more work, scatter them all over the land to gather straw,
that they may not meet to entice one another hearts from my service. Thus
Satan is very jealous of the sinner, afraid every Christian that speaks to him,
or Ordinance he hears should inveigle him. By his good will he should come at
neither, no, nor have a thought of heaven or hell from one end of the week to
the other, and that he may have as few as may be, he keeps him full-handed with
work. The sinner grindes, and he is filling the hopper, that the Mill may not
stand still. He is with the sinner as soon as he wakes, and fills his wretched
heart with some wicked thoughts, which as a morning draught may keep him from
the infection of any favor of good, that may be breathed on him by others in
the daytime. All the day long he watches him, as the Master would do his man,
that he fears will run away. And at night he like a careful Jayler locks him
up again in his chamber with more bolts and fetters upon him, not suffering him
to sleep as he lies on his bed, till he has done some mischief. Ah, poor
wretch! was ever slave so looked to? Luke 15.
as long as the devil can keep thee thus, thou art his own sure enough. The
Prodigal came to himself, before he came to his Father. He considered with
himself what a starving condition he was in, his husks were poor meat, and yet
he had not enough of them neither, and how easily he might mend his commons, if
he had but grace to go home and humble himself to his Father. Now and not till
now he goes: Resolve thus poor sinner to sit down and consider what thy state
is, and what it might be, if thou would but change the bondage of Satan for
the sweet Government of Jesus Christ. First, ask thy soul, whether the devil
can, after thou have worn out thy miserable life herein his drudg'ry, prefer
thee to a happy state in the other world, or so much as secure thee from a
state of torment and woe? If he cannot, whether there be not one Jesus Christ,
who is able and willing to do it? and if so, whether it be not bloody cruelty
to thy precious soul, to stay any longer under the shadow of this bramble, when
thou may make so blessed a change? A few of these thoughts abidingly laid
home to thy soul, (may God striking in with them) shake the foundations of the
devils prison, and make thee haste as fast from him, as one out of a house on
fire about his ears.

2ly. Satan has his instruments to oppose the messengers and overtures, Moses
comes to deliver Israel out of the Egyptian bondage, up start Iannes and
Iambres to resist him. When Paul preaches to the Deputy, the devil has his
Chaplain at Court to hinder him: Elymas, one that was full of all subtilty and
mischief. Some or other (to be sure) he will find, when God is parlying with a
sinner, and persuading him to come over to Christ, that shall labor to clog
the work. Either carnal friends, these he sends to plead his cause, or old
companions in wickedness, these bestir them, one while laboring to jeer him
out of his new way, or if that take not, by turning their old love into bitter
wrath against him for playing the Apostate, and leaving him so. Or if yet he
will not be stopped in his way, then he has his daubing Preachers, (still like
Jobs messengers the last the worst) who with their soul-flattering, or rather
murdering doctrine shall go about to heal his wound slightly. Now as ever you
desire to get out of Satan's bondage, have a care of all these, harden thy self
against the entreaties of carnal friends and relations. Resolve, that if thy
children should hang about thy knees to keep thee from Christ, thou will throw
them away. If thy father and mother should lie prostrate at thy foot, rather
then not go to Christ, to go over their very backs to him. Never can we part
with their love upon such advantageous terms as these. And for thy brethren in
iniquity, I hope thou do not mean to stay while thou have their good will,
then even ask the devils also. Heaven is but little worth if thou have not a
heart to despise a little shame, and bear a few frumps from profane Ishmaels
for thy hopes of it. Let them spit on thy face, Christ will wipe it off; let
them laugh so thou winnest. If they follow not thy example before they die, the
shame will be their own; God himself shall spit it on their face before men and
Angels, and then kick them into hell. And lastly, escape but the snare of those
flatterers, who use their tongues only to lick sinners consciences whole with
their placentia's soothing doctrine, and thou art fair for a Christ; ask not
counsel of them, they may go about to give you ease, but all those stitches
with which they sow up thy wounds, must be ripp't open, or thou die for it.

Brentius, (from that Senator his dear friend) took him at supper with his
wife and children, and bade him flee cito, citius, citissime; which he did,
leaving his dear company and sweet cheer; so do thou or else thou may
repent thy stay when it is too late. A vision charged the wise men to go back
another way, and not so much as see Herod, though he had charged them
otherwise. O go not back, drunkard, to thy good fellows; adulterer to thy
Queanes; covetous wretch, to thy usury and unlawful gain: turn another way,
and gratify not the devil a moment. The command says, now repent; the
Imperative has no future tense. God says, To day, while it is to day: The
devil says, To morrow; which will thou obey, God or him? Thou say, thou
meanest at last to do it, then why not now? Will thou stand with God for a day
or two, huckle with him for a penny? Heaven is not such a hard pennyworth, but
thou may come up to his terms: And which is the morrow thou meanest? thou
have but a day in thy life for ought thou know, where then can thou find a
morrow for repentance? but should thou have as many days to come is
Methuselah lived, yet know, sin is hereditary, and such sort of diseases grow
more upon us with our years. It Is with long accustomed sinners, as with those
who have sat long under a Government, they rather like to be as they are,
(though but ill on it) then think of a change, or like those who in a journey
have gone out of their way all the day, will rather take any new way, overhedge
and ditch, then think of going so far back to be set right.

Fourthly, Satan labors to comprimise the business, and bring it to a
composition between him and Christ: when conscience will not be pacified, then
Satan for quiets sake will yield to something, as Pharaoh with Moses: after
much ado he is willing they should go, Exodus 8.28. And Pharaoh said, I will let
you go, that you may sacrifice to the Lord your God in the wilderness. But
then comes in his caution, only you shall not go very far away. Thus Satan
will yield the sinner may pray, and hear the Word, and make a goodly
Profession, so he does not go very far, but that he may have him again at
night. If God has the mattins, he looks for the vigils, and thus he is content
the day should be divided. Does conscience press a reformation and change of
the sinners course, rather then fail, he will grant that also: yet as Pharaoh
when he yielded they should go, he meant their little ones should stay behind
as a pledge for those that went, Exodus 10.11. So Satan must have some one sin
that must be spared, and no matter though it be a little one. Now if ever you
would get out of the devils rule, make no composition with him. Christ will be
King or no King. Not a hoof must be left behind, or any thing which may make
an errand for thee afterward to return. Take therefore thy everlasting farewell
of every sin, as to the sincere and fixed purpose of thy heart, or thou do
nothing. Paul joins his faith and his purpose togethes, 2 Timothy 3.10. not the
one without the other. At the promulgation of the Law in Sinai, God did, as it
were, give Israel the oath of Allegiance to him; then he told them what law he
would rule them by, and they gave their consent: this was the espousal which
God puts them in mind of, Jerem. 2. in which they were solemnly married
together, as King and subjects. Now mark, before God would do this, he will
have them out of Egypt. They could not obey his laws, and Pharaoh's idolatrous
customs also, and therefore he will have them out, before he solemnly
espouseth them to be a Nation peculiarly his. Thou must be a widow before
Christ marry thee, he will not lie by the side of another wife. O that it were
come to this! then the match would soon be made between Christ and thee. Let me
ask thee, poor soul, have thou seriously considered who Christ is, and what his
sweet Government is? and could thou find in thy heart (out of an inward
abhorrency of sin and Satan, and a liking to Christ) to renounce sin and Satan,
and choose Christ for thy Lord? Does thy soul say as Rebecca, I will go, if I
could tell how to get to him. But alas, I am here a poor prisoner, I cannot
shake off my fetters, and set my self at liberty to come unto Christ. Well,
poor soul, can thou groan heartily under thy bondage? then for thy comfort
know, thy deliverance is at the door; he that heard the cry of Israel in Egypt,
will hear thine also, yea, come and save thee out of the hands of thy lusts. He
will not, as some, who entangle thy affections by making love to thee, and then
give over the suit, and come at thee no more. If Christ has won thy heart,
he will be true to thee, and be at all the cost to bring thee out of thy
prisonhouse also, yea, take the pains to come for thee himself, and bring
with him these wedding-garments in which he will carry thee from thy prison to
his Fathers house with joy, where thou shall live not only as a subject under
his Law, but as a Bride in the bosom of his love, and what can be added to thy
happiness more? when thy Prince is thy husband, and that such a Prince to whom
all other are vassals, even the Prince of the world himself; and yet so
gracious, that his Majesty hinders not his familiar converse with thee a poor
creature, but adds to the condescent thereof, therefore God chooses to mix
names of greatness and relation together; the one to sweeten the other: Thy
Maker is thy husband, thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel. The God of the whole
earth shall he be called, Isa. 54.5. And to usher in those promises with titles
of greatest dread and terror to the creature, that hold forth the greatest
condescensions of love; How can God stoop lower then to come and dwell with a
poor humble soul? which is more, then if he had said such a one should dwell
with him; for a beggar to live at Court is not so much as the King to dwell
with him in this cottage. Yet this promise is ushered in with the most
magnificent titles; Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabits eternity,
whose Name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit, Isa. 57.15. and why such titles? but to take
away the fears, which his Saints are prone to take up from them. Will the high
and lofty One, (says the humble soul) look on me a poor worm? will the Holy
God come near such an unclean creature, (says the contrite one?) Isaiah
himself cried he was undone at the sight of God, and this attribute proclaimed
before him, Isa. 6. Now God prefixeth these, that the creature may know his
Majesty and holiness, which seems so terrible to us, are no prejudice to his
love; yea, so gracious a Prince is thy husband, that he delights rather his
Saints should call him by names of love, then state. Thou shall call me Ishi,
and shall no more call me Baali, Hos. 2.16. that is, my Husband, not my Lord.

SECT. IV.
The second point follows. Doct. 2.
Ignorance above other sins enslaves a soul to Satan, a knowing man may be his
slave, but an ignorant one can be no other. Knowledge does not make the heart
good, but it is impossible that without knowledge it should be good. There are
some sins which an ignorant person cannot commit, there are more which he
cannot but commit: Knowledge is the Key, Luke 11.52. Christ the door, John 15.
Christ opens Heaven, Knowledge opens Christ. In three particulars the Point
will appear more fully.

First, ignorance opens a door for sin to enter.

Secondly, as ignorance lets sin in, so it locks it up in the soul, and the
soul in it.

Thirdly, as it locks it up, so it shuts all means of help out.

Lot, he knows not when the tempter comes, nor when he goes: he is like a man
that walks in his sleep, knows not where he is, nor what he does. Father,
forgive them, (said Christ) they know not what they do. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.
having reproved the sensuality of some, verse 32. who made the consideration of
death, by which others are awed from sin, a provocative to sin, Let us eat
and drink for to morrow we shall die, he gives an account of this absurd
reasoning; All have not the knowledge of God. An ignorant person is a man in
shape, and a beast in heart. There is no knowledge in the land, says the
Prophet, Hosea 4.2: and see what a regiment follows this blind Captain,
swearing; lying, killing, stealing, and what not? We read, 2 Timothy 3.5. of some
laden with sins; here are trees full of bitter fruit, and what dung shall we
find at the root, that makes them so fruitful but ignorance? silly women, and
such who never come to the knowledge of the truth.

and therefore he plays with his sin; as the child with the waves, that by
and by will swallow him up. Conscience is Gods alarm to call the sinner up; It
does not always ring in his ear that has knowledge, being usually set by God
to go off at some special hour; when God is speaking in an Ordinance, or
striking in a Providence; but in an ignorant soul, this is silent. The Clock
cannot go when the weights are taken off; Conscience is only a witness to what
it knows.

Non dantur purae tenebrae, I think, is good Divinity as well as Philosophy:
and this night-light may discover many sins, produce inward prickings of
conscience for them, yea, stir up the creature to step aside, rather then drown
in such broad waters. There are some sins so cruel and costly, that the most
prostrate soul may in time be weary of their service for low ends: but what
will all this come to, if the creature be not acquainted with Christ the true
way to God, faith and repentance the only way to Christ? such a one after all
this busle, in stead of making an escape from Satan, will run full into his
mouth another way. There are some ways, which at first seem right to the
traveller; yet wind about so insensibly, that when a man has gone far, and
thinks himself near home, he is carried back to the place from whence he set
forth. This will befall every soul ignorant of Christ, and the way of life
through him; after many years travel, as they think, toward heaven by their
good meanings, blind devotions and reformation, when they shall expect to be
within sight of heaven, they shall find themselves even where they were at
first, as very slaves to Satan as ever.

chains of darkness be knocked off their minds, there is no possibility of
getting them out of the devils prison; he has no such tame slave as the
ignorant soul: such a one goes before Satan (as the silly sheep before the
butcher) and knows not who he is, nor whither he carries him; and can you see
the devil driving your children to the shambles and not labor to rescue them
out of his hands? Bloody parents you are, that can thus harden your bowels
against your own flesh. Now the more to provoke you to your duty, take these
considerations.

1. Your relation obliges you to take care of their precious souls. It Is the
soul is the child rather then the body: and therefore in Scripture put for the
whole man. Abraham and Lot went forth with all the souls they had gotton in
Haran, Genesis 12. so All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, that is, all
the persons. The body is but the sheath; and if one should leave his sword with
you to be kept safely for him, would you throw away the blade, and only
preserve the scabbard? And yet parents do commonly judge of their care and love
to their children by their providing for the outward man, by their breeding,
that teaching them how to live like men (as they say) when they are dead and
gone, and comport themselves to their civil place and rank in the world, These
things indeed are commendable, but is not the most weighty business of all
forgotten in the mean time, while no endeavor is used that they may live as
Christians, and know how to carry themselves in duty to God and man as such?
and can they do this without the knowledge of the holy rule they are to walk
by? I am sure David knew no means effectual without this, and therefore
propounds the question, Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? and he
resolves it in the next words, By taking heed thereto according to thy word,
Psalm. 119.9. And how shall they compare their way and the Word together, if not
instructed? our children are not borne with Bibles in their heads or hearts.
And who ought to be the instructor if not the parent? yea, who will do it with
such natural affection? As I have heard sometimes a mother say in other
respects, Who can take such pains with my child, and be so careful as my self
that am its Mother? Bloody parents then they are who acquaint not their
children with God or his Word; what do they but put them under a necessity of
perishing, if God stir not up some to show more mercy then themselves to
them. Is it any wonder to hear that ship to be sunk, or dashed upon the rock,
which was put to sea without card or compass? no more is it, they should
ingulph themselves in sin and perdition, that are thrust forth into the world
(which is a sea of temptation) without the knowledge of God or their duty to
him. In the fear of God think of it parents: your children have souls, and
these God set you to watch over; It will be a poor account at the last day, if
you can only say, Lord, here are my children. I bred them complete Gentlemen,
left them rich and wealthy. The rust of that silver you left them will witness
your folly and sin, that you would do so much for that which rusts, and
nothing for the enriching their minds with the knowledge of God, which would
have endured for ever; happy if you had left them less money and more
knowledge.

2. Consider it has ever been the Saints practice to instruct and teach their
children the way of God. David we find dropping instruction into his son
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and with a willing mind. Though a King, he did not put it off
to his Chaplins, but whetted it on him with his own lips. Neither was his Queen
Bathsheba forgetful of her duty, her gracious counsel is upon record, Prove. 31.
and that she may do it with the more seriousness and solemnity, we find her
stirring up her motherly bowels, to let her son see, that she fetched her
words deep, even from her heart. What my son! and what the son of my womb!
and what the son of my vows? Ver. 2. Indeed that counsel is most like to go
to the heart, which comes from thence. Parents know not what impression such
melting expressions of their love mingled with their instructions leave on
their children. God bids draw forth our souls to the hungry, that is more then
draw our purse, which may be done, and the heart hard and churlish. Thus we
should draw forth our souls with our instructions. What need I tell of
Timothy's Mother and Grandmother who acquainted him with the Scripture from his
youth? And truly I think, that man calls in question his own Saintship, that
takes no care to acquaint his child with God, and the way that leads to him. I
have known some, that though profane themselves, have been very solicitous,
their children should have good education; but never knew I a Saint that was
regardlesse whether his child knew God or not.

3. It is an act of great unrighteousness not to instruct our children. We
read of some that hold the truth in unrighteousness: among others those
Parents do it, that lock up the knowledge of these saving truths from their
children, which God has imparted to themselves. There is a double
unrighteousness in it.

First they are unrighteous to their children, who may lay as much claim to
their care of instructing them, as to their labor and industry in laying up a
temporal estate for them. If he should do unrighteously with his child, that
should not endeavor to provide for his outward maintenance, or having gathered
an estate, should lock it up, and deny his child necessaries, then much more
he that lives in ignorance of God, whereby he renders himself incapable of
providing for his childs soul; but most of all, he that having gathered a
stock of knowledge, yet hides it from his child.

Secondly, they are unrighteous to God.

First, in that they keep that talent in their own hands which was given to be
paid out to their children. When God revealed himself to Abraham, he had
respect to Abraham's children, and therefore we find God promising himself
this at Abraham's hands, upon which he imparts his mind to him concerning his
purpose of destroying Sodom; Shall I hide from Abraham (says God) that thing
Which I do? I know that he will command his children, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.17, 19. The Church began
at first in a family, and was preserved by the godly care of Parents in
instructing their children and household in the truths of God, whereby the
knowledge of God was transmitted from generation to generation; and though now
the Church is not confined to such strait limits, yet every private family is
as a little nursery to the Church; if the nursery be not carefully planted, the
Orchard will soon decay. O could you be willing, Christians, that your children
when you are laid in the dust, should be turned into the degenerate plant of a
strange vine; and prove a generation that do not know God? Atheism needs not
be planted, you do enough to make your children such, if you do not endeavor
to plant Religion in their minds. The very neglect of the Gardner to sow and
dress his garden, gives advantage enough to the weeds to come up. This is the
difference between Religion and Atheism, Religion does not grow without
planting, but will die even where it is planted without watering. Atheism,
irreligion, and profaneness are weeds will grow without setting, but they will
not die without plucking up, all care and means little enough to stub them up.
And therefore you that are Parents, and do not teach your children, deal the
more unrighteously with God, because you neglect the best season in their whole
life for planting in them the knowledge of God, and plucking up the contrary
weeds of atheism and irreligion. Young weeds come up with most ease, simple
ignorance in youth becomes wilful ignorance, yea, impudence in age, you will
not instruct them when young, and they will scorn their Ministers should when
they are old.

Thy sons and daughters whom thou have borne to me, Ezekiel. 16.20. God had by the
Covenant which he made with that people, married them unto himself, and
therefore as the wife bears her children to her husband, (they are his
children) so God calls the children of the Jews his, and complains of it as an
horrible wickedness in them, that they should not bring them up as his: but
offer them up to Molech, They have slain my children, (says God) v. 21. And
are not the children of a Christian his children as well as the Jews were?
has God recalled or altered the first Covenant, and cut off the entaile; and
dare thou slay not only thy children, but the Lords also? and is not
ignorance that bloody knife that does it? My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge, Hosea 4.6. Do you not tremble to offer them not to Molech, but the
devil, whom before you had given up to God, when you brought them to that
solemn ordinance of Baptism, and there desired before God and man that they
might become Covenant-servants to the Lord? and have thou bound them to him,
and never teach them, either who their Lord and Master is, or what their duty
is as his servants? of thy own mouth God will condemn thee.

Thou have (says God by Nathan to David concerning Vriah,) slain him with the
sword of the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12.9. So thou may pierce Christ, and
slay him over and over with the bloody sword of thy wicked children* if thou
be not the more careful to train them up in the fear of God: There might be
something said for that Heathen, who when the Scholar abused him, fell upon the
Master and struck him. Indeed it is possible he might be in the most fault. When
the child breaks the Sabbath, it is his sin; but more the fathers, if he never
taught him what the command of God was. And if the Parent be accessory to the
sin of the child, it will be hard for him to escape a Partnership, yea, a
Precedence in the punishment. O what a sad greeting will such have of their
children at the great day! will they not then accuse you to be the murderers of
their precious souls, and lay their blood at your door, cursing you to your
face that taught them no better? But grant, that by the interposition of thy
timely repentance, thou securest thy soul from the judgment of that day; yet
God can scourge thee here for the neglect of thy duty to them. How often do we
see children become heavy crosses to such Parents? It is just that they should
not know their duty to thee, who did not teach them their duty to God; or if
thou should not live so long to see this, yet sure thou can not but go in
sorrow to thy grave, to leave children behind thee that are on their way to
hell. Some think, that Lots lingering so long in Sodom, was his loathnesse to
leave his sons in law behind him, to perish in the flames. No doubt (good man)
it was very grievous to him, and this might make him stay pleading with them,
till the Angel pulled him away. And certainly nothing makes holy Parents more
loath to be gone out of this Sodomitical world, then a desire to see their
children out of the reach of that fire, (before they go) that God will rain
upon the heads of sinners. You know not how soon the messenger may come to
pluck you hence; do your best while you are among them to win them home to God.

then let all fall down, because he cannot do it all at once. Many Ministers
may complain of their Predecessors, that they left them their people more out
of repair then their houses, and this makes the work great indeed. As the
Jews, who were to revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, before they
could build the wall, yet it went up, because the people had a mind to work.
Nehem. 4. O if once our hearts were but filled with zeal for God, and
compassion to our peoples souls, we would up and be doing, though we could but
lay a brick a day, and God would be with us. May be you who find a people rude
and sottishly ignorant, like stones in the quarry, and trees unfell'd, shall
not bring the work to such perfection in your days as you desire; yet as David
did for Solomon, thou may by thy pains in teaching and instructing them,
prepare materials for another who shall rear the Temple. Its very ordinary for
one Minister to enter into the labors of another; to reap those by a work of
Conversion, in whom a former Minister has cast the seed of knowledge and
conviction: And when God comes to reckon with his Workmen, the Plough-man and
Sower shall have his penny, as well as the Harvest-man and Reaper. O its a
blessed thing to be (as Job says he was,) eyes to the blind, much more to
blind souls; such are the Ministers. God himself calls Pastors after his own
heart, that feed his people with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.15. But woe
to those that are accessory to their peoples ignorance. Now a Minister may be
accessory to the ignorance of his people,

Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall
be no Priest to me: seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also
forget thy children, Hos. 4.6. The want of knowledge in a Minister is such a
defect, as cannot be supplied by any thing else; be he never so meek, patient,
bountiful, unblameable, if he has not skill to divide the Word aright, he is
not cut out for a Minister. Every thing is good, as its good for the end it is
appointed to; a knife, though it had a haft of diamonds, yet if it will not cut
it is no knife. A bell, if not sound, is no bell. The great work of a Minister
is to teach others, his lips are to preserve knowledge, he should be as
conversant in the things of God, as others in their particular trades.
Ministers are called Lights; if the light then be darkness, how great is the
darkness of that people like to be? I know these stars in Christ's hands are
not all of the same magnitude; there is a greater glory of gifts and graces
shines in some then others; yet so much light is necessary to every Minister,
as was in the star the wise men saw at Christ's birth, to be able out of the
Word to direct sinners the safe and true way to Christ and salvation. O Sirs,
it is a sad way of getting a living by killing of men, as some unskilful
Physicians do; but much more to get a temporal livelihood by ruining souls,
through our ignorance. He is a cruel man to the poor Passengers, who will
undertake to be Pilot, when he never so much as learned his Compass.

Idol-shepherd, Zech. 11. such as have mouths, but speak not; lips, but not to
feed the people with knowledge. It shall be the peoples sin, if they feed not
when bread is before them, but woe to us if we give them not meat in due season.
O Sirs, what shall we say to our Lord that trusts us, if those abilities which
he has given us as market-money to buy bread for our people, be found wrapped up
in a napkin of sloth? if that time wherein we should have been teaching and
instructing them, shall appear to be wasted in our pleasures, or employed about
our carnal profits. That servant shall have but a sad welcome of his Master
when he comes home, that shall be found out of the way with the Key, and the
family starving in the mean time for want of provision.

that are for the higher form of Professors, who have their senses well
exercised, excellent may be for the building up three or four eminent Saints
in the Congregation; but in the mean time, the weak ones in the family, (who
should indeed chiefly be thought on, because least able to guide themselves, or
carve for themselves) these are forgotten. He sure is an unwise builder, that
makes a Scaffold as high as Paul's steeple, when his work is at the bottom, and
he is to lay the foundation, whereas the Scaffold should rise as the building
goes up. So Paul advances in his doctrine, as his hearers do in knowledge;
Heb. 6.1. Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go
on unto perfection. Let us. It is well indeed when the people can keep pace
with the Preacher, To preach truths and notions above the hearers capacity, is
like a Nurse, that should go to feed the child with a spoon too big to go into
its mouth. We may by such preaching please our selves, and some of higher
seize, but what shall poor ignorant ones do in the mean time. He is the
faithful steward that considers both. The Preacher is (as Paul says of
himself) a debt or both to the Greek and to the Barbarian, to the wise and to
the unwise, Romans 1.14. to prepare truths suitable to the degree of his hearers.
Let the wise have their portion, but let them be patient to see the weaker in
the family served also.



Hamans face did tell him, that he should not stay in the Kings presence. If
thou live in ignorance, it shows thou art in Gods black bill; he puts this
cover before their eyes in wrath, whom he means to turn off into hell, 2 Cor.
4. If our Gospel be hid, it is to those that perish. In one place sinners are
threatened, they shall die without knowledge; in another place, Job 36.
they shall die in their sins, John 8. He indeed that dies without knowledge,
dies in his sins: and what more fearful doom can the great God pass upon a
creature then this? better die in a prison, die in a ditch, then die in ones
sins. It thou die in thy sins, thou shall rise in thy sins: as thou
fallest asleep in the dust, so thou awakest in the morning of the resurrection;
if an ignorant Christlesse wretch, as such thou shall be araigned and judged.
That God whom now sinners bid depart from them, will then be worth their
acquaintance (themselves being Judges;) but alas! then he will throw their own
words in their teeth, and bid them depart from him, he desires not the
knowledge of them. O sinners, you shall see at last, God can better be without
your company in heaven, then you could without his knowledge on earth: Yet, yet
it is day, draw your curtains, and behold Christ shining upon your face with
Gospel Light; hear wisdom crying in the streets, and Christ piping under your
window in the voice of his Spirit and Messengers, Prove. 1.21, 22, 23.
How long will ye simple ones love simplicity, and fools hate knowledge? Turn
you at my reproof; behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, and make known
my words unto you. What can you say (sinners) for your sottish ignorance? Where
is your cloak for this sin? the time has been when the Word of the Lord was
precious, and there was no open vision, not a Bible to be found in town or
Country; when the tree of knowledge was forbidden fruit, and none might taste
thereof without license from the Pope; happy he that could get a leaf or two of
the Testament into a corner, afraid to tell the wife of his bosom. O how sweet
were these waters, when they were forced to steal them? but you have the Word,
or may in your houses; you have those that open them every Sabbath in your
Assemblies, many of you at least have the offers of your Ministers to take any
pains with you in private, passionately beseeching you to pity your souls,
and receive instruction: yea, it is the lamentation they generally take up, you
will not come unto them that you may receive light. How long may a poor
Minister sit in his study, before any of the ignorant sort will come upon such
an errand? Lawyers have their Clients, and Physicians their Patients: these are
sought after, and called up at midnight for counsel: but alas! the soul, which
is more worth then raiment and body too, that is neglected, and the Minister
seldom thought on, till both these be sent away. Perhaps when the Physician
gives them over for dead, then we must come and close up those eyes with
comfort, which were never opened to see Christ in his truth, or be counted
cruel, because we will not sprinkle them with this holy water, and anoint them
for the Kingdom of Heaven, though they know not a step of the way which leads
to it. Ah, poor wretches! what comfort would you have us speak to those, to
whom God himself speaks terror? Is heaven ours to give to whom we please? or
is it in our power to alter the laws of the most High, and save those whom he
condemns? Do you not remember the curse that is to fall upon his head, that
makes the blind to wander out of the way? Deuteronomy. 27.18. what curse then would
be our portion, if we should confirm such blind souls, that are quite out of
the way to heaven, encouraging you to go on and expect to reach heaven at last,
when God knows your feet stand in those paths that lead to eternal death? No,
it is written, we cannot, and God will not reverse it; you may read your very
names among those damned souls which Christ comes in flaming fire to take
vengeance on, who the Apostle tells us are such, that know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.8. And therefore in the
fear of God, let this provoke you, of what age or sex, rank or condition
soever in the world, to labor for the saving knowledge of God in Christ, whom
to know is life eternal. Are you young? Enquire after God betimes, while your
parts are fresh, and memory strong, before the throng of worldly cares divert
you, or lusts of youth debauch you. The feet of those lusts which have buried
millions of others in perdition, stand ready to carry you the same way, if
preventing grace come not and deliver you out of their hands, by seasoning your
minds with the knowledge of God. This morning-draught may prevent thy being
infected with the ill savours thou may receive from the corrupt examples of
others. Nay, how long thy stay may be in the world thou know not, see
whether thou can not find graves of thy length in the burial place; and if
thou should die ignorant of God and his Law, what would then become of thee?
The small brush and the old logs, young sinners, and those that are withered
with age meet and burn together. Or if thou should stay a while longer here,
may be because thou will not learn now, God will not teach thee then: Or if
thou should in thy old age get acquaintance with God, yet it is sad to be
sowing thy seed, when thou should be reaping thy sheaves, learning to know
God, when thou might be comforting thy self from the old acquaintance thou
have enjoyed with him. Are you old and ignorant? Alas, poor creatures! your
life in the socket, and this candle of the Lord not set up and lighted in your
understanding? your body bowing to the dust, and nature tolling the passing
bell, as it were, and you (like one going into the dark) know not whither death
will lead you or leave you. It Is like the infirmities of age, make you wish
your bones were even laid at rest in the grave: but if you should dye in this
condition, your poor souls would even wish they were here again with their old
burdens on their back; aches and diseases of old age are grievous, but damned
souls would thank God, if he would bless them with such a heaven, as to lie
in these pains to escape the torments of the other: O bethink you before you
go hence; the less time you have, the more diligence you must use to gain
knowledge; we need not be earnest, (one would think) to bid the poor prisoner
learn his book, that cannot read, when he knows he shall be hanged if he read
not his neck-verse. It Is not indeed the bare knowing the truths of the Gospel,
saves; but the gross ignorance of them to be sure will damn souls. Are you
poor? It is not your poverty is your sin or misery, but your ignorance where
the true treasure lies. Were you Gods poor, rich in knowledge and faith, you
were happy, Eccles. 4.13. Better is a poor and wise child, then a foolish
King, who will no more be admonish't; yea, so happy, that did the Princes of
the world understand themselves aright, they would wish themselves in your
clothes, how ragged soever they are, rather then be in their own robes; there
are better making for you in heaven which you shall put on, when theirs shall
be pulled off to their shame: It will not then trouble you that you were, while
in the world, poor; but it will torment them that they were so rich and great,
and so poor to God and beggarly in their souls.

Are you rich? Labor for the knowledge of the most high. Solomon had more of
the worlds treasure then a thousand of you have, and yet we find him hard at
prayer, tugging with God for knowledge, 1 Chronicles. 1.10. All these outward
enjoyments are but vaginae bonorum, as afflictions are vaginae malorum. I am
afraid many men think themselves privileged by their worldly greatness from
this duty, as if God were bound to save them, because rich. Alas, Sirs, there
are not so many of you like to come there. I must confess, it would make one
tremble to think what a small number those among the great ones that shall be
saved, are summed up into. Not many great, not many rich; Why so few saved?
Because so few have saving knowledge. O the Atheism, the ignorance, the
sottish barbarism that is to be found even in those that the world applaud,
and even worship because of their lands and estates, who yet are not able to
give any account of their faith? A poor leather-coat Christian will shame and
catechize a hundred of them. If heaven were to be purchased with house and
lands, then these would carry it away from the poor Disciples of Jesus Christ,
they have their hundreds and thousands ly by them for a purchase always, but
this money is not current in heavens exchange. This is life eternal, to know
thee, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.



La^dicea, and know it not. Rev. 3.17. As Ignorance blinds the mind, so pride
is a blind before their ignorance, that they know it not. These have such a
high opinion of themselves, that they take it ill any should suspect them as
such; these of all men are most out of the way, to knowledge they are too good
to learn of man as they think, and too bad to be taught of God. The gate into
Christ's School is low, and these cannot stoop. The Master himself is so
humble and lowly, that he will not teach a proud Scholar. Therefore first
become a fool in thy own eye. A wiser man then thy self has confessed as
much, Prove. 30.2, 3. I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of
the Holy. When thou art come to thy self to own and blush at the brutish
ignorance of thy mind, thou art fit to be admitted into Christ's School. If
they be ashamed, then show them the pattern of the house, Ezekiel. 43.10.

Israel, they were brutish in their knowledge, Jer. 10.14. he does not say
brutish in their ignorance, had they sinned because they did not know better,
this would have excused a tanto, but they did that which was brutish and
unreasonable, as their worshipping graven images notwithstanding they knew to
the contrary. That man shall not excel in knowledge who prostitutes it to
sin, Job 36.12. If they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and shall
die without knowledge. A candle pent up close in a dark lanthorn, swailes out
apace: and so does light shut up in the conscience, and not suffered to come
forth in the conversation. Those Heathens that are charged for holding the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. the next news you hear of them is, that
they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened,
ver. 21.

Been orasse est been studuisse; he is the best student in divinity, that
studies most upon his knee. Knowledge is a divine gift, all light is from
heaven. God is the Father of light, and prayer puts the soul under the
pupillage of God. If any one lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. This is more
then naked knowledge, wisdom how to use it. Study may make one a great Scholar
in the Scriptures, but prayer makes a wise Christian, as it obtains sanctified
knowledge, without which it is no perfect gift, but (...), a gift and no gift.
Pray then with an humble boldness, God gives it to all that ask, and that
(...), heartily, liberally; not like proud man who will rather put one to shame
who is weak for his ignorance, then take the pains to teach him. Thy petition
is very pleasing to God. Remember how Solomon sped upon the like occasion, and
promise thy self the same success. Christ's School is a free School; he denies
none that come to him, so they will submit to the orders of the School; and
though all have not an answer in the same degree of knowledge (it is not
needful that all should be Solomon's in knowledge, except all were to be
Solomon's in place) yet the meanest disciple that Christ sends forth shall be
furnished with saving knowledge, enough to fit him for his admittance into
heavens Academy. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and after bring me to
glory.

Fourthly, thou must bestow some time for thy diligent search after truth.
Truth lies deep, and must be dug for. Since man was turned out of Paradise
he can do nothing without labor, except sin (this follows his hand indeed)
but this treasure of knowledge calls for spade and Mattock. We are bid search
the Scripture, and Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall
be increased; a Metaphor from Merchants, who bestirre themselves to get an
estate, run to and fro, first in one land, then in another, wherever they
hear of any thing to be got, thither they post, though to the ends of the
earth: Thus must the soul run from one duty to another, one while read, and
anon meditate of what he has read, then pray over his meditations, and ask
counsel after all. What is the meaning of this, and how understand you that?
Non schola Epicuri fecit magnos viros sed contubernium. There is more light got
sometimes by a short conference with the Preacher, then by his whole Sermon. Be
sure thou compass all the means for knowledge within the walk of thy
endeavor. In this thy search for knowledge observe three things.

Rachel is fair, but barren. Not to be known and admired by others for thy
stature in knowledge above thy Brethren, verily it is too base an end to aim
at in seeking knowledge, especially such as is the knowledge of God and Christ.
To see a Heathen study for knowledge in Philosophy, and then carry all his
labor to this market, and think himself rewarded with obtaining the name for a
wise man, is though base, yet more tolerable: but for one that knows God, and
what it is to enjoy him, for such a one to content himself with a blast or two
of sorry man's vain breath, this is folly with a witness, look thou fliest
higher in thy end then so. Labor for knowledge that thou may fear God whom
thou know, thus David, Psalm. 119.33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy
statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end. The Word of God is called a light
unto our feet, not to our tongues merely to talk of, but feet to walk by;
Endeavor for it, not that thou may spread thy own name, but celebrate Gods
As David promises, when he understands the precepts of God, then he will talk
of his wondrous works, he will trumpet the fame of them, and thereby awaken
others to enquire after God.

Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. Some are in a
good mood (may be) and they will look into the Bible, and read a chapter or
two, and away they go for a week, and never practice it more; like some boys
if at School one day truant all the week after: is it any wonder such thrive
not in knowledge? It is a good speech of Bernard, Tantum distat studium a
lectione, quantum amicitia ab hospitio, socialis affectio a fortuit a
salutatione. The study of the Word, and the reading of it differs as much, as
the friendship of such who every day converse lovingly together, does from the
acquaintance one has with a stranger at an Inn, or whom he salutes as he
passes by in the street. If you will get knowledge indeed, you must not only
salute the Word now and then, but walk with it, and enter into daily converse
with it. The three men (who were indeed Angels) that stood by Abraham, as he
sat at his Tent-door, were reserved, and strange, till Abraham invited them
into his Tent, and entertained them friendly; and then Christ who was one among
them (as appears by the Name Jehovah given him in several verses, and also by
what he promised he would do for Sarah, ver. 10. not what God would do, which
if a created Angel he would) begins to discover himself to Abraham, and reveal
his secrets to him. That soul above others shall be acquainted with the secrets
of God in his Word, that does not slightly read the Word, and as it were
complement with it, at his tent-doore, but desires more intimacy with it, and
therefore entertaines it within his soul by frequent meditating of it. David
compares the Word for sweetness to the honey and the honey-combe. Indeed it is
so full, that at first reading some sweetness will now and then drop from it,
but he that does not press it by meditation, leaves the most behind.

Tertullian says in another case, pudoris magis memores quam salutis, more
tender of their reputation then their salvation, who are more ashamed to be
thought ignorant, then careful to have it cured.

God makes manifest (says Paul) the savor of his knowledge by us in every
place, 2 Cor. 2.14. Let men talk of the Spirit what they please. He will at
last be found a quencher of the Spirit, that is, a despiser of Prophecy; they
both stand close together, 1 These. 5.19, 20. Quench not the Spirit. Despise not
Prophesying. But it is not enough, to sit under the means; Woeful experience
teaches us this, there are some no Sun will tan, they keep their old
complexion under the most shining and burning light of the Word preached, as
ignorant and profane as those that never saw Gospel-day; and therefore if thou will receive any spiritual advantage by the Word, take heed how thou hear.

First, Look thou be a wakefull hearer. Is it any wonder he should go away
from the Sermon no wiser then he came, that sleeps the greatest part of it
away, or hears betwixt sleeping and waking? It must be in a dream sure, if
God reveals any thing of his mind to him. So indeed God did to the Fathers of
old, but it was not as they profanely slept under an Ordinance. O take heed of
such irreverence. He that composeth himself to sleep (as some do) at such a
time, or he that is not humbled for it, and that deeply; both of them betray a
base and low esteem they have of the Ordinance. Surely thou think but
meanly of what is delivered, if it will not keep thee awake, yea, of God
himself, whose message it is. See how thou art reproved by the awful carriage
of a Heathen, and that a King. Ehud did but say to Eglon, I have a message from
God unto thee, And he arose out of his seat, Judge 3.20. And thou clapest
down on thy seat to sleep; O how dare thou put such an affront upon the
great God? How often did you fall asleep at dinner, or telling your money? And is
not the Word of God worth more then these? I should wonder if such
Sermon-sleepers do dream of any thing but hellfire. It Is dangerous you know
to fall asleep with a candle burning by our side; some have been so burnt in
their beds; but more dangerous to sleep while the candle of the Word is shining
so near us. What if you should sink down dead like Eatychus? here is no Paul
to raise you as he had; and that you shall not, where is your security?

Secondly, Thou must be an attentive hearer. He that is awake, but wanders with
his eye or heart, what does he but sleep with his eyes open? It were as good
the servants should be asleep in his bed, as when up, not to mind his Masters
business. When God intends a soul good by the Word, he draws such a one to
listen and hearken heedfully to what is delivered; as we see in Lydia, who
('it is said) attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. And those, Luke
1948. The people were attentive to hear him. They did hang on him as you shall
see Bees on some sweet flower, or as young birds on the bills of their dammes
as they feed them; that is, the soul which shall get light and life by the
Word. Hear ye children, and attend to know understanding, Prove. 4.1. Labor
therefore in hearing the Word to fix thy quicksilver-minde, and set thy self
to hear, as it is said Jehosaphat did to pray; and that thou may, before
thou go, get thy heart into some deep sense of thy spiritual wants,
especially of thy ignorance of the things of God, and thy deplored condition by
reason of it; till the heart be touched, the mind will not be fixed. Therefore
you may observe, it is said, God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended,
Acts 16.14. The Mind goes of the Wills errand; we spend our thoughts upon what
our hearts propose. If the heart has no sense of its ignorance, or no desires
after God, no wonder such a one listens not what the Preacher says; his heart
sends his mind another way. They sit before thee as my people (says God) but
their heart goes after their covetousness; They do not come out of such an
intent or desire to hear for any good to their souls, then they would apply
themselves wholly to the work; no, it is their covetousness has their hearts;
and therefore as some idle servant, when he has waited on his Master; brought
him to his pew, then he goes out to his good fellows at the Alehouse, and
comes no more till Sermon be almost done: so do the thoughts of most when they
go to the Ordinance, they slip out in the street, market or shop, you may find
them any where but about the duty before them, and all because these have their
hearts more then God and his Word.

Thirdly, Thou must be a retentive hearer, without this the work will ever be
to begin again. Truths to a forgetful hearer are as a seal set on water, the
impression lasts no longer then the seal is on; the Sermon once done, and all
is undone; be therefore very careful to fasten what thou hear on thy
memory; which that thou may do,

Can a woman forget her child, or a maid her ornaments, or a bride her
attire? No, they love them too well: Were the truths of God thus precious to
thee, thou would with David, think of them day and night. Even when the
Christian through weakness of memory cannot remember the very words he hears,
to repeat them; ye then he keeps the power and savor of them in his spirit;
as when sugar is dissolved in wine, you cannot see it, but you may taste it;
when meat is eaten and digested, it is not to be found as it was received, but
the man is cheered and strengthened by it, more able to walk and work then
before, by which you may know it is not lost: so you may taste the truths the
Christian heard in his spirit, see them in his life. Perhaps if you ask him
what the particulars were the Minister had about faith, mortification,
repentance, and the like, he cannot tell you; yet this you may find, his heart
is more broken for sin, more enabled to rely on the promises, and now weaned
from the world. As that good woman answered one, that coming from Sermon, ask't
her what she remembered of the Sermon? said, she could not at present recall
much, but she heard that which should make her reform some things as soon as
she came home.

David got more wisdom then his teachers. Observe what truth, what Scripture
is cleared to thee in the Sermon more then before, take some time in secret to
converse with it, and make it thereby familiar to thy understanding. Meditation
to the Sermon is what the harrow is to the seed, it covers those truths, which
else might have been picked or washed away. I am afraid there are many proofs
turned down at a Sermon, that are hardly turned up, and looked on any more, when
the Sermon is done; and if so, you make others believe you are greater traders
for your souls, then you are indeed; as if one should come to a shop and lay by
a great deal of rich ware, and when he has done, goes away, and never calls
for it. O take heed of such doings. The hypocrite cheats himself worst at last.



CHAP. VI. Of the Spirituality of the devils nature, and their extreme
wickedness.
Against spiritual wickedness.
THese words are the fourth branch in the deseription, Spiritual wickednesses,
and our contest or combat with them as such expressed by the adversative
particle [ Against] in the Greek, (...) word for word; Against the Spirituals
of wickedness, which is, say some, against wicked spirits; that is, true, but
not all. I conceive with many Interpreters, not only the spiritual nature of
the devil, and the wickedness thereof to be intended, but also, yea, chiefly
the nature and kind of those sins, which these wicked spirits do most usually
and vigourously provoke the Saints unto, and they are the spirituals of
wickedness, not those gross fleshly sins, which the herd of beastly sinners
like swine wallow in; but sin spirituallized, and this, because it is not
(...), but (...), not spirits, but spirituals. The words present us with these
three doctrinal Conclusions.







SECT. I.
The holy Angels, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits? The evil:
There came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade
him, 1 Kings 22.21. that spirit was a devil. How often is the devil called the
unclean spirit, foul spirit, lying spirit, etc. Sin did not alter their
substance, for then, as one says well, that nature and substance which
transgrest could not be punished.

Handle and see me (says Christ to his disciples, that thought they had seen a
Spirit) a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.39. If
they were not thus immaterial, how could they enter into bodies and possess
them, as the Scripture tells us they have, even a legion into one man? Luke
8.30. one body cannot thus enter into another.

Col. 1.18. the fall of some from their first estate, Jude 6. and the standing
of others called the Elect Angels; The happiness of the one, who behold Gods
face; and their employment, are sent out to attend on the Saints as servants on
their Masters heirs, Heb. 1. The misery of the other, reserved in chains of
darkness unto the judgment of the great day; and their present work, which is
to do mischief to the souls and bodies of men, as far as they are permitted;
all which show their subsistence plain enough. But so immerst is sorry man in
flesh, that he will not easily believe what he sees not with his fleshly eyes;
upon the same account we may deny the being of God himself, because invisible.



Fourthly, they are, though entire spiritual substances, yet finite, being but
creatures. God only is the uncreated, infinite, and absolutely simple Spirit,
yea Father of all other spirits.

Now from this spiritual nature of the devil, we may further see what a
dreadful enemy we have to grapple with.

Jude says of wicked men, may be said of them; What they know naturally in
these things they corrupt themselves. They know the holiness of God, but love
him not for it, as the Elect Angels do, and themselves by Creation did. They
know the evil of sin, and love it not the less; but though they are such
fools for themselves, yet have subtilty too much for all the Saints on Earth,
if we had not a God to play our game for us.

throwing burning coals of wrath and fury about with thy inflamed tongue,
where was it set on fire but of hell? When thou art hurried like the swine into
the precipice, and even choakt with thy own drunken vomit, who but the devil
rides thee?

Joseph of Herod. Persecuting men walk a turn or two upon the stage, and are
called off by death, and there is an end of all their plots; but devils die
not, they will hunt thee to thy grave, and when thou die they will meet thee
in another world, to accuse and torment thee there also.

Dioclesian, because he saw he did but mow a meadow, that grew the thicker for
the cutting down (as Tertullian speaks of the Christians martyred) he throws
away his Scepter in a pet. Charles the fifth did the like (some say) upon the
same reason, because he could not root out the Lutherans. But the devils spirit
is never cowed, nor he weary of doing mischief, though he has never stood
still since first he began his walk to and fro the world. O what would become
of us if a God were not at our back, who is infinitely more the devils odds
then he ours?

SECT. II.
The wicked one, Mat. 13.19. As God is called the holy one, because none holy
as the Lord. So, the devil the wicked one, because he is a none such in sin.
In a few particulars let us endeavor to take the height of the devils sin,
and the rather that we may judge of the degrees of sins, and sinners among the
sons of men, the nearer God in holiness, the more holy; the liker the devil,
the more wicked.

the father of lies, as those who found out any Art, are called the father of
it. Jubal the father of all such as handle the harp, and organ; he invented
Music; and this is a dreadful aggravation, because they sinned without a
Tempter. And though man is not in such a degree capable of this aggravation,
yet some men sin after the very similitude of the devils transgression in
this respect, who as Saint Paul, Romans 1.30. styles them, are inventers of evil
things. Indeed sin is an old trade, found out to our hand; but as in other
trades and arts, some famous men arise, who add to the inventions of others,
and make trades and arts (as it wtre) new; so there ever are some infamous in
their generation, that make old sins new by superadding to the wickedness of
others. Uncleanness is an old sin from the beginning, but the Sodomites will
be filthy in a new way, and therefore it carries their name to this day. Some
invent new errrors, others new oaths, such as are of their own coining, hot
out of the mint, they scorn to swear after the old fashion. Others new
devices of perseuting, as Julian had a way by himself different from all before
him; and to the end of the world every age will exceed other in the degrees of
sinning Ishmael and the mockers of the old world, were but children and
bunglers to the scoffers and cruel mockers of the last time. Well take heed of
showing thy wit in inventing new sins, lest thou stir up God to invent new
punishments. Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment to the
workers of iniquity? Job 31.3. Sodom sinned after a new mode, and God destroys
them after a new way, sends hell from above upon them. Some have invented new
opinions, Monstrous errors, and God has suited their monstrous errors with
births as monstrous of their own body.

the work of the devil, whoever commits it; as the house goes by the name of
the Master-workman, though he uses his servants hands to build it. O take heed
of soliciting others to sin; thou take the Devils office (as I may say) out
of his hand: let him do it himself if he will; make not thy self so like him.
To tempt another is worse then to sin thy self. It speaks sin to be of
great growth in that man, that does it knowingly and willingly. Herbs and
flowers shed not their seed till ripe, creatures propagate not, till of stature
and age. What do those, that tempt others, but diffuse their wicked opinions
and practices, and as it were raise up seed to the devil; thereby-to keep up
the name of their infernal Father in the world? this shows sin is mighty in
them indeed. Many a man though so cruel to his own soul as to be drunk or
swear, yet will not like this in a child or servant; what are they then but
devils incarnate, who teach their children the devils Catechism, to swear and
lie, drink and drab? If you meet such, be not afraid to call them (as Paul did
Elymas, when he would have perverted the Deputy) children of the devil, full of
all subtilty and mischief, and enemies of all righteousness. O do you not know
what you do, when you tempt? I Will tell you. you do that, which you cannot undo
by your own repentance; thou poisonest one with error, initiatest another in
the devils School, (Alehouse I mean) but afterward may be thou see thy
mistake, and recantest thy error, thy folly, and give over thy drunken
trade; art thou sure now to rectify and convert them with thy self? alas poor
creatures! this is out of thy power, they may be will say as he (though he did
it upon a better account) that was solicited to turn back to popery by him,
who had before persuaded him to renounce the same, You have given me one turn,
but shall not give me another. And what a grief to thy spirit will it be, to
see these going to hell on thy errand, and thou not able to call them back?
thou may cry out as Lam^ch, I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young
man to my hurt. Nay, when thou art asleep in thy grave, he whom thou seducedst
may have drawn in others, and thy name may be quoted to commend the opinion and
practice to others, by which (as it is said, though in another sense, Abel
being dead, yet speaks) thou may, though dead, sin in those that are
alive, generation after generation. A little spark kindled by the error of
one, has cost the pains of many ages to quench it, and when thought to be out,
has broke forth again.



uncessantly feeds this, but here is a glass that will give us the shape of
our hearts truly like themselves. See thou the monstrous pitch and height of
wickedness that is in the devil, all this there is in the heart of every man,
there is no less wickedness potentially in the tamest sinner on earth, then
in the devils themselves, and that one day thou whoever thou art wilt show to
purpose, if God prevent thee not by his renewing grace, thou art not yet
fledged, thy wings are not grown to make thee a flying Dragon* but thou art of
the same brood, the seed of this serpent is in thee, and the devil begets a
child like himself; thou yet stand in a soil not so proper for the
ripening of sin, which will not come to its fullness till transplanted unto
hell. Thou who art here so maidenly and modest, as to blush at some sins out
of shame, and forbear the acting of others out of fear: when there thou shall
see thy case as desperate as the devil does his, then thou will spit out thy
blasphemies with which thy nature is stuffed, with the same malice that he does.
The Indians have a conceit that when they die, they shall be transformed into
the deformed likeness of the devil, therefore in their language they have the
same word for a dead man and the devil; sin makes the wicked like him before
they come there, but indeed they will come to their countenance more fully
there, when those flames shall wash off that paint, which here hides their
complexion. The Saints in heaven shall be like the Angels in their alacrity,
love and constancy to serve God, and the damned like the devils in sin as
well as punishment. This one consideration might be of excellent use to
unbottome a sinner, and abase him so as never to have high thought of himself.
It is easy to run down a person whose life is wicked, and convince him of
the evil of his actions, and make him confess what he does is evil; but here
is the thicket we lose him in, he will say, it is true, I am overseen, I do what
I should not, God forgive me: but my heart is good. Thy heart good, sinner? and
so is the devils, his nature is wicked and thine as bad as his. These pimples
in thy face show the heat of thy corrupt nature within, and without
Gospel-physick, the blood of Christ applied to thee, thou will die a Leper;
none but Christ can give thee a new heart, till which thou will every day grow
worse and worse. Sin is an hereditary disease that increases with age. A young
sinner will be an old devil.

Manasses, or the worst of sinners, as in pardoning, so in preventing the same
cursed nature with theirs, before it gave fire on God with those bloody sins
which they committed. That thou did not act such outrageous sins, thou art
beholden to Gods gracious surprise, and not the goodness of thy nature which
has the devils stamp on it, for which God might have crushed thee, as we do the
brood of Serpents before they sting, knowing what they will do in time. Who
will say that Faux suffered unjustly, because the Parliament was not blown up?
it was enough that the materials for that Massacre were provided, and he taken
there with match and fire about him ready to lay the train; and can thou say
when God first took hold on thee, that thou had not those weapons of
rebellion about thee, a nature fully charged with enmity against God, which in
time would have made its own report of what for present lay like unfired ponder
silent in thy bosom, O Christian, think of this, and be humbled for thy
villainous nature, and say, Blessed be God that sent his Spirit and grace so
timely to stay thy hand, (as Abigail to David) while thy nature meditated
nothing but war against God and his laws.

sin, and give golden promises what they shall have in his service with which
silly souls are won: but how few ask their souls, Whom do I sin against? what
is the devils design in drawing me to sin? Shall I tell thee? do thou
think it is thy pleasure, or profit he desires in thy sinning? alas, he means
nothing less, he has greater plots in his head then so. He has by his
Apostasy proclaimed war against God, and he brings thee by sinning to
espouse his quarrel, and to jeopard the life of thy soul in defense of his
pride and lust; which that he may do, he cares no more for the damnation of thy
soul, then the great Turk does to see a company of his slaves cut off for the
carrying on of his design in a siege: And dare thou venture to go into the
field upon his quarrel against God? O Earth, tremble thou at the presence of
the Lord. This bloody Joab sets thee, where never any came off alive. O stand
not where Gods bullets fly, throw down thy arms, or thou art a dead man.
Whatever others do, O ye Saints, abhor the thoughts of sinning willingly,
which when you do, you help the devil against God, and what more unnatural then
for a child to be seen in arms against his father?

CHAP. VII. Of Satan's plot to defile the Christians spirit with heart-sinnes.
The second Point follows.
THat these wicked Spirits do chiefly annoy the Saints with, Doct. 2.
and provoke them to spiritual sins. Sins may be called spiritual upon a
double account; either from the subject wherein they are acted, or from the
object about which they are conversant.

First, in regard of the subject; when the spirit or heart is the stage whereon
sin is acted, this is a spiritual sin; such are all impure thoughts, vile
affections and desires; though the object be fleshly lust, yet are spiritual
sins, because they are purely acts of the soul and spirit, and break not
forth unto the outward man.

Secondly, in regard of the object, when that is spiritual and not carnal, such
as are idolatry, error, spiritual pride, unbelief, etc. both which Paul calls
the filthiness of the spirit, and distinguishes them from filthiness of the
flesh, 2 Cor. 7.1.

SECT. I.
First, of the first, Satan labors what he can to provoke the Christian to
heart-sinnes* to stir up and foment these inward motions of sin in the
Christians bosom; hence it is he can go about no duty but these (his Impes I
may call them) haunt him, one motion or other darts in to interrupt him, as
Paul tells us of himself, When he would do good, evil was present with him; if
a Christian should turn back, when ever these cross the way of him, he should
never go on his journey to heaven. It is the chief game the devil has left to
play against the children of God; now his field-army is broken, and his
commanding power taken away which he had over them, to come out of these his
holds where he lies sculking, and fall upon their rear with these suggestions.
He knows his credit now is not so great with the soul, as when it was his
slave; then no drudgery work was so base that it would not do at his command,
but now the soul is out of his bondage, and he must not think to command
another servant as his own: No, all he can do is to watch the fittest season
(when the Christian least suspects) and then to present some sinful motion
handsomely dressed up to the eye of the soul, that the Christian may (before he
is aware) take this brat up and dandle it in his thoughts, till at last he
makes it his own by embracing it; and this he knows will defile the soul, and
may be this boy sent in at the window may open the door to let in a greater
thief; or if he should not so prevail, yet the guilt of these heart-sinnes,
yea their very neighborhood will be a sad vexation to a gracious heart, whose
nature is so pure that it abhorres all filthiness (so that to be haunted with
such motions is, as if a living man should be chained to a stinking carcass,
that where ever he goes he must draw that after him) and whose love is so dear
to Christ that it cannot bear the company of those thoughts without amazement
and horror, which are so contrary and abusive to his beloved. This makes Satan
so desirous to be ever raking in the unregenerate part, that as a dunghill
stirred it may offend them both with the noisome streams which arise from it.

SECT. II.
Rahab hid the spies, and sent the King of Jerichoes messengers to pursue them,
as if they had been gone? Perhaps thou can say, the adulterer, the murderer
is not here, thou have sent these sins away long ago, and all this while thou
hidest them in the love of thy soul; know it or thou shall another day know it
to thy cost, thou art stark naught. If there were a spark of the life of God or
the love of Christ in thy bosom, though thou could not hinder such motions
in thy soul, yet thou would not conceal them, much less nourish them in thy
bosom; when overpowered by them thou would call in help from heaven against
these destroyers of thy soul.

The thought of foolishness is sin, Prove. 24.9. Mercury is poison in the
water distilled, as well as in the gross body. Uncleanness, covetousness,
murder, are such in the heart as well as in the outward act; every point of
hell, is hell. Secondly, consider thy spirit is the seat of the holy Spirit. He
takes up the whole heart for his lodging, and it is time for him to be gone when
he sees his house let over his head. Defile not thy spirit, till thou art weary
of his company. Thirdly, consider, there may be more wickedness in a sin of
the heart, then of the hand and outward man; for the aggravation of these is
taken from the behavior of the heart in the act. The more of the heart and
spirit is let out, the more malignity is let in to any sinful act. To
back-slide in heart, is more then to back-slide; it is the comfort of a poor
soul when tempted and troubled for his relapses, that though his foot slides
back, yet his heart turns not back, but faceth Heaven and Christ at the same
time; so to err in the heart, Heb. 3.10.
is worse then to have an error in the head; therefore God aggravates Isreal's
sin with this, They do always err in their heart. Their hearts run them
upon the error, they liked idolatry, and so were soon made to believe what
pleased them best. As on the contrary, the more of the heart and spirit is in
any holy service, the more real goodness there is in it, though it f^ll short
of others in the outward expression. The widows two mites surpassed all the
rest, Christ himself being judge; so in sin, though the internal acts of
sin in thoughts and affections seem light upon man's balance if compared with
outward acts, yet these may be so circumstanciated that they may exceed the
other in Gods account; Peter lays the accent of Magus his sin on the wicked
thought, which his words betrayed to be in his heart, Pray God, if perhaps the
thought of thy heart may be forgiven, Act. 8.22. Saul's sin in sparing Agag,
and saving the best of the sheep and oxen, which he was commanded to destroy,
was materially a far less sin then David's adultery and murder, yet it is
made equal with a greater then both, even witchcraft it self, 1 Samuel 15.23.
and whence received his sin such a dye, but from the wickedness of his
heart, that was worse then David's when deepest in the temptation? Fourthly, if
Satan get into thy spirit and defile it, O how hard will thou find it to stay
there? thou have already sipt of his broth, and now art more likely to be
overcome at last to sit down and make thy full meal of that, which by tasting
has vitiated thy palate already. It were strange if while thou art musing and
thy heart hot with the thoughts of lust, the fire should not break forth at thy
lips, or worse.



Not yet Lord, the heart of such a one cries, as Austin confessed of himself.
Sin is as truly the offspring of the soul as children are of our bodies, and
it finds as much favor in our eyes, yea more, for the sinner can slay a son
to save a sin alive, Micah 6.7. and of all sins none are more made on then
these heart sins.

First, because they are the firstborn of the sinful heart, and the chiefest
strength of the soul is laid out upon them.

Secondly, because the heart has more scope in them then in outward acts. The
proud man is staked down often to a short state, and cannot ruffle it in the
world, and appear to others in that pomp he would; but within his own bosom he
can set up a stage, and in his own foolish heart present himself as great a
Prince as he pleases. The malicious can kill in his desires as many in a few
minutes, as the Angel smote in a night of Senacheribs host. Nero thus could
slay all Rome on the block at once.

Thirdly, these sins stay with the soul when the other leave it; when the
sinner has cripled his body with drunkenness and filthiness. and proves
miles emeritus, cannot follow the devils campany longer in those ways, then
these cursed lusts will entertain the sinner with stories of his old pranks and
pleasures. In a word, these inward lusts of the heart have nothing but the
conscience of a Deity to quell them. Other sins put the sinner to shame before
men, and as some that believed on Christ, durst not confess him openly because
they loved the praise of men, so there are sinners who are kept from vouching
their lusts openly, for the same tenderness to their reputation; but here is
no fear of that, if they can but forget that heaven sees them, or persuade
themselves there is no danger from thence; the coast then is clear, they may be
as wicked as they please. These make inward sins so hugged and embraced. If
thou therefore can find thy heart set against these, I may venture to call
thee a Christian, and for thy help against them,

David so often crying out in this respect to order his steps in his Word, to
unite his heart to his fear, to en^^ine his heart to his testimonies. As a
servant, when the child he tends is troublesome, and will not be ruled by him,
calls out to the father to come to him, who no sooner speaks but all is whist
with him; No doubt holy David found his heart beyond his skill or power, that
makes him so often do its errand to God. Indeed God has promised thus much to
his children, to order their steps for them, Psalm. 37.22. only he looks they
should bring their hearts to him for that end. Commit thy work to the Lord, and
thy thoughts shall be established, Prove. 16.3. or ordered. Art thou setting thy
face toward an Ordinance, where thou art sure to meet Satan, who will be
disturbing thee with worldly thoughts, and may be worse? Let God know from thy
mouth whither thou art going, and what thy fears are; never does the soul
march in so goodly order, as when it puts it self under the conduct of God.

Job knew his eye and his thoughts were like to go together, and therefore to
secure one, he covenants with the other, Job 31, 1.



David mourned for Abner, all Israel it is said understood that day, that it was
not of the King to stay Abner: Thy mourning for them will show these thoughts
are not so much of thee, as of Satan.

thoughts are waste which help thee not to do Gods work withal in thy general
or particular calling. The Be will not sit on a flower where no honey can be
sucked, neither should the Christian. Why sit thou here idle (thou should
say to thy soul) when thou have so much to do for God and thy soul, and so
little time to dispatch it in?



John 2. but his time was not come. Good thoughts and meditations misplaced,
are like some interpretations of Scripture, good truths, but bad expositions;
they fit not the place they are drawn from, nor these the time. To pray when we
should hear, or be musing on the Sermon when we should pray, this is to rob God
one way to pay him another.



CHAP. VIII. How Satan labors to corrupt the Christians mind with error.
THe second sort of spiritual sins are such as are not only acted in the
spirit, but are conversant about spiritual objects proper to the souls nature
that is a spirit, and not laid out in carnal passions of fleshly lusts, in
which the soul acts but as a Pander for the body, and partakes of their
delights only by way of sympathy; for as the soul feels the bodies pains no
other way then by sympathy, so neither does it share in the pleasures of the
flesh by any proper taste it has of them, but only from its near neighborhood
with the body does sympathize with its joy; but in spiritual wickednesses that
corrupt the mind, here the soul moves in its own sphere, with a delight proper
to it self; and there are no less of these then the other. There is hardly a
fleshly lust, but has some spiritual sin analogical to it, as they say there
is no species of creatures on the land but may be pattern'd in the sea: Thus
the heart of man can produce spiritual sins answering carnal lusts; for
whoredom and uncleanness of the flesh, there is idolatry called in Scripture
spiritual adultery, from which the seat of Antichrist is called spiritual
Sodom; for sensual drunkenness, there is a drunkenness of the mind
intoxicating the judgment with error, a drunkenness of the heart in cares
and fears; for carnal pride in beauty, riches, honor, there is a spiritual
pride of gifts graces, etc. Now Satan in an especial manner assaults the
Christian with such as these; it would require a larger discourse then I can
allow to run over the several kinds of them; I shall of many pick out two or
three. As first, Satan labors to corrupt the mind with erroneous principles,
he was at work at the very first plantation of the Gospel, sowing his darnel,
as soon almost as Christ his wheat, which sprung up in pernicious errors, even
in the Apostles times, which made them take the weeding-hook into their hands,
and in all their Epistles labor to countermine Satan in this design. Now Satan
has a double design in this his endeavor to corrupt the minds of men,
especially Professors, with error.

SECT. I.
Psalm. 138.2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name. Every creature
bears the Name of God, but in his Word and truth therein contained it is writ at
length, and therefore he is more choice of this, then of all his other works;
he cares not much what becomes of the world and all in it, so he keeps his
Word, and saves his truth. Ere long we shall see the world on a light flame,
the heavens and earth shall pass away, but the Word of the Lord endures for
ever. When God will, he can make more such worlds as this is, but he cannot
make another truth, and therefore he will not lose one iota thereof. Satan
knowing this, sets all his wits on work to deface this truth, and disfigure it
by unsound doctrine. The Word is the glass in which we see God, and seeing him
are changed into his likeness by his Spirit. If this glass be cracked, then
our conceptions we have of God will mis-repesent him unto us, whereas the Word
in its native clearness sets him out in all his glory unto our eye.

Tim 1.7. Indeed the power of holiness in practice depends much on the
foundnesse of judgment. Godliness is the child of truth, and it must be
nursed, if we will have it thrive with no other milk then of its own mother.
Therefore we are exhorted to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may
grow, 1 Pet. 2.2. (...), if this milk be but a little dash't with error, it is
not so nutritive All error, how innocent soever any may seem, (like the Ivy)
draws away the strength of the souls love from holiness. Hosea tells us,
Whoredom and wine take away the heart; now error is spiritual adultery. Paul
speaks of his espousing them to Christ; when a person receives an error, he
takes a stranger into Christ's bed, and it is the nature of adulterous love to
take away the wises heart from her true husband, that she delights not in his
company so much as of her adulterous lover: and do we not see it at this day
fulfilled? do not many show more zeal in contending for one error, then for
many truths? how strangely are the hearts of many taken off from the ways of
God, their love cooled to the Ordinances and Messengers of Christ? and all this
occasioned by some corrupt principle got into their bosoms, which controuls
Christ and his truth, as Hagar and her son did Sarah and her child. Indeed
Christ will never enjoy true conjugal love from the soul, till like Abraham he
turns these out of doors. Error is not so innocent a thing as many think it;
it is as unwholesome food to the body, that poisons the spirits and surfeits
the whole body, which seldom passes away and not break out into sores. As the
knowledge of Christ carries a soul above the pollutions of the world, so
error entangles and betrays it to those lusts, whose hands it had escaped.

I hear (says Paul) there are divisions among you, and I partly believe it,
for there must be heresies, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. implying that divisions are the
natural issue of heresy. Error cannot well agree with error, except it be
against the truth, then indeed (like Pilate and Herod) they are easily made
friends, but when truth seems to be overcome, and the battle is over with that,
then they fall out among themselves, and therefore it is no wonder if it be so
troublesome a neighbor to truth. O Sirs, what a sweet silence and peace was
there among Christians a dozen years ago; me thinks the looking back to those
blessed days in this respect, (though they had also another way their
troubles, yet not so uncomfortable, because that storm united, this scatters
the Saints spirits) is joyous to remember in what unity and love Christians
walked, that the Persecutors of those times might have said, as their
Predecessors did of the Saints in primitive times, See how they love one
another; but now alas they may jeere and say, See how they that loved so dearly
are ready to pluck one another throats out.

SECT. II.
Use
The application of this shall be only in a word of exhortation to all,
especially you who bear the Name of Christ by a more eminent Profession of him.
O beware of this soul-infection, this leprosy of the head. I hope you do not
think it needless, for it is the disease of the times. This plague is begun,
yea, spreads apace; not a flock, a Congregation hardly that has not this scab
among them. Paul was a Preacher the best of us all may write after, and he
presses this home upon the Saints, yea, in the constant course of his
preaching it made a piece of his Sermon, Acts 20.30, 31. he sets us Preachers
also on this work: Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock; for I know
this, that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter; also of your own
selves shall men arise speaking perverse things; therefore watch. And then he
presents his own example, that he hardly made a Sermon for several years, but
this was part of it to warn every one night and day with tears. We need not
prophecy what Impostors may come upon the stage, when we go off: There are too
many at present above board of this gang, drawing disciples after them. And if
it be our duty to warn you of them, surely it is yours to watch, lest you by any
of them be led into temptation in this hour thereof, wherein Satan is let
loose in so great a measure to deceive the Nation. May you not as easily be
sowered with this leaven, as the disciples whom Christ bids beware? Are you
privileged above those famous Churches of Galatia and Corinth, many of which
were bewitched with false teachers, and in a manner turned to another Gospel?
Is Satan grown Orthodox, or have his instruments lost their cunning, who hunt
for souls? In a word, is there not a sympathy between thy corrupt heart and
error? Have thou not a disposition, which like the fomes of the earth, makes
it natural for these weeds to grow in thy soil. See thou not many prostrated
by this enemy, who sat upon the mountain of their faith, and thought it should
never have been removed, surely they would have took it ill to have been told
you are the men and women that will decry Sabbaths, which now ye count holy;
you will turn Pelagians, who now defy the name; you will despise Prophecy it
self, who now seem so much to honor the Prophets; you will throw family duties
out of doors, who dare not now go out of doors, till you have prayed there. Yet
these, and more then these are come to pass, and does it hot behove thee
(Christian) to take heed lest thou fallest also? and that thou may not,

They went out from us, (says Saint John) but they were not of us, for if they
had been of us they would no doubt have continued with us, 1 John 2.19 As if he
had said, they had some outward Profession, and common work of the Spirit with
us, which they have either lost or carried over to the devils quarters, but
they never had the unction of the sanctifying Spirit. By this, verse 20. he
distinguishes them, and comforts the sincere ones, who possibly might fear
their own fall by their departure: But ye have an unction from the Holy One,
and ye know all things. It Is one thing to know a truth, and another thing to
know it by unction. An hypocrite may do the former, the Saint only the latrer
It is this unction which gives the soul the savor of the knowledge of Christ;
those are the fit prey for Impostors, who are enlightened, but not enlivened. O
it is good to have the heart established with grace, this as an anchor will keep
us from being set a drift, and carried about with diverse and strange doctrines,
as the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 13.9.

Gal. 5.20. because it is occasioned by fleshly motives, and nourisht by carnal
food and fuel. Never any turned Heretic, but flesh was at the bottom, either
they served their belly, or a lust of pride; 'twas the way to Court, or secured
their estates, and saved their lives, as sometimes the reward of truth is fire
and faggot; some pad or other is in the straw when least seen, and therefore
it is no wonder that heresies should end in the flesh, which in a manner sprang
from it. The rheum in the head ascends in fumes from the stomach, and returns
thither, or unto the lungs which at last fret and ulcerate: Carnal affections
first send up their fumes to the understanding, clouding that, yea, bribing it
to receive such and such principles for truths, which embraced, fall down into
the life corrupting that with the ulcer of profaneness. So that, Christian, if
once thou can take off thy engagements to the flesh, and become a freeman,
so as not to give thy vote to gratify thy carnal fears or hopes, thou will
then be a sure friend to truth.

Tim. 4.3, 4. They shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables. Satan like a cunning thief draws the soul out of the road into
some lane or corner, and there robs him of the truth. By rejecting of one
Ordinance we deprive our selves of the blessing of all other: say not that thou
prayest to be led into truth, he will not hear thy prayer if thou turnest thine
ear from hearing the law. He that loves his child, when he sees him play the
truant, will whip him to school: If God loves a soul, he will bring him back to
the Word with shame and sorrow.

entertain strangers, for some have entertained Angels unawares, Heb. 13.3. but
he would not have us carried about with strange Doctrine, verse. 9. by this I am
sure some have entertained devils. I confess. it is not enough to reject a
doctrine, because strange to us, but ground we have to wait and enquire. Paul
marvelled that the Galatians were so soon removed from him, who had called them
unto the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel; they might sure have stayed till
they had acquainted Paul with it, and asked his judgment; what, no sooner an
Impostour come into the country and open his pack, but buy all his ware at
first sight? O friends, were it not more wisdom to pray such new notions over
and over again, to search the Word and our hearts by it, yea, not to trust our
own hearts, but call in counsel from others. If your Minister have not such
credit with you, yet the most holy, humble and established Christians you can
find. Error is like fish, which must be eaten new, or it will stink, When
those dangerous errors sprung up first in New England, O how unsettled were
many of the Churches? what an outis was made, as if some mine of gold had been
discovered; but in a while, when those errors came to their complexion, and it
was perceived whither they were bound, to destroy Churches, Ordinances, and
Power of Godliness: then such as feared God, who had stepped aside, returned
back with shame and sorrow.

CHAP. IX. Of Pride of Gifts, and how Satan tempts the Christian thereto.
THe second spiritual wickedness which Satan provokes unto, especially the
Saint, is spiritual pride. This was the sin made him of a blessed Angel a
cursed devil, and as it was his personal sin, so he chiefly labors to derive
it to the sons of men: and he so far prevailed on our first Parents, that ever
since this sin has and does claim a kind of regency in the heart, making use
both of bad and good to draw her chariot. First, of evil; Pride enters into the
labors of other sins, they do but work to make her brave, as subjects to
uphold the state and grandeur of their Prince: Thus you shall see some drudge
and droile, cheat, cosen, oppress; and what mean they? O it is to get an estate
to maintain their pride. Others fawn and flatter, lie, dissemble, and for what?
to help pride up some mount of honor. Again, it makes use of that which is
good, it can work with Gods own tools, his Ordinances, by which the holy
Spirit advances his Kingdom of grace in the hearts of his Saints. These often
are prostituted to pride. A man may be very zealous in prayer and painful in
preaching, and all the while pride is the Master whom he serves, though in Gods
livery. It can take Sanctuary in the holiest actions, and hide it self under
the skirt of virtue it self. Thus while a man is exercising his charity pride
may be the idol in secret for which he lavisheth out his gold so freely. It is
hard starving this sin, because there is nothing almost but it can live on;
nothing so base that a proud heart will not be lift up with, and nothing so
sacred but it will profane, even dare to drink in the bowls of the Sanctuary,
nay, rather then starve it will feed on the carcases of other sins; Difficile
valde vitatur peccatum, quod ex victoria vitiorum nascitur. This minion pride
will stir up the soul to resist, yea, in a manner kill some sins, that she may
boastingly show the head of them, and blow the creature up with the conceit of
himself above others; as the Pharisee who through pride bragged that he was not
as the Publicane; so that pride, if not looked to, will have to do every where,
and has a large sphere it moves in. Nothing indeed (without divine assistance)
the creature has or does, but will soon become a prey to this devourer; but I
am not to handle it in its latitude. Pride is either conversant about carnal
objects, as pride of beauty, strength, riches and such like, or about
spiritual; the latter we shall speak a little to. I confess for the former,
possibly a Saint may be catched in them, no sin to be slighted, yet not so
commonly, for ordinarily pride is of those perfections which are suitable, if
not proper to the state and calling we are in: thus the Musician, he is proud
of the skill he has in his Art, by which he excells others of his rank. The
Scholar, though he can play perhaps as well, yet is not proud of that, but
looks on it as beneath him; no, he is proud of his learning and choice notions,
and so of others. Now the life of a Christian as a Christian, is superior to
the life of man as a man; and therefore does not value himself by these which
are beneath him, but in higher and more raised perfections, which suit a
Christians calling. As a natural man is proud of perfections suitable to his
natural estate, as honor, beauty; so the Christian is prone chiefly, to be
puffed up with perfections suitable to his life; I shall name three: pride of
Gifts, pride of Grace, pride of Privileges; these are the things which Satan
chiefly labors to entangle him in.

SECT. I.
First, Pride of Gifts. By Gifts I mean those supernatural abilities, with
which the Spirit of God does enrich and endow the minds of men, for
edification of the body of Christ; of which gifts the Apostle tells us there is
great diversity, and all from the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4. There is not
greater variety of colors, and qualities in plants and flowers, with which the
earth like a carpet of needle work is variegated fOr the delight and service of
man, then there is of gifts in the minds of men, natural and spiritual to
render them useful to one another, both in civil societies and Christian
fellowship. The Christian as well as man is intended to be a sociable creature,
and for the better managing this spiritual Commonwealth among Christians; God
does wisely and graciously provide and impart gifts, suitable to the place
every one stands in to his brethren, as the vessels are larger or less in the
body natural, according to their place therein. Now Satan labors what he can
to taint these gifts, and fly-blow them with pride in the Christian, that so he
may spoil the Christians trade and commerce, which is mutually maintained by
the gifts and graces of one another. Pride of gifts hinders the Christians
trade, at least thriving by their commerce two ways.

First, pride of gifts is the cause why we do so little good with them to
others.

Secondly, why we receive so little good from the gifts of others.



parts and notions, and will not suffer him to stoop so low as to speak of
plain truths, or if he does, not plainly; he must have some fine lace, though
on a plain stuff, such a one may tickle the ear, but very unlikely to do real
good to the souls: alas, it is not that he attends.

Jezabel of pride be perceived to look out at the window in any exercise,
whether of preaching, prayer, or conference, it does beget a disdain in the
spirits of those that hear such a one both good and bad. It Is a sin very
odious to a gracious heart, and oft-times makes the stomach go against the
food; though good, through their abhorrency of that pride they see in the
instrument. It is indeed their weakness, but woe to them that by their pride
lead them into temptation! nay, those that are bad and may be in the same
kind, like not that in another which they favor in themselves, and so
prejudiced, return as bad as they went.

he resists the proud. Great gifts are beautiful as Rachel, but pride makes
them also barren like her. Either we must lay self aside, or God will lay us
aside.

sort of Professors, who are all to be served in a lordly dish of rare gifts.
The Church of Corinth was famous for gifts above other Churches, 1 Cor. 1. but
not in grace; none so charged for weakness in that, 1 Cor. 3.2. he calls them
carnal, babes in Christ, so weak, as not able to digest man's meat; I have fed
you, says Paul, with milk and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able to
bear it, neither yet now are ye able. Why? what is the matter? the reason
lies, verse 3. Ye are carnal, there is among you envy and strife, v.4. One
says, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollos. Pride makes them take parts, and
make sides, one for this Preacher, another for that, as they fancied one to
excel another. And this is not the way to thrive. Pride destroys love, and
love wanting edification is lost. The devil has made foul work in the Church
by this engine. Zanchy tells of one in Geneva, who being desired to go hear
Viretus, that preached at the same time with Calvin, answered his friend, If
Paul were to preach relicto Paulo Calvinum audirem: I would leave Paul himself
to hea^ Calvin, And will pride in the gifts of another so far transport, even
to the borders of blasphemy? what work then will pride make, when the gifts are
a man's own?

SECT. II.
a mercy may be wrapped up even in the meannes of thy gifts, or what temptations
their gifts expose them to, which God for ought I know may in mercy deny thee.
Joseph's coat made him finer then his brethren, but this caused all his trouble,
this set the Archers a shooting their arrows into his side; thus great gifts
lift a Saint up a little higher in the eyes of men, but it occasions many
temptations which thou meetest not with, that art kept low, what with envy
from their brethren, malice from Satan, and pride in their own hearts; I dare
say, none find so hard a work to go to heaven as such, much ado to bear up
against those waves and winds, while thou creepest along the shore under the
wind to heaven. It is with such as with some great Lord of little estate, a
meaner man often has money in his purse, when he has none, and can l^nd his
Lordship some at a need: great gifts and parts are titles of honor among men,
but many such may come and borrow grace and comfort of a mean gifted brother;
possibly the Preacher of his poor neighbor. O poor Christian, do not murmur or
envy them, but rather pity and pray for them, they need it more then others his
gifts are thine; thy grace is for thy self; thou art like a Merchant that has
his Factour goes to sea but he has his Adventure without hazard brought home.
Thou joynest with him in prayer, have the help of his gifts, but not the
temptation of his pride.



promise of this and another world, but gifts come on liking; though a father
will not cast off his child, yet he may take away his fine coat and ornaments,
if proud of them.

Gifts for the edifying of the body. Suppose a man should leave a chest of
money in your hands to be distributed to others, what folly is it in this man
to put this into his own Inventory, and applaud himself that he has so much
money? Poor soul, thou art but Gods Executour, and by that time thou have paid
all the Legacies, thou will see little left for thee to brag and boast of.



O woman, (says Christ) great is thy faith! not count and flourishing* thy
language. It were good after our duties, to sort the Ingredients of which they
are made up, what grace contributed, and what gifts, and what pride, and when
all the heterogeneal stuff is severed, you shall see in what a little compass
the actings of grace in our duties will lie.

thy self. It destroys Christian love, and stabs our fellowship with the Saints
to the heart: A proud man has not room enough to walk in company, because the
gifts of others he thinks stand in his way. Pride so distempers the palate,
that it can relish nothing that is drawn from another vessel.

to hide pride from man. Job 33.17.19
As you do with your hot-metall'd horses, ride them over plowed lands to tame
them, and then you can sit safely on their back. If Gods honor be in danger
through thy pride, then expect a rod, and most likely the affliction shall be
in that, which will be most grievous to thee, in the thing thou art proud of.
Hezekiah boasted of his treasure, God sends the Chaldeans to plunder him, Jonah
fond of his gourd, and that is smitten: and if thy Spirit be blown up with
pride of gifts, thou art in danger of having them blasted, at least in the
opinion of others, whose breath of applause (possibly) was a means to overset
thy unballast spirit.

SECT. III.
But how would you direct us against this?



eyes are full of the adulteress, and cannot cease from sin; a proud heart
is full of himself, his own abilities cast their shadow before him, they are in
his eye wherever he goes, the great subject and theme of his thoughts is what
he is, and what he has above others, applauding himself as Bernard confesses,
that (when one would think he had little leisure for such thoughts) even in
preaching, pride would be whispering in his ear Been fecisti Bernarde, O well
done Bernard. Now have a care (Christian) of chatting with such company. Run
from such thoughts as from a Bear. If the devil can get thee to stand on this
pinnacle, while he presents thee with the glory of thy spiritual seize and
endowments for thee to gaze on them, thy weak head w^ll soon turn round in
pride: and therefore labor to keep the sense of thy own infirmities lively in
thy soul to divert the temptation. As those who are subject to some kind of
fits, carry about them things proper for the disease, that when the fit is
coming, (which often is occasioned with a sweet perfume) they may use them for
their help. Sweet sents are not more dangerous for them, then any thing that
may applaud thee is to thy soul: Have a care therefore not only of wearing such
thoughts in thy own bosom, but also of sitting by others, that bring the sweet
sent of thy perfections to thee by their flattery.

1 Samuel 17.28.
David's brethren were mistaken in him in deed, but often the pride and
naughtiness of the heart breaks out at this door. Christ's carnal friends bid
Christ show himself; pride loves to climb up, not as Zaecheus, to see Christ,
but to be seen himself. The fool (Solomon tells us) has no delight in
understanding, but that his heart may discover it self, Prove. 18.2. Pride would
be some body, and therefore comes abroad to court the multitude, whereas
humility delights in privacy; as the leaves do cover and shade the fruits, that
some hand must gently lift up them before they can see the fruit: so should
humility and a holy modesty conceal the perfections of the soul, till a hand
of Providence by some call invites them out. There is a pride in naked gifts as
well as in naked breasts and backs: humility is a necessary veil to all other
graces; and therefore first, Christian, look whenever thou come forth to
public duty, that thou have a call; it is obedience to be ready to answer,
when God calls thee forth, but it is pride to run before God speaks. Secondly,
when called earnestly implore divine strength against this enemy: shun not a
duty for fear of pride, thou may show it in the very seeming to escape it,
but go in the strength of God against it; there is more hope of overcoming it
by obedience then disobedience.

Aaron and Miriam could not bear Moses his honor, Numb. 12.1. that was the
business, though they pick a quarrel with him about his wife, (because an
Ethiopian) as appears plainly, v. 2. Has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses?
has he not spoken also by us? They thought Moses went away with too much of
the honor, and did repine that God should use him more then themselves. And
it is observable, that the lusting for flesh broke out among the mixed multitude
and baser sort of people, Numb. 11.4, 5. but this of pride and envy took fire
in the bosoms of the most eminent for place and Piety. O what need then have
we, poor creatures, to watch our hearts when we see such precious servants of
God led into temptation? The Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy, James
4.5. Our corrupt nature is ever putting on to this sin. It Is as hard to keep
our hearts and this sin asunder, as it is to hinder two lovers from meeting
together: Thatch is not more ready to be fired with every flash of lightening,
then the heart to be kindled at the shining forth of any excelling gift or
grace in another. It was one of the first windows that corrupt nature looked
out at, a sin that shed the first blood; Cains envy hatched Abels murder. Now if
ever thou meanest to get the mastery of this sin;

The Spirit within us lusts to envy, but he gives more grace, v. 5. And
therefore sit not down tamely under this sin, it is not unconquerable. God can
give thee more grace then thou have sin, more humility then thou have pride. Be
but so humble as cordially to beg his grace, and thou shall not be so proud, as
wickedly to envy his gifts or grace in others.

face, (would thou look wishly on it) to make thee out of love with it. For
first, this envying of others gifts, casts great contempt upon God, and that
more ways then one.

Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? as if
Christ had said, what has any to do to cavil at my disposure of what is not
theirs but mine to give?



Miriam her sin by her punishment, she went to bespatter Moses, that shone so
eminently with the gifts and graces of God, and God spits in her sace, Numb.
12. yea, fills her all over with a noisome scab. Do thou cordially wish well
to the honor of God? why then hangest thou thy head, and do not rather
rejoice to see him glorified by the gifts of others? Could a Heathen take it so
well, when himself was passed by, and others chosen to places of honor and
government, that he said, he was glad his City could find so many more worthy
then himself? and shall a Christian repine that any are found fit to honor God
besides himself?

heat of nature. Charity envieth not, 1 Cor. 13. How can it when it lives where
it loves? and when thou ceasest to love, thou beginnest to hate and kill him,
and do not thou tremble to be found a murderer at last?

Joseph's cause against his envious brethren, and David's against wicked Saul.
Thy self only have real hurt.

Toll invidiam, mea tua sunt, and tua mea: What thou have is mine, and what I
have thine; when envy is gone. Whereas now, like the leach, (which they say
draws out the worst blood) thou suckest nothing, but what swells thy mind with
discontent, and is after vomited out in strife and contention. O what a sad
thing is it, that one should go from a precious Sermon, a sweet prayer, and
bring nothing away but a grudge against the instrument God used; as we see in
the Pharisees and others at Christ's preaching.

He that is cruel troubles his own flesh, Prove. 11.17. The envious man does it
to purpose, he sticks the honor and esteem of others as thorns in his own
heart, he cannot think of them without pain and anguish, and he must needs
pine that is ever in pain.

Joseph whom they envied? that very pride which made them disdain the thought
of bowing to his sheaf, made them stoop far lower, even to debase themselves as
low as hell, and be the devils instruments to sell their dear brother into
slavery, which might have been worse to him, (if God had not provided
otherwise,) then if they had sla^n him on the place. What an impotent mind and
cruel did Saul show against David, when once envy had envenomed his heart? from
that day which he heard David preferred in the women's Songs above himself, he
could never get that sound out of his head, but did ever after devote this
innocent man to death in his thoughts, who had done him no other wrong, but in
being an instrument to keep the crown on his head, by the hazard of his own
life with Goliath. O it is a bloody sin. It is the womb wherein a whole litter
of other sins are formed, Romans 1.29. full of envy, murder, debate, deceit,
malignity, etc. and therefore except you be resolved to bid the devil welcome
and his whole train, resist him in this, that comes before to take up quarters
for the rest.

CHAP. X. Of pride of Grace.
SEcondly, pride of grace. This is another way Satan assaults the Christian.
It Is true, grace cannot be proud, yet it is possible a Saint may be proud of his
grace, there is nothing the Christian has or does, but this worm of pride
will breed in it. The world we live in is corruptible, and all here is subject
to putrefie, as things kept in a rafty muggish room, subject them to mould. It
is not the nature of grace, but the salt of the Covenant keeps and preserves
the purity of it; in heaven indeed we shall be safe. But how can a Saint be
said to be proud of his grace? Then a soul is proud of his grace, when he
trusts in his grace. Trust and confidence is an incommunicable flower of Gods
Crown as Sovereign Lord, even among men it goes along with royalty. Set up a
King, and as such he expects you should give him this, as the undoubted
Prerogative of his place, and therefore to seek protection from any other, is
(as it were) to set up another King, Judge. 9.15. If indeed you anoint me King
over you, then come and put your trust under my shadow; therefore when a soul
puts his trust in any thing beside God, he sets up a Prince, a King, an Idol,
to which he gives Gods glory away. Now it does not make the sin less, that it
is the grace of God we crown, then if it were a lust we crowned. It Is idolatry
to worship a holy Angel as well as a cursed devil, to make our grace a god, as
well as our belly our god, nay rather it adds to it, because that is now used
to rob him of his glory, which should have brought him in the greatest revenue
of glory; certainly the more treasure you put into your servants hands, the
greater wrong to you for him to run away with it. I doubt not but David could
have borne it better to have seen a Philistine drive him from his throne then a
son, an Absalom. But how can or may a Saint be said to trust in his grace?

First, by trusting to the strength of his grace.

Secondly, by trusting on the worth of his grace. Indeed a professed trust in
grace, I conceive, cannot stand with grace: but there is an oblique kind of
trust, or that which by interpretation may savor of it. Satan is sly in his
assaults.

SECT. I.
Matthew. 5. by which a man lives in the continual sense of his spiritual beggary
and nothingnesse, and so has his recourse to Christ, as the poor to the rich
man's door, knowing he has nothing at home to maintain him. Such a one was
Paul, not able to do any thing of himself; he is not ashamed to let the world
know that Christ carries his purse for him. Our sufficiency is of God, yea,
after many years trading, this holy man sees nothing he has got, Phil. 3.13. I
count not my self to have apprehended: he is still pressing forward; ask him
how he lives, he will tell you who keeps house for him; I live, yet not I, Gal.
2.20* as ask a beggar where he has his meat, clothes, etc. he will say, I thank
my good Master; Now Satan chiefly labors to puff the soul up with an
overweening conceit of his own ability, as the readiest means to bring him
into his snare; Satan knows it is Gods method to give his children into his
hands, when once they grow proud and self-confident: Hezekiah was left to a
temptation, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. to try him. Why? God had tried him to purpose a
little before in an affliction; what needs this? O Hezekiahs heart was lift up
after his affliction. It was time for God to let the tempter alone a little to
foil him; probably now Hezekiah had high thoughts of his grace; O he would
never do as he had done before, and God will let him see what a weak creature
he is. Peter makes a whip for his own back in that bravado; Though all should
forsake thee, yet will not I. Christ now in mere mercy must set Satan on him,
to lay him on his back; that seeing the weakness of his faith, he might be
dismounted from the height of his pride. All that I shall say from this, is to
ent^eat thee (Christian) to have a care of this kind of pride. You know what
Joah said to David, when he perceived his heart lift up with the strength of
his Kingdom, and therefore would have the people numbered; The Lord God add
unto thy people, how many soever they be, a hundred fold; but why does my Lord
the King delight in this thing? 2 Samuel 24.3. The Lord add to the strength of
thy grace a hundred fold, but why delightest thou in this? why should thou
be lift up? is it not grace? shall the Groom be proud because he rides on his
Masters horse? or the mud wall because the Sun shines on it? may thou not
say of every dram of grace, as the young man of his hatchet, Alas, Muster, it
is borrowed? nay, not only borrowed, but thou can not use it without his
skill and strength that lends it thee. O beware of this, let not those vain
thoughts lodge in thee, left thou enter into temptation. It is a breach a whole
troop of sins may enter at, yea will, except speedily filled up.

Up, says Jacob, go down to Egypt for corn, that we live and not die. Thus
says the needy Christian, Up soul to thy God, thy faith is weak, thy patience
almost spent, ply thee to the throne of grace, go with thy homer to the
Ordinances, and get some supplies. Now a soul conceited of his store, has
another song; Soul, take thine ease, thou art richly laid in for many days.
Let the doubting soul pray, thy faith is strong; let the weak lie at the
breast, thou art well grown up; nay, it is well if it goes not further to a
despising of Ordinances, except they have some more courtly fate then ordinary:
such a pass were the Corinthians come to, 1 Cor. 4.8. Now ye are full, now ye
are rich, ye reign like Kings without us. I pray observe how he lays the
accent on the particle now; now ye are rich, as if he had said, I knew the
time, if Paul had been come to town, and news spread abroad in the City that
Paul was to preach, you would have flock't to hear him, and blessed God for the
season, but then you were poor and empty; now ye are full, you have got to a
higher attainment; Paul is a plain fellow now, he may carry his cheer to a
hungry people if he will, we are well apaid. And when once the heart is come to
this, it is easy to judge what will follow.

Secondly, this trusting to the strength of grace will make the soul bold and
venturous. The humble Christian is the wary Christian, he knows his weakness,
and this makes him afraid. I have a weak head, says he, I may be soon disputed
into an error and heresy, and therefore I dare not come where such stuff is
broach't, lest my weak head should be intoxicated: the confident man he will sip
of every cup, he fears none; no, he is stablish't in the truth, a whole team of
heretics shall not draw him aside. I have a vain light heart, says the humble
soul; I dare not come among wicked debautch't company, left I should at last
bring the naughty man home with me: but one trusting to the strength of his
grace, dares venture into the devils quarters. Thus Peter into the rout of
Christ's enemies, and how he came off you know; there his faith had been slain
on the place, had not Christ founded a retreat, by the seasonable look of love
he gave him. Indeed I have read of some bragging Philosophers, who did not
think it enough to be temperate, except they had the object for intemperance
present; and therefore they would go into Taverns and Whore-houses, as if they
meant to beat the devil on his own ground; but the Christian knows an enemy
nearer then so, which they were ignorant of; and that he need not go over his
own threshold to challenge the devils He has lust in his bosom that will be
hard enough for him all his days, without giving it the vantage ground.
Christian, I know no sin, but thou may be left to commit it, except one. It
was a bold speech of him, and yet a good man (as I have heard,) If Clapham die
of the plague, say Clapham had no faith, and this made him boldly go among the
infected. If a Christian, thou shall not die of spiritual plagues, yet such may
have the plague-sores of gross sins running on them for a time, and is not
this sad enough? therefore walk humbly with thy God.

Gal. 6.1. If any one be overtaken, you that be spiritual, restore such a one
with meekness; but how shall a soul get such a meek spirit? It follows,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. What makes men hard to the
poor? they think they shall never be so themselves. Why are many so sharp in
their censures, but because they trust too much to their grace, as if they
could never fall? O you are in the body, and the body of sin in you, therefore
fear. Bernard used to say, when he heard any scandalous sin of a Professor;
Hodie illi, cras mihi. He fell to day, I may stumble tomorrow.

SECT. II.
our own righteousness, (though God indeed be the efficient of it) and
opposes it to the righteousness of Christ, which alone is called the
Righteousness of God, Romans 10.1. Now to rest on any grace inherent, is to
exalt our own righteousness above the righteousness of God; and what pride
will this amount to? If this ware so, then a Saint when he comes to heaven
might say, This is Heaven which I have built, my grace has purchased; and thus
the God of Heaven should become tenant to his creature in Heaven. No, God has
cast the order of our salvation into another method, of grace, but not of grace
in us, but grace to us. Inherent grace has its place and office to accompany
salvation, Heb. 6.9. but not procure it. This is Christ's work, not graces. When
Israel waited on the Lord at Mount Sinai, they had their bounds, not a man must
come up besides Moses to treat with God, no, not touch the Mount lest they die:
thus all the graces of the Spirit wait on God, but none come up to challenge
any acceptance of God besides faith, which is a grace that presents the soul
not in its own garments. But you will say, what needs all this? where is the
man that trusts in his grace? Alas, where is the Christian that does fully
stand clear, and freely come his off his own righteousness? he is a rare Pilot
indeed, that can steer his faith in so direct a course, as not now and then to
knock upon this duty, and run on ground upon that grace. Abraham went in to
Hagar; and the children of Abraham's faith are not perfectly dead to the Law,
and may be found sometimes in Hagars arms, witness the flux and refluxe of
our faith, according to the various aspect of our obedience: when this seems
full, then our faith is at a springtide, and covers all the mountains of our
fears; but let it seem to wain in any service or duty, then the Jordan of our
faith flies back, and leaves the soul naked. The devils spite is at Christ,
and therefore since he could not hinder his landing, which he endeavored all
he could, nor work his will on his person when he was come; he goes now in a
more refined way to darken the glory of his sufferings, and the sufficiency of
his righteousness, by blending ours with his; this doctrine of Justification
by faith, has had more works and batteries made against it, then any other in
the Scripture. Indeed many other errors were but his sly approaches to get
nearer to undermine this; and lastly, when he connot hide this truth, (which
now shines in the Church like the Sun in its strength) then he labors to
hinder the practical improvement of it, that we (if he can help it) shall not
live up to our own principles, making us at the same time, that in our
judgment we profess acceptance only through Christ, in our practice confute
our selves. Now there is a double pride in the soul he makes use of for this
end, the one I may call a mannerly pride, the other a self-applauding pride.

with God, which keeps him from comfortable living on Christ.

First, when a poor soul is staved off the promise by the sense of his own
unworthiness and great unrighteousness; tell him of a pardon, alas, he is so
wrapped up with the thoughts of his own vileness, that you cannot fasten it upon
him. What, will God ever take such a toad as he is into his bosom, discount so
many great abominations at once, and receive him into his favor, that has
been so long in rebellious arms against him? he cannot believe it, no, though
he hears what Christ has done and suffered for sin, he refuses to be
comforted. Little does the soul think what a bitter root such thoughts spring
from, thou think thou do well thus to declaim against thy self, and
aggravate thy sins; indeed thou can not paint them black enough, or entertain
too low and base thoughts of thy self for them: But what wrong has God and
Christ done thee, that thou should so unworthily reflect upon the mercy of
the one, and merit of the other? May thou not do this, and be tender of the
good Name of God also? Is there no way to show thy sense of thy sin, except
thou asperse thy Savior? Can thou not charge thy self, but thou must condemn
God, and put Christ and his blood to shame before Satan, who triumphs more in
this then all thy other sins? In a word, though thou like a wretch have undone
thy self, and damned thy soul by thy sins, yet art thou not willing God should
have the glory of pardoning them, and Christ the honor of procuring the same?
or art thou like him in the Gospel, Luke 16.3. who could not dig, and to beg
was ashamed. Thou can not earne heaven by thy own righteousness, and is thy
spirit so stout that thou will not beg it for Christ's sake, yea, take it at
Gods hands, who in the Gospel comes a begging to thee, and beseeches thee to
be reconciled to him? Ah soul, who would ever have thought there could have
lien such pride under such a modest veil? and yet none like it. It Is horrible
pride for a beggar to starve, rather then take an alms at a rich man's hands: a
malefactor rather to choose his halter then a pardon from his gracious Princes
hand: but here is one infinitely surpassing both; a soul pining and perishing
in sin, and yet rejecting the mercy of God, and the helpng hand of Christ to
save him, Though Abigail did not think her self worthy to be David's wife, yet
she thought David was worthy of her, and therefore she humbly accepted his
offer, and makes haste to go with the messengers: That Is the sweet frame of
heart indeed, to lie low in the sense of your own vileness, yet to believe; to
renounce all conceit of worthiness in our selves, yet not therefore to
renounce all hope of mercy, but the more speedily to make haste to Christ that
wooes us. All the pride and unmannerlinesse lies in making Christ stay for us,
who bids his messengers invite poor sinners to come and tell them all things
are ready. But may be thou will say still, it is not pride that keeps thee off,
but thou can not believe that ever God will entertain such as thou art.
Truly, thou mendest the matter but little with this, either thou keep some
lust in thy heart, which thou will not part with to obtain the benefit of the
promise, and then thou art a notorious hypocrite, who under such an outcry for
thy sins, can drive a secret trade with hell at the same time; or if not so,
thou do discover the more pride in that thou dare stand out, when thou
have nothing to oppose against the many plain and clear promises of the Gospel,
but thy peremptory unbelief. God bids the wicked forsake his ways, and turn
to him, and he will abundantly pardon him; but thou say thou can not
believe this for thy own self. Now who speaks the truth? One of you two must be
the liar, either thou must take it with shame to thy self, for what thou have
said against God and his promise, (and that is thy best course) or thou must
proudly, yea, blasphemously cast it upon God, as every unbeliever does, 1 John
5.10. Nay, thou make him forsworn for God, to give poor sinners the greater
security in flying for refuge to Christ, who is that hope set before them, Heb.
6.17, 18. has sworn they should have strong consolation: O beatos quorum causa
Deus jurat! O miserrimos si nec juranti credamus. Tertul. de poenit. O happy
we, for whose sake God puts himself under an oath; but O miserable we, who will
not believe God, no, not when he swears!

Secondly, when the soul has shot the great gulf, and got into a slate of
peace and life by closing with Christ, yet this mannerly pride Satan makes use
of in the Christians daily course of duty and obedience, to disturb him and
hinder his peace and comfort. O how unchearfully, yea, joylesly do many
precious souls pass their days! If you enquire what is the cause, you shall
find all their joy runs out at the crannies of their imperfect duties and weak
graces; they cannot pray as they would, and walk as they desire with evennesse
and constancy; they see how short they fall of the holy rule in the Word, and
the pattern which others more eminent in grace do set before them, and this
though it does not make them throw the Promises away, and quite renounce all
hope in Christ, yet it begets many sad fears and suspicions, yea, makes them
sit at the feast Christ has provided, and not know whether they may eat or
not. In a word, as it robs them of their joy, so Christ of that glory which he
should receive from their rejoicing in him, I do not say, (Christian) thou
ought not to mourn for those defects thou find in thy graces and duties,
nay, thou could not approve thy self to be sincere, if thou did not. A
gracious heart, seeing how far short his renewed state (forth present) falls
of man's primitive holiness by Creation, cannot but weep and mourn, (as the
Jews to behold the second Temple*) yet (Christian even while the tears are in
thy eyes for thy imperfect graces, (for a soul rises with his grave-clothes
on) thou should rejoice, yea, triumph over all these thy defects by faith in
Christ, in whom thou art complete, Col. 1.10. while imperfect in thy self.
Christ's presence in the second Temple, (which the first had not) made it
(though comparatively mean) more glorious then the first Hag. 2.9 how much more
does his presence in this spiritual temple of a gracious heart, imputing his
righteousness to cover all its uncomelinesse, make the soul glorious above
man at first? This is a garment for which (as Christ says of the lilie) we
neither spin nor toil; yet Adam in all his created royalty was not so clad, as
the weakest believer is with this on his soul. Now, Christian, consider well
what thou do, while thou sit languishing under the sense of thy own
weaknesses, and refusest to rejoice in Christ, and live comfortably on the
sweet privileges thou art interessed in by thy marriage to him. Do thou not
bewray some of this spiritual pride working in thee? O, if thou could pray
without wandering, walk without limping, believe without wavering, then thou
could rejoice and walk cheerfully, It seems, soul, thou stayest to bring
the ground of thy comfort with thee, and not to receive it purely from Christ.
O how much better were it if thou would say with David: Though my house, my
heart, be not so with God, yet he has made with me a Covenant ordered in all
things and sure; and this is all my desire, all my confidence; Christ I oppose
to all my sins, Christ to all wants, he is my all in all and all above all.
Indeed all those complaints of our wants and weaknesses, so far as they
withdraw our hearts from relying cheerfully on Christ, they are but the
language of pride hankering after the Covenant of works. O it is hard to forget
our mothertongue, which is so natural to us, labor therefore to be sensible of
it, how grievous it is to the Spirit of Christ. What would a husband say, if
his wife in stead of expressing her love to him, and delight in him, should day
and night do nothing but weep and cry to think of her former husband that is
dead? The Law (as a Covenant) and Christ are compared to two husbands, Romans
7.4. Ye are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead. Now thy sorrow for
the defect of thy own righteousness, when it hinders thy rejoicing in Christ,
is but a whining after thy other husband, and this Christ cannot but take
unkindely, that thou art not as well pleased to lie in the bosom of Christ,
and have thy happiness from him as with your old husband the Law.

Job says of another kind of idolatry) or thy mouth does kiss thy hand, that
is, dote so far on thy own duties or righteousness, as to give them this
inward worship of thy confidence and trust, this is a great iniquity indeed;
for in this thou deniest the God that is above, who has determined thy faith
to another object. Thou come to open heaven-gate with the old key, when God
has set on a new lock. Do thou not acknowledge tnat thy first entrance into
thy justified state was of pure mercy? thou were justified freely by hit grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Romans 7.24. And whom are thou
beholden to, now thou art reconciled for thy further acceptance in every duty
or holy action? to thy duty, thy obedience, thy self, or Christ? The same
Apostle will tell you, Romans 5.2. By whom we have access by faith into this
grace wherein we stand. If Christ should not lead thee in and all thou do,
thou art sure to find the door shut upon thee: there is no more place for
desert now thou art gracious, then when thou were graceless, Romans 1.17. The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, for the just shall live
by faith. We are not only made alive by Christ but we live by Christ; faith
sucks in continual pardoning, assisting, comforting mercy from him, as the
lungs suck in the air. Heaven way is paved with grace and mercy to the end.

Be exhorted above all, to watch against this play of Satan, Use.
beware thou restest not in thy own righteousness; thou stand under a
tottering wall, the very cracks thou see in thy graces and duties, when best*
bid thee stand off, except thou would have them fall on thy head; the
greatest step to heaven, is out of our own doors, over our own threshold. It
has cost many a man his life when his house on fire, a gripplenesse to save
some of the stufte, which venturing among the flames to preserve, they have
perished themselves; more have lost their souls by thinking to carry some of
their own stuff with them to heaven. Such a good work or duty, while they,
like lingering Lot, have been loath to leave in point of confidence, have
themselves perish't. O Sirs, come out, come out, leave what is your own in the
fire, fly to Christ naked, he has clothing for you better then your own:
poor to Christ, and he has gold, not like thine, which will consume and be
found drossy in the fire but such as has in the fiery trial past in Gods
righteous judgment for pure and full weight; you cannot be found in two places
at once; choose whether you will be found in your own righteousness or in
Christ's. Those who have had more to show then thy self have thrown away all,
and gone a begging to Christ. Read Paul's Inventory, Phil. 3. what he had, what
he did, yet all dross and loss: give him Christ, and take the rest who will.
So Job, as holy a man as trod on earth, (God himself being witness) yet says;
Though I were perfect, Job 9.21.
yet would I not know my own soul, I would despise my life. He had
acknowledged his imperfection before, now he makes a supposition, (indeed quod
non est supponendum:) If I were perfect, yet would I not know my own soul; I
would not entertain any such thoughts as should puff me up into such a
confidence of my holiness, as to make it my plea with God, like to our common
phrase; We say, Such a one has excellent parts, but he knows it, that is, he
is proud of it. Take heed of knowing thy own grace in this sense, thou can
not give a greater wound both to thy grace and comfort then by thus priding thy
self in it.

SECT. III.
Reubens curse, that he should not excel, because he went up into his fathers
bed; when other tribes increased, he stood at a little number. By trusting in
thy own works thou do worse by Christ, and shall thou excel in grace?
Perhaps some of you have been long Professors, and yet come to little growth
in love to God, humility, heavenly-mindednesse, mortification, and it is worth
the digging to see what lies at the root of your Profession, whether there be
not a legal principle that has too much acted you. Have you not thought to
carry all with God from your duties and services, and too much laid up your
hopes in your own actings? Alas, this is as so much dead earth, which must be
thrown out, and Gospelprinciples laid in the room thereof; try but this course,
and see whether the spring of thy grace will not come on apace. David gives an
account how he came to stand and flourish, when some that were rich and mighty,
on a sudden withered and came to nothing. Lo, (says he) this is the man that
made not God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his riches. But I am
like a green olive tree in the House of God; I trust in the mercy of God
forever and ever, Psalm. 52.7, 8. While others trust in the riches of their own
righteousness and services and make not Christ their strength, do thou
renounce all, and trust in the mercy of God in Christ, and thou shall be like a
green olive when they fade and wither.

Secondly, Christian, you will not thrive in true comfort so long as you rest
in any inherent work of grace, and do not stand clear of your own actings and
righteousness. Gospelcomfort springs from a Gospel-root, which is Christ,
Phil. 3.3. We are the circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Now a soul that
rests on any holiness in himself; he graffs his comfort upon himself, not
Christ; he sucks his own breast, not Christ's; and so makes Christ a dry nurse:
and what comfort can grow on that dry tree? The Spirit is our Comforter as well
as our Teacher and Counselor. Now as the Spirit when he teaches comes not
with any new or strange truth, but takes of Christ's own; (what he finds in
the Word) so where he comforts, he takes of Christ's own, his righteousness,
not our own: Christ is the matter and ground of his comfort: all cordials are
but Christ distilled, and made up in several promises: his acting, not ours;
his suffering, not ours; his holiness, not ours; he does not say, Soul,
rejoice, thou art holy; but, Soul, triumph, Christ is righteous, and is the
Lord thy righteousness; Not, Soul, thou prayest sweetly, fear not; but thou
have an Advocate with the Father, Christ the righteous: so that the first step
to the receiving of comfort from the Spirit, is to send away all Comforters of
our own. As in learning of the Spirit, he that will be taught by him, must
first become a fool, (that is, no way lean to his own understanding,) so he
that would be comforted, must first be emptied of all self-supports, must not
lean to his own comforts. As a Physician first bids his Patient cast off all
others he has tampered with, he asks what Physic he has had from them, takes
off their plasters, throws away their Physic, and goes about the work de
novo: So the Spirit when he comes to comfort a poor soul; First, persuades the
soul to send away all its old Physicians. O, says the soul, I have been in
the hand of such a duty, such a course of obedience, and have thought sure now
I shall be well, and have comfort now I do this duty, set upon such a holy
course. Well, says the Spirit, if you will have me do any thing, these must
all be dismissed in point of confidence. Now, and not till how, is the soul a
subject fit to receive the Spirits comforts. And therefore, friends, as you
love your inward peace, beware what vessel you draw your comfort from. Grace is
finite, and so cannot afford much. It Is leaking, and so cannot hold long; thou
drinkest in a riven dish, that have thy comfort from thy grace. It Is mixed, and
so weak; and weak grace cannot give strong consolation, and such thou need,
especially in strong conflicts; Nay lastly, thy comfort which thou drawest from
it is stolen, thou do not come honestly by it, and stolen comforts will
not thrive with thee. Oh, what folly is it for the child to play the thief for
that which he may have freely and more fully from his Father, who gives and
reproacheth not? that comfort which thou would filch out of thy own
righteousness and duties; behold, it is laid up for thee in Christ, from whose
fullness thou may carry as much as thy faith can hold, and none to check
thee, yea, the more thou improvest Christ for thy comfort, the more heartily
welcome; we are bid to open our mouth wide, and he will fill it.

CHAP. XI. The third kind of spiritual Pride, viz. Pride of Privileges.
THe third kind of pride, (spiritual pride I mean) is pride of Privileges,
with which these wicked spirits labor to blow up the Christian; to name three,







SECT. I.
Tim. 3.6. says, he must not be a Novice, or a young Convert, lest he should
be lift up with pride, and fall into the condemnation of the devil; as if he
had said, this calling is honorable; if he be not well ballast with humility,
a little gust from Satan will tople him into this sin; The Seventy that Christ
first sent out to preach the Gospel, and prevailed so miraculously over Satan,
even these while they trod on the Serpents head, he turned again, and had like
to have stung them with pride, which our Savior perceived, when they returned
in triumph, and told what great miracles they had wrought, and therefore he
takes them off that glorying, left it should degenerate into vain glory, and
bids them not rejoice that devils were subjest to them, Luke 10.12
but rather that their names were writ in Heaven. As if he had said, It is not
the honor of your calling, and success of your Ministry will save you; there
shall be some cast to the devils, who shall then say, Lord, Lord, in thy name
we have cast out devils; and therefore value not your selves by that, but
rather evidence to your souls that ye are of mine elect ones, which will stand
you more in stead at the great day then all this.

SECT. II.
Unto you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer for his sake. God does
not use to give worthless gifts to his Saints, there is some preciousnesse in
it which a carnal eye cannot see. Faith you will say is a great gift, but
perseverance greater, without which faith would be little worth, and
perseverance in suffering this above both honorable; This made John Careless.
our English Martyr, (who though he died not at the stake, yet in prison for
Christ,) say, Such an honor it is, as Angels are not permitted to have,
therefore God forgive me mine unthankfulness. Now when Satan cannot scare a
soul from prison, yet then he will labor to puff him up in prison; when he
cannot make him pity himself, then he will flatter him till he prides in
himself; Affliction from God exposes to impatience, for God to pride; and
therefore (Christians) labor to fortify your selves against this temptation
of Satan, how soon you may be called to suffering work you know not, such
clouds often are not long arising. Now to keep thy heart humble when thou art
honored to suffer for the truth; Consider,

for sin in regard of God: none suffered without sin but Christ, and therefore
none may glory in them but he; Christ in his own, we in his; God forbid that I
should glory save in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6. This kept Mr. Bradford
humble in his sufferings for the truth, none more rejoiced in them and blessed
God for them, yet none more humble under them then he; and what kept him in
this humble frame? read his godly letters, and you shall find almost in all
how he bemoans his sins, and the sins of the Protestants under the reign of
King Edward: It was time (says he) for God to put his rod into the Papists
hands we were grown so proud, formal, unfruitful, yea, to loath and despise the
means of grace, when we enjoyed the liberty thereof, and therefore God has
brought the wheel of persecution on us. As he looked at the honor to make him
thankful, so to sin to keep him humble:

Benbridge in our English Martyrol. who thrust the faggots from him, and cried
out, I recant, I recant. Yet this man, when re-inforc't in his faith, and
endued with power from above, was able within the space of a week after that
sad foil, to die at the stake cheerfully: Qui pro nobis mortem semel vicit,
semper in nobis vincit: He that once overcame death for us, it is he that
always overcame death in us. And who should be thy Song, but he that is thy
strength? applaud not thy self, but bless him. It Is one of Gods Names, he is
called the glory of his peoples strength, Psalm. 89.17. The more thou gloriest
in God that gives thee strength to suffer for him, the less thou will boast of
thy self: A thankful heart and a proud cannot dwell together in one bosom.

Thirdly, consider what a foul blot pride gives to all thy sufferings, where
it is not bewailed and resisted, it alters the case. The old saying is, that
it is not the punishment, but the cause makes the Martyr; we may safely say
further, it is not barely the cause, but the sincere frame of the heart in
suffering for a good cause, that makes a man a Martyr in Gods sight. Though
thou should give thy body to be burnt, if thou have not an humble heart of a
sufferer for Christ, thou turnest Merchant for thy self. Thou deniest but one
self to set up another, runnest the hazard of thy estate and life to gain some
applause, may be, and rear up a monument to thy honor in the opinions of men;
thou do no more in this case then a soldier, who for a name of valor will
venture into the mouth of death and danger, only thou show thy pride under a
religious disguise, but that helps it not, but makes it the worse. If thou will
in thy sufferings be a sacrifice acceptable to God, thou must not only be ready
to offer up thy life for his truth, but sacrifice thy pride also, or else thou
may tumble out of one fire into another, suffer here from man, as a seeming
champion for the Gospel, and in another world from God, for robbing him of his
glory in thy sufferings.

SECT. III.
have on a gracious soul, is to humble it. The sight of mercy increases the
sense of sin, and that sense dissolves the soul kindly into sorrow, as we see
in Magdalen. The heart which possibly was hard and frozen in the shade, will
give and thaw in the Sunshine of love, and so long all pride is hid from the
creatures eye. Then (says God) Ezekiel. 36.31. ye shall remember your ways, and
your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight,
etc. And when shall this be, but when God would save them from all their
uncleanness, as appears? v. 25. yet notwithstanding this, there remain such
dregs of corruption unpurged out of the best, that Satan finds it not
impossible, to make the manifestations of Gods love an occasion of pride to the
Christian: and truly God lets us see our pronenesse to this sin in the short
stay he makes, when he comes with any greater discoveries of his love. The
Comforter ('it is true) abides for ever in the Saints bosom, but his joys they
come, and are gone again quickly. They are as exceedings, with which he feasts
the believer, but the cloth is soon drawn; and why so, but because we cannot
bear them for our every day food? A short interview of heaven, and a vision of
love now and then upon the mount of an ordinance or affliction, cheeres the
spirits of drooping Christians, who might they have leave to build Tabernacles
there, and dwell under a constant shine of such manifestations, would be prone
to forget themselves, and think they were Lords of their own comforts. If holy
Paul was in danger of falling into this distemper of pride from his short
rapture, to prevent which God saw it needful to let him blood with a thorn in
the flesh, would not our blood much more grow too rank, and we too crank and
wanton, if we should feed long on such luscious food? And therefore, if ever
(Christian) thou had need to watch, then is the time when comforts abound,
and God dandles thee most on the knee of his love, when his face shines with
clearest manifestations, lest this sin of pride (as a thief in the candle)
should swaile out thy joy. To prevent which thou should do well; First, to
look that thou measurest not thy grace by thy comfort, lest so thou be led
into a false opinion, that thy grace is strong, because thy comforts are so.
Satan will be ready to help forward such thoughts as a fit medium to life thee
up, and slacken thy care in duty for the future. Such discoveries do indeed
bear witness to the truth of thy grace, but not to the decree and measure of
it; the weak child may be, yea, is oftener in the lap then the strong.
Secondly, do not so much applaud thy self in thy present comfort, as labor to
improve it for the glory of God. Up and eat, says the Angel to the Prophet,
because the journey is too great for thee. The manifestations of Gods love are
to fit us for our work. It is one thing to rejoice in the light of our comfort,
and another to go forth in the power of the Spirit comforting us (as Giants
refreshed with this wine) to run our race of duty and obedience with more
strength and alacrity. He shows his pride, that spends his time in telling his
money merely to see how rich he is; but he his wisdom, that lays out his money
and trades with it. The boaster of his comforts will lose what he has, when he
that improves his comforts in a fuller trade of duty shall add more to what he
has. Thirdly, remember thou dependest on God for the continuance of thy
comfort. They are not the smiles thou had yesterday can make thee joyous to
day, any more then the bread thou did then eat can make thee strong without
more; thou need new discoveries for new comforts: let God hide his face, and
thou will soon lose the sight, and forget the taste of what thou even now
had. It is beyond our skill or power to preserve those impressions of joy,
and comfortable apprehensions of Gods favor on our spirits, which sometimes we
find; as Gods presence brings those, so when he goes he carries them away with
him, as the setting-Sun does the day. We would laugh heartily at him, who when
the Sun shines in at his window, should think by shutting that to imprison the
Sunbeams in his chamber; and do thou not show as much folly, who think
because thou now have comfort, thou therefore shall never be in darkness of
Spirit more? The believers comfort is like Isreal's Manna: it is not like our
ordinary bread and provision; we buy at market and lock up in our Cupboards
where we can go to it when we will; no, it is rained as that was from heaven.
Indeed God provided for them after this sort to humble them, Deuteronomy. 8.16. Who
fed thee in the wilderness with Manna which thy fathers knew not, that he
might humble thee. It was not because such mean food, that God is said to
humble them; for it was delicious food; therefore called Angels food, Psalm.
78.25. Such as if Angels did eat, might serve them. But the manner of the
dispensing it, from hand to mouth, every day their portion and no more, so that
God kept the key of their Cupboard, they stood to his immediate allowance; and
thus God communicates our spiritual comforts for the same end to humble us. So
much for this second sort of spiritual wickedness.

I had thought to have instanced in some other, as hypocrisy, unbelief,
formality; but possibly the subject being general, what I have already said may
be thought but a digression, and that too long.

I shall therefore conclude this branch of spiritual wickedness, in a word to
those who are yet in a natural and unsanctified state, which is to stir them up
from what I have said (concerning Satan's assaulting believers with such
temptations;) to consider seriously, how that Satan's chief design against them
also lies in the same sins. These are the wickednesses he labors to ingulph
you in above all others. If ever you perish, it will be by the hand of these
sins. It Is your feared conscience, blind mind, and dedolent impenitent heart,
will be your undoing if you miscarry finally. Other sins, the devil knows, are
preparatory to these, and therefore he draws thee into them to bring thee into
these. Two ways they prepare a way to spiritual sins; First, as they naturally
dispose the sinner to them; it is the nature of sin to blind the mind,
stupifie the conscience, harden the heart, as is implied, Heb. 3.13. Lest your
heart be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. As the feet of Travelers
beat the high way hard, so does walking in carnal gross sins the heart; they
benumbe the conscience, so that in time the sinner loses his feeling, and can
carry his lusts in his heart, (as Bedlams their pins in their very flesh)
without pain and remorse. Secondly, as they do provoke God by a judiciary act
to give them up to these sins, Lam. 3.65. Give them obstinacy of heart, (so
it is in your margin) thy curse unto them; and when the devil has got sinners
at this pass, then he has them under lock and key. They are the forerunners
of damnation; if God leave thy heart hard and unbroken up, it is a sad sign he
means not to sow the seed of grace there. O sinners pray, (as he did request
Peter for him) that none of these things may come upon you; which that they may
not, take heed thou rejectest not the offers he makes to soften thee. Gods
hardening is a consequent of, and a punishment for our hardening our own
hearts. It Is most true what Prosper says, Potest homo invitus amittere
temporalia, non nisi volens amittere spiritualia: A man may lose temporals
against hia will, but not spirituals; God will harden none, damn none against
their will.

CHAP. XII. Shows what the Prize is, which believers wrestle against these
Principalities Powers, and Spiritual wickednesses for. In High Places.
SECT. I.
THese words contain the last Branch in the description of our grand enemy,
which have in them some ambiguity, the Adjective being only expressed in the
Original; (...), that is, in heavenlies; the phrase being defective, our
Translatours read it in high or heavenly places, as if the Apostle intended to
set out the advantage of place, which this our enemy, by being above us has of
us Indeed this way most Interpreters go, yet some both ancient and modern read
the words not in heavenly places, but in heavenly things, interpreting the
Apostles mind to set out the matter about which, or prize for which we wrestle
with Principalities and Powers, to be heavenly things. (...), (says
Oecumenius) is as much as if the Apostle had said, (...): We wrestle not for
small and trivial things, but for yea, for heaven it self, and our Adoption, as
he goes on. The same way Chrysostom carries it, in coelestibus, id est, pro
coelestibus Dei. And after him Musculus, and other modern Writers. The Reasons
which are given for this Interpretation are weighty.

First, the word elsewhere indefinitely set down, is taken for things, not
places, Heb. 8.5. nay, one observes this word to be used almost twenty times in
the New Testament, and never for any aerial place, but always for things truly
heavenly and spiritual See, Dr. Gouge o^ the place.
; the word indeed properly signifies supercelestial, and if applied to places,
would signify that where the devil never came since his fall.

Lastly, there seems no great argument to render Satan formidable by his being
above us in place; it is some advantage indeed to men, togain the hill, or be
above their enemies in some place of strength, but none at all to spirits; but
now take it of things, and then it adds weight to all the other branches of
the description. We wrestle with Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual
wickedness, and against all these, not for such toys and trifles as the earth
affords, which are inconsiderable whether to keep or lose; but for such as
heaven holds forth, such an enemy, and such a prize makes it a matter of our
greatest care, how to manage the combat. The word thus opened, the note will
be this:

SECT. II.
The chief prize for which we wrestle against Satan is heavenly. Doct.
Or thus, Satan's main design is to spoil and plunder the Christian of all that
is heavenly. Indeed all the Christian has, or desires as a Christian is
heavenly; the world is extrinsecal, both to his being and happiness; it is a
stranger to the Christian, and intermeddles not with his joy nor grief. Heap
all the riches and honors of the world upon a man, they will not make him a
Christian; heap them on a Christian, they will not make him a better Christian.
Again, take them all away, let every bird have his feather, when stripped and
naked he will still be a Christian, and may be a better Christian. It was a
notable speech of Erasmus, if spoken in earnest, and his wit were not too quick
for his conscience; Nihilo magis ambio opes and dignitates, quam elumbis equus
graves sarcinas: He said he desired wealth and honor no more then a feeble
horse does a heavy cloak-bag. And I think every Christian in his right temper
would be of his mind. Satan should do the Saint little hurt, if he did bend
his forces only or chiefly against his outward enjoyments; alas, the Christian
does not value them, or himself by them: this were as if one should think to
hurt a man by beating of his clothes when he has put them off. So far as the
Spirit of grace prevails in the heart of a Saint, he has put off the world in
the desire of it, and joy in it; so that these blows are not much felt: and
therefore they are his heavenly treasures, which are the booty Satan waits for.

SECT. III.
Milet feri faciem, was Caesar's speech, when to fight with the Roman Citizens,
he bade his soldiers strike at their face, these Citizens (said he) love their
beauty, mar that and mar all. The soul is the face whereon Gods image is
stamp't: holiness is the beauty of this face, which makes us indeed like God,
this Satan knows God loves, and the Saint is chary of; and therefore he
labors to wound and disfigure this, that he may at once glory in the
Christians shame, and pour contempt upon God in breaking his image; and is it
not worth engaging limb and life in battle against this enemy, who would rob
us of that which makes us like God himself? Have you forgot the bloody Articles
of peace that Nahash offered to the men of Jabesh-Gilead? no peace to be had,
except they would let him thrust out their right eyes, and lay it for a
reproach upon all Israel, which how it was entertained read, 1 Samuel 11.6. The
face is not so deformed that has lost its eye, as the soul is that loses its
holiness; and no peace to be expected at Satan's hands except he may deprive us
of this: Me thinks at the thought of this, the Spirit of the Lord should come
upon the Christian, and his anger should be kindled much more against this
cursed spirit, then Saul's and the men of Isreal's was against Nahash

Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in heaven. Every man's conversation is suitable
to his calling; he whose trade lies in the earth minds earthly things: and he
whose trade is heavenly follows that close. Every man minds his own
business, the Apostle tells us. You may possibly find a Tradesman out of his
shop now and then, but he is as a fish out of the water, never in his element
till he be in his calling again. Thus when the Christian is about the world,
and the worldling about heavenly matters, both are men out of their way, not
right girt, till they get into their employment again. Now this heavenly trade
is that which Satan does in an especial manner labor to stop. Could the
Christian enjoy but a free trade with heaven a few years without molestation,
he would soon grow a rich man, too rich indeed for earth; but what with losses
sustained by the hands of this Pyrate Satan, and also the wrong he receives by
the treachery of some in his own bosom, (that like unfaithful servants hold
correspondence with this robber) he is kept but low in this life, and much of
his gains are lost. Now the Christians heavenly trade lies either within doors
or abroad; he can be free in neither, Satan is at his heels in both.

to make up and enlarge upon when he gets alone. Every Providence is as wind
to his sails, and sets his heart a moving in some heavenly affection or other
suitable to the occasion. One while he is wrapped up with joy in the
consideration of mercy, another while melted into godly sorrow from the sense
of his sins. Sometimes exalting God in his praises, anon abusing himself before
God for his own vileness. One while he is at the breast of the Covenant,
milking out the consolations of the Promises; at another time working his heart
into a holy awe and fear of the threatenings. Thus the Christian walks aloft,
while the base worldling is licking the dust below. One of these heavenly
pearls which the Christian trades for, is more worth then the worldling gets
with all his sweat and travel in his whole life. The Christians feet stand
where other men's heads are; he treads on the Moon, and is clothed with the Sun;
he looks down on earthly men (as one from a high hill does upon those that live
in some fenne or moore) and sees them buried in a fog of carnal pleasures and
profits, while he breaths in a pure heavenly air, but yet not so high as to be
free from all storms and tempests; many a sad gust he has from sin and Satan
without. What else mean those sad complaints and groans, which come from the
children of God, that their hearts are so dead and dull, their thoughts so
roving and unfixt in duty, yea, many times so wicked and filthy, that they dare
hardly tell what they are, for fear of staining their own lips, and offending
the ears of others by naming them? Surely, the Christian finds it in his
heart to will and desire he could meditate, pray, hear, and live after another
sort then this, does he not? yes, I durst be his surety he does. But so long as
there is a devil tempts, and we continue within his walk, it will be thus more
or less, as fast as we labor to clear the spring of our hearts, he will be
laboring to royle or stop it again; so that we have two works to do at once,
to perform a duty, and watch him that opposes us, trowel and sword both in
our hands. They had need work hard indeed, who have others continually
endeavoring to pull down, as they are laboring to rear up the building.

neighborhood, he is a heavenly trader in all; the great business of his life
is to be doing or receiving some good; that company is not for him that will
neither give nor take this. What should a Merchant be where there is no buying
nor selling? Every one labors (as his calling is) to seat himself where trade
is quickest, and he is likest to have most takings. The Christian (where he may
choose) takes such in relations near to himself, (husband, wife, servants) as
may suite with his heavenly trade, and not such as will be a pull-back to him;
he falls in with the holiest persons as his dearest acquaintance: if there be a
Saint in the town where he lives, he will find him out, and this shall be the
man he will consort with; and in his conversation with these and all else, his
chief work is for heaven, his heavenly principle within inclines him to it.
Now, this alarums hell. What, not contented to go to heaven himself, but by his
holy example, gracious speeches, sweet counsels, seasonable reproofs, will he
be trading with others, and labor to carry them along with him also? This
brings the Lion fell and mad out of his den, such to be sure shall find the
devil in their way to oppose them. I would have come, (says Paul) but Sacan
hindered me. He that will vouch God, and let it appear by the tenure of his
conversation that he trades for him, shall have enemies enough if the devil can
help him to such.

miserable, when others think him and the devil tells him, he is such. This,
this torments the very soul of the devil, to see the Christian under sail for
heaven, filled with the sweet hope of his joyful entertainment when he comes
there, and therefore he raises what storms and tempests he can, either to
hinder his arrival in that blessed Port, (which he most desires, and does not
wholly despair of) or at least to make it a troublesome winter-voyage, (such as
Paul's was, in which they suffered so much loss,) and this indeed very often he
obtains in such a degree, that by his violent impetuous temptations beating
long upon the Christian, he makes him throw over much precious lading of his
joys and comforts; yea, sometimes he brings the soul through stresse of
temptation to think of quitting the ship, while for the present all hope of
being saved seems to be taken away. Thus you see what we wrestle with devils
for. We come to Application.

SECT. IV.


Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? how long have Gospel-offers
rung in our ears? and yet to this day many devil-deluded souls furiously drive
on toward hell, and will not be persuaded back, who refuse to be called the
children of God, and choose rather the devils bondage then the glorious liberty
with which Christ would make them free, esteeming the pleasures of sin for a
season greater treasures then the riches of heaven. It Is storied of Cato (who
was Caesar's bitter enemy) that when he saw Caesar prevail, rather then fall
into his hand and stand to his mercy, he laid violent hands on himself, which
Caesar hearing of, passionately broke out into these words, O Cato, cur
invidisti mihi salutem tuam? O Cato, why did thou envy me the honor of
saving thy life? And do not many walk as if they grudged Christ the honor of
saving their souls? what other account can you give sinners of rejecting his
grace? Are not heaven and happiness things desirable, and to be preferred
before sin and misery? Why then do you not embrace them? or are they the worse,
because they come swimming to you in the blood of Christ? oh how ill must
Christ take it to be thus used, when he comes on such a gracious embassage? may
he not say to thee as once he did to those officers sent to attach him, Do you
come out against me as a thief with swords and staves? If he be a thief, it is
only in this, that he would steal your sins from you, and leave heaven in the
room: O, for the love of God think what you do, it is eternal life you put away
from you, in doing of which, you judge your selves unworthy of it, Acts 13.46.

Setters, who enquire where a booty is to be had, which when they have found,
and know such a one travels with a charge about him, then they employ some
other to rob him, and are themselves not seen in the business. The devil is
the grand Setter, he observes the Christian how he walks, what place and
company he frequents, what grace or heavenly treasure he carries in his bosom;
which when he has done, he has his instruments for the purpose to execute his
design. Thus he considered the admirable graces of Job, and casts about how he
might best rob him of his heavenly treasure: and who but his wife and friends
must do this for him? (well knowing that his tale would receive credit from
their mouths.) O friends, ask your consciences, whether you have not done the
devil some service of this kind in your days. Possibly you have a child or
servant who once looked heavenward, but your brow-beating of them scared them
back, and now (may be) they are as carnal as you would have them: or possibly
thy wife before acquainted with thee, was full of life in the ways of God, but
since she has been transplanted into thy cold soil, what by thy frothy
speeches and unsavory conversation, at best thy worldliness and formality,
she is now both decayed in her graces, and a loser in her comforts. O man, what
an enditement will be brought against thee for this at Gods bar? you would come
off better, were it for robbing one of his money and jewels, then of his graces
and comforts.

Thirdly, it reproves the woeful negligence most show in laboring for this
heavenly prize. None but would be glad their souls might be saved at last, but
where is the man or woman that makes it appear by their vigourous endeavor
that they mean in earnest? what warlike preparation do they make against Satan,
(who lies between them and home?) where are their arms, where their skill to
use them, their resolution to stand to them, and conscionable care to exercise
themselves daily in the use of them? Alas, this is a rarity indeed, not to be
found in every house, where the Profession of Religion is hanged out at the
door; if woulding and wishing will bring them to heaven, then they may come
thither; but as for this wrestling and fighting, this making Religion our
business, they are as far from these, as at last they are like to be from
heaven. They are of his mind in Tully, who in a Summers day, as he lay lazing
himself on the grass, would say, O utinam hoc esset laborare! O that this were
to work, that I could lie here and do my day-labour! Thus many melt and waste
their lives in sloth, and say in their hearts, O that this were the way to
heaven! but will use no means to furnish themselves with grace for such an
enterprise; I have read of a great Prince in Germany, invaded by a more potent
enemy then himself, yet from his friends and Allies, (who flock't in to his
help) he soon had a goodly Army, but had no money (as he said) to pay them, but
the truth is, he was loath to part with it, for which some in discontent went
away, others did not vigourously attend his business, and so he was soon
beaten out of his Kingdom; and his coffers (when his Palace was rifled) were
found thrack't with treasure. Thus he was ruined, as some sick men die, because
unwilling to be at cost to pay the Physician. It will add to the misery of
damned souls, when they shall have leisure enough to consider what they have
lost in losing God, to remember what means, offers and talents they once had,
toward the obtaining of everlasting life, but had not a heart to use them.

there ever was and will be, that mingle themselves with the Saints of God, who
pretend heaven, and have their outward garb faced and fringed (as it were) with
heavenly speeches and duties, while their hearts are lined with hypocrisy,
whereby they deceive others, but most of all themselves; such may be the worlds
Saints, but devils in Christ's account. Have not I chosen twelve, one of you is
a devil? And truly of all devils none so bad as the professing devil, the
preaching, praying devil. O Sirs, be plain-hearted; Religion is as tender as
your eye, it will not be jested with; Remember the vengeance which fell on
Belshazzar, while he carowsed in the bowls of the Sanctuary. Religion and the
duties of it are consecrated things, not made for thee to drink thy lusts out
of God. has remarkably appeared in discovering and confounding such as have
prostituted sacred things to worldly ends. Jezabel fasts and prays the better,
to devour Naboths vineyard, but was devoured by it. Absalom was as sick till
he had ravished his fathers Crown, as his brother Amnon till he had done the
like to his sister, and to hide his treason he puts on a religious cloak, and
therefore begs leave to go and pay his vow in Hebron, when he had another game
in chase, and did he not fall by the hand of his hypocrisy? of all men their
judgment is endorst with most speed, who silver over worldly or wicked
enterprises with heavenly semblances, of this gang were those, 2 Pet. 2.3.
concerning whom the Apostle says, Their damnation slumbers not; and those,
Ezekiel. 14.7, 8. to whom God says, I the Lord will answer him by my self, and I
will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign, and a Proverb,
and I will cut him off from the midst of my people, and ye shall know that I am
the Lord.



for heaven, and that which leads to heaven also? Earthly things God is pleased
to retaile; all have some, none have all; but in heavenly treasure he will not
break the whole piece, and cut it into remnants. If thou will have heaven, thou
must have Christ; if Christ, thou must like his service as well as his
sacrifice; no holiness, no happiness. If God would cut off so much as would
serve men's turns, he might have customers enough. Balaam himself likes one end
of the piece, he would die like a righteous man, though live like a wizzard as
he was; no, God will not deal with such pedling Merchants; that man alone is
for God, and God for him, who will come roundly up to Gods offer, and take all
off his hands. One fitly compares holiness and happiness to those two
sisters, Leah and Rachel. Happiness like Rachel seems the fairer, (even a
carnal heart may fall in love with that,) but holiness like Leah is the elder
and beautiful also, though in this life it appears with some disadvantage, her
eyes being blear'd with tears of repentance, and her face furrowed with the
works of mortification; but this is the Law of that heavenly country, that the
younger Sister must not be bestowed before the elder. We cannot enjoy fair
Rachel, Heaven and Happiness, except first we embrace tender-eyed Leah,
Holiness with all her severe duties of repentance and mortification. Now Sirs,
how like you this method? Art thou content to marry Christ and his grace, and
then (serving a hard Apprenticeship in temptations both of prosperity and
adversity, enduring the heat of the one, and the cold of the other) to wait
till at last the other be given into thy bosom?



In getting earthly things. If Heaven be thy chief prize, then thou will be
ruled by a heavenly Law in the gathering of these. Take a carnal wretch, and
what his heart is set on, he will have, though it be by hook or crook. A lie
fits Gehazi's mouth well enough, so he may fill his pockets by it. Jezabel
dares mock God, and murder an innocent man for an acre or two of ground.
Absalom regnandi causa what will he not do? Gods fence is too low to keep a
graceless heart in bounds, when the game is before him; but a soul that has
heaven in its eye is ruled by heavens law: he dares not step out of heavens
road to take up a crown, as we see in David's carriage toward Saul. Indeed in
so doing he should cross himself in his own grand design, which is the glory
of God, and the happiness of his own soul in enjoying of him; upon these very
terms the servants of God have refused to be rich and great in the world, when
either of these lay at stake; Moses threw his Court-preferment at his heels,
refusing to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. Abraham scorned to be made
rich by the King of Sodom, Genesis 14.22. that he might avoid the suspicion of
covetousness and self-seeking; it shall not be said another day that he came
to enrich himself with the spoil, more then to rescue his kinsmen. Nehemiah
would not take the tax and tribute to maintain his state, when he knew they
were a poor peeled people, because of the fear of the Lord. Do thou walk by
this rule? would thou gather no more estate or honor then thou may have
with Gods leave, and will stand with thy hopes of heaven?



First, the Saint improves his earthly things for an heavenly end, where layest
thou up thy treasure? do thou bestow it on thy voluptuous paunch, thy hawks
and thy hounds, or lockest thou it up in the bosom of Christ's poor members?
what use make thou of thy honor and greatness, to strengthen the hands of
the godly or the wicked? and so of all thy other temporal enjoyments; A
gracious heart improves them for God; when a Saint prays for these things, he
has an eye to some heavenly end. If David prays for life, it is not that he
may live, but live and praise God, Psalm. 119 175. When he was driven from his
regal throne by the rebellious arms of Absalom; see what his desire was and
hope, 2 Samuel 15.25. The King said to Zadock, Carry back the Ark of God into the
City: if I shall-finde favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again,
and show me both it and his habitation. Mark, not show me my Crown, my Palace,
but the Ark, the House of God.

Secondly, a gracious heart pursues earthly things with a holy indifferency,
saving the violence and zeal of his spirit for the things of heaven; he uses
the former as if he used them not, with a kind of non-attendency, his head and
heart is taken up with higher matters, how he may please God, thrive in his
grace, enjoy more intimate communion with Christ in his Ordinances, in these he
spreads all his sails, plyes all his oars, strains every part and power: thus
we find David upon his full speed; My soul presses hard after thee, Psalm. 63.
And before the Ark we find him dancing with all his might. Now a carnal heart
is clean contrary, his zeal is for the world, and his indifferency in the
things of God, he prays as if he did not pray, etc. he sweats in his shop, but
chills and grows cold in his closet; O how hard to pully him up to a duty of
Gods worship, or to get him out to an Ordinance? No weather shall keep him from
the market; rain, blow or snow he goes thither; but if the Church-path be a
little wet, or the air somewhat cold, it is apology enough for him if his pue
be empty; when he is about any worldly business, he is as earnest at it, as
the idolatrous Smith in hammering of his image; who (the Prophet says) works
it with the strength of his arms, yea, he is hungry, and his strength fails,
he drinks not, and is faint, Isa. 44.12. so zealous is the muck-worme in his
worldly employments, that he will pinch his carcass, and deny himself his
repast in due season to pursue that; The Kitchen there shall wait on the shop:
But in the worship of God, it is enough to make him sick of the Sermon, and
angry with the Preacher, if he be kept beyond his hour; here the Sermon must
give place to the Kitchen: so the man for his pleasures and carnal pastime, he
tells no clock at his sports, and knows not how the day goes; when night comes,
he is angry that it takes him off; but at any heavenly work, O how is the man
punished? time now has got leaden heels he thinks; all he does at a Sermon is
to tell the clock, and see how the glass runs: if men were not willing to
deceive themselves, surely they might know which way their heart goes by the
swift motion, or the hard tugging and slow pace it stirs, as well as they know
in a boat, whether they row against the tide, or with it.

Thirdly, the Christian uses these things with a holy fear, lest earth should
rob heaven, and his outward enjoyments prejudice his heavenly interest; he eats
in fear, works in fear, rejoices in his abundance with fear: as Job
sanctified his children by offering a sacrifice, out of a fear lest they had
sinned; so the Christian is continually sanctifying his earthly enjoyments by
prayer, that so he may be delivered from the snare of them.

Moses to Pharaho's Court, to settle him there in worldly pomp and grandeur, (a
carnal heart indeed would have expounded Providence, and imported it as a fair
occasion put into his hands by God to have advanced himself into the throne,
(which some say he might in time have done,) but as an opportunity to make his
faith and self-denial more eminently conspicuous in throwing all these at his
heels, for which he has so honorable a remembrance among the Lords Worthies,
Heb. 11.24, 25. And truly a gracious soul reckons he cannot make so much of
his worldly interests any other way, as by offering them up for Christ's sake;
however that Traitor thought Mary's ointment might have been carried to a
better market, yet no doubt that good woman her self was only troubled, that
she had not one more precious to pour on her dear Saviors head. This makes
the Christian ever to hold the sacrificing knife at the throat of his worldly
enjoyments, ready to offer them up when God calls; overboard they shall go,
rather then hazard a wrack to faith or a good conscience; he sought them in the
last place, and therefore he will part with them in the first. Naboth will
hazard the Kings anger, (which at last cost him his life,) rather then sell an
acre or two of land which was his birthright. The Christian will expose all he
has in this wotld to preserve his hopes for another: Jacob in his march
toward Esau, sent his servants with his flocks before, and came himself with
his wives behind; if he can save any thing from his brothers rage, it shall be
what he loves best: If the Christian can save any thing, it shall be his soul,
his interest in Christ and Heaven, and then no matter if the rest go, even then
he can say, not as Esau to Jacob, Genesis 33.9, 11.
I have (...) a great deal, but as Jacob to him, (...) I have all, all I want,
all I desire, as David expresses it; This is all my salvation. all and my
desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. Now try, whether thy heart be tuned to this note, does
heaven give law to thy earthly enjoyments? would thou not keep thy honor,
estate, no, not life it self to prejudice thy heavenly nature and hopes? which
would thou choose, if thou could not keep both, a whole skin, or a sound
conscience? It was a strange answer, if true, which the Historian says Henry
the fifth gave to his Father, who had usurped the crown, and now dying sent for
this his son, to whom he said, Fair Son, take the crown, (which stood on his
pillow by his head) but God knows how I came by it: to whom he answered, I
care not how you came by it; now I have it, I will keep it as long as my sword
can defend it. He that keeps earth by wrong, cannot expect heaven by right.

CHAP. XIII. An Exhortation to the pursuit of heaven and heavenly things.
Ask the Kingdom for him also, said Solomon to Bath-sheba, when she begged
Abishag for Adonijah. What can the devil leave thee worth if he deprive thee of
these? and yet I confess I have heard of one, that wished God would let him
alone, and not take him from what he had here: Vile Brute! the voice of a swine
and not a man, that could choose to wallow in the dung and ordure of his carnal
pleasures, and wish himself for ever shut up with his swill in the hogs coat of
this dunghill earth, rather then leave these to dwell in Heavens Palace, and be
admitted to no meaner pleasures, then what God himself with his Saints enjoy.
It were even just if God gave such brutes as these a swines face to their
swinish hearts: But alas, how few then should we meet that would have the
countenance of a man? the greatest part of the world (even all that are carnal
and worldly,) being of the same mind, though not so impudent as that wretch,
to speak what they think. The lives of men tell plain enough that they say in
their hearts, it is good being here, that they wish they could build
Tabernacles on earth for all the mansions that are prepared in heaven. The
transgression of the wicked said in David's heart, that the fear of God, was
not before them, Psalm. 36.1. and may not the worldliness of a muck-worm say in
the heart of any rational man, that heaven and heavenly excellencies are not
before their eyes or thoughts? O what a deep silence is there concerning these
in the conversations of men! Heaven is such a stranger to the most, that very
few are heard to enquire the way thither, or so much as ask the question in
earnest, what they shall do to be saved. The most express no more desires of
attaining heaven, then those blessed souls now in heaven do of coming again to
dwell on earth; Alas, their heads are full of other projects, they are either
as Israel, scattered over the face of the earth to gather straw, or busied in
picking that straw they have gathered, laboring to get the world, or pleasing
themselves with what they have got. So that it is no more then needs to use
some arguments to call men off the world, to the pursuit of heaven, and what is
heavenly.

per vicarium, with somewhat besides it self. Now there is no such earthly
enjoyment, but may be so supplied, as to make its room more desirable then its
company. In Heaven there shall be light and no Sun, a rich feast and yet no
meat, glorious robes and yet no clothes, thete shall want nothing, and yet
none of this worldly glory be found there; yea, even while we are here, they
may be recompensed; thou may be under infirmities of body, and yet better
then if thou had health: The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick, the people
that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniqui^y, Isa. 33.34. Thou may
miss of worldly honor, and obtain with those Worthies of Christ, Heb. 11. a
good report by faith, and that is a name better then of the great ones of the
earth: thou may be poor in the world, and yet rich in grace, and Godliness
with content is great gain. In a word, if thou partest with thy temporal life,
and find an eternal, what do thou lose by the change? but heaven and
heavenly things are such as cannot be recompensed with any other. Thou have a
heavenly soul in thy bosom, lose that, and where can thou have another?
There is but one heaven, miss that, and where can you take up your lodging but
in hell? One Christ that can lead you thither, reject him, and there remains no
more sacrifice for sin. O that men would think on these things! Go sinner to
the world, and see what it can afford you in lieu of these; may be it will
offer to entertain you with its pleasures and delights; O poor reward for the
loss of Christ and heaven! Is this all thou can get? does Satan rob thee of
heaven and happiness, and only give thee this posie to smell on as thou art
going to thy execution? will these quench hellfire, or so much as cool those
flames thou art falling into? who but those that have foredone their
understandings, would take these toys and new nothings for Christ and heaven?
while Satan is pleasing your fancies with these rattles and bables, his hand is
in your treasure, robbing you of that which is only necessary; It Is more
necessary to be saved then to be; better not to be then to have a being in hell.

As many as walk by this rule, peace be upon them, and the whole Israel of God.
There are some indeed who run, and yet obtain not this prize, that seek and
find not; knock and find the door shut upon them but it is, because they do it
either not in the right manner, or in the right season. Some would have heaven,
but if God save them he must save their sins also, for they do not mean to part
with them; and how heaven can hold God and such company together judge you; As
they come in at one door, Christ and all those holy spirits with him would run
out at the other. Ungratful wretches, that will not come to this glorious
feast, unless they may bring that with them, which would disturb the joy of
that blisseful state, and offend all the guests that sit at the Table with
them, yea, drive God out of his own mansion house. A second sort would have
heaven, but like him in Ruth, chapter 4. v. 2, 3, 4. who had a mind to his Kinsman
Elimelechs land, and would have paid for the purchase, but he liked not to have
it by marrying Ruth, and so missed of it: Some seem very forward to have heaven
and salvation, if their own righteousness could procure the same, (all the
good they do, and duties they perform they lay up for this purchase) but at
last perish, because they close not with Christ, and take not heaven in his
right. A third sort are content to have it by Christ, but their desires are so
impotent and listlesse, that they put them upon no vigourous use of means to
obtain him, and so (like the sluggard) they starve, because they will not pull
their hands out of their bosom of sloth to reach their food that is before
them: for the world they have metal enough, and too much, they trudge far and
near for that, and when they have run themselves out of breath, can stand and
pant after the dust of the earth, as the Prophet phraseth it, Amos 2.7. But for
Christ and obtaining interest in him, O how key-cold are they! there is a kind
of cramp invades all the powers of their souls when they should pray, hear,
examine their hearts, draw out their affections in hungrings and thirstings
after his grace and Spirit. It Is strange to see how they even now went full
soop to the world, are suddenly becalmed, not a breath of wind stirring to any
purpose in their souls after these things, and is it any wonder that Christ
and Heaven should be denied to them that have no more mind to them? Lastly,
some have zeal enough to have Christ and Heaven, but it is when the Master of
the house is risen, and has shut to the door, and truly then they may stand
long enough rapping, before any come to let them in. There is no Gospel
preached in another world; but as for thee poor soul, who art persuaded to
renounce thy lusts, throw away the conceit of thy own righteousness, that thou
may run with more speed to Christ, and art so possessed with the excellency of
Christ, thy own present need of him, and salvation by him, that thou pantest
after him more then life it self; In Gods Name go on and speed, be of good
comfort, he calls thee by name to come unto him, that thou may have rest for
thy soul. There is an office in the Word, where thou may have thy soul and
its eternal happiness ensured to thee: Those that come to him, as he will
himself in no wise cast away, so not suffer any other to pluck them away. This
day (says Christ to Zaccheus) salvation is come to thy house, Luke 19.9.
Salvation comes to thee (poor soul) that openest thy heart to receive Christ,
thou have eternal life already, as sure as if thou were a glorified Saint, now
walking in that heavenly City. O Sirs, if there were a free trade proclaimed to
the Indies, enough gold for all that went, and a certainty of making a safe
voyage, who would stay at home? But alas, this can never be had: all this, and
infinitely more may be said for heaven; and yet how few leave their uncertain
hopes of the world to trade for it; what account can be gigiven for this, but
the desperate atheism of men's hearts? they are not yet fully persuaded whether
the Scripture speaks true or not, whether they may rely upon the discovery
that God makes in his Word of this newfound land, and those mines of spiritual
treasure, there to be had as certain. God open the eyes of the unbelieving
world, (as he did the Prophets servants,) that they may see these things to be
realities and not fictions; it is faith only that gives a being to these things
in our hearts. By faith Moses saw him that was invisible.

Jobs messengers at our door to tell us they are all dead; now in honor, but
who knows whether we shall not live to see that butied in scorn and reproach?
The Scripture compares the multitude of people to waters, the great ones of the
world sit upon these waters; as the ship floates upon the waves, so do their
honors upon the breath and favor of the multitude; and bow long is he like to
sit that is carried upon a wave? one while they are mounted up to heaven, (as
David speaks of the ship) and then down again they fall into the deep. We have
ten parts in the King, (say the men of Israel,) 2 Samuel 19.45. and in the very
next verse, Sheba does but sound a trumpet of sedition, saying, We have no part
in David, no inheritance in the son of Jesse, and the wind is in another
corner presently: for it is said, Every man of Israel went up from after David,
and followed Sheba. Thus was David cried up and down, and that almost in the
same breath. Unhappy man he, that has no surer portion then what this variable
world will afford him. The time of mourning for the departure of all earthly
enjoyments is at hand, we shall see them as Eglons servants did their Lord,
fallen down dead before us, and weep because they are not. What folly then is
it to dandle this vain world in our affections, whose joy like the childs
laughter on the mothers knee, is sure to end in a cry at last, and neglect
heaven and heavenly things which endure for ever? O remember Dives stirring up
his pillow, and composing himself to rest, how he was called up with the
tidings of death, before he was warm in this his bed of ease, and laid with
sorrow on another, which God had made for him in flames, from whence we hear
him roaring in the anguish of his conscience. O soul, could thou get but an
interest in the heavenly things we are speaking of, these would not thus slip
from under thee; heaven is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Christ an abiding
portion, his graces and comforts sure waters that fail not, but spring up unto
eternal life. The quails that were food for the Israelites lust soon ceased,
but the rock that was drink to their faith followed them; this rock is Christ:
make sure of him and he will make sure of thee, he will follow thee to thy
sickbed, and lie in thy bosom, chearing thy heart with his sweet comforts,
when worldly joys lie cold upon thee, (as David's clothes on him) and no
warmth of comfort to be got from them. When thy outward senses are locked up,
that thou can neither see the face of thy dear friends, nor hear the counsel
and comfort they would give thee, then he will come (though these doors be
shut) and say, Peace be to thee my dear child; fear not death or devils, I
stay to receive thy last breath, and have here my Angels waiting, that as soon
as thy soul is breathed out of thy body, they may carry and lay it in my
bosom of love, where I will nourish thee with those eternal joys that my
blood has purchased, and my love prepared for thee.

Fourthly, earthly things are empty and unsatisfying. We may have too much, but
never enough of them, they often breed loathing, but never content and indeed how
should they, being so disproportionate to the vast desires of these immortal
spirits that dwell in our bosoms? A spirit has not flesh and bones, neither
can it be fed with such, and what has the world, but a few bones covered over
with some fleshly delights to give it? The less is blessed of the greater, not
the greater of the less. These things therefore being so far inferior to the
nature of man, he must look higher if he will be blessed, even to God himself
who is the Father of spirits. God intended these things for our use, not
enjoyment; and what folly is it to think we can squeaze that from them, which
God never put in them? They are breasts, that moderately drawn, yield good
milk, sweet refreshing, but wring them too hard, and you will suck nothing but
wind or blood from them. We lose what they have, by expecting to find what
they have not; none find less sweetness and more dissatisfaction in these
things, then those who strive most to please themselves with them. The cream of
the creature floats a top, and he that is not content to fleet it, but thinks
by drinking a deeper draught to find yet more, goes further to speed worse,
being sure by the disappointment he shall meet to pierce himself through with
many sorrows. But all these fears might happily be escaped, if thou would
turn thy back on the creature, and face about for heaven: labor to get Christ,
and through him hopes of heaven, and thou take the right road to content,
thou shall see it before thee, and enjoy the prospect of it as thou go, yea,
find that every step thou drawest nearer and nearer to it; O what a sweet
change would thou find? As a sick man coming out of an impure unwholesome
climate, where he never was well, when he gets into fresh air or his native
soil: so will thou find a cheering of thy spirits, and reviving thy soul
with unspeakable content and peace. Having once closed with Christ, first the
guilt of all thy sins is gone, and this spoiled all thy mirth before; all
your dancing of a child, when some pin pricks it will not make it quiet or
merry; well, now that pin is taken out which robbed thee of the joy of thy
life. Secondly, thy nature is renewed and sanctified; and when is a man at
ease, if not when he is in health? and what is holiness, but the creature
restored to his right temper, in which God created him? Thirdly, thou becomest
a child of God, and that cannot but please thee well (I hope) to be son or
daughter to so great a King. Fourthly, thou have a right to heavens glory,
whither thou shall ere long be conducted to take and hold possession of that
thy inheritance for ever, and who can tell what that is? Nicephorus tells us of
one Agbarus, a great man, that (hearing so much of Christ's fame, by reason of
the miracles he wrought,) sent a Painter to take his picture, and that the
Painter when he came was not able to do it, because of that radiancy and divine
splendour which sat on Christ's face. Whether this be true or no, I leave it;
but to be sure, there is such a brightness on the face of Christ glorified,
and that happiness which in heaven Saints shall have with him, as forbids us
that dwell in mortal flesh to conceive of it aright, much more to express;
it is best going thither to be informed, and then we shall confess we on earth
heard not half of what we there find, yea, that our present conceptions are
no more like to that vision of glory we shall there have, then the Sun in the
Painters table, is to the Sun it self in the Heavens. And if all this be so,
why then do you spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not, yea, for that which keeps you from that which can
satisfy? Earthly things are like some trash, which does not only not nourish,
but take away the appetite from that which would. Heaven and heavenly things
are not relished by a soul vitiated with these. Manna, though for
deliciousness called Angels food, yet but light bread to an Egyptian palate.
But these spiritual things depend not on thy opinion, O man, whoever thou art
(as earthly things in a great measure do) that the value of them should rise or
fall as the worlds exchange does, and as vain man is pleased to rate them;
think gold dirt, and it is so; for all the royal stamp on it, Count the
swelling titles of worldly honor (that proud dust brags so in) vanity, and
they are such: but have base thoughts of Christ, and he is not the worse;
slight heaven as much as you will, it will be heaven still, and when thou
come so far to thy wits with the Prodigal, as to know which is best fare,
husks or bread; where best living, among hogs in the field, or in thy Fathers
house, then thou will know how to judge of these heavenly things better, till
then go and make the best market thou can of the world, but look not to find
this pearl of price, true satisfaction to thy soul in any of the creatures
shops; and were it not better to take it when thou may have it, then after
thou have wearied thy self in vain in following the creature, to come back
with shame, and may be miss of it here also, because thou would not have it
when it was offered?

VERSE 13. Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able
to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.


THe Apostle in these words re-assumes his former Exhortation mentioned, verse
11. and presses it with a new force, from that more particular discovery which
he gives of the enemy, verse 12. where like a faithful Scout he makes a full
report of Satan's great power and malice, and also discloseth what a dangerous
design he has upon the Saints, no less then to despoil them of all that is
heavenly: from all which he gives them a second Alarm, and bids them Arm,
arm, Wherefore take unto you, etc. In the words consider,

First, the exhortation with the inference, Wherefore take unto you the whole
Armor of God.

Secondly, the argument with which he urges the exhortation, and that ss
double.

First, That ye may be able to withstand in the evil day.

Secondly, having done all to stand; that is, both able to fight, and able to
conquer. As for the first general, the Exhortation, we shall wave it as to the
substance of it, being the same with what we have handled, v. 11. only there
are two observables which we shall lightly touch. The one from the repetition
of the very same exhortation so soon, one verse only interposed. The other from
the verb the Apostle uses here, which being not the same with v. 11. affords
a different note. There it is*(...), here, (...).

CHAP. I. The reason why the Apostle renews the same Exhortation, as also what
truths Ministers are often to preach to their people.
FIrst of the first, the repetition of the same exhortation, and that in so
short a space. Sure it was not for want of matter, but rather out of abundance
of zeal, that he harps the second time on the same string. Indeed he is the
better Workman, who drives one nail home with reiterated blows, then he which
covets to enter many, but fastens none. Such Preachers are not likely to reach
the conscience, who hop from one truth to another, but dwell on none. Every
hearer is not so quick as the Preacher, to take a notion as it is first darted
forth, neither can many carry away so much of that Sermon, which is made up all
of varieties, (where a point is no sooner named, but presently pulls back its
hand, and another makes a breach and comes forth, before the first has been
opened and hammered upon the conscience by a powerful application) As where the
discourse is homogeneal, and some one necessary truth is cleared, insisted on,
and urged home with blow upon blow. Here the whole matter of the discourse is a
kin, and one part remembered brings the memory acquainted with the other,
whereas in the former one puts out the other in a weak memory. Short hints and
away may please a Scholar, but not so profitable for others, the one more fit
for the Schools, but the other for the Pulpit. Were I to buy a garment in a
shop, I should like him better, that lays one good piece or two before me that
are for my turn, (which I may fully peruse) then him, who takes down all his
shop, and heaps piece upon piece, (merely to show his store) till at last for
variety I can look wishly on none, they lie so one upon another.

Paul here goes over and over the same exhortation, v. 11. v. 13. and elsewhere
tells us, this is not grievous to him, but to them it is safe, to hear the same
things over and over, Phil. 3.1. There are three sorts of Truths must in our
Ministry be preached often.

Fundamental Truths, or, as we call them, catechise-points, that contain truths
necessary to be known and believed. The weight of the whole building lies on
these ground-cells, more then on superstructory truths. In a Kingdom there are
some staple commodities and trades, without which the Commonweal could not
subsist, as wool, corn, etc. in our country, and these ought to be encouraged
above others, (which though they be an ornament to the Nation, yea, add to the
riches of it, yet are not so necessary to the subsistence of it) Thus here;
there is an excellent use of our other Ministerial labors, as they tend to
beautify and adorn, yea, enrich the Christian with the knowledge of spiritual
mysteries; but that which is chiefly to be regarded is the constant faithful
opening of those main truths of the Gospel. These are the Landmarks, and show
us the bounds of truth; and as it is in towns that butt one upon another; if
the inhabitants do not sometimes perambulate, and walk the bounds, (to show the
youth what they are) when the old studs are gone, the next generation may lose
all their privileges by their encroaching neighbors, because not able to tell
what is their own. There is no fundamental truth, but has some evil neighbor,
(heresy I mean,) butting on it; and the very reason why a spirit of error
has so encroach't of late years upon truth, is, because we have not walked
the bounds with our people in acquainting them with, and stablishing their
judgments on these fundamental points, so frequently and carefully as is
requisite. And people are much in the fault, because they cast so much contempt
upon this work, that they count a Sermon on such point; next to lost, and only
childs meat.

Secondly, those truths are often to be preached, which Ministers observe to be
most undermined by Satan or his instruments in the judgments and lives of
their people. The Preacher must read and study his people as diligently as any
book in his study; and as he finds them, dispense like a faithful steward unto
them. Paul takes notice that the Galatians had been in ill handling by false
apostles, who had even bewitch't them back to the Law in that great point of
Justification, and see how he bea^s upon that point. Our people complain, we
are so much, so often reproving the same error or sin, and the fault is their
own, because they will not leave it; who will blame the dog for continuing to
bark, when the thief is all the while in the yard? Alas, alas, it is not once
or twice rowsing against sin will do it. When people think the Minister shows
his laziness, because he preaches the same things, he may then be exercising
his patience, in continuing to exhort and reprove those who oppose, waiting, if
at last God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. We are
bid to lift up our voice like a trumpet, and would you have us cease while the
battle lasts, or sound a retreat when it should be a battle?

Thirdly, truths of daily use and practice. These are like bread and salt,
whatever else is on, these must be on the board every meal. Saint Peter was of
this mind, 2 Pet. 1.12. I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things, though ye know them. He had (you may see) been
speaking of such graces and duties, that they could not pass a day without the
exercise of them, and therefore will be ever their Monitour, to stir up their
pure minds about them. All is not well, when a man is weary of his ordinary
food, and nothing will go down but rarities; the stomach is sickly, when a man
delights rather to pick some sallet, then eat of solid meat, and how far this
dainty age is gore in this spiritual disease, I think few are so far come to
themselves, as yet to consider and lament. O Sirs, be not weary as in doing, so
not in hearing those savoury truths preached you have daily use of, because you
know them, and have heard them often; faith and repentance will be good
doctrine to preach and hear to the end of the world; you may as well quarrel
with God, because he has made but one heaven, and one way to it, as with the
Preacher for preaching these over and over; if thy heart were humble, and thy
palate spiritual, old truths would be new to thee every time thou hear them.
In heaven the Saints draw all their wine of joy, (as I may so say at one tap)
and shall to all eternity, and yet it never tastes flat. God is that one object
their souls are filled with, and never weary of, and can any thing of God and
his love be wearisome to thee in the hearing here? I am not all this while an
Advocate for any Loyterer in our Lords vineyard; for any slothful servant in
the work of the Gospel, who wraps up his talent in idleness, or buries it in
the earth, (where (may be) he is digging and playing the worldling all the
week, and then has nothing to set before his people on the Lords day, but one
or two old moldy loaves, which were kneaded many years before.) This is not
the good Steward, here is the old, but where are the new things which he should
bring out of his treasure? If the Minister labors not to increase by stock, he
is the worst thief in the Parish. It is wicked for a man trusted with the
improving of Orphans estates, to let them lie dead by him, much more for a
Minister not to improve his gifts, (which I may call the town-stock given for
the good of the souls of both rich and poor:) if that Preacher was wise, Eccl.
12.9. who still taught the people knowledge, that is, was ever going on,
endeavoring to build them higher in knowledge, and that he might, did give
good heed, and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs; then surely he will
be proved a foolish Preacher at last, that wastes his time in sloth, or spends
more of it in studying how to add to his estate out of his peoples, then how
to add to their gifts and graces, by a conscionable endeavor to increase his
own.

CHAP. II. The best of Saints subject to decline in their graces, and why we
are to endeavor a recovery of decays in grace.
Ephesus, who (at least many of them) were not now to put on this Armor by a
Conversion, (or the first work of faith, which no doubt had already past upon
many among them) he in regard of them and believers to the end of the world
has a further meaning, i. e. that they would put on more close where this
armor hangs loose, and they would recover where they have let fall any duty,
or decayed in any grace. So that the Note is,

Doct.
That the Christian should have an especial care to repair his broken Armor
to recover his decaying graces. This Armor may be battered; I might show sad
examples in the several pieces. Was not Jacobs girdle of truth and sincerity
unbuckled, when he used that sinful policy to get the blessing? he was not the
plain man then, but the subplantour; but he had as good have stayed Gods time:
he was paid home in his own kind. He puts a cheat on his father, and did not
Laban put a cheat on him, giving Leah for Rachel? What say you to David's
breast plate of righteousness in the matter of Vriah? was it not shot through,
and that holy man fearfully wounded? who lay almost a year (for ought we read
of him,) before he came to himself, so far as to be thoroughly sensible of his
sin, till Nathan a faithful Surgeon was sent to search the wound, and clear
it of that dead flesh, which had grown over it? And Jonah, (otherwise a holy
Prophet) when God would send him on an errand to Ni neveh, he has his shoes to
seek, I mean that preparation and readiness with which his mind should have
been shod, to have gone at the first call. Good Hezikiah we find how near his
helmet of hope was of being beaten off his head, who tells us himself what his
thoughts were in the day of his distress, that he should not see the Lord in
the land of the living, expecting that God would never let go his hold, till
like a Lion he had broke his bones, and at last made an end of him. Even
Abraham himself, famous for faith, yet had his fits of unbelief and
distrustful qualms coming over his valiant heart; now in this case the
Christians care should be to get his armor speedily repaired. A battered
helmet is next to no helmet in point of present use; grace in a decay, is like
a man pulled off his legs by sickness; if some means be not used to recover
it, little service will be done by it, or comfort received from it. Therefore
Christ gives this Church of Ephesus (to whom Paul wrote this Epistle) this
counsel, To remember from whence she was fallen, to repent and do her first
works, How many does a declining Christian wrong at once?

oil, flax and wool: But the Christian by the other, bereaves him of the
glory which should be paid him from his faith, zeal, patience, self-denial,
sincerity and the rest. Suppose a Master should trust one servant with his
money, and another with his child to be looked to; would he not be more
displeased to see his dear child hurt, or almost killed by the negligence of
the one, then his money stolen by the carelessness of the other? Grace is the
new creature, the birth of the Spirit, when this comes to any harm by the
Christians careless walking it must needs go nearer the heart of God, then the
wrong he has from the world, who are trusted with nothing like this.

he wrongs his whole body that seeks not cure for a wound in any member. We are
bid to love one another, 2 epist. of John 5. v. but how shall we show our love
to one another? the very next words will direct us, And this is love, that we
walk after his Commandments. Indeed we show little love to our brethren by
sinning, whereby we are sure either to ensnare them or grieve them; and how to
let grace go down, and sin not go up is a riddle to any that know what they
both are.

Thirdly, the Christian wrongs himself in not endeavoring to repair his
broken armor, and recover his declining grace. By this he loses the evidence
of his inheritance, at least so blots it that it cannot be so clearly perceived
by him. A declining Christian must needs be a doubting Christian, because the
common symptom of an hypocrite, is to wear and waste like a stake set in the
ground, (which rots, while true grace like the tree grows.) Is not this the
knot which the devil poseth many poor souls withal, and finds them work for
many years to untie? If thou were a Christian thou would grow. Right Saints
go from strength to streugth, and thou go from strength to weakness. They
go up the hill to Zion, every Ordinance and Providence is a step that bears
them nearer Heaven; but thou go down the hill, and art further from thy
salvation then when thou did first believe (as thou thoughtest;) and does it
stand wirh thy wisdom, Christian, to put a staff into the dev^ls hand, an
argument into his mouth, to dispute against thy salvation with? If you held an
estate by the life of a child, which upon the death of it should all go away
from you, that child I warrant you should be well looked unto; his head should
not ache, but you would post to the Physician for counsel; I pray what is your
evidence for that glorious estate you hope for? Is it not Christ within you? Is
not this new creature (which may well be called Christ for its likeness to
him) the young heir of Heavens glory? and when that is sick or weak, is it not
time to use all means for its recovery? while thus, thou can neither live
nor die comfortably. Not live; a man in a consumption has little joy of his
life, he neither finds sweetness in his meat, nor delight in his work, as a
healthfu^ man does. O how sweet is the promise to faith when active and
vigourous? how easy the yoke of the Command to the Christian, when his
conscience is not galled with guilt, nor hi strength enfeebled by temptation?
but the Christian in a declining condition, he tastes not the promise, every
command is grievous, and every duty burdensome to him: he goes in pain like one
whose foot is out of joint, though the way be never so pleasant. And he is as
unfit to die as he is to live, such a one can like no more to hear the news of
death, then a tenant that wants his rent does to hear of the quarter-day. This
made David beg time of God; Spare me a little, that I may recover my strength.

Having shown you why the Christian should endeavor to recover his declining
graces, it will be very requisite to give a word of counsel to the Christian.

First, to direct him how to judge of the declining state of grace, that he may
not pass a false judgment upon himself therein.

Secondly, to direct him when he finds grace to be in a declination, how he
may recover it.

CHAP. III. A cautionary direction from what we may not, as also from what we
may judge our graces to be in a declination.
How may a Christian judge whether grace be declining in him or no?



Secondly, positively, by what he may certainly conclude a decay of grace.

First, negatively, and that in several particulars.

of poor souls complaints in this case O they never felt pride, hypocrisy and
other corruptions so haunt them as now; none knows how they are vexed with
these, and the like besides themselves. Now let me ask thee who make this sad
moan, whether thou do not think these corruptions were in thee before thou
did thus feel them? how often have thou prayed as formally, and not been
troubled? how often have thou stood chatting with the same lusts, and thy soul
has not been laid low before the Lord with such abasement of thy self as now?
deal faithfully between God and thy soul, and tell not a lie for God by
bearing false witness against thy self. If it be thus, thou have rather a
comfortable sign of grace growing then decaying. Sin cannot be on the getting
hand, if the sense of sin grow quick; this is the concomitant of a thriving
soul, none so full of complaints of their own hearts as such; the least sin
goes now to their very souls, which makes them think viler of themselves then
ever* but it is not the increase of sin in them, but the advance of their love
to Christ makes them judge so: when the Sun shines with some power, and the
year gets up, we observe, though we may have frosts and snow, yet they do not
lie long, but are soon dissolved by the Sun, O it is a sweet sign that the love
of Christ shines with a force upon thy soul, that no corruptions can lie long
in thy bosom, but they melt into sorrow and bitter complaints. That is the
decaying soul where sin lies bound up and frozen, little sense of, or sorrow
for it appears.

My God, my God; here faith was at its meridian, when it was midnight in
respect of joy. Possibly thou come from an Ordinance, and bring not home
with thee those sheaves of comfort thou usest to do, and therefore conclude
grace acted not in thee as formerly. Truly if thou have nothing else to go by,
thou may wrong the grace of God in thee exceedingly. Because thy comfort is
extrinsecal to thy duty, a boon which God may give or not, yea, does give to
the weak, and deny to the strong. The traveller may go as fast, and rid as much
ground, when the Sun does not shine, as when it does; though (indeed he goes
not so merrily on his journey) nay, sometimes he makes the more have; the warm
Sun makes him sometime to lie down and loyter, but when dark and cold he puts
on with more speed. Some graces thrive best (like some flowers) in the shade,
such as humility, dependence on God, etc,



Secondly, positively, how thou may conclude that grace is declining; and
that in a threefold respect.

First, in reference to temptations to sin.

Secondly, in reference to the duties of Gods worship.

Thirdly, the frame of thy heart in worldly employments.

First, in reference to sin, and that is threefold.

David's heart smote him, when he but rent the skirt of Saul's garment: at
another time when his eye glanced on Bathsheba, he takes no such notice of the
snare Satan had him in, and so is led from one sin to another, which plainly
showed that grace in him was heavy-eyed, and his heart not in so holy a frame
as it had been. If an enemy comes up to the gates, and the sentinel not so much
as give an alarm to the City of his approach, it shows he is off his guard,
either fallen asleep, or worse: If grace were awake, and thy conscience had not
contracted some hardness, it would do its office.



David's natural heat sure was much decayed, when he needed so many clothes to
be laid on him, and he yet feel so little heat, the time was he would have
sweat with fewer. I am afraid, many their love to Christ will be found (in
these declining times) to have lost so much of its youthful vigor, that what
would formerly have put them into a holy fury, and burning zeal against some
sins, (such as Sabbath-breaking, pride of apparel, neglect of family duties,
etc.) has now much ado to keep any heat at all in them against the same.

Secondly, in point of duties of worship.

in any duty; possibly thou know the time when thy heart echoed back to the
motions of Gods Spirit, bidding thee, Seek his face; Thy face, Lord, will I
seek; yea, thou did long as much till a Sabbath or Sermon-season came, as the
carnal wretch does till it be gone; but now thy pulse does not beat so quick a
march to the Ordinances public or secret; nature cannot but decay, if appetite
to food go away; a craving soul is the thriving soul, such a child that will
not let his mother rest, but is frequently crying for the breast.





Thirdly, by thy behavior in thy worldly employments.

First, when thy worldly occasions do not leave thee in so free and spiritual a
disposition, to return into the presence of God as formerly; may be thou
could have come from thy shop and family-employments to thy closet, and
find that they have kept thee in frame, yea, may be delivered thee up in a
better frame for those duties, but now it is otherwise, thou can not so shake
them off, but they cleave to thy spirit, and give an earthly savor to thy
praying and hearing; thou have reason to bewail it; when nature decays men, go
more stooping, and it is a sign some such decay is in thee, that thou can not
as thou usest, lift up thy heart from earthly to spiritual duties. They were
intended as helps against temptation, and therefore when they prove snares to
us there is a distemper on us. If we wax worse after sleep, the body is not
right, because the nature of sleep is to refresh; if exercise indisposeth for
work, the reason is in our bodies: So here.

Secondly, when thy diligence in thy particular calling is more selfish;
possibly thou have wrought in thy shop, and set close at thy study, in
obedience to the command chiefly; thy carnal interests have swayed but little
with thee, but now thou tradest more for thy self, and less for God. O have a
care of this.

Thirdly, when thou can not bear the disappointment of thy carnal ends in thy
particular calling, as thou have done; thou workest and gettest little of the
world, thou preachest and art not much esteemed, and thou know not well how
to brook these. The time was thou could retire thy self into God, and make
up all thou did want elsewhere in him; but now thou art not so well satisfied
with thy estate, rank and condition; thy heart is fingering for more of these
then God allows thee; this shows declining; children are harder to be pleased,
and old men, (whose decay of nature makes them more froward, and in a manner
children the second time) then others; labor therefore to recover thy decaying
grace, and as this lock grows, so thy strength with it will, to acquiesce in
the disposure of Gods Providence.

CHAP. IV. A word of counsel for the recovery of declining grace.
WE come now to give a few directions to the Christian, how to recover decaying
grace.

Enquire faithfully into the cause of thy declining. The Christians armor
decays two ways; either by violent bartery, when the Christian is overcome by
temptations to sin; or else by neglecting to forbish and scour it with the use
of those means which are as oil, to keep it clean and bright. Now enquire,
which of these have been the cause of thy decay. It is like both concur.



First, thou art to renew thy repentance. It is Christ's counsel, Rev. 2.5. to
Ephesus, Repent, and do thy first works; where it is not only commanded as a
duty, but prescribed as a means for her recovery; as if he had said, Repent,
that thou may do thy first works. So, Hosea 14.2. The Lord sets backsliding
Israel about this work, bidding her take words and turn to the Lord; and, v. 4.
he then tells her he will take her in hand to recover her of her sins, I will
heal their backslidings: a repenting soul is under promise of healing; and
therefore (Christian) go and search thy heart, as thou would do thy house,
if some thief or murderer lay hid in it, to cut thy throat in the night; and
when thou have found the sin that has done thee the mischief, then labor to
fill thy heart with shame for it, and indignation against it, and so go big
with sorrow, and cast it forth before the Lord in a heartbreaking confession;
better thou do this, then Satan do thy errand to God for thee.

that is perfect, converting (or rather restoring) the soul, Psalm. 19.7.
Though thou were pined to skin and bones, all thy strength wasted, yet faith
would soon recruit thee, and enable every grace to perform its office
cheerfully. Faith sucks peace from the promise, called peace in believing; from
peace flows joys, Being justified by faith we have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
and, v. 2. We rejoice in the hope of glory; and joy affords strength: The joy
of the Lord is our strength.

Lent; or as some unsound Professors among our selves, who seem to bestir
themselves before a Sacrament or day of Fasting, with a great noise of zeal,
and then let those very lusts live peaceably in them all the year after. No,
this is child-play to do and undo; thou must mortify daily thy lusts by the
Spirit, Romans 8.13. Follow but this work conscionably in thy Christian course,
making it thy endeavor, (as constantly as the laboring man goes out every day
to work in the field where his calling lies) to watch thy heart, and use all
means for the discovery of sin, and as it breaks forth to be humbled for it,
and be chopping at the root of it with this axe of mortification; and thou
shall see by the blessing of God what a change for the better there will be in
the constitution of thy grace; thou who art now so poor, so pale, that thou art
afraid to see thy own face long in the glass of thy own conscience, shall then
reflect with joy upon thy own conscience, and dare to converse with thy self
without those surprizals of horror and fear, which before did appale thee;
thy grace, though it shall not be thy rejoicing, yet it will be thy evidence
for Christ, in whom it is: and lead thee in with boldness to lay claim to him,
while the loose Christian, whose grace is overgrown with lusts (for want of
this weeding hook) shall stand trembling at the door, questioning whether his
grace be true or no; and from that doubt of his welcome.



David tells us, where he renewed his spiritual life, and got his soul so often
into a heavenly heat, when grace in him began to chill. The Word (he tells us)
quickened him. This was the Sunny bank he fate under. The Word draws forth the
Christians grace, by presenting every one with an object suitable to act upon,
this is of great power to rouse them up; as the coming in of a friend, makes us
(though sleepy before) shake off all drowsinesse to enjoy his company.
Affections they are actuated when their object is before them; if we love a
person, this is excited by sight of him, or anything that minds us of him; if
we hate one our blood rises much more against him when before us. Now the Word
bring the Christian graces and their object together. Here love may delight her
self with the beholding Christ, who is set out to life there in all his love
and loveliness; here the Christian may see his sins in a glass that will not
flatter him; and can there any godly sorrow be in the heart, any hatred of sin,
and not come forth, while the man is reading what they cost Christ for him?

Secondly, from the Word go to meditation; this is as bellows to the fire;
that grace which lies chosk't and eaten up for want of exercise, will by this
be cleared and break forth; while thou art musing this fire will burn, and thy
heart grow hot within thee, according to the nature of the subject thy thoughts
dwell upon: resolve therefore (Christian) to enclose some time from all worldly
Suitours, wherein thou may every day (if possible) at least take a view of
the most remarkable occurrences that have past between God and thee; First, ask
thy soul what takings it has had that day, what mercies heaven has sent into
thee, and do not when thou have asked the question, (like Pilate) go out; but
stay till thy soul has made report of Gods gracious dealings to thee: and (if
thou be wise to observe, and faithful to relate them) thy conscience must
tell thee, that the cock was never turned, the breast of mercy never put up all
the day, yea, while thou art viewing these fresh mercies, telling over this new
coin, hot out of the mint of Gods bounty, ancient mercies they will come
crowding in upon thee, and call for a place in thy thoughts, and tell thee what
God has done for thee months and years ago, (and indeed old debts should not
be paid last) give them (Christian) all a hearing one time or another, and thou
shall see how they will work upon thy ingenious spirit. It is with the
Christian in this case, as with some Merchants servant that keeps his Masters
cash, he tells his Master he has a great sum of his by him, and desires he
would discharge him of it, and see how his accounts stand, but he can never
find him at leisure. There is a great treasure of mercy always in the
Christians hands, and conscience is often calling the Christian to take the
account, and see what God has done for him, but seldom it is, he can find time
to tell his mercies over; and is it any wonder that such should go behinde-hand
in their spiritual estate, who take no more notice what the gracious dealings
of God are with them? how can he be thankful that seldom thinks what he
receives? or patient when God afflicts, that wants one of the most powerful
arguments to pacify a mutinous spirit in trouble, and that is taken from the
abundant good we receive at the hands of the Lord as well as a little evil? how
can such a souls love flame to God, that is kept at such a distance from the
mercies of God, which are fuel to it? and the like might be said of all the
other graces. Secondly, reflect upon thy self, and bestow a few serious
thoughts upon thy own behavior, what it has been toward God and man all
along the day. Ask thy soul, as Elisha his servant, Whence come thou, O my
soul? where have thou been? what have thou done for God this day, and how? and
when thou go about this, look that thou neither be taken off from a
through search, (as Jacob was by Rachels specious excuse) nor be found to
cocker thy self, (as Eli his sons) when thou shall upon enquiry take thy heart
tardy in any part of thy duty; take heed what thou do, for thou judge for
God, who receives the wrong by thy sin, and therefore will do himself justice
if thou will not.

Thirdly, from meditation go to prayer; indeed a soul in meditation is on his
way to prayer; that duty leads the Christian has to this, and this brings help
to that; when the Christian has done his utmost by meditation to excite his
graces, and chase his spirit into some divine heat, he knows all this is but to
lay the wood in order. The fire must come from above to kindle, and this must
be fetched by prayer. They say, stars have greatest influences when they are in
conjunction with the Sun; then sure the graces of a Saint should never work
more powerfully then in prayer, for then he is in the nearest conjunction and
communion with God. That Ordinance which has such power with God, must needs
have a mighty influence on our selves. It will not let God rest, but raises
him up to his peoples succor, and is it any wonder if it be a means to rouse
up and excite the Christians grace? how often do we see a dark cloud upon David's
spirit at the beginning of his prayer, which by that time he is a little warm
in his work, begins to clear up, and before he ends breaks forth into high
actings of faith and acclamations of praise? Only here (Christian) take heed of
formal praying, this is as baneful to grace as not praying. A plaster, though
proper and of sovereign virtue, yet if it be laid on cold may do more hurt then
good.

Fourthly, to all the former join fellowship and communion with the Saints
thou lived amongst. No wonder to hear a house is robbed that stands far from
neighbors; he that walks in communion of Saints, he travels in company, he
dwells in a City where one house keeps up another, to which Jerusalem is
compared. It Is observable concerning the house in whose ruins Jobs children
were entombed, that a wind came from the wilderness and smote the four
corners of it; it seems it stood alone; the devil knows what he does in
hindering this great Ordinance of communion of Saints; in doing this he hinders
the progress of grace, yea, brings that which Christians have, into a
declining wasting state. The Apostle couples those two duties close together,
to hold fast our Profession, and to consider one another, and provoke unto love
and to good works, Heb. 10.23, 24. Indeed it is a dangerous step to Apostasy,
to forsake the communion of Saints; hence it is said of Demas, he has left us,
and embraced the present world. O what mischief has Satan done us in these few
late years, in this one particular? what is become of this communion of Saints?
where are there two or three to be found that can agree to walk together? those
that could formerly suffer together, cannot sit together at their Fathers
table, can hardly pray one with or one for another; the breath of one Christian
is strange to another that once lay in his, bosom; -- This is a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation.

CHAP. V. The words opened, and what is meant by the evil day.
That ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done, etc.
WE come to the argument with which the Apostle urges the exhortation, and
that is double.

The first has respect to the hour of battle, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day.

The second to the happy issue of the war, which will crown the Christian thus
armed, and that is certain victory, and having done all stand.

First of the first, That ye may be able to withstand in the evil day; But what
is this evil day? Some take this evil day to comprehend the whole life of a
Christian here below in this vale of tears; and then the argument runs thus:
Take to your selves the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to persevere
to the end of your life, which you will find, as it were, one continued day of
trouble and trial, Thus Jacob draws a black line over his whole life, Few and
evil have the days of my life been, Genesis 47. What day shines so fair that over
casts not before night, yea, in which the Christian meets not with some shower
or other, enough to deserve the name of an evil day? Every day has its
portion, yea, proportion; Sufficient is the evil of the day. We need not borrow
and take up sorrows upon use of the morrow, to make up our present load; as we
read of daily bread, so of a daily cross, Luke 9.23. which we are bid to take,
not to make, (we need not make crosses for our selves, as we are prone to do)
God in his Providence will provide one for us; and we are bid to take it up,
but we hear nothing of laying it down, till cross and we lie down together;
our troubles and our lives are coetaneous, live and die together; here when joy
comes sorrow is at its heel, staff and rod go together. Job himself, (whose
prosperity the devil so grudged, and set forth in all his bravery and pomp, Job
1.10. as if his Sun had no shadow,) hear what account this good man gives of
this his most flourishing time, chap. 3. 26. I was not in safety, neither had I
rest, neither was I quiet. There were some troubles that broke his rest, when
his bed was (to thinking) as sort as heart could wish, even now this good man
tosses and tumbles from one side to the other, and is not quiet. If one should
have come to Job and blessed him with his happy condition, and said Surely,
Job, thou could be content with what thou have for thy portion, if thou
might have all this settled on thee and thy heirs after thee, he would have
said, as once Luther, that God should not put him off with these. Such is the
Saints state in this bottom, that their very life here, and all the pompous
entertainments of it, they are their cross, because they detain them from
their crown. We need nothing to make our life an evil day more then our absence
from our chief good; which cannot be recompensed by the world, nor enjoyed with
it. Only this goodness there is in this evil, that it is short, our life is
but an evil day, it will not last long; and sure it was mercy that God has
abridged so much of the term of man's life in these last days, wherein so much
of Christ and Heaven are discovered, that it would have put the Saints patience
hard to it, to have known so much of the upper worlds glory, and then be kept
so long from it, as the Fathers in the first age were. O comfort one another
(Christians) with this; though your life be evil with troubles, yet it is short;
a few steps, and you are out of the rain. There is great difference between a
Saint in regard of the evils he meets with, and the wicked; as two travelers
riding contrary ways, (both taken in the rain and wet) but one rides from the
rain, and so is soon out of the shower; but the other rides into the rainy
corner, the further he goes, the worse he is. The Saint he meets with troubles
as well as the wicked, but he is soon out of the shower; when death comes he
has fair weather: but the wicked the further he goes the worse; what he meets
with here, is but a few drops, the great storm is the last. The pouring out of
Gods wrath shall be in hell, where all the deeps of horror are opened, both
from above of Gods righteous fury, and from beneath of their own accusing and
tormenting consciences.

Secondly, others take the phrase in a more restrained sense, to denote those
particular seasons of our life, wherein more especially we meet with
afflictions and sufferings. Beza reads it tempore adverso, in the time of our
adversity. Though our whole life be evil, if compared with Heavens blisseful
state, our clearest day, night to that glorious morning; yet one part of our
life compared with another may be called good, and the other evil, we have our
vicissitudes here. The Providence of God to his Saints here, while on this low
bottom of earth are mixed and parti-colored, Ezekiel. 18.
as was signified by the speckled horses in Zechariahs vision; Red and white,
peace and war, joy and sorrow checker our days. Earth is a middle place betwixt
heaven and hell, and so is our state here; it partakes of both: we go up hill
and down till we get to our journeys end, yea, we find the deepest slough
nearest our fathers house. Death, I mean, into which all the other troubles of
out life fall, as streams into some great river, and with which they all end,
and are swallowed up. This being the comprehensive evil, I conceive to be meant
here, being made remarkable by a double article (...), that day, that evil day,
not excluding those other days of tribulation which intervene. These are but
so many petty deaths, every one snatching away a piece of our lives with them,
or like Pages sent before to usher in this King of terrors that comes behind.

The phrase being opened; let us consider the strength of this first argument,
with which the Apostle reinforceth his exhortation, of taking to our selves the
whole Armor of God, and that consists in three weighty circumstances.



that you may withstand in the evil day. He shuts out all hope of escaping, as
if he had said you have no way but to withstand, please not your selves with
thoughts of shunning battle; the evil day must come, be you armed or notarm'd.

to withstand. As we cannot run from it, so not bear up before it, and oppose
the force which will be made against us, except clad with Armor. These would
afford several points, but for brevity we shall lay them together in one
Conclusion.

CHAP. VI. Shows that the day of affliction is evil, and in what respects, as
also unavoidable, and why to be prepared for.
Doct.
IT behooves everyone to arm and prepare himself for the evil day of affliction
and death, which unavoidably he must conflict with. The point has three
branches.

First, the day of affliction and death is an evil day.

Secondly, this evil day is unavoidable.

Thirdly, it behooves every one to provide for this evil day.



Against this family do I devise an evil, Mic. 3.2. yea more, he impropriates
it so to himself, as that he will not have us think any can do us evil beside
himself. It Is the Prerogative he glories in, that there is no evil in the City,
but it is of his doing, Amos 3.6. And well it is for the Saints that their
crosses are all made in heaven, they would not else be so fitted to their backs
as they are. But for the evil of sin, he disownes it with a strict charge, that
we lay not this brat, which is begotten by Satan upon our impure hearts, at his
door. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man, James 1.13.

Secondly, if affliction were thus intrinsecally evil, it could in no respect
be the object of our desire, which sometimes it is and may be. We are to choose
affliction rather then sin, yea, the greatest affliction before the least sin.
Moses chose affliction with the people of God, rather then the pleasures of sin
for a season. We are bid rejoice when we fall into diverse temptations, that is,
afflictions.

But in what respects then may the day of affliction be called evil?

We looked for peace, and behold no good. A merry heart is called a good heart,
a sad spirit an evil Heb.12.11
while present is joyous, but grievous; it has like Physic, an unpleasing
farewell to the sense. Therefore Solomon, speaking of the evil days of
sickness, expresses them to be so distasteful to nature, that we shall say,
We have no pleasure in them. They take away the joy of our life. Natural joy is
a true flower of the Sun of prosperity, it opens and shuts with it. It Is true
indeed, the Saints never have more joy then in their affliction, but this comes
in upon another score; they have a good God that sends it in, or else they
would be as sadly on it as others. It Is no more natural for comfort to spring
from afflictions, then for grapes to grow on thorns, or Manna in the
wilderness. The Israelites might have looked long enough for such bread, if
heaven had not miraculously rained it down. God chooses this season to make
the Omnipotency of his love the more conspicuous. As Elijah to add to the
miracle, first causes water in abundance to be poured upon the wood and
sacrifice, so much as to fill the trench, and then brings fire from heaven by
his prayer, to lick it up: Thus God poures out the flood of affliction upon his
children, and then kindles that inward joy in their bosoms which licks up all
their sorrow, yea, he makes the very waters of affliction they float on, add a
further sweetness to the music of their spiritual joy, but still it is God
that is good, and affliction that is evil.

Secondly, the day of affliction is an evil day, as it is an unwelcome
remembrancer of what sinful evils have passed in our lives. It revives the
memory of old sins, which it may be, were buried many years ago in the grave of
forgetfulness. The night of affliction is the time when such ghosts use to
walk in men's consciences; and as the darkness of the night adds to the
horror of any scareful object, so does the state of affliction (which is it
self uncomfortable) add to the terror of our sins then remembered. Never did
the Patriarchs sin look so ghastly on them, as when it recoiled upon them in
their distress, Genesis 42.21. The sinner then has more real apprehensions of
wrath then at another time; affliction approximates judgment, yea, it is
interpreted by him, as a Pursevant sent to call him presently before God, and
therefore must needs beget a woeful confusion and consternation in his spirit. O
that men would think, of this, how they could bear the sight of their sins, and
a Rehearsal Sermon of all their ways in that day! That is the blessed man
indeed, who can with the Prophet then look on them, and triumph over them. This
indeed is a dark parable, as he calls it, few can skill of it, as Ps. 94.3, 4.
I will open my dark saying upon the harp; wherefore should I fear in the day
of evil, when the iniquity of my heels compasses me about?

Natura vexata prodit seipsam. When corrupt nature is vexed it shows it self,
and some afflictions do that to purpose. We read of such as are offended when
persecution comes, they fall quite out with their Profession, because it puts
them to such cost and trouble; others in their distress that curse their God,
Isa. 8.21. It is impossible for a naughty heart to think well of an afflicting
God. The hireling, if his Master takes up a staff to beat him, throws down his
work and runs away; and so does a false heart serve God. Yea, even where the
person is gracious, corruption is often found to be stronger, and grace weaker
then they were thought to be. Peter, who set out so valiantly at first to walk
on the sea, the wind does but rise and he begins to sink; now he sees there
was more unbelief in his heart then he before suspected. Sharp afflictions are
to the soul as a driving rain to the house; we know not that there are such
crannies and holes in the house, till we see it drop down here and there. Thus
we perceive not how unmortified this corruption, nor how weak that grace is,
till we are thus searched, and made more fully to know what is in our hearts by
such trials. This is the reason why none have such humble thoughts of
themselves, and such pitiful and forbearing thoughts toward others in their
infirmities; as those who are most acquainted with afflictions, they meet with
so many foiles in their conflicts, as make them carry a low sail in respect of
their own grace, and a tender respect to their brethren, more ready to pity
then censure them in their weaknesses.

Mat. 13.22. we find in the same parable, Luke 8.13. called the time of
temptation. Indeed they both meet; seldom does God afflict us, but Satan
adds temptation to our wilderness; This is your hour (says Christ) and the
power of darkness, Luke 22.53. Christ's sufferings from man, and temptation
from the devil came together. Esau, who hated his brother for the blessing,
said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand, then will I
kill my brother, Genesis 27.41. Times of affliction are the days of mourning,
those Satan waits for to do us amischief in.

It is good for me that I was afflicted, says David. I have read of a holy
woman, who used to compare her afflictions to her children, they both put her
to great pain in the bearing, but as she knew not which of her children to have
been without (for all the trouble in the bringing forth) so neither which of
her afflictions she could have missed, notwithstanding the sorrow they put her
to in the enduring. But to the wicked the issue is sad, first in regard of sin,
they leave them worse, more impenitent, hardened in sin, and outrageous in
their wicked practices. Every plague on Egypt added to the plague of hardness
on Pharaohs heart: he that for some while could beg prayers of Moses for
himself, at last comes to that pass, that he threatens to kill him if he come
at him any more. O what a prodigious height do we see many come to in sin after
some great sickness or other judgment? Children do not more shoot up in their
bodily stature after an ague, then they in their lusts after afflictions. O how
greedy and ravenous are they after their prey, when they once get off their
clog and chain from their heels! when Physic works not kindly, it does not
only leave the disease uncured, but the poison of the Physic stays in the body
also. Many appear thus poisoned by their afflictions, by the breaking out of
their lusts afterward. Secondly, in regard of sorrow, every affliction on a
wicked person produces another, and that a greater then it self. The last
wedge comes the last, which shall rive him fit for the fire, the sinner is
whip't from affliction to affliction, as the vagrant from Constable to
Constable till at last he comes to hell, his proper place and settled abode,
where all sorrrows will meet in one that is endless.

None has power over the Spirit to retain it, neither has he power in the day
of death, and there is no discharge in that war, Eccl. 8.8. Among men it is
possible to get off when pressed for the wars, by pleading privilege of years,
estate, weakness of body, protection from the Prince, and the like, or if all
these fail, possibly the sending another in our room, or a bribe given in the
hand may serve the turn. But in this war the press is so strict, that there is
no dispensation; David could willingly have gone for his son, we hear him
crying, Would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son: but he will
not be taken, that young Gallant must go himself. We must in our own person
come into the field, and look death in the face. Some indeed we find so fond
as to promise themselves immunity from this day, as if they had an ensuring
office in their breast. They say they have made a Covenant with death, and with
hell they are at an agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through
it shall not come unto them. And now (like debtors that have feed the Sergeant)
they walk abroad boldly and fear no arrest. But God tells them as fast as they
bind he will loose: Your Covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand; and how should it if God will not set his
seal to it? There is a divine Law for this evil day, which came in force upon
Adams first sin, that laid the fatal knife to the throat of mankind, which
has opened a sluice to let out his heart-blood ever since. God to prevent all
escape has sown the seeds of death in our very constitution and nature, so
that we can as soon run from our selves, as run from death. We need no feller to
come with a hand of violence, and hew us down; there is in the tree a worm
which grows out of its own substance that will destroy it, so in us, those
infirmities of nature that will bring us down to the dust. Our death was bred
when our life was first conceived; and as a breeding woman cannot hinder the
hour of her travel, (that follows in nature upon the other) so neither can man
hinder the bringing forth of death with which his life is big. All the pains
and aches man feels in his life are but so many singultus morientis naturae,
groans of dying nature; they tell him his dissolution is at hand. Be thou a
Prince sitting in all thy state and pomp, death dare enter thy Palace, and come
through all thy guards, to deliver the fatal message it has from God to thee,
yea, runs its dagger to thy heart; were thou compassed with a College of
Doctors consulting thy health, Art and Nature both must deliver thee up when
that comes. Even when thy strength is firmest, and thou eatest thy bread with a
merry heart, that very food which nourishes thy life, gives thee withal an
earnest of death, as it leaves those dregs in thee which will in time procure
the same. O how unavoidable must this evil day of death be, when that very
staff knocks us down to the: grave at last, which our life leans on, and is
preserved by! God owes a debt both to the first Adam and second; to the first
he owes the wages of his sin: to the second, the reward of his sufferings. The
place for full payment of both is the other world, so that except death comes
to convey man thither, the wicked who are the posterity of the first Adam, will
miss of that full pay for their sins, which the threatening makes due debt,
and engages God to perform; The godly also who are the seed of Christ, these
should not receive the whole purchase of his blood, which he would never have
shed but upon the credit of thar promise of eternal life, which God gave him
for them before the world began; This is the reason why God has made this day
so sure, in it he discharges both bonds.





what is the intent of God in lengthening out our days, and continuing us some
while here in the land of the living? was it that we might have time to revel
or rather ravel out upon the pleasure of this vain world? Does he give us our
precious time to be employed in catching such butterflies as these earthly
honors and riches are? It cannot be. Masters do not use (if wise) to set their
servants about such work, as will not pay for the candle they borne in doing
it. And truly nothing less then the glorifying of God, and saving our souls
at last can be worth the precious time we spend here. The great God has a
greater. end then most think in this dispensation: If we would judge aright, we
should take his own interpreration of his actions; and the Apostle Peter bids
us, count that the long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, 2 Pet. 3.15. which
plate he quotes out of Paul, (as to the sense, though not in the same form of
words) which in Romans 2.4. are these, Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance? From both places we are taught what is the
mind of God, and the language he speaks to us in by every moments patience,
and inch of time that is granted to us. It is a space given for repentance. God
sees (as we are) death and judgment could bring no good news to us, we are in
no case to welcome the evil day, and therefore mercy stands up to plead for the
poor creature in Gods bosom, and begs a little time more may be added to its
life, that by this iudulgence it may be provoked to repent before he be called
to the bar, Thus we come by every day that is continually superadded to our
time on earth. And does not this lay a strong obligation on us to lay out every
point of this time, unto the same end it is begged for.



First, in the matter of his choice and chief care.

Secondly, in a due timing of this his choice and care.

Solomon was in making of his Temple. Those poor bables are as adequate to
their foolish apprehensions, as great enterprises are to wise men. Now such is
the importance of the evil day, especially that of death, that it proves a man
a fool, or wise, as he comports himself to it. The end specifies every action,
and gives it the name of good or evil, of wise or foolish. The evil day of
death is as the end of our days, so to be the end of all the actions of our
life. Such will our life be found at last, as it has been in order to this one
day. If the several items of our life (counsels and projects that we have
pursued) when they shall then be cast up, will amount to a blessed death, then
we shall appear to be wise men indeed, but if after all our goodly plots and
policies for other things, we be unprovided for that hour, we must be content
to die fools at last; And no such fool as the dying fool. The Christian goes
for the fool (in the worlds account) while he lives; but when death comes, the
wise world will then confess they mis-call'd him, and shall take it to
themselves; We fools counted his life to be madness, and his end to be
without honor. But how is he now numbered among the children of God, and his
lot is among the Saints? therefore have we erred from the way of truth, Wisd.
5.4, 5. The place is Apocryphal, but sinners will find the matter of it
Canonical. It Is true indeed, Saints are outwitted by the world in the things
of the world, and no marvel, neither does it impeach their wisdom any more,
then it does a Scholars, to be excelled by the Cobbler in his mean trade,
Nature, where it intends higher excellencies, is more careless in those things
that are inferior, as we see in man, who (being made to excel the beasts in a
rational soul) is himself excelled by some beast or other in all his senses.
Thus the Christian may well be surpast in matters of worldly commerce, because
he has a nobler object in his eye, that makes him converse with the things of
the world in a kind of non-attendance; he is not much careful in these matters
if he can die well at last, and be justified for a wise man at the day of the
resurrection, all is well; he thinks it is not, manners, to be unwilling to
stay so long for the clearing of his wisdom, as God can wait for the,
vindicating of his own glorious Nature, which will not appear in its glory till
that day, when he will convince the ungodly of their hard thoughts and speeches
of him. Jud. 2.15.
Then they shall, till then they will not be convinced.

Secondly, a wise man labors duly to time his care and endeavor for the
attaining of what he proposes. It Is the fool that comes when the market is
done; as the evil day is of great concernment in respect of its event, so the
placing of our care for it in the right season is of chief importance, and that
sure must be before it comes. There are more doors then one, at which the
messenger may enter that brings evil tidings to us, and at which he will knock
we know not; we know not where we shall be arrested, whether at bed or board,
whether at home or in the field, whether among our friends that will counsel
and comfort us, or among our enemies that will add weight to our sorrow by
their cruelty. We know not when, whether by day or night, (many of us) not,
whether in the morning, noon, or evening of our age. As he calls to work at all
times of the day, so he does to bed; may be while thou art praying or
preaching, and it would be sad to go away profaning them and the Name of God in
them; possibly when thou art about worse work, death may strike thy quaffing
cup out of thy hand, while thou art sitting in the Alehouse with thy jovial
mates, or meet thee as thou art reeling home, and make some ditch thy grave,
that as thou livedst like a beast, so thou should die like a beast. In a
word, we know not the kind of evil God will use as the instrument to stab us;
whether some bloody hand of violence shall do it, or a disease out of our
bowels and bodies; whether some acute disease, or some lingering sickness;
whether such a sickness as shall slay the man while the body is alive, (I
mean take the head and deprive us of our reason) or not; whether such noisome
troubles as shall make our friends afraid to let us breath on them, or
themselves look on us; whether they shall be afflictions aggravated with Satan's
temptations, and the terrors of our own affrighted consciences or not; who
knows where, when, or what the evil day shall be? therefore does God conceal
these, that we should provide for all. Caesar would never let his soldiers
know, when or whither he meant to march. The knowing of these would torment us
with distracting fear, the not knowing them should awaken us to a providing
care. It is an ill time to calk the ship, when at sea, tumbling up and down in
a storm, This should have been looked to, when on her seat in the harbor. And
as bad it is to begin to trim a soul for heaven, when tossing upon a sick bed.
Things that are done in a hurry are seldom done well; A man called out of his
bed at midnight with a dismal fire on his housetop, cannot stand to dress
himself in order as at another time; but runs down with one stocking half on
may be, and the other not on at all. Those poor creatures I am afraid go in as
ill a dress into another world, who begin to provide for it, when on a dying
bed conscience calls them up with a cry of hellfire in their bosoms: But
(alas!) they must go, though they have not time to put their armor on. And so
they are put to repent at leisure in hell, of their shuffling up a repentance
in haste here. We come to the Application of the Point.

CHAP. VII. The Application of the Point.
Moses was to Pharaoh. Therefore they say to it as he to Moses, Get thee from
me, and let me see thy face no more; the sear of it makes them to butcher and
make away all those thoughts which conscience stirs up concerning it, And at
last they get such a mastery of their consciences, that they arrive to a kind
of Atheism, it is as rare to have them think or speak of such matters, as to
see a fly busy in Winter. Nothing now but what is frolic and jocund is
entertained by them. If any such thoughts come as prophecy mirth and carnal
content, these (as right with their hearts) are taken up into the chariot to
sit with them, but all other are commanded to go behind. Alas, poor-spirited
wretches! something might be said for you, if this evil day of death and
judgment were such entia rationis, as had no foundation or being but what our
fancies give them, (such troubles there are in the world, which have all their
evil from our thoughts, when we are disquieted with the scorns and reproaches
of men, did we but not think of them they were nothing) but thy banishing the
thoughts of this evil day from thy mind, will be a poor short relief, Thou
can neither hinder its coming, nor take away its sting when it comes by thy
slighting it. Thou art like a Passenger in a ship sleep or wake, thou are going
thy voyage. Thou do but like that silly bird, who puts her head into a reed,
and then thinks she is safe from the Fowler because she sees him not. Thou art
a fair mark for Gods vengeance, he sees thee, and is taking his aim at thee,
when thou see not him, yea, thou put thy self under an inevitable
necessity of perishihg, by not thinking of this day. The first step to our
safety, is consideration of our danger.

from the pleasures of this life, O then they will do great matters to fit them
for the evil day. Bold man! who gave thee leave to cut out such large thongs of
that time which is not thine but Gods? Who makes the Lease, the Tenant or the
Landlord? or do thou forget thou farmest thy life, and art not an Owner?
This is the device of Satan, to make you delay, whereas a present expectation
of the evil day, would not let you sit still unprepared. O why do you let your
souls from their work, make them idle and rest from their burdens, by telling
them of long life, while death chop in upon you unawares? O what shame will
your whorish hearts be put to, (that now say your husband is gone afar off, you
may fill your selves with loves) if he should come before he is looked for, and
find you in bed with lusts? And let me tell you, sudden destruction is
threatened, especially to such secure ones. Read Matthew. 24.48, 50, 51. where
it is denounced against that sort of sinners, who please themselves with their
Lords delaying his coming, that the Lord of that servant shall come in a day
when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of. Indeed
God must go out of his ordinary road of dealing with sinners, if such escape a
sudden ruin. One is bold to challenge any to show a President in Scripture of
any that are branded for security, that some remarkable yea, sudden judgment
did not surprise. Sodom, how soon after a Sunshine morning did the heavens
thicken, and bury them in a few hours, (by a storm of fire) in their own
ashes? Careless Laish cut off before they almost think of it. Agag, when he
saw the clouds of his fears break, and fair weather was in his countenance,
they return immediately upon him, and shut him up in death; he is presently
hewn in pieces. Amalek slaughtered by David before the triumph of their late
victory was cold. Nebuchadnezzar strutting himself in his Palace with this
bravado in his mouth, Is not this great Babylon that I have built? and before
he can get the words out of his throat, there is another voice falling from
heaven, saying, O King, to thee be it spoken, Dan. 4.31, 33.
thy Kingdom is departed from thee: and the same hour it was fulfilled, and
he sent to graze with the beasts. Dives blessing himself for many years, and
within a few hours the pillow is plucked from under his head, and you hear no
more of him, till out of hell he roar; yea, a whole world, (few persons
excepted) drowned, and they not know till the day the flood came, Mat. 24.29.
and swept them all away: And who art thou, O man, that promisest thy self an
exemption, when Kings, Cities, a whole world have been ruined after this sort?

Paul's text (before Felix) to them, till it makes them tremble as he did; yet
such is the power of lust in their hearts, that it makes them spur on,
notwithstanding all the rebukes conscience gives them, and affrighting thoughts
they have of the evil day; yet they continue in their old trade of sin
desperately. These wretches are the objects of our saddest pity. The secure
sinner (that has broke prison from his conscience,) is like a strong-brain'd
drunkard, he swallows down his sin, (as the other does his drink) with
pleasure, and is not stirred at all; but here is a man that is stomach sick,
(as I may so say) his conscience is often disgorging his sweet draughts, and yet
he will sin, though with pain and anguish. O consider (poor wretches) what
you do, instead of arming your selves against the evil day, you arm the evil
day against your selves; you are sticking the bed with pins and needles, on
which you must ere long be laid; you are throwing billets into that fiery
furnace, wherein at last you shall be cast, and all this in spite of your
consciences, which yet God mercifully sets in your way, that the prickings of
them may be as a hedge of thorns, to keep thee from the pursuit of thy lusts.
Know therefore, if thou will go on, that as thy conscience takes from the
pleasure of thy sin at present, so it will add to the horror of thy torment
hereafter.

Corah with his Censer, as undauntedly as Moses himself) even to the mouth of
the grave, till on a sudden they are swallowed up with destruction, and sent to
be undeceived in hell, who would not be beaten from their refuges of lies here;
whoever thou art, O man, and whatever thou have to glory in, were it the most
Saint-like conversation that ever any lived on earth, yet if this be thy
shelter against the evil day, thou will perish. No salvation when that flood
comes but Christ, yea, being in Christ, hanging on the outside of the Ark by a
specious Profession, will not save; Me thinks I see how those of the old world
ran for their lives, some to this hill, and others to that high tree, and how
the waves pursued them, till at last they were swept into the devouring flood.
Such will your end be, that turn any other way for help then to Christ; yet the
Ark waits on you, yea, comes up close to your gate to take you in. Noah did not
put forth his hand more willingly to take in the dove, then Christ does to
receive those who fly to him for refuge. O reject not your own mercies for
lying vanity.

would cut deeper in his amazed heart. But if thou believe another world, and
that judgment which stands at deaths back, ready to allot thee thy
unchangeable state in bliss or misery; surely thou can not relieve thy
awakened conscience with such a poor cordial. O therefore think what answer
thou meanest to give unto the great God, at thy appearing before him, when he
shall ask thee, what thou can say, why the sentence of eternal damnation
should not then be pronounced against thee. Truly we deal unfaithfully with
our own souls, if we bring not our thoughts to this issue. If now you should
ask how you should provide against the evil day, so that you may stand before
that dreadful bar, and live so in the mean time, that you might not be under a
slavish bondage, through the fearful expectation of it; Take it in a few
directions.

David's living comfort was drawn from the Covenant God had made with him; this
was all his desire and all his salvation; how can thou put thy head into the
other world without horror, if thou have not solid ground that Christ will own
thee for his? Heaven has its proper heirs, and so has hell. The heirs of
heaven are such as are in Covenant with God. The foundation of it was laid in a
Covenant, and all the mansions there are prepared for a people in Covenant with
him; Gather my Saints together that have made a Covenant with me. But how
may thou get into this Covenant Relation? First, break thy covenant with
sin. Thou art by nature a covenant-servant to sin and Satan, may be thou have
not expressly in words and formally as witches sealed this covenant, yet
virtually as thou have done the work of Satan, and been at the command of thy
lusts, accepting the reward of unrighteousness, (the pleasure and carnal
advantages they have paid thee in for the same) therein thou have declared thy
self to be so. Now if ever thou will be taken into Covenant with God, break
this; a Covenant with hell and heaven cannot stand together.

Rebeccah had not the Jewels and costly raiment till she was promised to become
Isaaks wife, Genesis 24.53. All the Promises are Yea and Amen in Christ. If once
thou receivest Christ, with him, thou receivest them. He that owes the tree
has right to all the fruit that is on it. Now that thou may not huddle up a
marriage between Christ and thee, so as to be disowned of Christ, and it prove
a nullity at last; it behooves thee to look to it, that there be found in thee
what Christ expects in every soul that he espouseth. First, therefore consider
whether thou can heartily love the person of Christ. Look wishly on him again
and again as he is set forth in all his spiritual excellencies, are they such
as thy heart can close with? does his holy nature and all those heavenly graces
with which he is beautified, render him desirable to thee? or could thou
like him better if he were not so precise and exactly holy? yea, is thy heart
so inflamed with a desire of him, that thou can love him with a conjugal
love. A woman may love one as a friend? whom she cannot love so as to make him
her husband. A friendly love may stand with a love of some other equal to it,
yea, Superior; But* a conjugal love is such as will bear neither: can thou
find in thy heart to forsake all other, and cleave to Christ? does thy heart
speak thee ready, and present thee willing to go with thy sweet Jesus, though
he carry thee from father and fathers house? Is thy confidence such of his
power to protect thee from all thy enemies, sin, wrath and hell, that thou
can resolvedly put the life of thy soul into his hands, to be saved by the
sole virtue of his blood, and strength of his omnipotent arm; and of his care
to provide for thee for this life and the other, that rhou can acquiesce in
what he promises to do for thee? In a word, if thou have Christ, thou must not
only love him, but for his sake, all thy new Kindred, which by thy marriage to
him thou shall be allied unto. How can thou fadge to call the Saints thy
brethren? can thou love them heartily, and forget all the old grudges thou
have had against them? some of them thou will find poor and persecuted, yet
Christ is not ashamed to call them brethren, neither must thou. If thou find
thy heart now in such a disposition as suits these Interrogatories, I dare not
deny the banes, yea, I dare not but pronounce Christ and thee Husband and Wife.
Go, poor soul, (if I may call so glorious a Bride poor,) Go and comfort thy
self with the expectation of thy Bridegrooms coming for thee, and when the evil
day approaches, and death it self draws nigh, look not now with terror upon
it, but rather revive with old Jacob, to see the chariot which shall carry thee
over unto the embraces of thy husband, whom thou hear to be in so great
Honor and Majesty in Heaven, as may assure thee he is able to make thee
welcome when thou come there. Amongst the all things which are ours by being
Christ's, the Apostle forgets not to name this to be one, Death is ours. And
well, he did so, or else we should never have looked upon it as a gift, but
rather as a judgment. Now soul, thou art out of any danger of hurt that the
evil day can do thee. Yet there remains something for thee to do, that thou
may walk in the comfortable expectation of the evil day. We see that
gracious persons may for want of a holy care fall into such distempers, as may
put a sting into their thoughts of the evil day. David, that at one time would
not fear to walk in the valley of the shadow of death, is so affrighted at
another time when he is led toward it, that he cries, Spare me, O Lord, that I
may recover my strength, before I go hence, Psalm. 39. The child, though he
loves his father, may do that which may make him afraid to go home. Now,
Christian, if thou would live in a comfortable expectation of the evil day,

Paul tells us he died daily. He was ever sending more and more of his heart
out of the world, so that by that time he came to die, all his affections were
pack't up and gone, which made him the more ready to follow, (...), I am ready
to be offered up, 2 Timothy 4.6. If it be but a tooth to pull out, the faster it
stands the more pain we have to draw it, O loosen the roots of thy affections
from the world, and the tree will fall more easily.

I beseech thee, O Lord, (says good Hezekiah at the point of death as he
thought) remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. This cannot be
our confidence, but it will be a better companion then a scoulding conscience;
if the blood be bad, the spirits will be tainted also; the more our life has
been corrupted with hypocrisy and unfaithfulness, the weaker our faith will
be in a dying hour. There is great difference between two children that come
home at night, one from the field, where he has been diligent and faithful
about his fathers work, and another that has played the Truant a great part of
the day; the former comes inconfidently to stand before his father, the other
sneaks to bed, and is afraid his father should see him, or ask where he has
been. O Sirs, look to your walking. These have been trying times as ever came
to England. It has required more care and courage to keep sincerity then
formerly. And that is the reason why it is so rare to find Christians
(especially those whose place and calling has been more in the wind of
temptation,) go off the stage at death with such a Plaudite of inward peace in
their bosoms.

thy soul what Christ has done to take the sting out of it what the sweet
promises are, that are given on purpose to overcome the fear of it, and what
thy hopes are thou shall get by it. These will satisfy and compose thy Spirit,
whereas the shunning the thoughts of it will but increase thy fear, and bring
thee more into bondage to it.

CHAP. VIII. The second Argument with which the Exhortation is pressed, drawn
from the assured victory which shall crown the souls conflict, if in this
Armor, where several Points couched in the Argument, are briefly handled.
WE come now to the second Argument the Apostle uses, further to press the
exhortation; and that is taken from the glorious victory, which hovers over the
heads of believers while in the fight, and shall surely crown them in the end;
this is held forth in these words, And having done all, to stand. The phrase is
short, but full.

SECT. I.
Having done all. The doing Christian is the man that shall stand, when the
empty boaster of his faith shall fall. The great talkers of Religion are often
the least doers. His Religion is in vain, whose Profession brings not letters
testimonial from a holy life. Sacrifice without obedience is Sacrilege. Such
rob God of that which he makes most account of. A great Captain once smote one
of his soldiers for railing at his enemy, saying, that he called him not to
rail on him, but to fight against him and kill him. It Is not crying out upon
the devil, and declaiming against sin in prayer or discourse, but fighting and
mortifying it that God looks chiefly upon; such a one else does but beat the
air; there are no marks to be seen on his flesh and unmortified lusts that he
has fought. Paul was in earnest, he left a witness upon his body, made black
and blew with strokes of mortification. It was not a little vapouring in sight
of the Philistines that got David his wife, but shedding their blood: And is it
so small a matter to be son to the King of Heaven, that thou think to obtain
it, without giving a real proof of thy zeal for God, and hatred to sin? Not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work; this man (says the Apostle) shall be
blessed in his deed, James 1.25. Mark, not by his deed, but in his deed; he
shall meet blessedness in that way of obedience he walks in. The empty
Professor disappoints others, who seeing his leaves, expect fruit, but find
none; and at last he disappoints himself; he thinks to reach heaven, but shall
miss of it. Tertullian speaks of some that think, Satis Deum habere, si cord
and animo suspiciatur, licet actu minus fiat: God has enough (they think) if
he be feared and reverenced in their hearts, though in their actions they show
it not so much: and therefore they can sin, and believe in God, and fear him
never the worse: This (says he) is to play the Adulteress, and yet be chaste,
to prepare poison for ones father, and yet be dutiful; but let such know,
(says the same father) that if they can sin and believe, God will pardon them
with a contradiction also; he will forgive them, but they shall be turned into
hell for all that. As ever you would stand at last, look you be found doing the
work your Lord has left you to make up, and trust not to lying words, as the
Prophet speaks, Jer. 7.

SECT. II.
Secondly, Observe, Doct. 2.
that such is the mercy of God in Christ to his children, that he accepts their
weak endeavors, (joined with sincerity and perseverance in his service) as if
they were full obedience, and therefore they are here said to have done all. O
who would not serve such a Lord! you hear servants sometimes complain of their
Masters to be so rigid and strict, that they can never please them, no, not
when they do their utmost: But this cannot be charged upon God. Be but so
faithful as to do thy best, and God is so gracious that he will pardon thy
worst. David knew this Gospel-indulgence, when he said, Then shall I not be
ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. (...), when
my eye is to all thy Commandments. The Traveller has his eye on or toward the
place he is going, though he be yet short of it; there he would be, and is
putting on all he can to reach it; So stands the Saints heart to all the
Commands of God, he presses on to come nearer and nearer to full obedience:
such a soul shall never be put to shame. But woe to those that cover their sloth
with the name of infirmity, yea, that spend their zeal and strength in the
pursuit of the world or their lusts, and then think to make all up when charged
therewith. That it is their infirmity, and they can serve God no better. These
do by God as those two did by their Prince, ( Francis the first of France) who
cut off their right hand one for another, and then made it an excuse they were
lame, and so could not serve in his Galleys, for which they were sent to the
Gallows. Thus many will be found at last to have disabled themselves, by
refusing that help the Spirit has offered to them, yea, wasted what they had
given them, and so shall be rewarded for hypocrites as they are. God knows how
to distinguish between the sincerity of a Saint in the midst of his
infirmities, and the shifts of a false heart. But we will wave these, and
briefly speak to four points which lie clear in the words.

Having done all.

2ly, here is the necessity of divine Armor, to persevere til we end, if they
could do it without?



to stand, From these follow four distinct Points.









SECT. III.
Doct. 1.
He that will be Christ's soldier must persevere to the end of his life in this
war against Satan. This Having done all, comes in after our conflict with
death: That ye may be able to withst and in the evil day; then follows, And
having done all. We have not done all till that pitched battle be fought. The
last enemy is death. The word (...), imports as much as to finish a business,
and bring a matter to a full issue; so, Phil. 2.12. where we translate it well,
Work out your salvation: that is, perfect it; be not Christians by halves, but
go through with it; the through Christian is the true Christian. Not he that
takes the field, but he that keeps the field; not he that sets out, but he that
holds out in this holy war, deserves the name of a Saint. There is not such a
thing in this sense belonging to Christianity as an honorable retreat; not
such a word of command in all Christ's military Discipline, as fall back and lay
down your arms; No, you must fall on, and stand to your arms, till called off
by death.

soldiers used to take an oath not to flinch from their colors, but
faithfully to cleave to their Leaders, this they called Sacramentum militare, a
military oath. Such an oath lies upon every Christian. It is so essential to
the being of a Saint, that they are described by this, Psalm: 50.5. Gather my
Saints together, those that have made a Covenant with me. We are nor
Christians, till we have subscribed this Covenant, and that without any
reservation. When we take upon us the Profession of Christ's Name, we list our
selves in his muster-roll, and by it do promise, that we will live and die with
him in opposition to all his enemies. Every Nation will walk in the name of his
God, and we will walk in the Name of our God; and what is it to walk in the
Name of our God, but to fight under the banner of his Gospel, wherein his Name
is displayed, by giving an eternal defiance to sin and Satan? If a Captain had
not such a tie on his soldiers, he might have them to seek when the day of
battle comes: therefore Christ tells us upon what terms he will enroll us
among his disciples: If any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me. He will not entertain us, till we resign up
our selves freely to his dispose, that there may be no disputing with his
commands afterward, but as one under his authority, go and come at his word.

Bethel did his errand well, withstood Jeroboams temptation, but in his way
home was drawn aside by the old Prophet, and at last slain by a Lion. Thus many
fly from one temptation, but not persevering are vanquished by another, those
that at one time escape his sword, at another time are slain by it. Joash was
hopeful when young, but it lasted not long. Yea, many precious servants of God,
not making such vigorous resistance in their last days as in their first, have
fallen foully, as we see in Solomon, Asa, and others. Indeed it is hard when a
line is drawn to a great length, to keep it so straight that it slacken not,
and to hold a thing long in our hand, and not to have a numbnesse grow in our
fingers so as to remit of our strength; therefore we are bid so often to hold
fast the Profession of our faith; but when we see an enemy gaping to catch us
when we fall, me thinks this should quicken us the more to it.

Thirdly, because the promise of life and glory is settled upon the persevering
soul, the crown stands at the Goal, he has it that comes to the end of the
race. To him that overcomes will I give, not in praelio, but in bello, not in a
particular skirmish, but in the whole war. Ye have need of patience, that after
ye have done the whole Will of God, ye might receive the promise, Heb. 10.36.
There is a remarkable accent on that henceforth, which Paul mentions, 2 Timothy
4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness. Why, was it not laid up before? yes, but having persevered and
come near the Goal, being within sight of home, ready to die, he takes now
surer hold of the promise. Indeed in this sense it is, that a gracious soul is
nearer its salvation after every victory then it was before, Romans 13.10.
because he approaches nearer to the end of his race, which is the time
promised for the receiving of the promised salvation. Then and not till then
the Garland drops upon his head.

Use
Here we may take up a sad lamentation, in respect of the many Apostate
Professors of our days. Never was this spiritual falling sickness more rise.
O how many are sick of it at present, and not a few fallen asleep by it? These
times of war and confusion have not made so many broken Merchants as broken
Professors; where is the Congregation that cannot show some who have outlived
their Profession? not unlike the silkworm, which (they say) after all her
spinning, works her self out of her bottom, and becomes at last a common
fly. Are there not many, whose forwardness in Religion we have stood gazing
on with admiration, as the disciples on the Temple, ready to say one to another
as they to Christ, See what manner of stones these are? what polished gifts and
shining graces are here? and now not one stone left upon another. O did you
ever think, that they who went in so goodly array toward heaven in communion
with you, would after that face about, and run over to the devils side, turn
Blasphemers, Worldlings and Atheists, as some have done? O what a sad change is
here! It had been better for them, not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered
unto them, 2 Pet. 2.21. Better never to have walked a step toward heaven, then
to put such a scorn and reproach upon the ways of God. Comparationem videtur
egisse qui utrumquo cognoverit, and judicato pronunciusse eum meliorem, cujus
se rursu^ esse maluerit. Tertul. de poenit. Such a one who has known both what
a service Satan's is, and what Gods is, then to revolt from God to the devil,
seems to have compared one with the other, and as the result of his mature
thoughts, to pronounce the devils which he chooses better then Gods which he
leaves. And how is it possible that any can sin upon a higher guilt, and go to
hell under a greater load of wrath? These are they which God loathes. He that
hates putting away disdains much more to be himself thus put away. If any man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. The Apostate is
said to tread upon the Son of God, Heb. 10.29. as if he were no better then the
dirt under his feet. Well, he shall have treading for treading, God himself
will set his foot upon him, Psalm. 119.118. Thou have trodden down all that err
from thy statutes, and who (think you) will be weary soonest? he that is under
foot bears the weight of the whole man upon him. To be under the foot of God,
is to lie under the whole weight of Gods wrath. O pity and pray for such
forlorn souls, they are objects of the one, and subjects of the other; though
they are fallen low, yet not into hell; now and then we see an Eutichus raised,
that has fallen from such a height. And you that stand, take heed lest you
fall.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, A soul void of divine armor cannot persevere. Doct. 2.
What this divine armor is I have shown, and the Apostle here does in the
several pieces of it. The sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit are this Armor.
One that has not these wrought in him, will never hold out to pass all the
stages of this Christian race, to fight all the battles that are to be fought
before victory is to be had. Common gifts of the Spirit, such as illumination,
conviction, sudden pangs and flushing heats of affection may carry out the
creature for a while with a goodly appearance of zeal for God, and forwardness
in Profession, but the strength these afford is soon spent. John's hearers
mentioned, John 5.35. got some light and heat by sitting under his burning
Ministry, but how long did it last? Ye were willing to rejoice for a season.
They were very beautiful colors that were drawn on them, but not laid in oil,
and therefore soon washed off again. The foolish Virgins made as great a blaze
with their lamps, and did expect as good a day when Christ should come, as the
wise Virgins, but (alas!) their lamps are out before he appeared, and as good
never a whit as never the better. The stony ground more forward then the best
soil, the seed comes up immediately, as if a crop should soon have been
reap't, but a few nipping frosts turns its hue, and the day of harvest proves a
day of desperate sorrow. All these instances, and many more in Scripture do
evince, that nothing short of solid grace, and a principle of divine life in
the soul will persevere. How forward soever Formalists and slighty Professors
are, to promise themselves hopes of reaching heaven, they will find it too
long a step for their short-breathed souls to attain. The reasons are,

I live, (says Paul) yet not I, but Christ in me; that is, I live but at
Christ's cost, he holds as my soul, so my grace in life: Now the carnal person
wanting this union, must needs waste and consume in time. He has no root to
stand on. A carcass when once it begins to rot, never recovers, but every day
grows worse till it runs all into putrefaction, no salve or plaster will do it
good: but where there is a principle of life, there when a member is wounded
nature sends supplies of spirits, and helps to work with the salve for a cure.
There is the same difference between a gracious person and an ungracious; see
them opposed in this respect. Prove. 14.17. The righteous man falls seven times
a day, and rises; but the wicked falls into mischief: that is, in falling he
falls further, and has no power to recover himself. When Cain sinned, see how
he falls further and further like a stone down a hill, never stays till he
comes to the bottom of despair; from envying his brother to malice, from
malice to murder, from murder to impudent lying, and brazen-fac't boldness to
God himself, and from that to despair; so true is that, 2 Timothy 3 13. Evil men
shall wax worse and worse. But now when a Saint falls, he rises, because when
he falls he has a principle of life to cry out to Christ, and such an interest
in Christ as stirs him up to help; Lord, save me, said Peter, (when he began to
sink) and presently Christ's hand is put forth, he chides him for his unbelief,
but he helps him.



Demas has forsaken us, and embraced this present world. Another is a slave to
his lust, and when this calls him he must go in spite of Profession,
conscience, God and all, Herod feared John, and did many things, but love is
stronger then fear; his love to Herodias overcomes his fear of John, and makes
him cut off at once the head of John, and the hopeful buddings which appeared
in the tenderness of his conscience, and begun Reformation. One root of
bitterness or other will spring up in such a one. If the complexion of the
soul be profane, it will at last come to it, however for a while there may some
religious color appear in the man's face from some other external cause.

Use.
This shows us what is the root of all final apostasy, and that is the want of a
through change of the heart. The Apostate does not lose the grace he had, but
discovers he never had any; and it is no wonder to hear that he proves bankrupt,
that was worse then naught when he first set up. Many take up their Saintship
upon trust, and trade in the duties of Religion with the credit they have
gained from others opinion of them. They believe themselves to be Christians,
because others hope them to be such, and so their great business is by a zeal
in those exercises of Religion that lie outmost, to keep up the credit which
they have abroad, but do not look to get a stock of solid grace within, which
should maintain them in their Profession, and this proves their undoing at
last. Let it therefore make us in the fear of God, to consider upon what score
we take up our Profession. Is there that within which bears proportion to our
outward zeal? Have we laid a good bottom? Is not the superstructive top heavy
jetting too far beyond the weak foundation? They say trees shoot as much in the
root under ground, as in the branches above, and so does true grace. O remember
what was the perishing of the seed in the stony ground; it lacked root, and why
so? but because it was stony. Be willing the plough should go deep enough to
humble thee for sin, and rend thy heart from sin. The soul effectually
brought out of the love of sin as sin, will never be through friends with it
again. In a word, be serious to find out the great spring that sets all thy
wheels on motion in thy religious trade. Do as men that would know how much
they are worth, who set what they owe on one side, and what stock they have on
the other; and then when they have laid out enough to discharge all debts and
engagements, what remains to themselves they may call their own: Thus do thou
consider what thou stand engaged to, thy worldly credit, profit, slavish
fear of God, and selfish desire of happiness, and when thou have allowed for
all these, see then what remains of thy fear of God, love to God, etc. if
nothing, thou art naught; if any, the less there be, the weaker Christian thou
art, and when thou come to be tried in Gods fire, thou will suffer loss of
all the other, which as hay and stubble will be burnt up.

SECT. V.
Every soul clad with this Armor of God shall stand and persevere: Or thus,
true grace can never be vanquished. Doct. 3.
The Christian is borne a Conqueror, the gates of hell shall nor prevail
against him. He that is borne of God overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. Mark,
from whence the victory is dated, even from his birth. There is victory sown
in his new nature, even that seed of God, which will keep him from being
swallowed up by sin or Satan. As Christ rose never to die more, so does he
raise souls from the grave of sin, never to come under the power of spiritual
death more. These holy ones of God cannot see corruption. Hence he that
believes is said in the present tense to have eternal life. At the Law that
came four hundred years after, could not make void the promise made to
Abraham, so nothing that intervenes can hinder the accomplishing of that
promise of eternal life, which was given, and passed to Christ in their behalf
before the foundation of the world. If a Saint could any way miscarry, and fall
short of this eternal life, it must be from one of these three causes, 1.
Because God may forsake the Christian, and withdraw his grace and help from
him; Or, 2. Because the believer may forsake God; Or lastly, because Satan may
pluck him out of the hands of God. A fourth I know not Now none of these can be.

Job and David. O what admirable security has the great God given his children
in this particular!

First, in Promises. He has said, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Five negatives in that promise as so
many seals to ratify it to our faith, he assures us there never did or can so
much as arise a repenting thought in his heart concerning the purposes of his
love and special grace toward his children, Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling
of God are without repentance, even the believers sin against him, their
froward carriage stirs not up thoughts of casting them off, but of reducing
them; For the iniquity of this covetousness I was wroth and smote him; I hid
me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart; I have seen
his ways and will heal them, Isa. 57.27, 28. The water of the Saints failings,
cast on the fire of Gods love cannot quench it; Whom he loves he loves to the
end.

Secondly, God to give further weight and credit to our unbelieving and
mis-giving hearts, seals his promise with an oath. See, Isa. 54.9, 10. With
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer;
this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of
Noah should not return over the earth, so have I sworn that I will not be wroth
with thee. Yea, he goes on and tells them, The monntaines shall depart,
(meaning at the end of the world, when the whole frame of the heavens and earth
shall be dissolved) but his kindness shall not depart, neither shall his
Covenant of peace be removed. Now lest any should think this was some charter
belonging to the Jews alone, we find it, v. 17. settled on every servant of
God as his portion: This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their
righteousness is of me, says the Lord. And surely God that is so careful to
make his childrens inheritance sure to them, will con them little thanks, who
busy their wits to invalid and weaken his conveyances, yea, disprove his will;
if they had taken a bribe, they could not plead Satan's cause better.

Thirdly, in the actual fulfilling these promises, (which he has made to
believers) to Christ their Attorney. As God before the world began, gave a
promise of eternal life to Christ for them, so now has he given actual
possession of that glorious place to Christ (as their Advocate and Attorney)
where that eternal life shall be enjoyed by them; for as he came upon our
errand from heaven, so thither he returned again to take and hold possession of
that inheritance, which God had of old promised, and he in one sum at his
death had paid for. And now what ground of fear can there be in the believers
heart, concerning. Gods love standiog firm to him; when he sees the whole
Covenant performed already to Christ for him, whom God has not only called to,
sanctified for, and upheld in the great work he was to finish for us, but also
justified in his Resurrection and Jayle-delivery, and received him into heaven,
there to sit on the right hand of the Majesty on high, by which he has not
only possession for us, but full power to give it unto all believers?

A second occasion of fear to the believer that he shall not persevere, may be
taken from himself. He has many sad fears and tremblings of heart, that he
shall at last forsake God: The journey is long to heaven, and his grace weak,
O, says he, is it not possible that this little grace should fail, and I fall
short at last of glory? Now here there is such provision made in the Covenant,
as scatters this cloud also.

First, the Spirit of God is given on purpose to prevent this; Christ left his
mother with John, but his Saints with his Spirit, to tutour and keep them that
they should not lose themselves in their journey to heaven. O how sweet is that
place, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit in you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. He does not say they
shall have his Spirit, if they will walk in his statutes: no, his Spirit shall
cause them to do it. But may be thou art afraid thou may grieve him, and so
he in anger leave thee, and thou perish for want of his help and counsel. Answ.
The Spirit of God is indeed sensible of unkindnesse, and upon a Saints sin, may
withdraw in regard of present assistance, but never in regard of his care; as a
mother may let her froward child go alone, till it get a knock, that may make
it cry to be taken up again into her arms, but still her eye is on it that it
shall not fall into mischief. The Spirit withdrew from Samson, and he fell into
the Philistines hands, and this makes him cry to God, and the Spirit puts forth
his strength in him again. Thus here, indeed the office of the Spirit is to
abide for ever with the Saints, John 14.16. He shall send you another
Comforter, that he may abide for ever with you.

Secondly, it is one main business of Christ intercession, to obtain of God
perseverance for our weak graces. I have prayed, (says Christ to Peter) that
thy faith fail not. But was not that a particular privilege granted to him,
which may be denied to another? O Sirs, do we think that Christ's love looks a
squint? does he pray for one child more then another? such fears and
jealousies foolish children are ready to take up, and therefore Christ prevents
them, by bidding Peter in the very next words. When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22.31. that is, when thou feel the efficacy
and force of my prayer for thy faith, carry this good news to them, that their
hearts may be strengthened also; and what strengthening had it been to them, if
Christ prayed not for them as well as Peter? does Christ pray for us? yea, does
he not live to pray for us? O how can children of so many prayers, of such
prayers perish? The Saints prayers have a mighty power. Jacob wrestled and had
power with God, this was his sword and bow (to allude to what he said of the
parcel of ground he took, from the Amorite,) by which he got the victory and
had power with God. This was the Key with which Elijah opened and shut heaven.
And if the weak prayers of Saints (coming in his Name) have such credit in
heaven, that with them they can go to Gods treasure, and carry away as much as
their arms of faith can hold; O then, what prevalency has Christ's
intercession, who is a Son, an obedient Son, that is come from finishing his
great work on earth, and now prays his Father for nothing, but what he has
bid him ask, yea, for nothing but what he is beforehand with him for, and all
this to a Father that loves those he prays for as well as himself? Bid Satan
avaunt, Say not thy weak faith shall perish, till thou hear that Christ has
left praying, or meets with a repulse.

the Christian whom he loves so dearly, surely it shall be when he shall be
repulsed with greatest shame.

Peter, anon a Judas; O what unsavory stuff is this! a principle it is that
at once crosses the main design of God in the Gospel Covenant, reflects sadly
on the honor of Christ, and wounds the Saints comfort to the heart.

Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be of grace; to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed. God on purpose because of the weakness
of the first Covenant through the mutable nature of man, makes a new Covenant
of a far different constitution and frame, not of works as that was, but of
faith, and why? the Apostle tells us, that it might be sure to all the seed,
that not one soul, who by faith should be adopted into Abraham's family, and so
become a child of the promise, should fail of inheriting the blessing of the
promise, which is eternal life; called so, Titus 1.2. and all this because the
promise is founded upon grace, that is, Gods immutable good pleasure in Christ,
and not upon the variable and inconstant obedience of man as the first Covenant
was. But if a Saint may finally fall, then is the promise no more sure in this
Covenant then it was in that, and so God should not have his end he propounds.

First, as he is entrusted with the Saints salvation. He tells us they are
given him of his Father for this very end, that he should give them eternal
life, yea, that power which he has over all flesh; was given him to render him
every way able to effect this one business, John 17.2. He accepts the charge,
ownes them as his sheep, knows them every one, and promises, he will give
them eternal life, they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
his hand, John 10.27, 28. Now how well do they consult with Christ's honor,
that say his sheep may die in a ditch of final apostasy notwithstanding all
this? Secondly, as he is interessed in the salvation of every Saint. The life
of his own glory is bound up in the eternal life of his Saints. Its true, when
Adam fell God did save his stake, but how can Christ who is so nearly united to
every believing soul? There was a league of friendship betwixt God and Adam;
but no such union as here where Christ and his Saints make but one Christ, for
which his Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. As the body is one, and has
many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so
is Christ. Christ and his members make one Christ: now is it possible a piece
of Christ can be found at last-burning in hell? can Christ be a cripple Christ?
can this member drop off and that? It Is as possible that all, as any should;
and how can Christ part with his mystical members and not with his glory? does
not every member add an ornament to the body, yea, an honor? The Church is
called the fullness of him, Ephesians. 1.23. O how dishonorable is it to Christ that
we should think he shall want any of his fullness? and how can the man be full
and complete that wants a member?

2 Cor. 2.17
Paul says, he did not (...), He did not dash the generous wine of Gods Word
with the water of man's conceits No, he gave them pure Gospel. Truly, this
principle of Saints falling from grace gives a sad dash to the sweet wine of
the Promises; the soul-reviving comfort that sparkles in them, arises from the
sure conveyance with which they are in Christ made over to believers to have
and to hold for ever. Hence called the sure mercies of David, Acts 13.34.
mercies that shall never fail: This, this indeed is wine that makes glad the
heart of a Saint; though he may be whipped in the house when he sins, yet he
shall not be turned out of doors. As God promised in the type to David's seed,
Psalm. 89.33. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from
him* nor suffer my faithfulness to fail* and, v. 36. His seed shall endure
for ever. Could any thing separate the believer from the love of God in Christ,
this would be as a hole at the bottom of his cup to leak out all his joy, he
might then fear every temptation or affliction he meets would slay him, and so
the wickeds curse would be the Saints portion. His life would ever hang in
doubt, before him, and the fearful expectation of his final miscarriage, which
he sees may befall him, would eat up the joy of his present hope. Now how
contrary such a frame of heart is to the spirit of adoption, and full assurance
of hope, which the grace of the new Covenant gives, he that runs may read in
the Word.

Whom he loves he loves to the end, J^h. 13.1. Has he made thee willing in the
day of his power to march under his banner, and espouse his quarrel against sin
and hell? the same power that overcame thy rebellious heart to himself, will
overcome all thy enemies within and without for thee; say not thou art a
bruised reed; with this he will break Satan's head, and not cease till he has
brought forth judgment into complete victory in thy soul. He that can make a
few wounded men rise up and take a strong city, Jer. 37.10.
can make a wounded spirit triumph over sin and devils. The Ark stood in the
midst of Jordan, till the whole Camp of Israel was safely got over into Canaan,
Josh. 3. And so does the Covenant (which the Ark did but typifie;) yea, Christ,
Covenant and all stand to secure the Saints a safe passage to Heaven. If but
one believer drownes, the Covenant must drown with him. Christ and the Saint
are put together as co-heires of the same inheritance, Romans 8.17. If children,
then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. We cannot dispute
against one, but we question the firmness of the others title. When you hear
Christ is turned out of heaven, or himself to be willing to sell his
inheritance there, then, poor Christian, fear thy coming thither and not till
then. Co-heires cannot sell the inheritance except both give up their right,
which Christ will never do nor suffer thee.

with safety to our souls, stand and view the pleasant prospect this truth
presents to our eye. That flower from which the Be sucks honey, the spider
draws poison. That which is a restorative to the Saints grace, proves an
incentive to the lust of a wicked man. What Paul said of the Law, we may truly
of the Gospel: Sin taking occasion from the grace of the Gospel, and the sweet
promises thereof, deceives the carnal heart, and works in him all manner of
wickedness. Indeed sin seldom grows so rank any where, as in those who water
its roots with the grace of the Gospel. Two ways this doctrine may be abused.

First, into a neglect of duty.

Secondly, into a liberty to sin. Take heed of both.



First, there are other arguments to invite, yea, that will constrain thee to a
constant vigourous performing of duty, though the fear of falling away should
not come in, or else thou art not a Christian; what? nothing make the child
diligent about his fathers business, but fear of being disinherited and
turned out of doors? There is sure some better motive to duty in a Saints
heart, or else Religion is a melancholy work. Speak for your selves, O ye
Saints, is self-preservation all you pray for, and hear for? should a
messenger come from Heaven, and tell you Heaven were yours, would this make you
give over your spiritual trade and not care whether you had any more
acquaintance with God till you came thither? O how harsh does this sound in
your ears! There are such principles engraven in the Christians bosom, that
will not suffer a strangeness long to grow betwixt God and him. He is under
the Law of a new life, which carries him naturally to desire communion with
God, as the child does to see the face of his dear father, and every duty is
a Mount wherein God presents himself to be seen and enjoyed by the Christian.

First, his practice. Though Christ never doubted of his Fathers love, nor
questioned the happy issue of all his temptations, agonies and sufferings; yet
he prays, and prays again more earnestly, Luke 22.44. Secondly, his counsel
and command. He told Peter, that Satan had begged leave to have them to sift
them. But withal he comforts him (who was to be hardest put to it) with this,
But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Sure our Savior by this
provision made for him and the rest, means to save them a labor that they need
not watch or pray. No such matter: after this, as you may see, v. 40. He calls
them up to duty, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. Christ's praying for
them was to strengthen their faith, when they should themselves pray for the
same mercy; not to nourish their sloth that they needed not to pray. Christ's
prayers in Heaven for his Saints are all heard already: but the return of them
is reserved to be enclosed in the answer God sends to their own prayers The
Christian cannot in faith expect to receive the mercies Christ prays for in
Heaven, so long as he lives in the neglect of his duty on earth. They stand
ready against he shall call for them by the prayer of faith, and if they be not
worth sending this messenger to Heaven, truly they are worth little.

Thirdly, consider that although the Christian be secured from a total and
final apostasy, yet he may fall sadly to the bruising of his conscience,
enfeebling his grace, and reproach of the Gospel, which sure are enough to keep
the Christian upon his watch; and the more, because ordinarily the Saints
backslidings, begin in their duties. As it is with tradesmen in the world,
they first grow careless of their business, often out of their shop, and then
they go behinde-hand in their estates: So here, first remiss in a duty, and
then fall into a decay of their graces and comforts, yea, sometimes into ways
that are scandalous. A stuff loses its gloss before it wears: The
Christian, the luster of his grace in the lively exercise of duty, and then the
strength of it.

Secondly, take heed of abusing this doctrine unto a liberty to sin; shall we
sin because grace abounds? grow loose, because we have God fast bound in his
promise? God forbid, none but a Devil would teach us this Logic. It was a
great height of sin those wretched Jews came to, who could quaffe and carouse
it while death looked in upon them at the windows; Let us eat and drink for
tomorrow we shall die. They discovered their Atheism therein. But what a
prodigious stature in sin must that man be grown to, that can sin under the
protection of the promise, and draw his encouragement to sin from the
everlasting love of God? Let us eat and drink, for we are sure to live and be
saved. Grace cannot dwell in that heart, which draws such a cursed conclusion
from the premises of Gods grace. The Saints have not so learned Christ. The
inference the Apostle makes from the sweet privileges we enjoy in the Covenant
of grace, is not to wallow in sin; but having these promises, to cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. It Is the nature of
faith, (the grace that trades with Promises) to purify the heart. Now the more
certain report faith brings of Gods love from the promise to the soul, the
mote it purifies the heart, because love by which faith works, is thereby more
inflamed to God; and if once this affection takes fire, the room becomes too
hot for sin to stay there.

SECT. VI.
The fourth note and last is, That it will abundantly recompense all the
hardship and trouble the Christian endures in this war against sin and Satan,
that he shall be able when the war is ended to stand. In man's wars all do not
get by them that fight in them; the gains of these are commonly put into a few
pockets. The common soldiers endure most of the hardship, but go away with
little of the profit; they fight to make a few that are great yet greater, and
are many times themselves turned off at last, with what will hardly pay for the
cure of their wounds, or keep them from starving in a poor Hospital. But in
this war there is none loses, but he that runs away. A glorious reward there
is for every faithful soldier in Christ's Camp, and that is wrapped up in this
phrase, Having done all to stand. Now in this place, to stand imports three
things, which laid together will clear the point.

First, to stand in this place, is to stand Conquerours. An Army when
conquered, Lev. 26. Dan. 11.25
is said to fall before their enemy, and the Conqueror to stand. Every
Christian shall at the end of the war stand a Conqueror over his vanquished
lusts, and Satan that headed them. Many a sweet victory the Christian has here
over Satan; But (alas!) the joy of these Conquests is again interrupted with
fresh alarms from his rallied enemy. One day he has the better, and may be the
next he is put to the hazard of another battle, much ado he has to keep what
he has got: yea, his very victories are such as send him bleeding out of the
field: Though he repulses the temptation at last, yet the wounds his conscience
gets in the fight, do overcast the glory of the victory. It Is seldom the
Christian comes off without some sad complaint of the treachery of his own
heart, which had like to have lost the day, and betrayed him into his enemies
hand: But for thy eternal comfort. Know (poor Christian) there is a blessed day
coming, which shall make a full and final decision of the quarrel betwixt thee
and Satan: Thou shall see this enemies Camp quite broke up, not a weapon left
in his hand to lift up against thee. Thou shall tread upon his high places,
from which he has made so many shots at thee. Thou shall see them all
dismantled and demolished, till there be not left standing any one corruption
in thy bosom, for a devil to hide and harbor himself in. Satan, at whose
approach thou have so trembled, shall then be subdued under thy feet: he that
has so often bid thee bow down, that he might go over thy soul and trample upon
all thy glory, shall now have his neck laid to be trodden on by thee. Were
there nothing else to be expected as the fruits of our watching and praying,
weeping and mourning, severe duties of mortification and self-denial, with
whatever else our Christian warfare puts us upon but this; our labor sure
would not be in vain in the Lord. Yea, blessed watching and praying, happy
tears and wounds we meet with in this war; may they out at last end in a full
and eternal victory over sin and Satan. Bondage is one of the worst of evils.
The baser an enemy is, the more abhorred by noble spirits. Saul feared to fail
into the hands of the uncircumcised Philistines, and to be abused by their
scorns and reproaches more then a bloody death. Who baser then Satan? what
viler tyrant then sin? Glorious then will the day be, wherein we shall praise
God for delivering us out of the hands of all our sins, and from the hand of
Satan. But dismal to you (sinners) who at the same time wherein you shall see
the Saints stand with crowns of victory on their heads, must like fettered
captives be dragged to hells dungeon, there to have your ear bored unto an
eternal bondage under your lusts. And what more miserable sentence can God
himself pass upon you? Here sin is pleasure, there it will be your torment.
Here a sweet bit and goes down glib, but there it will stick in your throats.
Here you have suitable provision to entertain your lusts withal: Palaces for
pride to dwell and strut her self in: Delicious fare for your wanton palates:
houses, and lands, with coffers of silver and gold for your covetous hearts, by
their self-pleasing thoughts to sit brooding upon: but you will find none of
these there; hell is a barren place, nothing grows in that land of darkness to
solace and recreate the sinners minds. You shall have your lusts, but want the
food they long for. O what a torment must that needs be, to have a soul sharp
set, even to a ravenous hunger after sin; but chained up where it can come at
nothing it would have to satisfy its lost: for a proud wretch, that could wish
he might dominere over all the world, yea, over God himself if he would let
him, to be kept down in such a dungeon, as hell is, O how it will cut! for the
malicious sinner, whose heart swells with rancour against God and his Saints,
that he could pluck them out of Gods bosom, yea, God out of his throne if he
had power, to find his hands so manacled, that he can do nothing against them
he so hates: O how this will torment! Speak, O you Saints, whose partial
victory over sin at present is so sweet to you, that you would choose a
thousand deaths, sooner then return to your old bondage under your lusts: how
glorious then is that day in your eye, when this shall be completed in a full
and eternal Conquest, never to have any thing to do more with sin or Satan.

to stand, is here to stand justified and acquitted at the great day of
judgment. The phrase is frequent in Scripture, which sets out the solemn
discharge they shall have then, by standing in judgment, Psalm. 1.5. The wicked
shall not stand in the judgment; that is, they shall not be justified, Psalm.
130.3. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? that
is, who shall be discharged? The great God, upon whose errand we come into the
world, has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world by Jesus Christ; a
solemn day it will be, when all that ever, lived on earth, high and low, good
and bad, shall meet in one Assembly to make their personal appearance before
Christ, and from his mouth to receive their eternal doom, who shall in his
Majestic robes of glory ascend the awful seat of Judicature, attended with his
illustrious train and guard of Angels about him, as so many officers ready to
execute and perform his pleasure according to the definitive sentence that he
shall pronounce; either to conduct those blessed ones whom he shall justify
into his glorious Kingdom, or bind them hand and foot to be cast into hells
unquenchable flames whom he shall condemn. I do not wonder that Paul's Sermon on
this subject, did make an earthquake in Felix his conscience: but rather that
any should be so far gone in a lethargy, and dedolent numbnesse of conscience,
as the thought of this day cannot recover them to their sense and feeling. O
Sirs, do you not vote them happy men and women that shall speed well on this
day? are not your thoughts enquiring who those blessed souls are, which shall
be acquitted by the lively voice of Christ the Judge? You need not ascend to
search the rolls of election in heaven, here you may know they are such as
fight the Lords battles on earth against Satan, in the Lords Armor, and that
to the end of their lives. These having done all shall stand in judgment. And
were it but at a man's bar, some Court Martial, where a soldier stood upon
trial for his life, either to be condemned as a Traitor to his Prince, or
cleared as faithful in his trust. O how such a one would listen to hear how it
would go with him, and be overjoyed when the Judge pronounces him innocent!
Well may such be bid to fall down on their knees, thank God and the Judge that
have saved their lives; how much more ravishing will the sweet voice of Christ
be in the Saints ears, when he shall in the face of men and Angels make
public declaration of their righteousness? O how confounded will Satan then
be, who was their accuser to God and their own consciences also, ever
threatening them with the terror of that day! How blank will the wicked world
be, to see the dirt that they had thrown by their calumnies and lying reports
on the Saints faces, wiped off with Christ's own hand; they from Christ's mouth
to be justified as sincere, whom they had called hypocrites! will not this, O
ye Saints, be enough for all the scorn you were laden with from the world, and
conflict you endured with the Prince of the world? But this is not all.
Therefore

Thirdly, to stand, does here also (as the complement of their reward) denote
the Saints standing in heavens glory. Princes when they would reward any of
their subjects, that in their wars have done eminent service to the crown, (as
the utmost they can do for them) do prefer them to Court, there to enjoy their
Princely favor, and stand in some place of honorable service before them
continually. Solomon sets it out as the greatest reward of faithful subjects to
stand before Kings. Heaven is the royal city where the great God keeps his
Court. The happiness of glorious Angels is to stand there before God. I am
Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, Luke 1.19. That is, I am one of
those heavenly spirits who wait on the great God, and stand before his face, as
Courtiers do about their Prince. Now such honor shall every faithful soul
have. Thus says the Lord of hosts, If thou will walk in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge, I will give thee places to walk, among these that stand
by, Zech. 3.7. He alludes to the Temple, which had rooms joining to it for the
Priests that waited on the Lord in his holy service there. Or to Courtiers,
that have stately galleries and lodgings becoming their place at Court allowed
them in the Kings Palace they wait upon. Thus all the Saints, (whose
representative Joshua was) shall after they have kept the Lords charge in a
short life's service on earth, be called up to stand before God in heaven, where
with Angels they shall have their galleries, and mansions of glory also. O
happy they who shall stand before the Lord in glory! The greatest Peers of a
Realm (such as Earls, Marquesses and Dukes are) count it greater honor to
stand before their King, though bare-headed and often upon the knee, then to live
in the country, where all bow and stand bare to them; yea, let but their
Prince forbid them coming to Court, and it is not their great estates or respect
they have where they live will content them. It Is better to wait in heaven then
to reign on earth. It Is sweet standing before the Lord here in an Ordinance,
one day in the worship of God is better then many elsewhere; O what then is it
to stand before God in glory! If the Saints spikenard sends forth so sweet a
smell, Cant. 1.12
while the King sits at his table here in a Sermon or Sacrament: O then what
joy must needs flow from their near attendance on him, as he sits at his table
in heaven, which when God first made, it was intended by him to be that Chamber
of presence, in which he would present himself to be seen of, and enjoyed by
his Saints in all his glory. I know nothing would have a more powerful, yea,
universal operation upon a Saints spirit, then the frequent and spiritual
consideration of that blisseful state in heaven, which shall at last crown all
their sad conflicts here on earth. None like this sword to cut the very sinews
of temptation, and behead those lusts, which defy and out-brave whole troops
of other Arguments. It is almost impossible to sin with lively thoughts and
hopes of that glory. It Is when the thoughts of heaven are long out of the
Christians sight, and he knows not what is become of his hopes to that glorious
place, that he begins to set up some idol, (as Israel the Calfe in Moses his
absence) which he may dance before. But let heaven come in sight, and the
Christians heart will be well-warm'd with the thoughts of it, and you may as
soon persuade a King to throw his royal Diadem into a sink, and wallow with
his robes in a kennel, as a Saint to sin with the expectation of heavens glory.
Sin is a devils work, not a Saints, who is a Peer of heaven, and waits every
hour for the Writ, that shall call him to stand with Angels and glorified
Saints before the throne of God. This would cheer the Christians heart, and
confirm him when the fight is hottest, and the bullets fly thickest from men
and devils, to think, it is heaven all this is for, where it is worth having a
place, though we go through fire and water to it. It Is before the Lord, (said
David to scoffing Michal) that chose me, before thy father and all his house,
therefore I will play before the Lord, and I will yet be more vile then thus. 2 Samuel 6.21. Thus, Christian, would thou throw off the vipers of reproaches,
which from the fire of the wickeds malice fly upon thee; It Is for God that I
pray, hear, mortify my lust, deny my self of my carnal sports, profits and
pleasures, that God who has passed by Kings and Princes, to choose me a poor
wretch to stand before him in glory; therefore I will be yet more vile then
thus. O Sirs, were there not another world to enjoy God in, yet should we not
while we have our being serve our Maker? The heavens and the earth obey his
Law, that are capable of no reward for doing his Will. Quench hell, burn
heaven, (said a holy man) yet I will love and fear my God; How much more when
everlasting arms of mercy stand ready stretched to carry you as soon as the
fight is over into the blisseful presence of God. You have servants of your own
so ingenuous and observant, that can follow your work hard abroad in all
weathers; and may they but when they come home, weary and hungry at night,
obtain a kind look from you, and some tender care over them, they are very
thankful. Yea, says one, (to shame the sluggish Christian) how many hundred
miles will the poor Spaniel run after his Master in a journey, who gets nothing
but a few crumbs, or a bone from his Masters trencher? In a word, which is
more, the devils slaves, what will they not do and venture at his command, who
has not so much to give them, as you to your dog, not a crust, not a drop of
water to cool their tongue? and shall not the joy of heaven which is set before
the Christian, into which he shall assuredly enter, make him run his race,
endure a short scuffle of temptation and affliction? yea sure, and make him
reckon also that these are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall
be revealed in him.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately printed by RALPH SMITH.
Master Dicksons Exposition on the whole Book of Psalms, in three Books,
Second Edition. Mr. Hutcheson on all the twelve Small Prophets, in three
Volumns. Mr. Cottons Exposition on Ecclesiastes. Dr. Spurstowe, of the Nature,
Preciousnesse, and Usefulness of Gospel-Promises. Mr. Rutherford on the
Covenant of Grace, are to be sold by Ralph Smith. Also Mr. Bailies Appendix to
the Hebrew Grammar.
AN ALPHABETICAL Table.
A.
Ability. ABilities of mind and body not to be gloried in. 202
Accuser. Satan an Accuser. 116 How to know his accusations from the rebukes of
Gods Spirit. 117
Affliction. Affliction, a season Satan chooses to tempt in. 95 The day of
affliction an evil day. 351 How affliction is evil, and how not. 352
Afflictions discover the naughtiness of the heart. 354 Wicked men the worse
for afflictions. 356
Almighty. Almightinesse given as the finest hold-fast for faith in straits. 24
No easy matter to oppose Almighty Power against sense and reason. 25 God very
tender of the honor of this Attribute. 27, 28 A five-fold engagement on Gods
Almighty Power for his Saints help. 29, 30, 31
Answer. How we put a stop to Gods Answers of prayer, how not. 47, 48
Apostasy. The Apostasy of false Christians must not discourage weak Saints.
8 Lamentation for the Apostasy of these times. 376 The root of final
Apostasy, is the want of a through change upon the heart. 380
Armor. What meant by Armor. 53 The Saints Armor must be divine in
institution. 61 The slighty Armor used by Papists and carnal Protestants. 62
Our armor must be of divine constitution. 67 How to try our armor whether of
God or not. 69 The necessity of armor, for every faculty and sense, and why. 73
Assurance. Assurance lost by declining. 336
Attribute. Those Attributes of God, which comfort Saints, speak terror to the
wicked. 38

B.
Boldness. The wickeds boldness, and Saints cowardice alike uncomely. 10

C.
Christ. What a Prince Christ is to his subjects. 219 Covenant Relation with
Christ; See Covenant Relation.
Christian course. Uprightness in our Christian course, a comfort in the evil
day. 370
Church. A cordial to our fainting faith for the afflicted Church. 153, 154
Comfort. The Saints comfort ebbs or flows, as he believes or questions his
interest in the power of God. 35
Conflict. A souls conflict with sin, an evidence of grace. 169
Conquer, Conquest. Saints when most tempted, cannot be conquered. 138 The
Saints Conquest at last makes amends for all. 390
Conscience Sins against rebukes of conscience very dangerous. 365
Contention. The contention of Saint with Saint. 179 The evil of it. 180
Conversation. The vanity of pretending to grace without a holy conversation
discovered. 89
Converts. The advantage Satan has on new Converts. 94
Conversion. Not necessary to know the time of Conversion. 131
Covenant. Gods Covenant sure. 31 Covenant Relation with Christ. How to get
into Covenant Relation with Christ. 367
Courage. Courage necessary in a Saint. 4 The want of this, one cause of
Apostasy. 9
Corruption. How to improve Gods power when corruption is too strong for us. 4O
Cunning. The folly of thinking to be too cunning for the devil, and who do. 112
Curse. The curse that lies on the devil and his cause. 139 This the cause why
he prevails not over Saints. ib.

D.
Darkness. Sin called darkness, and why. 213 Day, See evil.
Death. The hour of death, an hour of temptation. 97 Death to be thought of.
362, 370
Decay. Grace subject to decay. 78
Declining. Saints subject to decline in grace. 334 And to take care to
recover. ib. The wrong a declining Christian does to God. 335 To his brethren.
ib. To himself. 336 How to know whether grace be declining. 337, 338 How to
recover declining grace. 343, 344
Degrees. Further degrees of grace denied, that Saints may stir up what they
have. 45
Despair. Temptation to despair, from defects of humiliation. 121
Devil. The devils nature spiritual. 250 And what a dreadful enemy he is. 252
Distrust. To distrust Gods willingness lames faith, to distrust his power
kills it. 26
Doctrine. Strange doctrine, not hastily to be embraced. 272
Doing. Doing required of Christians. 317
Duty. When duty too great for us, we should not run from it, but by faith lay
it on God. 41 How we do the duties God appoints, not as he has appointed, in
three particulars. 65 Three rules to know whether we eye God in a duty or not.
66 Satan cavils at the Saints duties. 118 Constant and diligent performance of
duty, required of Christians notwithstanding they be sure never to fall away.
388 Thoughts of heavens glory should quicken to duty. 394

E.
Earth, Earthly. Many profess heaven, and practice earth. 314 Earthly things
to be improved for an heavenly end. 317 To be pursued with an holy
indifferency. 318 How to keep earthly things. 319 Arguments to call men off
from earthly things to heavenly. 322 Earthly things are uncertain. 325
Election. Satan pusles Saints about their Election. 130 How to evade his
sophistry therein. 131
Endeavors. God accepts weak endeavors with sincerity, as full obedience. 373
Envy. Envy of others gifts, how to get victory over it. 282 The evil of
envying gifts of others in three particulars. 283
Enemy. Satan's policy to make God and the Saints enemies. 146 How God defeats
him therein ib.
Error. Error indulgent to the flesh. 107 Three lusts from whence most
errors spring, carnal reason, pride and fleshly liberty. 108 Satan labors to
corrupt the Saints with error. 267 His design therein. 268 What need
Christians have, especially in this age, to watch against error. 270 Four
preservatives against error. 271
Evidence. Old evidences for our spiritual state, carefully to be kept. 135
What to do when they are out of the way. 136
Evil day. How afflictions are called an evil day. 373 The evil day to be
thought of and provided for. 358, 362, 363 How to provide for the evil day.
367, 369 Uprightness in a Christian course a comfort in the evil day. 370
Exercise. Why we ought to keep grace in exercise. 82, 83 Grace must be
exercised or sinwil. 90
Expectation. The expectation of believers shall never be disappointed. 31

F.
Fall. Saints falls end in the advance of their grace. 144 Gods love to Saints
after their falls, no encouragement to sin, and why. 147, etc. Why God
communicates his love to such. 149
Final falling away. This doctrine of the Saints final falling away, crosses
Gods design in the Gospel, reflects on Christ's honor wounds the Saints
comfort. 385, etc.
Faith. Satan in tempting strikes at the faith. 149 How he is disappointed. ib.
Fear. Fear makes incapable of counsel. 3 Of distrustful fears, how we shall
bear affliction. 131 Satan's policy in them. 132 Three considerations to quiet
the heart tempted with them. ib. The sin of fearing man, because flesh. 177 How
we may come not to fear flesh. 178 A sovereign cordial to weak believers,
against fear of not holding out to the end. 387
Flesh. Why sin is called flesh. 172 We conflict not with flesh singly but
backed by Satan. ib. Best policy to disarme our flesh, before Satan comes. 173
Man is flesh. 174 We must not be proud of flesh. 175 Nor trust in man because
flesh. 176 Nor fear flesh. 177

G.
Grace. Gifts are ornaments, but grace is armor. 60 Grace, how it depends on
God, and why. 17, 18 Grace left weak, that supporting power may be great. 47
Better no grace then counterfeit, in two respects. 68 The concatenation of
graces, where the whole chain, in 2 Pet. 1.6, 7. is drawn out. 74, 75 Grace to
be exercised. 82, 83 Grace in the Saints lives not endured by those that like a
Profession. 88 When a soul is proud of his grace. 285 It Is no excuse that its
grace we are proud of. 286 Grace not to be rested on for our acceptance with
God. 289 Resting on grace hinders its thriving. 296 And hinders the souls
comfort. 297 Grace subject to decline. See Decline. Without true grace, no
perseverance. 377 Where true grace is, that soul shall persevere. 381
Gifts. The variety of the gifts of the Spirit. 275 A double evil of pride in
gifts. ib. Great gifts without grace yield no solid comfort. 277 Saints not to
be troubled at the meannesse of their gifts. 277 Reasons against pride of
gifts. 278 Wherein it discovers it self. 280 Glory. See Heaven.
Gospel. The reason of Satan's spite against the Gospel. 58 Government. See
Rule.

H.
Hear. People should not be weary of hearing the same truths often. 333
Heart. The more of the heart in a sin, the greater the sin. 262 No sins more
made of then heart sins. 263 The root of final Apostasy, want of a through
change of the heart. 380 Afflictions discover the naughtiness of the heart. 354
Heaven. Heavenly. The Saints wrestling life should make him long for Heaven.
170 No easy matter to get Heaven, and why. 203, 371 Satan's design to plunder
the Christian of what is heavenly. 307 How the Christian is heavenly. 308 A
check to men for refusing Heaven. 312 They are the devils agents that hinder
from what is heavenly. 313 Trials whether we are heavenly. 315 To be with God
in heaven the highest preferment. 394 Thoughts of Heaven, how profitable. 395
Heresy. Heresy why rank't among the deeds of the flesh. 271
Holiness. Holiness in a Saint, awful to the wicked. 91
Hopes. False hopes very dangerous. 365
Humble. Humility. Saints dependence on God, a ground of humility. 22 To be
humble, when most afflicted, necessary. 49 Two particulars discover whether we
be so or not. ib. Satan's arguments to prove a soul not humbled. 122 The fallacy
of them. 124

I.
Ignorance. Ignorance enslaves a soul to Satan. 227 It lets sin in by troops.
228 Locks them up in the heart. ib. Shuts out the means of recovery. 229 The
misery of an ignorant state. 238
Instrument. Why Satan chooses to tempt by instruments. 103 Four sorts of
instruments he uses to seduce others. 104, 105
Day of Judgment. The day of judgment, a day of justification to the godly.
392
Justification. Ignorance in the doctrine of justification, the cause of long
troubles of conscience. 129

K.
Knowledge. How the knowledge of a natural man differs from a Saints. 56 What
is required to get divine knowledge. 242, 243 Three things to be observed in
our search after knowledge. 245

L.
Lazy. Against lazy Preachers. 333
Light. Sinners hate the light. 214
Love. Saints the object of Gods love in a threefold respect. 30, 31 The best
way to quench our love to the creature, is to set it on Christ. 79 Satan
ambitious to tempt after manifestations of Gods love, and why. 96 Why God
communicates his love to Saints after their falls. 149 Saints love to Christ
advanced by their temptations. 150 How this comes to pass. 151 Gods love to
the soul, sometimes an occasion of pride. 302 Saints should watch against this.
303 How to prevent it. ib.

M.
Man Man is flesh. 174 Why seeing his better part is a spirit, is he called
flesh. 175 Man not to be trusted in. 176
Memory. How to remember what we hear. 248
Ministers. Ministers duty toward the ignorant. 235 Four ways they may be
guilty of their peoples ignorance. 236
Ministry. Ministry of the Word, the means to get knowledge. 246
Motions. Satan annoyes Saints with sinful motions. 260 Saints should resist
thsee motions for three reasons. 262 Helps against them. 26^

O.
Obedience. Obedience strong or weak, as our faith is on the power of God. 34
Weak endeavors with sincerity, accepted by God as full obedience. 373
Old Age. The misery of old age, yoked with ignorance. 241

P.
Parents. Parents duty to instruct their children, and why. 229, 230
Parts. What fools men of the greatest parts are without grace. 55
Perfection. Perfection of grace to be pressed after and why. 77, 78 How God
confutes those that dream of perfection here, etc. 80
Persecute. When wicked men persecute us, we should pity them, and save our
wrath for the devil. 181 Perseverance. See falling away.
Perseverance necessary. 9 How to persevere in our Christian course against all
opposition. 12 Without true grace no perseverance. 377 Where true grace is,
that soul shall persevere. 381 The doctrine of perseverance, not to be abused.
388
Pity. God's pity to the frail nature of his children, in three particulars.
178
Pleasure. The sinners pleasures but short. 209
Policy. Sinful policy thrives not with Saints. 105 It makes men like the
devil. 110
Poverty. Not poverty, but ignorance makes miserable. 241
Power. Satan's power discovered in five particulars. 196 Saints not to be
dismayed at his power, and that for three reasons. 204, 205
Prayer. Prayer sometimes answered, when it is not perceived, and in what cases
this is. 43, 44
Preach. What truths are to be preached often. 331 Against lazy Preachers. 333
Preferment. To stand before God in Heaven, the highest preferment. 394
Prevent. God to be admired for preventing mercy. 258
Pride. Pride makes use of good and evil to draw her chariot. 273 Pride double,
carnal and spiritual. The Saint commonly in most danger of the latter, and why.
274 Pride of gifts. See Gifts. Pride of grace. See Grace. A mannerly pride, how
it hinders from Christ. 290, 291 It hinders from peace. 292 A self-applauding
pride, what it is, and the evil of it. 294 Pride of privileges what. 299
Prince. Satan a great Prince. 183 How he obtained it. 185 Trialls whether
Christ or Satan be our Prince. 187, 188 The blessedness of those that have
Christ to be their Prince. 193 See Christ.
Prison. How Paul spent his time in prison.
Profession. Heaven not won by good words and a fair Profession. 371
Profit. How to profit by the Word. 247, 248
Promise. The end of the Promises, to give security to the Saints faith. 34 Not
to endeavor an established faith on them, is to undervalue them. ib. In
claiming the benefit of the Promise, we must keep close to the condition. 41
When absolute Promises stand the soul in great stead. 136
Protection. An unregenerate soul cannot claim Gods protection. 55
Providence. Dark Providence used by Satan to trouble Saints. 133

Q.
Question. Satan pusles the Christian with nice questions. 130

R.
Reserve. Satan has his reserves to fall on, when former temptations are
beaten back. 101
Retreat. Satan's politic retreats. 102
Rich. Rich men poor with knowledge. 242
Rule. The time when Satan rules. 209 The place where. 211 The subjects whom he
rules. 212 Now to get from under Satan's rule. 221 His policy to keep sinners
under his rule. 222

S.
Satan. The reason why Satan's conquests are so great. 97 Of Satan's rule. 209 Of
Satan's wiles. See Wiles.
Scripture. Obscure Scriptures most mused on by tempted souls. 102 Satan's
policy therein, and what is to be done. 133
Security. The danger of security. 363
Sense. Affliction grievous to sense. 353
Sincerity. Sincerity a comfort in the evil day. 370
Sin. In troubles of conscience for the greatness of sin, what to do. 39
Satan has a strange Art in aggravating the Saints sins. 116 How he fathers his
own sin upon the Christian. 115 Satan's method to tempt to sin, before he
troubles for sin. 128 Why sin is called flesh. 129 The state of sin a state
of misery. 217 The devils design in tempting to sin, an argument to hate it.
258 Sin hardens the heart. 305 Sins against rebukes of conscience very
grievous. 365 We must not take liberty to sin, because (if true Christians) we
shall not fall away. 389
Sinner. The sinner and Satan friends when they seem to fight. 57 Every sinner
under Satan's rule. 213 The sinner an unserviceable creature. 215
Singularity. How it is necessary in the Saints. 7
Sloth. The difficulty of recovering a soul out of spiritual sloth. 83
Solicitour. Christ in heaven the Saints Solicitour, and his faithfulness
therein. 32, 33
Spiritual. Of spiritual sins, and how Satan annoyes the Saints with them. 259
How to know our spiritual state. 251
Stability. The stability of the Saints, not from their grace, but from God
reinforcing their grace. 20
Strength. A Christians strength in God, not in himself. 13 God takes it kindly
we will make use of his strength. 42 Less assisting strength given to advance
accepting grace. 46 The sweetness of being at Gods finding for assisting and
comforting strength. 19 A Christian when foiled, stronger then another, when a
seeming Conqueror over the same temptation in two respects. 71, 72
Subtilty. Satan's subtilty in drawing to sin. 98
Suffering. No reason to be proud of our suffering for God. 300

T.
Tempt. Temptation. Satan chooses the best season to tempt. 93 How the
presence of the object gives force to the temptation. 96 Satan's subtilty in
tempting. 98 His approaches in tempting are gradual: 100 The same sin Satan
tempts to, purged by the temptation. 143 Satan in tempting one Saint, has a
design against others. 144 How God disappoints him. 144, 145 Why God suffers
his Saints to be tempted. 152 Temptation to one sin, God orders to prevent
another. 143
Thoughts. How thoughts good for the matter, may be sinful. 266
Trouble. Satan the troubler of the Saints for sin. 114 Troublers of the
Saints, thereby prove themselves Satan's children. 125 Four ways wicked men
may trouble the Saints spirits. 126 The mercy of being kept out of Satan's hands
as a troubler. 127 Its dangerous in temptation to keep our troubles secret. 137
The Saints troubles but short. 211 The Christians life in this world full of
trouble. 349
Trust. To trust God when he withdraws, yea, frowns very hard. 8 The evil of
trusting to the strength of grace. 286, 287

U.
Unregenerate. Unregeneracy a state of ignorance. 50
Unthankfulness. Unthankfulness for what we have, hinders our receiving what
we would have. 48 Uprightness. See Sincerity.

W.
Waiting. Waiting on God under discoucouragements a sign of strong grace. 50
Such are assured to speed well at last. 50, 51
War. How hard to war with bosome-sins. 5.
Weak. Encouragements to the weak in grace to press for more. 80 Weak
endeavors with sincerity, accepted by God through Christ as full obedience.
373 A cordial to weak believers. 387
Wicked, Wickedness. The attempts of the wicked against the Saints are folly,
and why. 16 Wicked men trouble the Saints. 180 The devils wickedness. 253 The
wickedness of man's nature. 256 Wicked men the worse for affliction. 356
Wiles. Christians should labor to know Satan's wiles. 112 How we may know
them. ib.
Wisdom. The Wisdom of God in baffling Satan. 140 Great wisdom to provide
for the evil day. 360
Word. How to profit by the Word. 247, 248
Wrath. The devil is in the wrath of wicked men.
Wrestling. The Saints life is a wrestling. 159 Its dangerous wrestling with
God. 161 How sinners wrestle against the Spirit. 162, 163 How against
Providence in two particulars. 164, 165 Several sorts that wrestle against sin,
but not lawfully. 166, 167 How we are to wrestle against sin. 168

Y.
Youth. Youth the best time to get knowledge. 240

FINIS.

