SVVEET AND Soule-Perswading INDVCEMENTS Leading unto CHRIST.

DEDVCED, 1. From the Consideration of Man's Misery, Emptiness, Baseness, and
Dishonor without Christ. 2. From the Meditation of the Comforts attending the
Souls receiving of CHRIST. 3. From the Apprehension of the Joy and Excellency
of Christ's living in Man: The whole singularly sweetning the Meditation of
Christ to the Soul of Man.


Hoe every one that thirsts come to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye buy, and eat yea come buy wine and milk without money, and without
price: Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which satisfies not. ISA ^5.1, 2.

Draw me, and we will run after thee, the King has brought me into his
chambers, we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
then wine, CANT. 1.4.

BERN. SERMON. 43. in CANT. Aridus est omnis animae cibus si non oleo isto
infunditur, insipus est si non hoc sale conditur, si scribas, non sapit mihi
nisi legero ibi Jesum, si disputes, aut conferas, non sapit mihi nisi sonuerit
ibi Jesus

By Alexander Gross, Minister of CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed by G. M for John Bartlet at the Sign of the Gilt-Cup near
Saint Austins-Gate. MDCXXXII.

To the Christian READER.
Reverend and Christian Reader,
THere is nothing more pleasant and comfortable, more animating and inabling,
more ravishing and soule-contenting to a true Christian, then the frequent and
serious meditation of Christ, then an holy and humble, sweet and constant
commerce and communion with Christ: Christ Jesus being the whole of man's
happiness; the Sun which gives him light in darkness; the Physician which
heales his souls sickness; the wall of fire which defends him in the assaults
of all enemies; the Friend comforting him in his heaviness; the A^ke
supporting him in the deluge of all his distresses; the Rock sustaining him
under the heaviest pressures; the enjoyment of Christ solaceth in the deepest
sorrows; the want of Christ distracteth in the greatest worldly abundance.

Who but Christ is the cloudy Pillar, protecting and leading Gods Israel; the
heavenly Manna feeding the Lords people; the brazen Serpent curing Gods
children of the sinful venom which the fiery Serpent has infused into them:
Who but Christ is the Propitiatory or Mercy-Seat in whom mercy is seated, and
through whom it is revealed and communicated to all that thirst after it; the
Jacobs ladder by whom God descends unto man, and man ascends unto God; the
Table of Shewbread on whom our souls are feasted; the Candle-stick by which
the Church of God is enlightened; the Altar of perfume, in whose name and
through whose mediation we and our prayers are accepted the brazen Laver in
whose blood we are washed, and the fiery Chariot by which we shall at the last
like Eliah be translated in transcendent glory and triumph: Nothing can make
that man miserable who has Christ for his possession; the fullest confluence
of all abilities can never make that man's estate truly comfortable who has no
Christ's fulness communicated to him: Christ being the only Well which is
able to refresh and fill us, when all our vessels like Hagars, prove empty
bottles: the only ^onductor, who is able to lead us, when we are to pass
thorough the Wilderness, and red Sea of manifold adversities: the only
Companion able to comfort us, When God calls us with the three children to walk
in the fiery furnace of sharp and scorching trials; the only Joshua, the
only Captain of the Lords Hosts, who can rescue us, when the Amoritish
Princes, either men or Devils do besiege us: sweet and sure is their Refuge,
who are under the protection of the Lord Jesus: He is a hiding place from the
wind, and a covert from the tempest, rivers of waters in a dry place, the
shadow of a great rock in a weary Land: The life and liberty, peace and safety,
joy and victory, wealth and glory of a Christian is treasured up in Christ.

Be therefore instant and industrious, giving all diligence,

1. To make Christ sure unto thy self: With Boaz in another case be in no rest
until thou have finished this thing this day. Christ is richly worth the
having, all the residue without Christ is worth nothing. Stand not upon the
cost, whither pains or study, tears or prayers, peace, or wealth, goods or
name, life or liberty; Romans 8.^^.
sell all for this pearl. Christ is of that worth and use that thou can
never over buy him, though thou gave thy self and all the world for him; the
making sure of Christ is the assurance of all the rest.

2. Stand for Christ, take Christ's part, be on his side, whoever be against
him; the victory ever passes on Christ's side at last; all his faithful
Soldiers are glorious Conquerours: they all have crowns, though sometimes
they swim unto them in blood; take to thee therefore the heart and courage of
Shammah one of David's Worthies, who stood and defended the field when all the
rest fled. Thus abide thou with Christ, stand for him, defend his Truth, his
Worship, his Church and children, though all others fly from him or rise up
against him: there is more joy and glory in Christ's sufferings, then in the
triumph of profane persons, there is more dignity in Christ's thorns then in
their golden crowns; the more thou loosest for the Lord Jesus, the greater is
thy advantage: he is unworthy the name of a Servant that will not stand by his
Lord and Master in time of dangers; She dishonours the name of a wife that
refuses copartnership with her husband in his troubles; he is unworthy of a
name either with God or man, worthy to have his name buried in everlasting
infamy, that will not stand by Christ with most resolution and confidence, wi^h
most courage and boldness, when men and Devils oppose Christ with most rage
and violence, o then as Maevius that noble Centurion of Augustus being taken
and brought unto Antonius and demanded how he would be handled, Iugulari me
jube, quia non salutis beneficio, nec mortis supplicio adduci possum, ut aut
Caesaris miles esse desinam, aut tu u esse incipiam. Bruson. lx. c. 1.
heroically answered, Command me to be slain, because neither the benefit of
life, no^ the punishment of death can move me, either to cease to be Caesar's
soldier, or to begin to be thine. Thus whatsoever do befall thee, though a
thousand deaths be threatened to be inflicted on thee, let neither the hope of
life, nor the fear of death draw thee to cease from being Christ's soldier, or
to begin to sight under the worlds banner; it is more noble and comfortable to
die the most ignominious death for Christ, then to live the most glorious
worldly life with the deny all of Christ.

3. Do not stand aloof off from Christ when Christ is upon the Cross: Do
not halt and neutralize in the hour of Christ's and his Churches troubles; he
that is not Christ's friend is Christ's enemy: He that is not with him is against
him: It is Salomons observation of the sloathfull, He that is sloathfull in his
work is brother to him that is a great waster, accordingly, he that is
sloathfull in Christ's work: that does not readily put forth his hand, to the
help and assistance of Christ and his Church, is brother to him that is a
great waster of the Kingdom and Church of Christ: Christ looks on all
Neutralists, as on enemies, and not on servants, Aut totum mecu^ tene, aut
totum omit. Greg. Nazien.
he that holds not wholly with Christ, does very sham^fully neglect Christ:
there is no consistence between the service of two Masters, men cannot possibly
at once be the followers of two contrary leaders: And what are these time
serving Politicians and carnal Neutralizing middle men? but spiritual
Harlots, their hearts are divided betwixt Christ and other lovers: Ignominious
Disgracers of the Christian name and profession, their way like the goings of
the lame whose legs are not equal: prodigious Is proditor est veritatis qui
aut non libere pronunciat, aut non sufficienter eam defendit. Chrysostom.
Traitors to their heavenly Prince, the truth, the cause and Church of Christ:
The very off spring of Judas. Shameful exposers of themselves to the scorn
and hatred of all men, both good and bad: it happening unto these middle men,
as to them who dwell in the Aristot^l^s de mediis.
middle rooms of some high building, as they are smoaked and smothered by them
that dwell under them, and polluted with slime and filth from them that dwell
over them; so smoke and smother, disgrace and shame is the portion of such
neutralizing and middle people: they that cleave heartily to neither side, are
justly suspected and abhorred of each side: He that is neither thoroughly for
God, nor for man, is rejected both of God and man: do not say then in the day
of Christ's and worlds contestation, as sometime the Roman Cato did in the
civil war between Caesar and Pompey Quem fugiam video, quem sequar non
video. I discern whom to fly, but I see not whom to follow. Whosoever be
deserted, Christ must be fully followed, or the curse of Meroz must be
expected. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, Jud. 5.23.
curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help
of the Lord, to the help of the Lord in the day of the mighty. Which words I
wish, as once Chrysostom did that sentence. Eccles. 2.11. were engraven on the
doore-posts, into which these Politicians and Neutralizers enter, on the Tables
where they sit, on the dishes cut of which they eat, on the cups out of which
they drink, on the bedsteeds where they lie; on the walls of the houses where
they dwell; on the garments which they wear; on the heads of the horses on
which they ride; and on the fore heads of all them whom they meet, that they
might learn and continually remember, That there is bitter curse attending not
only them that openly oppose Christ, Rev. 3.16.
but also such as neglect to minister their assistance to Christ: Who will spew
all them out of his mouth who are neither hot nor cold; such as halt in the
profession of Christ are the greatest abomination to Christ, Christ will make
their condition very base and ignominious, who are not Zealous in Christ's cause
and service.

4. Be not terrified with the multitude of opposers or opp^sitions which thou
shall see against Christ; but rather say as that noble Paedaretus.
Soldier in Erasmus did to him that told him of that numerous and mighty Army
which came against him, Tanto plus gloriae reforemus, quoniam ^o plures
superabimus, the number of opposers makes the Christians conquest the more
illustrious: say to thy soul in this case as Hezekiah did to his Soldiers in
the like: ^ Cro. 32.7, 8.
Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the King of Assyria,
nor for all the multitude that is with him, for there be more with us then with
him; with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help
us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the word of
Hezekiah King of Judah: and that thy heart may not meditate a revolt from
Christ, nor entertain a thought of conspiring with the profane multitude in
hope of temporal preservation and safety: consider,

1. How the profanest part does ever in the issue prove the weakest part: the
power of ungodliness cuts in sunder the sinews of the greatest earthly
forces, as Jonah weakened the Mariners in the Ship, Achan the Soldiers in the
Army, and a reigning disease the greatest body of flesh, their sin against
God brings a curse on them that oppose God, and though they may prosper for a
season, for the trial or castigation of Gods children, yet at length like the
Isa 10.6.
rod in the fathers hand they are burnt or broken. God at length resolves even
unto nothing, all the powers which exalt themselves against Heaven, as is
manifest in the fall of the Midianites, Goliath, Absalom, Zera the Ethiopian,
the King of Assiria, and infinite others.

2. Consider, how they who for safety forsake Christ, and betake themselves
unto an arm of flesh, Jer. 14.3.
Have no other but a withered reed to lean on, no other then a sandy
Foundation to build upon. They go like the children in the Prophet with their
vessels to empty pits, and return ashamed, they shelter themselves with the
men of Shechem under a bramble, Jud. 9.
where they are pierced and goared, instead of being shadowed; their imaginary
way and means of supportation, turns to their real shame and ruin: all
worldly powers to them that desert the Lord Jesus, prove not only vain
helpers, but miserable destroyers: for thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man
that trusts in man, Jer. 17.5, 6.
and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord, for he
shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good comes, but
shall inherit the parched places in the wilderness in a salt land and not
inhabited. When a people have most of man for them, and least of God with them,
then are they usually nearest unto utter ruin.

3. Consider how they who go from Christ and unite themselves to the profane
and disaffected multitude for safety, do engage themselves in a common
quarrel against Christ, and make Christ their enemy, and having armed Christ
against them, all the world cannot preserve them; Psa 2.9. Mat. 21.
but now they are dashed in pieces as a Potters vessel by an iron rod, now
Christ like a Rock falls upon them and grindes them unto dust: Conjunction with
Christ's enemies is the worst of all ways and means for refuge; Should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? (said the Prophet to that
good King Iehoshaphat) therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.

2 Cro. 19 2.
4. Consider how combination with the adversaries of Christ and his cause for
temporal preservation, has ever more a cross and curse attending it;
enterprises against the Lord Jesus have in all ages proved dismal to their
undertakers, Who (says Job) did ever harden himself against the Almighty and
prosper. Job 9.4.
No weapon (says the Lord) that is formed against thee shall prosper, Isa. 54
17.
and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall
condemn. They who cast the three children into the fiery furnace burnt
themselves. Pharaoh perished in the very waters into which he forced the
Israelites: there is nothing but an expectation of crosses and curses to that
man that does oppose Christ the fountain of all blessings.

5. Consider, when the Church is weakest and the combination strongest against
it, then God is always nearest to it, and most ready to show his power in the
preservation of it. The Churches deepest misery is Gods choicest opportunity;
the Lords people never see and enjoy more of Gods presence then in the fiery
furnace: God takes occasion by his Churches distresses at once to manifest his
power, wisdom, justice, truth and goodness.

6. Consider, that Christ is the strength of every thing, the foundation is the
strength of the house, the roots are the strength of the Tree; Christ the
Creator is the strength of the creature. He turns the strength of the mighty
into weakness, and the impotency of the weak into strength, the creature
always proves more or less powerful, according to the concurrence of Christ's
arm either with or against him; all the Nations of the world, when the
influence of Gods power is suspended, are but as a drop of a bucket, Isa.
40.15. Is. 41.11, 12, 13
and as the small dust of the balance: the weakest people, the worm Jacob
when Christ joins with them are stronger then the Mountains: No man's station
is firm or stable beside his, who has Christ sustaining him. Gods Church has
no cause of contracting, despairing cogitations either from her own weakness,
or from the power of her adversaries, 1 Samuel 2.9.
receiving her supportment from the power of Christ Jesus; for he will keep
the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness, and by
strength shall no man prevail.

7. Consider, how they who step out from Christ and betake themselves to the
shadow of carnal men for refuge, do therein associate and combine themselves
with Satan, for an uncertain, bodily preservation, do expose their souls
unto certain and inevitable ruin, and what can it avail a man, to loose the
jewel in hope to keep the casket, or to destroy the Inhabitant, in hope to
preserve the house: How ever it go for the present. Christ will prevail at
last; and whither will thou run then, that runnest from Christ now: He that
now flies from the cause of Christ, will not be then able to fly from the wrath
of Christ: He that now refuses Christ suffering, shall with dreadful horror
and amazement at last behold Christ triumphing.

Lastly, Consider, There is more Majesty, terror and security too, in the
presence and consortship of a few good men then in the presence of a great
number of profane men: There is a manifestation of God in them, which makes the
hearts of their enemies to shake, as they who came to apprehend Christ fell
backward at the very beholding of Christ. Gods powerful and blessed presence
among his people, the efficacy of their prayers, the power of godliness
apparent in their lives, the very persuasion which wicked men have of their
integrity, of their intimacy and communion with God, and of Gods taking part
with them, does make their presence dreadful to the eye and apprehension of
profane men: thus the Psalmist, Ps. 48.2, 3, 4.
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole Earth is Mount Syon, on the
sides of the North the City of the great King. God is known in her Palaces for
a Refuge: for lo the Kings were assembled, they passed by together, they saw
and so they marvelled, they were troubled and hasted away, fear took hold
upon them there, and pain as of a woman in travel. Hest 9 2.
And in the days of Hester the fear of the Jews fell upon all people: And in
the days of Joshua, such a fear fell upon the profane Nations that their
hearts melted neither was there spirit in them any more, Josh. 5.1.
because of the children of Israel. The enduring of affliction with Gods
people, is better, more honorable, more comfortable, more safe and profitable
then the enjoyment of the pleasures of sin for a season.

5. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for the safety, unity, tranquillity of the
Church of Christ. Pray for the blessing of Heaven upon our dear and dread
Sovereign, and upon his great Council, that his Name, his Throne and Kingdom
may flourish and shine in glory like the Sun to the end of the world, and that
their Council may be acceptable to him, the divisions of Reuben sweetly and
fully reconciled, and our threatened storm changed into a blessed calm, having
one Prince of peace commanding us, one word of peace instructing us, one spirit
of peace conducting us, one way of peace, whereunto the Lord has called us: let
every man cast the disobedient Jonah out of the Ship of his own soul, which
makes our waters tempestuous. Let every man cut off the Sheba of his own
rebellious lust, which causes God to threaten the laying of a Siege against
the City both of our soul and body. Let us meet the Lord as Abigail did David,
that the Lord may be entreated, that all that is amiss may be thoroughly
reformed, and the Gospel of our peace in the purity and perfection thereof
continued, and the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace preserved.

6. Communicate freely and fully to the necessities of the Church of Christ, as
the Sun his light to them that sit in darkness, the mother her breast to the
hungry child, and the Cloud its rain to the thirsty ground; the Churches wants
are for the trial of thine abundance, the Church purchased by the blood of
Christ is more precious then all worldly possessions and challenges
pre-eminence in thy affections above all earthly treasures. What thou
possessest is not so much thine as Christ's, and therefore ought freely to be
expended in the cause of Christ. It is the honor of thy substance to be
employed in the Lords service; it is the glory of a Christian to be Christ's
Almoner to feed his Church and children; the Church is a Vineyard whence a
liberal harvest returns to every man that sowes plentifully to it. Christ's
blood is infinitely more precious then thy gold. He gave his blood for thee,
and how can thou withold thy money from him. Depart rather with all thy
substance, then that one member of Christ perish for the want of it. It is not
man's riches, but man's bounty to Christ's members that honors man; it is not the
presence, but the well using of thy abilities which will give thee comfort in
the hour of thy last and dreadful Summons.

7. Be constant in the knowledge, faith, love, fear and profession of Christ.
Be not in the matter of Gods worship and thy salvation like a Reed shaken with
the wind. Be not carried too and fro with every vain and empty Doctrine like a
Ship without an Anchor. Be not tossed up and down with every gust and wave of
affliction; take not thy leave of Christ as Orpah did of Naomi for any
distress that does befall the Church or cause of Christ; do not leave the Sun
for a Gloc-worme, the favor of God for the love of men; do not change the
Arc for Dagon, the ^heat for chafe, the Doctrine of Christ for the tradition
of Antichrist, pure Religion for fordid and slavish Superstition. Forsake not
the bridegroom of thy soul for a Harlot, the Lord Jesus for the creature;
perfidiousnesse to Christ is the shame of all shames to a Christian; God and
man, friend and for abhor him that proves unfaithful to the Prince of his
salvation: It was the saying of the Father of Constantine the great, occasioned
by some of his households sacrificing to Idols upon a Commandment which he gave
for trials sake, Eos Regi suo nunquam fideles fore, qui Deo infideles ex it
ssent. He that will be false to God will never be true to man for conscience
sake. He that breaks faith with God is worthy of least credit with man. Take
heed therefore, let not thought arise within thee of departing from the living
God; but press forward, draw nearer and nearer unto God, break through all the
Armies of opposition and discouragement which do or shall encounter thee, as
David's worthies brake through the Army of the Philistines, and came to the wels
of Bethel: grow in Knowledge as the light shining more and more to the perfect
day: grow in faith as the Tree in roots; increase in love as the fire in heat
having much wood. Be not terrified with any comminations, be not disheartened
with any losses, revolt not for fear of any sufferings, there is enough in
Christ to make a super abundant recompense. In him thou have a living Spring,
when all thy bottles are empty; an iron pillar when all thy withered reeds are
broken; a wall of fire, when all the refuges and hiding places of chafe and
stubble are scattered like the dust before the wind; in him thou have a
glorious Sun when all the blazing stars of thy worldly comfort are extinguished
and come to naught; a bridegroom the fairest of ten thousand, when all thy
friends according to the flesh are put to perpetual silence in the grave. O
then suffer thy self now to be guided by Christ, prostrate thy self under the
feet of Christ, be contented with Christ, repose thy self upon Christ, increase
thy interest in Christ, live wholly to Christ, and be ready to suffer and dye
for Christ, that so thou may for ever triumph with Christ: So prays

The most unworthy of them that serve the Lord Christ, A. G.

SWEET AND Soule-Perswading INDVCEMENTS, Leading unto CHRIST.
CHAP. I.
Psalm 1 ^8.26. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, we have
blessed you out of the house of the Lord.


Christ's triumphant coming into Jerusalem, Mat 21.
is a lively Emblem and clear representation of his gracious coming in the
Gospel to his people, and in his spiritual and heavenly kingdom, to the
souls of his chosen. Christ coming into Jerusalem, sent two of his Disciples
to loose the colt which was tied, and to bring him unto Christ. Christ coming
in his spiritual kingdom, sends his Ministers by their preaching to loose and
free the souls of men which are fast chained and fettered to sin, Satan, and
the world. All men in their natural estate and condition are slaves to the
world, servants of corruption, and bondmen to Satan. Christ by the labors of
his Ministers in the Gospel communicates spiritual liberty and freedom to
the souls of Gods chosen. We all continue fast tied with the cords and bands
of carnal lusts and affections, till Christ sends his Ministers amongst us.

The colt was first loosed, and then brought to Christ. The powers of sin and
ungodliness must first be dissolved within us, before we can come to Christ
Jesus. We must be loosed and set free from the power of sin, Satan, and the
world; which formerly ruled and swayed like Masters over us, or else we are
unfit for Christ's service: He that will not be untyed and loosed from his
sin, cannot be united unto Christ; the labors of Christ's Ministers in
respect of us are fruitless, if they do not loose us from the power of
ungodliness.

Christ commands the two Disciples to bring the colt to him, not to keep him
to themselves, not to imply him in their own service. It is the duty of Gods
Ministers to draw the souls of men not unto themselves, but unto Christ: They
are corrupt and carnal Ministers that seek to exalt themselves, and not the
Lord Jesus, in the eyes and hearts of their hearers; the drawing and working
home of the souls of men to Christ Jesus, is the chiefest crown and honor of
all ministerial labors; they who make either their own profit, or applause
the end of their ministerial service, are certainly deceitful workers.

The Lords and owners of this colt, though they questioned with the Disciples,
why they loosed him, yet at their word they readily let him go. Christ makes
his word in the mouth of his Ministers powerful and effectual in the hearts
of his people to move them to resign themselves and all that they have to
Christ and his service. Christ makes the souls of such as belong to Gods
Election, to obey the voice of his Ministers in the Gospel. Christ sent not
his Disciples to loose and bring unto him some magnificent and stately horse,
such as Princes and Nobles use to ride on, but the fool of an Ass, an
ordinary, dull, and plain beast. Christ does most usually set up his
spiritual throne and kingdom in the hearts of men of mean and low condition,
and of little of no esteem in the world. Men most eminent for their moral and
temporal endowments, are often found the greatest strangers to Christ and his
service: Christ is many times carried in triumph in the hearts of poor and
despised people, when such as have the fullness of the world will not veil and
stoop to him.

The Disciples did not only bring this colt to Christ, but they also spread
their clothes upon him, and so prepared and fitted him for Christ to ride
thereon. Gods Ministers must by their doctrines garnish the souls of men, that
they may be fit for Christ to reign in them. Nothing should be of such esteem
or use with us, but we should readily spare it for Christ's service, be ready to
strip our selves of all, even our very garments to exalt the Lord Jesus; we
should rather choose to make our selves naked, then suffer Christ to be
dishonored.

The Disciples having cast their garments upon the beast, they set up Christ
thereon. The exaltation of Christ must be the prime intendment and labor of
every Minister of Christ; they must never rest nor please themselves in their
labors, till they have set up Christ, and caused him to reign in the hearts
of their hearers. That man is very low, and base in his undertakings, who
strives not to make Christ glorious.

Christ being by the Disciples set upon this colt, a great multitude spread
their garments in the way, and others cut down branches from the trees, and
strawed them in the way. When Christ is by his Ministers exalted, and lifted up
in the preaching of the Gospel, many souls veil and bow to him, embrace, and
reverence him, as their spiritual King and Sovereign, prostrating themselves
and all that is theirs under him. The multitude did not only straw the way with
their garments, and branches, but they also cried Hosanna to the son of
David: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
highest. Humble and believing souls receive and entertain the Lord Jesus with
very great joy and gladness. The blessed presence of Christ in the Gospel
ministers matter of very great rejoicing; here is such a sun of heavenly
light shining, such a stream of consolations flowing, such a storehouse of
spiritual treasure set open, and such dewes of grace, mercy, and peace
distilling, that every man that has an eye of wisdom to discern Christ, a
hand of faith to lay hold on Christ, and a heart of love to embrace Christ's
coming in the Gospel, must needs say with the Psalmist, Blessed be he that
comes in the name of the Lord. We are blessed out of the house of the Lord.

Scope of the words.
The words are an Acclamation of the people, declaring and setting forth the
welcome of Christ to all believing souls; their joy, and rejoicing, conceived
upon the coming of Christ among them; their gratulation and thanksgiving for
Christ's appropinquation and coming nigh unto them; their vote and exoptation
of all prosperity, blessed and happy success to Christ in his kingdom. Note.
Christ's coming proves most joyful to them that lovingly receive and
entertain him. All true believers are holy and hearty welwishers to the
Gospel and Kingdom of Christ Jesus, all manner of blessings attend and wait
on the Lord Jesus, in the humble and gracious use of his ordinances. True
Christians have such experience of the benefits and blessings, mercies and
comforts flowing from Christ in the ministry of his Gospel, that with great
joy and thanksgiving they cry out; Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord. We have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.

Analysis.
In the words we have in the general two things considerable:

1. A Gratulation, uttered by the people, Blessed be he that comes in the
name of the Lord.

2. A Benediction pronounced by the Ministers of the Lord, We have blessed you
out of the house of the Lord.

1. Agens. Note.
In the gratulation, there is 1. the Agent, the people, they bless, they
rejoice, they are thankful for Christ's coming. Man has greatest cause of all
creatures to rejoice in and for the coming of Christ Jesus. 2. Actus.
2. there is the Act, Blessed, praised, exalted, magnified be Christ. Christ is
worthy to be celebrated with all praises for his coming to us. 3. 3. Modas.
there is the manner of their gratulation, Blessed, expressed 1. by way of
thanksgiving and rejoicing, and 2. by way of exoptation and wishing. Note.
Whosoever truly rejoices in Christ, does also wish well to the cause and
kingdom of Christ. 4. there is Movens, or the party coming, 4 Movens.
He, who is the son of God by eternal generation, and by grace of
hypostaticall union, the Prince of the Kings of the earth by authority and
dominion; He who is the head of the Church by spiritual Jurisdiction; He who
is the Redeemer of man by the merit of his obedience and passion; He who is the
Conqueror over hell, death, sin, and Satan by his Resurrection; He who by
his office is the Prophet instructing us, the King commanding and defending us,
and the Priest offering himself a sacrifice for us. He who is the Mediator
between God and us by his intercession, the fountain of all mercy, grace and
peace unto us by divine ordination. Blessed be he, welcome be he, in him let
our souls rejoice, his coming let us entertain with the chiefest and
strength of our rejoicing. Note.
The Lord Jesus ought to be the prime and complete object of man's joyfulnesse.
5. Here is his Motion, Comes. 5. Motus.
Christ as God is every where, and neither goes nor comes, but fills all places;
yet he comes by his Laws and ordinances, as a Prince by his Proclamations;
He comes by his Ministers, as a King by his Ambassadors; He comes by his
Incarnation; as a brother taking our nature upon him; He comes by his gifts
and graces best;owed on us, as a friend comes by his love tokens; He comes
by his Word and Gospel, as the Sun comes by his light, enlightening us, as a
King comes by his Scepter binding, bowing, and inclining our hearts unto
obedience; as a General comes by his military weapons, casting down the
strong holds of sin within us; as the Cloud comes by his dew, watering,
refreshing, and fructifying us; as the Master of a feast comes by his
dainties, feeding and feasting us; as a Bridegroom comes by his voice,
solacing and comforting us; He comes by his Sacrament; as the King by his
Broad Seal, sealing to us the remission of our sins, and justification of
our souls through his righteousness; he comes by his holy and gracious
operation upon our souls; as the Sun by casting a sweet and heavenly
influence into our hearts; as a King setting up his throne within us; as a
heavenly and Almighty Workman new moulding, new framing, and fashioning us,
all these ways comes the Lord Jesus to the souls of his servants. Blessed is
that person that knows the way and manner of Christ's spiritual and gracious
coming. Terminus a quo.
Here is the term, from whence he comes, from God, in the name of the Lord,
by the ordination and appointment of God, with authority and commission from
God, every way fitted and furnished for the administration of his kingdom, and
accomplishment of the work undertaken by him.

CHAP. II.
I Will not insist on all these particulars, but only upon the peoples
gratulation, and Christ's authority or commission. First, the peoples
gratulation, Blessed be he that comes, expressing their rejoicing and
thanksgiving for Christ's coming in his Gospel and spiritual kingdom: Man
blesses man, by making prayer and supplication for him: God blesses man by
bestowing good things upon him, by removing evil things from him, and by
turning all for good unto him, and man blesses God and Christ by thanksgiving
to God and Christ, well speaking of God and Christ, holy and hearty rejoicing
in God and Christ, gracious and unfeigned welwishing unto the cause of God and
Christ, and thus the people in this place bless Christ's coming in the name of
the Lord; and hence we learn,

Doct.
That Christ coming in his Gospel and spiritual kingdom, ought to be
received and entertained with much thanksgiving and rejoicing. The Arc was a
type of Christ, David at the coming of the Arc into the Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 6
danced with all his might, and all the house of Israel brought up the Arc
with shouting, and with the sound of a Trumpet. Thus should the souls of men
be filled with very great thanksgiving and rejoicing at the coming of Christ
among them, this was prophesied also, and also given in charge long before the
coming of Christ in the flesh. Z^ch. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem, behold thy
King comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding
upon an ass, and upon a colt the fool of an ass. As men rejoice at an earthly
Kings coming in love and mercy unto them, so and much more should we rejoice
at Christ's, the spiritual and heavenly Kings coming in grace and mercy unto
us, the people piped with pipes, and were exceedingly joyful in the day of
Salomons coronation, when he was set up to reign over them, much greater
should be our rejoicing in the day when Christ comes to us by his Gospel,
and sets up his spiritual kingdom in the hearts of his people. This joy
and rejoicing is promised by the Prophet, Isa. 12.1.
in that day, in the day of the Gospel, in the day of Christ's gracious and
merciful coming, in the day of Christ's erecting his spiritual and heavenly
kingdom, thou shall say, Lord I will praise thee, I will be thankful to thee,
I will exalt and magnify thee, I will confess and acknowledge thy power to be
a rock that never sinketh, thy truth to be a word that never fails, thy
mercy to be a river whose water never decays, Ver. 3.
and thy love to be a Sun that never sets, and with joy shall ye draw
waters out of the Wells of salvation; then shall we draw by the bucket of a
lively faith, spiritual and sweet, strong and plentiful consolations from
Christ, who is a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, and out of
the doctrine of the Gospel, which like a river refreshes and makes glad the
hearts of the Lords people: This joy and rejoicing is illustrated by a
similitude taken from the light: Isa. 9.2.
They that walked in darkness, have seen a great light, they that dwell in
the land of the shadow of death, to them has the light shined. As the coming
of the light is very joyful to them that are in darkness, so is the coming
of Christ in the Gospel, very joyful, bringing spiritual and heavenly light
to them that sat in darkness, and the shadow of death, all light is but
darkness, and all joy but heaviness, in respect of that light and joy which
arises from the coming of Christ Jesus; and with great joy and gladness has
this coming of Christ been celebrated by the Angels: Fear not (says the
Angel to the Shepherds) Luke 10 11.
behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people, for
unto you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord, and suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and in the earth peace,
good will toward men. Thus likewise the multitude of Disciples beholding and
seeing Christ come, observing his miracles, Luke 19.37
and embracing his doctrine, they began to rejoice and praise God with a loud
voice for all the mighty works that they had seen, saying, Blessed be the King
that comes in the name of the Lord, grace in heaven, and glory to the
highest. The true and saving discerning of Christ's coming, and mighty
operation in the Gospel ever makes the soul joyful: It is said of the
Gentiles hearing Saint Paul to cite that prophecye of our Savior, I have set
thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation to the
ends of the world, that they were Act. 13.47, 48.
glad and glorified the word of the Lord; they were glad, as a man that sits in
darkness is glad of a light, as a man that is arrested is glad of a surety to
pay his debt, as a man that is mortally sick is glad of a Physician to heal
his disease, as a man that is condemned is glad to hear of his coming that
brings him a pardon; very sweet and strong is that souls joy and gladness
which has a lively taste of the comforts and benefits springing from the
coming of Christ in the Gospel: They were not only glad, Aug. Gauleat
sanctus quoni^ recipietremunerationem, gau deat peccator, quoniam invitatur ad
venia^, gaudeat, etc.
but they also glorified the word of God, by understanding it as a word of
wisdom, by believing it as a word of truth, by obeying it as a word of power,
by loving it as a word of goodness, and by delighting in it as a word of
surpassing and comfortable sweetness; the soul that looks on Christ with
joyful apprehensions is very active, and ready to glorify Christ by faith and
obedience. Luke 16.6.
Zacheus was very industrious to see Christ joyful in his entertainment of
Christ, he made haste, Gaudium pioru^ tu ipse es, and ipsa est beata vita
gaudere de te propter te, ipsa est, and non altera. Aug.
and came down, and received him joyfully. Questionless every soul that
truly desires to know Christ, receives Christ coming in the Gospel with much
thanksgiving and rejoicing. Thus it is, and thus it must be.

In regard of the clear and comfortable revelation of God in Christ. God is
truly and savingly known, 5. Grounds hereof 1. Revelation of God.
only in and through his son, God indeed is obscurely and darkly known in his
Romans 1.19.20
works, as a God of power; in his providence, as a God of authority, wisdom,
and order; in his common mercies, as a God of bounty, and in his punishments
and judgments as a God of justice; but in Christ opened and preached in the
Gospel, God is known with a clear, a comfortable, and saving knowledge, as a
father of grace and singular mercy and loving kindness: In Psalm. 76.1.
Judah (says the Psalmist) is God known, and his name is great in Israel; in
Judah in his Church, where his Word and Ordinances are, where Christ is
preached, and the mystery of man's salvation is opened, there God is known
truly without error, perspicuously without obscurities, and savingly without
uncertainties; there he is known as a King in his Courts, for the glory and
beauty which he there manifests; as a teacher in his school, for the
wisdom and knowledge which he there dispenses; as a dweller in his house,
for the holy orders he there prescribes, and gracious rule and dominion he
there erecteth, and bears in the souls of his servants; as a bridegroom in
the banqueting house, for the spiritual dainties he there makes, for the
clear and open manifestations of himself, and love and comforts he there
ministers to his spiritual friends and guests, and his name is great in
Israel: His power, wisdom, truth, love, and goodness is much magnified, and
very glorious in their apprehensions who know him in Christ Jesus. Man's
knowledge of God, out of the Lord Jesus is nothing else but blindness, nothing
but miserable and uncomfortable ignorance; for no man (says Christ) Mat. 11.27
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.
Christ is the lively image of the Father, and God is known in Christ as a
father is known in his sons face: The soul of man is full of hellish
darkness, that is not taught of Christ Jesus: For as the Apostle says, the 2
Cor. 4.6.
light of the knowledge of the glory of God is given in the face of Jesus
Christ: The knowledge of the glory of Gods wisdom in the mystery of man's
redemption, the knowledge of the glory of Gods power in dissolving the works of
Satan, the knowledge of the glory of Gods justice in satisfying himself for
man's sin by Christ's suffering, the knowledge of the glory of Gods mercy in
forgiving man's transgression, the knowledge of the glory of Gods holiness in
sanctifying man's soul, and the knowledge of the glory of Gods love in
reconciling man unto himself, all this knowledge of the glory of God is given
in the face of Jesus Christ, it is all manifested and made known in and
through Christ, of all Christian scholars he is the choicest that knows most
of God in Christ, and because this knowledge is given in the face of Christ, we
should receive Christ coming in the Gospel with very great rejoicing; for as
the light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to the eye to behold the Sun:
so this wisdom Prove. 6 10.
when it enters into the heart, and this knowledge is pleasant to the soul,
in regard of spiritual liberty and freedom brought to the soul of man by the
coming of Christ in his Gospel and spiritual kingdom. 2. Spiritual liberty.
Christ is the worker, and the Jo^. 8, 32, 36.
Gospel the instrument of man's freedom: Christ coming in the Gospel brings
liberty from ignorance, as the Sun brings liberty from darkness: Christ
coming into Capernaum, the Evangelist says, the Mat. 4.16. Io^ 1^.44.
people that sat in darkness saw a great light, and to them that sat in the
region and shadow of death light is sprung up: By this Christ brings liberty
from death in sin, as by his voice he raised Lazarus, and set him free from
the grave: so the dead in sin Ioh. 5.25.
hear the voice of the Son of God in the Gospel and live, by this Christ
brings liberty from Satan, 1 Samuel 17. 2 Cor 10 4. Luke 10.
as David by his staff and stone overthrew the great Goliath, and brought
liberty to Israel: so does Christ by his Gospel cast down the strong holds of
sin, and make Satan fall like lightening from heaven, and frees the souls of
Gods chosen: Hereby Christ brings liberty from uncleanness: 2 Kin ^.
As Jordan freed Naaman from his leprosy, so does Christ by his word Job.
17.17.
sanctify and cleanse the souls of all believers; Hereby Christ brings
liberty from the Wrath of God, and curse of the Law, as a surety paying the
debt brings liberty to the principal from the prison, the arrest and sentence
of the Judge. Christ preached in the Gospel, is the end of the law for
righteousness to all that believe in him. As we therefore rejoice in the light
which frees us from darkness, in the Physician which frees us from diseases,
in the ransomer which frees us from bondage, in the surety which frees us from
the Sergeants, that they do not arrest us, from the prison that it does not
hold us: so should we rejoice in the coming of Christ, bringing manifold,
sweet, and comfortable freedom to us. The Prophet having declared how God had
given Christ for a Isa. 49.8.
Covenant of the people, for a mediator of the people, to establish the earth,
the elect living on the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages, to
restore them say to the prisoners go forth, to loose them that were bound with
the fetters of their corruption, and captivated by Satan, adds this as a duty
of the people, and a fruit of that freedom which Christ has brought unto
them. Sing O Heaven, and be joyful And thus Philip preaching Christ in
Samaria, and the devils departing out of many that were possessed by them, it
is said there was Act. 8.7, 8.
great joy in that City: spiritual freedom from the power of Satan, and our
own corruption ministers matter of much and very sweet rejoicing.

In regard of that heavenly and blessed victory which we obtain by the coming
of Christ in the Gospel; 3. Heavenly victory.
the Priests sounding the rammes-hornes, the Josh. 6.20.
walls of Jericho fell, and the Israelites obtained the victory: Gods Ministers
crying aloud, and lifting up their voices like a trumpet in the preaching of
the Gospel, the holds of sin are w cast down, and the souls of men are made
victorious, according to that of the Apostle, the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God to the casting down of
strong holds. ^ Sam. 5.4.
When the Arc was erected Dagon fell. When Christ is erected, exalted, and set
up among the people in the ministry of the Gospel, then the Devil falls from
his possession, then sin falls from its dominion, and then the world falls from
the room and sway it had in the hearts of the people; the soldier is made
victorious by his weapon, the Christian by the Gospel, the word being the Ephesians.
6.17.
sword of the Spirit, that instrument by which the Spirit shows his power in
making the soul of man a glorious conqueror. Why does the Prophet (speaking
in the person of Christ) say, the Lord had made his mouth a Isa. 49.2.
sharp sword, and a polished shaft, but to show the energy and working of his
doctrine, in piercing the heart, in wounding sin, as a sword and shaft does
the body of the enemy in the day of battle: The right use of this weapon ever
gives man victory over his corruption. What is the Rev. 6.1.
white-horse mentioned by Saint John, but the Primitive Church being, white and
bright for the purity and perfection of doctrine and discipline; the Apostles
like a horse swiftly running, propagated the faith of Christ through the world.
Who is the rider there spoken of, but Christ who is exalted, and carried in
spiritual triumph by the Ministry of his Word: What is his bow, but his Word,
the Law and Gospel, with which he wounds the hearts of his elect, that he may
heal and enliven them; The hearts of the reprobate to terrify and destroy
them, according to that of the Psalmist, Thine Psalm. 45.5.
arrows are sharp in the hearts of the Kings enemies whereby the people fall
under thee. And how went Christ forth conquering and to conquer? he went forth
conquering, overcomming sin by his death and passion, and overcomming death,
hell, Satan, and the world, by his Resurrection, and he goes forth to
conquer, converting his chosen, and convincing his enemies, by the preaching of
the Gospel, and in this victory there is matter of great joy; It is greater
joy to a Christian to see the Devil and his own lust overcome, and cast
down, then to Israel, to see Pharaoh and the Egyptians lie drowned before them
in the waters; this gives them occasion in a holy and triumphant manner to say,
the Lord has triumphed gloriously, the horse and the rider has he thrown
down together: He cannot but rejoice in Christ's coming that partakes of the
victory coming by him.

In regard of the spiritual and heavenly peace hence arising to the soul: 4.
Heavenly peace.
Christ's coming to the souls of men in the Gospel, is like the coming of
the Dove to Noah, with an Olive branch in her mouth, certifying the soul of
the abatement, and removal of Gods wrath, of the speedy departure of the
deluge of present sorrows, and the happy return, and re-appearance of
spiritual and heavenly comforts. Here Christ as a bright and shining Sun,
dispels the clouds of sorrow from the soul. Here Christ as a valiant Captain,
removes the siege, Ios. 10.6.
which the infernal Princes lay against the souls of his servants, as Joshuah
drove the Amoritist Princes from the Gibeonites: Here Christ as a Physician
heales the wounded consciences, and binds up the broken hearts of his children,
as he sometime healed the diseased woman whom no Physician could cure: Here
Christ as an absolute Commander appeaseth the inward stormy troubles of the
heart, as by his voice he appeased the stormy tempest and gave a calm to his
Disciples: Mat. 8.26.
Here Christ as a King of mercies assures the souls of men of the pardon of
their sins, and gives them the sense of his love, and so fills them with sweet
and blessed peace; therefore Christ is styled a Sun of Mal. 4.2.
Righteousness appearing with healing in his wings; in the wings of his
ordinances without, and in the wings of his grace within, and it was prophesied
of him that he should Isa. 61.1.
preach good tidings to the meek, bind up the brokenhearted, proclaim
liberty to the captive, and open the prison to them that are bound to comfort
all that mourn, and God has created the fruit of the lips to be Isa. 57.19.
peace, to be the instrument of peace, and the Gospel is called the Gospel of
peace, for the Author of it, the God of peace, for the Subject of it, Christ
the Prince of peace, for the parties receiving it, the children of peace, and
for the fruit of it, spiritual and heavenly grace.

Soul-refreshing Communion with God.
In regard of that blessed, and soule-refreshing Communion which we attain
with God through Christ coming in the Gospel. Joseph's brethren were brought
nigh to the King, of Egypt by Joseph: Man is brought nigh to God by Christ,
Christ preached in the Gospel, is like Jacobs ladder, by him God descends
unto us, and through him we ascend unto God, the Arc was an assurance of Gods
presence among the people, and God dwelled there: Where Christ is preached in
the Gospel, there God is in mercy present with his people, there is the Lords
dwelling, in Psalm. 76.2.
Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion; In the Gospel men
are regenerate, and made the children of God, men are humbled, and made loyal
Subjects to God, men are endowed with faith wrought into Gods Covenant, and
made the friends of God: Men are separated from the world, and gathered home to
God, and made the sheep of his pasture, so that now they have communion with
him, as children with a father, as favorites with a King, as scholars with a
teacher, as the members of a house with the master of the house. Now they are
made Ephesians. 2.13. Christus oculus noster, ut per illum videamus patrem, ipse vox
nostra per quam loquamur ad Patrem, ipse dextra, per quam Deo sacrificium
nostrum offeramus, quo nisi intercede^to, nec nobis, nec sa^ctis quicquam cum
Deo est. Ambr.
nigh through Christ; nigh in knowledge, nigh in faith, nigh in love, nigh in
likeness, nigh in conformity and obedience, nigh in the participations of
spiritual comforts, and in the enjoyment of the light of Gods countenance,
very pleasant and comfortable is a gracious souls communion with God in the
Gospel; Christ is most worthy of all acceptance for that communion which we
have with God through him.

CHAP. 3.
THis discovers their sin, Such very miserable to whom Christ is unwelcome.
their miserable and wretched condition, who are not thankful for, who rejoice
not in the coming of Christ in his Gospel, and in the kingdom of his grace
among them: There were children of Belial that said of Saul when he was set up
King over Israel, How shall this man save us, they despised him, 1 Samuel 10.27.
and brought him no present. There are many children of Belial in the world,
that say of Christ coming in the Gospel, coming in his word to reign and
rule over them, how shall Christ save us by this preaching of the Gospel, the
preaching of Christ seems foolishness unto them, 1 Cor. 1.
a dark doctrine wherein is no light, no wisdom, no excellency of learning,
an empty doctrine wherein is no fullness, no worth, a very babbling, a weak
doctrine wherein is no power: The false Apostles said of Paul, his bodily
presence is weak, 2 Cor. 10.10.
and his speech contemptible. Many false and counterfeit Christians say of
Christ in the closet of their own hearts, Christ's presence in the Gospel is
weak, and his speech in the Gospel is contemptible, and thus they despise
Christ in his offices, in his Ministers, in his Ordinances, in his members,
they bring him no present, they present not themselves in Christ's school as
scholars to learn Christ, they present not themselves in Christ's house, as
children to feed on those dainties which Christ has there prepared for them,
they present not themselves in Christ's Courts, as Subjects to receive his Laws
and do his will, they present not their souls and bodies as a living, holy,
and acceptable sacrifice unto Christ: But as the men of the old world said in
the Atheism of their hearts unto God, so say these in the ignorance,
infidelity, pride, and profaneness of their souls unto Christ, Job.
21.14.15.
Depart from us we care not for the knowledge of thy ways. What is Christ,
that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have if we pray unto him? if
we attend him preached in the Gospel, surely Christ preached in the Gospel is
very strangely and shamefully undervalued by many people: In stead of
rejoicing, they grieve at the preaching of Christ among them; as Herod, and all
the men of Jerusalem were Mat. ^.2.
troubled to hear of Christ's being borne King of the Jews, and of the
appearing of a star, declaring the coming of Christ, the true light of the
world; the clear and full opening of Christ, and the setting up of Christ to
reign and rule over the hearts and ways of men, is very troublesome to many
people, like those evil citizens in the parable, Luke 19.14.
they will not have this man Christ to reign over them, they will not have him
reign over their understandings, as a light guiding them, over their wills, as
a Prince commanding them, over their affections, as a Lord, and Master ruling,
and ordering them, over their lusts, as a Physician lancing, purging,
mortifying, and taking them off. Many men delight to talk much of Christ's
salvation, but they have no pleasure to hear of his kingdom, it is acceptable
to them to be saved by Christ, but very troublesome to serve Christ: But what a
shame, what an abomination, what foul hypocrisy is this, that we should
profess Christ, and yet deny him in his Gospel, in his Kingdom? Is it not a
shame for a wife to profess such a man to be her husband, and yet deny him her
presence, her hand, her heart, her body, her love, dwell with a stranger, love
a stranger, delight in a stranger, and bring forth children to a stranger, what
is this but shameful disloyalty, and odious adultery? What a shame for a man
to profess such a man to be his Master, and yet deny him all service, and shut
the doors of the house against him? and what a shame is it for us to profess
Christ to be our husband, our Master, and yet deny him our service, breaking
his bands, and casting away his cords from us, shutting the doors of our
hearts against him, denying him our presence in his house, denying him our
heart to love him, our affections to rejoice in him, our hand to work for him,
denying him our souls and bodies to be a holy Temple for him to dwell in,
bringing forth all our fruit to the flesh, and to the world, and none to
Christ, what disloyalty? what hypocrisy? what spiritual adultery is this?
certainly such men like the Angel of the Church of Sardis, though he had Rev.
3 1. Irenaeus of Heretics, similia nobiscum loquntur, dissimilia sentiunt: so
these profess as Christians, love as Infidels. Ioh 5.44.
a name that he lived yet he was dead: so these though they have the name of
Christians, yet they are none of Christ's: This is an evil of which Christ is
very sensible, whereof he much complains: If (says he) a man come unto you in
his own name, bring a corrupt and carnal doctrine, seek himself, exalt, and
magnify himself, him ye will receive, his person you will reverence, his
doctrine you will receive, his sayings you will believe, to his dictates you
will veil and stoop,; but says Christ, I am come in my Fathers name and ye
receive me not, I am come from God, I have my calling and commission from God,
I bring no humane, but a heavenly doctrine, I seek not mine own, but my
Fathers glory, and ye receive me not, ye regard not my person, ye believe not
my doctrine, ye obey not my precepts, you love not me, you rejoice not, you
delight not in me. Generally men are more addicted to, and delighted in corrupt
and carnal inventions, then in the spiritual and heavenly doctrine of Christ,
and his Gospel. Christ's coming in the power and brightness of his Gospel is
very unwelcome to many people; as the coming of the King to a Rebel, the
coming of an officer to a thief, or the coming of the husband to his wife
that plays the harlot; and what is this? but the shame of all shames, and
dishonor of all dishonours, to a Christian to deny his Christ, to refuse his
Christ, not to rejoice and delight in his Christ coming to him in the glad
tidings of his Gospel. We all conclude it a foul dishonor to a subject, a
servant, a wife, to deny their King, their Master, their Husband, not to
rejoice in their coming, in their presence, but to shut the doors of their
houses against them, to deny them entrance and entertainment: And is not a
foul stain so to deal with Christ, so to exclude Christ coming to us by his
Word and Ministers.

If you ask me whence it is that Christ is so unwelcome, that many of us are
so far from rejoicing in his coming?

5. Grounds of Christ's unwel comnesse.
I answer, there are these 5. grounds of this:

Ignorance. Men do not know Christ, they do not discern Christ in the
Gospel, 1 Ignorance.
Christ in the Gospel is 2 Cor. 4.3, 4
hidden from them, as the light is hidden from the blind, the God of this world
has blinded their eyes that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ
may not shine into them; they do not discern Christ in his Gospel shining
like the Sun for the excellency of his knowledge there appearing, they do
not discern Christ there triumphing like a conqueror in the subjugation of
Satan, and their corruptions; they do not discern Christ there as a Prince of
peace, sweetly and graciously ruling in their hearts, by the Scepter of his
Word; they do not discern Christ there as a Physician healing their sinful
maladies, as the impotent discerned the Ioh. 5.5.
Angel moving in the poole of Bethesda, and healing their bodily infirmities;
they see not these Psalm. 27.2.
beauties of Christ, which David desired to see in the Temple of the Lord: they
see not that Psalm. 63.2.
power and glory of Christ in the Gospel, Delictorum meritum est ut qui vita
indigni vitam ante oculos habeant, nec tamen videant. Cypr.
which the Psalmist saw in the Sanctuary; and therefore as a blind man
rejoices not in the appearance and coming of the Sun, because he sees not
the Sun, no more do these in the coming of Christ in the Gospel, because
they do not there discern him.

2 Earthly mindedness Their hearts are glued to the world, this is the Master
whom they serve, 2 Earthly mindedness.
this is the rock on which they build, this is the wife or harlot rather whom
they marry, this is the object of their joy, they rejoice in the creature, Amos
6.13.
in a thing of naught, says the Prophet, and therefore having another Master
whom they serve, they cannot receive and rejoice in Christ's Laws, having
another rock on which they build, they cannot believe and delight in Christ's
promises, having another husband to whom they are wedded, they cannot embrace
and rejoice in Christ, as the Bride rejoices in the Bridegroom, when the
people rejoiced in Isa. 8.6.
Rezin Remalials son, they refused the waters of Shiloah. When man rejoices in
the creature he refuses Christ, his soul takes no pleasure in Christ.

3. Insensibleness of Christ; 3. Insensibleness.
they have no feeling of Christ within them, the Apostle says they are Ephesians.
4.19.
past feeling, they are past the feeling of their sin, as a dead body is past
the feeling of the disease, they are past the feeling of the shame of sin, as a
common harlot has cast of all modesty, is even degenerated from her sex, Ier.
33.
and takes no shame of her whoredoms, they have no feeling of the judgments
of God denounced against them, they sleep in the midst of these, as Jonah did
in the storm, they take no notice of them, they have no feeling of the
workings, bitings, and convulsions of an accusing and condemning conscience;
their consciences are like a mastive fallen asleep after long and much barking;
like flesh seared with a hot iron; their sense and feeling is gone, they are
alienated from the life of God, dead and have no feeling of the life of Christ,
Christ does not live in them; they are blind, Ioh. 1.5.
and have no feeling of the wisdom and knowledge which comes from Christ,
as a blind man has no feeling of the light which comes from the Sun; they
are deaf and have no feeling of the sweet and comfortable voice of Christ in
the Gospel, any more then a deaf man feels the sweet sound of a musical
instrument; their pallates are distempered, and they cannot taste the
sweetness of Christ, they loath him as the full stomach the honey-combe; he
is unsavory to them as the Manna to the Israelites; as sometimes the pottage
were to the Prophets children, he seems to them a pot of death, the very savor
of death unto death; they feel not the necessity of Christ, as of a quickner
to enliven them, as of a guide to direct them, as of a surety to pay their debt
for them, as of a ransomer to free them out of prison, as of a fountain to
replenish and fill them* and being thus unsensible of Christ, they cannot
rejoice in the coming of Christ; the Israelites rejoiced not in Moses coming
to them, but refused him before they felt the cruelty of the taske-masters
which Pharaoh set over them, and the weight of the burdens which he laid upon
them. He that is void of the sense of his own corruption, rejoices not in
Christ's coming.

4. Contrariety to Christ.
4. Contrariety to Christ, there is no likeness, no sutablenesse, no
answerablenesse between them and Christ, they are as contrary as life and
death, light and darkness, the Arc and Dagon, the house of David and the
house of Saul, they are 2 Timothy 2.25.
contrary-minded; they are contrary to Christ in their judgments, wise in
their own eyes, reputing light darkness and darkness light; contrary in
their wills, Christ wills his Fathers glory, and teaches his Disciples to pray
that his Fathers will may be done, they will themselves, and their own ends,
they look not beyond themselves in any thing, they make their own will their
rule and guide; contrary in their affections, they hate holiness which Christ
loves, and love profaneness which Christ abhors; contrary in their
society and fellowship, All Christ's delight is in them that excel in virtue,
they delight themselves in the frowardness of the froward; contrary in their
natures. Christ is holy and without all sin, they are totally sinful, and
void of all holiness; they are contrary to Christ in his Offices, they oppose
him, as a Prophet they will not receive his instruction, as a King they will
not obey him, as a Priest they will not be sanctified by him, their whole man
is wholly set in opposition against whole Christ, there is a mavelous
distance and unlikenesse between them and Christ, they are altogether incapable
of him. Man can never rejoice in Christ's coming until God does put some new
and gracious principle into him; Man never delights to do the will of God
until God has written his Law in the heart of man, Christ's coming is ever
more or less joyful unto man, as man has more or less of Christ's image
within him.

5. Infidelity.
5. Infidelity. The Israelites believed not the word of God, and therefore
despised the pleasant land, that rich and plentiful land which God had
promised them: He that does not believe in Christ sets a low price upon him,
and rejoices little or nothing in the testimony of Christ's presence: I^^. 6.
The Disciples which believed not aright, were offended, and went back from
Christ, they took no pleasure in Christ and his doctrine: He that does not by
the eye of faith discern Christ, and by the hand of faith single and take out
Christ unto himself, as his light and counselor to guide him, as his Rock to
sustain him, as his Prince, to be commanded by him, as his pearl, looking for
no other treasure, and as the husband to whom he marries his soul, and on whom
he places all his love: He that does not thus believe cannot rejoice in
Christ, Christ is none of his; therefore he cannot rejoice in him no more then
the poor can rejoice in a rich man's treasure, to which himself has no title,
or a woman in a man that is a stranger to her, in whom she has no matrimonial
interest, toward whom she has no matrimonial love. Unbelief blinds the
understanding, that it discernes not the beauty, worth and excellency of
Christ; it hardens the heart, Isa. 53.12.
and makes it unsensible of Christ, as the rock is of the dew; it shuts up the
soul, and makes it incapable of Christ; as the eye that is shut, is incapable
of the light, until it is opened again; it alienates the mind of man from
Christ, and causes him to depart from Christ to the creature; as the men of
Shechem did from the vine to the bramble, from the sons of Ierubbaal to
Abimelech: Through unbelief Christ is to the soul as a Sun under an
Eclipse, whom it sees not, as a sealed well of which it drinks not; unbeleefe
shuts out the soul from Christ, and all his benefits, as Adam was kept out of
the garden, and from the tree of life, it makes Christ a stranger to his soul,
and his soul a stranger unto Christ; and as it excludes man from all communion
with Christ, so it deprives him of all joy in Christ, He that believes not in
Christ, and in the benefits flowing from him, can never rejoice in him, because
the soul is filled with all joy in believing.

CHAP. IV.
Persuasion to a joyful entertainment of Christ.
THis should excite and move us all to work our hearts to a joyful and
thankful receiving and entertainment of Christ coming in the Ministry of the
Gospel, the wise men Mat. 2 10.
rejoiced with an exceeding great joy at the appearing of the Star which
pointed out the birth of Christ: Christ appears in the Gospel, as a heavenly
Star, ministering celestial and comfortable light to them thar sit in
darkness; his appearance ministering matter of choicest rejoicing, doubtless
he is no wise man, a man far from true and saving wisdom, that does not
rejoice to see Christ shining in the Gospel; the men of Bethshemesh were
reaping their wheat harvest in the valley, and they lifted up their eyes, and 1 Samuel 6.13.
saw the Arc, and rejoiced to see it, and breaking off their labors, ceasing
their harvest-worke, they offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed sacrifices
the same The man that lifts up his eyes, his heart, his thoughts, his desires
from the world, and sees Christ in the Gospel, cannot but rejoice to behold
him. Men should with great alacrity and readiness break off their bodily
labors to entertain the Lord Jesus, and offer to God the sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving on that day, when Christ comes among them in his Gospel,
joyful attendance upon Christ in the Gospel should have pre-eminence above
every ordinary undertaking: When Iehoiada the Priest brought forth Jehoash the
Kings son, and put the Crown upon him, all the people of the land 2 King.
11.12, 14.
rejoiced and blew with trumpets. When the Minister of the Lord does bring
forth Christ in the Congregation, reveal and show forth Christ the Son of
God, in the ministry of the Gospel, and does set the Cant 3 11.
crown (according to Solomon's phrase) upon Christ's head, by declaring Christ's
Sovereignty, and causing the people to submit to Christ's law and government,
all the Congregation should rejoice and blow the trumpet of spiritual joy and
gladness: Agracious soul draws matter of choice and sweet rejoicing from
Christ's exaltation in the Gospel.

This joyful and thankful entertainment of Christ coming in the Gospel, was
shadowed by the feast of solemnity, called Lev. 23.14, 25
blowing of Trumpets, signifying the spiritual joy and gladness occasioned
and raised in the hearts of men by Christ's coming in the flesh, and in the
preaching of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus being the gladsome body and substance
of all the Leviticall and Ceremonial joyous festivals; this was also foretold
and often prophesied, How Isa. 52.7.
beautiful (says the Prophet Esaias) are the feet of him that brings good
tidings that publishes peace, and brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation, that says unto Sion thy God reigns; which Prophecye
the Apostle referres to the preaching of the Gospel; Romans 10.15.
the feet carry the body in motion and going; the ministry carry Christ in the
preaching of the Gospel; the feet lift and bear up the body, the Ministers
lift up and carry Christ aloft, and make him conspicuous in the eyes of the
people, by their holy and wholesome doctrine; the feet of him that brings
tidings of a pardon to a condemned person, tidings of redemption to a captive,
tidings of supply to him that is in want, are very beautiful in the eyes of
such people; the feet of Gods Ministers bringing tidings of forgiveness,
tidings of deliverance, tidings of all fullness, in and by Christ Jesus, are
very beautiful in their eyes who know and feel the danger of their own
sinful condition; therefore Isa. 52.9.
break forth into joy (says the Prophet) sing together ye waste places of
Jerusalem, for the Lord has comforted his people, he has redeemed Jerusalem.
The coming of the Sun comfort him that sits in darkness; the coming of
the Physician comforts him that is oppressed with sickness, the coming of the
ransomer comforts him that is in bondage, the coming of Christ in the Gospel,
like the coming of the light comforts men with knowledge, like the coming of
a Physician, with healing in his wings, comforts men with spiritual health,
and like the coming of a ransomer gives the comfort of spiritual freedom;
sweet, and blessed, and full of refreshing is the joy arising from Christ, his
coming in the Gospel: This makes the Isa. 51.3.
wilderness like Eden, and the desert like the garden of the Lord. This fills
the desolate, sad, and sorrowful soul of man, full of joy and gladness,
thanksgiving, and the voice of melody; and to this joyful entertainment of
Christ's coming in his spiritual kingdom, Let us all provoke our hearts, and
frame, and dispose our souls, as the eye is disposed to a joyful
entertainment of the light, the ear to a joyful entertainment of music, and
the bride to a joyful entertainment of the bridegroom.

And that we may give Christ coming in the Gospel, a Christian and
wel-pleasing entertainment, there are three things in the general observable.
1. Modus, the manner how we must entertain him. 2. Medium, the means which we
must use to entertain him. and 3. Motivum, the inducements persuading thus to
entertain Christ.

1. Manner of entertaining Christ.
1. The manner how Christ must be entertained and received; and thus Christ must
be entertained, received.

1. Spiritually.
1. Spiritually. The entertainment of the King is suitable to the condition,
quality, and nature of the King; earthly entertainment is given to earthly
Kings: Christ is a spiritual and heavenly King, his kingdom is not of this
world, and therefore he must not be carnally but spiritually entertained; the
Exodus 25.11, 16.
Tabernacle into which the Arc was received had in it the two Tables of the
Law, it was overlaid within with pure gold, and the Arc had a crown of gold
about it: He that will entertain Christ must have the Law of God written in
his heart, his soul within, and his life without must be overlaid with the
gifts and graces of the Spirit, more pure and precious then the gold which
perishes; holiness and righteousness must crown the souls of such persons
as will entertain Christ Jesus; slimy, sluttish, and filthy houses are fitter
to entertain swine then Princes; corrupt, and carnal, unsanctified, and
ungracious souls are fitter to entertain Satan, the prince of darkness, then
to entertain Christ the King of Righteousness. The Kings daughter, the Spouse
of Christ, the Type of all that truly entertain Christ, was Psalm. 45 13.
all-glorious within. Heavenly graces are the peculiar glory of Gods servants,
making their souls a fit receptacle for the Lord Jesus: As men therefore to
receive and entertain an earthly King, cleanse their houses, perfume and
garnish all their rooms, and prepare such delicacies as the King delights in:
Thus we, to entertain and receive Christ the heavenly King, must cleanse our
souls of all sin, we must put all iniquity far from us, as a spot from our
faces, a disease from our flesh, and a thief from our house; we must garnish
all the rooms of the house of our souls, with spiritual ornaments, our
understandings with spiritual knowledge, our wills with gracious liberty and
freedom to embrace and choose Christ, our imaginations with holy thoughts and
medetations upon Christ, our affections with filial fear to offend Christ,
with lively faith to believe in Christ, with pure and fervent love to Christ,
with heavenly joy and delight in Christ; He that is most holy and gracious is
most capable of Christ Jesus; the soul which abides under the sway and power
of profaneness cannot receive the Lord Jesus, the swaying presence of
ungodliness, nullifies the gracious presence of Christ Jesus. No man receives
Christ with true and sollid comfort in the Gospel, but only he whose soul is
endowed with Iam. 4 8. Heb. 10.22. Mat. 5.8.
purity and sanctification.

2. Speedily. 2. Speedily.
The servant speedily opens the door of the house when the Master knocks, and
readily entertaines him. Christ is the great Lord and Master of the house of
man's soul, at the door whereof he knocks by the ministry of the Gospel, and
man must speedily open to Christ so knocking, Behold (says Christ) I stand at
the Rev. 3.20.
door and knock: the heart of unregenerate man is a door shut, a hard, a
stony door: God and Christ are shut out, Ephesians. 2.12.
to this door Christ knocks by the preaching of the Law, threatening
destruction to him that will not open; by the preaching of the Gospel,
promising pardon to all that speedily and sincerely open; by the rod of
affliction and terror of conscience on all that do delay to open; by the
inward motion and powerful operation of his Spirit on Gods chosen; repairing
and disposing their hearts to open to him: If any man (says Christ) hear my
voice, speedily without delay, unfainedly, without hypocrisy, humbly without
disdain, beleevingly, without unbeleefe, joyfully, without repining, and
obediently without rebellion: If any man thus hear my voice, and open unto me,
by understanding me and my will, by believing me and my promises, by loving me
and my testimonies, by embracing me and my benefits, by dedicating himself to
me and my service. I will come into him, I will make his soul my temple and
holy habitation, I will enter into a near and sweet communion with him, and I
will sup with him, I will accept and delight in his knowledge, faith,
repentance, and new obedience; and he shall sup with me, I will communicate
unto him justification, sanctification, peace, the joy of the Holy Ghost, the
heavenly treasure of all saving grace; their bliss and happiness is very
great and comfortable, who give a full and speedy entertainment to Christ
coming in the Gospel: It is a point of Christian and choicest wisdom
(according to the charge of the Prophet) to Isa. 55.6.
seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call upon him while he is near
at hand: The Sun of heavenly light which now shines may set, and we be left
in darkness; the Well of salvation now opened may be sealed up, and we perish
with want of spiritual water to refresh us; the gate of mercy now opened to us
may be shut against us, Christ may withdraw himself, and refuse to be found of
us; the things belonging to our Luke 19.42.
peace may be hidden from us: It is just with Christ to withdraw himself from
them that delay to receive him, Christ will be to them as a deaf man that
hears not, in the day of their trouble and afflictions, who are deaf to
Christ, and will not hear him in his Gospel, in the day of his merciful
visitation: O therefore Psalm 95.7, 8.
to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, behold 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. Now while Christ is
preached in the Gospel, salvation, pardonall mercy is offered, now if ever is
the time to accept it; therefore as Zaccheus Luke 19.6.
made haste, and came down from the Sycamine tree, and received Christ into
his house joyfully: So let us make haste and come down, every man from all
high thoughts of our own worth, and joyfully receive Christ into the house of
our heart. When Christ appeared unto Abraham in the plain of Mamre in the
form of an Angel, and two other Angels with him; it is said that Abraham Genesis
18.1, 2, 6
ran to meet them from the tent door, and hasted to his tent to make
provision for them, he used all speed in their entertainment. Thus when Christ
appears in the Gospel, and comes to us by his Ministers, we should run from
our tent doors, from our selves by Christian denial, from the world by
desertion, from our sins by mortification. Thus we should run to meet Christ
coming in the Gospel, and hasten every man into his tent, into his heart, and
there make all spiritual provision to entertain him: The use of have and
speed in the entertaining of Christ coming in his Gospel, is more necessary
and commendable then in any other undertaking.

3. Cordially, With much and fervent affection; 3. Cordially. Romans 6.17.
the heart is Christ's house, where he must dwell, Christ's throne where he must
reign, and the palace whereinto he must be received; the place of the Arc
was not in a corner, but in the 2 Samuel 6.17.
midst of the Tabernacle, Christ must not be thrust into a corner of the soul,
his dwelling must be in the midst thereof, in the heart of man, he must have
the best and choicest room of man's affection; this Christ requires, My son
Prove. 23.26.
give me thy heart, not thy head barely to know me, nor thy memory nakedly to
remember me, nor thy tongue formally to speak of me, nor thy foot only to
come outwardly unto me; but thy heart to love and embrace me, to surrender and
yield up all unto me. This was the Apostles prayer in the behalf of the
Ephesians, that Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ might dwell, not only in their care, or in the tongue, the outward
rooms of the body, nor in the head, or memory, the upper rooms of the soul;
but in their heart, the middle and choicest room of the soul of man: Our
prayers are but empty and fruitless until we have prayed Christ into our
hearts and affections; Christ comes in the Gospel as a King of mercies to
pardon us; as a bridegroom to marry us, and we must entertain him with love,
much, strong, and fervent love; as a malefactor his King coming to him with a
pardon, or the bride the bridegroom; our love to Christ must be like the love
of 1 Samuel 18.1.
Jonathan to David, a love passing the love of women; our soul must be knit to
Christ, as Jonathan seeing what David had done for Israel, in the overthrow of
Goliath, his soul was knit to David: so we seeing what Christ has done for us
in the overthrow of Satan, our souls must be knit to Christ; our souls must
long for Christ, as the soul of Shechem Genesis 34 8.
longed for Dinah, our soul must delight in Christ, as the soul of the rich
in his treasure, and the soul of the bride in the bridegroom; thus the Spouse
expresses her self, show me O thou whom my Cant. 1 7.
soul loves, whom I love fervently, unfainedly, and with a longing desire to
enjoy; and in the banqueting house, in the ministry of the word she found her
self Cant. 2.4.5.
sick of love, ravished with love to Christ. Plus est habere Christum in cord
quam in domo; quia cor nostrum interius est nobis, quam domus nostra. Aug.
The entertainment of Christ into the heart is the glory of a Christian, as the
entertainment of the King to a house is the glory of a Subject: This is the
fullness of the soul, as the entertainment of the Sun into the eye is, the
fullness of the eye, the heart is an empty vessel until Christ has the
possession of it; this is the defense and safety of the soul, as the being of
the Pilate in the ship, is of the safety of the ship; the being of the keeper
in the Castle, is the safety of the Castle; the being of Christ in the ship in
the stormy tempest, was the safety of the Disciples; Mat. 8.25, 26.
the being of Christ in the soul, is the safeguard of the soul in all the
stormy tempests of trouble; the soul where Christ has no dwelling lies open
to all the assaults of Satan. This brings the soul to a sweet communion with
Christ in the Gospel, as Iehu said unto Iehonadab coming to meet him, 2 Kin.
10.15.
Is thy heart right as my heart is with thy heart, if it be give me thine hand,
and he gave him his hand, and he took him up to him into the charet. Non
pertiuet domine ad te, ^ec de tuis est qu^ te non deligit, nec deligit te qui
scienter offendit; dilectioni tue detrabit qui terminos a te positos ira^ sit,
and Evangelij tui decreta contemni^. Cypr. 4. Cheerfully.
Thus when we come to meet Christ in the Gospel, Christ looks to the
integrity of our hearts, if our hearts be right with Christ, and we give him
the hand of faith, and the hand of love; then he takes us up into his charet;
then he takes us to himself; then he brings us into a near, a sweet, and
comfortable communion with himself; the soul which does not love Christ, has
neither clear discerning of Christ, nor gracious fellowship with Christ.

4. Cheerfully. Old Jacob seeing the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him
to Egypt to bring him to himself, it is said his heart Gen 45 27.
revived. Man seeing Christ in the Gospel, coming by the labors of his
Ministers, as by a charet, to take and carry him of from the world, to bring
him nigh unto himself, and to the participation of his fullness, should have
his heart revived, and his soul made cheerful: Christ in the Gospel
ministers all matter of rejoicing to his children; in the Gospel Christ
comes as a M^l. 4.2.
shining Sun, and here we should rejoice in him, as the eye rejoices in the
light; Here Christ comes as a Psalm. 110.2, 3.
King in his armies, and we should rejoice in him, as the captive rejoices in
him that comes with warlike weapons to beat down the prison, and set him
free; here Christ comes as a Mal. 4.2. Isa. 6.1, 2.
Physician with healing in his wings; and we should rejoice in him, as the
sick in the Physician that comes to cure him; here Christ comes as Ios. 10.6.
Joshuah came to the Gibeonites, to rescue them from the Amoritish Princes; and
in him we should rejoice, as the besieged City in him that comes to drive away
their enemies: Here Christ comes as a Master of the Cant. 2 4.
feast in his banqueting house* and in him we should rejoice as the hungry
stomach in a feast of all varieties: Here Christ comes as a Ioh. 3.29.
bridegroom in his letters, in his friend, in his voice, to woo, and betroth
us, and in him we should rejoice, as the bride in the letters, voice, and
presence of the bridegroom; superlatively sweet, and soule-ravishing are the
comforts which Christ dispenses by his word and doctrine; he is altogether
unworthy the name of a Christian that does not joyfully entertain Christ
coming in the Gospel.

^ Humbly.
5. Humbly. Abraham entertaining the Angels Genesis 18.2.
bowed himself to the ground. Man must entertain the Lord Jesus in the
Gospel, with all humility, meekness, lowly and reverent submission: He must
prostrate himself, and all that is his at the feet of Christ; he must be low
and base in his own eye and apprehension; he must look on himself as Genesis
18.28.
dust and ashes, Romans 7.18.
he that is most sensible of his own vileness, is most capable of Christ
Jesus; he must Romans 12.16.
captivate his own wisdom, and carnal reason; he has the most clear and
comfortable discerning of Christ in the Gospel, that is most apprehensive of
the vanity of his own wisdom. He that will be made wise unto salvation by
the Gospel, must become as a 1 Cor. 3.18. Luke 9.23.
fool in his own opinion; he must deny himself that will acknowledge and
embrace Christ, abase himself that will exalt and set up Christ, and be out of
love with himself that will be in love with Christ; he must discern and feel
his own sickness, his own poverty, his own bondage, and emptiness, that
will receive Christ in the Gospel, as a Physician to cure him, as a surety to
make satisfaction for him, as a conqueror to free him, and as a fountain to
fill him. When David sent his servants, and communed by them with Abigail to
take her to wife; she arose and 1 Samuel 25.40, 41.
bowed her self on her face to the earth, and said, behold, let thy handmaid
be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord. When Christ communeth
with us by his servants, the Ministers in the preaching of the Gospel, to take
our souls to him to wife: We must rise up, with all lowly reverence,
entertain their message, receiving it as the Word of God, 1 These. 2.13.
and not of man; we must bow our selves to the earth, humble and abase our
selves very low, showing all obedience to their doctrine, and ready to minister
any service to their persons, as Saint Paul testifies of the Galathians, My
temptation (says he) which was in my flesh ye Gal. 2.14.15.
despised not nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ
Jesus. I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked
out your own eyes, and have given them to me. Great is the love and reverence
showed by Gods children toward Christ and his Ministers in the Gospel. Christ
is ever so much the more precious unto men, by how much the more they are
abased in their own sense and feeling; Christ's favor, dwelling, and
communion, is only with the soul which is truly Isa. 57.15. Isa. 66.2.
humble.

6. Chiefly. Christ is the highest King, 6. Chiefly.
and must have the chiefest room in the heart of man, Christ excels all
creatures, and must have pre-eminence above all others in the hearts of his
receivers, 1 Samuel 5.4.
Dagon in the Philistines Temple falls before the Arc; the creature, and
whatsoever else in the heart of man, must fall before Christ; all must be base
and vile in comparison of Christ; the Elders of Gilead bringing home again
Ieptha to fight for them against the children of Ammon, made him their Judge
11.9, 10
head. Man bringing home, and receiving Christ into his heart to fight for him
against Satan, and his corruption, must make him his head, exalt him, and give
him pre-eminence above all creatures. Christ is King of Kings, and must have
pre-eminence in our obedience, Rev. 19.16.
as Kings have in the hearts of their loyal Subjects; Christ is the husband of
his Church, and must have pre-eminence in our love, 2 Cor. 11.2.
as husbands have in the hearts of their chaste and loving wifes; Christ is the
pearl of choicest worth, and must have pre-eminence in our choice, and
estimation, Mat. 13.44.
as the pearl with the Merchant above the dross. Christ is the Sun of
clearest and sweetest light, and must have pre-eminence in our understanding,
Mal. 4.2.
as the Sun in the eye above other lights; Christ is the surest, the most
constant and loving friend, Cant. 5.16.
and must have pre-eminence in our delight and joy, as a friend has
pre-eminence in the joy of his friend above all strangers: He is far from the
true receiving of Christ, that does not thus exalt Christ; he does very
shamefully abase Christ that sets up any thing above Christ; he neither
discernes the worth, nor tastes the sweetness of Christ in the Gospel, who
makes not himself and all things to veil and stoop to him.

7. Fully.
7. Fully. Whole Christ must be received, we must entertain Christ according to
all his Latitudes, as all the points and lines are received in one Center,
whole Christ must meet in man's heart, as in a Center: We must receive Christ in
his person, as God and man in one person, as our only Mediator, the only
Jacobs ladder, by whom God and all blessings come down to us, and by whom we
ascend again to God. We must receive Christ in his Attributes, in his
wisdom, as a light to guide us; in his power, as a rock to support us; in
his truth, as a faithful witness that never deceives us; in his justice as a
righteous Judge to awe us; in his mercy, as a King of mercies to forgive us; in
his holiness, as a fountain of grace to sanctify us; in his righteousness,
as a royal roabe to cloathe and cover us; and in his love, as a bridegroom to
marry us, and in his All Sufficiency as a fountain to fill us. We must receive
Christ in all his Offices, as a Prophet to instruct us, making Christ's doctrine
the complete and only rule of our faith and obedience; as a King to reign and
rule over us, wholly subjecting our selves to the Scepter of Christ Jesus; as a
Priest to sanctify us, to expiate our offenses, and make atonement for us,
relying solely on Christ's merits. We must receive him in all his Ordinances, in
his word regenerating, renewing, reforming us; in his Sacrament feasting,
strengthening, sealing up his love, and the forgiveness of our sin unto us: We
must receive him in his Ministers, as a Prince in his Ambassadors; as a
Bridegroom in his friends, in his members; as a father in his children; as a
husband in his wife, in his precepts, as a King in all his Laws obeying them;
in his promises, as a faithful friend in all his words believing them; in his
gifts and dispensations, as a giver in his gifts, as a workman in his
workmanship* as the eye receives the Sun in his light, and the ground the
cloud in the rain, and dew distilling thereupon: We must receive him in our
understandings as a light, in our wills as a Prince, in our thoughts as a
treasure, in our affections as a Lord and Master, fearing him, as a sure
foundation, building upon him, as a bridegroom being full of love toward him:
The full receiving of Christ in the Gospel fills the soul with fullness of
grace and consolation He that does not universally receive Christ, does not at
all receive Christ: He that does not surrender all truly, surrenders none to
Christ: He that shuts Christ out of one room of his soul, leaves his whole
man to the possession of sin, Satan, and the world.

8. Perpetually. Christ must be received once, and forever; 8. Perpetually.
the Covenant between the soul and Christ is an Ier 32.40.
everlasting Covenant, a Covenant of wedlock; Hos. 2 19.
the Covenant between the husband and the wife is for ever, until death; the
husband is the guide, delight, and object, the wifes love for ever, so long as
life lasts; Christ must be received as the souls guide, and love for ever;
Christ must shine in the understanding as an everlasting Sun, rule in the
will as an everlasting Prince, possess the soul as an everlasting dweller,
and abide in the affections as an everlasting husband: The soul which truly
receives Christ in the Gospel, is an everlasting lover of Christ; as Hyram
loved David 1 Kin. 5.1.
ever, an everlasting servant to Christ; as the servant under the Law, which
had his ear boared, abode a servant in the house Exodus 21.6.
for ever; as the land of Canaan was to Jacob and his seed an Genesis 48.4. Psalm.
73.26.
everlasting possession, so must Christ be our everlasting portion; we may not
receive Christ and thrust him out again, as sick men receive a Physician, and
put him off again as soon as the disease is put away; as a besieged City
receives soldiers, and turns them off again as soon as the siedge is
removed; as the Philistines received the Arc, 1 Samuel 5. 2 Kin 13 15.
and sent him away again when Dagon could not stand before him; as Amnon
received Thamar and thrust her out of doors again, hating her more then ever
he loved her: Such are very base receivers of Christ, as receive him either for
fancy, novelty, or constraining necessity. He is a very Philistine, that will
rather thrust Christ from him, then suffer the fall of his Dagon, his base
lust, or corrupt affection; their love to Christ, when at the best was but
fained, and counterfeit, which afterward turns to hatred: He is no Ioh. 8.3^.
son, but a slave; no Spouse, but a harlot, which abides not with Christ to
the end. Having therefore once received Christ, to seweth Christ, retain
Christ in every estate, abide with Christ; Man changes, as Ittai with David, 1 Samuel 15.21
in life and in death.

CHAP. V.
Means disposing and inabling to receive Christ.
THus of the manner of receiving Christ in the Gospel, the second thing is the
medium, or means disposing and inabling us to receive Christ with rejoicing
and thanksgiving. The means are these:

1. Full deposition of what is contrary to Christ.

3. Things to be deposed and laid aside. 1. Sin.


1. A full and through deposition and putting aside of all that is contrary to
Christ. 1. there must be a deposition of sin, all motes, distempers, and
blindness being put away out of the eye, the eye joyfully receives the Sun,
ignorance and error being put out of the understanding; Christ the Sun of
Righteousness is joyfully received in our knowledge, the knowledge of Christ
becomes clear and pleasant to the soul; witherednesse and infirmity being
removed from the hand, the hand readily receives the gift: Unbeleefe which
wounds and withers the hand of faith, being removed from the heart, man
cheerFully entertaines Christ, and is filled with Romans 15.13.
all joy in believing; rebellious, proud, and mutinous persons being put out of
the kingdom, the King is joyfully entertained by the people; pride, 2 Cor.
10.5.
imaginations, and every high thing which does exalt it self against the
knowledge of God being cast down and brought into captivity to the obedience
of Christ, Christ is gladly received; strange love and strange lovers being put
far from the wife, the husband is cheerfully received by the wife; the
removal of strange lusts, and corrupt affections prepares the heart to a
joyful entertainment of Christ; He that does not sorrow for his sin, cannot
rejoice in Christ; He that does not hate the former, can never love the latter;
He that does not empty himself of the one, can never be filled with the other.
The Jebusites told David, unless he took away the blind and the lame he
should not enter into the fort of Syon. Unless we take away the blind and the
lame, ignorance, infidelity, and all uncleanness out of our souls, Christ
will never enter into our hearts, we cannot receive Christ into our souls, the
keeping in of sin is the keeping out of Christ; the holding fast of corrupt
affections, is the loosing of Christ Jesus; as the Philistines keeping up of
their Dagon wrought a removal of the Arc. 2. 2. The World.
There must be a deposition of the world 1 Ioh. 2.15.
in affection. We must not love it in Mat. 6.25.
cogitation; we must have no distracting thoughts about it; in Prove. 23.5. Col.
3.2.
estimation, we must not overprize, but esteem it as a thing which is not; in
c inquisition, we must not seek the things which are here below, as if our
happiness consisted in the finding of these things; in Mat. 6.24.
subjection, we must not be the servants of the world; in Psalm. 62.10.
affiance, we must not build upon them; in Iam. 4.16. Iam. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 2.15.
Mat. 6.24.
rejoicing, we may not rejoice in them. He that is married to the creature is
divorced from Christ; he that loves this has no love to Christ; he that is the
servant of this cannot serve Christ; therefore as Christ overthrew the Ioh.
2.15.
tables of the money changers, and whipped the buyers and sellers out of his
fathers house: so must we whip the love, thought, command, and delight of the
world out of our hearts, that we may receive Christ; it is a great unhappiness
to lose Christ for the gain of the world; it were strange folly in a woman to
refuse a wise, a potent, beautiful, victorious, and noble Prince, and marry
her self to a foolish, impotent, base, beggarly, and deformed captive.

3. There must be a deposition of our selves, 3. Our selves.
we must lay aside our selves in respect of opinion, we must have very low
thoughts of our selves in respect of delight and pleasure, we must not please
our selves in our selves, but loath ourselves in respect of Love; we must not
love our selves, please, mind, and exalt our selves, but deny our selves; in
respect of trust, we must not trust in our selves, but be jealous of our
selves, distrust our own hearts, accuse and condemn our selves; and in
respect of the end, we must not intend our selves, propose our own ends, but
intend Christ, and the glory of Christ. Thus we must lay aside our selves, and
empty our selves of our selves, that we may receive Christ; the empty vessel
receives the liquor, there is no place for it in the full.

2. Holy preparation.
2. Holy, wise, and careful preparation to the hearing of Christ in the
Gospel. Elisha before he prophes^ed before Jehosaphat and Jehoram, called for
a Musician to play some sacred song, the better to appease his spirit, and put
his mind in a quiet and heavenly frame, and then the hand of the Lord was upon
him, and he prophesied: Thus before we come into the presence of Christ, to
hear, we should by some holy meditation, and fervent prayer, gather home our
thoughts, take off our selves from the world, suppress and put away the
distemper of our spirits, work our hearts into a holy and gracious frame and
tempor, and compose our selves to hear; so shall the hand of God he upon us in
hearing, and we shall hear, and receive Christ with much joyfulnesse; the
preparedness of the eye to see, of the care to hear, and of the palate to
taste, makes them joyful in seeing, hearing, tasting; the souls joy and
comfort in hearing is ordinarily suitable to man's preparation. Man is ashamed
and grieved to receive his Prince into a s^rded and filthy house; but having
his house cleansed, garnished, and all things set in order, he is joyful in the
entertainment. Want of preparation is the cause of much discomfort, sadness,
and dullness in hearing: Christ coming in the Gospel is very comfortably
entertained by the soul which is duly prepared.

3. Gracious interest in Christ.
3. Sure and gracious interest in Christ. Believe in Christ, lay hold on Christ,
select, and take Christ unto your selves, make him yours: As the Merchant sold
all for the precious pearl in the parable, and made the pearl his own: so
sell all, put away all your sins, remove all worldly vanities, and interest
your selves in Christ; as the woman leaves her own people, and her fathers
house, to make another man her husband, thus, leave the world, your sinful
acquaintance, your corrupt and carnal customs, come off from them all, and
apply your selves to Christ, espouse your selves by faith and love to him, and
then your souls shall joyfully wait upon him in the Gospel; as the Queen
waits upon the King in his Psalm. 45.15.
palace, with joy and gladness; as the bride does joyfully hear the voice of
the bridegroom; thus the Spouse professes her joy and comfort in Christ in
the Gospel, his mouth, his word and doctrine, is most sweet, he is altogether
lovely. There is the expression of her joyful receiving Christ in the Gospel,
this is my Beloved, and this is my friend; there is the declaration of her
interest in him; Christ is ever more or less joyful to the heart of man in
the Gospel, according to man's assurance of interest in him; he never feels
Christ a sweet and gracious comforter, that looks upon him in his word as a
stranger.

4. Clear and lively discerning, 4. Clear discerning of Christ worth.
and apprehension of the dignity, worth, and excellency of Christ: He that has
a jewel and knows not the worth of him, is nothing affected with him; like
Esops cock, he rejoices more in a barley corn; Isa. 53.1, 2.
ignorance of the worth of Christ takes away the souls delight and joy in
Christ; the wise Merchant knows the worth of a pearl, and is much joyed at
the finding of him; the wise Christian knowing the price and worth of Christ,
is much joyed when he meets with Christ in the Gospel ^ the Spouse in Solomon's
Song sets forth her Cant. 5.
apprehension of the beauty, worth, and excellency of Christ; of his Godhead
and manhood in one person; of his glory, innocence, grace, mercy, and justice,
of his pre-eminence and exaltation above all creatures, of his glorious
kingdom, his unsearchable wisdom, his gracious and merciful beholding of
grieved sinners, his beauty and comeliness to the eyes of faith, and concludes
at length, his mouth is most sweet and altogether lovely; His mouth, the
doctrines, words, promises, comforts of his Gospel, are very sweet as the
honey or the honey-combe; strive then more clearly to discern the worth of
Christ, if you intend the increase of your comfort in Christ: The profane Mat.
8.
Gaderine that thinks more highly of his swine then of Christ never meets with
joy in Christ.

5. Holy making use of Christ.
5. Holy and gracious making use of Christ in the Gospel. The eye makes use of
the Sun, it sees by it; the care makes use of the voice, it discernes what is
spoken by it; the thirsty traveller makes use of the fountain, he quenches
his thirst with it, refreshes himself by it: And all these rejoice, the eye
in the Sun, the care in the sound, and the thirsty in the fountain, and in
these they rejoice because they make use of them. Make use then of Christ in
his Gospel; as a scholar does of his teacher, learning heavenly wisdom; as
a sick man does of his Physician, recovering spiritual health by him; as a
besieged City does of their Captain, feeling him casting down the holds of
sin, and restoring thy soul to freedom; as the wise man in the parable did
of the rock, build upon him; the more use you make of Christ, the more comfort
you shall find in Christ, Christ is both unprofitable and uncomfortable to him
that makes no use of him, as a sealed Well, and an eclipsed Sun. There is a
price (says Solomon) in the hand of a fool, but he has not a heart to make
use of him. We have Christ in the Gospel, a pearl of great price, and it is
man's exceeding great foolishness not to make use of Christ Jesus.

6. Experience of Christ's saving worth.
6. Blessed and heavenly sense, and experience of Christ's sanctifying and saving
work upon our souls in the Gospel. The influence and operation of the Sun
upon the earth in the Spring, makes it appear very pleasant and joyful; the
sense of Christ's gracious work upon the heart, glads the heart, he Cant. 1.4.
brought me (says the Spouse) into his chambers, that is, he revealed unto me
the secret of the Lord, the secret work of the Lord in the illumination of my
understanding, in the regenerating of my heart, in the quickening of my soul,
in the putting of a new nature upon me, in the pacifying of my conscience, and
comforting of my soul, these are the chambers whereinto she was brought, the
secret and blessed ways of Christ with a gracious soul; and what found she in
these chambers? how was she affected with this work of Christ? We will (says
she) be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine.
Experience of Christ's gracious operation upon man makes the soul of man
joyful; the more we feel the blessed working of Christ within us, the greater
are our rejoycings; Man's unsensiblenesse of Christ and his gracious
dispensations, deprives man of Christ's sweet and blessed comforts,

CHAP. VI.
THe third thing is Motivum. Inducements to entertain Christ joyfully
The inducements persuading to a ready and joyful embracement and receiving of
Christ coming in his Gospel, and spiritual kingdom, and to move our selves
to this let us wisely consider, and seriously look upon,

1. The condition of the creature without Christ. 1 Condition of creature. 1.
Empty.
To him that receives not Christ, the creature, all earthly perfection and
fullness is 1. an empty thing, it never fills, never satisfies, never
contenteth him that has it; the more man drinks of this brook, not drinking
of Christ, the full and everliving fountain, the more he thirsts; the more
he feeds on this, not feeding on Christ, the true bread of life, the more his
hunger increases; The soul which receives not Christ, like the horsleaches
daughters in Solomon, is ever crying, give, give, and can never have enough:
The fullness of the world without Christ is but a dry bone without marrow, an
empty pit without water, a barren tree without fruit, like that in the Gospel
which had leaf but no fruit, promising much to him that beholds it afar off,
but ministering no satisfaction to them that draw near unto it; emptiness ever
attends their greatest possessions who are strangers to Christ Jesus; the soul
is a vessel of that largeness that none can fill it but Christ, in whom is
all fullness; the barren ears in Pharaohs dream eat up the full, and the
lean kine eat up the fat; and when they had eaten them up, it Gen 41.20, 21
could not be known they had eaten them; but they were still ill-favored. Man
that stays upon the creature, and comes not to Christ, that entertaines the
creature and not Christ, eats up the full and fat of the earth, and yet it
cannot be known that he has eaten, his desires and his hunger after it, are
as great as ever; he is nothing at all filled with it, his desires grow as his
possessessions grow, the creature has a power to inflame, but not to satisfy
man's desire; ordinarily the greatest worldly possessors are vexed with most
insatiable desires; of such the Lord says, they shall not be satisfied, and
their desire is enlarged as hell, and they can never have enough: The
emptiness of the creatures must make Christ the more precious in our
apprehensions. Hagar seeing the emptiness of her bottle, came readily for
water to the fountain; the emptiness of the creature should make us ready in
coming unto, and cheerful in the entertainment of Christ Jesus; the gracious
and through receiving of the Lord Jesus is the only way to satisfaction and
fullness.

2. Uncomfortable.
2. The creature to him that receives not Christ is an uncomfortable thing. The
world without the Sun is an uncomfortable dwelling; the fullness of the world
without Christ is an unquiet possession; the waters of Marah without the tree
were Exodus 15.25.
bitter, the children of Israel could not drink of them; the greatest rivers,
the deepest floods, and most pleasant things of earthly abundance, are very
bitter and distastefull without Christ; Christ is the sweetner of man's earthly
possession, as the honey-combe sweetened the Lion unto Sampson; the man that
receives not Christ is in Ioh. 20.22.
straights, in perplexities, fears, doubtings, and great distractions; in the
fullness of his sufficiency, in the plenitude and presence of his greatest
worldly abundance, his path is a way of snares, and his bed is a bed of
thorns; his abundance will not suffer him to Ecel. 5.12.
sleep, that does not repose his soul on Christ; his bread is bread of Psalm.
127.2.
sorrows, that does not feast and feed his soul upon Christ. Worldly
abundance is a 1 Timothy 6.9, 10
snare entangling, an arrow piercing, a sword wounding, a tempestuous sea
tossing, shaking, drowning them that possess it, and possess not Christ with
it; the greater possession, the greater trouble to him that receives not Christ
in the Gospel; It is not the having of the creature in the house, but the
having of Christ in the heart, that ministers true peace and comfort.

3. The creature to him that receives not Christ, 3. Enthralling. Gloria
regnoru^ splendida servitus est. Antigonus Rex Macedonum. Just. 16.
is an inthralling and inbondaging thing; it takes away the liberty and
freedom of the soul, it fetters and imprisons it, it makes a slave and
servant of it; Sampson doting upon, and inordinately applying himself to
Dalilah, she cut off t his locks, delivered him into the hand of the
Philistines, and made him their slave. Man that neglects Christ, that
receives not Christ, that is not ravished with his beauties, is so enamoured
with the creature, and so gives himself to the creature, that the creature
^obs him of the strength of faith, and spiritual love, and makes him a slave
to himself and his own lusts, the creature ever swayes in that soul like a
tyrant, where Christ is not; he that refuses to be Christ's Subject, makes
himself the creatures slave; therefore are they termed the Mat. 6.24.
servants of Mammon, for their alienation from Christ and spiritual freedom,
for their subjection and slavery under the world, and they are said to Romans
16.18.
serve their own belly and not Christ. Most miserable and wretched is the
souls bondage, which receives not the Lord Jesus.

4. The creature to him that receives not Christ, 4. Polluting.
is a polluting and defiling thing, it makes the soul a very sink, and cage
of uncleanness, a very den and dungeon of filthiness; as the Temple before
Christ entered into it, was made a den of thieves. Exclude the housewife out of
the house, and all the residue of goers and comers, and implements brought
into the house make a foul house; exclude Christ out of the house of the
soul, and their going, and coming, and travel of the creature will quickly
make a very unclean and filthy soul; Genesis 34 2. La^ro spiritualium honorum
Basil.
Dinah went out from her fathers house to see the daughters of the land, and
Shechem took her and defiled her; Man steps aside, goes out from Christ,
neglects and leaves Christ, abides not close with Christ, but sets his eye, his
thought, his heart upon the creature, and the creature takes him, ensnares him,
and shamefully defiles him; it defiles his understanding with error, dust
blinds the eye of the body, the creature, the dust of the world duls and blinds
the eye of the mind: The love of 1 Timothy 6 10.
money (says Paul) is the root of all evil, Isa. 59.7.
which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith: It
defiles his thought, his thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and
destruction, thoughts of injustice and oppression, thoughts of fraud and
treason, Psalm 10.6.
thoughts of pride and selfe-admiration, thoughts of carnal confidence, and
fleshly contentments; it defiles the heart of man with covetousness: Thine
eyes and thy heart (says the Lord to Jehoiakim) are not but for thy
covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for
violence to do it; it defiles the affections with idolatry, and with
spiritual fornication and adultery: the covetous man is an idolater (says
Saint Paul) and the adulterers and adulteresses (says Saint James to such as
embrace not Christ, but the creature) know you not that the love of the world
is enmity with God, Fallax suavitas, and infructuosus labor, and perpetuus
timor, and periculosa sublimitas: initium sine providentia finis cum
paenitentia. Aug.
and that he that is a friend to the world is an enemy to God. The world fills
that man's soul with most shameful uncleanness, that embraces not the Lord
Jesus; therefore as Hagar seeing the emptiness of her bottle, came readily to
the fountain; as the mariner feeling the tempest and troublesomnesse of the
seas, comes willingly to the haven; as the Israelites feeling the cruelty of
Pharaohs taskmasters, and the insupportablenesse of his burdens, willingly
embraced Moses; and as the diseased woman feeling the loathsomeness of her
bloody issue, and having experience of the vanity of all Physicians came gladly
unto Christ: so we seeing the emptiness, feeling the uncomfortablenesse, and
knowing the inthralling and defiling nature of the creature without Christ, let
us readily, willingly, joyfully, and thankfully receive and embrace Christ,
that our souls may be freed, sanctified, and filled with all saving graces,
and heavenly comforts. Experience of the vanity, trouble, bondage, and evils
which attend the naked having of the creatures, should marvellously endeare
unto us the Lord Jesus, and make his coming in the Gospel surpassingly sweet
and welcome.

2. Let us thoroughly view and consider the state of man without Christ: Man not
receiving Christ in the Gospel, 2 Through view of man's estate without Christ
has no spiritual life, but is dead in sins, as the body is dead without
the soul; he has no saving knowledge, but is in spiritual blindness, as he
that is without the Sun is in darkness; he has no heavenly gift or grace,
but is empty of all the fruits of the Spirit, as the branch which is separated
from the vine, has neither juice nor fruit; he has no Christian liberty, or
freedom, but is a bondsman to sin, Satan, and the world, as Peter lay in Herod's
prison, in fetters, and under the custody of the soldiers before the Angel
came and freed him; he has no interest in Gods promises, but as Adam was shut
out of the garden of Eden, so is man shut out of Gods Covenant, 2 Cor 1.20.
Gods promises are a sealed well whereof his soul drinks not; he has no
garment of righteousness to cover him, no jewel of grace to adorn him, no
spiritual treasure to enrich him, but is poor, blind, naked, miserable, and
wretched: Rev. 3 17.
As the Egyptians were led away by the King of Assyria, prisoners, captives,
naked, Isa. 20.4.
barefoot with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt: so man without
Christ is led away by the prince of darkness, a spiritual prisoner, and
captive, his soul bare, naked, uncovered to the shame of mankind; he has no
holy and heavenly peace, but as the Disciples were tossed upon the tempest till
Christ calmed the waters, so is man like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest,
whose Isa 57.20.
waters cast up mire and dirt, until Christ ministers comfort. Man without
Christ is like a blind traveller that has no guide to lead him; like a dead
man in the grave, putrefying in sin, having none to raise him; like an empty
cisterne having no fountain to fill him; like a bondsman having no ransomer to
free him, like a woman in travel, having no midwife to help her, lik a sheep
in the midst of wolves, having no shepherd to conduct and defend it, and like
a besieged City in the midst of many enemies, having no wall to protect it, no
captain to fight for it: Miserable is man's condition that receives not Christ
in the Gospel; did man know and feel his unhappiness without Christ, he
would never be so regardlesse of Christ, never so carelessly let Christ pass,
but would meet Christ where he comes in his word, as the blind men went out,
and stood by the highway side where Christ was to pass, and cry after Christ
as they did; as the woman of Shunem hasted to the Prophet for the raising of
her dead son, and laid hold upon the Prophets feet, and would not let him go,
until he came with her, and raised her son again to life: so would man
hasten unto Christ, lay hold upon Christ in the Gospel, and bring Christ home
into his heart, he would be at no rest until Christ had raised, freed, purged,
and comforted his dead, captived, polluted, and comfortless soul: He would as
joyfully entertain Christ's coming in his Gospel to free him from the power
of his corruptions, as ever the Gibeonites gladly entertained Ioshuah coming
to rescue them from the Amoritish Princes; it is man's unsensiblenesse of the
misery of his own condition, that causes Christ's coming to be unwelcome.

Man's apprehension of God without Christ terrible.
3. Meditate the souls apprehension of God without Christ: God, who to the
souls of them that savingly embrace Christ, is looked on, rejoiced, and
delighted in, as a father for his love, as a gracious King for his mercies, as
a sure and sweet friend for his comforts, as a loving husband for his amiable
and soule-refreshing presence, as a shield for the defense, as a rock for the
supportment, and as a full fountain for the satisfaction which he ministers:
This thrice blessed and gracious God is apprehended, considered and looked upon,
by him that does not embrace Christ in the Gospel; as a severe Judge to
condemn him, as an enemy full of displeasure against him, as a man of war
bending his bow, and whetting his sword to destroy him, as a rock ready to
fall upon him, and grind him to powder, as a tempestuous sea, ready to swallow
him, and as consuming fire, and everlasting burning, ready for ever to consume
and to destroy him. Very dreadful, and soule-amasing, and frightening is man's
meditation and apprehension of God, that does not savingly apprehend him in
Christ, such a man flies from the thought of God, the voice of God, and the
presence of God, as Adam fled into the thicket, as a silly sheep flies before
the Lion, a guilty malefactor before the hue and cry, or a Partridge before the
Hawke. This makes them cry to the hills to Rev. 6.16.
cover them, and to the rocks and the mountains to fall upon them, to hide
them from the day of the Lord, and the wrath of the Lamb. God looked upon
without Christ Jesus, is the terror of all terrors to a guilty soul, and
accusing conscience. Were men truly apprehensive and sensible of the wrath of
God without Christ, their souls would be at no rest until they had assured
interest in Christ; the fierceness and terror of God against sinners, does
exceedingly endeare and sweeten the Lord Jesus to the souls of his faithful
servants, had we frequent and right consideration of the terriblenesse of God
without Christ Jesus, Christ's coming in the Gospel would be unspeakably
joyful.

4. Look upon the frustration of all the Ordinances of God, 4. Frustration of
Gods Ordinances not entertaining Christ.
and labors of Gods Ministers by men's not receiving of Christ in the Gospel.
He that does not receive and embrace Christ preached in the Gospel,
annihilates all the labor of Gods messenger; had not Rebeckah received Isaac
to husband, she had frustrated all the labor of Eleazar the servant of
Abraham: If we receive not Christ to husband, we frustrate the labor of the
Ministers, the Lords servants. Should not 2 Samuel 3.17.
Abner have brought about Israel unto David, he had lost his labor, his
communication with the Elders of Israel, and his speaking in the ears of
Benjamin had been in vain. Thus all our preaching, all our speaking in the
cares of men is in vain, if they be not brought about to Christ; if they do
not truly subject themselves to Christ, if they receive not Christ as their
spiritual King; for what is the end of our preaching, but to 2 Cor. 11 2.
espouse you to Christ, to work you to the receiving and embracing of Christ,
as the husband of your souls; and to present you as a chaste virgin unto
Christ; besides all your hearing, all your attendance upon the word is vain,
it is all hypocrisy and vain ostentation if you receive not Christ. Genesis 42.
Jacobs sons had gone to Egypt in vain, if they had returned empty handed,
and not carried home provision with them. You come to the Well in vain, if you
drink not, if you carry home no water with you: you come to Gods house, to
Gods treasury, to the wels of salvation in vain, if you return empty hearted;
if you receive not, if you carry not home Christ with you in your hearts, all
your labor is lost: The temporal curse denounced on the people by the Prophet
Haggai, is in a spiritual sense fulfilled in such: Ye Hag. 1.6.
have sown much and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye drink
but ye are not filled with drink, ye cloth you but there is none warm, and
he that earneth wages, earneth to put it in a broken bag with holes. Thus in
this case, much is heard, much spiritual seed is sown, but little or no fruit
is reaped; they eat much, they hear much, but there is no spiritual filling,
their worldly thirst is not quenched, their soul is not satisfied in Christ;
there is no warmth, no love, no zeal for Christ, no burning of heart in
hearing, no fervency in supplication; all that the Minister has provided and
dispensed for the souls enrichment, it is all put in a broken bag with holes,
it is all lost, it runs out as fast as it is powered in; if we recive not
Christ in the Gospel, all our hearing is worth nothing.

5. Excellency of receiving Christ.

Christ received gives 1. Life.


5. Meditate upon the dignity, excellency, utility and comfort of receiving and
embracing Christ in the Gospel. 1. Christ received in the Gospel, gives life
unto the soul: He quickened Lazarus by his corporal voice accompanied with
the power of his Godhead; he quickens the soul by his Evangelicall voice
attended with the lively operation of his Spirit, the Gospel is the external
instrument and means by which Christ lives in the soul; therefore is the
Gospel called the word of Phil. 2.16.
life, revealing and effecting life in Gods chosen; Christ has in himself all
life, our life is hid in Christ, as the life of the branch is hidden in the
root, and he that 1 Ioh. 5.11, 1^.
has the son has life; he that has the Son in the Gospel, as in the seed
of his regeneration, as in the instrument of his conversion, as in the warlike
weapon, by which are thrown down all the strong and mighty holds of Satan, as
in the Scepter, by which Christ does sway within him, and bind, and bow his
heart unto subjection; He that has Christ in his heart by faith, and love, as
a root of life living in him, as a fountain filling him with his fullness, as
a King sitting up his throne within him, as a bridegroom betrothing himself
unto him, he has life; but he that has not the son has not life: The evil
of neglecting Christ in the Gospel is no less then eternal death and
destruction. Isa. 9.3.
2 Light.
2. Christ received in the Gospel gives light, spiritual, heavenly, and
comfortable light; the receiving of the Sun gives light to the body, the
receiving of the Sun of Righteousness gives light to the soul; he that does
not embrace Christ in the Gospel has no light but all darkness within him.
3. Christ received in the Gospel gives health, 3 Health.
health of soul: Here he comes with Mal. 4.2.
healing in his wings, the Angel in 1 Ioh. 5.5.
Bethesda cured the bodily impotent, in the Gospel Christ cures them that are
spiritually diseased, here he opens the eyes of the understandings which are
blinded, strengthens the hand of faith which is withered, rectifies the feet of
the affections which are crooked, purges away the leprosy of the soul which
is defiled, Christ by the Gospel as by a spiritual Jordan, works many blessed
cures upon the souls of Gods people. 4. Honor.
4. Christ received in the Gospel gives honor. He makes them that receive
him in the Gospel, the Ioh. 1.1..
sons of God by adoption; the friends of God, by revelation of the will and
mind of God unto them; heirs of God for that incorruptible inheritance whereof
he makes them partakers; the Lords freemen, free from the guilt and punishment
of sin, free from the power and dominion of sin, free from the tyranny and
captivity of Satan, free from the curse and rigor of the Law, and free to
serve God with an ingenuous and free spirit; Kings and Priests to God, for
their dignity and dominion, and for their holy and gracious consecration unto
God; high and excellent is the honor which Christ communicates to them that
truly receive him in the ministry of the Gospel. 5. Christ received in the
Gospel gives riches, 5. Riches.
Ephesians. 3.8.
unsearchable riches, riches which the wit of man cannot find out, incomparable
riches, to which all the riches of the earth is not to be compared, that
knowledge, faith, and love, which is far more excellent then the gold that
perishes. The poorest Lazar receiving Christ in the Gospel, is endowed with
greater riches then the wealthiest Dives in the world not embracing him. 6.
Christ received in the Gospel gives prosperity, 6. Prosperity.
the Arc received into Obed-Edoms house caused all that he had to prosper.
Crist received into the soul makes the whole man prosperous; he makes him
prosper in hearing, in prayer, in meditation, in the use of all Gods
Ordinances; as the tree prospers that is planted by the waters side; he makes
him prosper in all his undertakings, whatsoever he does shall prosper, all the
affairs of soul and body are made successful and prosperous through the
blessed presence of Christ Jesus: He makes him prosper in the inward man,
making him victorious over all his corruptions, replenishing him with all
heavenly fullness, communicating to him peace and reconciliation with God, and
tranquillity of conscience: Ioh. 3.2.
He that receives the Lord Jesus, like Joseph has the Lord Genesis ^9.2.
with him, and is a prosperous man; Man's not embracing Christ Jesus exposes
him to all plagues and curses, in his soul, in his body, in all his services,
all blessing attends the holy and gracious embracement of Christ, all curses
follow the profane refusal of Christ. 7. Christ received in the Gospel
sweetens and sanctifies all afflictions, 7. Sweetness. Exodus 15.25.
the tree sweetened the waters of Marah, Christ takes away the bitterness of
affliction from the soul which beleevingly entertaines him, he makes them see
light in darkness, he sends them water out of the hard and stony rock, he
gives them honey out of the belly of Lions, Meat out of the Eater, and sweet
out of the sour, he makes them sing in prison, he makes them glory in
tribulation, he turns the fiery furnace into a Paradise, he so takes away the
evil of affliction that it does no more harm them, then Nebuchadnezzars fire
did the three children; his affliction that enjoyes Christ in the Gospel, is
more pleasant and joyous then the carnal man's peace that shuts his heart
against Christ, peace without Christ is full of trouble, trouble with Christ is
full of consolation. 8. Comfort.
8. Christ received in the Gospel gives comfort, holy, sweet, and sure
comfort. In the Arc was the pot of Manna, in Christ is the treasure of all
true comfort. Christ in the Gospel makes a feast for his faithful receivers,
a feast of Isa. 25.6.
fat things, of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on
the lees well refined: Of all comforts such have most fullness and sweetness
as are ministered by Christ Jesus, all others like Jobs friends prove miserable
Comforters, if Christ does not comfort us; Christ received in the Gospel
comfort the souls of his servants, as a nurse her children feeding them, as
a Physician his patients healing them, as a merciful King his delinquent, and
humbled subjects, pardoning them, as a teacher his scholars, filling them with
heavenly wisdom, as a Bridegroom his Bride, speaking graciously to them,
making them sensible of his love toward them, replenishing them with strong
Heb. 6.15. 2. These. 2.16.
and everlasting consolation; his estate is of all men's the most joyful, who
has the most full and sweet enjoyment of Christ in the Gospel. Perplexities,
distractions, and convulsions of soul and conscience are infallible attendants
of the neglect and refusal of Christ Jesus, he that shuts his eyes against the
Sun abides in darkness, he that shuts his heart against Christ abides in
heaviness. 9. Satisfaction.
9. Christ received in the Gospel gives satisfaction: The Sun satisfies
the eye with light, the fountain satisfies the thirsty with water, the pearl
satisfied the Merchant in the parable with treasure, Christ in the Gospel
satisfies the soul with wisdom in the understanding, with holy and sweet
meditations in the mind, with the sense of his love in the heart, with the
treasure of spiritual gifts in the affections, with sure and blessed peace in
the conscience. He that rightly possesses Christ in the Gospel, may say as
Jacob did, I have enough. Christ in the Gospel is a living spring, he that
drinks of him shall thirst no more: He is an all-sufficient portion to them that
enjoy him; he that seeks contentation with the neglect of Christ in his
Gospel, seeks for water to quench his thirst in a broken cesterne: The soul
is restless, and never truly contented until Christ is enjoyed; the house
without the husband seems an empty place to the wife; the world without Christ
proves an empty thing to the soul. 10. Abiding substance.
10. Christ received in the Gospel is an abiding substance to the soul, he is
an Isa. 9.6.
everlasting father, he will never forget us, he is a husband Hos 2.19.
for ever, he will never cease to love us, he is a faithful friend loving Ioh.
13.1. Romans 11.19. Ioh. 3.9. Ioh.4.14.
at all times; his love is a Sun that knows no setting, his gifts are t
without repentance, his grace an immortal seed that never dies, a wellspring
springing up to life everlasting: All that is without Christ is full of vanity
and changes, only Christ is a possession of everlasting continuance, the
meditation of all which should sweetly allure and draw us, graciously dispose
and frame us, and mightily persuade, and move us to give Christ a joyful
welcome coming to us in his Gospel.

6. Fastening thoughts upon brevity of life
6. Fastening our frequent and most serious thoughts upon the brevity and vanity
of the life of man. Man has no abiding City here, he flourishes like Ionahs
gourd in an evening, and is smitten and withered in the morning; Death like the
waters of the red sea drownes all, only Christ makes a safe passage through
death, for his Israel, for all that receive him; the Arc divided Jordan, and
Israel went dry, and safe over to Canaan; Christ makes a ready way for all that
beleevingly entertain him, through the horrors of death, to the heavenly
kingdom; death like the deluge spares none, as Noah therefore betook himself
to the Arc, and was preserved, so let us betake our selves to Christ, that we
may be preserved from the second death; all they who were out of the Arc
perished in the waters, all they that are out of Christ will perish in the
deluge of Gods vengeance, the Lord Jesus is the souls only refuge and
deliverance. Exodus 9.19.
Behold (says the Lord by Moses in another case) to morrow about this time, I
will cause it to rain a very grievous hayle such as has not been in Egypt
from the foundation thereof until now. Send therefore now and gather thy
cattle, and all that thou have in the field, for upon every man and beast that
shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hayle shall
come down upon them and Thus in this case behold to morrow, ere long, very
shortly, the Lord will cause a mighty rain, he will rain down snares, fire
and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, send therefore now and gather your
souls, your selves, your friends, husbands, wives, children, servants,
kindred, and neighbors unto Christ, get ye interest in Christ, hide your
selves by faith, and love in Christ, for upon every soul of man that shall not
be found in Christ, upon every parent and child, husband and wife, master and
servant, young and old, bond and free, that shall not be brought home to
Christ, the hail, fire, and brimstone of Gods wrath shall come down upon
them, and they shall dye, both the first, and the second death; and now I know
that he that fears the word of the Lord among you, will flee to Christ, give
all diligence to receive and entertain Christ, to get a sure and blessed
interest in Christ; but he that regards not the word of the Lord will stay in
the field, abide in the service, way, and practice of the profane world, and
be for ever destroyed, for there is no salvation out of Christ; He is the
resurrection and the life, and our life is hid with him in God; therefore let
us say with Augustine, let all these things perish, let us let pass all these
vain, and empty things, and let us betake our selves to the only inquisition
of those things which have no end, let us betake our selves to Christ who is
the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever; He like Noah's Dove will bring us an
Olive branch of peace, when all the comforts of the creature are drowned; he
will stand by us, and defend us as Shamma, one of David's worthies stood, and
defended the field when all the residue fled from it. When all worldly staffes,
and stays, pillars and supporters, leave us and stay behind us, then as Isaac
went up to the Mount with Abraham, so will Christ go up with us, and present
us with acceptance, with great joy and gladness in God his fathers presence;
and let the remembrance and thought of these things sweeten and make
exceedingly joyous Christ's coming among us.

CHAP. VII.
Christ's welco^e manifested.
ANd let us declare and manifest the truth of Christ's welcome, and our joy at
Christ's coming by our prepared, humble, and hearty receiving of Christ,
according to the charge of the Psalmist, Let us Psa. 24.7. By opening and
elevating the heart.
lift up the gates and doors of our hearts from the creature, and all things
here below, let us remove the bolts and bars of infidelity, obstinacy, pride,
security, and self-love; and let us by faith, love, repentance, and humble
obedience, open the doors of our hearts, that Christ the King of glory may come
in. As the Mat. 9.24.
Minstrels, and other people, were put forth out of the Rulers house, and
Christ received, that his dead daughter might be raised to life. Thus let us
put out of the doors of our hearts, all carnal joys, and fleshly lusts, that
Christ may enter into, and minister the life of grace to our souls; let all
give place to Christ, that Christ may have the full possession of us, and work
effectually within us. 2 Let it appear that Christ is welcome by our
garnishing our hearts with all spiritual ornaments, suitable, 2. By garnishing
the heart
and fit for the entertaining of Christ, putting our hearts into such a
gracious frame and temper, that Christ may take pleasure in us: The gate of the
Tabernacle was very costly and glorious, having a hanging made for it Exodus
26.36, 37.
of blew, purple, skarlet, and fine twined linen wrought with needle-worke,
the pillars for the hangings being overlaid with gold, and their hooks of
gold, to shadow out, and signify the making glorious of the hearts of Gods
elect by faith, and other gifts of the Spirit, to entertain Christ the
glorious King. 3. By offering our selves to Christ.
3. Make Christ's welcome apparent, by offering your selves to Christ; the wise
men rejoiced in Christ's coming, and they fell down and worshipped him, opened
their treasures, and Mat. 2.10, 11.
presented to him gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Thus let us rejoice in
Christ coming in the Gospel, fall down before him, make the whole man veil
and stoop to Christ, and to him let us offer the gold of a pure heart, the
frankincense of holy and humble prayer, and the myrrh of patient suffering, and
bearing Christ's cross to him, let us yield our Romans 12.1.
bodies, souls, and all our substance, as a holy and acceptable sacrifice. 4.
By exalting Christ
4. Manifest every man Christ's welcome by exalting Christ above every thing in
your heart, do not set him as Jesse did David 1 Samuel 16.1^.
behind the ewes, but set him as Pharaoh did Joseph, above all his Nobles, and
over all his land; allow him universal and absolute jurisdiction over the
whole man, cut off whatsoever does rebel against him. 5 By Love. Faith
conformity and acquiescence.
5. Declare Christ's welcome by your love to him, as to the bridegroom of your
souls, by your faith and dependence upon him, as upon your only rock, and
sure foundation, by your full and through-conforming your selves to his
statutes and testimonies, as to that which is the light of your feet, the
lantern of your paths, and the delight of your souls, and by a holy and
gracious acquiescence in Christ, as in the Counselor in whom is all wisdom
to direct; as in the King, in whom is all authority to command; as in the
rock, in whom is all strength to support; as in the fountain, in whom is all
fullness to satisfy us, Christ will not be pleased with a verbal, he will
have a real entertainment; with Judas to kiss Christ with our lips, outwardly
to give him fair words, and secretly to nourish treason and rebellion in our
hearts against him, is a cursed welcome. With Joab to salute Christ with one
hand, and stab him with another hand, as Joab at once saluted and slew Abner,
to salute Christ by an outward and open profession, and to stab him by a
corrupt and dissolute conversation is very unseemly, shameful, and
dishonorable for any Christian. Let therefore our spiritual, universal,
cheerful and constant subjection unto Christ declare the truth and joy of
Christ's welcome unto us.

Want of joyful receiving Christ shows, 1 Want of knowledge.
If we rejoice not in Christ, if Christ coming in the Gospel be not welcome,
Where is our knowledge of Christ if we rejoice not in Christ coming in the
Gospel; the blind eye has no joy in the Sun, but to the seeing eye the
light is sweet, and It is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun; to the ignorant
Christ is nothing joyful, but to them that have the eyes of their
understanding opened, Christ is very pleasant, he is in their eye the fairest
of ten thousand, Prove. 2.10.
to them the knowledge of Christ is pleasant, to him that knows the Wisdom
of Christ shining into his heart, and making him wise unto salvation, to him
that knows the death of Christ, mortifying his lusts and corrupt affections,
the resurrection of Christ spiritually reviving and quickening him, to him that
knows the righteosnesse of Christ's clothing, and justifying him, to him that
knows the blessed presence of Christ encouraging him, to him that knows the
Al-sufficiency of Christ satisfying him, to him that knows the gracious
dispensation of Christ, ministering the sense of his love and peace to him; to
that man Christ is welcome in the Gospel. Man's ignorance deprives him of all
Christ's comforts.

2. Want of Love.
2. Where is our love to Christ, if Christ be not welcome? David loved Jonathan,
and Jonathan was very pleasant to him. Old Jacob loved Joseph, and his spirit
revived when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent, he was very glad that
Joseph was alive, I will go (says he) and see him before I dye: Christ is
very pleasant to him that loves him, it is a reviving of heart to such a man to
hear of Christ, he will surely go, and see Christ in the Gospel; Love to
Christ, and joy in Christ are inseparable companions, in all the Friends of
Christ, David was a man of love to God, a man of sweet and strong affections:
He uses many feeling and lively expressions hereof, and his joy was suitable to
his love; he was Psalm 122.1.
glad to go up to the house of the Lord, he rejoiced in praising God, Psalm
71.23.
My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee: He rejoiced in visiting
the house of God, he went to the house of God with the Psalm. 42.4.
voice of joy and praise, with the multitude that kept holy day; He rejoiced in
the understanding, meditation, and service of God; he rejoiced in the Way of
Gods testimonies as much as in all riches. Psalm 119.14.
He is no friend of Christ that does not rejoice in Christ; he is no lover,
that is not a joyful receiver of Christ in the Gospel: His pretense and
profession of love is not real, but counterfeit and hypocritical. How can
thou say thou love me (said Dalilah once to Sampson) Judge. 16.15.
when thy heart is not with me. Thus how can man say he loves Christ, when his
heart, the joy and delight of his heart is not with Christ; how is it possible
man can love Christ, and yet Christ be unwelcome; Christ's unwelcomnesse to man
in his Gospel, proclaims the enmity of man's heart against him.

Where is our faith in Christ, if Christ be not welcome? 3. Want of faith.
do we choose and single out Christ to our selves, to be our Mediator and
Savior? Do we build on Christ as on a sure rock? Do we apprehend and take
Christ by the hand of faith into a spiritual wedl^cke, as the husband of our
souls? Do we make Christ our treasure, our crown, our royal roabe of
righteousness? Do we by the bucket of faith draw waters of salvation out of
Christ, as out of a living fountain? and yet not rejoice in Christ, not bid
him joyfully welcome, it is impossible: A believing apprehension is
comfortable, an unbeleeving apprehension ministers no rejoicing. It is recorded
of Jacob, that his sons telling him Joseph is yet alive, and he is Governor
over all the land of Egypt. Jacobs heart fainted, for he ^ believed them not,
afterward believing, he much rejoiced; but now, not believing, his heart
fainted. Thus man hearing of Christ's life and kingdom, hearing him preached in
the Gospel, as the Author of life, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
hearing great and glorious things spoken of Christ, and his heart fainting, his
soul sad, dull, troubled, and not solaced with it, that man believes not, for
the soul is filled with all joy in believing.

4 Want of pricing Christ.
Where is our pricing of Christ? He that does not rejoice in Christ coming in
the Gospel, has a very low esteem of Christ: The Spouse had a high esteem
of Christ surpassing all creatures, and her soul was ravished with love to
him, and with joy in him: The Merchant in the parable prized the pearl above
all that he had, and as he highly prized it, so he was glad when he found it:
Did we prize Christ as the hungry prizeth food, the sick health, the captive
liberty, the rich his treasure, the King his crown; we could not but rejoice
in Christ's coming as people in a famine rejoice in the coming of the harvest,
sick men in restoration of health, captives in a Jubilee, and the rich in his
treasure; the true valuing of Christ makes his coming in the Gospel matter of
more rejoicing, then the coming of all the fullness of the world.

5. Want of relishing Christ.
Where is our taste and relish, our sense and feeling of Christ, if we rejoice
not in Christ coming in the Gospel; the taste of wine rejoices the thirsty,
the taste of meat rejoices the hungry: He that has no joy in Christ, has no
taste of Christ; Christ is not unto him as Isaacks venison was to him, Genesis
27.4.
savoury meat which his soul loved. The things of God are unsavory unto such;
but the soul which does relish Christ, which tastes how good Christ is, does
abundantly rejoice in Christ; to him Christ's Cant. 1.3.
good ointments, his saving gifts and graces, are savory,; are tasted,
perceived, felt, like good ointments, with great joy and revivement of heart;
and his name is as an ointment powered forth, the doctrine of his grace, the
name of his wisdom, in opening his fathers counsel; the name of his merit in
purchasing man's salvation; the name of his mercy, in pardoning man's sin; the
name of his righteousness in justifying man's soul; the name of his love in
embracing and solacing man's heart; this is an ointment powered out, this in the
preaching of the Gospel casts a sweet savor, as ointment does in the
pouring forth, as the breaking of the box of ointment in the Gospel, and
pouring it upon Christ's head, filled the house with the Mar. 14.3. Ioh. 12.3.
savor thereof: so the opening of Christ in the Gospel, gives a sweet savor
to the hearts of all Christians. The true receivers of Christ find a very
sweet, and blessed, a very gracious and soule-refreshing taste in Christ.

And as we profess our selves to be scholars in Christ's school, servants in
Christ's family, members in Christ's body, Joy in Christ's coming persuaded.
subjects, friends, and Spouse of Christ; so let us rejoice in the coming of
Christ, in his Gospel, as a traveller rejoices in the coming of the Sun to
guide him, as the subject rejoices in the coming of the King to honor him,
as the captive rejoices in the coming of the ransomer to free him, as the
sick rejoices in the coming of the Physician to cure him, as the child
rejoices in the coming of the nurse to feed him, and as the bride rejoices
in the coming of the bridegroom to marry her: In him let us rejoice as in the
Sun enlightening us, as in the friend solacing us, as in the shield defending
us, as in the King honoring us, as in the treasure enriching us, as in the
jewel adorning us, as in the fountain filling us, and as in the paradise of
our most choice and everlasting pleasures; and in the joy of our souls let us
say, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
DAvid did not only rejoice in the Arc, and dance before it in testimony of
his joy, but did also erect and set it up in the 2 Samuel 16.17.
midst of the Tabernacle: Every man that does indeed rejoice in Christ, every
man to whom Christ is truly welcome, does desire and endeavor the exaltation
of Christ, the setting up of Christ's kingdom, the welfare of Christ and his
Gospel; therefore the people here say, Welfare and exaltation of Christ and
his kingdom desired.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; not only by way of
exaltation and rejoicing in Christ's coming, but also by way of exoptation and
wel-wishing, heartily desiring the welfare and prosperity of Christ, his
kingdom, and Gospel, Blessed be he; furnished be he, with the greatest and
choicest wisdom, righteousness, prudence, mercy, power, fortitude, and
courage for the administration of his kingdom and people; successful be he,
in the promulgation and preaching of his Gospel, in the gubernation of his
Church and children, in the dissipation of all adversary powers; victorious be
he in the subjugation and conquest of his enemies; glorious be he in the
conversion of sinners, in the multiplication and increase of his holy and
loyal subjects; beautiful and amiable be he, in the eyes of all persons; Let
his Gospel shine like the Sun from the one end of heaven unto the other; Let
his name be as an ointment powered out, casting a sweet smell throughout this
great house of the world; to him let all the Kings and kingdoms of the earth
veil and stoop, become truly obedient and subject. This is the prayer, desire,
and endeavor of all that rejoice in Christ aright, teaching us, That,

Doct.
It is the duty of all people unfainedly to desire, and earnestly to endeavor
the welfare, promotion, and advancement of Christ, his spiritual kingdom and
Gospel. David and 2 Sa^. 6.15.
all the house of Israel joined together in erecting and setting up the Arc in
the Tabernacle, Kings and Subjects, Masters and servants, parents and children,
the people of every calling and condition should unite their forces, their
hearts and hands, their counsels and tongues, their affections and endeavors
to set up Christ, to advance his Gospel, to honor and enlarge his kingdom:
This was shadowed in the building of the Temple; to the building thereof
concurred Solomon and his servants Hyram of Tyrus, and the Sydonians, 1 King. 6.
who did hew the timber for it; to the building of the Church of Christ, to the
setting up of Christ and his Gospel, there should be an universal, unanimous,
full and sweet concurrence of men of all nations, of Kings and subjects, of
Lords and servants, of Ministers and people, every man in the place and calling
wherein God has set him, according to the gift and endowment which God has
bestowed on him, must concur in his prayers and endeavors, to advance the
honor and kingdom of Christ Jesus. This was also figured in the neighboring
Kings payment of tribute unto Solomon, desiring his friendship, and by variety
of gifts and presents making their peace with him. All people coming from all
the Kings of the earth to hear his wisdom; the whole as in a shadow,
presignifying men's payment of the spiritual tribute, of fear and reverence,
faith and obedience, love and thankfulness unto Christ; their entering into a
Covenant of peace with Christ, their seeking of the love and friendship of
Christ, their attendance upon the Gospel to hear and learn Christ's wisdom,
their dedication of themselves and their substance to the service of Christ,
their spiritual subjection unto Christ, and their holy and gracious endeavors
to make the name of Christ glorious. This was foretold by the Psalmist, Psalm.
72, 9.
they that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and his enemies shall
lick the dust, they shall humble themselves under the mighty hand of Christ,
they shall acknowledge and receive him as their Lord, they shall fear and
reverence him as their King, they shall veil and bow to his scepter, they
shall put themselves and all that is theirs under Christ, they shall give
themselves to The Kings of Tharsis and of the Isles shall bring presents, the
Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts; they shall consecrate their
abilities to Christ's service, they shall communicate of their substance to the
maintenanne of Christ's Church and Ministers, to the preservation and increase
of Christ's kingdom. All Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall
serve him. All shall adore and serve him as their King, all shall exalt and
honor him, as loyal subjects their heavenly Sovereign; all persons from the
highest to the lowest must serve the Lord Jesus, and study to make him
glorious; grace works obedience in the hearts of Princes, as well as in the
hearts of beggars: The Sun as well as the stars did obeisance unto Joseph in
his vision; Kings as well as inferior persons, do ob^^^ance unto Christ under
his kingdom and Gospel. Rev 4.10.
The four and twenty Elders in Saint John's vision, fell down before him that
sat on the throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast
their crowns before the throne. Godly Kings and Governors cast their crowns,
their dominion, dignity, power, honor, and jurisdiction, and all that they
have before Christ, they make all serviceable to the exaltation of Christ and
his kingdom. This was like prophesied by the Prophet Esaias, the Isa. 60.5.
abundance of the sea; multitudes of men dwelling in Islands, shall be
converted unto thee, shall be gathered unto the Church and kingdom of Christ,
and the forces, great troops and companies of the Gentiles shall come to thee,
shall be joined to the people of God, embrace their Religion, and enter into a
sweet and gracious fellowship with They shall bring gold and incense, they
shall contribute liberally to the maintenance of the Gospel, and Christ's poor
members, they shall dedicate their earthly abundance to Christ's service, and
they shall show forth the praises of the Lord, they shall be very industrious
and studious to make The sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, become
members in thy house, and fellow-helpers in thy work, and their Kings shall
minister shall serve Christ and labor the welfare of his Church and kingdom.
The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, there is nothing so excellent which
shall not put it self under Christ, and be made serviceable to his Gospel and
kingdom; and thus our Savior taught his Disciples to pray, that Gods kingdom
might Mat. 6.10.
come, that the Gospel might be preached, and men filled with the light
thereof, As the air is filled with light upon the coming of the Sun; that
the Holy Ghost might be powered out, and the hearts of men inspired with the
knowledge, love and obedience of the truth; that all the lusts of men, the
impediments of Gods gracious kingdom in the soul of man might be crucified,
and utterly extinct; and that God might universally, spiritually, and fully
reign in the hearts of men, all the weapons of their rebellion laid aside, and
their souls brought into a gracious subjection; and it is the Apostles charge,
pray that the word of the Lord may 2 Thessalonians. 3.1.
run, have a free and a speedy passage, running as the Sun, shining to all the
corners of the world, and running as the rivers, to water the earth, and be
glorified by the pure and powerful preaching of it, by the holy and gracious
working of it, by the ready and cheerful entertainment of it, and by the holy
and humble subjection of the souls of men under it: Man's obedience makes the
word very glorious, and the free and speedy passage, and powerful working of
the Gospel, should be earnestly prayed for by the Lords people; this is the
charet on which Christ rides in spiritual triumph; this is the scepter by
which he swayeth in the souls of his chosen, and the welfare of this do all
the friends and welwishers of Christ much desire, and with great earnestness
endeavor, Psalm. 45.3.
gird thy sword upon thy thigh (says the Psalmist in the person of the
faithful unto Christ) O most mighty, show thy self in thy word and Gospel
like a mighty man of war, fully armed, to mortify the lusts, to humble the
souls, and to bring into subjection all the thoughts of thy servants, and do
this thy glory and in thy majesty, make thy self appear dreadful, and
glorious, by the powerful and gracious effects of thy Gospel, and in thy
majesty ride upon the word of truth, the Gospel of salvation, prosperously.:
Be thou successful in the preaching of the Gospel, for the speedy and
universal manifestation of it to all people, for the profligating and putting
to flight of all false doctrines and corrupt worship, as the Sun does dispell
the clouds, and Aarons rod devoured the Magitians serpents; for the reclaiming
and gathering home the souls of men, as the shepherd gathers home the sheep
by his voice; for the healing of the diseased souls of men, as Bethesda healed
the diseased bodies; for the setting up of thy throne in their hearts to reign
and rule within them, as a King reigns in his Throne. Christ's blessed
success in the ministry of the Gospel, is both the wish and prayer, joy and
labor of all that love him. He is a very stranger to Christ's kingdom that
seeks not Christ's exaltation. The true members of Christ prefer the welfare
of Christ's Church, kingdom, and Gospel, above the welfare of their own
estate and person. As the arm lifts up it self to receive the blow, rather
then it shall fall upon the head; such as clearly discern and truly taste
Christ in the Gospel, are very solicitous to uphold Christ's kingdom, and
propagate his Gospel: Psalm. 122.9.
Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good, says David to
Jerusalem, because the doctrine of salvation is there published, the worship of
God there erected, and God there manifested and made known: I will seek thy
good, I will endeavor thy safety, I will do what in me lies to uphold the
doctrine there taught, and the worship there established: I will seek the good
thereof by prayer and supplication, by advice and counsel, by communicating
whatsoever is behoofull, either for the supportation, honor, or comfort of it.
A good man will not willingly keep back any thing which may tend to the
advancement of Christ, 1. Grounds of this truth.
his Gospel, and kingdom; and thus it ought to be.

1. Covenant.
1. In regard of the Covenant between us and Christ, we are baptized into the
Mat 28.19.
name of Christ; into the faith of Christ, to believe in him as the author of
our salvation; into the religion of Christ, to adore and worship him as our
spiritual and heavenly Sovereign; into the doctrine of Christ, to learn him
as the truth is in him, to hear him as the great Prophet and Doctor of his
Church; into the profession of Christ, openly declaring our hope and
expectation of salvation by Christ, our subjection under Christ, and our
dependence upon Christ; into the service of Christ, being dedicate and set
apart by Baptism unto Christ, as his peculiar people, to adore and serve him,
to honor and exalt him; and into the death of Christ, receiving Baptism as a
testimony of mortification, and as an instrument of the Holy Ghost, for the
extinguishing and killing of sin by the death, and for the quickening of our
souls by the resurrection of Christ, to the end that we who live should live
no more unto our selves but unto Christ: This is the tenor of the Covenant
which the Lord himself uttered by the mouth of the Prophet, I Ier. 37.39.
will be their God. I will be their King to command them, their counselor to
guide them, their shield to defend them, their Savior to minister salvation to
them, their father to make provision for them, to communicate the sense of my
love unto them, and their portion to satisfy them; and they shall be my
people, the scholars of my school to learn my will, the subjects of my
kingdom to honor and exalt me, the servants of my family to obey and serve
me, and the bride of my delight to love me, and to bring forth fruit to me. By
virtue of the Covenant between us and Christ, our names are given unto Christ,
as soldiers to their Captain, to fight for Christ; as subjects to their
Sovereign, to exalt and magnify the name of Christ, to labor the welfare and
honor of the kingdom of Christ. Abner entering into Covenant with David, 2 Samuel 3.
went forth to bring about all Israel unto David, to exalt and set up David,
and to increase the kingdom of David. Thus man being entered into Covenant with
Christ must bring himself, and all that is his, and all other people, so much
as in him lies into subjection unto Christ, he must to the utmost of his power,
labor the exaltation of Christ and his kingdom: such men are very regardlesse
of their holy covenant and sacred promise, as labor not the exaltation of
Christ's kingdom and Gosple.

2. Relation.
2. In regard of the Relation betwixt us and Christ. Christ is the King and we
the Subjects; Christ is the Lord and we the Servants; Christ is the Head and
we the members: Christ is the Bridegroom and we the Bride; true Subjects
endeavor the honor of their King and Kingdom. Saul's Subjects would put to 1 Samuel 11.12
death all them who would not have Saul to reign over them. David's Subjects
preferred him above themselves, endeavored his 2 Samuel 18.3.
safety, put themselves in hazard to safeguard him, accounted him worth ten
thousand of themselves; the members support and bear up the head, employ all
their strength in the defense and honor of the head; good servants labor
their Masters honor and welfare; Thy servants said David's men to him, 2 Samuel
15.15
are ready to do whatsoever my Lord the King shall appoint, and the Centurian
could say of his servant, Do this and he does it: And the faithful Spouse
brings forth children to her husband, she was a fruitful Vine by the sides of
his house, and her children like Olive plants round about his Table, a great
honor, a crown as Solomon says to her husband: thus must we by virtue of
that Relation which is betwixt us and Christ, as loyal subjects mortify and
put to death, whatsoever does in us oppose Christ's honor and dominion, exalt
Christ and his Gosple above our selves, our ease, profit, or credit; expose our
selves to all difficulties, dangers and inconveniences amongst men, for the
magnifying of Christ's name, and the welfare of Christ's Gosple; as good servants
be ready to do whatsoever Christ shall appoint us for the making of him
glorious; as true and living members of Christ's mystical body, we must put our
selves under Christ, bear up Christ and make him conspicuous in the eyes of
others, and like a chaste Spouse bring forth all our fruit unto Christ,
endeavoring to the utmost of our power the welfare of Christ's kingdom and
Gospel. Such men are altogether unmindfull of their relation unto Christ, who
desire not, who labor not the prosperity of the Gospel and kingdom of Christ.

3. In regard of Christ's interest in us. 3. Christ's interest in us.
We are not our own, but Christ's, as sometimes the King of Syria said to the
King of Israel, thy silver and thy gold is 1 King 20.3, 4
mine, thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest are mine. Thus may
Christ say to us, thy body and thy soul, thy wife and thy children, thy gold
and thy silver, thy lands and thy livings, and whatsoever thou have is mine;
and we must answer as the King of Israel did, My Lord, O King, I am thine, and
all that I have. This the Lord claims by the mouth of the Prophet: Now thus
says the Lord that created thee O Jacob, and that formed thee O Israel, I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, Isa. 43.1.
thou art mine, my chosen vessel, my redeemer, and sanctified one, my child,
my servant, my jewel, and the Lords Deuteronomy. 32 9.
portion (says Moses) is his people, Jacob is the Lot of his inheritance; He
has separated and taken us unto himself, to be his peculiar people, whom he
loves, in whom he delights, and to whom we must bring forth all our fruit, and
be unto him whatsoever we are, as a portion or inheritance, is all that it is
to him that ownes it; and Christ's we are indeed, by Ioh. 17.7.
donation. We are given unto him from eternity in the decree of Gods election;
by redemption, he has bought us with a price; by vocation he called us out of
darkness into a mavelous light, and has made us a peculiar people to
himself, and also by way of spiritual Conjunction and wedlock. We are
espoused unto Christ, and are styled Rev. 19.8.
his wife. And as we are Christ's, so we must be for Christ, so we must seek
the prosperity of Christ's kingdom, and advancement of his Gospel: 1 Chr. 12.8.
Thine are we O David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse, said Amasai to
David, peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thine helpers. Thus must we
say unto Christ, thine are we O Christ, and on thy side O Son of God, peace,
peace, all welfare and prosperity be to thee, and thy kingdom, successful be
the labors and undertakings of all them that are thy ministerial and
underhelpers. This is urged as a fruit and effect of Christ's interest in us. 1
Cor. 6.20.
We are bought (says the Apostle) with a price, therefore let us glorify God
in our bodies and in our spirits; and again Christ has died, that we who
live, 2 Cor. 5.15.
should not henceforth live unto our selves, but to him who died for us, and
rose again. That man does not well consider Christ's interest in him, who puts
not himself and all that is his upon Christ's service. He is doubtless a
stranger to the efficacy and fruit of the work of Christ's redemption, who does
not thoroughly apply himself to the setting up of Christ and his Gospel.

4. Subversion of Satan.
4. In regard of the Subversion of Satan and his kingdom. The setting up of the
Arc was the fall of Dagon; the setting up of the house of David was the
overthrow of the house of Saul; the setting up of Christ, his Kingdom, and
Gospel, is the overthrow of Satan. Where the Gospel is preached, and Christ
set up, Satan falls like Luke 10.18.
lightning from heaven, his holds of sin are overturned, like the walls of
Jericho at the blowing of the rams horns. There is no competition between
the Devils kingdom, and the powerful preaching of the Gospel. When David was
once set upon the throne all Israel by degrees came about, left the house of
Saul, and bowed unto David's scepter: When Christ is set upon his Throne,
exalted and lifted up in the preaching* of the Gospel, all that are ordained
unto life come about and stoop to Christ, they leave the service of sin,
Satan, and the world, and veil to Christ's scepter, they Act. 26.18. Acts ^.
turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. When
Philip preached in Samaria, the Devils went out of many that were possessed by
them: The Lord has ordained the ministry of the Gospel to be the instrument
and means of the ruin of Satan's kingdom; and for this cause we should come
our selves to Christ, and labor the welfare and increase of Christ's Kingdom,
that Satan the grand adversary of our souls, of our peace, of our salvation,
may be overthrown and trodden under Rev. 16.20.
foot, and have no more place Rev. 12.8.
in heaven, in the Church of God, in the hearts of the people of God, but be
Ioh. 12.3^.
cast out, as a strong man bound is put out of his house, and a King vanquished
and overcome is cast out of his Kingdom: He is no true subject unto Christ,
that endeavors not the subversion of Satan and his kingdom, that Christ alone
may reign, and have complete dominion over Gods Church and people.

5. In regard of the Glory, Crown, and dignity of Gods Church, and people. The
setting up of Christ, his Gospel, and Kingdom, is the glory of the Church of
God; the appearance and shining of the Sun in the fullness of his beauty is
the glory of the world; the presence of the Arc was the 1 Samuel 4.23.
glory of Israel, being a witness of Gods glorious presence among them, the
Lord there giving forth his oracles, and hearing the prayers of his people.
Thus the presence, appearance, and bright shining of Christ the Sun of
Righteousness in the Gospel, is the glory of the Church. Where Christ is in
the Gospel, there God is graciously present, clearly manifesting himself to
men's understanding, and mercifully hearing and answering the prayers of his
people, and the place where the ordinances of God are, where the Gospel is
published, and the mysteries of Gods Kingdom opened, is called the habitation
Psalm. 26 8.
of his house, and the place where his honor dwells. The Lord does ever show
himself very glorious to the souls of his servants, in the use of his
ordinances; and vouchsafes great honor to the people, in setting up his
Gospel and Kingdom among them; and therefore the Church of God is called the
Isa. 11.10.
glorious rest of Christ, because Christ by his Gospel, and by his love and
grace does rest there; that place is of all places most glorious, which is the
Evangelicall resting place of Christ; and the Lord foretelling the
multiplication of his Church, the increase of his faithful people, and
augmentation of his sons Kingdom, says he Isa. 60.7, 15.
will glorify the house of his glory, and make his Church an eternal
excellency; and therefore we should mightily endeavor the exaltation of Christ
and his Gospel, because this is the honor, crown, and glory of the Church:
The clear, full, and open enjoyment of Christ in the Gospel, is the prime
glory of any place or people. Such people are very base and ignominious,
whatsoever be their outward abundance, who enjoy not Christ in his ordinance;
that man is altogether regardlesse of the honor, dignity, and glory of Gods
Church and people, who labors not the exaltation of Christ and his Gospel.

CHAP. IX.
Impiety of three sorts opened.

1. Non-regarders of welfare of Gospel.


IN this as in a glass we may with open face behold the great impiety and
shameful profaneness of three sorts of men. 1. Such as have no regard, nor
desire unto, no pleasure nor delight in the prosperity and welfare of Christ's
Kingdom and Gospel: Like Gallio, they care for none of these things, it is a
matter indifferent unto them, whether the Gospel sink or swim, whither
Christ's Kingdom stand or fall, flourish or wither; the Lord says of the wild
Ass. Job 39.6, 7, 8.
I have made the wilderness his house, and the barren land his dwelling: He^
scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the crying of the
driver, the range of the mountains is his pasture, and he seareheth after
every green thing: Such wild Asses are these men, the wilderness of the
world is their habitation, they regard not, they desire nor with David to Psalm.
24.4.
dwell in the house of the Lord; they delight in a barren land, where are no
waters, and wels of salvation; they regard not the Psalm. 23.2.
green pastures of holy and heavenly doctrine, in which the Lord feeds the
souls of his people: They thirst not after the still waters of the Gospel,
and sweet consolations of the Spirit, with which God refreshes the souls of
his children, they scorn the multitude of the citizens of the new Jerusalem,
the holy assemblies of Gods people; They Psalm. 41.4.
go not to the house of God with the voice of joy and praise, with the
multitude that keeps it holy day, neither regard they the voice of the
spiritual driver, they esteem not the voice of Gods Minister endeavoring to
drive them from the world unto Gods Church, from sin to holiness, and from
Satan unto Christ, the range of the mountains is their pasture, they seek no
food for their souls but worldly vanities, they look after no treasure but
earthly substance; they care not what become of Christ and his Gospel, if it
go well with them according to the world. The Harp and the Violl, Isa. 5.12.
the Tabret and pipe (says the Lord by the Prophet) and the wine are in their
feasts, but they regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider they the
operation of his hands. Such men are blind, Grounds of this evil.
and see not the beauties of Christ and his Gospel, and therefore as it is a
thing indifferent to the blind, whether the Sun rise or set, shine or be
eclipsed: so it is all one to these men, whether the Sun of Righteousness in
the Gospel, rise or set, shine or shine not, they neither rejoice at Christ's
coming, or grieve at Christ's departing. Such men are unsensible of the want of
Christ, and therefore do no more regard Christ's presence in the Gospel, then
a diseased man that feels not his sickness, regards the presence of a
Physician. Such men are earthly minded, altogether taken up with the world, and
therefore are incapable of Christ, unable to relish any sweetness in Christ,
or to give him any audience in his Gospel. Eliah spoke mockingly of Baal, to
his worshippers, 1 Kin. 18.27.
Cry aloud, for he is a God, neither he is a talking, or he is a pursuing, or
he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleeps and must be awaked; and We may
truly say of these, they are men, but they are either a talking of the world,
or pursuing of the world, with such earnestness, or fallen into such a sinful
sleep and slumber, that they cannot hear; and though the Minister lift up his
voice like a trumpet, and cry aloud, yet there is no voice, nor answer of faith
and obedience, nor any regard showed by them to Christ and his Gospel: Such
men are halting Israelites, and lukewarm Laodiceans, void of all true love to
Christ, and far from all Christian zeal for Christ. Solon reputed him no good
citizen, who in a civil dissension risen in the City did adhere to neither
party: Such as cleave not to Christ and the Gospel in the dissension and
opposition of the world are no true citizens of the new Jerusalem. He that is
not with me is against me (says Christ) he that stands not on Christ's side
stands on Satan's side, Mat. 12.30.
he that serves not God serves Mammon, he that has not communion with Christ,
has communion with the world. Christ looks upon all such as are not zealous
for him, as on enemies against him, Rev. ^.16.
and he will spew them out of his mouth at last as foul abomination.

2. Opposers of Gospel 2 Samuel 3.1.
2. A second sort, are such as oppose Christ's Gospel and Kingdom. The house of
Saul made long war against the house of David. There is a family of profane
Saulites, that make Luke 19.14.
continual opposition against the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, they will
not have Christ rule over them, they take Psalm. 2.2.
counsel against the Lord and his Christ, and say, come let us break their
bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Grounds of opposing the
Gospel.
Some are superstitious, and as the Philistines would not suffer the Arc to
stand upon the right hand of their Dagon, no more will they suffer Christ and
the Gospel to have pre-eminence above their traditions and devises; some are
covetous, and as Jesse set David behind the ewes, so do these men set Christ
and his word behind the world, below their earthly employments, and
undertakings; some are ambitious, and as Joseph's brethren conspired against
him, because they were loath to veil and bow to him. Thus proud men conspire
and combine against Christ and the Gospel, being loath to deny, and humble
themselves, and put their necks under Christ's yoke; some are under the power of
profaneness; with Ahab they sell themselves to commit wickedness, they are
impatient of reproof, and therefore imprison the Prophet of the Lord; Christ
coming in the power of his Gospel is very uncomfortable, and terrible to such
as are under the power of their corruption; some are profanely jealous, least
the setting up of Christ and his Kingdom will cross their profit, and eclipse
their honor and credit amongst men; and therefore they seek to suppress the
Gospel, as 1 Samuel 18.29. and 19.1.
Saul sought to suppress David: This moved Act. 19 24.
Demetrius to accuse Paul, and this caused Mat. 2.
Herod secretly to plot the death of Christ. Christ and his Gospel have ever
met with many oppositions from the world.

3. A third sort, 3 Grievers at prosperity of the Gospel.
are such as grieve at the prosperity and welfare of the Gospel and Kingdom
of Christ. When Nehemiah came to repair the walls of Jerusalem, Sanballat the
Horonite, and Tobiah the Ammonite grieved Neh. 2.10.
exceedingly that there was a man come to seek the welfare of the children of
Israel. It is a great grief to many ill affected men, that bear evil will to
Sion, to hear that God raises up any to repair and build up Christ's Church
and Kingdom, to seek the spiritual welfare of his children. The Psalmist
having mentioned and set forth the felicity and prosperity of the faithful
servants of God: In the multiplication of their seed, in the increase of their
wealth, in the Lords dispensation of joy in heaviness, of safety in dangers,
of deliverance in distresses, of exaltation after all oppositions to Gods
Church and children; concludes thus, The Psalm. 112.10.
wicked shall see it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt
away, the desire of the wicked shall perish. Wicked men are more grieved at
good men's prosperity, then at their own misery. It is a sure argument of
reigning profaneness to sorrow for the welfare of the righteous. All H^st. 5
13.
Hamans honors and preferments avail him nothing while he sees Mordecai
sitting in the gate. Wicked men often lose the comfort of all their own
earthly fullness, whiles they behold the prosperity and welfare of Gods Church
and righteous servants: The exaltation of Christ's Kingdom, and flourishing of
the Gospel does fill some men with such vexation, that all their wealth,
honors, and high places seem to them as nothing: No doubt it much troubled
the Philistines to see the 1 Samuel 5.4.5.
Ark of the Lord stand upright, and Dagon broken to a stump. It is a great
trouble to many people to see the Kingdom of Christ stand, and the Gospel to
flourish, and the Dagon of superstition, usury, drunkenness, etc. disgraced,
shamed, and cast to ground; the Priests, the Captain of the Temple, and the
Sadduces, were Act. 4.1.2.
grieved that the Disciples taught the people, and preached through Jesus the
resurrection from the dead, and the two Prophets in the Revelation are said to
Rev. 10.10.
torment them that dwell on the earth. The glorious shining of the Sun is a
trouble to diseased eyes, the bright and clear shining of the truth is a
torment to profane, and ungracious souls; such as grieve not for their sin,
grieve at the Gospel, the means of mortifying sin; such as most rejoice in
superstition, profaneness, and the vanities of the world, are most grieved
and troubled at the powerful preaching of the Gospel. O how great is man's
blindness! how strange is man's perverseness! that he should be most grieved
and troubled at the presence of that, which God has ordained to be the
instrument of man's greatest honor, profit, and comfort.

CHAP. X.
Admonition to set up Christ's Kingdom and Gospel.
ALl men should learn by this, to work their hearts, to employ their thoughts,
and to give themselves to the utmost of their abilities to the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom and Gospel, to the setting up of Christ upon his throne, in
his Church, here on the face of the earth. Zadok the Priest, Nathan the
Prophet, Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the
Pelithites, 1 King. 1.44, 45, 46, 47.
caused Solomon to ride upon the Kings mule, they anointed him King in Gihon,
and all the servants of King David came and said, God make the name of Solomon
better then thy name, and his throne greater then thy throne: All Kings and
rulers, all Ministers and teachers should set up Christ, and cause him to ride
in spiritual triumph upon Gods Church, and all the servants of the Lord from
the highest to the lowest should pray for the prosperity, success, honor and
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom: Magistrates.
All Magistrates as representative Psalm. 82.1.
gods should be in stead of God to Christ's Church, as Isa. 44 28.
shepherds they should see that spiritual pastures be provided for Christ's
flock, and that all wolves, bears and foxes, all instruments of annoyance be
kept far from them; as Isa. 49.23.
nursing fathers and nursing mothers they should be careful that provision be
made for Christ's family; and as they are styled the Psalm. 49 7.
shields of the earth, so they should be careful to minister defense to
Christ's Church and people against the power and fury of all that offer any
injury to them. Thus they must Psalm. 1.12.
kiss the son with the kiss of love and affection, with the kiss of honor
and exaltation, with the kiss of reverence and subjection, with the kiss of
congratulation and rejoicing, with the kiss of prayer and welwishing,
endeavoring to the utmost of their power the propagation of Christ and his
Gospel.

All Ministers as builders in Christ's house, Ministers.
as stewards in Christ's family, as teachers in Christ's school, as laborers in
Christ's vineyard, as under-rowers in Christ's ship, as burning lamps in Christ's
Temple, as watchmen in Christ's City, should by their frequent preaching,
wholesome doctrine, sharp reprehension, wise admonition, seasonable and gracious
consolation, and holy walking propagate the Gospel, advance the Kingdom, and
increase the number of Christ's people, and make the Lord Jesus every day more
and more glorious in the eyes of all beholders.

All Masters and rulers of families should strive the exaltation of Christ's
Kingdom, by being as Kings, Prophets, Masters of Families.
and Priests, within their domestical walls, by their godly government,
Christian instruction, and holy prayer and supplication with and for them, that
are under their jurisdiction, teaching them with Abraham to know the Lord,
bringing them with Cornelius to the ministry of the word, and making their
houses with Philemon a Church of God. Private persons


All private persons should likewise put their hands to this work, and labor
the setting up of Christ's Kingdom and Gospel, by Mic. 4 1. Isa. 60.
flowing to the house of God, as rivers to the ocean, by coming speedily and
unanimously, as the doves unto the windows, as the Eagles to the carcass, or
the lame unto Bethesda; by growing in all spiritual gifts and graces, as
children grow in stature, as trees in fruitfulness, and as the light shines
more and more unto the perfect day; by consecrating themselves to Christ, and
his service, as soldiers to their General, as servants to their Lord and
Master, and as a Spouse to their husband, to fight Christ's battles, to do
Christ's work, to love Christ's name, and to bring forth all their fruit to
Christ, as a wife brings forth all her children to her husband, and by holy
exhortation, and gracious counsel, persuading and drawing others to Christ, to
the knowledge, faith, love, and obedience of Christ, leaving other employments
at convenient seasons, as the woman of Samaria left her water pot to bring
other men to Christ, as she brought her fellow citizens, Considering (as the
Apostle says) one another, and provoking one another to love and to good
works; being to their fellow brethren, as spurs quickening them, and as
loadstones drawing them daily nearer and nearer unto Christ, laboring to make
Christ appear more amiable and glorious in the eyes of all their
fellow servants: As all the rivers great and small empty themselves into the
sea, to the filling up of the sea; so let us all, high and low, young and old,
rich and poor, bond and free, empty our selves, and all our abilities, and
endeavors into Christ, to the filling up of Christ, his Church, his Kingdom,
his mystical body, which is the Ephesians. 1 23.
fullness of him that fills all in all. As all the people who were willing
hearted, both men and women, came and offered freely to the building of the
Tabernacle: so let us both men and women, all that have a willing and a loving
heart to Christ, come and offer our selves, and all that we have to Christ, for
the building up of the Church and Kingdom of Christ, for the advancement of
the Gospel of Christ. Inducements to exalt Christ.


And to excite and move our selves hereunto, do but consider how the
exaltation of Christ, his Gospel and Kingdom, is the honor and glory of a
Christian; 1 Honor of a Christian.
what is the glory of a servant, but the enrichment of his Master by his
industry? what is the honor of a Subject, but his loyalty to his King? his
exalting the name, crown, kingdom, and jurisdiction of his Prince? what is
the honor of a wife, but her fidelity to her husband, her cleaving close to
her husband, her bringing forth of many children to her husband? and what is
the crown and dignity of all Christians, but their serviceablenesse to Christ,
their exaltation of the name of Christ, their cleaving close to Christ, their
bringing forth of much fruit to Christ, their enlarging the territories of
Christ's kingdom. Alphonsus had written on his Symboll as a character of his
greatest honor, these words: Pro Lege, and pro Grege, for the Law, and for the
people; and this is the most honorable character of a Christian to make his
heart and tongue, his thoughts within, and his works without, to carry this
inscription, for Christ and for his Kingdom, for his Church, and for his
Gospel: He is every way of all persons the most honorable and glorious who is
every way most for Christ Jesus.

2. The argument and evidence of our love to Christ. 2. Love to Christ.
Where is our love to Christ, as to our Lord and Master, as to our King and
Captain, as to our head and husband? if we seek not Christ's honor, if we do
not endeavor the exaltation of Christ's kingdom: Jonathan loved David as his
own soul, and he stripped himself of the roabe that was upon him, and gave it
to David, and his garments, even to his sword. He that loves Christ will keep
back nothing from Christ, he will disroabe himself to honor Christ, to exalt
his kingdom, and beautify his Gospel. Jacob loved Rachel, and he served for
her twice seven years. He that loves Christ will put himself upon any
hardness for Christ; Christian love reputes the honoring and exaltation of
Christ Jesus, a sufficient recompense to its greatest losses, and hardest
service. Love will make a man even holily prodigal, in his layings out for the
exaltation of Christ's Gospel and kingdom.

3. Peril of not endeavoring welfare of Christ's Gospel.
3. Observe the peril of not endeavoring the welfare of Christ's Church and
Gospel. He that is not a friend of Christ is an enemy against Christ; he that
does not help to set up Christ's kingdom, is by interpretation, and in Gods
construction, an overthrower of Christ's kingdom: He that is not with me is
against me (says Christ) and he that does not gather does scatter. He that is
not a labourer is a scatterer in Christ's vineyard. He that fights not under
Christ's ensign is a soldier under Satan's banner. He that is Prove. 18.9.
slothful in his work, is brother (says Solomon) to a great waster. Thus he
who does not labor for Christ is a brother to them that are great wasters of
the kingdom of Christ; and fearful is the curse pronounced on them that
stand still, and put not their helping hand to Christ's Kingdom, Cause, and
Gospel. Iud 5.23.
Curse ye Meros (said the Angel of the Lord) Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty.

4. Christ withholding nothing to exalt man.
4. Look upon Christ's sparing and withholding of nothing for our exaltation.
Christ humbled himself to the lowest degree of humiliation and abasement, for
our elevation and advancement. He emptied himself to fill us; he abased
himself to honor us; he stripped himself to apparel us; he made himself a
man of sorrows to fill us with spiritual and soule-refreshing consolations: 2
Cor. 8 9.
Ye know (says Saint Paul) the grace; the love, the bounty, the rich
liberality of our Lord Jesus Christ; that though be was rich, rich in the glory
of his divine Essence, in his absolute dominion over all creatures, in his
plenary possession of heaven and earth: Yet for your sakes he became poor;
vailing his Diety, Majesty and glory, under the poor and unworthy garment of
humane flesh, being borne of poor parents, and appearing in the form of a
servant, humbling and abasing himself to the Phil. 2 7.
death, the shameful death of the cross, that ye through his poverty might be
rich; rich in the participation of the divine nature, rich in the fruition of
the fullness of Christ; Christ's humiliation is the meritorious cause, spring,
and fountain of man's exaltation; Christ was very free and full in his
exinaition, and abasement for our honor and advancement: The condition of man
was so extremely base and shameful, that nothing but the humiliation of the
Son of God was able to restore honor to him: And how ready should we be to
put all under the feet of Christ, to employ all to the honor of Christ, who
has done so much to honor us. We should (says Chrysostom) prefer nothing
above Christ, Nil debemus Christo preponere, quia nec nobli, ille quicquam
praeposuit
because he preferred nothing above us. As he veiled and bowed down himself,
and all that was his, for our salvation: so should we veil and bow our selves,
and all that is ours, for the exaltation of his Gospel and kingdom. The
meditation of Christ's abasing himself for us, should make us studious and
inquisitive how to honor Christ: 2 King. 4.13.
Thou have been careful for us with all this care (said the Prophet to the
woman of Shunem) what is to be done for thee: Thus should we say to Christ,
thou have been humbled and abased, thou have suffered a great suffering for us,
what is now to be done for thee? what shall we do to honor thee, to exalt and
magnify thy name, who have undergone so great disgrace and shame for us. The
more Christ humbled himself for us, the more he should be exalted by us;
Christ made himself a Ephesians. 5 1.
sacrifice for us, and we should Romans 12.1.
sacrifice our selves, and all that is ours to him, and his service. Christ
gave himself for our salvation, and we should give our selves to him, and the
exaltation of his kingdom; Christ was contented to be made low, and as a very
nothing, as a Psalm. 22.6.
worm and no man, that we might be made the Ephesians. 1.
fullness of him who fills all in all, and we should be content to abase our
selves, and to be reputed vile and as nothing in the eyes of men, to set up
Christ, to make him and his Gospel glorious in the eyes of the people. He does
neither wisely, nor graciously consider Christ's humiliation, that does not give
himself to the exaltation of Christ's name and kingdom.

5. Meditate the sweet, the great, 5. Blessing attends the exaltation of the
Gospel.
and wonderful blessing that comes unto men by the exaltation of Christ's
Gospel. The setting up of the Arc in the house of Obed-Edom caused all that
he had to prosper. 2 Samuel 6.11.
The setting up of the Gospel brings great and singular prosperity to the
people: Christ's Gospel, the revelation of Christ, and the mysteries of his
kingdom, Luk 10.23.
is a great blessing: Blessed (says our Savior) are the eyes which see the
things which ye see; having the Gospel preached to them, the tidings of
salvation published among them, Christ revealing and opening himself unto
them: These are blessed in the illumination of their understandings, having the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ communicated to them:
Blessed in the vivification of their souls, having the word of life quickening
them: Blessed in the sanctification of their hearts, the Gospel cleansing
their sin, as Jordan cleansed the leprosy of Naaman: Blessed in their
Conquest, over sin, Satan, and the world, the Gospel overturning all the holds
of Satan, as the sounding of the rams horns overthrew the walls of Jericho:
Blessed in (...) pacification of their consciences, the Evangelicall voice of
Christ quieting their perplexed consciences, as his personal voice quieted the
stormy tempest; and blessed in the sweetning of their afflictions, the Gospel
sweetens all trials and troubles to Gods children, as the tree sweetened the
waters of Marah to Israel; Blessed in their very temporal possessions and
bodily undertakings. Where God gives his Gospel the food of the soul, he will
also give the staff of bread, the food of the body: Christ did not only feed
the souls of them who followed him, with his doctrine, but he also
miraculously fed their bodies with corporal provision: the Gospel is indeed
even the choicest of all blessings, where this goes, all goes, that is
behoofull for the welfare of Gods children; therefore blessed (says the
Psalmist) is the nation Psalm. 33.11.
whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has chosen for his own
inheritance. God is the God of all by creation, by absolute dominion, by common
preservation; but he is their God to whom he gives his Gospel, by gracious
manifestation, heavenly instruction, spiritual regeneration, familiar and
comfortable habitation, sweet and celestial dispensation of heavenly fullness
to them, God is there alone sweetly, and spiritually known, and enjoyed, where
his Gospel is erected; and for this cause we should mightily endeavor the
advancement of the Gospel. King David being told how the Lord had blessed the
house of Obed-Edom, and all that pertained to him, because of the Ark of the Lord, 1 Samuel 6.12.
went and brought the Arc into the City of David with gladness. Men hearing
of the prosperity and blessing which does attend the Gospel, should with great
care and diligence, with much alacrity and cheerfulness endeavor the erection
of the Gospel among them: He is altogether unsensible of the manifold and
singular benefits, and mercies accompanying the Gospel, that does not heartily
desire, and effectually labor the welfare thereof. As the Gospel excels all
temporal endowments, so should we endeavor the success and stability of the
Gospel more then of any, or all other possessions.

CHAP. XI.
ANd for the disposing, framing, and working our hearts, Means disposing man
to advance the Gospel. 1 Distaste of Sin.
thus to advance the Gospel and kingdom of Christ, there must be, 1. A
distasting, disrellishing, and being weary of sin: The Gospel never seems
sweet until that sin seems bitter; he will never effectually endeavor the
setting up of Christ, and the Gospel, that desires not the deposition of
sin; the Philistines having a desire to maintain and uphold Dagon, set the
Arc below Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.
on the left hand of Dagon. Man having a desire to uphold sin, abaseth
Christ, and his Gospel, puts them below his lusts, gives pre-eminence to his
lust above the Gospel, and above Christ; Herod not disrellishing his
incestuous sin, not being weary of it, but intending the maintenance thereof,
Mar. 6.
cut off the head of the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ. Man can neither
truly desire, nor faithfully endeavor the advancement of Christ and his
Gospel, that is not weary of his sin, as of a heavy burden. Man to whom
sin is pleasant and delightful, is very impatient and weary of the presence
and power of the Gospel; he alone consecrates himself to Christ, and the
advancement of his kingdom, to whom sin is distastefull, as gall to his
palate, gravel to his teeth, a disease to his flesh, or fetters to his feet.
When Abner was wroth with Ishbesheth the son of Saul, then he 2 Samuel 3.8, 10
came to David to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah from
Dan even to Beersheba. When man is wroth with sin, full of indignation
against sin, then he comes to Christ, then he joins himself in a holy and
solemn Covenant with Christ then he labors to set up the throne of Christ
over his soul and body, then he prays, and strives that Christ may reign
from Dan to Beersheba, from the highest to the lowest faculty of his soul, and
from the greatest to the smallest undertaking of his life. Man is ever so much
the more industrious to set up Christ and his kingdom, by how much the more
his corruption does grieve and trouble him.

2. Holy fear
2. A holy and filial fear toward Christ making loath to offend Christ,
willing in every thing to please Christ. All the Rulers of the Provinces, the
Lievtenants, Deputies, and Officers of the King helped the Jews, when the Hest
9.5.
fear of Mordecai fell upon them. When the holy and gracious fear of Christ
does fall upon the souls of men, enter into, and take possession of the hearts
of men, then they join themselves to the help of Christ, to the help of the
Gospel, and Church of Christ; then they study and endeavor the advancement of
Christ and his kingdom; therefore Psalm. 2.11, 12.
serve the Lord with fear (says the Psalmist) rejoice before him with
trembling, and kiss the son, embrace the son, rest and rely upon the son,
acknowledge, exalt, and magnify the son; put your selves with all readiness
and fullness upon the service of the son; true fear ever makes the Lords
servants subject, and serviceable to Christ Jesus. I will Ier. 32.40.
put my fear into their hearts (says the Lord) and they shall not depart from
me; they shall not depart from my knowledge by ignorance, from my promises by
unbelief, from my precepts by disobedience, from my covenant by
unfaithfulness, nor from my worship by profaneness. Such as do not truly
and thoroughly apply themselves to Christ's service, are profanely fearelesse. A
servants true and ingenuous fear makes him labor his Masters welfare, the
matrimonial fear of a wife moves her to desire, and endeavor her husbands
honor: Act. 2.43.
fear came upon every soul (says S. Luke) and what followed thereupon, All
they that believed were together; there is their unity in affection in divine
invocation, They sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men,
as every man had need. There is their communication to Christ's members, their
putting of themselves and their abilities upon Christ's service. He that truly
fears Christ will withhold nothing which may tend to the exaltation of Christ,
his Church, and Gospel.

3. 3. Feeling of the necessity of Christ.
Lively sense and feeling of the necessity of Christ and his Gospel. Men's
exaltation of Christ is according to their apprehension of the necessity of
Christ. When the Elders of Gilead saw the necessity they had of Jeptha, then
Judge. 11.11.
they made him head and Captain over them. When men see, and feel the want of
Christ, the peril of their estate without Christ, then they put themselves
under Christ, then they exalt and magnify Christ, then they labor the setting
up of Christ and his Gospel. Sense of sickness, famine, siege, bondage, makes
physic, food, an army, a ransomer very precious; Physicians were of great
esteem with the woman troubled with a flux of blood, she spent all her
substance upon them; Mar 5.
Christ and his Gospel are of great price with the man to whom sin is a
torment, a grief, a trouble, he will withhold nothing which may tend to the
exaltation of Christ and his Gospel, to the working out, and removing of the
sin which does molest him. When Joseph's brethren were in want, and had no
bread to sustain them, then they came and bowed themselves before Joseph; and
when they called to mind their great trespass against him, then they besought
his favor, and were very submissive to him; Man's sense of his own emptiness
drives him to Christ, and causes him to veil and stoop to Christ; to put
himself under the feet of Christ, and readily to exalt and set up Christ;
selfe-opinion, ignorance of man's want of Christ* and the Gospel is a great
impediment to our setting up of Christ and his kingdom.

4 Elevation of the heart to a spiritual temper.
4. Elevation and raising of the heart of man to a holy, spiritual and noble
frame and temper. The heart of man naturally is very base, carnal, and
earthly, delighting like the swine in the mire and mud of the world, rellishing
and savouring nothing but that which is Ier. 22.
worldly and fleshly; his spirit is very low and ignoble, and his highest aim
is but to ascend some molehill or mountain of the earth; Luke 15.
like the prodigal, he is a companion of swine, and feeds on the husks of
worldly vanities, his longings like the besotted Israelites, is after the
onyons and fleshpots of Egypt, poor things, unworthy and empty things of the
earth; Dan 2.
Man like Nebuchadnezzars image, how ever decked with gold and silver, authority
and dominion, and glorious in outward appearance to the world; yet his feet are
iron and clay, his thoughts, his affections, the motions, and goings of his
heart are very base and dishonorable: The spirit of man must be therefore
sublimated and refined by Christ, the great Mal. 3.
refiner of the soul. Man's dross and tin must be purged out, the earthinesse
and baseness of his spirit must be taken away, and man endowed with a more
spiritual, sublime, and noble disposition, and temper of soul, or he can
never intend Christ, exalt Christ and his Gospel. It is recorded in Ezra that
the chief of the fathers rose up with all them whose spirits God had Ezra 1.5.
raised to go up to build the house of God in Jerusalem: First God raised
their hearts, put willingness, alacrity, enlargement, opennesse, and courage
into their hearts to do the work, and then they went to build. Thus God must
raise our hearts, innoble our spirits, make us spiritually heroical, or we
shall never build Jerusalem, never labor the advancement of Christ and his
^ospell; Christ Ioh. 11.
raised Lazarus out of the grave, and then he followed him: Christ must raise
our spirits from their earthlinesse and baseness, or they will never be
serviceable to him: The Spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels, and
they Ezekiel. 1.
moved where the living creatures moved. Christ must put his Spirit into us, or
we shall never follow him, never seek his honor and the welfare of his
Gospel. It is said of Saul when the Lord had made him King, that he went home
to Gibeah, and there 1 Samuel 10.24
went with him a band of men whose heart God had touched. God has set Christ
his King upon his holy hill of Sion; but there is no man follows him, no man
exalts and honors him as a King, but such whose hearts the Lord does touch
with the gracious finger of his Spirit; the baseness, cowardlinesse, and
earthlinesse of our spirits must be put away, and our hearts thoroughly refined,
otherwise we cannot discern Christ, we cannot relish Christ, we cannot love
Christ, we cannot prize Christ, we can never put our selves upon the exaltation
of Christ, his Kingdom, and Gospel; but when 2 Cor. 5.17, 18 Romans 12.2.
old things are past away, and all become new; when we are renewed in the
spirit of our mind, when the Spirit of God, like Eliahs fiery charet, has
taken us up from the earth, and has raised our hearts, thoughts, desires, and
affections to the things which are above; then shall we rejoice in Christ and
his Gospel, then shall we put our selves and all that we have upon the service
of Christ and the Gospel; then shall we pray for the prosperity, welfare, and
advancement of Christ's Gospel and kingdom; then shall we say, Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. XII.
CHrist came not as the false prophets of old, in his own name, he had his
calling and commission from above. Heb. 5.4. Christ comes in the name of the
Lord in 6. respects.
No man (says the Apostle) speaking of Christ) takes this honor to himself,
but such an one as is called of God as Aaron was; and this is the second
particular in the first general part of these words, Christ's Calling and
Commission. He came in the name of the Lord; Christ is said to come in the name
of the Lord. 1. Ordination.
1. In respect of Ordination. Christ as Mediator was appointed of old to
minister salvation to Gods chosen; 1 Pet. 1.20. Rev. 13.8.
foreordained (says Saint Peter) before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times: A lamb slain from the foundation of the world
says Saint John, slain from the foundation of the world in the eternal
preordination of God, in the promise of the seed of woman to break the
serpents head, in the legal sacrifices, in the faith of the fathers; and in
the sufferings of his members, in whose sufferings Christ suffered, their
sufferings then shadowing Christ's suffering to come. 2. Preparation.
2. In respect of preparation, Christ as Man and Mediator is prepared and
furnished with all abilities to execute and accomplish his office; it pleased
the Father (says Paul) that in him should all Col. 1.19.
fullness dwell; fullness of wisdom, power, grace, righteousness, and worth
to minister to his Church, whatsoever appertained to the salvation, welfare, or
peace thereof, Ioh. 3.34.
he having the Spirit poured out upon him above measure. 3. Calling.
3. In respect of Calling, designation, and investiture into his office. The
Lord (says Christ as Mediator) has Isa. 49.1.
called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of
my name; and I (says God the Father will preserve thee, and give thee for a
Covenant of the people to establish the earth; and when Christ was baptized and
solemnly entered upon his calling: He was confirmed by a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my Mat 3 17.
Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. 4. Doctrine.
4. In respect of the doctrine which he taught, no private, nor humane
doctrine, but the doctrine of God his Father. I am come (says Christ) in my
Fathers Ioh. 5 43.
name, declaring his truth, and seeking his glory, and ye receive me not, if
another shall come in his own name, preaching his own invention, exalting and
magnifying himself; him ye will receive, to him ye will adhere, him you will
admire and adore. And again elsewhere, I have not Ioh. 12.49, 50.
spoken of my self (says Christ) but the Father which sent me; he gave me a
commandment what I should say, and what I should speak; and I know that his
commandment is life everlasting; whatsoever I speak therefore even as the
Father said unto me, so speak I. 5. 5. Benediction.
In respect of benediction, Christ is come in the name of the Lord, accompanied
with the fullness of all blessing from God: In thy seed (said God to Abraham,
speaking of Christ) shall all the kindreds of the earth be Act. 3.25, 26.
blessed, unto you first says Peter, God having raised up his son Jesus sent
him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; Ephesians
1.3. 6 End.
and God (says Saint Paul) has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places in Christ. 6. In respect of the end which Christ proposed to
himself, his Fathers glory; he came in the name of the Lord, not seeking his
own, but his glory who sent him. I seek not mine own Ioh. 8 50, 54.
glory (says Christ) I honor my Father, if I honor my self, my honor is
nothing. And thus Christ came in the name of the Lord; ordained, prepared,
called of the Lord, declaring his Fathers will, accompanied with the fullness
of his Fathers blessing, intending and seeking his Fathers glory: The whole
showing, That,

Christ is furnished with authority and all divine abilities to minister all
peace and salvation to Gods servants. Doct.
This was tipyfied in Genesis 37.13. Mat. 9 15.
Joseph; Joseph was sent of his father to visit his brethren in the
wilderness; Christ was sent of God his Father to visit mankind, sinfully
straying in the wilderness of the world; Joseph was set over the whole land of
Egypt, and over the Kings house, by Pharaoh King of Egypt. Joseph was furnished
with wisdom, understanding, and the Spirit of God to rule the people, and
with all the store and fullness of Egypt, to minister to the necessities of the
people. Christ is set by God his father, the King of Kings, over the whole
Zach. 14 9.
world in general, over the Psalm. 2 6.
Church of God in special; Christ is furnished with Col. 2 3.
treasures of all wisdom, to guide the people; and with all divine and
heavenly Ioh 10.
fullness to minister to the several necessities of Gods servants, to fill
them with all spiritual fullness. This was also figured in Josuah. Josuah was
confirmed in his calling by the dividing of the waters in Jordan, at the
presence of the Arc, standing therein, Christ was confirmed in his calling by
the opening of the heavens, and the Spirit descending in the form of a Dove
upon him, when he was baptized in Jordan; Moses being dead, Joshuah was made
the Captain of Gods people, Moses leading them to the land, Joshuah entering
them in the land; the Law ceasing, and the Ceremonies thereof vanishing. Christ
is appointed the Captain of Gods Church and people, the Law leading to Christ,
Christ by his death and conquest, giving men entrance into the heavens. Joshuah
overcame the enemies of Israel, and going before them, brought them into the
land of Canaan, allotting to each one their portion: Christ has overcome the
enemies of his Church, and is ascended into heaven before us, there to prepare
for all the Lords servants: It is not the Law, but Christ that ministers
salvation to the Lords people: Christ Jesus is the author of our spiritual
conquest, there is no way for man to heaven, but only by Christ, who came from
heaven: Christ is the Jacobs ladder, by whom God descends to us in his grace,
and through whom we ascend to God by our faith. This was likewise typified in
David, David was anointed King and Ruler over Israel, Christ is anointed King
and Ruler over Gods Church. David delivered Israel from the great Goliath, he
slew him with his own weapon, Christ overcame the infernal Goliath the Devil,
and brought deliverance to Gods chosen; Christ by Heb. 2 14.
death, Satan's weapon, destroyed him that had the power of death: The power of
all opposers is mere weakness to the power of Christ Jesus. Such is the
transcendent fullness of Christ's abilities, that he turns the instruments of
man's destruction, to further man's salvation; this calling, preparation, and
mission of Christ, was prophesied by the Psalmist, His dominion Psalm 72.
shall be from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. There
is Christ's universal jurisdiction and kingdom over men of every nation: I
will give thee (says the Lord by the Prophet, for a Isa. 42 6.
Covenant of the people, a light of the Gentiles. There is Christ's ordination
to be the publisher of the Covenant of peace, the Author of reconciliation
between God and man, the revealer of the mystery of man's salvation, and Isa.
6^.1.
the Spirit of the Lord (says the Prophet in the person of Christ) is upon me,
and he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the meek: There is the
calling, the preparation, unction, and full furnishing of Christ with all
abilities to execute his Mediatory office; and in this respect Christ is
sometimes termed by the Prophets a Isa. 42.^.
servant for his calling and obedience to his fathers will, an Mal. 3.1.
Angel for his mission being sent of God, and for his publication of the
tidings of salvation; a Isa. 28 16.
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, for his
strength to sustain them that are built upon him; a noble Ier 30.21.
Ruler for his sacred prescription, and gracious administration of Gods Church
and kingdom; a Zach. 13.1.
fountain for his efficacy to purge out sin, and for his fullness to
satisfy the thirsty souls of all believers; a Mal. 4.3.
Sun of righteousness for the fullness of the light of knowledge and comfort
which he dispenses, and for his blessed influence into the souls of his
servants: The Sun does not shine more clearly in the stars, then the
authority and ability of the Sun of righteousness to save us, does shine in
these Prophetical predictions; and this calling, mission, full and through
preparation of Christ to this office of mediation between God and man, is
plainly declared by the Evangelists and Apostles. Saint Matthew speaks of Christ
as of a Mat. 15.^4. Mar. 9 37.
Shepherd sent to gather the sheep which are lost. Saint Mark as of an
Ambassador sent with tidings of peace, as of an heir sent to rule over us,
Luke 4.18, 43.
to be honorably entertained by us. Saint Luke, as of a Physician sent to
heal us, as of a ransomer sent to free us, and to restore spiritual liberty
to us. And Saint Paul says plainly, When the fullness of time was come, Gal.
4.4, 5.
God sent forth his son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that were under the Law, Col. 2.9.
that we might receive the adoption of sons, and in him dwells the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, and he fills all in all.

And the authority, calling, preparation and fullness of Christ's abilities to
save us is very manifest.

4. Grounds of Christ's authority and ability to minister salvation.

1. Power.


1. In regard of the power communicated unto Christ as Mediator. All power both
in heaven and in earth is given unto him; power of vivification, he quickneth
whom he will, as he raised Lazarus out of the grave; power of illumination, he
opens, and no man shuts, as he opened the eyes of him that was borne
blind; power of sanctification, he purges away all sin, as he cleansed the
leprosy from the unclean; power of remission, as Lord and King he forgiveth
sin, he blotteth out sin as the Sun the cloud; power of pacification, as he
appeased the winds, and waters; power of administration, as the high Steward of
Gods family, the supreme Pilot over the ship, which is the Church of God, as
the great Centurion over the Lords army, and chief Justice in Gods Kingdom;
power of subiugation, casting down and breaking in pieces all opposing forces,
as the stone out of the mountains burst Nebuchadnezzars Image; power of
protection and sustentation in all troubles, as Noah's Arc sustained him in the
deluge, and Christ safe guarded the three children in the fiery furnace. The
miraculous and mighty acts of Christ's power are clear and manifest
declarations of his calling and commission, and of his ability to minister
salvation.

2. Exaltation.
2. In regard of Christ's exaltation^. He is exalted above all Ephesians. 4.21.
principalities, he is exalted above all the common creatures, as the Creator
and workman above the work, as the Lord above his lowest servants; he is
exalted above all Angels, as the Prince above the Nobles, as the son above the
attendants; he is exalted above all devils, as the Conqueror above the
captives; he is exalted above all the Saints of God, as the head above the
members, as the King above the subjects, as the bridegroom above the bride: He
is Heb, 1.3.
set at the right hand of God, an exaltation whereof no mere creature is
capable. Christ's Majesty, dignity, glory, and exaltation, does even infinitely
surpass the dignity and honor of man and Angel; Heb. 7.1^.
He is made higher then the heavens, others ascend into heaven, have their
dwelling in heaven; but Christ is made higher then the heavens, being God and
man in one person, having an exaltation above all Saints and Angels, the
inhabitants of heaven, all that is in heaven and in the earth being put under
him, Christ's sitting in his Fathers throne. Christ's exaltation above all
creatures fully declared his ability to save his chosen from all evils.

3. In regard of Christ's impletion and filling of all. 3 Impletion.
He ascended far above all heavens that he might Ephesians. 4.10.
fill all things: Christ fills all things with his power, and common and
general operation, as the Sun fills all the earth with his influence; with
his absolute authority and dominion, as a King fills his kingdom with his
common gifts and mercies; as the Master of the house fills all the persons of
the house; Christ fills the Devils and damned men with his justice, wrath,
vengeance, but he fills his Church and children with his ordinances, as a
teacher fills his school with books and rules of instruction, as a nurse fills
the child with her breasts, and the Master of the feast his guests with food;
these he fills with knowledge, as the Sun the air with light; with
spiritual life, sense and motion, and all heavenly graces, as the head the
members, as the root the branches, as the Sun the stars; sweet and
comfortable, excellent and gracious is that fullness which Christ ministers to
his members, and by his filling of his faithful servants, he verefies his
Fathers mission and preparation of him to accomplish man's salvation.

4. In regard of his proposing of his Fathers glory, 4. Proposing Gods glory.
and referring all to his Fathers praise, as the supreme and ultimate end of
all his service and undertakings; an ingenuous son preferres his fathers honor
above his own honor; a good servant his Masters profit, above his own
profit; a loyal Ambassador the Kings will, message, advantage, and renown
above his own will, errant, benefit, or credit. Christ as Mediator was both a
son, a servant, and Gods great Ambassador, preferring his fathers will,
pleasure and praise above his own: I Ioh. 5.30.
seek not mine own will (faith Christ) but the will of him that sent me; and
again, he sought not his own glory, but the glory of him that sent him, and
to the father Christ thus speaks of himself: I have glorified thee on earth,
Ioh. 7.18.
I have finished the work which thou gave me. Ioh. 17.4.
He glorified his father on earth, by declaring his fathers will and counsel,
by making his father appear glorious in the eyes of the people, by ascribing
all his miraculous and mighty works to his fathers power, by fulfilling his Law
by his obedience, by satisfying his fathers justice by his sufferings, by
gathering home the souls of men to God his Father, to know his Fathers will,
to adore his Fathers name, to obey his Fathers precepts, to believe his Fathers
promises, to love his Fathers truth, to glorify his ^athers name, and every
way to conform themselves and their doings to his Fathers testimonies; and by
his full intendment, and glorious accomplishment of his Fathers honor, he
completely demonstrated his ordination and preparation, his coming in the name
of his Father to be man's Savior.

CHAP. XIII.
Salvation dispensed by Christ.
IN this with open face may all men behold and see Gods dispensation of
salvation unto man by Christ his Son: Christ is come in his Fathers name,
ordained; prepared, most absolutely and completely furnished, to communicate
salvation to the Lords chosen; others come in the name of the Lord to procure
and promote the salvation of man, instrumentally, ministerially, subordinately,
dependantly; but Christ is come in his fathers name to give salvation unto man
absolutely, and independantly, by his own power, meritoriously, by his own
worth and merit, efficiently by the efficacions and mighty work of his own
Spirit, fully and everlastingly, being Heb. 7.25.
able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him; the Lord Jesus
is the efficient and meritorious cause, spring and fountain of man's salvation:
There is no Mat. 4.12.
other name given under heaven where by man can be saved, but only the name of
Christ. The name of the creature is a name of weakness, emptiness,
unworthiness; the name of man's righteousness is a name of many pollutions;
the name of man's work and services, is a name of debt and manifold
imperfections; the name of birth, of wealth, of art, of strength and humane
excellencies, are a name of no esteem with God, for God is no respector of
persons. None of these names have wisdom to open the mystery of man's
salvation, worth to satisfy Gods justice, or ability to dissolve the works of
Satan, or sanctify the souls of men; Christ alone communicates salvation to
the Lords people; the Arc was the only place of safety to Noah from the
deluge; Christ is the only safeguard of the soul of man from the deluge of
destruction; all that were out of the Arc perished in the waters, there is no
salvation to them that are out of Christ Jesus. Christ is the head and root.
enlivining man. The body of Lazarus lay corporally dead till Christ raised it;
the soul of man lies spiritually dead until Christ quickens it, Christ is the
Sun enlightening man, the world without the Sun is in darkness, the soul
without Christ is in blindness, none of the Magitians and wise men, only
Joseph was able to interpret Pharaohs dream: Neither man nor Angel, but
Christ only, has revealed his fathers will, and counsel touching man's
salvation; Christ is the Conqueror that vanquisheth the adversaries of man's
peace; all Israel stood trembling only David overthrew the great Goliath:
Christ through death destroyed the Devil that had the power of death, and
delivered them who through fear of death were all their life time subject to
bondage: Christ is the surety that pays man's debt, he gave himself a ransom
for man, whom all the world could not redeem; Christ is the fountain purging
the sin of man's soul, none of the rivers of Damascus, only Jordan cleansed
the leprosy of of Naaman; neither man nor Angel, only the Lord Jesus can
purge away man's uncleanness: Christ's righteousness is the roabe which covers
us, and makes us appear just in Gods presence: Jacob obtained the blessing not
in his own, but in his elder brothers apparel: Man is accepted of God,
obtaines the blessing of pardon and peace, not through his own but through the
righteousness of Christ; Christ is the treasure and storehouse which fills
man, all the garners in the land of Egypt were empty, only Joseph had
provision for them; all the souls of men are empty, only Christ fills all in
all: Christ is the Prince of man's peace, and Author of man's reconciliation
with God. Joseph's brethren being shepherds were an abomination to the
Egyptians; but by Joseph's means they came nigh to Pharaoh, and found favor
with him: Man by reason of his sin is an abomination to the Lord, but through
Christ he comes nigh to God, and finds sweet and gracious acceptance of God;
and thus as in a glass we see all the causes of man's salvation and eternal
happiness derived, and flowing from and through Christ Jesus. God ministering
all his fullness unto man by Christ, and accepting man and all his holy service
in Christ; he that looks beside or beyond Christ for salvation, looks beyond
the fountain for water to refresh him, beyond the Sun for light to guide
him, and beyond the rock for a foundation to support him; he that lays not
firm and sure hold on Christ, never meets with sweet, with sure and
everlasting peace; he that truly embraces Christ, may undoubtedly persuade
himself of his salvation; he has a guide of infinite wisdom to direct him,
a rock of invincible strength to sustain him, a rich and royal roabe of
absolute purity to cloth and cover him; a Conqueror of insuperable power to
subdue all that does oppose him; an Advocate or never failing intercession, to
take off all the accusations which are brought against him; and a fiery Charet
to carry him through all difficulties, to sweet and everlasting rest in the
highest heavens.

Christ's coming in his Fathers name, Danger of stepping our from Christ to
humane traditions.

Evils hereof.

1. Derogatory to Christ's Authority.


Christ's authority and ability to minister salvation makes manifest their folly
and vanity, their pride and insolency, who leaving Christ and the rules which
he has given, the laws of divine worship which he has prescribed, betake
themselves to humane traditions, and selfe-inventions, teaching and receiving
for doctrines the commandments of men; a practice 1. very derogatory to the
Authority and dominion of Christ who is the King of the Church, whose voice
alone ought to be heard in the Church of God, who is set over the house of God,
and ought to be observed as the Lord and Master of the house by the whole
family of faith, and household of God, who is exalted above the Church, as the
head above the members, as the husband above the Spouse. Does not a Subjects
receiving of Laws from a foreign Prince much derogate from the authority of
his own Sovereign? Does not a servants receiving direction from another man
in his service annihilate his Masters jurisdiction? Does not a wives conforming
her to the prescription of a stranger, obscure and darken, and even disanull
the authority of her husband? And what else do the embracers of foreign and
strange inventions, but deny and disanull the jurisdiction and dominion of
Christ? Does not our Savior say to such, You have made the Commandment of God
of none effect through your traditions. The observation of men's devices in Gods
service is a transgression of Gods precepts. He that thinks to honor and
please God by thrusting upon God his own devises, in stead of honoring and
pleasing him, does very highly dishonor and provoke him: No man does further
honor Christ, 2. Argues great pride and presumption.
then he conformes himself to the Law and rule of Christ. 2. This also argues
much pride and presumption in man, who but a proud Subject will take upon him
to give a Law to his Sovereign how he shall be obeyed; who but an insolent
servant will take upon him to prescribe to his Lord and Master how he shall be
served; and who but a proud soul durst take upon him to give a Law unto his
God how he shall be adored; who but the great Master of humane traditions
sits in the Temple of God as God, and exalts himself above all that is
called God: The most superstitious are the proudest of all persons, their very
humility is ambition who have a spirit of superstition overswaying them; they
adore themselves and not Christ, who neglect the rule which Christ has given,
and worship after their own invention: His servant man is to whom he obeyes;
he that worships according to a rule of his own framing serves himself and
not God; instead of obeying God he becomes a Lawgiver unto God. 3.
Dispa^agement of Christ's wisdom.
This does much impeach and disparage the perfection of Christ's and the
sufficiency of the Scriptures. If there be light enough in the Sun what needs
a candle? If all the treasures of wisdom be hidden in Christ, and his word
able to make man wise unto salvation, what need or use in this behalf of man's
invention? addition ever supposes imperfection. 4. 4 Perilous to the soul.
This is very perilous to the souls of men. He that leaves Christ and his
word, and applies himself to tradition, like the foolish man in the parable,
he leaves the rock, and builds upon the sand, which will sink under him; he
forsakes the firm pillar, and leanes upon a withered reed, which will pierce
him; he goes from the living fountain to the broken cisterne wherein is no
water to refresh him; he refuses the wheat, and feeds upon the chafe which
will choke him; he rejects the vine, the Olive, and the Figtree, and
addresseth himself to the bramble which will nor feed nor shelter him, but
scratch and prick, goare and torture him. Humane observations like the foolish
Virgins Lamps are empty, Isa. 8.20.
there is no light in them: Like the Tree in the Gospel which had leaves and
no fruit; these are no trees of Gods planting, no good fruit grows on them,
no blessing, but a curse attends them: These like the sons of Sheva have no
power to overcome Satan; in stead of ministering freedom they imbondage the
soul to Satan; these like Jobs friends are miserable comforters and Physicians
of no value, in stead of healing they wound, instead of nourishing they
destroy, in stead of gathering home the soul of man to Christ, endearing man
to God, and bringing him to communion with God and Christ; they separate man
from God, oblige man to Satan, and associate the soul with the Devil,
according to that of the Apostle dissuading the Corinthians from the
superstitions and inventions of the Gentiles, saying, I would not that ye
should have fellowship with the Devils, ye 1 Cor. 10.10, 21.
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of the Devils, ye cannot be
partakers of the table of the Lord, and of the table of Devils, He that
worships God by humane tradition serves not God but Satan; as we cannot serve
God and Mammon, no more can we worship God and an Idol. The sacrifice which is
not offered to God with fire from his own Altar, is an abominable oblation;
whatsoever duty, act, or exercise of Religion, has not Gods word for the rule
of it, is in Gods interpretation, a service of Satan, and in stead of pleasing
provokes Gods indignation: They have Deuteronomy 31.21, 22.
moved me to jealousy (says the Lord) with that which is not god, they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities, a fire shall be kindled in mine
anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with
her increase. As Christ therefore is come in Gods name, furnished with all
authority and dominion, so let us in every thing receive our commission and
direction from him.

The perfection of Christ's authority and dominion, Christ's Authority and
ability pressing to ^ duties.

1. Of Subjectio^ Properties of Subjection.

1. Spiritual.


and fullness of divine abilities, presses man to four duties toward Christ.
1. A duty of Subjection, as to him that has supreme authority. We are charged
by a voice from heaven to hear him, to him is given a name above every name,
and to him must we make all the faculties of our souls, and all the members of
our bodies to veil and stoop, as all the sheaves in Joseph's vision fell down
before his sheafe. To him let us subject our selves, 1. Spiritually. The end of
the commandment is love out of a pure heart, arising from an inward principle
of true grace. Worshipping in Spirit and in truth is the worship which Christ
requires, accepts, and wherein he delights, obedience from an unsanctified
heart is but filthy water from an unclean fountain, and bad fruit of a
corrupt tree: Christ takes no pleasure in it, the sacrifice, prayer, and whole
way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. 2. Filial.
2. To Christ let us subject our selves, filially, not as slaves for fear of
hell, but as sons for love, having a holy affection awing us, and making us
loath to offend Christ, our love to and delight in holiness moving us to walk
in the way of Gods precepts, serving him Luke 1.74, 75
without fear, without base and servile fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. 3 Universal.
3. To Christ let us be subject universally, Moses built the whole Tabernacle
after Gods pattern, man must build his whole conversation according to Christ's
prescription; that obedience which is not universal, is unsound and
hypocritical; the Law is one Copulative, he that allows himself in the
breach of one precept is guilty of the whole Law; he that makes not conscience
of all truly makes conscience of none. It is in vain with Herod to do many
things reserving an Herodias in our bosoms: It is to no purpose with Saul to
slay the refuse of the stuff, reserving to our selves the lowing. Ox, and
bleating Sheep; his heart is not right with God that walks not in all the ways
of God; he does truly hate no sin, that labors not the mortification of all
sin. As the careful Scholar therefore writes according to the whole copy:
so let us have respect to the whole Law of God; and as sometime Jonathans
armor-bearer said to him, Lo I am with thee according to thy heart, turn
thou which way soever thou will. Thus let us be with Christ, even after Christ's
own heart, let us be with him which way soever he turns before us, in his
word, walking with Zachary and Elizabeth, 4 Speedy.
in all the ordinances of God. 4. To Christ let us subject our selves speedily:
As Abraham rose up early, and put away the bondwoman and her son: so let us
rise up early, and put away our sins betimes: Let us not sleep and slumber
like the foolish Virgins, with empty Lamps; but let us hasten our souls out of
sin to Christ, as the Angels hasted Lot out of Sodom: Let us Psalm. 119 60.
consider our ways, and turn to the testimonies of the Lord: Let us make
haste and not delay, as the erring traveller hasteneth to his right path: Let
us remember our Creator in the days of our youth, and seek him while he may
be found; and as 2 Samuel 18.
Ahimaaz ran as soon as Joab gave him a commission, so let us labor to be as
ready to obey, as Christ to command; speedy obedience does much honor and
commend man's service. 5. To Christ let us subject our selves freely, not
mercinarily as hirelings, 5. Free.
but freely as friends serving Christ for Christ himself, intending Christ and
his glory above our selves, in all our services, moving to Christ fully and
freely, as the rivers to the Ocean. As Rachels beauty induced Jacob to twice
seven years service: so let Christ's beauties, the apprehension we have of
Christ's perfections work and draw us to a free and ready service of Christ in
all difficulties; Christ abhorres all baseness, all by and sinister respects
in men's services: He that serves not Christ for Christ himself, serves not
Christ but himself. 6. To Christ let us subject steadfastly, 6. Steadfast.
as the wise to the husband until death, keeping the commandment always unto
the end, abiding with Christ, as Ittai with David, in life and in death:
Perseverance with Christ's Jesus crowns man's service; He that continues to the
end shall be saved.

A second duty which the fullness of Christ's authority and divine abilities
does press upon us is a duty of Dependence. 2. Of Dependence.
Christ is no withered reed, no sandy foundation, no weak, poor, and empty
person, but one endowed with all power and authority, with all abilities;
therefore depend upon him, cleave to him, when you are in darkness and have no
light; Isa 50.10.
Trust in the name, in the power, truth, faithfulness, and al-sufficiency of
the Lord; Christ is a Isa. 32.2.
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as, rivers of
waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. Christ
is a comforter in all sorrows, a helper at all needs, a deliverer in all
distresses, a counselor in all doubts, and a supply in all wants; therefore
stay upon the Lord: He can command a deliverance for Jacob when there is no
deliverer, as he commanded the stormy tempest, and restored a calm to the
Disciples: He can support man when he is ready to sink, as he supported Peter
sinking in the water; he can provide, as he made provision for the Disciples
attending him, and having nothing to eat, as he prepared a Well for Hagar when
her bottle was empty; he can comfort, when all the stars of consolation are
set; he can give light in darkness, as he gave Sampson honey out of the Lion:
therefore look unto Christ, fasten the eyes of your faith upon him, commit
your selves to him, trust your selves with him, and you shall see in due season
a ministration of whatsoever is behovefull.

3. Of Love.
A third duty whereunto this presses us is a duty of Love to Christ: In Christ
is the fulness of all abilities, whatsoever is worthy of love is in Christ in
the highest perfection; therefore this should much endeare Christ to man, and
make him very amiable and glorious in the eyes of man: He indeed is worthy of
all love, he is the King that rules over us, the guide that leads us, the
shepherd which watches over, and feeds us, the ransomer that redeemes us, the
builder which new makes us, the Captain that overcomes for us, the teacher
that instructs us, the treasury that enricheth us, and the husband who
betrotheth himself unto us; therefore he should be in our eye the fairest of
ten thousand, our souls should be sick of love toward him, and in our love
we should prostrate our selves, and all that is ours under him.

4. Of Acquiescence and contentation.
A fourth duty whereunto this does press us, is a duty of Acquiescence in
Christ, and contentation with Christ; in Christ are all divine abilities; he
that has Christ has all, he that has the Sun has all light, he that has
the fountain has all water, he that has Christ may say as Jacob did, I have
enough. Elkan^h gave to Hanna a worthy portion, he has the choicest portion to
whom God gives Christ; he that possesses most of Christ, has the richest, the
sweetest, the most noble and sure possession; he has no cause to complain of
want who has the fruition of Christ; the soul which enjoys Christ as his
King, as his counselor, as his friend, as his treasure, as his bridegroom, as
his shield and fountain, has the highest honor, the choicest wisdom, the
sweetest comfort, the best riches, the most heart-reviving love, the surest
defense, and the chiefest and most abiding and soule-contenting fullness: Of
all the gifts of God Christ is the worthiest; of all the estates of men theirs
is the sweetest and most comfortable who have Christ for their possession.

CHAP. XIV.
THe second general part in these words is a benediction, uttered by the
Ministers of the Lord, We have blessed you out of the house of the Lord;
wherein we have, 1. the parties blessing, the Ministers of the Lord; we, who
are called of God to this sacred function, who are appointed to make prayer and
supplication for you, to pronounce a blessing upon you. Note.
Holy and faithful Ministers are the isntrumental causes of great blessings
to Gods Church and servants. 2. here is their Act, an act of blessing, We have
blessed: Ministers bless the people sometime by way of vote and exoptation,
prayer and supplication; sometime by way of vocal pronunciation, pronouncing
good things in the name of God upon them; sometime by way of prophecye and
prediction, foretelling great blessings to come; sometime by way of doctrine
and instruction: They declare and open the blessings which God has prepared
for them, and the Lord by them as by his ministerial instruments communicates
his grace and blessing to the people. It must be the care of Ministers so to
demean themselves in their function, Note.
that they prove a blessing to the people. 3. Here is the Object or parties
blessed, You, you to whom Christ's coming is acceptable, you who wish well to
Christ's kingdom, you who readily endeavor the exaltation of Christ's name, and
Gospel, Note.
we have blessed you The labors of Gods Ministers prove a blessing only to
such people as rejoice in, and endeavor the advancement of the Gospel. 4,
Here is the place from whence they blessed the people, out of the house of the
Lord, the place of Gods public worship, where his Saints are assembled, his
ordinances sincerely handled, his name invocated, his word preached, and
religious duties celebrated: Note.
God uses to dispense his spiritual blessings in the public and sacred
assemblies. From all these particulars knit together we may gather, That,

Doct.
God by his holy and faithful Ministers dispenses every great, sweet, and
heavenly blessing to his Church and servants: The Lord by Joseph brought great
prosperity to the house of Pharaoh; he Gen 39.5.
blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake, the blessing of the Lord was
upon all that he had in the house and in the field; the Lord by the presence
and labors of his Ministers blesses his Church and servants, his blessing is
upon their souls, and upon their bodies, upon all their labors, and upon all
their possessions; the estate and persons, the undertaking and possessions of
men are made very prosperous through the prayer and labors of Gods Ministers.
This was prophesied by the mouth of Esaias, in Isa 19.19.
that day, in the day of the Gospel, when salvation shall be preached and
published in and through Christ: There shall be an Altar to the Lord in the
midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord; an
Altar and a pillar, the worship of God shall be erected, the word preached, the
Sacraments administered, Christ the true Christians Altar and pillar shall be
clearly manifested, his name published, his kingdom established, his truth
propagated among the people of Israel, Egypt and Assyria, whom the Lord of
Hosts shall bless, saying, blessed be Egypt my There is the blessing attendant
on the Ministry of the Gospel, a blessing of regeneration, renovation,
remission, and sweet reconciliation with God in Christ; they are the choicest
and best blessings which God communicates by his Gospel to the souls of his
people; the very names and titles given to Gods Ministers, do as in lively
characters declare how great a blessing they are to Gods Church and people;
being styled Seers, Lights, Watchmen, Shep-heards, Salt, Nurses, Laborers,
Stewards, Horsemen and Charets: The eyes are a blessing to the body, to guide
it; the light is a blessing to the world enlightening it; the watchmen are a
blessing to the City, giving warning to it; the Shepherds are a blessing to
the flock, watching over it, conducting and feeding it; the Salt is a blessing
to the meat, preserving it from putrefaction; the Nurses are a blessing to the
children, ministering provision to them; the Laborers are a blessing to the
vineyard, manuring and dressing it, removing the thorns and briars out of it,
and sowing good and profitable seed in it; Stewards are a blessing to the
house, guiding it, distributing to the several necessities of the persons in
it; Horsemen and Charets are a blessing to the kingdom, strengthening and
protecting it; Gods Ministers are a great blessing unto Gods Church and people,
as eyes guiding them, as lights laying open the deep things of God before them,
as Watchmen admonishing them, Shepherds leading and defending them, as Salt
seasoning their souls, preserving them from the putrefaction of sin, and
making them a sweet savor unto God; as Nurses feeding, as Laborers manuring,
and dressing their souls, and as horsemen and charets defending them against
their spiritual adversaries, making them victorious, and driving them forward
in the ways of peace and holiness; and the having of Gods Ministers, the
enjoyment of them and their labors has heretofore been conceived, and taken
as a great blessing, as a means attended with a blessing from the Lord; as
appears by that speech of Micah, having gotten a Levite for his Priest, Now
Judge. 17.13.
know I (says he) that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest: His judgment was good conceiving Gods blessing to attend the labors
of Gods Ministers, though he shamefully erred in expectation of it by an
idolatrous service; and our Savior plainly pronounces them blessed who
enjoyed the light of his doctrine, to whom he opened the mysteries of Gods
kingdom: Blessed (says he) are the eyes which see the things that ye see:
Blessed for the presence of the Son of God amongst you, for the near
appropinquation of God unto you, for the manifestation of the great things of
God before you, for the detection of the sin which is within you, for the
revelation of the love of God in Jesus Christ toward you, and for the great
salvation offered you: great and manifold, sweet and comfortable is the bliss
and happiness tendered unto man by the presence of Gods ordinances, and holy
labors of Gods Ministers; of all light, the light of Gods countenance, and the
light of the Gospel, are the chiefest and sweetest blessings: 1 Kin. 10.8.
Happy (said the Queen of Sheba to Solomon) are thy men, happy are these thy
servants which may stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.
Christ is greater then Solomon, they are more happy who may stand continually
before him in the house of his ministry, and hear his wisdom in the
Gospel: The nearer man approaches to Christ Jesus, the greater is man's
happiness; therefore, Blessed (says the Psalmist) is the Psalm. 65.^.
man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in
thy Courts, he shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy
holy Temple. Blessed is the man, happy is the man, sweet and comfortable is the
estate, and condition of the man whom thou leavest not, as a house in darkness
without light, as a field overgrowne with thorns and briars, without
husbandman to manure and dress it, as a dead man in the grave without life, as
a captive in prison without freedom, as a sick man in his disease without
Physician, as a City in famine without food to feed them: Blessed is the man
whom thou do not cast away, as the ungodly, reprobate, and rejected
multitude, to perish in their sins; but chusest, adoptest, and take to thy
self to be thy son by adoption, and to be and heir of thy celestial and
everlasting kingdom; and causest to approach unto thee, calling him by thy
word, to be a scholar in thy school, a member of thy Church and of thy
Christ, a partaker of those benefits, gifts and graces which thou dispensest by
thy ordinances; a dweller in thy Courts, conversant in that Congregation, where
he may hear thy voice, learn thy will, embrace thy truth, and his soul have
interest and acquiescence by faith in thy promises; and be satisfied with the
goodness of thy house; with the heavenly mysteries there opened, with the
gifts and graces there dispensed, as the eye is satisfied with the Sun, as
the palate is satisfied with the fountain, and the hungry stomach with the
full feast set before it; and this the Lord promises and proposes as a great
blessing to the people, as an anchor in the storm to sustain and stay them, as
a feast in the famine to feed them, as a light in the darkness to revive and
solace them, as an answer and recompense to all their trials, troubles and
disasters: The people (says the Lord) shall dwell in Sion at Jerusalem, they
shall return from their captivity and bondage, and shall enjoy the house of
God, the sacred assembly, and his ordinances; thou shall weep no more, the
sorrow of thy captivity, exilement, and estrangement from the house of God
shall be taken away; The Lord will be very gracious unto thee, at the voice of
thy cry, when he shall hear it he will answer thee; and though the Lord give
you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, though he bring you
into many straights, and great distresses, yet shall not thy Isa. 30.19.
teachers The having of Gods ordinances is a blessing sweetning the most
disastrous estate of Gods people. The presence of the Gospel ministers sweet
consolation to Gods children, in the greatest affliction; better is the estate
of man in the enjoyment of the labors of Gods Ministers in the absence of all
worldly abilities, then in the presence of all worldly fullness, the Lords
Ministers being strangers; great is the blessedness of that people to whom the
Lord affords his Gospel, singular soule-ravishing, and heart-satisfying are
the gifts and favors, comforts and mercies, which God dispenses by his
Ministers.

In regard of Gods communication of Christ to the souls of men by the labors
of his Ministers; Grounds hereof
Pharaoh communicated the fullness of Egypt to the people, by Joseph, the
Steward of his house God communicates the fullness which he has put into
Christ, to the souls of men, by his Ministers, the Stewards of his house, the
Church; the Stars in the night season communicate the fullness of the Sun to
the air, and inhabitants of the earth; the Ministers as Stars in the right
hand of Christ the Sun of Righteousness communicate to the souls of men the
fullness of Christ Jesus in the night of this world; 6. Communication of Christ
by Gods Ministers.
we are all strangers to Christ Jesus without the Lords Ministers; Christ is
hidden from that people which enjoy not the ministry of the Gospel; Gods
Ministers by their labors communicate the knowledge of Christ, as the
Ambassador communicates the knowledge of the King and of his mind. 1. Knowledge
of Christ.
God (says the Apostle) who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
has shined into 2 Cor. 4.6.
our hearts to give the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ
Jesus. God is known in and through Christ, as a man is known in and by his
face: We know an earthly Father in the face of his Son begotten by him; we
know God as a father of mercies, only and through the face of Christ Jesus; we
see the face of man in a glass, in the Gospel, in the labors of Gods
Ministers; we behold as in a 2 Cor. 3.18
glass, the face of Christ Jesus: Christ is a storehouse in whom are hidden
Col. 2.3.
all the treasures of wisdom. The Ministers have the ministerial key of
knowledge to open Christ unto the people: Christ is a living fountain, a well
of salvation, a well sealed and shut up in the Scriptures: Jacob rolled away
the stone from the mouth of the well, and gave Labans flock water to drink,
the Minister rowles away the stone, removes the obscurity of the Scripture,
opens and interprets it, and makes the people drink of Christ, 2. Faith of
Christ.
the true and everliving fountain; the Ministers communicate the faith of
Christ as Gods instruments the work of faith in men; the man of God by his
prayer restored 1 King. 13.
Jeroboams withered hand; the Minister by his preaching and prayer restores the
hand of faith in the heart of man, formerly withered, dried up, and of no use:
Faith comes by Romans 10.17. 1 Cor. 3.

3. Life of Christ.


hearing. Who is Paul, and who is Apollo but Ministers by whom ye believed,
even as the Lord gave to every man. The Ministers communicate the life of
Christ to men; Christ by his corporal voice called Ioh. 11.44.
Lazarus out of his grave, by his Evangelicall voice, by his word in the mouth
of his Ministers he calls the souls of men out of the grave of sin; the dead
in sin Ioh. 5.25.
hear the voice of the Son of God in the Gospel, and they that hear, live.
The ministry of the Gospel is the instrument of the souls vivification, a
means of Christ's living in them that are Gods children; the Ministers
communicate the love of Christ, 4. Love of Christ.
Christ Cant. 7.12.
gives his love to the soul of man, in the ministry of his word; Isaac gave
the pledges of his love to Rebeckah by Eleazar his father Abraham's servant:
Christ gives the pledges of his love to his Spouse the Church by the Ministers,
God his fathers servants; by them he woeth and 2 Cor. 11.3.
espouseth them unto himself, and in the banqueting house of his ordinances,
his banner over them is 2 Cant. 2 4. 5. Peace of Christ.

Isa. 9 6.


love; the Ministers communicate the peace of Christ, the Ambassador speaks
words of peace from the King, and communicates the Kings peace unto the people;
the Minister, the Ambassador of Christ the Prince of peace, Act. 10 30.
preaches peace by Jesus Christ to the souls of men. The Lord has created,
ordained, and appointed the fruit of his lips to be peace to them that are
nigh, and to them that are afar off. Christ feeding the multitude corporally,
6. Whole treasury of Christ.
distributed bread unto them by his Disciples; Christ feeding the souls of men
spiritually with himself, the true bread of life come down from heaven,
communicates himself to men by the labors of his Ministers. Abraham by the
hands of his servants ministered jewels and bracelets to Rebeckah; God by his
Ministers communicates many spiritual and heavenly jewels, even the whole
treasury of Christ Jesus to his faithful Church and servants, whom he joins
in wedlock with his son: Manifold, sweet and gracious are Gods dispensations
of his Son, by the labors of his Ministers; Christ in and by the ministry
of the Gospel is made very conspicuous and glorious in the eyes of the people;
very great is their blessedness who have Christ communicated to them by the
labors of Gods Ministers.

2. Deliverance from 5 evils dispensed by Ministers. 1. Spiritual death.
2. In regard of the evils from which God delivers man by the labors of his
Ministers. God delivered the woman of Shunems son from bodily death by the
ministry of the Prophet; the Lord delivers the soul of man from spiritual
death, from being dead in sins by the labor of his Ministers; the ministry
of the Gospel is the isntrumental cause of the first resurrection; the word
is termed a word of life, declaratively revealing life, and operatively as an
instrument working life. God delivered Paul from his bodily blindness by the
hands of Ananias; 2. Blindness.
he delivers man from spiritual blindness, by the doctrine of his messengers,
by their instruction, Act. 26.18.
he opens their eyes, and turns them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God. The Lord delivered Peter from Herod's prison by the
ministry of the Angel: He delivers man from Satan's prison, and bondage by the
work of his Ministers, 3. Bondage.
by this as by a warlike weapon he casts down the holds of sin: Satan falls
like lightening from heaven, and the souls of men partake of spiritual
freedom; as Goliath fell before David with a stone out of David's sling, so does
Satan before the Minister of the Lord, with the word of God out of their mouth.
God delivered Naaman from his leprosy in Jordan, 4. Vnclannes.
and the impotent from their infirmities in Bethesda: The Lord in and by the
Gospel sanctifies the souls of his children, this washes away their
uncleanness, this heales their infirmities, this makes them new creatures.
Christ by his voice appeased the stormy tempest, 5 Soul tortures
and gave a calm to his Disciples; Christ by his Gospel appeaseth the
tempestuous and perplexed consciences of his servants, and brings them into a
haven of spiritual peace and quietness: He makes his Ministers as an Angel
of God, and one of a thousand to the afflicted soul, coming like Noah's Dove
with an Olive branch, quieting him that is tossed upon the deluge of trouble,
turning his perplexity into peace, his fear into confidence, and his sorrow
into sweet rejoycings. God abundantly declares his dispensation of blessings by
his Ministers, through the removal of evils by their labors: The Gospel is
the choicest instrument averting evil; foul and shameful, perplexing and
mortal are the plagues and miseries resting upon them, that neither enjoy nor
regard the labors of Gods Ministers.

3. In regard of the blessed state and condition whereinto God puts man by the
labors of his Ministers. Deuteronomy. 11.29.

3. Man by labors of Ministers put into a condition of 6. Excellencies.

1. Of wisdom.


The estate of man under the Gospel, making a true use of the doctrines and
instructions of Gods messengers is an estate of blessings: The blessing of old
was upon Mount Gerazim, the blessing is now upon the Gospel: He that savingly
entertaines the Gospel, enjoyes a most blessed condition; a condition of
divine and heavenly wisdom, Gods Ministers feed him with knowledge and
understanding, and make him wise unto salvation; a condition of holiness and
sanctification, 2. Of Sanctification.

3. Of Freedom


the ministry of the word does wash him, like water, and purify him like
fire; a condition of liberty and freedom, Moses freed Israel from Pharaohs
bondage, Gods Minister frees the souls of his children from the servitude of
Satan, the world, and their own corruption; the word makes them free; from
ignorance in their understandings, from perverseness in their wills, from
vanity in their thoughts, from infidelity, servile fear, worldly love, and
carnal joy in their affections; the word makes them free, to know God, as the
clear eye is free to see the Sun, to receive Christ as the strong and open
hand, is free to receive a gift; to love Christ, as the bride has an open and
enlarged heart to love the bridegroom, to attend Gods Ordinances, to run the
way of Gods Commandments, as he whose feet and ankle-bones received strength
by the ministry of Peter, was free to Act. 3.7, 8.
stand and leap, and walk and enter into the Temple, 4. Of Exaltation.
and free to move and come to God by faith, and love, and joy, as the rivers
are free to move and flow unto the sea; a condition of honor and exaltation,
the Gospel making them Sons of God by regeneration, the friends of God by
love, the members of Christ by faith, and heirs annexed with Christ, for their
present title to, and future participation of the same inheritance with Christ
Jesus; a condition of fullness and satisfaction, they are satisfied with the
goodness of Gods house; 5. Of Satisfaction.
the Gospel leads them unto Christ, the Sun in whom is all light, the tree
on whom grows all fruit, the fountain from whom flows all refreshment, the
rock in whom is all strength, the pearl in whom is all worth, and the
Paradise in whom is all pleasure and peace; very sweet and wonderful, gracious
and overflowing are the comforts and contentments derived from Christ to Gods
children, under their enjoyment of the Gospel. Lastly, a condition of
permanency and duration; 6. Of Duration
though the grass wither, and the flower fade, yet the word of the Lord
abides for ever. Though worldly fullness change like the Moon, and vanish
like a vapor, and wither like the flower and the grass, yet the estate of
grace, into which men are called by Gods Ministers, is an estate of firm and
sure continuance; they are sons abiding always in their fathers house; they
are trees planted by the water side never withering; they are houses built upon
the rock never sinking; their graces like the light shine more and more to the
day of their perfection; the excellency of their estate who enjoy and make best
use of the Gospel, abundantly declares Gods dispensation of very great, sweet
and heavenly blessings by the labors of his Ministers.

CHAP. XV
THe Lords dispensing of sweet and heavenly blessings unto man, by the labors
of his holy and faithful Ministers, shows what the estate and condition of
man is without the Lords Ministers; even an estate of woes, Man's estate without
the Gospel, an estate.

1. Of Death.


of myseries, and curses: Man's condition without the ministry of the Gospel
is very wretched and miserable, an estate of death without spiritual life; the
earth without the Sun is but a dead and fruitless lump; the soul without
the Sun of Righteousness shining in the Gospel is Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in sins and trespasses; a tree twice dead, oncce by original
corruption, and secondly by actual transgression, and plucked up by the Iud.
ver. 12.
roots, wholly separate from all the means of life; 1 Ioh. 5.12.
he that has not the Son, externally in the Gospel, internally in his
heart, ministerially in his word, and efficiently in his work of grace; he
has not life: Such are far from the life of grace and sanctification, as are
strangers to Christ in his Gospel: The woman of Shunems son remained dead, 2
King. 4.
according to the body, till the Prophet came and raised him; the soul of man
continues dead in respect of the inward man, until the Minister of the Lord
comes to quicken him. 2. An estate of darkness: 2. Of Darkness.
Man without the ministry of the word is in darkness and the shadow of death,
a dark body without an eye, a dark house without a Lamp. The souls clearest
light is nothing else but darkness, as long as the Gospel does not shine into
it, to irradiate and enlighten it. There was once no light in all the land of
Egypt, only the children of Israel had light in Exodus 10.23.
their dwellings; there is no spiritual and heavenly light in all the world,
but among Gods Israel; there is light only in their dwellings who enjoy the
Gospel, In Judah is God known, and his name is great in Israel. God is truly
and savingly known only by that people who enjoy the light of the Gospel. 3.
3. Of Servitude.
An estate of servitude and bondage. Israel continued under hard bondage,
until Moses and Aaron came to deliver them, until the Lord raised a fiery
pillar to conduct them out of Egypt unto Canaan. Man abides under the hard
bondage of Satan and his own corruption, until the Lord sends his Minister to
free him, and sets up the fiery pillar of his word to lead him out of this
servile and slavish condition; Man without the Gospel is in prison, and has
no key to open it; he is taken captive, and has no weapon to resist his enemy,
to procure his freedom; he is manacled with many fetters, and has no hammer
to dissolve and loose them; Man's condition without the ministry of the Gospel
is very base and servile: When and where the Gospel shines, then and there as
the Prophet speaks, The Isa 42.7.
eyes of the blind are opened, the prisoners are brought out from the prison,
and they that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. 4. Of Emptines
4. An estate of emptiness and barrenness. The field without the dew is
unfruitful, the soul without the dew of divine and heavenly doctrine
distilling thereupon, bears no good fruit; there is no lawful conception
without an husband, all the fruit of the soul, not espoused to Christ by the
Gospel, is illegitimate, and a very abomination; there is no reaping, where is
no sowing: The soul which is not sown with the seed of the word yields no
harvest of grace, they are barren ground nigh to burning, who are strangers to
the Gospel. 5. An estate of pollution and uncleanesse. ^. Of Pollutio^.
The house without the besome is overspread with slime and cobwebs; Naaman
continued leprous until he went seven times into Jordan and washed; the Temple
was a den of thieves till Christ came with his whip, and drove them out; the
heart of man is an unclean house, without the besome of the word sweeping it;
the soul of man is oversread with the loathsome leprosy of sin, until he
bathe himself in the Jordan of the Gospel; the whole man is a very den of
thieves, until Christ comes, and by the ministry of his word scourge and
drive them out: The ministry of the Gospel is the outward instrument and
means of the souls cleansing: Every foul estranging it self from Gods
ordinance is under the power of uncleanness. 6. 6. Of Sorrow^.
An estate of continual and remediless sorrows, straights and perplexities.
If God begin to waken the conscience, and make man a little sensible of his
wrath, then without the Gospel, his estate like the waters of Marah without
the tree is very bitter, Exodus 15.25.
he cannot drink of it, he cannot meditate upon it, without any comfort, then
he is in Job 20.22.
straights in the midst of his sufficiency; then he is in the green meadow of
his worldly plenty, as a Psalm 42.1. Mat. 8.
chased Heart without the water brook; then he is full of blessings and
agitations; like the Disciples in the storm, and nothing but the voice of
Christ in the Gospel can minister peace or comfort to him; Better be deprived
of all worldly possessions, then of the Gospel, and Gods Ministers. O that
such men would consider and study the misery of their condition, as are left
without the Gospel, and a faithful Minister to instruct them: All our
blessings will prove at last as curses, if we have not the Gospel to sweeten
and sanctify them to us; the waters about Jericho were naught, until the
Prophet powered salt into them; 2 Kin. 2.
the deepest rivers, and fullest floods of man's worldly abundance, prove
naught, an instrument of death and condemnation, to him that has not the
Gospel to season them; not the estate of him that wants earthly abilities, but
the estate of him that wants the labors of Gods Ministers, is an estate of
woes, miseries, and curses.

Does God dispense his greatest, his heavenly, Their folly opened who estrange
themselves from the ministry.
his choicest blessings by his Ministers? Then in this, as in a plain and open
character may we read their folly, and their impiety, who estrange themselves
from the house of God, who slight and undervalue the labors of Gods
Ministers; these men estrange themselves from the place, and from the means of
blessing: The soul which is regardlesse of the ministry of the Gospel is far
from blessing; such as come not to the light abide in darkness; such as reject
the Physician, perish in their diseases; such as cast away their weapon, fall
in the battle; such as refuse the ministry of the word, the light, the
physic, and armor of their souls, abide in ignorance, perish in their
impieties, and fall before their spiritual adversaries. Such as came not to
the Arc, the place and instrument of preservation in the deluge, were drowned
in the waters: such as refuse the ministry of the Gospel, the instrument of
the souls preservation, are swallowed in the deluge of Gods vengeance; Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram refusing to come up at Moses call, the Number. 16.
earth opened her mouth and swallowed them; the earth will prove the occasion
and instrument of their ruin, who through their earthly mindedness despise
the Gospel, and slight the call of Gods Ministers inviting them: Such men are
blind, Grounds of neglecting the ministry.
and see not the worth of the Gospel, dead in sin, and taste not the
sweetness of Christ in the Gospel, unsensible of their own misery, and know
not the necessity of Christ; as of a Physician to heal them; as of a ransomer
to redeem them; and as of a fountain to wash and cleanse them: Such men are
selfe-conceited, self-admirers, puffed up with an opinion of their own
fullness, and consider not the need they have of Christ, his Ministers, and
Gospel; as of a guide to direct them, as of a jewel to adorn them, as of a
pearl to enrich them, and as of a living spring to fill them. Such as have
least sense of their own misery and emptiness, are the greatest despisers and
undervaluers of the means of their eternal happiness: And such as are most
exalted with an opinion of their own wisdom, do ever prove the most foolish
of all others; neither does man ever declare greater folly and madness, then
in sleighting the Gospel and work of Gods Ministers; Folly and evil hereof.
for every such man is blind, and will not be guided, leprous, and will not be
cleansed, in thraldom, and will not be freed empty, and will not be filled,
naked, and will not be clothed, condemned and will not receive a pardon were
it is tendered: Such men refuse Gods sweetest mercies, and expose themselves to
Gods bitterest curses; they cast aside the Seals and pledges of Gods greatest
loving kindness, and thrust themselves upon Gods severest judgments, and God
will at last be far from them, in the withdrawment of the light of his
countenance, who are now far from him, by their absence from his ordinances,
God will at last slight their prayers, who now slight the voice of his
Ministers.

As the Lord dispenses many sweet and heavenly blessings by his Ministers,
Care not to withdraw our selves from Gods house.
so it should be our care and wisdom, 1. Not to estrange our selves from
their labors, not to withdraw our selves from Gods house, as the Prodigal in
the parable withdrew himself from his fathers house: Forget not (says the
Apostle) the Heb. 10.25.
assembling of your selves together; absence from the sacred assemblies, proves
uncomfortable and perilous. The proffer of Gods mercy is refused, the tender
of Gods sweetest love is rejected, the choicest comforts of the soul are
despised; the estate of the men of the old world despising the Arc, the only
instrument of preservation from the waters, proved dangerous; the estate of
such as refuse the Gospel, the means of salvation proves ruinous, everlasting
perdition proves their last portion; the Scholar estranging himself from the
School, remains void of learning; the sick man estranging himself from the
Physician continues diseased; the soldier withdrawing himself from the
Artillery house, remains unarmed; the diseased woman in the Gospel could not
get her bloody issue cured, until she came to Christ; Man estranging himself
from the house of God remains ignorant, his soul unarmed, his whole man
mortally diseased. Sin ever proves an incurable and mortal sickness to him
that absents himself from Christ in his ordinances, absence from the house of
God, spoils the soul of all gracious and comfortable communion and
acquaintance with God; he that refraines the Kings Court, loses all communion
with the King: Gods house is Gods Court, his Gospel the voice by which he
speaks, the glass in which he shines and shows himself; the banqueting
house wherein he communicates himself, as the Master of the feast unto his
guests. He that neglects this, neglects the medium of his souls communion
with God; estrangement from the house of God brings poverty upon the soul; the
Prodigal forsaking his fathers house, became very poor and base, he made
himself a companion of Swine and would have eaten of the husks, if any man
would have given to him; great is their baseness, swinish are their
dispositions, shameful is their spiritual poverty and emptiness, who forsake
the house of God, their Father, reject the labors of Gods Ministers, and
follow their own (...): Absence from the house of God, argues want of love to
God; Can you love a man from day to day, inviting you, preparing a costly feast
for you, and yet you refuse to come within the threshold of his house, and to
taste of his dainties? Man's absence from the house of God proclaims the
alienation of his heart from God. How can thou say (says Dalilah to Sampson)
that thou love me, when thy heart is not with me. How can thou O man say
that thou love God, when thy heart is not with God, exciting, thee to come to
God, when thy foot is not with God, to carry thee to the house of God, when thy
ear is not with God, to hear the word of God: He is far from God in his
inward affections, who wittingly denies God his bodily presence; Estrangement
from Gods ordinance provokes God, causes him to become a stranger to us, to
reject and leave us, and to walk as an adversary against us. When Vasthi
refused to come to the Kings feast at the Kings command, it was ordered that
Vasthi should come no more before the King, and that her royal state should be
given unto another better then she. Many people refusing to come to God, to
partake of that feast which God has prepared for them in his Gospel, have
been rejected of the Lord, excluded from his gracious presence, and the Gospel
given unto others. God will deny that man the comfort of his face and
counteance, who denies God his presence in his sacred assembles; shameful and
soule-destroying desertion is the usual attendant of man's refusal of the
Gospel. When Joah refused to come to Absolon inviting him, Absalon sent, and
set sire in his corn fields: Man's rejection of Gods invitations, turns his
favor into anger, his mercy becomes fury. Great were Gods mercies toward
Jerusalem, great was Jerusalems abuse of Gods goodness, patience, and
long-suffering, and at the last very dismal was Ierusalems desolation;
Capernaums fall and destruction was answerable to her exaltation. God will make
such men desolate at last, as leave the house of God desolate now.

Secondly, let it be our care and wisdom, Care not to slight Gods Ministers.
not to slight and undervalue the labors of Gods Ministers, and the presence
and publication of the Gospel; preferring our base and servile lusts above it,
as Esau did a mess of pottage above his birthright, exalting the vain and
empty things of the world above it, as the men of Shechem set the bramble above
the vine; this is the cisterne by which God conveyed the rivers of his grace,
of his sweetest and choicest blessings to the souls of men; therefore do not
deride this as a foolish thing; a light, an idle, a fruitless thing, as a
light head, 1 Cor. 2.14. Number. 11.5.
as a babbling speech; but remember this is Gods ordinance, the instrument by
which he has appointed to minister salvation unto man, as he ordained to save
Israel by the staff and stone in David's hand; this is the arm and power of
God unto salvation; this is the fiery pillar by which he will guide us; this is
the Bethesda in which he will heal us; this is the immortal seed by which he
will regenerate us; this is the green pasture and still water by which he will
lead and feed us; this is the trumpet, ^t the sound whereof he will make the
walls of Jericho, the holds of sin to fall; this is the storehouse in which
the Lord will enrich us; this is the banqueting house in which God will
betroth us to his Son Christ Jesus; this is the river by which the Lord will
water, refresh and glad us; and this is the Dove by which God will send the
(live branch of peace unto us. Undervalue not this then, which is to our souls
a Sun of so many bright and comfortable beams, a tree laden with such variety
of soule-nourishing fruit, a messenger coming with such joyful, peaceable,
and pacifying tidings, a storehouse enriching us with such matchless
treasures, and an instrument of the choicest, fullest, and everlasting
blessings. How blind are they who slight the light of this Sun? how ignorant
are they who disesteeme the worth of this pearl? how distempered are their
palates who relish not the sweetness of this feast? how deaf are their ears
who are not affected with this joyful sound? O! how base are they in the eyes
of God, who have such base apprehensions of Gods Ordinances, and the labors of
his Ministers. God will surely slight them that slight his Christ, his
Gospel, or any of Gods appointed instruments and means of their salvation:
Honor therefore and attend the Gospel as the Star in which Christ the Sun
of Righteousness does shine unto you; as the cloud whence Christ distilleth
like the dew upon you; as the fiery pillar wherein Christ goes before you; as
the School wherein Christ instructs you; as the feast whereat Christ feeds
you; as the Physic by which Christ heals you; and as the fiery charet in
which Christ triumphantly carries you to everlasting bliss and glory. *

FINIS.
THE MYSTERY OF SELF-DENIAL: OR, THE CESSATION OF Man's living to himself: AND
THE INCHOATION OF CHRIST'S living in Man.

Discoursing of the necessity, utility, and comfort of man's prostrating
himself, and all that is his under Christ: Discovering the danger of
Self-seeking, Self-admiration, and Self-exaltation, and also opening the
Mystery, Comfort, and Excellency of Christ living in Man. The whole conducing
to the working of Man out of himself into CHRIST.

Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life
for my sake shall find it,

Mat. 16.25. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts,

Gal. 5.24. By Alexander Gross, B. D. Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of
Bridford near Exon in Devon-shire.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bartlet, at the Sign of the Gilt Cup near
Saint Austius Gate. 1642.

THE MYSTERY OF SELF-DENIAL: OR, THE CESSATION OF Man's living to himself: AND
THE INCHOATION OF CHRIST'S living in Man.
CHAP. I.
Gal. 2.20. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.


THE condition of the man in the Parable, traveling between Jerusalem and
Jericho, is a clear and lively Emblem of the estate of a Christian. The man
in the Parable descended from Jerusalem to Jericho: Man is fallen from
Jerusalem to Jericho, from heaven to the world, from God to Satan, from
knowledge to ignorance, from holiness to uncleanness, from liberty to
bondage, from honor to ignominy, from fullness to emptiness, from pure and
perfect Religion to corrupt and carnal superstition: He is wholly gone down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, from the participation of all grace, from all
interest in God, and from all communion and acquaintance with God, into the
servitude of corruption and consortship with the world: The sin of man has
cast him from the top and crown of the choicest glory, into the gulf and
sink of the foulest and basest misery. The man in the parable fell among
thieves which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, leaving him half
dead: Man is fallen among three great thieves, the Devil, sin, and the
world; and these have stripped man of all his spiritual raiment; these have
taken all grace and holiness from man, which once covered him, like a rich and
costly garment; and they have also wounded, and left man half dead in his very
natural abilities. The fall of man has totally stripped him of all grace and
holiness, and also given a mortal wound to his moral and natural faculties.
He that abides not with God at Jerusalem, makes himself a prey to sin, the
Devil, and the world.

There came a Priest and a Levite passing by, and looking upon the man thus
stripped and wounded, but neither of them had compassion upon him, neither of
them ministered any consolation, nor lent an assisting hand unto him: Neither
the Priest, nor the Levite, neither the Moral, nor Ceremonial Law, can
deliver sinful man from Satan's bondage, nor heal his wounded conscience;
neither the works of the one, nor the Rites and Ceremonies of the other, can
restore man to his original happiness, nor justify him in Gods presence.
Man's best abilities and all-humane devises are miserable comforters to sinful
and perplexed souls in their anguish.

Though the Priest and the Levite had no compassion upon him, yet there came a
Samaritan which had compassion upon him; though the Law show no pity, nor
minister no comfort to wounded souls, and afflicted consciences; yet the Lord
Jesus communicates both great and sweet mercies to broken hearted sinners. The
Samaritane, a man from whom this distressed man could not expect any mercy, had
compassion upon him, and helped him. Christ is become the Author of man's
comfort and salvation, beyond all humane and Angelical thought, conceit or
imagination; the wisdom, work, and love of God in providing a Savior for
distressed sinners, was far above the reach and comprehension of all
creatures: The Samaritan bound up this poor man's wound, and poured in wine and
oil; the Lord Jesus binds up the brokenhearted, and gives the oil of joy for
mourning to them whose souls are truly humbled; the Samaritan set the man upon
his own beast. Christ communicates his own honor to the penitent and
brokenhearted sinner; sin is the cause of man's dejection, Christ is the
Author of man's exaltation; the Samaritan brought this distressed man to an
Inn, and took care for him, gave two pence to the Host, charged him to take
care of him, and promised payment of whatsoever he should spend more: The Lord
Jesus brings perplexed souls to God as to their spiritual Host, and to the
ministry of the Gospel, as to an Inn full of spiritual provision, gives his
Ministers the two Testaments, the Law and the Gospel, out of them to minister
to the souls of his people, and charge them as the ministerial Host of
poor and perplexed souls, to make all necessary and plentiful provision, and
in the end by his merits, his active and passive obedience, his two great
pence, he discharges the debt of all penitent and believing sinners. The whole
of a sinful and grieved souls happiness flows from the Lord Jesus; all the
supply of man's want and emptiness is derived from Christ's super-abundant
fullness.

All the myrrh and odours, and instruments of Hesters purification, and all her
rich and costly apparel were given her out of the Hest. 2.13, 17. Christ the
Author of man's welfare.
Kings house, and the royal crown was put upon her head by the Kings hand.
All the purity and perfection, all the righteousness and justification, all
the dignity and excellency of a holy and gracious soul is drawn from Christ,
the spiritual and heavenly King. All man's holy and heavenly excellencies are
borrowed from the Lord Jesus: Man is an empty cisterne, and has all his
fullness from Christ, the true and everliving fountain; Christ is the root by
whom he is sustained, the spring by whom he is filled, the Sun by which he is
enlightened, the garment wherewith he is covered, the crown with which he is
honored, the head by which he is guided, the eye by which he sees, the hand
by which he works, the foot by which he walks, yea the very soul by which
he lives. Whatsoever goodness or excellency is in a Christian, it is Christ's
and not his own; his very life is nothing but the living of Christ in him; he
must say with Paul, Nevertheless, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

Scope of the Apostle.
The words are a declaration of a Christians life. Christ living in believing
man, and man living unto Christ. The Apostle setting forth how he was dead to
the Law, that he might live to God, tells us that he was crucified together with
Christ. Christ being crucified for us, and we being by faith ingrafted into
him, do dye to sin, and mortify our earthly members which are upon earth;
the death of the Lord Jesus is the death of sin in all believing Christians,
they live no more as formerly they did, they have Christ now living in them,
and communicating himself unto them: He that has not experience of Christ's
living in him, in the way and work of sanctification, presumes in vain of
being saved by his death and suffering; no man knows the benefit of Christ's
death, but he that feels the virtue of Christ's life. Man has no further
assurance of Christ's dying for him then as he feels Christ living in him: He
that knows the power of Christ's death in the mortification of his lusts,
knows also the virtue of Christ's life in the quickening of his soul, and can
say with Paul, now I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

Analysis. 2. Parts.
In the words, not to trouble you with many particulars, we have two general
things proposed, 1. Christian abnegation, I live, yet not I. 2. Holy and
gracious vivification, but Christ lives in me. In the abnegation, we have 1.
the Subject: I Paul the Apostle, Subdivision. 1. Subjection. Note.
a man chosen and called of God, a man filled and furnished with the fullness
of Christ; and in and under him is understood all believing Christians. Such
alone as are truly sanctified and gracious people are the complete and proper
Subject of that life which is heavenly and spiritual: Only the living body is
the seat and subject of the soul; and that man alone that is spiritually
quickened, has Christ residing and dwelling in him, communicating holy and
heavenly life to him.

2. Here is the Predicate, or thing affirmed, Life; 2. Praedicatum.
and that is two ways proposed: 1. affirmatively, I live. 2. Negatively, yet
not I. First affirmatively, I live, I lived once under the Law, which made me a
persecutor of the Church of God, convinced me of sin, wrought in me all
manner of concupisence, and slew me, and I then found my self to be dead in
sin, but now I have embraced Christ, and am crucified with him; now I am no
more the man I was, but now I have Christ, who does quicken me, who does rule,
and guide, and strengthen me by his Spirit; now I live spiritually and holily,
now I live to God, and not unto my self, to Christ, and not unto the world;
now I live under grace, and not under the Law; now I live according to the will
of Christ, and not after mine own lust and fancy; now I live indeed, Note.
formerly I did but seem to live; All life is as nothing, 1 Timothy 5.6. Mat 4.16.
yea as a very death in comparison of a holy and gracious life. Men without
grace are as dead, even while they live: He that has not Christ living in him,
sits in darkness, and the shadow of death, all the days of his natural and
temporal life, as the Apostle said of the Law compared to the Gospel, That
which was made glorious had no glory by reason of the glory that excels: so
in this case, the natural life of man, howsoever dear, and precious, sweet or
glorious, it may seem to be; yet it is of no price, of no sweetness, of no
glory, in comparison of the worth, 2 Cor. 3 10.
glory, sweetness, and comfort of a spiritual life, which excels; great is
that man's happiness that lives by the life of Christ Jesus. He is the most
blessed and happy of all living persons that lives the life of grace and
holiness.

CHAP. XII.
SEcondly this is proposed negatively, yet not I. I live in deed, and yet I
live not, in respect of original. The life which I live is not of nature, but
of grace, not of my self but of Christ: In respect of the rule which guides my
life, though I live in the flesh, yet I live not after the flesh, I am not led
by my lusts, but by the Spirit of Christ, I live not after my own fancy, but
according to the will of Christ, in respect of the means by which I live, I
live not, by the Ier. 23.28.
chafe of humane traditions, selfe-devises, carnal doctrines, and inventions
of men, or superstitious observations, but I live by the wheat of Christ's
doctrine, the 1 Pet. 2.2.
sincere milk of Gods word, this is the staff and stay of my life: In respect
of the end or term to which I live, I live not to my self, I seek not, I
exalt not, I magnify not my self, I propose not mine own ends; but I live to
Christ, I intend, propose, and exalt Christ, I strive to be all that I am unto
Christ: In respect of the opinion, and apprehension which I have of my self, I
live not as mine own Lord and Master, but I carry my self as a crucified man,
suffering nothing in me to exalt it self against Christ; but I prostrate all
at the feet of Christ, I make all to veil and bow to Christ, that Christ may
live and reign in me, look upon my self as the chief of sinners, and the
basest of creatures, as unworthy of the least of Christ's mercies, I deny my
self, I allow no place within me, to mine own wisdom and reason, to my own
will and affections, to mine own fancy and desires; I look on these as empty
lamps that have no light, as on false guides and treacherous friends, that have
no truth: I handle these as traitors, that conspire against the welfare of my
soul: I trample and tread these under foot, as enemies to my peace: I silence
these, and will not hear them speak, I suppress these, and will not suffer
them to reign, I mortify these, and will not suffer them to live; and thus I
live and live not, hence we learn,

That he who lives the life of grace and true holiness, Doct.
does wholly deny himself, his own ends, counsels, and affections, and
altogether prostrates himself and all that is his under Christ Jesus: He put
himself and all that he has under Christ, he implies himself and all that he
has for Christ, in all that he does he chiefly minds and intends Christ: In
Joseph's vision the Genesis 37.7, 9.
Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars, these celestial creatures did obeisance unto
him, and all the sheaves in the field veiled unto his sheafe; in the soul,
life, way, and work of a regenerate man; all the supernatural gifts and
graces, all the moral abilities, and endowments, and all the natural powers
and faculties of the soul, with all the members of the body, all the labors
of the life, and whatsoever else do obeisance unto Christ, are made subject
and serviceable unto Christ: True Christians are termed by the Apostle, a Romans
12.1.
living sacrifice. The sacrifice under the Law was no more his that offered it,
but the Lords, and wholly to be spent in the service of the Lord; the Christian
who offers himself unto God under the Gospel, is no more his own, but the
Lords, to be employed wholly in the service of the Lord; this our Savior
imposes as a necessary duty, and sets it forth as a clear and lively
character of a true Disciple, and sincere Christian: Luke 9.23.
If any man (says he) will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me: If any man will come after me, as a Scholar after
his teacher, receiving my instruction; as a sheep after his shepherd, feeding
in my pastures, as a soldier after his Centurion, fighting my battles; as a
Subject, after his Sovereign, obeying my commandments; as a bride after her
bridegroom, making me the complete object of his love, and embracing me as
the husband of his soul, if any man will come after me, in the knowledge of my
will, in the belief of my promises, in the love of my truth, and in the
obedience of my precepts: Let him deny himself, Let him lay aside his own
wisdom as an empty lamp, his own will as an evil commander, his own
imagination as a false rule, his own affections as corrupt counselors, and
his own ends as base and unworthy marks to be aimed at; let him deny himself
whatsoever is of himself, within himself, or belonging to himself as a
corrupt and carnal man; let him go out of himself, that he may come to me;
let him empty himself of himself, that he may be capable of me, that I may
reign and rule within him, that he may wholly subject himself to me and my
service; there is no true following of Christ and his example, no through
subjection to Christ and his precepts, without the denial of our selves and
our affections, without the rejection of our own ends and counsels; this the
Apostle styles 2 Cor 5.15.
a living not unto our selves, but unto him that dyed for us; not to live unto
our selves, by following our own imaginations, not to serve our own lusts and
affections, not to terminate our selves within our selves, by seeking our own
applause and profit, by making our selves the Lords and Masters of our service,
serving our selves, and not the Lord Jesus; but to live to Christ, to do all
in love and obedience unto Christ, to refer all to the praise and glory of
Christ: It is a very base and carnal service which does not primarily intend
the Lord Jesus; surely he is far from the life of Christ, that does not live
to Christ; that man's life is of a base, corrupt, and earthly original, the
energy, operation, and intendment of whose living is not to exalt and make
Christ glorious; he alone truly understands the end of Christ's death, that
makes Christ's glory the end of his life; and thus runs the charge of the
Apostle to the Romans, Romans 6.13.
Yield your selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and your
members as instruments of righteousness unto God. Yield your selves to God, as
soldiers to their Captain, as servants to their Master, to fight for God, to
work for God, to do all for Gods glory; let every faculty of the soul, and
member of the body, even whatsoever belongs unto you be dedicated unto God, and
employed in the work and service of God; that service which is not universal
is hypocritical; he alone is a perfect servant, that puts the whole man upon
the service of the Lord, as all the rivers Eccl. 1.4.
come from the sea, and return, and empty themselves into the sea: Thus must
we return to God, and empty our selves, and all that we have into God,
prostrate it all under Gods feet, and put it all upon the service of the Lord;
as Moses Exodus 10.26.
lest not a hoose behind him in Egypt, but carried all out, that he might
sacrifice to the Lord of whatsoever the Lord would have; thus, we must not love
a hoof of our hearts, thoughts, loves, desires behind us upon sin, and the
world, but take of all, and sacrifice all to God and his service; we must with
the Baptist be willing to Ioh. 3.30.
decrease that Christ may increase, to become vile, and of no esteem with men,
that Christ may be exalted; we must with the Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5.
give our selves to the Lord. We must give our understandings to know God, our
wills to choose God, our imaginations to think upon God, our memories to
remember God, our affections to fear, trust, love, and rejoice in God, our
ears to hear Gods word, our tongues to speak God, praise, our hands to work
for God, and all our substance to the honor of God.

CHAP. III.
ANd a holy and gracious Christian does thus deny himself, Grounds of
Self-denial.
and put himself and all that he has under Christ.

1. In regard of that carnality, vanity, baseness, 1. Self-vanity.
earthlinesse, unworthiness, corruption, and uncleanness, which he sees, and
feels in his own flesh, in his own affections, ends and counsels: He sees
there is an emptiness in himself, that his own flesh is an Romans 7 18.
empty house, wherein dwells no good, and wherein is 2 Cor. 3.5.
no sufficiency to the performance of any good duty; he sees that his own
heart is a City full of treason, Ier. 17.9.
deceitful above measure, and not to be trusted; he feels a Romans 7.23.
law in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind, as Rebeckah felt
the twins in her womb striving the one against the other; he discernes that
his own wisdom is foolish, an empty lamp, a bleare-eye, a false light; he
discernes that he is brutish, and has not the Prove. 30.2.
knowledge of the holy; he sees much uncleanness within himself, many spots
in his soul; he sees that he is like Jacobs flock, spotty colored; like
Noah's Arc, wherein are many unclean beasts among the clean; like the field
in the parable, wherein are many tears among the wheat; he sees how he is yet
in part Romans 7.14
carnal, and sold under sin, not fully freed and discharged from the strength
and working of sin; he discernes an unhappy pronenesse in his heart, to
consult with flesh and blood, and to propose bie, and sinister, low, and base
ends; and having the sight, sense, and sorrowful experience of all this; he
denies himself, as Jacob having experience of the Genesis 31.7.
deceitfulness of Laban, grew weary of him, denied him his service, and went
forth from him. Thus a gracious man having experience of the corruption and
deceitfulness of his own heart and flesh, grows weary of himself, denies
himself, goes out of himself, comes unto Christ, and puts himself wholly
under Christ; and as the Evangelist said of Christ, that Ioh. 2.13.
knowing what was in man, he would not commit himself unto man: so sanctified
man knowing what is in himself, he will not commit himself unto himself, he
will not trust himself with himself, he denies his own wisdom, he becomes
1 Cor. 3.18.
a fool in his own apprehension, and seeks to Christ to be made wise unto
salvation; he looks upon his own righteousness, as Isa. 64.
rotten rags, and comes to Christ for justification; he considers his own
weakness, and comes to Christ as the Ios. 10.6.
Gibeonites came to Joshuah, to rescue him from his enemies, he is experienced
in the vanity of all other helpers; and therefore comes to Christ, as the
diseased Mar. 5.29.
woman, whom the Physicians could not cure, that Christ may heal his
spiritual maladies; Man is ever so much the more strong, and powerful in the
work of self-denial, by how much the more clearly he discernes the carnality
and baseness of his own heart and counsel. He that knows how subject he is
to miscarry when he leanes upon himself, will readily put himself and all
that he has under Christ.

2. In regard of the holy, strong, and constant bent, 2. Holy inclination to
Christ.
and inclination of the heart of a gracious Christian unto Christ: As every
thing moves toward its proper center, and is at no rest until it comes to
that: so does the sanctified soul incline and move to Christ, the true center
of the soul, and rests not until it comes to Christ, and has the fruition
of Christ; there is in a gracious soul such a principle of grace, such a
communication of Christ, such a sutablenesse between the soul and Christ, such
a fervent and operative love toward Christ, such a vehement longing after
Christ, that it mightily moves to Christ as the rivers to the sea; that nothing
but Christ can answer it, quiet and content it; there is in the soul such a
blessed residence, such a powerful and gracious energy, and operation of the
Spirit of Christ, that as the Ezekiel. 1.20.
wheels in Ezekiels vision moved, wheresoever the living creatures moved,
because the Spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels: so the soul
moves after Christ, because the Spirit of Christ is in the soul; this makes it
Psalm. 42 1.
pant after Christ, as the Heart after the water brooks; this makes it Psalm
63.1, 8.
thirst for Christ, as the dry ground for waters; this makes it follow hard
after Christ, as the child with cries and tears after the father going from
it; this makes it cry for Christ, as sometimes Genesis 30.2.
Rachel did for children, O give me Christ or else I dye; and as David
thirsted, and his worthies 2 Samuel 23.15.
burst through the army of the Philistines for water out of the wels of Bethel:
so the soul thirsting for Christ, breaks through all the armies of opposition
to come to Christ, to refresh it self with Christ; now it denies all, leaves
all, passes through all, prostrates it self and all that it has under
Christ, that it may enjoy Christ, it hates all that hinders its coming to
Christ, and embraces all that may further its communion with Christ,
sutablenesse between the soul and Christ, readily denies and rejects all that
hinders the fruition of Christ.

3. Uanity of all things.
3. In regard of the vanity, nullity, and nothingnesse which a gracious man
discernes in himself, and in all things else without and beside Christ; he
looks upon himself as on Genesis 18 28,
dust and ashes; he is vile in his own apprehension, as a Psalm. 22.6.
worm and no man; he humbles and abhorres himself Job 42 6.
below the dust and ashes; he looks on all other things as Phil. 3.8.
dung and dross, and a thing of Prove. 23.5.
naught in comparison of Christ; he reputes all things in respect of Christ, as
Judge. 9.9.
Jothan did Abimelech in respect of the Sons of Jerubbaal; but as a bramble
in respect of the vine, fig tree, and olive tree; and having such a low opinion
of himself, and all things else; he readily denies himself and all things
else, and makes all to veil and stoop to Christ; with Mat. 4.21, 22.
Simon and Andrew they are ready to leave their nets, their ship, and their
father, to deny their possessions, and their friends, to put all under Christ,
to leave whatsoever is most profitable and dear, according to the flesh for
Christ's sake, with Paul to esteem their very Act 20 24.
life as nothing, that they may glorify Christ, and finish Christ's work: The
more any man does undervalue himself, and the creature; the more he exalts
Christ, the more freely, fully, and readily he prostrates all at the feet of
Christ.

4. Rule of Christ.
4. In regard of the holy, powerful, and universal reign, rule and dominion
of Christ in a gracious and sanctified soul: Here Christ reigns as a King in
his Throne, Psalm. 72.8.
as Solomon reigned over the land of Canaan from sea to sea, and from the river
to the ends of the earth: so does Christ reign in a regenerate and gracious
soul, from the highest to the lowest faculty thereof, and from the head to the
feet, and from the highest to the lowest undertaking of a Christian: Here
Christ reigns as a Ephesians. 3.17.
dweller in his house; the dweller rules over all the rooms, members, and
goods of his house, and disposes all to his service; Christ rules over all the
faculties of the soul, members of the body, and disposes all the endowments
and doings of a Christian to his own service, and for his own honor: Here
Christ rules as the Ephesians. 1.20.
head over the body, acting, moving, guiding, and framing the whole man, to a
holy, humble, and free subjection: Here Christ reigns as a Mat. 8.8.
Centurion in his army, and as the servants of the Centurion did go and come
at his command, and do whatsoever he bad them: Thus all the faculties of the
soul, and members of the body of a true Christian, are at the command of
Christ, receiving their direction and commission from Christ, doing every thing
in subjection and obedience to Christ: Thus the Psalmist speaking of Christ's
kingdom, says, Psalm. 110.3.
in the day of thy power, when Christ should reign by his Gospel and Spirit
in the souls of men, the people should be willing, free, ready, and full in
their subjection unto Christ, and his Psalm. 72.9.
enemies should bow before him, and lick the dust; such as were enemies,
rebellious, and disobedient in their unregeneration, should after their
conversion bow themselves, and lick the dust, acknowledge and receive Christ
as their Lord and King, and in very great humility subject and prostrate both
themselves and all theirs to him, and his service; for as Abner entering into
Covenant with David, and taking David for his King, undertook to 2 Samuel 3.
bring about all Israelite to David Thus the soul entering into Covenant with
Christ, and taking Christ for its King, brings about all to Christ, and puts
all in subjection under Christ.

5. In regard of the holy and fervent desire of a gracious soul to exalt and
set up Christ: This is the prime ^^^our, 5 Desire to ex^^^ Christ.
joy and comfort of a godly soul, to see and feel Christ's kingdom within
him, to set up Christ in his heart, and to discern him ruling and commanding
there, as a King in his Throne, as a Pilate in the ship; this is his suite and
supplication unto God, that Christ's Mat. 6.10.
kingd^m^ may come, that Christ may reign and rule within him as David
sometimes thirsted, and longed to see the Psalm. 63.2.
power and glory of God in the Sanctuary: so does a godly man long to see the
power and glory of Christ in his soul; to behold him reigning in his heart: In
the day of Solomon's coronation the 1 King 1.40.
people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rung
with the sound thereof: In the day of Christ's coronation, and reign in the
soul of man, the heart of man rejoices with exceeding great joy, Christ's
dominion is a holy souls rejoicing, the kingdom of God is righteousness and
peace, and Romans 14.17
joy in the Holy Ghost. It was the care, labor, and joy of David to bring the
Ark of the Lord into the Tabernacle, in that day David 2 Samuel 6.14
danced before the Lord with all his might, and all the house of Israel brought
up the Ark of the Lord with shouting and Thus it is the care, labor, and
comfort of the whole man that is godly, to set up Christ in the midst of his
soul, to see him reigning in his understanding, as the Sun in the eye; guiding
in his will, as a Prince commanding it; in his imagination, as the object on
which he thinks with most frequency, delight and comfort; in his trust, as
the only rock whereon he builds; in his fear, as the King of Kings, whom
he chiefly reverenceth; and in his love, as an husband in the love of the wife:
so powerful and operative is this desire, labor, and joy of a gracious soul,
touching the exaltation, reign, and rule of Christ within it; that as the
people would have all the men put 1 Samuel 11.12
to death which would not have Saul reign over them: so does such a man
mortify all his lusts which oppose Christ's kingdom, remove whatsoever may
hinder Christ's spiritual dominion, and makes all veil, and stoop for Christ's
exaltation within him.

Acquiescence in Christ's approbation.
6. In regard of a gracious souls acquiescence and contentation with the
approbation of Christ: In this it pleases, in this it blesses, delights,
and satisfies it self, whatsoever it has besides it, this is in stead of
all, as the Sun is to the eye in stead of all lights, and the fountain to the
thirsty in stead of all bottles; the approbation of Christ is of very great
price with a true Christian; his Romans 2.29.
praise is not the praise of men but of God; not to have the approbation of men
to his doings, but of God; not to have his ear tickled with the empty breath
of vain man's applause, but with the solid and sweet inspiration, and
breathing of Gods Spirit, assuring him of Gods acceptance of him; as our
Savior sought not himself, nor his own praise, but the Ioh. 8.50.
praise of his Father, made it his Ioh 4.^4.
meat and drink to do his Fathers will, and contented himself with his
Fathers approbation, how unworthily soever men thought of him: Thus all the
members of Christ in proportion seek not themselves, nor the applause of men,
but the testimony of Christ; in this they rejoice and solace themselves, in all
things 2 Cor. 6.4.
approving themselves to God, as good servants, in all estates, in all changes,
in all their undertakings; and this is the holy glorying, rejoicing and comfort
of the soul, to 2 Cor. 10.17, 18.
glory (as the Apostle says) in the Lord, to glory in the dominion of God,
subjecting himself unto him, to glory in the power of God, resting upon him,
to glory in the testimony of God, blessing and pleasing himself in Gods
approbation for not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends: Gods approbation is the crown and comfort of a Christian; and
therefore as the wife seeks and rejoices in the approbation of her husband,
though she displease her self, and all the family to enjoy it: Thus the soul
which is wedded to Christ seeks the approbation of Christ, pleases himself
herein, and for the enjoyment whereof will displease his own flesh, and all
the world, he denies whatsoever is a hinderance hereunto, he subjects himself
wholly unto Christ, to gain and keep the testimony of Christ; for as he said
of Plato, unius Platonis calculum inter mill, the approbation of Plato alone
was in stead of a thousand: so the testimony and approbation of one Christ, of
Christ alone, is more to a gracious soul, then the applause of the world or
whatsoever the earth can afford, and for these and such like causes does a man
endued with true holiness deny himself, his own ends and counsels, and
prostrates all under Christ Jesus.

CHAP. IV.
Want of selfdenyall dangerous.
COnsider this then, and see the dangerous estate of men not denying themselves
and their own ends and thoughts, not subjecting themselves and all that they
have to Christ and his service; as the Sodomites would not have Lot to be a
Genesis 19.9.
Judge among them, no more will many men have Christ to reign over them; the
sons of Belial 1 Samuel 10.27
despised Saul, and brought him no presents. Many like sons of Belial despise
Christ in his person, they see no beauty nor comeliness in him, they despise
him in his Gospel, they will not veil to his Scepter, they despise him in his
Ambassadors, they deny audience, and reverence to their message, they despise
him in his offices, they do not hear him as their Prophet, obey him as their
King, they do not believe in him as the Priest who has offered himself to
God an all-sufficient sacrifice for them, they despise him in his Psalm 2 2.
laws, they burst them asunder, as Sampson burst his withs: strange and
shameful is the contempt offered by profane persons to the Lord Jesus, and
though they profess Christ, and pretend Christ, and will have Christ to be
preached and spoken of among them; yet as the Philistines though they
entertained the Arc, yet they set Dagon 1 Samuel 5.4.
above, and would not endure the presence thereof when Dagon fell before it: so
these men though they outwardly entertain Christ, and give him some place
amongst them, yet they will set their Dagon, their lusts, their pride,
pleasures, profits, inventions above Christ; and if their Dagon fall, if Christ
begin to show his power, and work upon their Dagon, discover, reprove, shame,
and offer to cast down their lusts, and will not suffer these to reign, they
grow very weary of Christ, his presence is uncomfortable: Christ preached in
his power ever proves a burden to the soul where sin is pleasant and
delightful; he that does not deny himself, denies Christ; he that allows not
Christ a full and universal dominion, is a great stranger to self-denial.

Some deny not their own wisdom, 4. Sorts non-denyers of themselves.

1. Self-wise.


Christ reigns not in their understanding, they are Isa. 5.21.
wise in their own eyes, they embrace not Christ's direction, Christ is not in
stead of eyes unto them, as Number. 10.30.
Hobab was to Moses and Israel in their journeyes through the wilderness; they
ask not counsel of Christ, but walk after their own counsel, they make not
their wisdom to stoop to Christ's wisdom, and therefore folly dwells with
them, Christ is not known to them; he of all men sees least of Christ, and
continues most foolish that most exalts and magnifies his own knowledge.

Some deny not their own wills, 2. Self-willed.
they make not Christ's will the rule of their will, but set up their own wills
to be the rule of Christ's will, and make their own will the Law by which they
walk, as it was foretold of the King of Greece, that he should Dan. 11.3.
Psalm. 2, 2.
stand up and rule with great dominion, and do according to his will: so it is
true of these men, they stand up against Christ, and they rule and sway over
Christ's Laws, Ministers, Ordinances, and Offices, and do all things according
to their own will. In the days of Micah the Idolater, there was no King in
Israel, and every man did that which was right in his own eyes: Thus these men
are without a spiritual King, Christ does not reign in their souls, but they
do what is right in their own eyes, they are Isa. 30.9, 10.
rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the Law of the
Lord, which say to the Seer see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us
right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy to us deceits. Christ
has no kingdom in the soul which is swayed by vain delusion, and carnal
counsel.

Some will not deny their own affections, Self-lusted.
they will not put them under, but suffer them to Lord it over Christ, Christ
has not the pre-eminence in their fear, trust, love, joy; but as the Lord
said to Ely, thou 1 Samuel 2.29.
honor thy sons above me, so these men honor their affections and lusts
above Christ. Solomon observed in his time Eccl. 7.10.
servants riding on horseback, and Princes walking on foot. Every man may see
in these times men's natural lusts and affections which should like servants be
kept under and suppressed, humbled, brought low, and made to walk on foot; yet
these are set on horseback, exalted, honored, preferred, and Christ the
Prince of peace, and all his ordinances, statutes, and testimonies, which
should reign and rule like Princes in the soul of man, these are made like
servants to travel on foot; these are of no esteem and price with men; these
have no rule and sway in the hearts of men: Herodias has pre-eminence in the
heart of Man. 6. Mat. 8.
Herod above the Baptist; a Swine is of more esteem then* Christ with the
Gaderine. Man's exaltation of his corrupt affections is a foul and shameful
abasement of Christ and his ordinances.

4 Worldly minded.
Some deny not their worldly profits; Jesse set David behind the 1 Samuel 16.
ewes, many set Christ behind the ox and the ass; the Luke 14 18.
farm and the wife, their merchandise and worldly traffic, they prize the
world above Christ, they love this more then they love Christ, the love of the
world carries their Ezekiel. 33.31.
heart far from Christ, when their bodies draw near to Christ; the
overvaluing of the earth is an undervaluing of Christ; when the world is over
sweet and savoury to men's palates, their souls Amos 8.5.
disrellish Christ and his ordinances; whon the earth is pleasant like a
Paradise, Christ and all the means of grace are apprehended as a very
wilderness.

5. Voluptuously affected, and vainly exalted.
Some deny not their own pleasures, but value them above Christ, as Esau did a
few pottage above his birthright; some deny not their pride, but as Absalom
sought to reign, though it were to the dishonor and deposall of his father
David from his throne: so they seek to magnify themselves, though to the
dishonor of God, and deposall of Christ from his Throne in their hearts; some
deny not their own worth and goodness, they are rich and full in their own
opinions, as the man in the Prophet, which dreamed, he had eaten and was full;
some deny not their own superstitions, they receive for doctrines the
commandments of men, they will see Christ in a glass of their own framing,
learn Christ in a school of their own erecting, and draw the waters of
salvation out of a cisterne of their own digging; doubtless they are a very
small number that have learned the lesson of self-denial, questionless Christ
has spiritual and heavenly dominion in the souls of few men. Very full of
base respects and purposes are the hearts of many that profess Jesus Christ:
The Prophet speaks of a day, wherein Isa. 4 1.
seven women should take hold of one man, saying we will eat our own bread,
and wear our own apparel, only let us be called by thy name to take away
our reproach. There is a day now, wherein seven, a very great number, take hold
of one man Christ, by an outward profession; but they will eat their own
bread, and wear their own apparel, they will find their own pleasures,
walk in their own ways, keep themselves apparelled with the old man, they
will not deny themselves, they will not put away their old things, and make all
things new, they will only be called by the name of Christ to take away their
reproach, of being reputed Atheists and Infidels among men. Many men that
profess themselves Christians do shamefully deny the Lord Jesus, and are far
from the denial of themselves, their own counsels and affections.

CHAP. V.
IF you demand whence it is, and how it comes to pass that men are so backward
in denying themselves and their own ends, Seven grounds of backwardness in
self-denial.

1. Self-prizing.


and in subjecting themselves and all that they have unto Christ. I answer of
this there are seven grounds:

1. Man's overvaluing of himself. Man is very prone to think of himself above
that which is convenient, to pride himself in his endowments, abilities, to
think of himself as the Queen of Babylon did, that he is a Isa. 47.
Queen and no widow, wise and not ignorant, rich and not poor, full and not
empty, holy and not profane, free and not bound, as Goliath 1 Samuel 17.
prided himself in the tallness of his stature, and bigness of his armor: so
does man pride himself in his natural, moral, and temporal habiliments and
furniture, contrary to the charge of the Apostle, Rom 12 16
Man is wise in his conceit, and will not stoop to wholesome instruction, he
thinks himself sufficient for himself, to guide himself, to sustain
himself, to make himself acceptable unto God. Gen 33 9.
Esau thought he had enough, and refused his brothers present: vain man thinks
he has enough, wisdom, faith, love, holiness enough; and therefore refuses
the spiritual and heavenly presence of Christ, his ordinances, benefits,
graces, and all helps to happiness; he dreams that he is wise, when he is
foolish, spiritual, when he is carnal, full when he is empty, like the Rev.
^.17.
Laodicean; and this disables him to deny himself, and subject himself to
Christ; he that supposes he has water enough at home in his own cisterne,
will not go to his neighbors well. Thoughts of self-sufficiency hinder men
from going out of themselves, and coming unto Christ: The Pharisees conceited
so highly of their own wisdom, that they refused Christ and his doctrine;
the whole puts not himself under the hands of the Physician to be dieted,
lanced, and purged by him.

2. The overswaying of corrupt and carnal lusts: These oversway man, 2.
Overswaying lusts.
as a Master does his servant, or a King his subject, they rule and reign
within man, and make man their 2 Pet. 2.10.
servant; the servant (as S. Peter says) of corruption; and as a servant is
not his own man, but his Masters, is guided by his Master, minds and intends
his Master, seeks the pleasing and profiting of his Master, is bound and
cannot enter into the service of another. Thus these men are not their own
men, but the servants of their lusts, moved, led, and guided by their lusts,
minding and intending their lusts, seeking to please and profit their lusts,
making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: To these they are
bound, and cannot put themselves into Christ's service, they cannot take upon
them Christ's yoke; these oversway man as a lover is overswayed by his love:
Man is very indulgent to them as David to Absalom, and as he charged the
Captains of his armies to deal gently with the young man Absalom: so man is
very loath to have his lusts roughly handled; he wishes that all the Prophets
would prophecy smooth things and deceits; and as the ha^lot in Solomon caused
the young man with her much fair Prove. 7.11, 22
speech to yield, and forced him with the slattering of her lips, so that he
went after her as an ox goes to the slaughter: Thus these lusts with their
flatteries, and fleshly-seeming sweetness, and bewitching eloquence do make
the soul yield and follow them; and as strange love in a wife takes away her
matrimonial love from her husband, and makes her regardlesse of him, and
disobedient to him: Thus the indulgency and love of man to his lusts takes away
his Isa. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 2.15.
love from Christ, makes him regardlesse of Christ, and rebellious against
Christ: These lusts oversway man as a disease overswayes the body, distempers
the palate, destroys the appetite, and makes the meat distastefull and
irksome: Thus do these lusts distemper the foul, and make Christ and his word
the bread of life and food of the soul unpleasant, the very savor of death
unto death. There is no possibility of self-denial and subjection unto Christ
as long as the soul is overswayed by any carnal lusts; the dominion of sin,
and subjection unto Christ are incompatable, and inconsistent; Abner could not
serve David until he denied his service and obedience to the house of Saul.

3. 3. Inordinate disposition toward the creature.
An inordinate disposition of the heart toward the Creature. The heart of man
is inordinate toward the creature, in his opinion and judgment of the
creature, judging it to be strong as a mountain, when it is weak as the sand,
to be full as the Sea, when it is empty as a broken ^^sterne to be noble and
honorable, when it is base and full of thraldom, to be permanent as the
Sun, when it vanishes like a meteor: The heart of man is inordinate about
the creature, in his thoughts, of its filling it self with distracting and
perplexing thoughts about it, making his bed a bed of thorns whereon he cannot
sleep; the heart of man is inordinate about the creature, in his pursuit of it,
pursuing it as the choicest and most desirable object, in his trust in it,
building on it as a rock that never sinketh, in his love to it, his heart
going after it, as the heart of the adulterer after the harlot, in the price he
puts upon it, prizing it above Christ, as the men of Shechem did the bramble
above the vine, in his sorrow for the loss of it, as Micah grieved as a man
undone for the loss of his Idol, and in the promises he makes unto himself
from it, promising himself like the rich man in the parable, fullness of all
peace, and contentment from his worldly abundance; and judging of Gods love
toward him, according to that outward abundance which God bestows upon him;
the heart of man being thus inordinately disposed toward the creature, he
cannot deny the creature, he cannot come fully and freely off from the
creature, and submit himself to Christ's Scepter; the Elders of Judge. 11.
Gilead came not to Jeptha, made him not their head, until they saw their own
and Isreal's weakness. Man never comes to Christ, never makes Christ his head,
never truly and thoroughly subjects himself to Christ, until he sees both his
own and the creatures weakness, emptiness, and unworthiness.

4. Over-prizing man.
4. An over-piercing of man. Man is very prone to over-prize man, the favor and
countenance of man, the society and fellowship of man, the praise and applause
of man: These are chains and fetters which bind and imbondage man to man; and
make man the 1 Cor. 7.24.
servant of man, flatterers and admirers of vain man, companions in evil with
sinful man, inordinate haunters after the approbation and applause of idle
man, doing many things contrary to Christ, for the winning and retention of
this; he that is ambitious of the favor, fellowship, and praise of men, can
never solace and satisfy himself with the favor and approbation of Christ;
he cannot subject himself to Christ, and make him in stead of all friends,
companions, applauders, and approvers to his soul. What hindered the parents
of the blind man from professing Christ, from making mention of Christ having
done such a miraculous courtesy to their child; but their overprizing of man,
they Ioh. 9.22.
feared the Jews, they were loath to displease the Jews, unwilling to lose
their place in the Synagogue among the Jews. Why did not the Rulers, which
with a dogmaticall and historical faith believed in Christ, confess Christ?
why did they not deny all for Christ? why did they not openly profess and
exalt Christ? Ioh 13.42.4^.
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be put
out of the Synagogue, for they loved the praise of men more then the praise of
God. We can never rightly value Christ, till we have learned to slight and
undervalue man, the vain and empty favor and applause of man. How Ioh. 5.44.
can ye believe (says Christ) how can ye embrace me, dedicate your selves to
me, and partake of me: Which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor which comes from God only; the soul never gains sweet and gracious
communion with Christ, which esteems and doats on the fellowship of sinful
men. Luk 14.26.
He that cannot hate father and mother with a comparative hatred, that cannot
reject the fellowship, friendship, and applause of carnal men for Christ, can
never come to Christ, never be a true Disciple of Christ, never have the sweet
enjoyment of Christ.

5. A carnal judging and mistaking of Christ. 5. Mistaking of Christ.
Men do not discern nor conceive of Christ aright, they learn not Christ as
the Ephesians 4.27.
truth is in him, they misjudge the knowledge of Christ, esteeming it, 1 Cor.
2.14.
foolishness, vain, idle, unprofitable knowledge, whereas this is Phil. 3.8.
excellent and superlative knowledge, transcending all the knowledge and
wisdom of the world, as the Sun the gloe-worme, they discern not the love
of Christ any more then the dead do the warmth of the Sun, being Ephesians. 4.19.
alienated from the life of God, and past feeling, they taste not any
sweetness, they feel not any comfort in Christ's love, whereas his love is
sweeter then Cant. 1.3.
wine, and better then life, their souls are not married to Christ, Christ is
not brought into the chamber of their hearts, as the bridegroom into the
chamber of the bride, but stands afar off, as a stranger whose love they know
not, they discern not the Isa. 53.1.
beauties of Christ, they see no comeliness in him, they do not see him in
his ordinances shining as a Sun, sweetly and gloriously triumphing as a King;
his beauties are hidden from their eyes, they judge of Christ as Samuel did of
the sons of Jesse, according to the 1 Samuel 16.
outward appearance, they discern not the fullness of Christ, he seems to
them a Isa. 53.2.
dry tree, their souls never found any satisfaction in him, he is a sealed
well whereof they never drank, and a hidden Manna of whom they did never eat,
they discern not the dispensations of Christ, they suppose that he dispenses
nothing but sorrows, fears, terrors, and anguish to the souls of men,
whereas he dispenses love, peace, comfort, making for them a feast of Isa.
25.6.
fat things, of marrow, and of wine well refined upon the lees, filling them
with all Romans 15.13.
joy in believing, they discern not Christ's purpose in humbling the souls of
his servants, they perceive not how he gives them light in darkness, how he
makes them rejoice with 1 Pet. 1.7, 8.
joy glorious, and unspeakable, when they suppose them to be of all men most
miserable; they discern not the contentments which Christ gives to them that
lose and leave all for him; they perceive not that Mat. 19.29.
hundred fold more which Christ gives them, in bestowing himself upon them,
being infinitely more to them then all friends, honors, riches, and whatsoever
worldly comforts; as the pearl in the parable, Mat. 13.^0.
was much more to the Merchant then all that he gave, though he gave all that
he had for it. Men thus mistaking and misjudging Christ, think dishonourably
of Christ, esteem him no better then another Cant. 5.9.
beloved, no better then gold, silver, honor, the covetous and ambitious man's
beloved; and man will never leave much for that wherein he discerns little,
or no worth: we shall never be able to subject our selves to Christ, until we
have rightly learned the worth of Christ; he that knows the comfortable
dispensations of Christ in the time of Christian suffering, will choose to live
with Christ in the deepest outward misery, rather then live without Christ, in
the greatest worldly prosperity, peace and plenty.

6. A corrupt framing and devising of false Christ's, 6. Corrupt devising of
false Christ's.
and false ways to life and peace. Some frame unto themselves a carnal
Christ, placing all his worship, and their service in a carnal and bodily
attendance upon his ordinances; they think it enough to Ier. 7.10.
come and stand before him in his house, in this they stay and look no
further, they suppose the having of the outward ordinances is the having of
Christ; some frame unto themselves a ceremonial and superstitious Christ,
embracing the traditions of men, and being very severe and frequent in the
observation of humane devises, they bless themselves as the only true
worshippers of Christ; some frame unto themselves a licentious Christ, such a
Christ as died to bring redemption to man, but requires no obedience from Man,
this is the Libertines Christ, and all these suppose they have Christ when yet
they have him not; and as he that is full is loath to beg, and the full
stomach Prove. 27.7.
loatheth the honey-combe: so these supposing that they have Christ, are full
of Christ, though yet they have him not; as he in Solomon made himself rich
when yet he Prove. 13.7.
had nothing; they are loath either to deny themselves, or to seek any further
for Christ: He that falsely faines himself to have Christ, is of all others
most uneasily drawn and wrought home to Christ: The heathen man could say,
Many might have been wise, if they had not already thought themselves wise; and
so many might have Christ, if they were not persuaded they had already gotten
Christ.

7. Ignorance of the nature and sweetness of Christ's yoke, 7. Ignorance of
nature of Christ's yoke.
and of the comfort of living under the command of Christ. Men know not how
good and pleasant the service of Christ is, how full of joy and contentment the
fruition of Christ is; they imagine that Christ's yoke is an iron yoke,
Christ's way a way of thorns, and the day of a Christian as a day of clouds and
darkness; they know not that Christ's yoke is made Mat. 11.29.
easy through grace, that his ways are ways of Prove. 3.17.
peace, and his paths paths of pleasantness; they know not the 2 Cor. 1.11.
joy and rejoicing arising from the having of our conversation in simplicity
and godly sincerity; they see not the Sun of love that shines upon the heads of
the righteous, they drink not of that Psalm 46 4.
river of comforts which refreshes the city of the Lord, they feed not upon
the Psalm 23.2.
green pastures, nor taste of the still waters, by which Christ leads and
pa^^ureth his flock; they never knew the peace, confidence, security,
satisfaction, safety and glory derived to the soul from the participation of
Christ, and therefore they will not put their necks under Christ's yoke.

CHAP. VI.
IF you demand what the evils are which attend the want of self-denial, Evils
arising from want of Self-denial 1. Vncapablenes of Christ.
and full and through subjection unto Christ: I answer, hence arise these evils
and great inconveniences to the souls of men.

1. Vncapablenesse of Christ: The full vessel is incapable of other liquor,
the full house is incapable of another dweller, the full soul, the soul which
does not deny it self, which is not emptied of all self-sufficiency, is
incapable of Christ, as long says the Apostle, Romans 7.3, 4.
as the husband lives, the wife is bound to the law of her husband, and she
cannot marry another, when her husband is dead she is free to marry whom she
will: As long as the creature lives, as long as opinion of self-sufficiency or
any other lust does live, and bear sway in the heart of man; Man is bound to
the law of the creature, and his own lust, he is under the power and authority
of the creature, and lust, and he cannot marry his soul to Christ; but if the
creature be dead, if the world be Gal. 6.14. Gal 5.24.
crucified unto him, and he to the world, if he has crucified the flesh with
the affections thereof, then he is free to marry himself to Christ, then he is
capable of Christ. Christ has no gracious being where there is no true and
through self-denial; that soul alone which is truly humble is Christ's
dwelling.

2. Alienation and estrangement from all the benefits and comforts flowing from
Christ. 2. Alienation from the benefits and comforts of Christ.
The Subject which exalts himself, and denies obedience to his Sovereign,
deprives himself of all the prerogatives which the King grants unto his loyal
people: He that exalts himself with an opinion of his own worth, or sets up
the creature in the room of Christ, and will not veil and bow to Christ,
excludes himself from all the comforts of Christ: He is estranged from the
knowledge of Christ, as a diseased eye from the light of the Sun, from the
love of Christ, as a harlot from the love of her husband, from the Ioh. 5.14.
faith of Christ, as the house builded upon the sand was estranged from the
rock, from the communion and fellowship of Christ, as Joab exalting Adoniah
into the Throne, was excluded from communion with 1 King. 1.
Solomon: so man exalting the creature, or any lust into the heart, the Throne
of Christ loses all communion with Christ; he that denies not himself
receives nothing of Christ, he receives not Christ as a Prophet instructing, he
is still in darkness and in the shadow of death, he receives not Christ as a
King, to reign and rule over him, he feels nothing of Christ's kingdom within
him, he receives not Christ as a Priest; he knows not the virtue of Christ's
death in the death of his sin, he is still in his sin without
justification. Adam preferring the persuasion of his wife, above the
commandment of God, lost all his communion with God, and was excluded from the
Tree of Life. Man exalting any thing Luke 14.26, 27.
above Christ excludes himself from God and Christ. 3. Emptiness and
hallown^s of profession.


3. Vanity, emptiness, hallownesse of profession of Christ, and attendance
upon the ordinances. The profession of Christ without self-denial, and full
subjection under Christ, is nothing worth; a tree of leaves without fruit, like
that in the Gospel, whose end was accursed. Joah exalting Adoniah fled in
vain to the horns of the Altar, he was there slain; Man exalting himself,
or any thing else above Christ, flies in vain to the ordinances of God, to the
outward profession of Christ; Herod's hearing the Baptist, and doing many
things, stood him in no stead, exalting Herodias in his heart; the Philistines
exalting Dagon, had no benefit by the Arc, they were the more plagued for the
presence of it. Man's very profession of Christ turns to the increase of his
condemnation, not thoroughly subjecting himself to Christ's dominion.

4. Abasement under the creature.
4. Subjection, abasement, and thraldom under the creature, and his own
sinful flesh. They that dream of liberty by refusing to take the yoke of
Christ upon them, in stead of freedom meet with thraldom: The Apostle says
of false Prophets, while they promise others liberty, themselves are the 2 Pet.
3.
servants of corruption; such false Prophets are these men to their own
souls, for whiles they promise themselves liberty, they make themselves the
servants of the creature, and of their own lusts, for of whom a man is
overcome of the same is he brought in bondage. The Lord sometime threatened
Israel, because they would not serve him, they should serve their enemies; they
that deny holy and cheerful service to the Lord Jesus, make themselves
miserable and wretched slaves to the creatures, and many base affections; Man
ever make that a Lord and Master over him, which he will not deny to make
himself Christ's servant; the service of Christ is spiritual freedom; the
denial of obedience to Christ is accursed thraldom.

5. Annihilatio^ of the fruit of Christ's death.
5. Annihilation of the fruit and benefit of Christ's death. A ransom is paid in
vain for him that will not put off his fetters, and come forth of the house of
bondage: Christ's death without self-denial is no way beneficial; he that puts
not off his lusts as fetters, and comes off from the world as from a house of
bondage, has no benefit by the ransom which Christ has given: For this 2
Cor. 5.15.
end (says Saint Paul) has Christ dyed, that we that live should live no mere
unto our selves but unto Christ who died for us.

6. Deprivation of the heavenly fruit, 6. Deprivation of the fruit of Gods
O^dinances.
and soule-refreshing comfort of the ordinances of God, and labors of Gods
Ministers. The reserving of one moate in the eye, frustrates the shining of the
Sun; the allowing of thorns in the field makes the sowing of the seed
fruitless; the Word, Sacrament, Ministers can do you no good, unless you
will deny your selves, and resign your selves wholly unto Christ; Jonah 1.
Jonah being kept in the ship, the mariners rowed in vain, they could not
bring the ship to the shore; without an universal self-denial, the Minister
cannot bring the soul to Christ, he cannot wave and work it into the haven of
everlasting peace.

7. 7. Losses waiting on the want of self-denial.
The loss which attends the want of self-denial and subjection unto Christ.
Achan exalted the golden wedge and Babylonish garment in his heart, and thereby
losed both that and all his substance with his life; Adam overprized the fruit
of the forbidden tree, and eat of it against Gods precept, and thereby lost
both the tree and all the garden. That which man gains with Christ's dishonor,
and with the neglect of Christ, proves man's greatest loss; soulelosing is the
fruit of self-seeking; they that seek their own things, and not the things
which are Jesus Christ's, lose both their own things, and the things which are
Jesus Christ's. He (says Christ) that will save his life, that is, by denying
Christ, by preferring man above Christ, that man shall lose his life: so he
that will save his goods, his credit, his peace among men, with the neglect of
Christ, by shunning the cross of Christ; that man shall lose his goods, the
comfort of them, he shall eat the bread of sorrows; he shall lose his credit
with men, he shall be a slave to men, he shall be reputed vile in the eyes of
men, they shall no more esteem him then the Highpriests did Judas: He shall
lose his peace with men, who will trust him, or have communion with him, that
proves unfaithful to his God; in the midst of his sufficiency he shall be in
straights, every hand of the wicked shall be upon him, and all darkness shall
be hid in his secret places, everlasting confusion shall be his last portion:
The gain of all is a very fearful loss to him that for gain does lose
Christ: He that for worldly honors, and outward riches denies and loses the
Lord Jesus, Mar. 9.34, 35.
is the most poor, base, and contemptiole of all persons.

8. Apostasy from Christ.
8 Apostasy and falling away from Christ. He that cannot thoroughly deny
himself, and all things else for Christ, he will never hold out with Christ;
he will fall a lusting after his old ways, as the Israelites did after the
onyons and garlic of Egypt, retaining still his corrupt and carnal nature,
he will return like the sow to his wallowing in the mire; when trouble and
affliction comes, he will repine and wish himself in his former estate, as the
Israelites repined at the red Sea, and wished they had tarried in Egypt: He
that began to build in the parable, and considered not the cost before hand
left off with shame: He that takes upon him the profession of Christ, and
considers not what it will cost him, resolves not to deny all, to leave all, to
suffer all, and to content himself with Christ alone, can never hold out with
Christ to the end: A horse of unsound feet may travel well a few miles, but at
length his feet fail him, and he can travel no further; a rotten vessel may
row speedily upon the Seas for some hours, but as soon as a storm arises
the ship sinketh: Thus man of a rotten and unsound heart may make a glorious
profession, be very zealous for a season, but not having thoroughly denied
himself, he faints and Ioh. 6.66. Luk 14 23. M^^. 1^.^. 9. Christ's rejection
of such.
falls away, he makes shipwreck of faith and a good conscience at length

9. Christ's denial, and rejection of such as will not deny themselves for him
and his sake: He (says Christ) that shall deny me before men, him will I deny
before my Father which is in Heaven. He that shall deny Christ in his Gospel,
refusing to attend and embrace it; in his Ministers, refusing them and their
doctrines; in his members, denying love and fellowship to them; in his offices,
refusing to hear him as a Prophet, to obey him as a King, and to rest upon him
as a Priest, and Mediator for salvation: He that shall deny Christ in his
promises, refusing to believe them, or in his precepts, neglecting to observe
them; he that shall deny him in his understanding, not caring for the knowledge
of Christ; in his will, not choosing and taking Christ unto himself; in his
imagination, not delighting in the thought of Christ; in his affections, not
fearing, trusting, loving, and rejoicing in Christ: He that shall deny him
before men, for the fear of men's displeasure, or game of men's favor, him will
Christ deny; he will deny him his blessed presence, and power in his
ordinances, 2 Timothy 2.13.
audience to his prayers, deliverance in his distresses, peace in his
conscience, pardon of his sins, justification in the sight of God, and at the
last day before the face of his Father, in the presence of all men and Angels,
he will deny them to be his, he will not offer them unto God as his own; very
fearful is their estate that want self-denial, if Christ deny us, who but
the Devil will acknowledge them, what more dishonorable and discomfortable to
a child, then to be denied of his father, or to a wife then to be denied of
her husband. It is the greatest dishonor and shame of a man, professing
himself a Christian, to be denied of Christ. Better deny our selves and all
the world now then be denied of Christ at the last.

CHAP. VII.
THis must therefore persuade us to work our hearts to a full and through
denial of our selves, 2. Persuading Self-denial.
to a hearty, free, and effectual subjection of our selves to Christ; as Genesis
12.
Abraham left his kindred, habitation, country, and all, and followed the
Lord, going whither the Lord commanded him: so let us leave all that is most
near, and dear, most pleasant and profitable, and follow the Lord Jesus,
doing whatsoever he should enjoyne us: As Moses left the Court of Pharaoh, Heb.
11.
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to
endure affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season. Thus let us leave the world, refuse to be called the sons and
daughters, friends and favorites of the earth, and of the profane men
thereof; and let us choose rather to endure affliction, reproach, disgrace, and
any thing with Christ, in the service of Christ, in the enjoyment of Christ,
rather then enjoy all the pleasures, riches, honors, and comforts of the world
without Christ: Let us take heed with Paul that we be not brought under the 1
Cor. 6.12.
power of any creature, or of any lust whatsoever: Let us see that our denial
be not 1. 1 Kinds and qualifications of Self-denial. 1. Spiritual.
a natural, moral, or superstitious denial, as some heathen have, and many
Papists do, in many things deny themselves; but let our denial be a
spiritual denial, arising from a principle of grace within, inabling us to
reign and rule over our affections, to forsake and renounce the motions of our
own corrupt will and reason, putting all in subjection under Christ, that
Christ alone may reign in our souls. 2. Voluntary.
2. Let not our denial be a forced and constrained denial; as a Mariner in a
storm casts away his goods, which yet he loves very well; but let it be a
voluntary and free denial, arising from the hatred and detestation of what
does oppose Christ's kingdom in our souls; as Amnon hated Thamar and thrust
her from him; and also from unfeigned love to Christ, as the bride in love to
the bridegroom, leaves her fathers house, to live with and enjoy the
bridegroom. 3. Universal.
3. Let not our denial be partial and halting; as Saul slew some of the
cattle, and spared others; but let it be universal, he that does not deny all
truly, denies none; as Joshuah put down all the Kings of Canaan, so depose
all, leave nothing in the soul to exalt it self against Christ, to lift up it
self above Christ. 4. Continual.
4. Let not our denial be temporary and vanishing; as a bulrush that bows
down the head for a day; as a sick man denies himself many dainties during
his sickness, and no longer; but let it be continual and constant, grow in
it; a man once dead lives no more, but daily rots and consumes away in his
grave. Thus the world and sin being once denied, once crucified, must live no
more, but daily decay and dye within us.

And let us not only deny our selves, Subjection joined to Self-denial with
the qualifications.

1 Holily. 2. Cordially.


but to our self-denial join subjection unto Christ, prostrate all under
Christ; and to him let us subject our selves holily, with obedience out of a
pure heart, being holy in all manner of conversation, as he that has called us
is holy. 2. Cordially, obeying from the heart root the form of doctrine
delivered us, able to say with the Psalmist, thy Law O Lord is in my heart, I
delight to do thy will. 3. Fully, 3. Fully.
let us not indent with Christ as Pharaoh did with Joseph, reserving chiefly
the Throne unto himself; but let us put all under Christ, let Christ reign
over all, in our understandings as a Prophet enlightening us, in our wills as a
King commanding us, in our affections, as a Priest mortifying us, in our love,
as a husband marrying us, let the whole man be subject unto whole Christ. And
4. Perpetually, 4. Perpetually.
let there be no end of Christ's kingdom, let his kingdom in our souls like
the house of David in Israel grow stronger and stronger. And the better to
induce us thus to deny our selves, and to put all under Christ. Look upon,

1. The interest which Christ has in a Christian, Inducements to Self-denial
1. Christ's interest in a Christian.
as a workman in his workmanship, for we are the workmanship of God in Christ
created unto good works; as a ransomer in the redeemed, he has bought us with
a price; as a dweller in his house, he dwells in our hearts by faith; as a
doner in his gift, we are given unto him of God by eternal election, and by
effectual vocation; Christ's interest in us does challenge full obedience from
us, none has such claim and title to us, none should have such service and
subjection from us.

2. The relation between us and Christ, 2. Relation to Christ.
a relation of King and people, husband and wise, shepherd and flock, head
and members, in all which we may read, as in lively characters the duty of
selfe-denyall and obedience.

3. Subjection of all things under Christ.
3. The subjection and putting of all things under Christ: He has all power
both in heaven and earth, he is made the head over all things to the Church,
all is Christ's servant: It is a great wrong to the Master of the house, to draw
away the service and obedience of his servant from him, to exalt his servant
above him: The withholding of any thing from the service of Christ, the setting
up of any thing in the room of Christ is a great dishonor to Christ.

4. Abuse of things not made serviceable to Christ.
4. The abuse of all things which are here made subject and serviceable unto
Christ. There is in every thing a power and a disposition to do some service
to Christ, to work to the exaltation of Christ, they are all made for this end
and use, they have an energy and inclination hereunto; there is in all the
implements of a house an artificial aptitude to do some service to the Master
of the house; there is in all the things of the little house of man, and in
this great house of the world a virtuall aptitude to do some service to
Christ, the Master of this house, Rom 11.36.
all things (says the Apostle) are of him, by creation, through him, by
preservation, and to him, in their service, use, and application, and
whatsoever man has which he does not put under Christ, which he does not use
as an instrument of Christ's glory, he does abuse it, the gold and silver, lands
and livings, art and learning, friends and acquaintance, understanding, will,
memory, affections, speech, or whatsoever else man has; he does abuse and
profane it, he does divert and turn it from its true and proper inclination,
end, and appointment, when he does not glorify Christ with it. Know you not
(says the Apostle) that your bodies are the members of Christ, shall I then
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot, God forbid.
Thus know we not that that all the faculties of our souls, all the members of
our bodies, and all things else, are the gifts and creatures of Christ, shall
we then take the gifts and creatures of Christ, and use them against, and not
for Christ, God forbid.

5. The sweet and heavenly comforts arising to the soul, 5. Comforts ^sing
from Self-denial.
from a through self-denial, and full subjection unto Christ. Hence arises
the comfort of liberty and freedom from the servitude of the creature, and of
every sinful lust, ministering matter of greater joy to the soul, then Israel
had, to see themselves freed from Pharaoh, and the burdens of E^ypt. Hence
arises the comfort of the evidence of grace, by this man knows the holy and
gracious work of God: Now he can give thanks to God the Father, for that he
has made him meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light,
and has delivered him from the power of darkness, and translated him into the
kingdom of his dear Son: Now he can with joy say with the Psalmist, come
and I will show what the Lord has done for my soul. Hence arises the comfort
of alacrity and cheerfulness in the service, now the heart is enlarged, and
man can run the way of Gods commandments, now he comes forth like the Sun,
and rejoices like a mighty man to run his race. Hence springs the joy of
love to Christ, now the objects of all corrupt and base love are removed, and
Christ is become the sole object of the souls love, and now it delights it
self in Christ, as the bride in the bridegroom. Hence comes the comfort of
Christ's power and presence, now he is discerned reigning in the soul as a
Prince of peace in his Throne, subduing all corrupt and carnal lusts, as
Joshuah subdued the Amalekites, driving Satan from the soul of man, as the
Gibeonites discerned Joshuah driving away the Amoritish Princes; now he is
discerned dispelling all blindness and error from the understanding, as the
Sun dispelleth darkness from the eye; now he is discerned binding up the
broken heart, and healing the wounded conscience, as the sick discerns the
Physician healing his disease; now he is discerned pacifying and quieting the
troubled and perplexed soul, as the Disciples discerned him appeasing and
calming the stormy tempest; now he is discerned pouring in the spiritual oil
of heavenly consolation into the soul, as the wounded man in the parable
discerned the Samaritan pouring oil into his wounds; now he is discerned
feasting, cheering, and ministering the sense of his love to the heart, as the
Spouse in Solomon discerned the bridegroom in the banqueting house, spreading
his love over her as a banner; and this ministers matter of sweet and singular
comfort; and hence arises the comfort of sweet and gracious communion with
God, the Lord dwells with the humble. The more man goes out of himself, the
nearer he comes unto God, the more man is emptied of himself, the more he
enjoyes of God. Very sweet and manifold is the consolation which the soul
derives from holy and gracious selfe-denyall.

6. Mitigation of disasters.
6. The mitigation and sweetning of all disasters. Self-denial in all troubles,
trials, losses, and temptations is to the soul, like the honey-combe in the
belly of the Lion unto Sampson; a blessed sweetner of them, affliction is ever
so much the less burdensome, by how much the more perfect man is in the work
of self-denial: He that truly and thoroughly denies himself, puts a low price
upon all outward abilities, and can take the spoiling of his goods joyfully; he
sees and feels the good of afflictions, and can readily receive them, as a
wise patient a bitter purgation, and quietly bear them, as an Ox the yoke,
that is accustomed thereunto; he can sing with Paul in the prison; he can walk
comfortably in them, as the three children in the fiery furnace; he can rejoice
with joy glorious and unspeakable, that he is accounted worthy to suffer for
the cause of Christ. The want of self-denial makes affliction a most
insupportable burden.

7. Contentatio^ in all estates.
7. The Contentation which Self-denial ministers with the least earthly portion
and possession. He that can deny himself, knows how to want, and how to
abound, and to be content in every state; the humble man possesses Christ, and
in possessing him possesses all things; there is more in a holy man's little,
then in a carnal man's great abundance. God proportions his thirst accordingly.

CHAP. VIII.
SEeing this self-denial is a work so necessary, so excellent, of such great
profit, so rare, and few partakers of it, it may be demanded how a man may
discern it, and assuredly know himself to have attained to it? Whereunto I
answer, that Christian, gracious, and true selfe-denyall may be discerned by
these ensuing market or characters: Characters of Self-denial 1. Captivation
of Self-reason.


1. Captivation of a man's own reason, wisdom, and will: Self-denial
emptieth man of self-wisedome and self-wil: He that denies himself is not wise
in his own eyes, 1 Romans 12.16.
or wise in himself, but all his wisdom is in Christ, he has a very low
opinion of his own understanding, he reputes his own wisdom to be folly,
his own knowledge to be ignorance, his own reason to be blind and carnal; he
complains, abaseth, and shames himself before the Lord for his ignorance; he
confesses and says with Agur, surely Prove. 30.2, 3.
I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man. I
neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. He that abounds
most in saving knowledge, is most sensible of his ignorance, and has the
lowest opinion of his own wisdom: The more a man is taught of God, the more
he sees his ignorance of God; he that has high thoughts of his own
understanding is far from the least and weakest beginnings of Christian
learning; he never truly learned Christ in the Gospel that has not denied his
own humane reason. When the Sun appears and sends his light into the house,
the light of the candle which lightened the house before the dawning of the day
goes out and appears as no light; when Christ the Sun of Righteousness
shines into the heart, then man's humane reason, and the wisdom of the flesh
(the only light of the soul before the dawning and appearance of Christ these)
goes out, and is looked upon as darkness it self; and Christ is made the only
guide and counselor of the soul; the eye thereof receives all its light from
Christ shining in the Gospel. Carnal wisdom 1 Cor 8.1, 2.
pusseth up, saving knowledge humbles: In much Eccl. 1.18.
wisdom (says Solomon) is much grief, and he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow; because the more man knows, the more he sees amiss: Thus
the more a man increases in the knowledge of Christ, the more he sees amiss
in himself, the more he is grieved for his own ignorance and corruption; true
wisdom is ever accompanied with godly sorrow, and self-denial; and
self-denial 2 Cor. 10 5.
casts down imaginations or carnal reasonings, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ. Self-denial makes him that formerly
seemed to be 1 Cor. 3.18.
wise in this world, according to the opinion of the world, dreaming of a
sufficiency of wisdom in himself to guide himself, making himself his own
counselor and instructor: Self-denial makes such a one to become a fool, by
reputing his own wisdom, ignorance, his own knowledge foolishness, by
rejecting his own understanding, as an empty lamp wherein is no light, by
distrusting his own reason, as a blind guide, by resigning himself wholly
unto Christ, as a scholar to the teacher, to be taught by him; by depending
solely upon Christ, as a traveller upon the guide, to be directed by Christ, by
placing all his wisdom, in being teachable and obedient to Christ's doctrine:
Man must be emptied of his own reason, that will be filled with Christ's
wisdom; he must renounce his own will that will have the will of God to rule
over him; he that denies himself makes Christ's wisdom, his wisdom to guide
him, and Christ's will the rule of his own will, to sway and command him.

2. Cessation from mansself.
2. Cessation from man's own self. He that denies himself cease from
himself; he cease from his own Prove. 23.4.
wisdom, from his opinion of it, from his subjection under it, from his being
guided by it; he cease from his own will, from the sinful bent and
inclination of it, from the carnal objects which it chooses, and from the
corrupt dictates which it prescribes; he desires not the doing of his own but
of Gods will, as a servant cease from his own, and does his Masters will; he
is borne of God, and the motion and inclination of his will is toward God, as
the motion of the rivers is toward the Sea, the Law of God is in his heart, by
knowledge and understanding, by meditation and affection, by inscription and
dominion, and he delights to do the will of the Lord; he cease from his own
Isa. 58.13.
imaginations, his thoughts are not high thoughts, carnal thoughts, worldly
thoughts, vain thoughts; but his thoughts are holy thoughts of God, low
thoughts of himself, hateful thoughts of sin, joyful thoughts of Christ,
and sweet and pleasant thoughts of the word of God, slight and weak thoughts
of the world. The meditation of the Lord is sweet unto him, and the Law of the
Lord is his meditation all the day long; he cease from his own affections,
he has crucified the flesh with the Gal. 5.24.
affections thereof; he does not trust in himself, but in the Lord, he is no
self-lover, but an unfeigned lover of the Lord Jesus, he does not rejoice in
himself, but in Christ; he cease from his own pleasure, he does not Iam 5.5.
live in pleasures, making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof; he is no lover, no follower of corrupt and carnal pleasures; he
chooses rather to endure affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
Heb. 11.25.
pleasures of sin for a season, sinful pleasures are more bitter and
distastefull then any affliction to the soul which has attained Christian
self-denial; he cease from his own applause among men, he is Gal. 5.36.
not desirous of vain glory, he is not affected and tickled with the sounding
of the trumpet of men's praises, he seeks not the praise which comes from men,
but that which comes from God: The more perfection man attaines in this
gracious work of selfe-denyall, the less he regards man's commendation: He
that denies himself reputes the testimony and approbation of God to be honor
enough; he cease from his own profit, he seeks not his own things, but the
things which are Christ's: He that denies himself, reputes it his choicest
riches to glorify Christ by his service; he esteems these labors of his most
profitable which prove most advantageous and beneficial to Gods Church and
children, not seeking 1 Cor. 10.33.
his own profit, but the Prophet of many, that they may be saved: He that
denies himself is well pleased to be temporally poor, that he may thereby
make others spiritually rich. A humble and gracious man reputes it a greater
gain to gain a soul to God, then to gain the fullness of the world to
himself. Lastly, he cease from his Heb. 4.10.
own works, from his own carnal and sinful works, from his own proud and
ambitious works, from his own greedy and covetous works; he cease from
these, as a traveller from a false path, as Israel ceased from Pharaohs work,
so does he from the works of sin, Satan, and the world, he is no longer their
servant; he that denies himself, serves not himself but the Lord; Christ is
his high and great Master; him he serves, and to his honor he referres all his
service: The glorifying of the Lord Jesus is the supreme end of a good man's
undertakings, and the crown of a true Christians labors.

3. Application of man's self to Christ.
3, Full, free, and ready application of man's self to Christ. He that denies
himself, resigneth himself wholly into the hands of Christ, as a scholar to
the teacher to learn of Christ, as a traveller to the guide, to be directed by
Christ, as a servant to the Master, to work and serve for Christ, as a
soldier to the General, to fight for Christ, as a subject to the King, to
receive Christ's laws, and seek Christ's honor, as a bride to the bridegroom,
to dwell with Christ, to love and delight himself in Christ: 1 Pet 4.1, ^
He that has suffered in the flesh (says Saint Peter) by mortification of his
lusts, by abnegation and denial of himself, he has ceased from sin; from
the life and power of sin, from the love and pleasure of sin, and from the
trade and practice of sin, as a man that has suffered death in the flesh,
cease from his former life, love, pleasure, and work; and he thus cease
from sin, that he may no longer live the rest of his time in the flesh to the
lusts of men, but to the will of God; he is no longer conformable to the
sinful example of men, a follower of the lusts of men, a servant of
corruption; but being crucified to these, he lives to the will of God,
receiving all direction from it, every way obsequious to it, wholly applying
himself to this one thing, even to please God: Self-denial takes a man off
from himself and the world, and puts him wholly under God, and sets him fully
and effectually upon the work of God: This is sometimes termed a Romans 12.1.
yielding up of our selves to God, as a sacrifice to be wholly spent in the
Lords service; sometimes 2 Cor. 8.3.
giving of our selves to the Lord, as a wife gives her self to the husband;
and sometimes a 2 Cor. 5.15.
living unto Christ, and a Romans 7.4.
bringing forth of fruit unto the Lord; and all this is to express their full
application of themselves unto Christ, who truly deny themselves; and this is
that which Christ calls a Mat. 16.24.
following of him, and makes it a concomitant of self-denial, to follow him in
his doctrine as a Disciiple, in his precepts as a servant, in his promises as a
believer, in his sufferings as an imitator: Self-denial makes a man embrace
Christ, as the Pilate to guide him, as the King to command him, as the rock to
sustain him, and only fountain to minister all fullness to him; and causes a
man also to apply himself again wholly to Christ, to the wisdom of Christ
to be guided by it, to the authority of Christ to obey him, to the truth of
Christ to believe in him, to the al-sufficiency of Christ to be filled with all
spiritual and heavenly fullness. He applies himself to Christ in his
understanding, to know Christ, in his will to choose and embrace Christ, in his
thoughts to meditate upon Christ, in his fear to serve and honor Christ, in
his faith to trust and depend upon Christ, in his love to affect Christ, in his
joy to delight in Christ, in his desires to long after Christ, in his
endeavors to exalt Christ, in all his possessions, abilities, and endowments
to make them serviceable unto Christ; he applies himself to the ordinances of
Christ, as to a light guiding, food feeding, and physic healing his soul; to
the precepts of Christ as to the rule directing him, and to the promises of
Christ as to the staff sustaining him. Man's full application of himself to
Christ, does minister clear and comfortable evidence of man's denial of
himself for Christ.

4. Ascribing of all to the grace of God.
4. The humble and hearty ascribing of all the good which is in man, or done by
man unto the grace of God. He that denies himself translates the doing of all
that good which he does from himself unto God, as the proper Author thereof;
he puts all from himself, as being nothing in himself, and ascribes all to
God as to the fountain whence all grace flows, as to the almighty hand by
which all good is accomplished: He acknowledges his own 2 Cor. 3.5.
insufficiency without God, as the cisterne is insufficient to minister water
without the fountain, and the branch to bear any fruit without the root, or
the tool to work without the hand: Self-denial abaseth man and the abilities
of man, and exalts God and his grace. A humble man will not endure the glory
of any thing to be ascribed to himself, but referres all to God and Christ,
and strives to raise the eyes and hearts of men to God and his grace. Paul and
Barnabas perceiving the men of Lystra had too high thoughts of them, reputing
them as Gods when they were but the Lords instruments, they Act. 14.14, 15.
rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, and saying, why
do ye these things, we also are men of like passions with you, and preach that
ye should turn from these vanities to the living God. The immoderate honoring
of men is a great dishonouring of God; a humble and gracious man is not so much
displeased to hear himself unjustly traduced, as to see himself inordinately
magnified; he that does deny himself that he may exalt God, cannot but much
grieve to see himself by the applause of vain men set in the room of God,
and made a dishonourer of God: It is questionless the study of him who sees
his own vileness, emptiness, and unworthiness, to make the name of God
glorious; he is very willing and ready to be abased, that God may be the more
glorified. When God has made him the instrument of any excellent work, he is
jealous of being deified and idolized; and therefore says with Peter, why Act
3.12, 13, 16.
marvel ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own
power or holiness we had done this: The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, has
glorified his son Jesus, and his name through faith in his name has done
this thing: Be he never so well qualified and fitted for the work of the Lord,
yet as the Lord said of Israel, so he conceives of himself, that without the
Lord his Isa. 31.7.
strength is to sit still. He that is most fully furnished with spiritual
abilities, is most sensible of his own emptiness, most free and ready in the
magnifying of God, and his grace. Who more eminent then Paul for his gracious
and ministerial endowments? yet who more effectual in self-denial, and in
the exaltation of the grace of God? 1 Cor. 3.3, 4, 5
Are ye not carnal (says he) and walk as men; for while one says I am Paul,
and another I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal, who then is Paul, and who is
Apollo, but Ministers, servants and not Lords, instruments and not supreme
agents, by whom ye believed as God gave to every man. I have planted, Apollo
watered, but God gave the increase: so then neither is he that planteth
anything, neither he that waters, not any thing, of no ability, of no
efficacy of themselves, but God that gives the increase: The choicest
instruments prove unprofitable without the hand of God assisting: The soul
which knows and feels its dependancy upon God, cannot but refer the fruit
and worth of all its labors to the grace of God. There was not a greater borne
of woman then the Baptist, he far surpassed all the Prophets, yet how low
does he abase himself, to exalt Christ, how freely does he refer the whole
efficacy of his ministry to the grace of Christ. I indeed (says he) baptize
with water unto repentance, but there is one that comes after me is mightier
then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost, and with fire. He that has low thoughts of the grace of God, and
high thoughts of his own abilities, is far from the self-denial which is
proper to Gods children.

5. A low prizing and Christian undervaluing of man's self, and all things else
in comparison of Christ. He that denies himself, looks upon himself as a Gal
6.14.
crucified man: In a crucified man there is no beauty, no dignity, no
excellency to be seen, no pleasure to be taken: He that denies himself sees
no beauty, no worth, no excellency in himself, he takes no pleasure, no
delight in himself; he looks on his own flesh as on an empty Romans 7 18.
house, wherein dwells no good thing, he is Romans 6.8.
dead with Christ, for the mortification of his flesh, for his low opinion and
denial of himself; he is Gal. 6.14.
crucified to the world, willingly contented for Christ's sake to have no
honor, no favor, no esteem among the men of the world; as a crucified man
has no place, no authority, no esteem in the world; he is willing to be
traduced, reproached, and rejected of the world, for the love he has to
Christ, as a crucified man is despised and accounted odious in the world: David
being vile in the eyes of Michal for dancing before the Arc, said, I will yet
be 2 Samuel 6.22.
more vile then thus, and will be base in mine own sight* He that denies
himself, being vile in the eyes of men, for his profession of Christ, for his
subjection and obedience to Christ, for his zeal and earnestness for Christ,
is willing and ready to be more vile, to be more reproached, more traduced,
more despised; and will be base in his own sight, neglect himself, abase
himself, and make himself as nothing, that he may exalt and honor Christ.
True self-denial makes a man neglect and abase himself below the very dust,
for the exaltation of Christ; to have his Luke 6.22.
name cast out as abominable among men, and to be accounted as the 2 Co^. 4.13.
filth and obscuring of all things: He that has the highest esteem of Christ,
has the least and lowest esteem of himself: Self-denial makes a man not
only to undervalue himself, but all other things in comparison of Christ, to
esteem all the glory of the earth as dung and dross in comparison of Christ,
to repute all learning but ignorance in comparison of the knowledge of Christ,
all honor but ignominy in comparison of the crown which Christ gives, all
riches but poverty in comparison of that treasure which is in Christ, all joys
but sorrows in comparison of the joy which comes from Christ, all friends
and friendship but dumb idols in comparison of Christ's love, and all worldly
fullness but empty vessels in comparison of the al-sufficiency of Christ. Gal.
6.14.
The world is crucified to him that is crucified with Christ, and has denied
himself, as men have no commerce with, put no price upon, have no love unto,
no pleasure in a crucified man: so he that denies himself has no intimate and
entire communion with the world any more then the living with the dead, is free
from the creature, from the power and command of the creature, as a woman is
free from her dead husband; his thoughts and joy are not taken up with the
creature, no more then Abraham's thoughts and delights were taken up with dead
Sarah, whom he desired to be removed out of his sight; he puts no price upon
the creature in comparison of Christ; he prizeth all as straw and stubble in
comparison of Christ the true treasure; he esteems all things in respect of
Christ but as a bramble in respect of the vine, as Judge 9 9.
Jotham to another purpose speaks in his parable. He that over values either
himself, or any thing else of the world, is far from holy self-denial.

CHAP. IX.
VOluntary and cheerful desertion and leaving of all for Christ. 6. Desertion
of all.
He that denies himself will deny all things else for Christ; Ruth in love to
Naomi left her father and mother, and the land of her Ruth 2.11.
nativity, and came unto a people which she knew not theretofore. The man that
denies himself will for the love he has to Christ, leave father and mother,
and the land of his nativity, whatsoever is most near and dear unto him, and
come to Christ, whom before this work of self-denial he knew not; he that
denies himself sees so much worth in Christ, and finds in him so much love to
Christ, that he will leave all to enjoy Christ; he leaves all for the present,
in respect of affection, his love to the creature in comparison of his love to
Christ is a comparative Luke 14.26.
hatred; he leaves all in respect of price and estimation, Christ in his eye
the Cant. 5.10.
fairest of ten thousand: A vine, a lilley, a glorious Prince, a bright and
shining Sun: The creature a thorn, a weed, a beggar, a very glo-worme, a
thing of Prove. 23.5.
naught; he leaves all in respect of service and subjection, he is not under
the power of the creature, he is not the servant of the creature, he 1 Cor.
7.20.
possesses as if he possessed not, and he is ready actually to leave all,
whenever he shall be called to it, as a woman leaves her Psalm. 45.
Fathers house, and her own people, to cohabite with her husband; he that
denies himself leaves his friends with Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9
Levi, leaves his country with Genesis 12.1.
Abraham, leaves his Ioh 9.
place of dignity with the blind man, leaves his Mat. 4.22.
possessions with the Disciples, and is ready with Paul to leave his life for
the testimony, honor, and service of Christ; he chooses rather to enjoy Christ
with the loss of all, then to lose Christ with the gain of all the world can
afford him: Where self-denial dwells, and bears dominion, Christ is
infinitely more dear then all the treasure of the world; he that denies
himself, chooses rather to be the servant of Christ in the lowest worldly
emptiness, then to serve himself, and be a stranger to Christ in the greatest
earthly fullness.

7. Man's pleasing and delighting himself in Christ under the cross.
7. Man's pleasing and delighting himself in Christ under the cross and hatred
of the world. He that denies himself is well pleased, and fully satisfied with
Christ, though the world hate him, rise up against him, pour great contempt
upon him, and minister much trouble to him; the bride pleases her self in the
bridegroom, though her other friends become strangers to her, or turn enemies
against her, though many troubles and disasters attend her, yet the enjoyment
of her husband mitigates and sweetens all, and comfortably answers all. The
soul that is married unto Christ, pleases and delights it self in Christ,
though all friends according to the flesh become strangers, or prove enemies,
yet Christ is in stead of all friends, though many clouds of sorrow and storms
of trouble arise, and no star of worldly comfort appears; yet Christ is a
Sun, in stead of all lights, a rock, in stead of all supporters, and a
haven, in stead of all hiding places. Christ to him that denies himself, is an
Isa 32.2.
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water
in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land: Christ is in
stead of all, and much more then all to him that for Christ's sake denies all,
and is denied of all. Christ is a recompense answering all losses, to his holy
and humble servants, Psalm. 73.25, 26.
whom have I in haven (says the Psalmist) but thee, and there is none upon the
earth that I desire beside thee, my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: The world never brings a
gracious and humbled man so low, but he sees power enough in Christ to raise
him up, never makes him so empty, but he sees fullness enough in Christ to
replenish him, never so hates him, but he sees love enough in Christ to comfort
him, never so fills him with trouble, but he sees peace enough in Christ to
quiet him; and this makes him that denies himself, when he Isa. 50.10.
walks in darkness, and has no light, to trust in the name of the Lord, and
to stay himself upon his God: This makes him account it all joy Iam. 1.7.
to fall into manifold temptations for Christ's sake; all temptations and
troubles being to him that denies himself, arguments of his separation from
the world, pledges of his effectual calling, testimonies of the Devils and the
sinful worlds hatred against him, physic to cure and purge out many unhappy
diseases of sin, trumpets to awaken him, preservatives against security,
conflicts to try his faith and love to Christ, and means of the endearement of
his soul to Christ, Christ sweetning them unto him, Christ being to him in the
midst of them, as the honey in the belly of the Lion unto Sampson; as the Arc
to Noah in the deluge, apprehending, tasting, and pleasing himself in the love
of Christ, he does glory in tribulation, and though he is in heaviness through
manifold temptations, yet believing in Christ, he 1 Pet. 1.8.
rejoices with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Christ to him that denies
himself is a crown in disgrace to honor him, a friend in heaviness to
solace him, a Sun in darkness to enlighten him, a precious pearl in poverty
to enrich him, a helper in all desertions to sustain him, and a fountain in
all wants to supply him; sweet and pleasant, satisfactory and soule-ravishing
are Christ's ministrations to mortified and humble souls in their Christian
sufferings.

8. Valuing of Christ's cross above the worlds crown
8. The prizing and valuing of Christ's Cross above the worlds Crown. He that
indeed denies himself, esteems it more happy, more excellent, and more
honorable to partake of Christ's sufferings, then of the worlds rejoycings, to
be conformed unto Christ in holy sorrows and afflictions, then to be conformed
to the world in carnal pleasures, and fleshly exaltations; he preferres the
poverty, reproach, exilement, bondage, and death which does usually attend
Christ in the Gospel, above the riches, honor, favor, liberty, and life
which the world ministers to her followers. Thus Moses denying himself, Heb
11.26.
esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.
The reproach of Christ, the disgrace, loss, trouble, and persecutions with
which the world does pursue Christ truly preached and sincerely professed in
the Gospel, was of more esteem with Moses then all the treasures of Egypt,
then all the honors, riches, favors, and contentments which the world can
afford without Christ. Christ's poverty, prison, contempt, hatred, persecution,
is of greater price with him that denies himself, then the riches, liberty,
crown, favor and peace which the world bestows upon her choicest favorites
and followers. There is more dignity in the contempt of a Christian, then in
the crown of a worldling; there is more joy in Christian sufferings, then in
worldly pleasures. The loss which man sustaines for Christ, is greater gain
then the winning of the whole world without Christ; the Devil and the world
are much mistaken in their offering of violence, wrongs and injuries to Christ's
members; the poverty, sorrow, shame, trouble, bondage, which they impose upon
them, prove riches, joy, honor, peace, and freedom to them; Men are much
deceived in their judgments, supposing Christian sufferings miserable and
contumelious; the wife, subject, soldier, servant repute it an honor to
suffer for their Husband, Sovereign, General, Lord and Master, and doubtless
he that denies himself, cannot but account it as an honor to suffer for his
spiritual Husband, King, Captain, Lord and Savior: He that denies himself
will choose with David to be a Psalm 84.10.
doorkeeper in the house of God, rather then dwell in the tents of
wickedness; to live in any low, poor, contemptible, and despised condition,
enjoying communion with Christ, rather then partake of all worldly fullness
without Christ. The Lord Jesus is a humble souls fullness, whether it has much
or little of the world; a little with Christ is honorable, and full of
contentation, the greatest abundance without Christ is shameful, and attended
with much distraction; therefore the Apostle says of himself, and such as he
was, men denying themselves and enjoying Christ, that they were as 2 Cor 6.9,
10.
unknown, and yet well known, as dying and behold we live, as chastened and not
killed, as sorrowful yet always rejoicing, as poor yet making many rich, as
having nothing and yet possessing all things. God is wonderful in honoring,
protecting, delivering, rejoicing, and satisfying the souls of the humble, in
sanctifying and sweetning their low, poor, and sad condition: The Lord makes
them see such glory springing out of their ignominy, and such light shining out
of their darkness, that they Act. 5.41.
rejoice they are accounted worthy, that they are vouchsafed this honor to
suffer for Christ's name; they rejoice in Col. 1 24.
filling up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ, suffering for
Christ, being thereby made conformable to Christ, and having thereby communion
with Christ, and Christ taking their sufferings as his sufferings; Christ
suffering in them, and they for him, they are very joyful in suffering; the
more a man denies himself, the more he rejoices in the cross of Christ, in
Christ crucified, for his sake, and in his own sufferings for Christ's sake.

9. Man's making it his honor to honor Christ.
9. Man making it his greatest honor to honor Christ. He that denies himself,
is 1. so inflamed with love to Christ, that as a wife reputes it her choicest
matrimonial honor to advance her husbands honor, to be according to Solomon's
phrase, a Prove. 12.4.
crown to her husband, by her subjection under him, by her choice, sober, and
pious carriage toward him, by her fidelity to him, and by her industry and
labor for him: so the man that denies himself, reputes it his highest honor
to honor Christ, to be a crown to Christ his spiritual husband, by his
gracious subjection under Christ, by his holy walking toward Christ, by his
godly heart put into such a holy and humble frame, made so graciously subject
unto Christ, and is so strongly and fully devoted to the service of Christ,
that as a good servant takes it as his, prime glory, to honor his Master, to
advance his Masters credit and profit: so he that denies himself, like the
good servant of Christ, takes it for a special honor to serve Christ, to
have Romans 6.21. Gal. 1.10.
his fruit unto holiness, to please Christ, and not himself or others. 3. He
that denies so sensible of, so experienced in the vanity, emptiness,
baseness, and fugitivenesse of the honor that comes from men; so out of love
and liking with, and so low prizing and esteeming the applause and praise of
men, that he accounts all other honor as no honor, to that which arises from
the honoring of Christ. He esteems it a greater honor to serve Christ in
true holiness, in the lowest and poorest condition, then to command nations,
and rule kingdoms, remaining a stranger to Christ's Scepter and service; for he
that in these things (says the Apostle) in holiness and true righteousness
Romans 14.18.
serves Christ is acceptable to God and approved of men. Gods acceptance, and
good men's testimony is a crown of much honor to them that serve the Lord
Jesus in true righteousness. 4. He that so wrought out of himself, so taken
off from himself, from minding, intending, and seeking himself, that he
reputes all his labor lost, if it does not bring some glory to Christ, it is
in his eye an arrow below the mark, a casting of seed upon the sand, Gal 6.8.
a sowing to the flesh; he reputes it a base and unworthy service which
terminates in himself, and not in Christ, it is an abomination to him to be of
their number who Rom 16.18.
serve their own belly, their own lust of pride, pleasure, or covetousness,
and not Christ. 5. He that denies himself, is so taken up with the thought of
Christ, with the admiration of If any man (says he) Ioh. 12.26.
serve me, let him follow me, and where I am there shall also my servant be; if
any man serve me him will my father honor. Christ's service is a good man's
crown and comfort, and therefore he that denies himself referres all to the
glory of God and Christ; and this is his glory, joy, and rejoicing, to be the
servant of Christ, to approve himself to Christ, by 2 Cor. 1.12.
having his conversation not in fleshly wisdom, but in simplicity, and in
godly sincerity.

Lastly, sincerity, humility, piety and plainness of heart, Sincere heart.
accompanies and argues self-denial in Gods children. He that denies himself,
has 1. a sincere heart, his heart like Christ's Nathaniell in whom is Ioh. ^.47.
no guile; Ioh. 19.23.
self-denial abhorres and abandons hypocrisy far from the heart, it puts it
self upon the trial; Psalm. 139.23.
search me O Lord and try me, if there be any evil way within me, and lead me
in the way that is everlasting; Jonah 1.
it searches it self, as the Master in Jonah searched the ship; if there be
any disobedience, any lust, any carnal or sinister respect there, it casts it
out, it drownes it in the tears of godly sorrow, as the Master of the ship
cast Jonah into the sea; he is very severe against sin, (...)
not only in others, but chiefly in himself, his own sin is most odious in
his eye; as a man is most sensible of and most troubled with a moate in his
own eye, or a disease in his own flesh; he is most jealous and suspicious of
his own heart, as best acquainted with the deceitfulness thereof; he is the 1 Timothy 1.15.
worst of sinners in his own eye, he will not spare nor suffer sin upon
himself, as a man will not suffer a spot upon his own flesh, but speedily
wash it away; nor a disease in his own body, but hastens the purging of it
out; as a traveller will not knowingly walk in a false path, but hastens
himself into his right way, so he Psalm. 119.60.
considers his ways, makes haste and turns unto the testimonies of the
Lord: As Asa spared not his own mother, but deposed her being an Idolatresse;
so this man spares not his own sin, Hab. 1.16.
though a mother sin, be it never so dear or pleasant, he will depose it; as
God is a God of pure eyes, and cannot behold iniquity, so is such a man, a man
of a pure heart, and he cannot behold iniquity with allowance in himself.

2 Humble heart
2 He has a humble heart; the proud man, the self-lover, who has not denied
himself, does all for the praise of men, his lamp will not burn without this
oil, his mill will not turn unless it has this wind or water to drive it;
but he that has denied himself is humble, he aims at the glory of God, he
seeks not himself, but God in what he does, he leanes not upon himself, but
upon God in whatsoever he does, he leanes on Gods wisdom to guide him, on
Gods power to support him, on Gods blessing to make all successful, and when
the work is done, and men would deifie him, he continues humble, he puts
all the glory from himself unto God, his rejoicing is not in himself, but in
the Lord.

3. Pious heart.
3. He has a pious heart, a heart cherishing an Ps 119.104.
universal hatred of all sin, universally bent and inclined to observe the
whole will of God, having a disposition and frame of soul answerable to the
Psalm. 40.8.
whole Law of God, resolved in nothing willingly to offend God, endeavoring to
the utmost to walk in Col. 1.10.
all well-pleasing toward God. All sin is as gravel to his teeth, gall to
his palate, snares to his feet, and a heavy burden on his back, his sin is
more troublesome to him, then all affliction, as bad or worse then death it
self; but the work of righteousness is his joy; this is the seed he sowes,
the race he runs, to this he gives himself, this is his meat and drink, this
is the joy and rejoicing of his heart, this is the element in which he desires
to live, and wherein he pleases and delights himself; as the fish in the
water, he Psalm. 112.1.
delights greatly in Gods commandments, to know them, to meditate upon them,
to receive direction from them, to do all things in obedience to them.

4. He has a plain and open heart; 4 Plain heart.
he will not smother nor conceal his sin, Ios. 7.
as Achan hid his golden wedge and Babylonish garment, as Rachel sat upon and
covered her Idols; he will not disguise and feign himself to be another then
he is, as Jeroboams wife 1 Kin. 14.
disguised her self, and feigned her self to be another then she was: He does
not desire that the Prophets should prophecy smooth things and deceits unto
him; Isa 30.10. 1 King. 22.
he will not with Ahab have the messengers of the Lord bid him prosper in a way
which the Lord allows not; but his desire is to have his heart ransacked, his
sin opened, Psalm. 141, 5.
the estate of his soul truly discovered; he says with the Psalmist, let the
righteous smite me, by discovering my sin, by reproving me for what is
amiss, by wounding my conscience, and humbling my soul for my corruption; he
is a most welcome messenger to him, that most clearly and fully sets his sin
before him; he rejoices in the detection of his sin, as a rich man in the
detection of a thief, that lies in ambush to rob him, as a sick man in the
finding out, and purging away of the disease which would bring death upon him.

5. He has a heart grieving at evil, 5. Heart-grieving at evil. Ezi^ 9.
and rejoicing in goodness and good things: He grieveth for his own and other
men's sins, for the dishonor done to God; he that grieves for his own and
not for other men's sins, grieves rather out of self-love, fearing some plague
which will fall upon him for sin, then out of any true love to God, for the
dishonor which sin is unto God; for God is dishonored by other men's sins
as well as ours; he therefore that denies himself, mournes with David, because
Ps. 119 ^16.
other men keep not the Law of God; Gods dishonor is the prime motive of true
and godly sorrow; the more a man denies himself, the more his soul is humbled
and grieved, because Gods name is dishonored: He likewise that denies
himself, rejoices when God is honored, whosoever be the instrument. Many can
rejoice when God has been glorified by some act of their own, but are not
joyfully affected, but rather grieved, when God is honored by some work of
others, wherein themselves have been no sharers: Men are often very dangerous
self-lovers in their holiest and most honorable performances. It argues a
humble, sweet and gracious disposition of men's affections, to be able to
rejoice in the godly service of others; a humble soul is joyful and thankful
that God is honored, the Church benefited, the Gospel preached, the cause and
kingdom of Christ promoted by others, as if himself had been the instrument;
Gods glory is a humble man's maine desire and intendment, and is much joyed to
see the same accomplished; and in these characters as in plain letters, may
all men read the truth and power of their self-denial, and accordingly judge
of their condition.

CHAP. X.
BUt it may be here demanded how many ways a man may deceive himself in the
point and matter of self-denial. The heart of man is deceitful above measure,
and man is very prone to deceive himself, as in other necessary points and
parts of salvation, so in this of self-denial. To this therefore I answer, 8.
Deceits in Self-denial.
that man is apt to deceive himself in this behalf eight ways.

1. By denying himself superstitiously. 1. Superstitiously.
Thus many deny rest, food, and liberty necessary, lawful, and allowed;
whipping, scourging, macerating, pinching, and even starving their own flesh,
denying themselves the use of such creatures, as God has ordained and provided
for the comfort and supportment of his servants. God has made man subordinate
Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8.
Lord over the works of his hands, and has put all things under his feet, all
sheep and oxen, and the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the
fishes of the sea. 1 Timothy 4 1^5
Every creature of God (says the Apostle) is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God
and prayer; yet many in their superstition deny themselves the free and
Christian use of the creature, placing their Religion and self-denial in
abstinence from some sorts of creatures. This is a law of Antichrist mentioned
by Saint Paul, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which
God has created to be received with thanksgiving. Such self-deniers are none
of Christ's, but Antichrists subjects. Men placing their self-denial in the
observation of humane inventions, are far from denying their own corrupt and
carnal lusts and affections; they that make tradition the rule of their
Religion, are far from spiritual and true mortification, zealous observers
of humane devises in stead of denying themselves, deny the Lord Jesus: Of such
therefore the Apostle testifies, that they are Col, 2.18, 19
vainly puffed up in their fleshly mind, and not holding the head which is
Christ, and rebuking their superstition as repugnant to Christ's death, he
says, subject to ordinances (touch not, taste not, handle not,

2. By denying himself covetously. 2. Covetously.
Many out of an immoderate desire after earthly riches, and inordinate love to
the world, deny themselves bodily rest, Psalm. 127.2.
rising up early, and sitting up late, and eating the bread of sorrows; they
deny themselves necessary food and raiment, they travel under their worldly
abundance, as a galled horse under a heavy burden; they want nothing of all
their souls desire, yet God Eccl. 6.1, 2.
gives them not power to eat thereof. This is the miserable worldlings humility
and self-denial, and in this he is ready to please and applaude himself; this
man indeed abaseth himself below the dust, but he does not humble himself
under Christ; he makes himself the drudge and slave of worldly dung and
dross, he makes not himself the servant of Christ.

3. Partially.
3. By denying himself partially. He denies some, but not all his lusts; he
walks in some, but not in all the ordinances of God. Jehu denied Baals Priests,
he 2 King 10.
put them to death, but he allowed the calves in Dan and Bethel. Saul denied
himself in the refuse of the Amalekitish stuff, he destroyed the 1 Samuel 15.
refuse, but he denied not himself in the bleating sheep, Mat. 6.
and lowing oxen, he spared them; Herod denied himself in many things, he
heard the Baptist gladly, and did many things, but he denied not himself in
Herodias, he continued his incest. He that denies not himself in all things,
truly denies himself in nothing; he that allows himself under the power of
one sin, is far from Christ, far from the knowledge of Christ; as he that
allows one moate in his eye is far from the clear and comfortable sight of
the Sun; far from the life of Christ, and health of grace, as he that allows
himself in one disease is far from health of body, far from the love of
Christ, as the woman which allows one strange lover in her bosom, is far
from the love of her husband; he is far from the way to life, as he that
keeps himself, and travels on in one false way, is far from his right path;
far from all interest in Gods promises, as he that breaks one Covenant and
condition of his Lease, has forfeited his whole Lease; and far from
spiritual liberty and freedom, as he that is fettered with one strong chain,
is far from bodily freedom; he that denies not all sin, denies none as it
is sin; hypocritical, miserable, deceitful is their self-denial, which is
partial, and halt like Israel between God and Baal, between virtue and vice,
between the earth and heaven, still abiding under the power of sin, without
either truth or perfection in grace.

4. By denying himself Constrainedly; Not for love, 4. Constrainedly.
but for fear; not for the hatred of sin, but for the sense of misery
attending sin; as the dog denies himself his meat when he is sick, and the
Sow denies her wallowing in the mire by reason of the coldness of the weather.
Lord says the Prophet, in trouble have they Isa. 26.16.
visited thee; they powered out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. When
the hand of God is heavy upon them, they walk humbly, they deny themselves
their former carnal contentments; with the Mariners they cast out Jonah in the
storm: This is the afflicted man's self-denial, a denial not springing from
any principle of grace, but forced upon the soul, not arising from any hatred
of sin, but from the punishment of sin: As Mariners cease from the Sea, and
lie fast in the haven, while the storms last, but as soon as the weather is
calm, they put themselves forth again: Thus many when the storm is up, when
their souls are tossed with the tempest of trouble, they cease from their
worldly and carnal ways; but as soon as their estate is clear and calm
again, they return to their former trade and practice of sin: Constrained
deny all is neither cordial nor perpetual.

5. By denying himself hypocritically; 5. Hypocritically.
seeming to others to deny himself, when yet indeed he does not; as Ahab put
off his Kings roabes, and disguised himself, and went into the battle as a
common man, when yet he was indeed the King of Israel: Thus many disguise
themselves, enter the profession of Christ, as if they were humble and
mortified men; when yet they are Kings for their pride, self-conceit, and high
opinion of their own worth, their change is only in appearance, not in truth;
outwardly they have sheeps clothing, the show of sanctity, humility, Mat. 7.15.
and self-denial, inwardly they are ravening wolves: Though they know
themselves to have Rev. 9.
Lions teeth, yet like the Locusts in the Revelation, they put on the hair of
a woman, and the face of a man; they pretend much love to God, much courtesy
and kindness unto man, and yet they truly love neither God nor man, they draw
Isa. 29.13.
nigh with their lips, but their heart is far from God; they fast from bodily
food with the Pharisees, Luke 18. Isa. 58.
but they feast and feed their souls with pride; they hang down their heads
with them in the Prophet like a bulrush, but their hearts stand upright, these
are nothing humbled; their denial is not cordial, sincere and true, it is
only superficial, formal, and seeming, as the Devil appeared in the
likeness of Samuel, but was not Samuel: so these appear in the likeness of
penitent, mortified, humble men, men dead to the world, yet in truth they are
not so; Iam. 1.
therefore the Apostle says of such, they seem to be religious: As a painted
man seems to be a man, and yet is no man but a rotten post; as an exhalation
seems to be a bright and shining Star, and yet is no Star, but a vanishing
vapor; Prove. 15.7.
as he in Solomon made himself rich, and yet had nothing: Of such our Savior
says, they appear Mat. 23.27, 28.
righteous before men: As whited sepulchers appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness; as Ixion in the fable
embraced a cloud in stead of Juno: so many under the Gospel take the shadow in
stead of the substance of self-denial.

6. Sinisterly.
6. By denying himself Sinisterly and politickely, to deceive others, to
insinuate himself into others, to accomplish some earthly project with the
more facility. As the Gibeonites came to Joshuah with Ios. 9 12, 13.
old shoes, and old garments, and rent bottles, as if they had come a long
journey, and thus politickely drew Joshuah to make a league with them: In like
sort many pretend self-denial, mortification, the putting off the old man, to
procure the favor of Gods servants, to increase their worldly profits, to
accomplish their own sinister ends; oftentimes men bring about, and finish
most mischievous designs and enterprises under a pretense of godliness,
mortification, humility, and meekness: Simeon and Levi cloak the massacring
of the Sichemites with the conscience of Circumcision; Genesis 34.^5. Mat. 2.8. 1
King. 21 9.
Herod intending to kill Christ, pretends the worship of Christ; Iezabel
plotting the death of Naboth, proclaims a fast, ordaines a day of humiliation;
the Crocodile first weeps upon man, and then kills and makes a prey of him: Such
Crocodiles are these men who under a pretense of tears, repentance, and
self-denial, deceive, and make a prey of their brethren.

7. By denying himself vain-gloriously, 7 Vain-gloriously. Mat. 6.2, 5.
many men do much, and go outwardly very far in the way of self-denial,
for the praise of men; Jacob to get Isaacks blessing put on Esau's clothes, and
some men to get the blessing of men's applause and praise, put on the outward
habit of truly mortitied men; the Pharisees were very liberal in their alms,
very frequent in their prayers, very severe in outward appearance in their
fastings; and all this they did to Mat. 23.5.
seen of men, to gain the praise of men, for this men may, and doubtless some
do, give their goods to the poor, and their bodies to the prison, to the
fire. Wherefore else does the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 13 3.
If I give my goods to the poor, and my body to be burned, and have not Love,
I am nothing. Vain men are carried by their self-love to suffer martyrdom, as
true love carries Gods children; Gods glory carries his children to suffer
death, that God may be honored, and to this pride and vainglory carries some
men, that their name may be magnified: Many who will suffer nothing for God out
of true love and affection, will suffer much for themselves out of an ambitious
humor of vain boasting and ostentation: They that care little for a name with
God, that do nothing for Gods approbation, will many times do much for a name
with men, for men's praise and commendation. He that does not humble and abase
himself, that God may be exalted is deceitfully humbled.

8. By denying himself Temporarily, 8. Temporarily.
to walk heavily with 1 King. 21.29.
Ahab for a few days, to bow down the head Isa. 58.5.
for a day with the bulrush, is an hypocritical and counterfeit self-denial;
false denial may bow, and bring a man very low; as Dan. 4.14, 15
Nebuchadnezzars tree was brought to a stump, but as that stump was bound with
bands of brass and iron, fast tied, and not rooted up, and therefore sprung
and sprouted up again; thus many men are very deeply humbled for the present,
but their inward lusts not being truly mortified, and plucked up by the roots,
but fast bound up within them, they sprout and spring again, after some dew of
temporal ease and peace, has a little distilled and dropped upon them; they
return again with the dog to 2 Pet. 2.22.
the vomit, and with the Sow to the mire: That self-denial which is not
constant and increasing, is built upon a false foundation. He never truly
denied himself for God, that does not abide and hold out to the end with God;
the hypocrite is off and on, he changes like the clouds, sometimes moving low,
and sometimes mounted on high; sometimes following the Sun, and sometimes
moving against the motion of the Sun. The hypocrite will not always delight
himself in the Almighty, Job 27 9, 10.
he will not always call upon God; whatsoever pretense of piety or love he
make toward God, like Orpah to Naomi; Ruth 1.
yet as she forsook Naomi, so will he forsake the Lord, but the meek Isa.
29.19.
shall increase his strength; the truly humble and mortified man shall hold out
and abide to the end; as his other works, so his self-denial shall be more at
last then at first; the longer he lives in the estate of grace, the more his
lusts are mortified, the more his own wisdom, will, thoughts, affections,
desires, and carnal ends and purposes are denied.

CHAP. XI.
IT may be yet further here demanded how a man may comfort himself touching
the truth of this holy and gracious work of self-denial, Rom 7.^3.
finding and feeling many lusts yet remaining and rising up within him, and
rebelling (as the Apostle says) against the law of his mind, sometimes
captivating, overswaying, and leading him away to the minding and seeking of
himself, and serving of his own base affections.

To this I answer, Comforts in the work of Self-denial against remaining
lusts. 1. Troublesomes of Lust
that in this case and estate a man may comfort himself, and assure himself
of the truth of his self-denial.

1. By the trouble which remaining and rebelling lusts are unto the soul of
man: If they be troublesome to the soul, as the Judge. 2.2, 3.
Canaanites to Israel, as thorns in our sides, and prickles in our eyes, as
diseases in our flesh, and burdens on our backs, as rebels and mutinous
persons in a commonweal are a trouble to the commonweal. Though we are not
fully freed from, yet we have truly denied them; when sin is not sweet as
wine, but bitter as gall to our palate, not pleasant as bread, but troublesome
as gravel to our teeth, not pleasing as the wife of a man's bosom, but
offensive as a contentious and quarrelsome inmate; there the lusts of a man are
denied, they do not reign and bear dominion, they have not the full and
peaceable possession where they are a trouble. Paul was one that had in a very
high measure denied himself, yet he complains of sin, as of a Romans 7.23, 24.
law in his members rebelling against the law of his mind, and sometimes
leading him captive; yet this being a trouble to him, as a dead member to the
body, as a mote to the eye, as a thorn to the foot, the Lord comforts him with
the sufficiency of his grace, My 2 Cor. 12.8.
grace is sufficient for thee.

2. By the godly grief and sorrow of the heart of man for the lusts yet
remaining, and making war within him. 2. Godly grief for remaining lusts.
When the presence and opposition of corruption makes man to sorrow, as a woman
in travel, until his soul is delivered and discharged of them, to mourn as
the Israelites lift up Judge. 2.3.
their voice and wept, because the Canaanites continued among them, and to
grieve for the presence of sinful lusts in his heart, as Sarah was grieved for
the presence of the daughters of Heth in her house. When a man's sorrow is
continually Psalm. 38.17.
before him, because sin is continually within him; such a man may assure
himself of his selfdenyall: He that has a continual godly sorrow for his
sin is not under the dominion of sin; true repentance argues an infallible
denial of corrupt and carnal affections.

3. Holy Contestation against lusts.
3. By a holy, gracious, and constant Contestation against the lusts which
remain within him. He that feels the Spirit, the regenerate part Gal. 5.17.
striving against the flesh; as Rebeckah felt Jacob striving against Esau in
her womb: He that fights against his lusts, Exodus 17.
as Joshuah against the Amalekites; he that makes war against his
corruptions, as the house of David against the house of Saul, and prevails and
increases his strength, 2 Samuel 3.1.
as the house of David did, may ascertaine himself of freedom from the
Lordship, and power of his corruptions: He that wars against sin makes no
provision for sin, any more then a man does for the enemy against whom he
wages war: He that wars a good warfare against Satan, the world, and his
own lusts, holding faith and a good conscience, is a blessed conqueror, has
won the conquest, though much assaulted by Satan, and his own corruptions: It
is not man's being assaulted by his lusts, but man's yielding to his lusts, which
argues absence of self-denial.

4. Humiliation for want of humility.
4 By man's humbling himself for his want of humility, and tenderness, and
softness of heart; freely confessing the pride, self-love, and high thoughts
which he discerns in himself, shaming, and loathing himself for the
obstinacy, haughtiness, and deceitfulness of his heart; as David considering
and feeling the pride and rebellion of Absalon, 2 Samuel 15.30
went weeping with his head covered and his feet bare: So man that feels the
pride and rebellion of his heart, must mourn, humble, and abase himself
before the Lord for it; the hypocrite is proud of his humility, the sincere man
is abased and ashamed for the remainders of pride which he discerns in
himself: The state of him that is exalted with his gifts is very dangerous;
the state of him that is made vile in his own eyes with the sense of his
corruptions, is hopeful and gracious. It is a blessed argument of
self-denial, when the sense of a man's secret self-love, and lurking corruption
does abase him in his own apprehension; pride and self-love have no dominion
as long as the soul is moved to humiliation by the sight and sense of them. He
that abhorres, abases, and humbles himself because his heart is not more
humble, is undoubtedly truly humbled, though his humility want some perfection.

5. By man's frequent and fervent prayer to be freed and thoroughly purged from
all pride, self-love, and sinister respects: 5. Fervent prayer against pride
and self-love. Exodus 17.11.
He cannot be a lover and servant of sin that prays feelingly, fervently,
and constantly against his sin: If Moses hands be lifted up the Amalekites
will fall; If the heart be constantly lifted up in holy and gracious prayer
unto God; proud lusts and self-respects will fall, prayer will surely bring
them down, Act. 12.5.7.
and work the heart to a very humble and gracious frame: The Church prayed,
and Peter was set free from his fetters, from the soldiers, and Herod's prison,
holy and earnest prayer has a very forcible operation to work the soul to
spiritual freedom from all sorts of evil, to make it truly sincere and
humble, both in the inward disposition, secret intention, and outward execution
of every action: Certainly man's prayer is but lip-labor, no cordial prayer
but vain babbling, words of custom, or of ostentation, if they make not the
heart sincere and humble. He that knows the holy, humble, constant, and
earnest way of his heart in secret prayer with God, may assure himself of his
self-denial before God.

CHAP. XII.
AS Self-denial is a holy and gracious work of Gods Spirit, Self-seeking very
dangerous.
a lively and honorable character of a true Christian, the prostrating of man's
self and all that he has under Christ: The seeking and exalting of Christ
above all, is the crown and glory of a Christian: so self-seeking and
self-exaltation is a very shameful and dangerous evil, an evil indeed very
common: Most men sowing to the flesh, and not to the Spirit, to themselves, and
not to Christ; Men generally moving, and tending in their understandings, wills,
thoughts, and affections to themselves, as rivers to the sea, levelling the
arrows of their endeavors to some carnal mark of their own, and not to the
honor of Christ: All (says the Apostle) seek Phil. 2.^1.
their own; all comparatively in respect of the paucity of others, seek their
own, their own profit, their own ease, their own pleasure, their own
honor, they confine themselves within themselves, they seek themselves, and
not the things which are Jesus Christ's: The honor of Christ, the edification
of the Church of Christ, the propagation and welfare of the Gospel they seek
not, this they mind not, this they intend not; they are all I^^. 6
given (said the Prophet of old) to their covetousness, to the minding and
seeking of themselves, their own low, base and unworthy ends, from the highest
of them to the lowest, and from the Priest unto the people. Self-seeking like
the deluge overslowes the whole world; few then addressed themselves unto the
Arc, few now address themselves to Christ, seek interest in Christ, or
seriously intend and mind Christ. Generally, then they lay drowned under the
waters, commonly now they are overwhelmed with the Sea of self-cogitations,
self-desires and intendments. Man's neglect of Christ, and self-seeking ever
turns to man's ruin, as their neglect of the Arc, and seeking other places of
refuge proved their destruction: Many indeed profess Christ, but few intend
Christ, like bad servants, they call him Lord and Master, but they do not his
work, they mind themselves and not Christ. Rehoboam 2 Chronicles 12.13, 14.
strengthened himself, but he did evil, and prepared not, or fixed not his
heart to seek the Lord. There are many of Rehoboams generation, they
strengthen themselves in wealth, in friends, in carnal policies, and worldly
honors; but they prepare not, they do not dispose and frame their hearts to
seek Christ, to exalt and set up Christ; they do not fix their hearts
toward Christ in their intendments and undertakings, as the rivers are fixed
toward the sea in their motion, and the arrows toward the mark in their
slying; This is an evil from which the Lord disswadeth, Seek ye Numb. 15.39.
not (says the Lord by Moses) after your own heart, and your own eyes, after
which ye use to go a whoring. Wherein the Lord calls them from their own
wisdom as from a false guide, from their own will as from a corrupt
commander, from their own thoughts, as from a pernicious suggester, and from
their own ends, as from low, base and carnal marks: 1 Evil properties of
Self-seeking.
And indeed self-seeking is a spring of many bitter streams, and a poisonous
root of many mortal and soule-slaying branches: For,

1. Self-seeking is insatiable. 1. Insatiable. Genesis 41.
He that seeks the creature and not Christ can never have enough, his desires
are never answered: Like Ph^raohs lean kine after the eating of the fat, his
soul is still lean, empty, hungry, he finds no satisfaction: Like the
dropsie-man, he is in a continual thirst; the more man seeks himself the
further he is from satisfaction, his desires are endless that desires not the
Lord Jesus he is always poor that makes not Christ his riches, distracting
and perplexing thoughts of want do ever pester their minds who mind not Christ
Jesus in whom is all fullness: The eye which sees not the Sun of righteousness
is never Ec^ll 1.8.
satisfied with seeing: The ear which hears not the glad tidings of Christ in
the Gospel is never satisfied with hearing: The hand which receives not
Christ, is never filled with receiving: The soul which finds not Christ is
never satisfied with finding, though it finds all the fullness of the world. No
man does less enjoy himself then he that does most inordinately mind
himself: Disorderly intendment of the creature deprives man of the comfort of
the creature; the least of the creature with Christ ministers much
contentation, the most of the creature without Christ works great vexation and
trouble, and fills the soul with restless and insatiable longing: To them
therefore that intend themselves and not Christ, that mind the multiplication
of their worldly abilities, and not the exaltation of Christ, the Lord
threatens Pro 27 20. Isa 9.20. Mica 6.14.
emptiness, to them that intend Christ and not themselves, the Lord promises
fulness and satisfaction to their desires; the soul which applies it self
to the creature, discernes a seeming beauty in the creature, and that inflames
the soul with love to it, with lusting after it; the soul promises it self
great things from the creature, and therefore is much in the multiplication of
the creature; it discernes a pronenesse in the creature to change, and therefore
labors much to make it sure; such a man places his confidence in the
creature, and yet is very jealous, least the creature should fail and prove a
sandy foundation; and therefore is he very sollicitous and laborious about the
creature, thinks he never bestows pains and care enough, to make it sure unto
himself: but the man who sincerely minds and intends Christ, sees such
perfection, tastes such sweetness, discernes such power and stability, and
meets with and feels such a fulness of all goodness in Christ, that in
Christ his soul has a sweet acquiescence, and sure reposall, whether he enjoy
much or little of the world; the more man neglects and denies himself and
the creature for Christ, the more satisfaction he finds in Christ; the more a
man intends himself and the world, with the neglect of Christ, the more
vanity, vexation and emptiness he finds in himself, and in his earthly
abundance: There is no Eccl 4 8.
end (says Solomon) of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with
riches: He spends his money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55.
and his labor for that which satisfies not, says the Prophet.

2 Hypocritical
2. Self-seeking makes man hypocritical, corrupt and full of sinister and
by-respects in his profession and duties of Religion; the wife of Jeroboam
coming to the Prophet 1 Kin. 14.5.
disguised her self, and fained her self to be another then she was;
self-seekers coming to Christ, taking upon them the profession of Christ,
disguise themselves, and fain themselves to be others, then they are; to be the
friends of Christ, the followers and servants of Christ and seekers of the
honor of Christ, when they are the enemies of Christ, followers of the world,
Romans 16 18.
serve their own bellies, and seek their own worldly profit and temporal
advancement: Selfe-seekers make their attendance upon the Lord Jesus a means
to accomplish their own carnal purposes, like cunning Anglers they make
Religion a bait to cover their hook, the more readily to take the fish of some
worldly profit, men often gain that riches and ascend the steps of that
honor, under a pretense of godliness, which they could never attain in the
way of open profaneness; Antichrist puts on the Rev. 13.11.
horns of the Lamb, and under pretense of being Christ's Vicar, he sets
himself in Christ's throne, and acts the part of the Dragon; under color of
seeking the welfare of the Church, he does prey upon, and brings ruin to the
Church; the Pharisees were great self-seekers, men of covetous and ambitious
spirits; they robbed widows houses, and for a Mat 23.14
pretense made long prayers; their whole Religion, who are given to
self-seeking, is altogether corrupt and carnal: Judas followed Christ not for
any love to Christ, but because he bore the bagg. Man may go far in the way
of Christ, and do much in the work of Christ, as long as Christ's service
tends to his worldly advantage, having no true love at all to the Lord Jesus;
Joh. 6.
why did the Disciples mentioned by Saint John follow Christ, but because
Christ filled them with the loaves, earthly gain is the only lodestone that
draws self-seekers to the observation of religious duties, Hemor and Shichem,
persuading their fellow Citizens to be circumcised, drew them by an argument
taken from their worldly profit, Shall not (say they) their Genesis 34.2^, 23, 24.
Cattle and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours, and to this
they hearkened and were circumcised. Self-seekers never put themselves upon the
profession of godliness, but under the promise of some worldly advantage; did
they not persuade themselves that some honor, favor, or other earthly benefit
would thereby accrue unto them they would never put their foot within the lists
of Religion; Abimelech was kind to Abraham, not for Abraham's, but for Sarah's
sake; self-seekers sometimes pretend much kindness to Christ, but it is not
for Christ's, but for the worlds sake, they cloak and color their earthly
purposes with religious pretenses, and this is the cursed Hypocrisy of
self-seeking, to make God, Christ, Religion and Christian profession as
servants and slaves to man's carnal lusts and purposes, most shamefully
injurious are all such selfe-seekers to the Lord Jesus.

3. Polluting.
3. Selfe-seeking is a polluting and defiling evil, termed by S. James
Adultery, Ye Joh 4 4.
adulterers and adulteresses (says he to such self-seekers) know you not that
the love of the world is enmity with God, and that he that is a friend of the
world is an enemy to God, and it is styled by Moses a Number 15 39.
going a whooring; adultery and whooredome defile the body and self-seeking
defiles the soul; the Jews by their covetous practices and self-seeking,
polluted the Temple, and made it a Den of thieves, Ioh. 2.
and men by their self-seeking pollute their souls, which should be a holy
Temple to Gods Spirit, this they make a den of thieves, a very cage of
uncleanness; Gehezi sought himself in running after Naoman for a talent of
silver and two changes of garments, and what was the issue of it, a 2 Kin.
5.22, 27
loathsome leprosy clave unto him: all self-seekers are in the sight of God as
loathsome lepers, self-seeking defiles their understanding with ignorance, as
dust defiles the eyes, disabling them to discern the things of God, the
Pharisees were covetous, and because they sought themselves, they Lu. 16.14.
derided Christ's Doctrine, with self-seekers the Doctrine which crosses their
carnal projects is reputed a Doctrine of no knowledge; this defiles the
thoughts of men with worldliness, injustice, carnal plots and imaginations;
this filled Saul with thoughts to 1 Samuel 18.25. Hest. 3 6.
make David fall: This filled Haman with thoughts to destroy all the Jews,
throughout the whole Kingdom of Aha^huerus; this defiles the affections of men
with base fear, carnal confidence, self-love and fleshly joy; this made the
Rulers afraid to confess Christ, they were self-seekers, they Ioh. 11.42
loved the praise of men more then the praise of God, and therefore did not
confess Christ; this makes men ambitious of a name with men, for this they
seek to perpetuate their memory upon earth, their inward thought is (says the
Psalmist) that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places
to all generations, Psalm. 49 11. Ier 48.^. Psalm, 52.7. Ier. 13.25.
they call their Lands after their own names; this makes them lean upon an
arm of flesh, and to trust some in their works, some in their treasures, some
in their falsehood selfe-seekers ever build their confidence upon false
foundations, and cast their souls into many shameful pollutions.

4. Self-seeking alienates the soul of man from God, 4 Alienating.
and from all interest in, and communion with Christ; the men of Israel
following Sheba, alienated themselves from David, they had no part in David;
self-seekers following their own lusts walking after their own imaginations,
alienate themselves from God, they have no part in Christ; a wife that goes a
whoring from her husband, dissolves the wedlock, and alienates herself from
her husband; the soul by self-seeking goes a whooring and commits fornication
with the creature, and altogether estrangeth it self from Christ; of such the
Lord says, they are Psalm. 58. Ier 5.23.
estranged, they are revolted and gone: Self-seeking alienates a man from God
in his understanding; Self-seekers have no knowledge, They eat up my people
(says the Lord) as bread, there is their selfe-seeking; they have no Psalm. 14.
knowledge, no true, no clear, no saving knowledge, there is their ignorance
of God; this alienates man from the thought of God, of such the Psalmist says,
God is Psalm 10.
not in all his thoughts, he thinks not of God as of his Counselor to advise
him, as of his rock to build upon him, as of his fountain to replenish him, as
of his King to glorify him; this alienates man from the love of God. If any
man 1 Ioh. 2.15.
love the world, the love of the Father is not in that man; from attendance
upon the Ordinances of God, the invited guests in the Parable were so eager in
the pursuit of the world that they could not come; from tasting and relishing
the sweetness of Christ in the ministry of the Word, the fruit of Christ, the
fruit of his Doctrine, the fruit of his death and resurrection communicated by
the Gospel, are not sweet unto them, as to the Spouse in Salomons Song, Cant.
2.3.
but as Job sometime said of Eliphaz his speech, Can that which is Job 6.6, 7.
unsavory be eaten without salt, or is there any taste in the white of an
egg? The things which my soul refuses to touch are as my sorrowful meat:
Such is the Ministers speech and preaching of Christ to self-Seekers,
altogether unsav^ry, having no sweet relish, or comfortable taste to their
palates; their soul refuses it as sorrowful meat, troubling rather then
comforting, grieving rather then rejoicing them. Christ ever proves very
troublesome to the soul that is addicted to self-Seeking; Man spoils himself
of many sweet and heavenly comforts in Christ Jesus, by seeking himself, and
the satisfaction of his own corrupt affections: This alienates man from the
faith of Christ. He that seeks himself cannot believe in Christ, he cannot
take unto himself Christ for his husband to love him, for his King to honor
him, for his Counselor to be guided by him, for his rock to build upon him,
and for his precious pearl to rest himself contented with him: The foolish
man (in the parable) who built upon the sand, did not also build upon the
rock: He that leanes upon the creature, leanes not upon Christ; He that seeks
himself trusts in himself, and not in Christ: True faith and self-seeking
like the Arc and Dagon cannot stand together. How can ye believe (says our
Savior) which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only. You seek the praise and applause of men, to exalt and
magnify your selves in the eyes of men, you seek not the testimony and
approbation of God, you labor not to approve your selves unto God, and
therefore you cannot believe, you cannot receive and embrace me, you cannot
rest and rely upon me, you cannot quiet and content your selves with me.
Doubtless all worldly and ambitious self-seekers are miserable and wretched
unbeleevers; all inordinate self-lovers are very great strangers to Christ
Jesus; Cursed and shameful is that fruit of self-seeking which turns off the
soul of man from Christ, and spoils him of all interest in Christ: This
alienates man from the service of Christ, all self-seekers serve themselves,
Romans 16.18. Mat 6.24.
they serve not our Lord Jesus Christ (says Saint Paul) but their own belly,
they serve not God but Mammon (says Christ) Self-seekers are the servants of
worldly vanities, and the slaves of carnal lusts and affections; the souls
unhappy bondage and enthralment is the fruit of self-intendments; all
self-seekers like Israel are Hos. 10.1.
empty vines; they bring forth fruit unto themselves and not to Christ: Such
men's services are an illegitimate brood, spurious works begotten by the world,
Satan, and the flesh, and not by the Spirit of Christ: To such our Savior
says, Ioh. 8.44.
ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do^ Of
such Saint John says, they are of the world, 1 Ioh 4.5.
therefore speak they of the world; they have worldly hearts, worldly
thoughts, worldly language, and worldly intendments, and all their labors are
a worldly service: The intendment of man in his undertaking is ever suitable to
man's original: He that is not of Christ cannot intend Christ, nor refer his
^ervice unto Christ. 1 Ioh. 4.6.
We are of God (says the Apostle) he that knows God hears us, he that is
not of God hears not us, hereby know we the Spirit of truth and the Spirit of
error. Lastly, 2 Cor 11.13.
this alienates from all true and sweet delight and joy in Christ. Self-seekers
rejoice in themselves, and in the creatures, and not in Christ; as the men of
Sichem rejoiced in Abimelech, the bramble, and not in the sons of Jerubbaal,
the Vine, Olive, and Fig Tree, Iud. 9.
in Jothams parable. He that seeks himself rejoices in a very empty and
unworthy object, in the creature which like a bramble, has neither fruit, nor
shadow to minister either satisfaction or safety; but pricketh, scratcheth,
vexes all that set their hearts upon it, and he leaves Christ, who like a
Vine, Olive, and Fig Tree communicates food and shadow, pleasure, contentation,
defense, and sweet refreshment to all that come unto him, and place their
confidence in him: The Jews in the Prophet Isa. 8.6.
refused the waters of Shiloah, the defense and aid which God promised them,
and rejoiced in Rezin and Remeliahs son. The man that seeks himself refuses
Christ, sleighteth and undervalueth Christ the fountain of living waters, from
whom slowes all protection, comfort, and contentation to them that sincerely
embrace him; and rejoices in the creature, which proves a sandy foundation,
and a broken cisterne. Of such the Prophet says, Amos 6 13. Mat. 2.
they rejoice in a thing of naught; in a thing of no strength, of no fullness,
of no continuance; Herod sought himself, the establishment of himself in the
kingdom, and the tidings of Christ's birth was terrible to him: The Pharisees
were great self-seekers, and the presence, preaching, and miracles which Christ
wrought, did very much perplexe and grieve them: Man's inordinate minding and
intending himself, and worldly riches, honors, or pleasures, deprives him of
all delight and joy in Christ Jesus. Self-seeking works a very unhappy
alienation from Christ, and makes the soul a very great stranger to Christ.

5. Full of unlawful means.
5. Self-seeking puts a man upon unlawful and forbidden means to accomplish
his corrupt and unworthy ends: Through self-seeking the covetous man thrusts
himself into unlawful ways of gain; the ambitious man into forbidden ways
to attain honor and high places, and the voluptuous man into unlawful ways
of carnal and fle^hly pleasures; the covetous man seeking himself and worldly
wealth, defraudeth, oppresses deceives: He intrudes himself upon the time
and things which God has made sacred: He turns the day of sacred rest into a
day of bodily labor, into a day of treading wine-presses, bringing in of
sheases, and bearing Neh. 13 15.
of burdens, as sometime Nehemiah saw it in Judah. This makes them according
to Salomons phrase, to devour Prove 20.25.
holy things, things dedicated to the honor, worship, and service of God: This
makes them use as the Lord speaks by the Prophet, the Mic. 6.11, 12
wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful weights: For this they are full of
violence, speak lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth; they fell
as Amos says, the righteous for silver and the poor for a pair of shoes.
Amos 2.6.
Self-seeking sets man upon many ungodly, injurious, and dishonorable
practices, to gain the wealth of the world: This makes the ambitious man full
of fraudulent and bloody plots and designs to exalt himself, and make
himself a man of eminency and great authority amongst men. Why did Joab
murder 2 Samuel 3. 2 Samuel 15.
Abner? why did Absolon seek to put his own father from the throne? The one
feared lest through Abner entering into Covenant with David his honor would be
eclipsed, and the other was ambitious of his Fathers Throne, carried away with
an inordinate desire to reign. Self-seekers are not terrified with the
horridness of any practice, be it never so unnatural and merciless: The Lu.
15.
Prodigal in the parable making carnal pleasures the prime object of his
desires, fully minding and intending the satisfaction of his own lusts, left
his Fathers house, put himself into consortship with harlots, and spent all
his patrimony: Man being over indulgent to himself, and his own corrupt
affections forsakes God, the Word, and way of God, and runs into all
exorbitancies; very shameful and odious are the ways and courses entered upon
by self-seekers. He that restraines not himself from self-seeking, will never
contain himself within the bounds and limits which God has prescribed to
him, but will wander from God, and the rule of holy walking, into many
forbidden evils. Sarah and Rahel being carried with an over-strong desire after
children, seeking themselves too much in that behalf, became impatient and
would not wait for God any longer in Gods way, they put themselves upon a
forbidden way, and Genesis 16.3. and 30.3, 4. 1 Samuel 15. Ios. 7.
gave their handmaids to their husbands. Saul contrary to the Lords
commandment, intending his own worldly profit, spares the best of the
Amalekitish beasts: Achan in a self-seeking humor lays his greedy hands upon
the golden wedge, and Babylonish garment, the cursed thing which God had
forbidden to be spared; there is no evil so odious, soul and hateful, which
he will not adventure upon, that is overswayed with the lust of self-seeking.

6. Self-seeking makes man unthankefull and discontented with his present
estate and condition, 6 Discontented.
though in it self an estate very full and comfortable: The eyes of a
self-seeker are so much upon what he has not, that he neither takes notice,
nor tastes the sweetness of what he has; his full vessel is an empty bottle,
and his Paradise in his own apprehension as a barren wilderness, his thoughts
are more perplexed with the desire of what he seems to want, then comforted
with the presence of what he does indeed possess; the more he has, the more
his desire of having is increased. There is no Eccles. 4.^.
end (says Solomon) of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with
riches: His abundance gives no satisfactory answer to his desires, he has no
contentment in what he has, but is full of murmuring and repining, he dreams
of a condition more happy then that wherein the Lord has set him, and
therefore loses the comfort of his present plentiful possession. This is the
constant an^ common lot of them that seek themselves and not the Lord Jesus,
to be strangers to contentment and satisfaction in the great abundance of the
world. A foolish son (says Solomon) is a Prove. 17.25. Eccl. 5 12.
grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him; his parents have
no contentment in him, such a foolish birth, such an unhappy possession is the
worldly fullness of self-seekers, a grief and bitterness to their souls,
they have no satisfaction with it, it is a bed of thorns, and a feast of gall
and gravel, Ps. 127.2. Eccles. 2.23.
bread of sorrows, as the Psalmist terms it: Their days (says Solomon) are
sorrows, and their travel grief, their heart takes not rest in the night,
they are eve^ discontented; the Lord gave Israel Manna from Heaven, he fed them
with Angels food; yet having a self-seeking lust within them, they were not
contented, they murmured and fell a lusting after the fleshpots of Egypt,
their Manna seemed to be a Number. 11.5. Genesis 3.
light bread: If God does not crucify man's carnal lusts and affections, man
meets with nothing but distraction and trouble in the choicest condition under
Heaven, what felicity like that of our first parents? being created after Gods
Image, placed in Paradise, and having nothing within or without them, to molest
them; yet through self-seeking having a desire to be as Gods, they undervalued,
and grew discontented with their present holy, happy, and blessed estate.
Surely did not the blessed vision and fruition of God abolish the lust of
self-seeking, man would in a short time be discontented with Heaven. Like the
lapsed Angels he would not long keep his station, but grow weary of that
glorious Kingdom.

CHAP. XIII.
SElf-seeking opens the ears of men to Satan, 7. Attentive to evil counsel.
and corrupt Counselors, makes men ready to give audience to Satan's
suggestions, and the persuasions of his instruments, prone to entertain any
ungracious counsel that may promote their own carnal ends, and further the
accomplishment of their fleshly and worldly purposes. This makes men hearken to
corrupt teachers, Satan's trumpeters. As the Israelites hearkened to 2 Samuel 20.2.
Sheba the son of Bichri when he blew the trumpet of Rebellion, and drew the
people from David: This makes men apt to receive him that Joh. 5.43.
comes in his own name, with a humane, carnal, and deceitful doctrine, when
like the deaf adder they stop their ears against him that comes in Gods name,
preaching Christ sincerely, seeking Gods glory, and handling the word of God
truly. Self-seekers are 1 John 4.5.
of the world, worldly minded, carnally disposed, and therefore they hear him
that speaks of the world, that delivers a carnal and earthly doctrine to
them. The Rev 13.3. 1 Kin 21.20.
world wonders after the beast, all self-seekers are very ready to become
Antichrists followers. Ahab was a man that sold himself to commit wickedness,
a great self-seeker, and when the Devil became a 1 Kin. 22.22.
lying spirit in the mouth of his Prophets, he gave them full and ready
audience, followed their counsel though to his utter ruin, contrary to the
charge of the true Prophet: Self-seeking makes a man a ready embracer, a great
admirer of corrupt persuasion, a profane despiser of wholesome admonition; our
first Parents inclining to self-seeking gave present entertainment to Satan's
counsel, and Genesis 3.
eat of the forbidden Tree: Self-seeking makes the heart to Satan's suggestions
like tinder to the fire, it kindles without any resistance. Judas having a
worldly and self-seeking spirit, his heart was Ioh. 13.2.
open to entertain Satan, as ready to betray Christ for gain, as the Devil
was to suggest the thought, or the Priests to offer the money: Self-seekers are
of all others the fittest subject to receive Satan's counsels, to swallow his
hooks when they are baited with something suitable to their own lusts, and
tending to their own ends, there is no power nor possibility for that man to
decline Satan's temptations, who is strongly addicted to self-seeking. Satan
seldom fails of accomplishing his end, in such as are given to the seeking of
their own ends.

8. Servile and abasing.
8. Self-seeking does exceedingly abase man, it makes man, the Lord of the
creature, to become the servant of the creature; It fills him with base thoughts
about the creature, with base counsels to gain the creature, with base and
servile love to the creature, with base confidence in the creature, with base
services under the creature; Self-seekers are even the most base of all
persons: Such are under the creature and their own lusts, as Israel under
Pharaohs burdens and taskmasters: Man by self-seeking spoils himself both of
corporal and spiritual freedom; therefore these are styled the Mat. 6.24.
servants of Mammon. The servant is not his own but his Masters, goes and comes
at his Masters command, cannot dispose of himself, but is disposed by his
Master, works not for himself but for his Master. Thus self-seekers are not
their own, but the creatures, go and come at the command of the creature: As
the soldiers in the Gospel went and came at the command of the Centurion,
Mat. 8.8.
and did what he would have them: They cannot dispose themselves to any good
duty, they cannot put themselves upon the service of Christ, they cannot marry
themselves unto Christ; but are altogether at the disposal of the creature;
they are so under the power of the creature, that with the invited guests in
the Parable, they cannot Lu. 14.1^.
come to Christ: They cannot intend Christ, the honor of Christ, and the
everlasting welfare of their own souls; the creature and their own lusts are
the prime and ultimate objects of their intendments; they can look neither
above nor beyond these: And the Apostle expresses the shameful abasement of
such men by terming their Phil. 3.19.
belly their God, and their glory their shame; their belly their God, true
worshippers put themselves under God, study how to please God, refer all to
to the glory of God: Self-seekers prostrate themselves under the creature,
study how to please their lusts, and refer all to their own corrupt and
carnal ends, and that wealth, that honor, that ease, that pleasure, that
applause wherein they now glory proves their shame at the last. The present
condition of self-seekers is a wretched bondage, and their latter end most
shameful and ignominious.

9. Self-seeking makes a man both an Idolater and an Idol. An Idolater in
serving the creature and his own lusts, 9. Idolatrous.
and an Idol in exalting and setting up himself in the room of God:
Self-seekers bow down to the creature, and to their own base and carnal
affections: As Gideons many thousands Judge. 7.6. Genesis 49.14, 15
bowed down to the waters. Jacob prophesied of Issachar, Issachar is a strong
Asle couching down between two burdens, and he saw that rest was good, and
the land that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a
servant unto tribute: Such base, sloathfull, and stupid asses are all
self-seekers, couching down between the creature and their fleshly lusts as
between two burdens: They see it appears to them in their carnal
apprehension, that the creature is good, that riches, honors, pleasures are
much to be desired, and that the fulfilling of their own lusts is very
pleasant, and therefore they bow down the shoulders to bear the commands and
injunctions of the creature, and all the impositions of the flesh, and become
servants unto tribute: To these they pay the tribute of distracting thoughts,
of tormenting cares, of carnal confidence of inordinate love, and of hard
service and base servitude, worshipping and serving (as the Apostle says) the
Romans 1.25.
creature more then the Creator. And for this cause Saint Paul styles covetous
self-seekers Idolaters, because their self-seeking does alienate them from God,
and draws that love and confidence, joy and delight which they should place in
God to the creature; and that service which they should employ for God, and
that subjection which they should yield to God, they bestow about, and yield
unto the creature and their own lusts. And as they are Idolaters for their
prostration of themselves to the creature and their own corrupt affections: so
they are Idols, For the exalting of themselves above God, minding, intending,
and seeking themselves and not God, they adore and serve themselves and not the
Lord, his s servants ye are (says Saint Paul) to whom ye obey: Romans 6.16.
Self-seekers obey not God, but themselves, they conform not themselves to the
rules of Gods word, but to the dictates of their own hearts; they propose not
the glory of God, but their own ends, and therefore they serve, and adore
themselves and not God: Self-seeking excludes the soul of man from all
communion with the true God, and carries it to the world as to a false God, and
so proves a double abomination in the sight of God.

10. Self-seeking is ever attended with self-loosing. He that seeks himself
and not Christ, 10. Self-losing.
loses both himself and Christ: He that seeks himself takes a false rule to
direct him, erreth in his seeking, and therefore loses in stead of finding: He
builds his work upon a false foundation, and therefore sinks in stead of
standing, like the house built upon the sand in the Parable: He puts himself
out of Gods service, and therefore misseth his great Lord and Masters wages: He
levels all his arrows to a false mark, and therefore like an Archer that
shoots below the mark, he shoots in vain: He leaves out God, God is not in
his Psalm. 10.4.
thoughts, he takes not God with him, he takes not Gods counsel to guide him,
Gods power to assist him, Gods blessing to make his undertaking prosperous and
successful; and therefore in stead of a blessing the curse attends and waits
upon him: He intends not God, but himself, and therefore God leaves him to
himself, to prove the Author and workman of his own ruin. Present
self-seekers and self-gainers prove in the event the greatest self-losers. The
last end and issue never answers the expectation of self-seekers; their labor
like the labor of the Ostritch is in vain: The Ostritch leaves her Job. 39
16.
eggs in the dust, the foot crusheth them, and the wild beast breaks them.
Self-seekers lay all their labors in the dust, all their care and desire, all
their industry and endeavor is about the things which are here below; they lay
all their eggs in the dust, and all their labors at last are crushed and
brought to naught; Rahel had Genesis 35 16, 17.
hard labor, but the birth of her belly proved the death of her body:
Self-seekers have hard labor, they labor like a woman in travel, but their
birth proves their death, their gain turns to their loss, their pleasure to
their torment, their honor to their shame. Against such the Lord denounces
woe in stead of joy, shame in stead of glory, and desolation in stead of
exaltation. Hab. 1.
Woe (says the Lord) to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house,
that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of
evil: Thou have consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and
have sinned against thy soul: For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it. Woe to him that builds a Town with
blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity: Behold is it not of the Lord of
Hoasts, that the people shall labor in the very fire, and the people shall
weary themselves for very vanity. Very great and shameful are the losses which
wait on self-seekers; their riches proves their poverty, their refuge becomes
their ruin, and their exaltation their shameful downfall; Very great is that
man's unhappiness who in the profane neglect of God and Christ Jesus, labors
to fill and furnish himself with earthly abilities: Self-seekers build on
false promises, and feed themselves with deceitful expectations: The Lord
turns their imaginary calm into a tempestuous storm, their devised paradise
into a troublesome wilderness, and their intended crown into real shame. The
last event of their undertaking does ever cross their first intention; that
which is unlawfully sought and gotten proves the instrument of man's great
discomfort and trouble. He that labors for himself, and not for God and
Christ Jesus, is vain in his labors, like him that builds on the sand, his
house sinketh as fast as he erects it: Like him that weaves a piece of cloth in
or over the fire, the fire burns it as fast as he weaves it. Loss, vexation,
shame and ruin is the recompense and portion of self-seeking: The estate of
him that has nothing is far more pleasant, blessed and comfortable, then of
him that has a great abundance by self-seeking. Of such the Lord says by the
Prophet, declaring the vanity, peril, and perniciousnesse of their labors,
they have Hos. 8.7.
sown the wind, they have labored in vain, as he that casts forth an empty
hand, strives to sow but sowes not, and they shall reap the whirlewinde; their
harvest, the fruit of their labors shall be more troublesome then their first
undertakings; they that will be rich (says the Apostle) they whose bent and
inclination is to themselves, and to the world, who chiefly mind themselves and
things earthly, fall into 1 Timothy 6.9.
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. Most wretched and uncomfortable is the gain
of self-seeking, Satan has great advantage against them, they expose
themselves to many temptations, they lay themselves open to his arrows to
wound them, the world like a snare intangles them, their lusts grow strong
within them, and get Lordship over them; and they make shipwreck of soul and
body, splitting the ship of their souls upon the rock of worldly riches, and
what they supposed should have been a staff to sustain them, becomes a
burden oppressing them, and what they thought would have been a spring
refreshing them, becomes a Sea swallowing and utterly consuming them. There is
no other cause of self-seeking but inbondagement to Satan, inthralment to the
world, servitude to corruption, separation from God, self-condemnation from
man's own conscience; emptiness in the greatest worldly fullness, straights in
the midst of all sublunary sufficiency, and a tempepestuous Sea of dismal
agitations, tossings, and terrors in the soul of man: Look upon all
self-seekers, from the first to the last, and you shall find them all
self-losers; Adam sought himself the bettering of his condition, but lost that
blessed Image in which God created him, and that pleasant Paradise wherein the
Lord had set him: Cain sought himself, and slew his brother Abel, but he lost
himself, he became a fugitive and vagabond upon the earth: Genesis 4.12.
Absolon sought himself, he strove much to seat himself in his Fathers
Throne; but he lost his life in the battle: Gehazi sought himself, he ran
after Naaman for two change of garments; but he proved a shameful loser, he
sought change of raiment, but God changed his clean into a leprous skin. The
Babylonish King sought himself, he said, he would exalt his Throne above the
Stars of God, and ascend above the height of the clouds, and be like the most
High: But he lost himself, he was brought down to hell, to the sides of the
pit; cast out of his grave like an abominable branch, and as a carkaise trodden
under foot. Judas sought himself, he sold his Master to gain a few pieces of
silver, but he lost himself, in the issue and upshot he went away and hanged
himself. Invaluable is the loss of self-seeking, heerby men loose their
spiritual freedom and become bondmen to their own lusts, to Satan and the
world, hereby they loose their communion and acquaintance with God, and go out
like Caine from the presence of the Lord, and are spiritual vagabonds upon the
Earth, hereby they loose the benefit of all Gods ordinances, living under them
as the blind man under the Sun, receiving no light from them, as Rocks in the
midst of a River, no way softened nor made fruitful by them; hereby they loose
the love of God, as a woman that seeks strange lovers loses the love of her
husband; hereby they loose the peace and comfort of their souls, Ps. 127.2.
and pierce themselves thorough with many sorrows, they make their bed a bed
of thorns, and their feast becomes gravel to their teeth and gall to their
palate, and at last they loose their souls and bodies forever. Happy is that
man's loss that loses all with the gain of Christ, cursed is that man's gain
that wins the world with the loss of Christ, he that has Christ has also the
true sweet and comfortable use of what he does possess, he that has not
Christ is a very slave and bondsman in the midst of his greatest possession, the
self-seeker neither truly enjoyes himself, nor any thing else.

11. Selfe-seeking works the heart of man to a base and slender esteem of holy
and heavenly things; 11. Undervaluing holy things
Christ his ordinances and benefits are nothing precious in the eyes of
selfe-seekers, their eyes are blinded, and see not the beauties of Christ,
their palats are distempered, and taste not the sweetness of Christ; their hand
is withered, they cannot receive Christ; they commit Jam. 4.4.
spiritual adultery with the world, and cannot love Christ; nothing but the
creature is precious in the eyes of self-seekers: Esau preferred a Genesis 25.32.
mess of pottage above his birthright, the men of Shechem esteemed the Jud. 9
9.
bramble above the Vine, the Olive and the Fig Tree; the self-seeker prefers
the poor, low and empty things, the very bramble of the world, above Christ
the true and living Vine, above the ordinances of Christ, whose fruit is better
then the fruit of the Olive and the Fig Tree, and above the holy and heavenly
inheritance, the blessed birthright of Gods newborn children: the Pharisees
were great self-seekers, they Joh. 12.
loved the praise of men more then the praise of God, they did all their works
to be seen of men; and as they were great seekers of themselves, so they were
strange undervaluers of Christ; they saw no Isa. 53.2, 3.
beauty nor comeliness in him for which they should desire him, they despised
and esteemed him not, they derided his doctrine, they nourished in themselves a
dishonorable opinion of his person, they said of him, Is not this the Mat. 13.
Carpenters son, is not his mother called Mary, and they were offended in
him; they reviled and despised him, by reason of the external humility of his
person, they drew matter of calumniation from the lownes of his outward
condition; such as judge of Christ and his ordinances according to the outward
appearance, are ever filled with base and contemptible apprehensions; the
Gaderines were Mat. 8.34.
great Swine-masters, and like their Swine they were fall of swinish
dispositions, grovelling upon the Earth and minding only things earthly,
trampling under their feet like Swine the precious things which Christ did cast
before them, and when the unclean spirit which Christ cast out, carried their
Swine into the Sea headlong, they desired Christ to depart from them;
self-seekers value the basest things of the world above the choicest things of
God, they had rather be deprived of Christ Jesus, then of the least and lowest
of the creatures.

12. Seven evil branches of this unhappy root. 1 Imbondagement.
12. Self-seeking shortly is a root of many unhappy branches, a spring of many
bitter streams. 1. It imbondageth men to their corrupt and carnal lusts, makes
them the servants of corruption, and puts them under the power and command of
the world, it robs them as the Lu. 10.
thieves in the Parable did the man traveling between Jericho and Jerusalem,
of all their spiritual abilities, it wounds them in their understandings that
they cannot see God; as the Philistines put out Sampsons eyes and made a slave
of him; it wounds them in their wills that they have no liberty, no inclination,
no disposition to choose or embrace Christ; it wounds them in the hand of their
faith, that they cannot believe in Christ, they cannot embrace nor lay hold on
Christ, it puts them under the creature as a servant under the command of his
Master, as an adulterer under the power of the Harlot.

2. Enmity.
Self-seeking fills man with enmity against his fellow brethren; other men's
success and happiness, is a self-seekers anguish. Joseph's brethren being led
by a self seeking spirit, hated him, because his Father loved him, the increase
of their indignation against him was according to the increase of his Fathers
love toward him; this moved Saul to envy and eye David, to lay snares for his
life; he that is given to self-seeking is far from all true love to his
fellow-brethren, their prosperity is a great eyesore unto him.

3. Self-seeking makes men merciless and cruel, 3 Cruelty.
the lives of them who eclipse the honor, or hinder the gain, or disturb the
pleasure of self-seekers are of no esteem with them. Why did Genesis 27.42.
Esau plot the death of Jacob? Why did Joseph's brethren conspire against him,
and cast him into the pit? but by reason of that dominion which self-seeking
lusts had within them. Self-seeking dissolves the strongest bonds and
obligations of natural affection, and turns fraternall unity into unnatural
and mortal enmity.

4. Self-seeking fills men with causlesse, 4.Causles jealousies.
base and cursed jealousies over others, and makes them wrong interpreters of
other men's actions, and presumptuous and injurious expounders of other men's hid
and secret purposes; this self-seeking lust made Pharaoh jealous over the
Israelites, least they should Ex. 1.10.
join with his enemies, and make war against him: This made Herod jealous of
Christ, fearing least Christ would take his crown and Kingdom from him; what
made the chief Priests and Pharisees jealous of Christ, preaching many heavenly
Sermons, and working many miracles among them; but an ambitious and
self-seeking lust of theirs, they feared least thereby they should loose their
place and Nation; Christ came as a Servant to minister to them, to suffer for
them, to bring them to an heavenly Kingdom, and they out of their self-seeking
humor suspected him, least by his means they should loose their present
jurisdiction; self-seekers are very uncharitable in their constructions of
other men's purposes and undertakings.

5. Soule-torturing grief.
5. Self-seeking creates much needles, unhappy and soul-torturing grief, and
anguish in the hearts of self-seekers, like gall in the cup, a thorn in the
foot and strong wind in the Sea, it imbitters their estate, troubles their
walk and makes their inward man a very tempest; it makes their food bread of
Ps 127.2.
sorrows, their bed a bed of thorns, and their day a day of clouds;
self-seeking Ahab is 1 Kin 21.
sick upon his bed for want of Naboths vineyard; self-seeking Pharaoh is
grieved because the Israelite multiplieth: the self-seekers in the Psalmist are
grieved, Ps 112.10.
gnash with the teeth and melt away to see the prosperity of the godly and the
frustration of their own desires; every self-seeker is a self-tormentor, he
that is given unto self-seeking needs none besides himself to molest and vex
him; he carries his executioner still within him.

6. Unsuccessefullnesse.
6. Self-seeking usually proves unsuccessefull, the event does contradict their
expectation; Rebecca out of her strong affection sought by sinister means to
get the Genesis 27.15.
blessing for Jacob, she waited not for it in Gods way, she obtained it in her
own way, and when she had procured it, how fared it, she was greatly crossed
Esau purposed to ver. 42, 43.
kill Jacob, Jacob is sent away and becomes a stranger to his mother; the
crosses of self-seekers ever exceed their comforts; Sarah was very desirous of
children, the Lord restrained her from bearing, she Genesis 16.2, 3, 4
gives her maid Hagar to her husband, but what was the issue of it; Hagar
conceived, and Sarah was despised in her eyes, the birth of self-seeking proves
uncomfortable, the self-seekers intended instrument of consolation, turns to an
instrument of vexation; Lot Genesis 13.10, 11.
beheld all the plain of Jordan that it was well watered every where, and he
chose it for his habitation, and pitched his tent toward Sodom; But it came to
pass that the King of Shinar with three other Kings, Genesis 14.12.
took Lot and all his goods and departed, thus was Lot crossed in his choice;
the chiefest worldly fulness is often attended with the greatest crosses, and
men meet with most disquiet, where they promise themselves most comfort; it is
the Lords and not the worlds presence that ministers both safety and
contentation to Gods servants.

7. 7. Loss of the comfort of present havings.
Self-seeking takes away the comfort of what man possesses for the present;
the having of all is as nothing to him that is possessed with a spirit of
self-seeking; Ahabs crown and kingdom neither content nor comfort him, having
a lusting humor after Naboths vineyard, the want of this does more molest and
vex him, then the having of all the residue does solace him, for this he came
heavy and 1 Kin. 21 4.
displeased to his house, laid him down upon his bed, turned away his face and
would eat no bread: Most unhappy and wretched is the estate and condition of
that person whom God delivers over to the lust and humor of self-seeking, this
makes him apprehend the Sun of his prosperity, as a dark cloud wherein is no
light, and the deep river of his earthly abundance, as an empty pit wherein are
no waters. Haman was highly honored by Ahasuerus, yet having an ambitious and
self-seeking lust within him, when he had related all his honors, concluded,
All this Hest. 5.13.
availes me nothing so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings
gate: Many a gracious poor man that has nothing of the world, has more
satisfaction then he that has the greatest earthly abundance with an
iniatiable greedy and self-seeking lust within him: great is the vanity,
emptiness and vexation of worldly fulness without the blessed presence of
Christ Jesus; happy is the soul to whom God gives freedom from the lust of
self-seeking. Self-seeking lust how to be handled.
And this insatiable, polluting, base and imbondaging lust, let us mortify and
put to death with all the concomitants and attendants of it, as Joshua
destroyed self-seeking Achan with all that appertained to him; this let us
wound with godly sorrow, self-denial and a vocation of our hearts from the
world, as Joab with three darts thrust through self-seeking Absalom; this let
us root up as a most pernicious weed out of the garden of our souls; this let
us put to death, as a most dangerous traitor and mutinous rebel in the
commonweal of our hearts; let us daily strive for the increase of our liberty
from self-seeking, as from the most loathsome of all spots, the most servile of
all imbondagements the most sly and subtle of all snares, the most mortal of
all diseases, and the most prevalent of all enticing, soule-deceiving and
soule-slaying instruments.

CHAP. XIV.
IS it their property and practice who are endowed with the life of true
holiness to prostrate themselves and all that is theirs under the feet of
Christ Jesus? Then here may we see with open face the vanity, impiety and
peril 1. 1. Self-admiration very dangerous.
Of Self-admiration, of man's having high thoughts, an arrogant opinion of
himself, and an overweening conceit of his own excellency and worth. Goliath
much admired the tallnesse of his own stature, and the bigness of his armor,
vain and carnal man is often much taken, and extraordinarily lifted up with
the thought of his own worth, and transcendency of his own gifts, contrary to
the charge of the Apostle, To. 12.16.
be not wise in your own conceits: Do not dream of a sufficiency of a light
in the lamp of your own souls, take not upon you to be your own guides and
Counselors, presume not of a fulness at home in the house of your own
hearts: to which agrees that of Solomon, Pro. 3.5, 7.
lean not to thine own understanding, be not wise in thine own eyes: make
not thine own abilities the foundation whereupon thou buildest, the light by
which thou walk, the strength by which thou stand, nor the weapon by
which thou expectest the conquest, promise nothing to thy self of thy self;
be neither confident in, nor exalted with an opinion of thine own fulness and
worth, Six evils of self-admirations.

1. Ignorance.


For 1. Such as are over-swayed with self-opinion and self-admiration are very
ignorant, they know not the state and condition of their own souls. Ephraim
had gray hairs here and there upon him, howbeit (says the Prophet) he knew it
not. Self-admirers are full of the characters of profaneness carry about them
the signs and symptoms of spiritual blindness, baseness, uncleanness,
poverty, bondage and everlasting ruin, but they know it not: No man more
ignorant of himself, then he that has highest thoughts of himself, the
Pharisees were great selfe-admirers, extraordinarily lifted up with the thought
of their own wisdom, holiness and perfection, yet very miserably blind and
ignorant, blind leaders of the blind, To. 7.9.
without the law, as S. Paul confesses, without the knowledge of the law in
their understandings, without the inscription of the law in their hearts,
without conformity to the law in their lives. Without the light of the law
discovering their sins, without the power of the law humbling their souls;
ignorance of man's own vileness begets self-admirations; the Laodicean was
strangely puffed up with thoughts of his own spiritual excellencies, and the
maine ground thereof was his blindness, he said he was Rev. 3.17.
rich and increased in goods and wanted nothing, not knowing that he was poor,
blind, naked, miserable and wretched, he that is of all men the worst, is
usually in his own opinion the best: carnal men thorough their blindness,
do often take that for very great spiritual riches, which in the account of
God is no other then very poverty and baseness.

2. Self-admirers are non-apprehensive of the Majesty and perfection of God,
and transcendent beauties of Christ, 2. Non-apprehensivenesse of Gods and
Christ's perfections.
man's opinion of himself is suitable to his apprehension of God, the more
apprehensive the soul is of Gods incomprehensible Majesty, holiness and
glory, the more it is abased in the sense of its own emptiness, baseness and
impurity. I have heard of thee (says Job unto the Lord) by the hearing of the
ear, but now mine eye sees thee, wherefore I Job. 42.6.
abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes, he that is filled with the
admiration of Gods perfections is emptied of self-admiration, and made very low
and base in his own thought and meditation of himself. When the Prophet Esaias
had in vision seen the Lord sitting upon the throne, he cried out and
complained of his uncleanness, then he said, Isa 6.1.
woe is me I am undone, I am a man of unclean lips, the sight of other men's
rich and costly apparel, makes a Ps. 10.4.
of such the Psalmist says, God is not in all their thoughts; were the soul
of man well studied and insighted in, full, and frequent in the meditation of,
and thoroughly acquainted with the Lords perfections, he could not but be much
abased in the knowledge, sense and feeling of his own imperfections, His
comeliness with Daniel would be turned into Dan. 10.8, 9
corruption, and his face toward the ground, he would be humbled below the
dust, and be baser in his own eye than the earth: men's unacquaintednesse with
Gods excellencies is a maine cause of their being self-admirers.

3. Ingratitude and sacrilege.
3. Self-admirers are, very ungrateful and sacrilegious, they rob God of the
praise of all his gifts, they ascribe all unto themselves, they say with
Nebuchadnezar, is not this great Babell that I have built by the strength of
mine own arm, and for the honor of my name, as they refer all to their
own ends, so they look on all as proceeding from their own strength, They
Hab 1 16.
sacrifice (says the Prophet) to their net, and burn incense to their drag.
God is neglected, their own art, wit, power and industry are admired, they
deisie themselves and their own abilities. God is not regarded, his honor is
wholly ecclipsed; they go not like David in the 1 Samuel 17.45.
name of the Lord, in the name of Gods authority commanding them, in the name
of Gods wisdom guiding them, in the name of Gods power assisting them, in the
name of Gods glory to honor him; but like Goliath they go in their own name,
in the name of their, own pride exciting them, in the name of their own fancy
leading them, in the name of their own wit, art, and strength helping them,
and in the name of their own praise and honor moving them, this is the Alpha
and Omega of their undertaking, the first in intention, the last in execution.
Self-admirers of all others are the most injurious unto God and Christ Jesus.

4. Self-admirers are incapable of Christ and his graces, 4 Uncapablenes of
Christ.
no man partakes less of Christ, Pro. 29.20.
then he that does most admire himself, such a man has no right, nor clear
discerning of Christ, no sense and feeling of his want of Christ, no hunger nor
thirst after Christ, no honorable opinion and esteem of Christ, no room in his
soul to receive and entertain Christ, and therefore continues empty of Christ.
Ioh. 9.41.
There is more hope (says Solomon) of a fool then of a man that is wise in
his own eyes: he is full of self-wisdome, Pro. 27.7.
and therefore is incapable of instruction, as a full vessel of other liquor,
the Pharisees had their own learning in such admiration, that they utterly
rejected Christ's Doctrine. The full stomach (says Solomon) loatheth the
honey-combe, the full soul loatheth, slighteth, undervalueth those Doctrines
and gifts of Christ, which are sweeter then the honey or the honey-combe.
Self-admirers are very profane despisers of Gods choysest gifts and graces, and
as they are full of self-opinion, so God turns them away empty of things
heavenly and spiritual, he sends the rich away Luke 1.53.
empty. God fills that man's soul alone with heavenly goodness, who is emptied
of all opinion of his own excellencies.

5. Self-admiration alienates the soul from God, 5. Alienation from God.
cuts off all communion and acquaintance between the soul and God. God will
not look in grace and favor toward him, God opposes himself against him, 1
Pet. 5.5.
he resists the proud by withholding his grace from him, by rejecting his
prayer and supplication, by infatuating his wisdom, by dissipating his power,
by crossing his undertaking, by leaving him as a prey to Satan, and pouring
contempt upon him. The Lord is very terrible in his opposition against the
proud person. Very great and uncomfortable is the distance between God and
self-admirers. He that admires himself cannot draw nigh to God by holy and
humble supplication, pride has such dominion within him, he cannot draw nigh
to God by faith; he leanes so much upon himself, he cannot draw nigh to God by
love, self-love does so strongly oversway him, he cannot draw nigh to God by
obedience, his pride will not suffer him to stoop to Gods precepts; he cannot
draw nigh to God by holy hunger and thirst after Gods gifts and graces, he is
so transported with the thought of his own fulness: Self-admiration excludes
man from all the ways of communion between God and his children, therefore
Pro ^.5, 6, 7.
trust in the Lord (says the Wiseman) and lean not to thine own
understanding, in all thy ways acknowledge him, be not wise in thine own
eyes, fear the Lord and depart from evil: implying that as long as a man
leanes to his own wisdom, and has himself in admiration, he can neither
trust in God, nor humbly acknowledge God, nor truly fear God, nor depart from
evil, but continues in the state of a total and uncomfortable alienation and
estrangement from God.

6. Shame and confusion.
6. Self-admiration is attended with shame and confusion at last; Goliath much
admired himself, his own stature and armor, 1 Samuel 17.
yet was shamefully overthrown in the battle, the Sword in which he gloried
cut off his head. God often turns the instrument and matter of man's pride,
into the instrument and matter of man's shame. Nebuchadnezar magnified himself
above measure in his Palace, which he had built, Dan. 4.30, 31.
but from thence he was driven to dwell and eat grass among the beasts; the
Lord will make the condition of proud people most base and contemptible; he
that magnifies himself above men is unfit for the society of men; beasts and
brutish creatures are the fittest conforts for ambitious self-admirers.

Cure of self-admiration.
Look then, o man, upon the baseness and uncleannes of thy Original, upon the
absence of all spiritual good, upon the presence and plenitude of all sin,
upon thy imbondagement unto Satan, upon thy inthralment unto the creature, upon
thy servitude under many noisome lusts, upon the rottennes and deceitfulnes of
thy heart, upon the loathsomnes of thy ways, upon the imperfection of thy best
services, upon the strict account which thou must make for all thy abilities;
and be no more a self-admirer, but a self-shamer, a self-condemner, a humbler
of thy soul, and an admirer of God and Christ Jesus, for all thy freely
received favors.

CHAP. XV.
SEcondly, In this may we also behold the pernicious and hateful evil of
self-exaltation: Danger of self-exaltation opened and dissuaded.
man's magnifying himself above the statutes and ordinances of God, by setting
up his own inventions; above his brethren, by thinking better of himself then
of others, hunting after the praise and applause of men, striving to commend
himself to men, and to make himself glorious in the eyes of men; this is
repugnant to the property and practice of them that live the life of true
holiness, of them that prostrate themselves and all that is theirs under the
feet of Christ Jesus, and evil from which the Apostle disswades us, Gal. 5.26.
let us not be desirous of vain glory. Let us not exalt our selves above
others, let us not strive nor study to be magnified of others, let us not
please and bless our selves in the vain applause of others; it is not humane
applause, but Gods approbation, which ministers matter of true glorying to a
Christian; we should rejoice to see God glorified, but fear to hear our
selves applauded, least our persons be idolized, least our hearts be vainly
elevated, and Gods glory obscured. It is the crown and glory of a Christian to
abase himself in the eyes of his Brethren for Gods exaltation; but shame at
last will be that man's portion, who is ambitious and studious of
selfe-exaltation; that man has no cause to think that God will at last put
the crown of glory upon his head, who now takes the crown of praise from his
God, 1 Samuel 2.30.
them that honor me, says the Lord, will I honor, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed; them that honor me, by consecration of themselves
to my service, by subjection unto my precepts, by sincere intendment of me, and
my glory in their undertakings, them will I honor, with the communication of
my choysest graces to their souls, with the dispensation of my blessing upon
their labors, by causing their way to be prosperous, and by making them
amiable and acceptable in the eyes of their godly brethren, and by putting into
the hearts of their very enemies, an honorable opinion of them; humble
subjection under God, holy walking with God, and comfortable fruition of the
witness of God, is the most bright and beautiful crown of a Christian; he
that can most readily suffer himself to be abased for God, shall undoubtedly be
most highly exalted by God; but God shall cover that man's face with shame and
confusion, who dishonours God by false exaltation, for they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed, says the Lord; they that despise me, by nourishing
dishonorable thoughts in themselves of my most glorious and incomprehensible
essence, of my most sacred and divine attributes, of my most wise and
unsearchable counsels, or of the high and holy way of my most powerful, just
and gracious providence; they that despise me, by contemning my statutes, by
neglecting my ordinances, by slighting my servants, by profaning my name and my
service, or by not using and benefitting by my word, by my chastisements and
favors; they shall be lightly esteemed, accounted vile in my sight, and made
vile in the eyes of men; he that exalts himself and his own lusts to the
dishonor of his God, is of all persons the most base and ignominious. And self
exaltation is indeed a very great and dangerous evil. For

Evils of self-exaltation 1 Root and spring of foul impieties.
1. Self-exaltation is the root and spring of many foul impieties, the unhappy
mother of many cursed daughters; man's pride and profane contempt of Gods
precepts, is the Original of all vices, man's elevating himself and his own
corrupt affections and carnal purposes above the sacred limits which God has
set him, leads him into every transgression: Pride in the heart, like Sheba in
Israel, blows the Trumpet and draws the whole soul into rebellion against
God, as he drew Israel to rebel against David. Self-exaltation moved our first
Parents to eat the forbidden fruit; Corah, Dathan and Abiram to rebel against
Moses; Saul to plot the death of David; Pharaoh to lay heavy burdens upon the
children of Israel; Absolon to labor the deposition of his Father from the
throne: Pride makes a man H^b. 2.5. Pro. 13.10. Psa. 10.2. Psa. 119.69. Psa.
123.4.
in^atiable in his desires, contentious with his neighbors, injurious to his
fellow servants, slanderous in his speeches; a contemner of such as are truly
holy and gracious, and impatient of the yoke of Gods precepts; thorough pride
man will not have Christ rule over him, he will not stoop and bow to Gods
Commandment, but exalts himself above God, and becomes a lawgiver to
himself, walking after the counsel and imagination of his own heart; God has
ever least possession, where pride has most sway and dominion; all sorts of
vices are the Subjects of the Commonweal of that soul, where pride sits in
the heart as a King in his throne: Pride (says Augustine) is the beginning,
Superbia est omnium peccatorum initium and sinis, and causa; quum non solum
peccatum est ipsa superbia, etc.
end and cause of all sin, pride being not only sin, but also no sin can,
could or may be without pride, since sin is nothing else but a contempt of
God, whereby we despise his precepts, and nothing persuades man to this but
pride; and pride (says Aquinas) is the beginning of all sin; in regard of
time, the first sin of the Devil in heaven, and of Adam in Paradise; in
regard of the cause, contempt of God the cause of sin, being found in every
sin, and in regard of Original, all other vices springing either mediately or
immediately from this; the more a man exalts himself, the more he dishonours
God, the more a man does lift himself up in his own conceit and opinion, the
more he does cast and plung himself into the gulf and mire of spiritual
pollution: fulness of pride and fullness of uncleanness are inseparable
companions.

2. Self-exaltation is the patron and protector of all other vices, 2. Patron
of all vices.
this blinds men, that they cannot see their sins, this hardens men, that
they will not confess their sins, this makes men such admirers of themselves
and their own ways that they apprehend their very vices to be virtues, this
makes men studious and artificial to cloak and color, and hide their sins,
this makes instruction and admonition the means of suppressing sin
contemptible, and causes man with impudency and shameless boldness to
maintain and plead for his profaneness, the soul which learnes not to be
humble, cannot cease from transgression; pride among other vices is like Goliath
among the Philistines, the Philistines were invincible until Goliath was
overthrown, other lusts in the soul of man are impugnable, until pride and
self-exaltation is cast down, man's labor in the work of mortification is
vain and fruitles until his pride is mortified, the spiritual conquest is
never gotten, as long as pride bears the dominion: He that overcomes not this,
overcomes no lust; Selfe-exaltation in the soul of man is like a Castle or
Fort, and other vices like houses built under the Castle, which cannot easily
be assaulted and beaten down, because the Fort defends them, the overthrow of
other vices is impossible, until the Castle of pride is beaten down in the
heart of man; the Pharisees being given to self-exaltation, to the seeking and
lifting up of themselves, were under the power of every base lust, erroneous,
superstitious, covetous, malicious, their very piety was nothing but
hypocrisy; he that does not cease from himself will cease from no sin, if he
be but once put upon the temptation; Pro. 3.7.
therefore be not wise (says Solomon) in thine own eyes, fear the Lord and
depart from evil, implying that where there is not a cessation from
self-wisdome and self-exaltation, there is no fear of God, no keeping of Gods
precepts, no disposition, no care to please God, no cessation from sin for
conscience sake, therefore take away this vice (says Chrysostom) that men
would not appear to men; Toll boc vitiu^ ut nolint homines apparere hominibus
and sine labor omnia vitia resecantur
this vice of self-exaltation, and all vices are cut off without labor. Upon
the death of the firstborn of Pharaoh the children of Israel were delivered,
upon the mortification of pride, the firstborn of the spiritual Pharaoh, the
souls of men obtain a gracious freedom. Goliahs head being cut off, all the
Philistines fled, the death of pride is the slight of all sin; he that exalts
himself remains both a stranger to the life, power and comfort of all
godliness, and a nurse and patron to all unclean and base affections.

3. Most invincible of all vices.
3. Self-exaltation is the most invincible of all vices; the roots thereof are
so deep and strong, and so largely spread in the heart of man, it puts the
soul at such a great distance from God, makes man so incapable of Christ, and
heavenly wisdom, so weds man unto himself, and causes man so to please and
delight himself in himself, so to prize the applause of man, and to slight
the approbation of God, that there is no disease in the soul of man so uneasily
cured, no weed in the garden of man's heart so uneasily plucked up, no enemy in
the commonweal of man's soul so difficultly overcome as self-exaltation, it is
the hardest task that ever man undertook, truly to deny himself and fully to
prostrate and put himself under God and Christ's yoke. Pharaoh did many things
in the way of love and honor to Joseph, he put his ring upon his hand and
arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and set him over his house, but yet he
reserved this unto himself, to be greater in the throne then Joseph; man may
do much in the way of outward zeal for God, he may exalt God very far,
above his profit, above his pleasure, above his peace, yea above his life, and
yet still reserve to himself a pre-eminence above God, he may cloth the
naked, feed the hungry, and give his body to be burned in the cause of God, and
yet do all this for himself, more then for his God, for his own applause
more then for the praise of God, for the having of a name with men, more then
for the glorifying of the name of God. Of all conquests, selfe-conquest is the
most difficult, most excellent, most noble and glorious, he that can Pro. 16.32.
rule his spirit (says Solomon) his proud, his self-seeking and self-exalting
spirit, is better then he that takes a City. Man has no greater enemy then
himself, he never does more excellently then when he overcomes himself, the
overcoming of a Kingdom is nothing in comparison of man's conquest of his own
corruption, pride is the first evil in man's departure from God, and the last
evil which is overcome in man returning unto God. 2 Samuel 23 12 Cum been
pugnaris cum cuncta subjecta putaru, que post intestat vincenda superbia restat.
Shamma stood it out and defended the field when the people fled.
Self-exaltation stands it out like a mighty champion in the heart of man, when
all other lusts seem to fly; when other lusts go out like fire that wants
fuel, yet this lust of self-exaltation, as long as any thing of the old man
remains in man, will put it self forth and strive to soar aloft, and climb
up in the thron of God. Man has most cause to watch and pray against
self-exaltation of all the evils which are within him.

4. Self-exaltation corrupts and destroys all the gifts and graces bestowed
on man; 4. Corrupter of all gifts
the evil herb in the Prophets pot made the pot a pot of death; 2 Kin 4.40.
ambition and self-exaltation in the soul of man marres all the excellencies
of man, turns all his gifts into a pot of death, poisons all the endowments of
man, the more he has received, the less mindful he is of God, the higher
thoughts he conceives of himself, the more able and active he shows himself
in evil, and the more he sleights and scorns all instruction: That man of all
others is the fittest instrument to do the work of the prince of darkness in
whom abilities and a proud spirit are concurrent; this like leaven sowrs the
whole lump of man's virtues, the Ex. 15.25.
tree sweetened the waters of Marah which were bitter, but this like gall and
wormwood sowres and imbitters those gifts and abilities which in themselves are
very sweet and of singular use, making virtue and the duties of piety, subject
and serviceable to man's vainglory; it is Gregory's observation that as
humility cuts the sinews of all vices, and strengthens all virtues, so pride
destroys all virtues, and strengthens all vices; pride is a very pernicious
and venomous herb, poisoning all the liquor in the pot, his virtues will at
the last be censured as vices, in whom the ambitious humor of self-exaltation
bears dominion, the least measure of grace with humility and meekness is
far better then the greatest abilities with a proud spirit: It is better
feeding on a slender dish well seasoned, then on a great dish furnished with
all dainties having poison mingled with it.

5. Spiritual barrenness.
5. Self-exaltation keeps the soul barren, barren of knowledge; he that exalts
himself regards not wholesome counsel, he rejects the Word of God, and there
is no true wisdom in him; the proud (says the Apostle) 1 Timothy 6.4.
knows nothing: Nothing of God the Father regenerating him, of Christ
redeeming him, of the Spirit sanctifying him, of the Word enlightening,
humbling, changing and renewing him; he leanes upon his own corrupt and
carnal reason, a lamp wherein is no light; the proud man's light is darkness,
his very knowledge is miserable and wretched ignorance; he continues barren of
Faith, he builds on man and not on Christ, How can ye Ioh. 5.44.
believe (says Christ) who seek honor one of another, and not the honor
which comes from God; he remains barren of love, a self-lover, and no lover
of God, the motion of his heart is terminated within himself, he brings forth
all his fruit unto himself, and is an Hos. 10.1.
empty vine in Gods accounts he continues barren of all grace. God giving grace
to the humble, but Iam. 4 6.
resisting the proud. Isidore relates that on the mountain on Libanus there
are Cedars very tall, and gloriously flourishing, but never bearing fruit, and
the reason is rendered, because the Mountains on which they grow are so high,
that they receive not the reflection of the Sunbeams, and the waters
naturally descend unto the valleys. Thus self-exalters seated on the high
Mountains of common abilities are barren of all fruit acceptable unto God,
because they are neither savingly enlightened, nor warmed with the beams of the
Sun of Righteousness, nor watered with the dew and moisture of heavenly grace;
none more empty of saving goodness then such as are most exalted in their own
imaginations.

6. Self-exaltation abaseth God: 6. Abasement of God.
The Philistines placed their Dagon above the Arc, the proud man sets himself
above God, ambitious self-exalters, like so many petty Antichrists, exalt
themselves above all that is called God. They set themselves above the law of
God, they Ps. 2.2.
break the bands thereof asunder and cast away the cords thereof from them,
they serve not God according to Gods institution, but after their own
invention, instead of receiving Gods prescription, they prescribe how God shall
be served by them: they exalt themselves above the Ministers of God, they
esteem not their instruction, their words are in their account but babbling;
they exalt themselves above the offices of Christ, they entertain not Christ as
a Prophet instructing them, as a Priest to sanctify them, as a King to bear
spiritual dominion within them; they exalt themselves above the attributes of
God, above the dominion of God, refusing subjection above the wisdom of God,
rejecting his counsel, not suffering themselves to be guided by him, and above
the power of God, resting upon an arm of flesh, and not upon the arm of the
Lord; there is no sin that makes man more injurious unto God, nor that sets man
in greater opposition against God, then self-exaltation; all other vices, says
Gregory, fly from God to the creature, as covetous to gold and silver, luxury
to fleshly delights, etc. Only pride opposes it self against God and usurps
that unto it self which is proper to God. I say unto you (says Bernard) that
every proud man exalts himself above God, for God will have his will to be
done, and the proud man will have his will to be done, but God only in things
which right and reason does approve, the proud man in things which are beside
and against both right and reason; man does very shamefully abase God by
exalting himself and his own will, above the word and will of God.

7. Self deceitfulness.
7. Self-exaltation deceives, making man think himself wise, when he is
ignorant; holy, when he is profane; free, when he is captive; full, when he is
empty: It makes man appear unto himself to be another then in deed he is.
Like him in the Prophet that dreamed he had eaten, and was full, but when he
awakened he found himself empty: No man more apt to be deluded then he that is
self-conceited and desirous to be applauded.

8. Shameful abasement of man.
8. This likewise shamefully abaseth man, makes him the consort and very
habitation of Satan. God dwells with the humble, Satan with the proud, whom God
resists, Satan possesses, the more a man does exalt himself against God,
the more he does abase himself under Satan, the more God with-drawes himself
from him, the nearer Satan draws to him, the more God abhorres him, the more
delight Satan takes in him; and therefore the proud man is not unfitly termed by
one, umbraculum Satanae, a shadow set by Satan against the Sun of
Righteousness, driving the light of grace from him, and making himself a
shadow for Satan to sleep and rest in. O how dishonorable, base and shameful
is their condition, who seek their own honor with Gods dishonor: He that
most magnifies himself above others, is the most base of all others: He alone
that puts himself and all that is his under Christ is truly honorable; he
that exalts himself and denies obedience to Christ is most base and
contemptible; he that is not Gods holy and gracious servant is Satan's shameful
and unhappy slave.

9. And lastly, Self-exaltation alienates man from Heaven; 9 Alienation from
heaven.
the way to Heaven is by humility and self-denial; Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer ascending the hill, 1 Samuel 14. crept upon their hands and their
feet; Christ humbled himself and then he was exalted, he went by the Cross to
the Crown, and all believers his armour-bearers and followers, as many as
intend Heaven must tread the steps of Christ, veil and bow to Christ's Scepter,
he must learn of Christ to be meek and lowly, he must deny himself and take
up his Cross and follow Christ, or he can never enter into Christ's glorious
rest; hell is the appointed habitation for every soul that is not humble, God
will cast down them that exalt themselves; the Lord will shame them, who
honor themselves and not him, this is the great evil and danger of
self-exaltation.

CHAP. XVI.
IF you demand how it comes to pass that vain man is so prone and forward to
exalt himself, Grounds of man's pronenes to self-exaltation.
to magnify himself in the eyes of men, and so slow and backward to exalt and
set up Christ?

I answer, this arises 1. 1 Man's ignorance of his base estate.
From man's ignorance of his own corrupt and base estate; did man see how he is
a dead man in whom is Ephesians. 4 19.
no life of grace, a bondman, a spiritual Isa. 49.9.
prisoner unto Satan, having many lusts like chains and fetters tying him, an
To. 7.18. Lev. 13.
empty house wherein dwells no good, and a loathsome Leper having no
spiritual beauty on him, but altogether deformed and defiled with the
contagion of sin, he would with the Leper in Leviticus lay his hand upon his
mouth, and cry out, unclean, unclean, unclean; Paul while he saw not the
baseness and badnesse of his natural estate, put no price upon Christ, walked
as an adversary against Christ, being filled with high thoughts of himself;
but after the commandment Romans 7.9.
came, presenting his spots like a glass before him; he humbled himself, he
was in his own apprehension as a dead man, in whom was no life, no beauty, no
excellency, then he was an abhorring to himself, and Christ was precious in
his eyes, then all was dung and dross in comparison of the Phil. 3.8.
excellent knowledge of Christ; then he did no more exalt himself but Christ;
then he determined to know 1 Cor. 2.2.
nothing but Christ and him crucified; then he preached Christ and not
himself; then he put himself wholly upon the service of Christ, and made it
his crown and comfort to draw men unto Christ. He that is most ignorant of
himself, is most proud, and most studious to exalt himself. Man's ignorance of
his necessity of Christ makes him regardlesse to exalt Christ.

2 Inconsiderateness of receivings.
2. Man's inconsiderateness of his receivings. He considers not that he is a
cisterne, and God the fountain, a branch and Christ the root, that all that he
has is a Iam. 1.17.
gift, a borrowed thing, the Lords and not his; He remembers not that he has
nothing of his own besides his sin, that all his 2 Cor. 3.5.
sufficiency is of God, both natural and moral, temporal and spiritual, as
all the bright and lightsome sufficiency of the air is from the Sun: He
cannot sensibly confess with David, 1 Chronicles. 29.
riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thy hand is
power and might, and in thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto
all. Vain man looks on all that he has, as Nehuchadnezzar on his Dan. 4.30.
Babel, as on a house of his own building, as on a tree of his own planting.
He Hab 1.16.
sacrifices to his own net, and burns incense to his own dragge; and
therefore like Nebuchadnezzar, he exalts and magnifies himself and not Christ.
He that does not see and feel Christ in his receivings, can never admire
Christ in them, nor be drawn to Christ by them, but is vainly puffed up
against Christ in the presence of them. When Jesuran Deuteronomy. 32.15.
waxed fat, was filled with all earthly abundance, he kicked, rebelled against
God, refused the Laws and ordinances of God, he forsook God which made him,
and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. And why so, whence proceeded
this exalting of himself, and this sleighting of his God. The reason is
tendered: He was unmindfull of the rock that begat him, and forgot the God
that formed him, He remembered not that God was the author of his being, the
rock of his preservation, and the fountain that ministered all his fullness to
him. The great receivings which should move man to walk humbly with God,
through inconsideration do often occasion man to exalt himself against God.

3. Forgetfulness of man's place and station. 3. Forgetfulness of man's place
and station.
Man remembers not that his place is not the place of a Master, but of a
servant, not of a King but of a Subject, not of a Lord but of a Steward: The
greatest earthly Potentates are under God as servants, liable to an Luk 16 2^
account for all their receivings, bound to employ their Mat 25 23. 2 Cor. 8.14.
talents to Christ's advantage, to minister to others of their abundance, and
not to exalt themselves above others, because they possess more then others.
The Mother has full breasts given her not for insultation over the child, but
for ministration of milk to the child; God fills the breasts of some with
great abundance, not to magnify themselves above others, to trample and tread
down others, but to communicate to others necessities. Kings and Queens are
the Isa 49.23.
nurses of the Church, no man's greatness exempts him from obedience unto God,
and serviceablenesse to the Church of God: On some God bestows but little to
try their patience, on others he conferreth much to exercise their humility and
meekness: But man's forgetfulness of this does often occasion him to walk
insolently toward his poor brethren, and in stead of being an Olive, a Vine,
a Fig Tree to his brethren to shadow, feed, refresh, and cheer them: He
becomes a Judge 9.9.
bramble to vex and annoy them; in stead of honoring God with his substance,
he labors to honor himself in the eyes of others.

4. Misprision of the true glory of man. 4. Misprision of Man's glory.
Man's honoring Christ is the truest honor of man: Holy and humble obedience
is the honor of a Christian; The honoring of the Father, Husband, Sovereign,
is the honor of a Son, a Wife, a Subject; and the honoring of Christ is the
glory of them who are the Children, the Spouse and Subjects of Christ. He
(says Saint Paul) that in Romans 14.18
these things, in righteousness, peace of a good conscience, and spiritual
joy, serves Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men: Very honorable
in the eyes of God and good men; but vain and carnal man thinks no honor
comparable to the honor which men give, he Joh. 12.42.
loves the praise of men more then the praise of God; and therefore labors
more to work himself into the hearts of men, then into the favor of God,
does more to draw the eyes of men's vain admiration, then the eyes of Gods
gracious approbation toward him, and strives more to have the testimony of man
applauding him, then the witness of Gods Spirit, sealing him up unto the day
of redemption; and for this he studies to exalt and make himself appear Simon
Magus like, Some great one in the eyes of the people, for this he many times
shunnes Christ, and declines him in his ordinances, in his heavenly truths, in
his members, in his prescriptions, so far as he discernes them to prejudice
his reputation in the eyes of the people.

5 Vnsensiblenes of the unhappy fruits of Self-exaltation
5. Insensibleness of the evil and unhappy fruits of self-exaltation. Many men
have no thought, no apprehension of the wretched and shameful effects of this
exalting and magnifying themselves above that which is convenient, they
perceive not how it makes their souls the Subject of all uncleanness, the
slaves of Satan, the servants of men, the enemies of God, strangers to Christ,
an abomination in the eyes of God; incapable of all benefit and comfort by the
ordinances of God; impatient of crosses; despicable in the eyes of men,
discerning their ambition; unteachable receiving no instruction of wisdom
from them that teach them, no reproof from them that admonish them;
hypocritical in their profession of Christ, like a Sepulcher whited without,
but full of dead men's bones within; envious and full of grief to see the
welfare, prosperity, and honor of others; unsavory in the nostrils of their
brethren, through the rotten and loathsome breath of their self-commendation;
and at last, the Subject of all shame and confusion, the Lord making their
shame suitable to their pride, and the degree of their confusion answerable to
the measure of their self-exaltation.

O therefore if thy gifts be more eminent then others, Cure of Self-exaltation.

1. God makes the difference.


consider it is the Lord makes thee to differ, and Gods favor must be unto
thee as motives to humility and meekness, and as obligations to sincere and
sound obedience.

2. 2 Well using of gift, honor of receiver.
Remember that it is not the greatness of the gift, but the well using of the
gift, that is, the glory of the receiver: It is not the having of any thing,
whether much or little, but the having of Christ with it, that makes it full
and satisfactorie, sweet and comfortable, useful and beneficial unto man.

3 Consider whatsoever thou have, if it puff thee up, 3 Gifts puffing up, a
curse.
and make thee swell, it is not food but poison, no mercy but a curse, no
evidence of divine favor but of severe anger to thy soul.

4. 4. A man's tenure, a tenancy at will.
Think upon the tenure by which thou hold all that thou have, thou art but
a tenant at will, the inheritance is Christ's, and he may turn thee off when he
list: All things go and come at his command, as the soldiers at the command
of the Centurian.

5. 5. Christ man's glory and fullness.
Know and be assured that the glory and fullness of man is Christ, all abilities
are a very vanity and emptiness without Christ Jesus. He that has most of
Christ Jesus is of all persons the most glorious, neither has man cause of
glorying and rejoicing in any thing but in Christ alone. He that glories must
glory in the Lord, and in nothing else: He must glory in the power of Christ
supporting him, in the wisdom of Christ directing him, in the blessing of
Christ making all successful to him, in the all sufficiency of Christ putting
a fullness into his possession, whether much or little, in the righteousness
of Christ justifying him, in the presence of Christ encouraging him, and in the
love of Christ solacing him. That man has the greatest glory, and the sweetest
and surest fullness who has most of Christ Jesus.

6 Issue of all dependant upon Gods All-disposing hand.
6 Observe and weigh well how the issue and event of all is not so much
dependant upon the abundance and excellencies of man's abilities, as upon the
all-disposing hand of God. I returned and saw under the Sun (says Solomon
that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet
bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to
men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all. The event and issue is
not according to the abilities of man, but according to the decree and
dispensation of God: It is not in the power of the swift to escape by running,
nor in the power of the strong to overcome in the battle, nor in the power of
the wise to fill himself with bread, nor in the power of the prudent to
furnish himself with wealth, nor in the power of the skillful to obtain
favor with men. Hasael though swift as the Heart yet he fell in running; Goliath
a man of mighty stature fell in the conflict with little David; The Barley cake
in the Midianites dream overturned the Midianitish Host: David a man of
singular wisdom sometime wanted bread, and Paul was in hunger and in thirst
often: Joseph a man of singular wisdom was hated of his brethren, and
undeservedly cast out of the favor of Potiph^r. Man's welfare, comfort and
happiness springs not from the excellency of his abilities, but from Gods
gracious, wise, and all-ruling providence. A horse (says the Psalmist) is a
vain thing for the battle, neither shall he deliver any by his great
strength. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them
that hope in his mercy. It is not the perfection and excellency of the
instrument, but the Coagency of God with it that puts efficacy into it, and
makes it helpful, honorable and comfortable to the user of it. The meditation
of the subjection of all abilities under Gods gubernation and providence is of
great power to purge their possessors of all self-exalting cogitations.

7. Unexpected change.
7. Meditate upon the sudden and unexpected change which may come. The river of
man's abundance may be turned another way, dried up, or fail like the waters of
Tema, and be empty like Hagars bottle: The Sun of man's prosperity may be
suddenly ecclipsed, and shine no more: The shadow of man's earthly comforts may
be smitten, and vanish like Jonahs gourd. Very sudden and dismal outward
changes are incident to all sorts of persons. Jobs riches was soon changed
into poverty, Nebuchadnezzars glory was quickly turned into ignominy. Man
(says Solomon) knows not his time, he knows not his time of want when he
is full, his time of trouble when he is at peace, his time of disgrace when he
is in honor, nor his time of death when he is in health. As the fishes that
are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so
are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon
them. Man has small cause to magnify himself in the presence of things
subject to such sad and sudden changes. Were man well studied in, and truly
sensible of the mutability of all abilities, he would never glory in their
presence, he would undoubtedly walk in a holy fear, and in much humility and
meekness in the midst of the greatest fullness.

CHAP. XVII.
LAstly, Prerogatives and benefits of Self denial.
in the meditation of this we may behold and take notice of the happiness of
their estate, of the sweet and gracious frame of their souls who are able to
deny themselves and their own affections, and prostrate themselves and all
that is theirs under the feet of Jesus Christ: These men have a blessed liberty
and freedom from the odious monsters of impiety, self-seeking,
self-admiration, and self-exaltation with many other evils: He has ever most
freedom from the power of corruption, whose heart is filled with the greatest
measure of self-denial. It is a very great blessing to be truly and thoroughly
humble.

1 Full and comfort. He possession of Christ.
1. This works the soul of man to a very full and comfortable possession and
fruition of Christ* The more man is wrought out of himself, the more he is
wrought into Christ: The more man is emptied of himself, the more he is filled
with the fullness of Christ: The more man is removed from himself, the nearer
he approaches unto Christ: The more fully he participateth of Christ, the more
sweet and comfortable communion he has with Christ: The Altar under the Law
was hollow to receive the fire, the wood and the Sacrifice. The heart of man
which is humble, empty of all spiritual pride and self-conceit, is most
capable of the fire of the Spirit, and of Christ who offered himself a
Sacrifice for our sins. The soul of the humble is Christ's habitation; the
vessel which he fills with his grace, and receives into a sweet consortship
with himself: For thus says the Isa. 17.15.
high and the lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy. I dwell
in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite Ones. God ministers most spiritual consolation to him that is most
low and base in his own eye, and apprehension.

2. Invinciblenesse.
2. This makes the soul of man most invincible. The low shrub endures all the
gusts, and blasts of wind, abiding fast rooted; No winds of trouble or
temptation can overthrow the humble though they may a little shake him: The
humble soul puts a Phil. 3.8.
low price upon the world, the gain of it does not much affect him, the loss
of it does not much disquiet him: He leanes not on himself, or any other arm
of flesh, his whole 2 Cor 1.9.
dependence is upon Christ; Christ is the Phil. 4.13.
strength by which he stands, the light by which he walks, the crown and
portion in which he rejoices, and nothing can separate him from Christ: Satan
has least opportunity to fasten a temptation upon him: The proffers of the
world have no relish with him, the menaces of men raise no terror in him;
Christ is every way so complete in his apprehension, that he accounts both the
favor and the hatred of the world as nothing, being Gal. 6.14.
crucified to the world, and the world also unto him. Bid relates a poetical
fiction of a man whom they called Terrae filius, who fought with a tyrant named
Hercules. This Terrae filius when he was weary cast himself on the ground, and
recovered his strength, which Hercules perceiving lifted him up into the air,
and so overcame, and slew him. In like manner man fighting with Satan, humbling
and abasing himself, abhorring himself with Job below the dust and ashes,
renews his strength, and remains invincible; but Satan lifting him up,
filling him with high and proud thoughts of his own worth, prevails against
him, obtaines victory over him. Pride makes man a slave to Satan; humility
makes man victorious over him. The meek (according to that of the Prophet)
shall Isa. 29 10.
increase his joy in the Lord. The soul which is truly humble draws matter of
consolation out of all suffering, and from every estate and condition wherein
the Lord sets him.

3. This exceedingly indeares man unto God. 3. Endearemet of man to God.
He that is least in his own eye is greatest in the esteem of God: He is best
beloved of God who is most out of love with himself. The humble soul is most
capable of spiritual instruction: The best scholar in Christ's school; most
obedient unto Gods precept, the best servant in Christ's family; most fruitful
in every good work, most apt to every good duty, the choicest Tree in Gods
Orchard; most sincere and full in the intendment of Gods glory, the truest
lover among all the friends of God; most thankful for all blessings, the best
receiver and improver of Gods mercies; most apprehensive of Gods perfections;
most affected with Gods goodness, the greatest admirer of Gods and Christ's
excellencies, and therefore most dear to God of all others. To Isa. 66.2.
this man (says the Lord) will I look, with the eyes of my love solacing and
accepting him, with the eyes of my mercy pardoning and forgiving him; and with
the eyes or my care and providence, sweetning and disposing all for good unto
him: Even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
Isa. 66.2.
word. To him will I look when he hears my word, dispensing my grace into
him; when he prays, returning a gracious answer to him; when he mourns,
putting all his tears into my bottle, comforting him; when he is in distress,
delivering him; and when he is in want, supplying him: God is very wonderful
in his gracious manifestations to souls filled with humility and meekness, to
men denying themselves and their own affections. The 1 Pet. 3.3.
ornament of a meek spirit is in the sight of God a thing of great price; a
contrite and a broken spirit God will not despise. Man's estimation with God is
suitable to his disestimation of himself.

4. This does very wonderfully exalt a man. 4. Exaltation of man.
He that is most humble is most honorable. Man's self-denial ever tends to his
exaltation: It is Christ's promise, he that Luke 14.11.
humbles himself shall be exalted: The humble soul is the Iam 4 6.
vessel which God fills with the wine of his choicest grace, the Temple in
which the Spirit of God dwells, the servant whose work the Lord accepts,
the Psalm 10.17.
Petitioner in whose prayer the King of mercies delights, the Favorite whom
the King of Kings honors, the Spouse whom the Prince of peace receives in
wedlock, and the friend to whom the Psalm. 25.9, 14.
Secret of the Lord is imparted. God communicates great honor unto them, who
for his honor are contented to abase themselves in the eyes of men. David was
content to appear outwardly vile, yea 2 Samuel 6.22.
more vile, that he might honor God, and God made him more honorable,
confirming and strengthening him in the kingdom. Moses was the Number 12.2.
meekest man on earth, a man that had low thoughts of himself, a man of
singular perfection in the way and work of self-denial, Heb. 11.
refusing all the honor of Egypt, and choosing to endure affliction with Gods
people: But God made him most honorable, called him up unto himself in the
Mount, and made him the leader of his people: It is good losing for God, the
incurment of dishonor for God is recompensed with the greatest honor from the
hand of God: Mat. 3.
The Baptist abased himself very low to exalt Christ; he told the people that
such was Christ's dignity, worth and excellency, that he was not worthy to stoop
down and untie the latchet of his shoe; and Christ very highly honored him,
telling the people, that there was not a greater borne of women then the
Baptist. Man is ever so much the more precious in the eyes of Christ, by how
much the more despicable he is in his own, and other men's eyes for the love
and cause of Christ. There is more honor in the humble man's ignominy, then in
the proud man's pomp and glory: He that is Mat. 18.4.
least, through self-denial, holy abasement, and unfeigned humiliation, shall
be greatest in Gods Kingdom; Greatest in spiritual liberty and freedom, in
the measure of Sanctification, in Gods account and acceptance, and in the
degree of future glory communicated to him.

5. Sweet and blessed freedom.
5. This ministers a very sweet and blessed freedom to the soul. He that is
most humble is the choicest Freeman in the world: Self-denial is a very great
and happy freedom: He that is most humble has the greatest measure of grace
conferred on him, and wheresoever is most grace there is most freedom: Where
the 2 Cor. 3.17.
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty (says the Apostle) The humble man is
free from ignorance in his understanding, with the lowly there is Prove. 11.2.
Psalm. 25.9.
wisdom (says Solomon) and God does guide the humble in judgment (says the
Psalmist) He that is most humble has the most clear and comfortable
discerning of the mysteries of Gods Kingdom; He is free from perverseness and
frowardness in his will, to Romans 7.18.
will that which is good is present with him; ready at hand, his soul is very
strongly bent and inclined thereunto; as the rivers to flow down the channel:
Holy and religious duties suite with him, as the Sun with the eye, and the
path with the foot; he is free from much vanity in his thoughts, vain thoughts
do not lodge with him; his thoughts of God are high and honorable, his
thoughts of himself are low and humble, his thoughts of Christ are sweet and
full of admiration, his thoughts of sin are sorrowful and full of
detestation, his thoughts of the world are slight and contemptible, his
thoughts of the word and work of God are pleasant and delightful: He is free
in his heart from obstinacy and hardness, his heart is soft and tender,
trembling at the word of God: The Law of God is in his heart, and he delights
to do the will of God; he is free from base and servile fear, carnal
confidence, and fleshly joy, and worldly love in his affections; he is free
from impatience and murmurings in his afflictions, free from coffeehouse in
his low and empty estate, free from high and exalting thoughts in his greatest
earthly fullness, free from limiting and prescribing unto God in his hardest
conflicts and greatest trials, free from being daunted with the worlds
threatenings, enticed with the worlds persuasions, corrupted with the worlds
proffers, seduced by the worlds example, or entangled in the snares of Satan;
very sweet and comfortable, very pleasant and delightful is the humble man's
freedom; all are slaves and bondmen in respect of them in whom God has
wrought the great and gracious work of Self-denial.

(...).
6. This makes men very peaceable. The measure of man's peace is according to the
measure of man's humility and self-denial: The humble man does not grieve, but
rejoices at the prosperity of others, does not hinder, but delights in the
furtherance of other men's welfare; does not willingly minister any off^^ce, but
patiently endures injuries, puts the best interpretation upon things
doubtful; humility and self-denial, as the Apostle says of Love, suffers
long, and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does
not behave it self unseemely,, seeks not it is own, is not easily provoked
thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth,
bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things. Pride is the bellows kindling the fire of contention, humility and
self denial prevents strife, and preserves peace among men; there is no hope
of his living in peace with any man, who is at variance with the humble. It is
a rule among the Geometricians, Quod corpora Spherica quae quasi tumi^a sunt,
non possunt se tangere nisi solo puncto, etc. that Sphericall or round bodies
which are a swelling kind of bodies cannot touch one another, be applied one to
another, but only at the very point; but the hollow body can receive the round
within it self. Thus pride dissolves communion between man and man; Men are
never at a sweet agreement, where pride and self-conceit reigns; humility
disposes, opens, and prepares the heart to the unfeigned embracement of
others, to the patient toleration of other men's pride, injustice, and vain
boastings. The Iam. 3.17.
wisdom (says S. James) which is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits. The low shrub is
little or nothing moved with the winds which shake and shatter many tall
Cedars: The humble man is little or nothing d^squieted with the gusts and
blasts of opposition, loss and disgrace, which do even vex, and utterly
distract the man of a proud spirit: The soul which is spiritually and
thoroughly humble, is an inhabitant residing in a very sweet, and quiet
dwelling, a ship rowing in a very calm and peaceable haven.

7. Fruitfulness in all graces.
7. This makes fruitful in all gifts and graces: Like the low valleys;
cheerful in every trial and trouble, able to count it all joy to fall into
manifold temptations; Profitable under affliction, as the vine under the hand
of the Pruner dressing it; capable of the word of God, as the broken ground of
the seed, and the empty vessel of water: Every word of God is a Star of some
light, a flower of some comfortable smell, and a cloud of some refreshment to
the humble: This fills the soul with very clear and joyful, high and
honorable apprehensions of God. He that has the lowest thoughts of himself,
has the highest thoughts of God; This makes Christ very welcome, very amiable
in the eye of the soul, the fairest of ten thousand: As the Sun to him that
is in darkness, as the river to him that thirsts, or the Physician to him
that is extremely pained, man's sense of self-emptinesse, makes Christ very
precious: This sweetens the word of God as the famine sweetens bread, and makes
the messenger of God as an Angel of God, or one of a thousand: This disposes
man to every good duty; this makes the yoke of Christ easy, the service of
Christ pleasant, and suffering for Christ comfortable: This makes the inward
man very joyful, when the outward man is laden with much affliction, the
whole man heavenly minded, graciously disposed, holily exercised, abundantly
thriving in all well-doing, and incessant in the way tending to the heavenly
Kingdom. And thus you have seen the mystery, the worth and dignity, the
fruit and excellency of Selfe-denyall. Most sweet and blessed is that man's
Condition, who is truly humble, happy is the soul in which God has wrought a
through Self-denial.

CHAP. XVIII. The second general Part. Spiritual Vivification.
THe seed first dies, and then is quickened, and springs up into a green and
flourishing blade: Man first dies to sin, and then lives to God: The Syens is
first removed out of the old and natural stock, and then he is grafted into
another stock, becomes a living branch in another Tree: Man first denies
himself, goes out of himself, cease from himself, and then he is ingrafted
into Christ, Christ lives in him, and he lives in Christ, according to this of
the Apostle here, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

The second general thing observed in these words, is, spiritual
vivification. Christ living in all them that live the life of grace: The life
of a Christian is a borrowed life, he has it not of himself but from another,
it is no natural, but a spiritual life, a life not springing originally from
man, but derivative and flowing from Christ: Every Christian though wondrously
enriched by Christ, yet is very poor of himself, his very spiritual life is
a borrowed thing; Sin has made man extremely poor, it has not only
robbed him, but also slain him, it has utterly taken the life of grace from
him, and none but Christ can quicken him. The Christian has no cause of
glorying in himself, but all his glory is in Christ; the very whole of true
Christians is from Christ Jesus; Christ is both the fountain filling, and the
life quickening them; they cannot but acknowledge with Paul, It is Christ lives
in them.

In the words we have,

1. A term of opposition, But

2. An Agent or Author, Christ he is the Author of this spiritual life.

3. An Act, lives. Christians live not the life of grace by themselves, it is
received from Christ.

4. A Subject, in me. True believers are the only subject of spiritual life.

First of the term of opposition, but, a word signifying an opposition of
things in that sense in which things are opposed, Labor not for the meat
(says Christ) which perishes, Ioh 6.27.
but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life, and again, lay not up
for your selves treasure on earth, Mat. 6.19, 20. Ephesians 5 17, 18.
but lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven: And so likewise it is the
Apostles charge; be not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is:
And be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit:
And thus the Apostle here, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; I live
indeed, but it is not of my self, but from Christ, it is not of nature, but of
grace, Christ is the root of spiritual life in me.

It is plain and manifest to the feeling and experience of Gods children that
they have not the life of Grace and holiness from themselves, but from Christ
Jesus: Note.
they know that Christ is the author and finisher of their salvation; they
know that Christ is in them: Examine your selves, prove your selves, know ye
not that Christ is ^ Cor. 13.5.
in you, except ye be reprobates, says the Apostle: 1 Ioh. 5.20.
We know (says S. John) that we are of God, quickening, regenerating,
enlightening and sanctifying us; and we know that the son of God is come, and
has given us an understanding to know him that is true, and we are in him that
is true, even in his son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal
life; they know that Christ is in them, as a root enlivening them, as a Sun
illuminating them, as a Refiners fire purging them. The woman of Shunem 2 Kin.
4.
knew that the Prophet had raised her dead son to life, the children of God
know that Christ has raised their souls which were dead in sins and
trespasses; the blind man Ioh. 9. 2 Kin 5.
knew that whereas he was blind he did now see, and that Christ had opened his
eyes, Gods children have experience of Christ's opening the eyes of their
understanding. Naaman knew that Jordan had washed away the leprosy which clave
unto him, Gods servants 1 Cor. 6.9.
know that they are washed, sanctified and justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of God.

The ground hereof.
Gods children know that of themselves, they are dead in sins and trespasses,
and that Christ is the author of spiritual life unto them; they know that of
themselves they are empty of all spiritual good, and that Christ is the
fountain filling them; they know that in their natural estate they are the
slaves of Satan, the bondmen of the world, the servants of corruption, and
that Christ alone is the worker of their freedom, the beginning and the end of
their salvation.

The life of grace and holiness is not of man but of Christ, no child in the
course of nature can beget it self, Man's life of holiness of Christ.
but is begotten of another Parent; no child of God in the way of grace is the
author of his own regeneration and new birth, but is 1 Pet. 1.3.
begotten again by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Spirit of God
persuading them of the truth, informing them in the virtue, and applying to
them the power and efficacy of Christ's resurrection, begets them again unto
a lively hope; man's receiving of Christ is the receiving of spiritual life and
new birth; As many (says the Evangelist) as received him, to them Ioh. 1.12,
13.
gave he power to become the sons of God: which were borne not of blood, not
by the Nobility and dignity of their Parents, according to the flesh; nor of
the will of the flesh, not by the ability and strength of nature, not by any
activity, liberty or freedom of their own; nor of the will of man, not by the
art or industry education or instruction of man, but of God: It is not in the
power of man to regenerate man, God uses man as his instrument, but God
himself accomplisheth the work, as a supreme and free agent, when and where
he pleases. Man is an alien to the Ephesians 4.19.
life of God, and can no more raise himself to a spiritual life, then Lazarus
could raise himself to a natural life: Man's conversion is a new 2 Cor. 5.17
creation, which is as far beyond the power of man, as the forming of
himself of nothing. All the instruments of spiritual life are 1 Cor. 3.6.
dependant, no more able to quicken the soul of man, then Gehazi with his
Masters staff was able to raise the woman of Shunems son to life without
Elisha himself; the life of the soul is hidden in Christ, and he that has
not Christ is far from all spiritual life.

Such therefore as have no experience of Christ's communicating the life of
grace and holiness unto them are none of Gods children; their life is a
natural, a worldly, No experience of new life no child of God.
a carnal, and not a spiritual, a heavenly and holy life; they live by a
fleshly and not by a spiritual principle, by a corrupt and humane, and not by
a divine and heavenly rule, they live unto themselves and not to Christ; they
are of themselves, and they incline and move to themselves as to their proper
Center, they confine themselves within themselves, they can nor look, nor move
beyond themselves. Ioh. 3.6.
That which is of the flesh; of a fleshly original, compounded wholly of
fleshly principles, having no other then fleshly ingredients in it, that is
flesh; discerning after a fleshly and carnal manner, and not perceiving the
things of God, which are spiritually discerned; savouring and relishing only
things carnal and fleshly; minding only that which is vain, corrupt and
earthly; walking by a fleshly rule, the imagination of their own hearts; and
proposing a fleshly end, the satisfaction of their own corrupt and sinful
lusts; they are not of God, as a child is of his Parents, they bear not on
them the Image of God, as a child does bear the image of his Father: they
depend not upon God as a child depends upon his Parents; they abide not with
God as a child with his Parents; they receive not Gods instruction, as a child
receives his fathers instruction; they love not God as a child his Parent; they
delight not in God as a child rejoices in his Parents; the meditation of God
is not sweet, the thought of Gods presence is not pleasant to them; they
frequent not Gods house, they make it not their dwelling, and place of their
delight, as children do their Fathers house: He that is without Christ is
without God, empty of God, a stranger to God, an enemy against God. Christ is
the Jacobs ladder by whom God comes unto man, and man ascends unto God. God
is known as a Father of love, God is believed in as a king of mercies, God is
felt and tasted as the fountain of grace and goodness only in and thorough
Christ Jesus. He that knows not Christ working the life of grace and holiness
in him, is under the death of sin, and has no clear knowledge, no comfortable
remembrance, no blessed taste and feeling, no honorable and soul-ravishing
apprehensions of God; no delight in God, no comfortable communion with God; we
discern and apprehend God loving, merciful and gracious, only in and
thorough Christ working in us the life of true holiness; man's thoughts of God
are more or less joyous and delightful according to the measure of Christ's
working within him.

CHAP. XIX.
THe second thing in these words, is an agent or Author, and that is Christ,
Christ lives in his Saints, he is the worker of this life; the life of Gods
children has a very honorable original, it is not from a natural, but from
a spiritual seed: the life of nature is far inferior to the life of grace.
Life communicated by earthly Parents, is an unworthy life, in respect of that
life which Christ does minister unto us; a life which goes not by generation,
but by regeneration; a life communicable by no creature, dispensed only by him
who lives of himself, and gives life to others at his pleasure; according to
S. Paul's open profession that Christ lived in him, was the author of the life
of grace to him, showing us,

Doct.
That Christ is the Author of spiritual life to all Gods children; he raised
the body of Lazarus to a bodily life, he rayseth our souls to a spiritual
life; he Ioh. 5.21.
quickens whom he will, he has power to quicken all, his will is to quicken
only some; when he was on earth, he could have raised all the dead to life, yet
he raised but only a few, thus now he has power to quicken all men to a
spiritual life, but his will is to quicken only some, such as God the Father
has chosen to salvation; Christ, says S. John, has Ioh 17.2.
power over all flesh that he should give life to as many as God the Father
has given him, all that partake of the life of grace, derive and borrow the
same from Christ; who is the way leading, the truth enlightening, and the life
quickening unto life everlasting, and the Apostle says, our life is hid with
Christ in God, as the life of the branch is hid in the root; and Christ is
called, our life, by S. Paul, and our life, or the author of spiritual life,
he is in us, by way of Revelation, he opens and shows the way to life, without
Christ we are all in darkness and the shadow of death, and no man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Our life he
likewise is by way of meritorious impetration, he has purchased life for us.
Our life by way of original; the life of grace is originally in Christ, and
from him communicated unto us. Our life by way of ope^ation, he quickneth us by
the powerful work of his Spirit. And our life by way of conjunction; he
unites himself, communicates himself, and all his benefits to us, as the
Prophet applied himself to the woman of Shunems son, and raised him to life.
And that Christ is the Author of spiritual life to Gods children is apparent.

1. Grounds hereof 1. Man's alienation from the life of grace.
By man's alienation and estrangement from the life of grace without Christ; the
branch without the root, the body without the soul has no life; man without
Christ is a withered branch, a dead carcass, dead in sins and trespasses,
twice dead and plucked up by the roots; and it is in Christ's hand alone to
quicken him, Lord, said Peter to our Savior, whither shall we go, thou have
the words of eternal life: the word revealing, promising and working life in
all that are ordained unto life.

2 By Christ's ordination and appointment to minister all things to Gods chosen;
2 Christ's ordination to minister life.
the fulness of light is dispensed to the air by the Sun, fullness of water
is dispensed by the Sea unto the earth; the fullness of Egypt was dispensed to
the people by Joseph; the fullness of God is dispensed to the souls of men by
Christ; Christ is the Sun by whom they are enlightened; the root by whom they
are enlivened; the Storehouse by whom they are enriched; the fountain by whom
they are replenished, they are blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ.
God convayes all in mercy unto man thorough Christ; nothing proves a blessing
unto man, but what he has by virtue of his conjunction with Christ; there is
no relation of love and peace between God, and the soul of man, but only in
and through Christ, Jacob and his sons found favor with Pharaoh, only for
Joseph's sake. Christ is the only Medium Ephesians. 1.6.
of man's favor and acceptance with God, he alone is made of God to be wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption unto man: God has put the very
whole of man's happiness in Christ Jesus.

3 Insufficiency of any created power to minister the life of grace.
3. By the insufficiency of any created power to minister the life of grace to
man; this is above the power of men and Angels; the dispensation of life is
peculiar to him that is Lord of life; the industry of man is used indeed as an
instrument of spiritual vivification, but the efficacy is from Christ; to this
work all created strength without Christ is like the strength of Egypt in
another case to set still, the diseased woman in the Gospel spent all her
substance upon the Physicians, and yet there was no healing, man may spend all
his time and substance upon the creature, and the creature may spend all its
ability about man, and yet when all is done, without Christ there will be no
spiritual quickening; Am I a God (said the King of Israel to Naaman) to kill
and to make alive, that this man does send unto me to recover a man of his
leprosy: Thus may the holiest Saint and most glorious Angel say, Am I a God
to kill and to make alive, to kill sin and to enliven the soul, that man should
look to me for spiritual vivification, the sufficiency of the choysest
creatures is a borrowed sufficiency, derived from Christ, and the efficacy and
working thereof is wholly dependant upon Christ.

4. Excellency of spiritual life.
4. By the dignity and excellency of spiritual life; a life of that noblenes
and eminency, that none but Christ, who is life it self, can communicate it; a
seed which none but Christ can sow, a tree which none but Christ the great
Husbandman of the soul can plant; the life of grace arises from a principle
far more noble then the life of nature; Saul was head and shoulders above the
residue of the people; the life of grace is head and shoulders, very high and
far above the life of nature; whither vegitive, sensible or reasonable; Job
sometime said of wisdom: Where shall wisdom be found, and where is the place
of understanding, man knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the
land of the living, the depth says it is not in me, and the Sea says it is
not with me: thus may we say of spiritual life: where shall spiritual life be
found? and where is the place of true and saving grace? man knows not the
price thereof, neither is it found in the land of the living; Nature says it is
not in me; Art and industry say it is not with us, this life is Col. 3.
hid with Christ in God: It is hid in God, in regard of the original
preservation, protection and continuance of it, as the life of the branch is
hidden in the root, and the life of the stream in the fountain; it is hid in
God, and there and no where else it is to be found, therefore termed the Ephesians.
4.18.
life of God; for the spiritual original and celestial excellency thereof,
regeneration and new birth, being of all lives, the most excellent life, which
God communicates unto man, because God does then very graciously and sweetly
live in man, and man enjoyes the life of God, when God does sanctify and guide
man by his Spirit, and this life is ascribed by our Savior to the Spirit, as
to the proper cause of it: the flesh profits nothing, it is the Spirit that
quickneth; and all the faithful are born again of the Spirit, begotten of God
by the word of truth, and as they have the most noble and excellent Parent, so
they have the most honorable and eminent life, a life of such dignity that none
but God can communicate.

5. By the medium of spiritual life: conjunction with Christ by faith is the
medium of this life, 5. The Medium of this life, Conjunction with Christ by
faith.
as the natural life is a conjunction of the body with the soul; so the
spiritual life is a conjunction of the soul with Christ and his Spirit; Christ
is the head and they the members: Christ is the Vine and they the branches,
being enlivened by their conjunction with Christ, the members are enlivened by
the head, and the branches by the Vine, and believers coming to Christ, as to a
living Stone, are said as lively stones to be built a spiritual house: In
which words, Christ is likened to a Stone for his strength and steadfastness,
for his truth and unchangeablenes, for his union of Jew and Gentile, and for
his supportation of all Gods children; to an elect and precious stone, for his
worth and excellency, and to a living stone, for his everliving virtue,
ministering the life of grace to all the faithful, and preserving them therein
to the life of glory, and all true believers are called lively stones; for
their being founded upon Christ, and enlivened by Christ, the head-stone* and
of this life they participate by coming unto Christ; coming to Christ, by the
doctrine of the Gospel inviting them, and by a lively faith resting upon him,
incorporated into him, and receiving spiritual life from him; and this is
Christ's promise, he that believes in me, that is united and joined unto me,
and made one with me by faith, he shall live, he shall live the life of grace
first, and the life of glory last; and it is the plain assertion of the
Evangelist, he that believes on the Son has everlasting life, he has it in
inchoation, by the work of grace, he has it in promise by faith, he has it in
expectation by hope; he has that life begun in grace, which shall be
consummate in glory.

6 Opposition against the working of spiritual life.
6. By the opposition made against the working of this life in the souls of
men; the working of grace in the hearts of men is opposed by corruption, as
natural life is opposed by death, all men by nature being dead in sins and
trespasses; this life is opposed by sin, as natural health is opposed by a
mortal, an over-swaying and incurable disease; the cure of the diseased woman
in the Gospel, was so opposed by her bloody issue, that no Physician could
cure her, she bestowed all her substance upon the Physicians in vain, she
could not be healed until she came to Christ; the cure of the disease of sin
is so difficult, that neither the ministry of man, or Angel can accomplish it;
Christ alone is the Physician healing the diseased soul of man; he is the son
of righteousness who has healing in his wings; in the wings of his ordinances
instrumentally, in the wings of his gracious gifts and operation efficiently:
the Apostle lays down the opposition of sin against the working of spiritual
life 4. Sin opposes spiritual life. 1 By ignorance
ways. 1. Through ignorance, alienated from the life of God, through the Ephesians.
4.18, 19.
ignorance that is in them; they are ignorant of the absence and want of it,
they suppose they are alive to God, when they are dead in sin; they are
ignorant of the Original and Author of this life; they know not that he that
has not the Son has not life; they are ignorant of the means working it,
they know not that the word is the word of life, that the Gospel is the power
of God unto salvation, the immortal seed of man's regeneration; they are
ignorant of the necessity of this life of grace, they think there is a greater
latitude in Religion then there is, they know not that the way to life is a
narrow way, they imagine they may do well enough, though they be not so strict
and so zealous as others are; they are ignorant of that work of Christ, of
that holy and gracious change of heart, of that faith, repentance, purity of
heart, and circumspect walking which belongs to this life. And thus, through
their ignorance do they undervalue it and oppose the working thereof.

2. Their corruption does oppose it through the hardness of their hearts, 2.
By hardness of heart.
being alienated from the life of God through the hardness which is in them.
This hardness of heart makes them incapable of the word of life, Acts 7.51.
as the hard ground is incapable of seed: This causes them to resist the
means of grace, as the hard rock resists the rain distilling thereupon:
This makes them regardlesse, and fearelesse of all judgments, and cominations;
Affliction does not better them, but rather make them worse, as the anvill
hardens under the hammer: This makes them impenitent, they cannot mourn for
their sins, any more then a hard rock can send forth a stream of water.
Ier. 5 3.
O Lord (says Jeremy) thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou
have consumed them but they have refused to receive correction, they have made
their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return; and after their
hardness and impenitent heart (according to Saint Paul) they treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath; and thus their hardness of heart does oppose the
working of this spiritual life.

3. Their corruption opposes this spiritual life through unsensiblenesse; 3
B^ ^siblenesse.
they are strangers to this life (says the Apostle) being past feeling, being
unsensible of their sin, as a dead man of his disease, unsensible of the
misery of their estate, and perilousnesse of their condition, as the drunkard
in Solomon had no apprehension of his danger; unsensible of the word of
instruction, as a deaf man that hears not, is unsensible of advice and
counsel: They hear (says the Prophet) but understand not, they see but
perceive not, they hear outwardly, but not inwardly, they see confusedly, but
not clearly, the light shines upon them, but not within them, they walk not in
the light, they are not guided in their goings by the light; they are
unsensible of the characteres symptoms of destruction which are upon them, as
Ephraim had gray hairs here and there upon him, howbeit he knew it not:
Unsensible of the goodness and sweetness of Christ, as a distempered palate
is unsensible of the sweetness of the wine given him to drink; unsensible of
the comfort, and pleasantness of spiritual life, as the dead are unsensible
of the joys of the living; and being thus past feeling, they regard not the
life of grace, it is of no esteem with them.

4. By cusing them to give themselves over to lasciviousness.
4. Their corruption does oppose the life of grace, by causing them to give
themselves over to lasciviousness, to work uncleanness, disposing and
inclining them to evil, as heavy things incline downward, the whole current
of their affections moving toward sin strongly, speedily, undefatigably, and
unchangeably, as the Rivers move toward the Sea; soaking and surfeting
themselves with carnal delights and pleasures, as the drunkard soakes his
flesh with strong drink, and the glutton surfets himself with sweet meat;
delighting and sporting themselves in sin as the fish in the water, drinking
iniquity (as Job speaks) like water, as the dry ground drinks in the water, and
looks for more; giving themselves over unto sin, as the soldiers to the
Centurion, to be commanded by it, to be wholly subject to it, as the harlot to
the adulterer, prostituting and laying themselves open unto sin, and bringing
forth all their fruit to sin, and this their serviceablenesse to sin,
delight and pleasure in sin, voluntary and full subjection under sin, does
mightily oppose the working of the life of grace within them, so opposing it
that none but Christ can work it. Besides, Satan does also with much force and
fraud hinder this work, Rev. 7.1.
holding the winds that they may not blow, endeavoring to the utmost to stop
the ministry of the word, the means of begetting this life in the souls of
men, blinding the understandings of men, that the glorious light of the Gospel
may not shine into them; laboring by all means to hinder the regeneration of
Gods children, represented in Saint John's vision of the Dragon, ready to
devour the Rev. 12 4.
woman's child as soon as it was borne. This work the world also hinders, by
distracting men with worldly cares, by priding men with worldly wealth, by
ministering many profane and soule-bewitching examples, by withholding men
from attendance upon Gods ordinances, the means of life, by choking the word
of God, the instrument of life, with worldly cares, by disabling men to
discern and judge aright of Christ, the Author of life: Such is the
opposition made against the work of grace in the souls of men, that there is
a mere impossibility of attaining spiritual life, without the mighty work of
Christ the Lord of life.

CHAP. XX.
Their pride opened who dream of ability in themselves to restore themselves
to spiritual life.
SEe then in this the pride and vanity of such men as dream of a power and
ability in themselves to restore themselves unto spiritual life. As Sampson
burst his withs, and went out when Dalilah cried, the Philistines are upon thee
Sampson. Thus they think to break the chains of sin, to come forth of the
grave of their corruption at their pleasure, having the word of exhortation to
call them. Man indeed endowed with true and saving grace may come when God calls
him, as Sampson went forth at the voice of Dalilah, while his locks were upon
him; but as Sampson had no power to preserve himself when his locks were cut
off, no more has man destitute of saving grace any power to restore himself
to the life of grace, or to defend himself against the adversaries of his
peace: Man's n^bility to this work opened.

1. No principle of grace left.

Romans 7.18. Col. 2.12.


The branch cannot live without the root, nor the soul a spiritual life
without Christ; Man is wholly disabled unto this work, having no feed nor
principle of grace remaining in him, being as fully under the dominion of
sin, as the dead are under the dominion of death, at as great a distance from
the life of grace as they who have been long dead, and diverse days, like
Lazarus, in the grave, are from the life of nature.

2. Utter blindness.

Luke 19 41. Isa 5.21.


2. Being so blinded that they cannot discern the things which belong to their
spiritual vivification, from the things which tend to their destruction, the
ways of death are ways of life in their apprehension, as the Assyrians
smitten with blindness thought the way leading to Samaria to be the way
leading to Assyria. Thus they repute the way which leads unto death to be the
way leading unto life, they call evil good, and good evil.

3. Declination of means. Psalm. 58.5.
3. They decline the means of their spiritual quickening, they stop their cares
against the voice which should awaken and enliven them, they shut their eyes
against the light which should illuminate them.

4. Enmity against the ministry. Romans 8.7. John 3.19. Gal. 4.16.
4. They are full of enmity against the ministry which should convert them,
they make war against the ministry of the word, as Saul against David: This
troubles them as the Star troubled Herod, the Minister is their enemy because
he tells them the truth.

5. Sweenesse of sin Job 20.12.
5. Sin is a sweet dish to their palate, they are insatiable in the commission
of it, their souls are wedded to it, they have made a Covenant with it, they
boast and glory in it.

6. Grace and holiness dishonorable in their eye.

Job 21 14.


6. The life of grace and holiness is dishonorable and contemptible in their
eye; Nothing with them is beautiful and amiable, excellent and honorable, but
that which is either for the matter or for the circumstances sinful: And
therefore when the dead can raise themselves out of their graves, when the
stones can turn themselves into flesh, the thorns into vines, when the
Leopard can change his spots, and the Blackamoore his skin, then may man by
his own power, without the mighty work of Christ, raise himself to a new
life, turn his hard into a tender heart, his barren into a fruitful soul,
and his unclean into a pure conversation. Were man sensible of his emptiness
of all spiritual good, of his obstinacy against grace, of his strong and
unchangeable bent to evil, of the desperate disposition of his heart to sin,
of his through subjection under Satan, and of the profane antipathy which is
in his heart against grace, and of his inability to receive it when it is
proffered, he would never exalt himself into Christ's room, and take upon him
to be the workman of his own conversion; he would never continue in sin,
presuming to repent at last, when he list; doubtless that man never felt the
power of Christ in his conversion, that dreams of a power in himself to
convert and change himself; Presumption of self-goodnesse invincibly argues
the absence of all saving goodness: The diseased came either by their own
strength, or by the help of others to Bethesda; but when the foot was in the
poole, if the Angel did not move the waters there was no healing: Man may come
to the ministry of the word by his own strength, and by the persuasion of
others; but when he is come, and hears the word, there is no healing unless
Christ work mightily with the Gospel: For Paul plants and Apollo waters, but
God gives the increase.

Is Christ the Author and worker of spiritual life? Coming unto Christ for
spiritual life persuaded, being as dead me without Christ 1 For Ignorance.

Eccl 9.5. Isa. 59 10.


Then we must address our selves to Christ, that Christ may quicken and
enliven us. Whiles we stand aloof off, and continue strangers to Christ, we
are all dead men, dead spiritually while we live corporally, alienated from the
life of God while we enjoy the life of men; continuing strangers to Christ we
are all dead in sin; and as the dead know not any thing, no more do we
savingly and comfortably know any thing of God, of Christ, of his word, or of
the Spirit of grace; we are in darkness like the dead, we are blind and
groape at the noone day as in the midnight: 2. Insensibleness.
As the dead have no feeling of the disease which killed them, of the burden
of earth cast upon them, no more have we of the sin which wounds us, and
hastens the second death upon us; we are, as Saint Paul said, past feeling: As
the dead have no vigor, no strength, Ephesians 4.19. 3. Weakness.
no motion, no more have we any power, disposition, or inclination to any thing
holy, and savingly good in the sight of God. 4. Vncomfortablenesse.
As the dead are an uncomfortable spectacle, and cast an evil savor, so are
we very unsavory in Gods nosthrils, an abomination in the eyes of God: 5.
Exclusion from Christ.
As the dead have no claim nor title to any thing, their interest in what they
once enjoyed is lost: Thus we have no title to Christ, no interest in Gods
Covenant of grace; 6. Growing worse.
and as the dead putrify and rot more and more, so we grow worse and worse as
long as we continue without Christ. O therefore let us come to Christ that he
may enliven us, as he raised Lazarus, the Widows son, and the Rulers
daughter! Let us come to Christ to raise our souls, as the woman of Shunem
came to the Prophet to raise her dead son, she made haste to the Prophet; we
must come speedily unto Christ, in the days of our youth, before we have
continued long under the death and dominion of sin; the woman of Shunem came
humbly to the Prophet, she cast her self down at the feet of the Prophet: We
must come to Christ in great humility, humbling our selves before him, having
our hearts full of sorrow for our sin, earnestly petitioning the vivification
of our souls: The woman of Shunem laid hold upon the Prophets feet, and would
not let him go, until he went with her and raised her son. Thus must we lay
hold on Christ, carry him with us, bring him home into the house of our hearts,
that Christ may quicken us to the life of grace here, and to the life of glory
hereafter.

Man's best works without Christ are dead works.
This likewise discovers to us what all our works and services are as long as we
are without Christ; Christ is the Author and worker of spiritual life, and
while we are without Christ, we are without spiritual life; and where is no
life, there is no action, no motion; where is no life of grace, there is no
moving, no stirring in the ways of godliness: All the works of natural men,
how specious soever in outward appearance, yet they are as the Scripture terms
them, but dead works; 1 They proceed not from a Principle of spiritual life.
their hearing, praying, receiving of the Sacrament, and other duties of
righteousness done by them are works without life:

For 1. they proceed not from an inward Principle of spiritual life, all their
motions in and about the duties of godliness, like the motions of Clockes and
Watches, proceed not from life, but from art, from the fear of hell, from the
apprehension of death, from the sense of affliction, from the desire of the
applause and favor of men, from the hope of reaping the harvest of some
worldly benefit; and therefore as the clock cease his motion, when the
Spring is down, so do these men usually cease their motion in the ways of
godliness, when the outward loadstone which drew them, is taken away, as iron
having no principle of life within it, stops it is motion when the loadstone is
removed; then they are at a stay, then they go back.

2. Their services, if we consider the nature of them, 2 Moral, not
spiritual, formal, not powerful.
they are but moral and ecclesiastical services, no spiritual services; They
have (as the Apostle says) a form of godliness, but they deny the power of
it: As a dead man has the form and lineaments of a living man, but not the
power and vivacity of a living man; their works for the matter of them may be
morally and ecclesiastically good, but not spiritually good; their coin, their
service, as Jeremy terms it, is reprobate silver; Reprobate silver may have
the stamp, color, and similitude of true coin, and yet is base metal: A
natural man's duties of service, and obedience to God may have the similitude
and color of a spiritual man's service; but when they are tried, they are
found to be counterfeit, abominable in the sight of God, how beautiful soever
in the eyes of men: Swines blood is of as clear and perfect color to the eye,
as sheeps blood; yet it is of another nature, and to offer Swines blood under
the Law was an abomination: Thus the service of a carnal man may have the
outward color of a regenerate man's service, and be as pure and perfect in the
outward appearance, as the service of the holiest persons, and yet it is of
another nature, and a very abomination in the sight of God.

3. Their services, if you look upon the adjunct of them are cold services;
coldness is a Symptom of death, when a man is dead, the whole man is cold;
the works of a natural and carnal man are cold, they have no spiritual life,
no heavenly warmth, no vivacity and holy quickness in them. It is said of
David that he had many clothes, yet he got no heat: Thus carnal men have all
the ordinances of God, all means to warm their souls, and yet they continue
cold, as a dead body under many clothes; they may perform many religious
duties, and yet have no heat, no warmth in them; At the best they are but like
Ephraims cake half baked, like lukewarm meat, such as is offensive to the
stomach, and therefore Christ threatens to spew them out of his mouth; they
have nothing of the Spirit of God within them, whose working is likened unto
fire, making men fervent in Prayer, causing their hearts to burn within them
in hearing, as the hearts of the two Disciples did; this fire, this heavenly
heat is wanting, and therefore all their service is but as a sacrifice without
fire, of no use, of no acceptance with the Lord.

4. Services tending to base ends.
4. Their services, if you observe their end, are arrows levelled to a low
mark; A dead man cannot lift himself up from the earth; A man without Christ,
and empty of spiritual life, cannot look above himself and his own flesh in
any thing he does: The effect ever suites with the cause; the thorn cannot
bear figs, the fruit is answerable to the nature of the Tree; He that has
nothing of God in him cannot intend God in his undertaking; he that is
alienated from the life of God, cannot work for God. That (says our Savior)
which is of the flesh is flesh, fleshly disposed, intending the flesh, and
nothing else, doing all for himself; seeking his own things, and not the
things which are Christ's; his own profit, his own ease, his own applause; he
serves not the Lord Jesus, but his own belly, as Saint Paul speaks; and thus
the original, the nature, adjunct, and end of a carnal man's works demonstrate
them to be dead works, of no esteem with God, how glorious soever in the eyes
of men.

The glory of spiritual life due to Christ. Isa. 9.6.
As Christ is the Author and worker of Spiritual life, so the glory and the
praise of all grace and holiness, of the whole spiritual life of Christians
is to be attributed unto Christ Jesus; Christ is the everlasting Father, from
whom we have our new birth, the high and heavenly workman, from whom we have
our spiritual being and new Creation; Ephesians. 2.10.
the life by whom we are quickened; the Sun by whom we are enlightened; the
Physician by whom we are healed. Christ Jesus is the fountain of all grace and
goodness, life and holiness to true believers; they are all members enlivened
by this head, Stars enlightened by this Sun, fields manured by this
husbandman, houses builded by this Architect, and vessels filled by this
fountain; the praise of all man's grace and holiness is due to Christ Jesus.
Art thou awakened out of thy spiritual sleep and slumber? it is Christ has
done it, as the Acts 12 7.
Angel awakened Peter; the Lion by his cry awakens his young, Christ the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, by his mighty voice in the Gospel awakens Gods chosen.
Are the eyes of thy understanding enlightened? Christ is the John 1.9. John 9.
light who has enlightened thee, as he opened the eyes of him that was borne
blind. Art thou cleansed from thy sin? it is Christ who is the Mal. 3.3.
refiners fire, and the fullers soap that has purged thee, as Jordan cleansed
Naaman from his leprosy. Art thou Isa. 49.9. Isa. 61.1, 2.
delivered from the prison of thy corruption, and the bondage of Satan? it is
Christ has brought thee forth, as the Angel brought Peter out of Herod's
prison. Have thou liberty to come to God by faith and love? it is Christ has
made thee free in thy understanding to discern the things of God, in thy will
to choose and intend God, in thy imagination to think upon God, in thy memory
to remember God, in thy affections to fear, trust, love and rejoice in God, in
thy ears to attend to the word of God, in thine eyes to behold God in his
works, in thy tongue to speak of God, to the edification of others, and to
celebrate God for his mercies; Christ is the Author and workman of all
Christian freedom. Art thou filled with the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit?
Christ is the fountain that has filled thee, all thy receivings are of
Christ's John 1.16. 2 Cor. 5.19.
fullness, as the branches are filled by the root, and the Stars by the
Sun. Have thou reconciliation and acceptance with God? it is Christ that
has brought thee nigh to God, procured favor for thee with the Lord, as
Joseph procured favor for his brethren with the King of Egypt; Christ is the
Ephesians. 1 6.
beloved in whom thou art accepted. Art thou able to endure temptation, to
undergo the heavy burden of affliction? Christ is the rock that sustaines
thee, as the rock in the Parable sustained the house from sinking, when the
winds and waves did beat and blow upon it; Christ is the Arc that bears thee
up, as Noah was borne up in the Deluge; Christ is the shield and buckler, and
wall of fire that defends thee; it is Christ's power in thee, it is Christ's
presence with thee, as with the three children in the fiery furnace, that
strengthens and inables thee to hold out, that makes thee victorious over all
opposing powers. In a word, it is Christ that works all thy works of grace and
peace, faith and love, hope and patience, constancy and perseverance in thee;
he begins the life of grace within thee, and continues it to the life of glory:
Ascribe therefore to the Lord Jesus the praise of all thy goodness,
acknowledge him to be the giver of all thy gifts, the Author of all thy holy
and gracious works, the Sun that has enlightened thy darkness, the
quickening Spirit who has enlivened and freed thee from thy deadness, the
Physician who has healed thy diseases, the Counselor who has resolved thee
in all thy doubtings, the fiery pillar who has gone before thee, protecting
and guiding thee in all thy goings; the Moses rod which has divided the
waters, and made a passage for thee, through the red Sea of all thy
afflictions; the Captain who has overcome for thee in all thy Conquests; and
the King who of his own mercy crowns thee, and his own works in thee, after
all thy trials: Let Christ have the glory of all from thee, because he
accomplisheth all for thee by his living in thee.

CHAP. XXI.
THe third thing in these words, is, an Act, lives. Christ's living in man; the
soul lives in the body, enlivening, preserving, and strengthening the body;
and Christ lives in man, enlivening man with the life of grace, preserving man
in the estate of grace, Col. 1.11.
strengthening him with all might according to his glorious power. Christ is
the soul of our souls, the 1 Cor. 15.45.
quickening Spirit, by whom we are spiritually enlivened; Christ by the
supernatural, gracious, and powerful operation of his Spirit, raising us to
newness or life, and living in us, by this powerful and holy work of his.
Whence observe,

That Christ lives in Gods children by his holy and powerful work of
Sanctification. Doct.


The Ezekiel. 1.20.
Spirit of the living creatures in Ezekiels vision was in the wheels, and when
the living creature went they went, and when the living creature was lifted up,
they were lifted up, because the Spirit of the living creature was in the
wheels. Thus the Spirit of Christ is in the children of God, and they live as
Christ lives, they move according to Christ's prescription, because the Spirit
of Christ is in them, because Christ lives in them, and works effectually by
his Spirit upon them, putting a Principle of spiritual life into them: The
Prophet Elisha applied himself to the woman of Shunems son that was dead; 2
King 4.34.
He lay upon the child, and his mouth upon the childs mouth, and his eyes
upon the childs eyes, and his hands upon the childs hands; he stretched
himself upon the child, and the flesh of the child waxed warm; the child
neesed and opened his eyes. Christ applies himself and his benefits to the
understandings of men, to the souls and consciences of men, and their cold
hearts are warmed, their blind eyes are opened, their souls are enlivened, and
Christ lives within them, raising them from the death of sin, and restoring
them to the life of God, from which they are alienated by sin; therefore
Saint John says, 1 John 5.12.
He that has not the Son, has not life; He that has not the Son graciously
possessing him, spiritually quickening him, powerfully working upon him, and
causing a holy change in him; he has not life, the life of God, that holy and
gracious life, which God through Christ communicates to the souls of his
servants; but he that has the Son, he that believes in the Son is united
to the Son, and has the Son living in him; he has life, he is spiritually
quickened and enlivened; And God (says the Apostle) has 1 John 5.11.
given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: God has placed this,
and the fullness of all divine and heavenly good things in his Son; he
dispenses all these by the Son, that no man may live before him, without the
Son living in him, and the Son is called John 1.4.
Life, having in himself the fullness of all life, having the power of life
and death, being the Author and the root of life in all them that live the
life of grace, no man coming to the Father, receiving life from the Father,
finding grace and favor with the Father, but in and through the Son, who is
to us, the John 14.6.
Way, the Truth, and the Life; the way by whom we walk; the truth by whom we
are guided, and the life by whom we are quickened, called by Saint Paul our Col.
3.4.
life, because we live not the life of grace of our selves, but by Christ: It
is a life which arises not from our flesh, but is derived to us from Christ;
Christ lives in us, begets, preserves, and perfecteth this life in all
believers; and for this end Christ came, that all the chosen of God might John
10.10.
have life, and that they might have it more abundantly; Ministering not only
an inchoation, but a daily increase of the life of grace, until they come to
the life of glory; and Christ is termed eternal life; having life eternal in
himself, 1 John 5.20.
working life eternal, and living for ever in us, we enjoying the true and
eternal God in and through Christ.

And Christ lives in all them that are the children of God.

Grounds of Christ living in us.

1. By way of Original


1. By way of Original. The life of grace is originally from Christ; Christ
being not only the Author of this life, with the Father and the Holy Ghost; but
also the root of this life in us, living in us as the root lives in the
branches, as the parent lives in the child; therefore Christ is called the
John 15.1
vine, and we the branches: As the life of the branches is originally in the
vine, so is our life originally in Christ; and as the branches live by the vine
living in them, so we live by Christ living in us: And the Apostle terms the
second Adam, which is Christ, a 1 Cor. 15.45
quickening spirit: For as the life of the body of man is originally from the
soul, the soul quickening and living in the body: so the life of grace is
originally from Christ, Christ spiritually quickening, and living in all
believers; and as the body without the spirit is dead, so is man without Christ
spiritually dead in sins.

2. By way of Conjunction. 2 By way of Conjunction.
Christ lives in us by being united to us, and made one with us: The stock
lives in the graft, by union with the graft, we being taken Romans 11.24.
out of the wild Olive, separated from our natural and corrupt estate, called
and gathered home to Christ, and grafted in the true Olive; we live in him, and
he lives in us: If ye John 15.5.
abide in me, and I in you, ye shall bring forth much fruit, says Christ: 1
Pet 2.5.
If ye be united unto me, and I united unto you, then you shall live, and be
very fruitful. By being built upon Christ the living stone, they become lively
stones.

3. By way of influence, infusion, and transmission. 3 By way of influence.
The heavens by an influence into the earth, do quicken and enliven the earth,
and make all the seeds and roots hidden in the earth to revive and put
themselves forth, to sprout and flourish; there is an influence going forth
from the Sun of righteousness into the souls of men, reviving and quickening
them, and making them of dead to become living, of barren to become fruitful:
To M^l. 4.2.
you (says the Lord) shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his
wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as the calves of the stall. There is
an influence goes forth from the skill seated in the mind, and strength seated
in the hand of the Artificer, which passes upon the work, whereby he moulds
and fashions it, and sets a stamp upon it, according to his pleasure; Thus
there is a heavenly influence, a holy virtue, and power coming from Christ,
and his Spirit, that new moulds and fashions, that mightily quickens and
enlivens the soul of man, by which Christ sets his own Image upon man; and
this is called the Phil. 3.10.
power of Christ's Resurrection; That I may know him says Paul, and the power
of his Resurrection, that I may know Christ, and be made partakers of the good
things which come by Christ, that I may know him as a Prophet instructing me,
as a Priest sanctifying me, as a King reigning spiritually within me; and that
I may know the power of his Resurrection, in the vivification of my soul, in
the abolition of my sin, in the taking away of the guilt of my transgression,
in the acquisition of righteousness, and in the restoring of me to the assured
hope of future glory and immortality; There is a virtue flows from the
Resurrection of Christ's body from the grave, to the resurrection of the souls
of men from the death of sin: As Christ Romans 6.4.
was raised from the death by the glory of the Father, even so should we walk
in newness of life, says the Apostle; and this influence of Christ into the
soul of man is called the Ephesians. 1.19.
exceeding greatness of his power; an exceeding great power for the
omnipotency of the Agent; for the mightiness of the Devil, sin, death and
the world, who are overcome by it; for the greatness of the holy and gracious
change wrought thereby in the souls of men, changing the whole frame of the
hearts of men, from death to life, from darkness to light, from bondage to
liberty, from uncleanness to holiness, from earthlinesse to heavenlinesse;
and by this powerful and mighty influence does Christ live in the souls of
Gods children.

4. By way of Gubernation.
4. By way of gubernation and direction. The head lives in the members, acting
and guiding the members to move, and work according to the dictates of the
head; and Christ as head lives in believers, his members, acting and guiding,
framing and disposing them to move and walk, and do the things pleasing in
his sight; the will moves the members of the body too and fro by a commanding
active power, that goes from the will, acting and stirring the members,
according to the disposition of the will, the Pilot by his presence in the ship,
and by his activity, strength and skill, turns the rudder of the ship, and
guides the course thereof to a quite contrary point of the Compass; the King by
an influence from his Majesty, authority, power and Laws, lives and reigns in
the hearts of his loyal and obedient Subjects, binding and bowing them to the
observation of his Edicts. That there is a commanding active power passes from
Christ upon the souls of all sanctified persons, whereby he lives and reigns
in them, acts and moves them, according to the disposition of his will, turns
the rudder of their affections, and guides the course of their lives to a quite
contrary point, then what they formerly moved and tended to, hence it is that
our Savior says, the Luke 17.21.
kingdom of God is within you; Christ by his Spirit enlightening their hearts,
and effectually moving, working, and framing their souls to believe his
promises, and do his will; and they are said to have the Law in Psalm. 40.8.
their hearts; Christ ruling and commanding there, by putting into their hearts
a disposition of holy and humble subjection, suitable to the holiness of the
Law: And it was prophesied of Christ, that in the day of his Psalm. 110.3.
power, when Christ should be preached, and his kingdom erected in the hearts
of men: The people should be willing, voluntarily and freely subject and
obedient unto Christ, as the members to the head; and thus Christ lives in men
by his holy gubernation, reign and rule in the souls of men.

5. By way of preservation and continuance unto perfection. 5. By way of
preservation.
The soul lives in the body, preserving the body from putrefaction, continuing
the body unto its appointed perfection; Christ lives in the souls of Gods
children, preserving them from sin, that they do not putrify in sin,
though annoyed with sin, as the body with nasty humors, and keeping them
from the death of sin, that it never get dominion over them, as death over
dead men, though it abide like a disease within them; perfecting also the life
of grace in them, until they come to the life of glory: Those thou gave me
(says Christ) I have John 17.12.
kept, and none of them is lost. Whom God the Father gives to Christ by
eternal election, and effectual vocation, them Christ keeps in the state of
grace, in them he nourishes and maintains spiritual life, them he keeps in
the knowledge of Gods truth, in the says of Gods promises, in the love of Gods
testimonies, in the obedience of Gods precepts; them he keeps in prosperity,
that they swell not; in adversity, that they repine not; in temptation, that
they despair not; in all changes, that they change not; he does 1 Pet 5.10.
perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle them; he makes spiritual life more
full and active, strong and vigorous in them; the longer Christ lives in them,
the more perfection he ministers unto them, the more abundantly he fills them,
the more he manifests the power of his grace toward them: and thus Christ
lives in Gods children, by preserving and perfecting the life of grace in them.
And thus you see it is apparent that Christ does live in Gods children, by his
gracious and powerful work of Sanctification.

CHAP. XXII.
Christ living in man described.
IF you demand what is the life of Christ, or Christ living in the children of
God? I answer, it is a spiritual power or Principle of grace which Christ by
his Spirit does put into the hearts of the elect at their regeneration inabling
them to move themselves to Godward, in knowing, willing, intending, thinking,
loving, speaking and doing the things which are pleasing unto God; called the
life of Christ, because Christ is the Author and the root thereof; because it
is a life which Christ commands and approves, and because hereby Christ
lives in all them that are regenerate; and this is sometimes termed a Romans
6.11.
being alive to God, because men are hereby moved and quickened to do what
pleases God; sometimes it is styled a Romans 6.8.
living with Christ, having communion and fellowship with the grace of Christ
for newness of life, or with the glory of Christ for eternal felicity;
sometimes it is termed a Romans 6.4.
new life, a pure and unblameable life, framed (not after the lusts of the old
man, but (after the will of God in his word; and sometimes it is called a Romans
14.8.
living unto God; regenerate man consecrating and ordering his whole life after
the will of God, and unto his glory. Christ living in man, does enable, move,
and work the heart of man to acknowledge God and Christ to be his Lord, and
himself not to be his own but Gods and Christ's servant. 2. To frame and order
his thoughts, words and works according to the word of God and Christ in every
thing. 3. To refer and apply himself, his whole life, and whatsoever he has
to the honor of God and Christ. And fourthly, in all the changes, dangers, and
afflictions of his life to depend upon God and Christ, for counsel,
supportment, protection and deliverance; and this is Christ's living in man, and
Christ's keeping and continuing man in the state of grace unto the state of
glory.

If you ask me how or in what manner Christ begins to live in man? I answer:
Manner of Christ's living in Man.

1. By awakening Man.




1. Christ does awaken man, as the Angel smote Peter upon the side, and Acts
12.7.
awakened him when he slept between the two soldiers, with fetters upon him in
Herod's prison. This does Christ by his word without, and the motion of his
spirit within, smite upon the heart and conscience of man sleeping between two
great soldiers, the devil on his right hand, and the world on his left hand,
in the prison of sin; Christ thus smiting upon man, awakens man, causes him to
open his eyes, to see his miserable and wretched estate, to see the danger
wherein he stands: As the Prophet 2 King. 6.20.
opened the eyes of the Syrians, and let them see they were in Samaria, in the
hands of their enemies. Thus Christ awakens man, opens the eyes of man's
understanding, and makes him see himself in the hands of Satan, lead away
captive by him at his will, in the gall of bitterness, and under the bond of
iniquity, poor, blind, naked, miserable and wretched; Christ makes him see the
necessity he has of his righteousness to justify him, of his power to
deliver him, of his intercession to reconcile God unto him, and of his fullness
to fill him. Thus when Christ intended to live in Paul, he first awakened him
out of his spiritual sleep and slumber, he made him see himself: I was Romans
7.9.
alive once (says he) without the Law, I was once ignorant of the Law, I was
blind, and knew not the meaning of the law, I thought my self to be a living
man in Gods family, a shining star in the firmament of Gods Church, and a
fruitful vine in the Lords vineyard, but when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I dyed; when Christ awakened me, opened my eyes, and enabled me to
discern a right of the commandment, then I saw I was under the dominion of
sin, as a dead man is under the dominion of death, wholly possessed by sin,
as the dead by death. Man has first the sense of his being dead in sin
before he has the sense of Christ living in him; Christ makes man to know his
misery by sin, before he knows his happiness by Christ; Christ lives not
where the soul is not awakened, where the eyes of the understanding are not
opened; therefore Ephesians. 5.14.
awake (says the Apostle) thou that sleep and stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light.

2. By humbling Man.
2. Christ intending to live in man does humble man, and causes man to dye to
sin: Saul first dyed before David reigned in Israel: The death of sin in
order of divine operation, precedes the life of Christ, and his grace in the
soul of man; first we are buried with Christ, and then we are raised with
Christ to walk in newness of life; first we are planted into the likeness of
Christ's Romans 6.
death, and then into the likeness of his resurrection Christ therefore in the
dispensation of spiritual life, does first kill, and then make alive, first
wound, and then heal; he makes man sensible of his sin, as of a heavy
burden, before he does ease him, as of a body of death, before he does raise
him, as of a mortal disease before he does cure him; he charge sin upon
the conscience of man, he sets it upon him, to pursue and follow him, as the
avenger of blood under the Law pursued the malefactor. The Lord let loose
Pharaoh and the Egyptians upon Israel to impose heavy burdens upon them, to
deal hardly with them, to beat and scourge them, to pursue and follow them,
when he intended to set them free from Egypt: Christ lets loose Satan and
corruption upon man, to tempt and vex, to accuse and torment man, when he
intends to free man, to restore spiritual life and liberty unto man. The
Israelites were first led into the red Sea, and the Egyptians there drowned,
before Israel triumphed; Man is led into a sea of grief and sorrow for sin,
and his sin there drowned, and then he triumphs in Christ, then Christ
lives in him, and he in Christ. When Christ therefore does humble man as he
Acts 9.
cast Paul to the earth, emptieth man of all thought of his own worth, and
makes man abhor himself below the dust, causes man with the Jews at Peter's
Sermon to cry out, Acts 2.37.
men and brethren what shall we do; to accuse and condemn themselves, to
loath that sin as a Isa. 30.22.
menstruous clout, which was formerly worn by them as a garment of great
choice, to Job 20.15.
vomit up that sin (it is Jobs expression) as the gall of Aspes, which he
formerly kept in his mouth, and swallowed down like sweet meat; to hate his
sin more then ever he loved it, and to thrust it out of the doors of his
heart, as Amnon hated Thamar more then ever he loved her, and thrust her out of
his house. When Christ does thus humble man, thus set the heart of man against
sin, and mortify sin in man, 2 Samuel 13.15.
then Christ begins to live in man. When a man pulls down a house that is
ruinous and unhabitable, and begins to lay a new foundation, then we know he
usually intends to dwell and live there. Thus when Christ pulls down the old
man, a ruinous and unhabitable dwelling, unfit to entertain Christ; when
Christ pulls down our pride, when our old man (as S. Paul speaks) is crucified
with Christ, when all high thoughts are cast down, and Christ has laid
another, a new foundation of self-denial and true humility, then Christ means
to dwell there, then undoubtedly Christ begins to live there.

3. 3 By putting a restlesnesse into the heart of Man.
Christ beginning to live in man puts a restlesnesse into the heart of man in
his natural and corrupt estate, makes him out of love with himself, fills him
with dislike of his own ways and works, alienates and takes him off from
creature, and works him to an earnest longing after Christ, as the chased Heart
pants after the water-brookes, Psalm. 4^.1.
being chased and frighted with the sense of his sin, and the hideous noise
of his guilty, accusing and tormenting conscience; he begins to think of
Christ, to betake himself to Christ, for comfort, pardon and salvation, as the
guilty malefactor under the Law, being pursued by the avenger of blood, betook
himself to the City of Refuge for shelter and defense, now his soul^ follows
hard after Christ, Psalm. 62.8.
now he prizeth interest in Christ far above interest in the creature, now he
would take Christ upon any terms, he would gladly leave all for Christ, he
sees there is no other Physician can heal him, no other surety can make
satisfaction for him, no other shield and buckler can protect him, no other
friend can comfort him; and therefore he flies to Christ, as Joah to the horns
of the Altar; he presses after Christ, labors to lay hold on Christ, as the
diseased woman did, whom no Physician could cure; and as there went a Mar. 5.
virtue out from Christ, that healed her bloody issue, when she touched the
hemme of Christ's garment, so there goes a virtue out from Christ, healing and
enlivening the soul, longing after Christ, and touching Christ by faith,
though it may seem to be but weakly and afar off: For as when the iron comes
near the loadstone, there goes a virtue from the loadstone, that moves and
draws the iron to it: so when man comes near Christ, in hearing, in prayer,
in humiliation and earnest longing, there goes a virtue from Christ, which
moves, enlivens, and draws the soul of man home to Christ, and Christ begins
to live in man, to sustain and strengthen the soul of man.

4. By a Revelation of Christ in Man.
4. Christ beginning to live in man, there is a revelation of Jesus Christ in
the soul of man. The Son of God (as S. Paul speaks) is Gal. 1.15.
revealed in man. There goes a light forth from the Sun in the Firmament
which reveals the Sun to the eye of man, and there goes forth a spiritual
and heavenly light from the Sun of Righteousness into the soul of man,
which reveals Christ unto man; which the Apostle calls a 2 Cor. 4.6.
shining of Christ into our hearts. Christ revealing himself unto the soul,
as the only Savior ministering salvation to the soul, as the only Prophet
instructing man, and filling him with heavenly knowledge, as the only Jordan,
bathing and cleansing the soul from sin, as the only Prince of Peace,
sweetly and powerfully ruling in the heart of man, and graciously reconciling
God and man, as the only beloved Husband, marrying himself to man, as the only
precious pearl, in whom is all the treasure of the soul of man, as the only
rock, in whom is all the strength of man, and by whom man is supported, as the
only rich and royal roabe, by whom man's sin is covered, and the soul of man
justified; and as the only fountain, in whom man meets with fullness of
satisfaction; and where Christ is thus revealed, there he lives. This
Revelation of Christ in man ministers life and comfort unto man.

5. By changing Man.
5. Christ beginning to live in man does very powerfully and graciously change
and reform man; he does cause his Gospel to come to man not in ^ These. 1.5.
word only but in power also, humbling man, breaking and bruising the stony
heart, plowing up the fallow ground of man's heart, making it of barren to
become good ground, causing the choicest plants of his grace, and fruits of
righteousness to grow there. Christ does not only proffer his grace, and
stir up good desires and purposes, but he infuseth supernatural qualities of
holiness into the soul of man; he makes him a new creature, causing old
things to pass away, and making all things become new; he puts not a form,
but a power of godliness into man; he dies the heart in grain with grace and
holiness; he makes him a living man indeed for his life and power of grace,
for his unfeigned love to God, for his burning zeal for God, for his gracious
progress in the ways of God, for his sweet and blessed delight in God, and
for his full and through conformity to the will of God: Christ causes his
Spirit to come upon him mightily, as it came upon Iud. 14.
Sampson, inabling him to overcome the Devil, the world and his own
corruption, as the Spirit enabled Sampson to overcome the Lion, transforming
man into the Image and likeness of God, not as the Devil transformed himself
into the Image and likeness of Samuel, remaining a Devil still; but as Christ
John 5.
turned water into wine, graciously changing the qualities of man, making him
of a dead a living man, of proud humble, of ignorant wise, of obstinate soft
and tender hearted, of profane holy, of cold fervent, of barren fruitful, of
weak and impotent, untoward and indisposed, he makes him strong and able, apt
and ready to every good duty, and this is the manner of Christ's living in man.

CHAP. XXIII.
Use.

A Christians life the most noble life.


Does Christ live in man? Then the life of a Christian is the most noble and
honorable life of all others: the life of sensible creatures is more excellent
then the life of vegitive creatures; the life of reasonable creatures is more
excellent then the life of sensible; the life of man is more noble then the
life of beasts; but the life of spiritual and sanctified persons is more
excellent then the life of reasonable creatures; the life of a true Christian
surpasses the life of man, as far as the life of man surpasses the life of
beasts. Saul was in stature head and shoulders above the residue of the people.
The life of grace is head and shoulders in dignity, worth and excellency above
all other lives; this is the life of Christ, a living of Christ in man; and as
Christ is infinitely more excellent then man, so does this life exceedingly
transcend the life of man, called the Ephesians. 4.18.
life of God, in regard of the cause efficient, God working it by his holy
Spirit; in regard of precept, God commanding it; in regard of approbation, God
accepting and approving it; in regard of nobleness and dignity, as the life of
God is more excellent then the life of the creature, so is this life the most
honorable, sweetest and choysest life communicable to any creature; and in
regard of likeness with God, holy and gracious resemblance of God; he that
lives the life of man is like man, participates of the nature of man; he that
lives the life of grace is like God, is made partaker, as S. Peter speaks, of
the divine 2 Pet. 1.4.
nature, not in respect of essence, but in respect of holy and gracious
qualities: he that lives the life of grace comes nighest unto God,
participates most of Gods fullness, Christian life honorable.
and has nearest and sweetest communion with God of all persons. And this life
is indeed a very honorable and noble life.

1. Original.
1. For the Original of it, it is not from nature, but from grace, not from
man, but from the Spirit, it is the Spirit that Ioh. 6.63.
quickneth: It is a beam from the brightest Sun, even Christ Jesus the Son of
Righteousness: I (says Christ) am the bread of life come down from Heaven,
if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. It is a stream from the
highest and purest fountain, the Spirit of grace, becoming in the soul of man
a well of Ioh 4.14.
water springing up into everlasting life.

2. In regard of the nature of it, a spiritual life, 2. Nature.
a life of holiness and righteousness; a life surpassing the life of nature,
as the Sun the Glo-worme, as the Vine the bramble; and they that live this life
are said to Romans 6.4.
walk in newness of life: Having a new birth, being borne again, and having
new principles and qualities put into them by the Spirit of God; the Lord
according to his promise, putting a Ezekiel. 11.19.
new heart into them; their souls being renewed and changed, not in substance,
but in qualities, framed a new after God in knowledge, righteousness and true
holiness, made 2 Cor. 5.17.
new creatures, and leading a conversation pure, and unblameable in the sight
of God, and that life which is most full of grace and holiness, is of all lives
the most noble and glorious.

3. In regard of the rarity of it; 3. Rarity.
few men live this life, the whole world (as S. John says) lies in
wickedness, dead in sins and trespasses, as the old world lay drowned in the
deluge, only Noah and his Family, a few persons lived in the Arc; it is but a
little remnant, Ier. 3.14.
one of a city and two of a Tribe, as the Prophet speaks, that live this life.
Strait is the gate and narrow is the way (says Christ) which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. A godly person is a rare jewel; God
dispenceth the life of grace only to his chosen: Christ in the days of his
flesh raised not all the dead to life, but only a few, one now and another
then: thus Christ in the day of the Gospel, does not quicken all, but a few,
one here, and another there: the number of them, that profess themselves
Christians, is indeed very great, but the number of them in whom Christ lives
is very small, the greatest part, like the Angel of the Church of Sardis,
having a Rev. 3.1.
name that they live, and yet are dead, the outward form and show of
Christianity is very frequent, but the life, power and practice very rare.

4. Pleasantnes.
4. In regard of the sweetness and pleasantness of this life. Christ living in
the soul of man is the choysest joy of man, The light (says Solomon) is
sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to the eye to behold the Sun; the light of
Christ is sweet to the soul, the beholding of the Sun of righteousness living
in man is very pleasant unto man; the heart of old Jacob revived, hearing that
his son Joseph lived; the sense and feeling of Christ living in man, is a sweet
and powerful reviving of the heart of man. Christ is the Prince of peace, and
where he lives there is sweet and sure peace. Christ is the Paradise of all
comforts, he that enjoyes Christ has strong consolation; where Christ lives,
the wounds of the soul are healed, the adversaries of the soul are
vanquished, the sins of the soul are purged, the stormy tempest of the
conscience is appeased, the clouds of sorrow which darkened the soul are
dispelled, spiritual liberty is restored, forgiveness of sin is sealed, sense
of Gods love communicated, and the soul graciously reconciled unto God: all
other life is bitter and unsavory as death, in comparison of a holy and
gracious life.

5. Exaltation.
5. In regard of that estate and condition, whereinto this life does exalt and
advance man; Christ living in man makes man a child of God by adoption, a
spiritual freeman, a glorious Conqueror over Satan, himself and the world, a
living member of that mystical body whereof Christ is the head, a King and
Priest to God, and an heir of an inheritance incorruptible reserved in the
Heavens; no crown does so honor man as his Sanctification; man is more to be
esteemed for his holy walking, then for the highest honor the Earth is able to
confer upon him; it is not man's natural, but his new birth that makes him
truly noble; though holiness, thorough men's ignorance and profaneness, be of
no esteem with men, yet is this the prime advancer of man.

6. Lowness of man's estate without this life.
6. In regard of that lowness and baseness of spirit from which this life does
free man: man in his natural estate is very basely minded, very dishonourably
disposed, like the decreped woman in the Gospel, he is altogether bowed down,
and wholly bent to the things which are here below, minding only things earthly,
wallowing like a Swine in the dirt and mire of the world, and fleshly lusts;
but when Christ lives in man, when he puts the life of grace into man, he
ennobles the heart of man, communicates a heavenly disposition to him, and puts
the whole man into a heavenly frame, and sets his heart to seek the things
which are above, he rayseth his heart, his thoughts, his desires to the love,
meditation and seeking of things spiritual, as he raised the body of Lazarus
from the grave: he makes man to look upon the world, as upon a Pro. 23.5.
Phil. 3.8.
thing of naught, to repute all the fulness of the Earth as dung and dross
in comparison of Christ, to leave all and follow Christ, as Elisha left his
yoakes of Oxen and followed Elijah; having Christ living in him, he minds
Christ, adheres to Christ, pursues and follows after Christ, makes Christ his
crown and portion: he has an Numb 14.24. Heb. 1^.
excellent Spirit, like the Spirit of Christ, contemning the glory of the
world, as Christ contemned it, with Moses reputing the reproach of Christ,
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; despising all the profers and
persuasions of the Earth, not regarding all the cominations of the world; he
chooses rather with the three children to walk with Christ in the fiery Dan 3.
furnace, then to live without Christ in the choysest earthly palace. He had
rather be nailed with Christ to the cross, then set with Herod upon the
throne. He says to the men of the world, as Abraham in another case to the
King of Sodom; give me the persons, take thou the substance, give me Christ,
take ye the world, give me things heavenly and eternal, take ye things earthly
and temporal. He that has Christ living in him reputes the world as nothing,
Christ is both his crown, joy and portion.

7. In regard of their honorable walking, 7. Honorable walking.

Gal. 5.25.


who have Christ living in them, they c walk in the Spirit, says the Apostle;
the Spirit moves and guides them to walk according to that rule which the
Spirit has in the word proposed to them, the Spirit makes their hearts within
and lives without suitable to that holiness which the law prescribes, they
walk in the power of the Spirit quickening and assisting them; in the light of
the Spirit directing them; in the motion of the Spirit exciting them; and in
the operation of the Spirit, enlarging their hearts with the knowledge of God,
faith in God, love to God, and with the sense and feeling of Gods goodness
toward them, and in the testimony and evidence of the Spirit, sealing up the
forgivenes of their sins unto them; as the soul is not idle, but operative in
the body, distributing sense, and motion to every member of the body: So the
Spirit of Christ, in them, in whom Christ lives, is not idle, but operative,
manifesting it self in the fruits and effects thereof; the soul inables man
to humane works and services, the Spirit of Christ living in man inables man to
spiritual duties and exercises, to shine as a light in the midst of the
froward generation among whom he lives; to walk as a child of light, with
Zachary and Elizabeth to walk in all the Commandments of God and be
blameless; and this is the honor and crown of a Christians life, to walk as
beseems the Gospel, to walk worthy of God, and his Christian and holy
calling; he is most honorable who expresses most holiness in his
conversation.

8. In regard of the term whereunto they live, who have Christ living in them;
carnal men who are aliens to the life of God and Christ, live to a very low,
ignoble and base term, they live to the world, minding and intending the
world, conforming themselves to the example, custom and fashion of the world,
they serve Mat. 6.24.
Mammon and not God; to this they live as servants to the Master whom they
serve: they live unto themselves and their own lusts, walking after their own
imaginations, proposing their own by and base ends, doing all things for
themselves, for their own profit, pleasure and applause, they serve their Romans
16.
own belly, and not the Lord Jesus; they live to Satan, not doing the will of
God, but the Ioh. 8.44.
lust of the Devil, as Christ speaks, and this is the shame and dishouour of
the life of man, to live to live to such low, by and base ends as these; but
they who have Christ living in them, do live unto God, intending God, making
God and his praise, the supreme end of their living; as a wife lives to her
husband, bringing forth children to her husband; a vine lives to the Master of
the vineyard, bringing forth his fruit to him; and a flock lives to him that
is the Master of the flock, yielding all their increase to him that ownes
them: thus these men live to God, bringing forth all their fruit and increase
to God: Whether we live (says the Apostle) we live Romans 14.8.
unto the Lord, or whether we die we die unto the Lord, whither we live
therefore or die we are the Lords: They live unto the Lord, 1. Living to God
what?
Acknowledging themselves not to be their own, or under their own power, but
to be Christ's as his proper and peculiar people. 2. By receiving all their
direction from Christ, and not walking after their own imagination, taking
Christ's word, as the Israelites did the fiery pillar, and the wise men the
star, to conduct them in all their goings. 3. By surrendering themselves up to
Christ, to do his and nor their own will; as servants to do the will of the
Master with whom they are entered into covenant. 4. By making Christ their
refuge, flying to him in their distresses, as servants to their Masters. 5. By
minding Christ, and intending his glory in all that they do, even to the very
end of their life, preferring Christ's honor above their own welfare, being
willing to abase themselves, that they may exalt Christ: and as they live to
Christ, so they dye to Christ, acknowledging him to have the power of death in
his hand, submitting with patience to the decree of Christ, touching both time
and manner of their dissolution, being willing to glorify Christ by their
death, resigning themselves wholly into the hands of Christ, when the hour of
death comes upon them. It is the earnest desire and unfeigned endeavor of all
gracious persons, both in life and death, to make the name of Christ glorious;
looking beyond themselves to God and Christ Jesus in all their doings and
sufferings. As they are endowed with noble principles within, in their inward
man, so they have honorable ends without, in their external work: as their
life is originally from Christ; so their motion is to Christ, he is the prime
object of their intendment, as they have their use from him, so they live unto
him; and this is the honor of the life of a Christian, to live to Christ. What
is the honor of a wives life? but to live to her husband, and not to
strangers: What is the honor of a servants life? but to live to his Master in
the faithful discharge of his office. And what is the honor of a Christians
life? but to live to Christ, and not to his own corrupt affections; doubtless
every man's life is more or less honorable and glorious, as he lives more or
less to God and the Lord Jesus: And thus it appears that their life in whom
Christ lives, is of the lives of all people, the most excellent and honorable:
Their life is glorious in prosperity, by walking humbly in the midst of their
abundance; in adversity, by walking patiently in all their sufferings: In
temptation, by walking beleevingly, resting upon God with a firm and sure
confidence; In opposition, by walking courageously, holding fast their
profession of Christ Jesus: In losses, by walking joyfully, knowing they have
an abiding substance in Heaven; In all estates and conditions, by walking
holily and circumspectly, shining like the light more and more to the day of
their perfection.

CHAP. XXIIII.
BUt if their life in whom Christ lives, be of all lives the most honorable
and glorious; how comes it to pass that such people as live this life are
often in outward appearance of all others the most ignominious and
dishonorable.

I answer it so comes to pass. 1. Causes of the obscurity of holy life opened.
By reason of the secrecy and spirituality of their life: their life is a
hidden life, it is hid with Col. 3.
Christ in God, says the Apostle, as the life of the branch in the winter is
hidden in the root, and has little appearance in the branch; thus the glory of
a Christians life, is hidden in God, the outward splendor and beauty thereof,
many times appears not; Beloved (says S. John) now we are the sons of God,
we have now a very blessed and glorious life with God; but it does not yet 1
Ioh. 3.1, 2.
appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be
like him; the flower has a glorious life surpassing Solomon in all his
royalty, yet in the winter, it is hidden under the Earth, but when the vernall
Sun appears, then the flower appears in her beauty; thus when Christ who is
our life shall appear, Mat. 6.
then shall we appear with him in glory, though our life be now hidden in
obscurity.

2. This comes to pass thorough the ignorance of carnal men; 2. Ignorance.
the blind man sees not the glory of the Sun, the carnal man by reason of his
spiritual blindness, sees not the glory of a Christians life. Christ had meat
and drink which the Disciples knew not, the true Christian has a life, and in
that life an honor, and a glory which the carnal man discernes not; The
natural man (says S. Paul) receives 1 Cor. 2.14.
not the things of the Spirit of God, they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: carnal men thorough
their ignorance repute that the foulest shame of man, which is indeed the
choysest glory of man; holiness the special workmanship of the Spirit of God
upon man, the brightest star shining in the firmament of man's soul, the
richest and most orient pearl in the Cabinet of man's heart, is looked on, and
censured by corrupt and carnal man, as the only disgrace and shame of man;
speaking 2 Pet. 2.12.
evil (as S. Peter says) of the things which they understand not.

3. 3. Reproach.
It so comes to pass thorough the disgrace and reproach which is cast upon
them that live the life of grace: holiness has ever been cumbred with the
foulest traducements. Scandalous mouths have ever been most shamefully open
against such as have been most holy in their conversation; the best men have
ever had the worst report. Christ surpassed all in holiness as the Sun the
candle in brightness, and who ever was equal to him in reproaches, they said
of him that he was a friend of Man. 12.
Publicans and sinners, that he had a Devil, was madd, and that by Beelzebub
the Prince of the Devils he cast out Devils; and Christ f^re-told his Disciples
that men should revile them and persecute them, and say all Mat. 5.
manner of evil saying against them falsely for his sake: It is not some, but
all manner of evil saying, which is heaped upon Gods children; the ways and
workers of godliness are l^aden with innumerable reproaches, as the smoke out
of the bottomless pit in the Revelation did darken the Rev. 9.
Sun and the air; so do the smoaky scandals of carnal men, whose throat
is an open Sepulcher, obscure and darken the names, persons and lives of Gods
servants; he that departs from iniquity making himself a prey, as the Prophet
of old spoke, a prey to the thoughts of men secretly to censure him, a prey to
the hands of men to oppress him, and a prey to the tongues of men to traduce
him, and the honor and glory of the lives of Gods children is much obscured
thorough the scandals which always are cast upon them.

4 Corruption remaining.
4. This likewise comes to pass thorough some corruption yet remaining in Gods
children; thorough some failings wherewith they are sometimes over-taken;
though Christ live in them, yet they are not so full of life, but that there is
some sin, like a disease, or evil humor in a living body, abiding in them,
they have an Esau as well as a Jaacob in their womb, some tares of sin
growing with the wheat of grace in the field of their hearts; they carry a 2
Cor. 1^.
prick of imbred corruption in their flesh, and this lusts against the
spirit, against their regenerate part, as the Amalekites fought against
Joshuah, and sometimes it foiles them, as they sometime prevailed over Joshuah;
and as an inward evil humor sometimes breaks out into an open ulcer, so does
this hidden and remaining corruption, sometimes vent and show it self in some
open failing, as in Job, David, Jeremy, Peter, and the choysest of Gods
servants; and as one ulcer does much obscure the beauty of the face, so one
failing does much eclipse and darken the glory of the conversation of Gods
children; if a child of God keep not himself Iam. 1.26.
unspotted of the world, if he fail but a little, the world will blot and
blaze his name all over, if they espy but a little spot now and then in him,
they will report and proclaim him as one that is leprous all over.

Mis-judging.
5. This also comes thus to pass, thorough men's misprision and
mis-interpretation of the ways and works of Gods children: Their eyes are
blood shot, they behold the doings of Gods servants in a false glass, and they
appear unto them in contrary colors, and as Hanuns servants misinterpreted
David's 2 Samuel 10.
kindness, and handled his men as spies, who were sent as comforters; thus
they misinterpret the doings of the righteous and censure their knowledge as
error, their piety as hypocrisy, their zeal as frenzy, their attendance on
Gods ordinances as idleness, their sacred meetings as confederacies and
combinations, their works of mercy as works of ostentation and vainglory;
such as are farthest from sincerity, and the greatest deceivers, are most ready
to charge hypocrisy upon others; such as are least industrious to examine
their own hearts are usually the severest censurers of other men's lives, and
thus they change the clear and shining day of a godly man's life, into an
obscure and dark night, 1 Samuel 17.28.
calling evil good, and good evil, putting light for darkness and
darkness for light, as we may see in David, Paul and others.

6 Base outside
6. This likewise is so, by reason of the base outside of Gods children: They
in whom Christ lives are for the most part of low estate and slender reputation
in the eye of the world, Christ at first was borne of a Virgin, espoused to a
Carpenter, her condition no way conspicuous and glorious in the eyes of men,
and Christ is now for the most part formed again in the hearts of men, far
from all external pomp and glory, God having chosen poor things and base
things, 1 Cor. 1.
and things which are not, to confound the things which are, and the poor
(says Christ) receive the Gospel, and blessed is he that is not offended in
me, that does not stumble and take offense at me, by reason of the low and
slender estate of them that receive and embrace me preached in the Gospel. And
the Prophet has told us long since that Gods people are an afflicted poor
people; and this does much obscure the honourablenesse of their life, in the
eye of the world, who usually judge nothing excellent and honorable, but that
which is externally pompous and glorious, as we see by experience both in
Christ and his members, Mat. 13.55. Ioh. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Ioh. 7.48, 49.

7. Lastly, thus it likewise comes to pass, thorough the manifold
afflictions which attend the righteous; they in whom Christ lives are hated of
the world, persecuted by the men of the Earth and pursued with many troubles,
walking like the Israelites thorough the red Sea of many afflictions,
destitute, afflicted, tormented in Sheep and Goates-skinnes, in Caves and in
Dens; Killed all the day long, and accounted as Sheep for the slaughter, as
the Psalmist speaks, and these afflictions are a great darkning of the glory
of their life in the eyes of the World, as the clouds darken the Sun in the
eyes of men, continuing in it self bright and beautiful.

CHAP. XXV.
Does Christ live in the souls of Gods children? 2. Life of Gods children a
cheerful life.
then the life of Gods children is of all the lives of men, the most joyful
and cheerful, the most pleasant and comfortable. The Sun is the joy and
comfort of the world; Christ the Sun of Righteousness is the glory, joy and
comfort of the soul: The more fully and powerfully Christ lives in man, the
greater is the joy of man; Luke 2.10.
Christ's coming unto man is tidings of great joy, Behold (said the Angel) I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be unto all people, for unto
you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
This is great joy for the Author, matter, quality, quantity and duration of it:
All joy is but heaviness to the having of Christ living in us, purging our
corruptions, pardoning our offenses, filling us with all heavenly blessings,
and sweetly and powerfully ruling over us: 1 Samuel 4 5.
The coming of the Arc ministered such joy to Israel, that they gave a shout,
which made the earth to ring; how much more does the coming of Christ in the
Gospel, and ministration of spiritual life to Gods chosen, make them joyous
and comfortable, witness the men of Samaria, of whom it is recorded, that upon
Philips preaching the Gospel to them, the ejection of Satan, and consequently
Christ's beginning to live within them, there was great joy in that City: Acts
8.8. Where Christ lives is joy of 1. Life.
And all joy and gladness does indeed accompany Christ's living in man. 1.
Where Christ lives, there is the joy of life, of spiritual life, of the life
of God, a life in respect whereof all other life is but death; and therefore as
the Father of the Prodigal said to his servants, Luke 15.
bring hither the fatted Calfe and kill it, and let us eat and be merry, for
this my Son was dead and is alive, he was lost and is found. Thus the man in
whom Christ lives, has great cause to be merry, because his soul was dead and
is alive, was lost and is found 2. Where Christ lives, there is joy of Light.
2. Light.
The Sun fills the air with temporal light; Christ fills the soul with
spiritual light, with all knowledge and wisdom, and spiritual
understanding: And as the beholding of the Star filled the wise men with
exceeding great joy; so does the shining of Christ into the soul of man fill
man with great joy and rejoicing. Mat. 2.10. 3 Liberty. John 11.44.
3. Where Christ lives, there is the joy of liberty; Christ restoring life to
Lazarus set him free from the grave, and from the fellowship of the dead, his
eyes were free to see, his ears to hear, his tongue to speak, his hands to
work, and his feet to walk; Christ living in man makes man free from the
death of sin, from carnal fellowship with them that are dead in sin; he
makes him free in his understanding to know God, in his thoughts to meditate
upon God, in his memory to remember God, and in his affections to believe in
God, to love God, and to walk in the ways of God; Exodus 15.
And this liberty ministers to the soul as great a cause of rejoicing, as ever
Israel conceived upon their freedom from the Egyptians. 4. Victory.
4. Where Christ lives, there is the joy of victory. When David came into the
Israelitish army he gave them victory over Goliath and all the Philistines, they
all fled; when Christ comes into, and lives in the soul of man, he overcomes
Satan, he dissolves his works, he casts that strong man out, he subdues all
the corruptions that are in man: They that are Christ's (says Saint Paul) have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts; they have gotten a blessed
and honorable victory over Satan, themselves, and the world; a victory
ministering to them greater cause of rejoicing, then Israel had, when they gave
a shout for their victory over the Philistines. 5. Regeneration
5. Where Christ lives, there is the joy of regeneration, adoption and
sanctification Christ makes us the sons and daughters of God, the friends and
lovers of God, who were aliens and enemies to God; he makes us clean who were
defiled; he abolisheth the character and stamp of Satan, and engraves the Image
of God on our souls; he like a refiners fire, and fullers soap, puts away the
spot and dross of our sin, purifying and purging us as gold and silver, that
we may offer to the Lord an offering of righteousness: And this affords us
matter of greater rejoicing then Naaman had upon his being cleansed from his
leprosy in Jordan: Rejoice not in this (says Christ) that the spirits are
made subject unto you, but rather rejoice in this, that your names are written
in Heaven, that you have a name with God, that you are by adoption the children
of God, that you are sanctified and cleansed from your sins: The work of
holiness ministers more joy to Gods servants, then the gift of working
miracles; there is more comfort arises from the subiugation of our corrupt
affections, 6. Riches.
then from having all the world put under us. 6. Where Christ lives there is
the joy of riches, he cannot be poor and miserable that has Christ living in
him, Christ is unsearchable riches, as Gideon said of Ephraim the gleanings of
Ephraim are better then the vintage of Abiez^r: so the gleanings, the smallest
gatherings of Christ, are better then the vintage, then the greatest abundance
of the world. Christ's spiritual gifts and graces are the choicest of all
riches; all the riches of the world are but straw and stubble to this pearl;
he that has this has cause of holy glorying and rejoicing in his wealth, as
the Merchant in the Parable had joy upon the finding of the precious pearl:
The rich man in Saint Luke having pulled down his barnes, builded them
greater, and filled them with worldly store, Luke 15.
bid his soul (though upon weak grounds) eat, drink and be merry, because he
had goods enough laid up for many years. The man that has pulled down his
lusts, new built his heart, and received Christ to live and dwell there, may
upon better grounds bid his soul eat, drink and be merry; for having Christ he
has a full and an abiding substance, he has treasure enough for ever. 7.
Peace.
7. Where Christ lives, there is the joy of peace, reconciliation, and sweet
communion; he brings us nigh to God, as Joseph brought his brethren nigh to
Pharaoh; he makes God a father and friend to us; he causes the face of God to
shine upon us more comfortably then Sun, and fills us with that peace which
passes all understanding, and thus he makes the life of them in whom he lives
a very sweet and pleasant life, a life of choicest comforts, a life for
delights, surpassing the lives of rich men, Nobles, Conquerours, and all
pleasure-hunters, as the Paradise does surpass the wilderness, and the
glorious Sun the rotten gloe-worme.

But you will say if their life in whom Christ lives, be such a sweet and
pleasant, such a joyous and comfortable life, whence is it that many of them in
whom Christ lives, are so sad and sorrowful, and of all others many times in
outward appearance the most uncomfortable livers?

Grounds or cause, of sorrow in Gods children.

1. Remaining corruption.


I answer, the sorrow and sadness of them in whom Christ lives arises:

1. From the corruption which yet remains in them: Diseases in the body though
they do not destroy the body, yet they now and then abate and hinder the
comfort of bodily life: Clouds in the air though they do not abolish the
Sun, yet they hinder the light of the Sun, and darken the air. Thus
corruption in them that live the life of grace, though they do not destroy and
abolish this holy life, yet they many times abate the comfort of it, obscure
and darken Christ's living in man, and until they are overcome and dispelled,
they minister occasion of sorrow and sadness to the souls of Gods children,
causing them with David to complain of them as of a heavy burden; and with
Paul to cry out, O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body
of death. Where Christ lives there is joy, because the life of grace has there
an inchoation; there is sorrow, because sin has not yet it is complete
dissolution, and perfect burial. Israel had joy in their victory over the land
of Canaan; they had sorrow, because some Canaanites yet remained among them:
The children of God have much joy from their spiritual conquest, though
somewhat sadded by their fleshly oppositions.

2. Aberrations
2. This arises from some particular aberrations of Gods children, of which
they are sometime guilty; sometimes they step aside from Gods way, their hearts
hang loose, and cleave not close to God, Satan gets an advantage against them,
and foiles them; and as so ^e great fall takes away the sense and comfort of
bodily life for the present: Thus Gods children through some fall do lose the
comfort of Christ living in them, Psalm 51.
and are very sorrowful, as a man whose bones are broken.

3. Satan's assaults.
3. This arises from some violent assault of Satan, God lets him loose upon
them, to buffet them for their humiliation for sin past, or for excitation
from security for the present, or for prevention for the time to come, and
while this temptation lasts, the joy of their spiritual life is eclipsed, as
the joy of a rich man is darkened, while his house is besieged; the joy of a
City is disturbed, while the siege against it lasts; and as the joy of the
Merchant in his rich treasure cease, while the violent storm continues:
Though Gods children have a rich treasure of grace, a blessed portion of
spiritual wealth within them; yet the joy hereof is much abated for the
present, by reason of Satan's violent temptation; Gods children through the
force and fury of the assault of Satan, are sometimes disabled to make a
comfortable use of the gifts they have received.

4. Impieties of others.
4. This arises from the sinfulness and great impieties which they see in
others among whom they live. The Lords people have matter of sorrow and
humiliation ministered to them, not only from their own sins, but also from
the sins of other people; they see the name of God is dishonored, the
Christian profession is disgraced, the mouth of the common adversary is opened,
the welfare of the Church is hazarded, the removal of the Gospel is
threatened, and many punishments are inflicted, by the exorbitancies of many
living within the Pale of the Church, and for this they are much grieved and
very deeply humbled; 2 Pet. 2.8.
their righteous soul with Lot is vexed from day to day with their unlawful
deeds, Ps. 119.136.
in seeing and hearing; and their eyes with David gush out with rivers of
tears, because men keep not the Law of God; and with the marked ones in
Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9.4.
they sigh and cry for all the abominations which are done in the Family, City,
Congregation, and Kingdom whereof they are members; they are unworthy the name
of Christians, who sorrow not for other men's impieties.

5. This arises from their prevision, preconsideration, 5 Foresight of future
calamities.
and foresight of future calamities. Noah foresaw the coming of the flood, and
prepared an Arc; Joseph foresaw the coming of the famine, and accordingly
made preparation; the skillful Mariners foresee the storm, and betake
themselves unto the haven; Prove. 2^.3.
The wise man (says Solomon) foreseeth the evil, and hides himself,
humbles himself, addresseth himself to God, makes his peace with God, and
hides himself with the Lord: Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me
(says the Psalmist) for my soul trusts in thee, Psalm. 57.^.
yea in the shadow of thy wings will I hide my self until these calamities be
over-past. He saw the rage of the adversary against him, their intendment of
evil to him, their conspiracy and determination to take his life from him, he
saw the absence of all humane help to assist him; and therefore he makes his
petition unto God, humbles himself before him; and as the chickens betake
themselves to the wings of the Hen, to hide them from the tempest, rain, wind
and cold coming upon them: So did the Psalmist betake himself to the Lord, to
the wisdom, power, truth, and goodness of God, as to the wings of
protection; the clearer discerning men have of incumbent evils, the more
effectually they apply themselves to God for future refuge; Men's ignorance and
inconsiderateness of future judgments, makes them obstinate in present
impieties, taking no notice of the evil of sin, until the evil of
punishment come upon them: The simple (says Solomon) pass on, and are
punished; but good men whose souls are sanctified, whose eyes are opened, see
the rain of Gods displeasure afar off in the clouds, and hide themselves from
it. Elijah, seeing a little cloud arising out of the Sea like a man's hand, 1
King. 18.43, 44.
bid his servant go up and say to Ahab, prepare thy charet, and get thee down
that the rain stop thee not, and Ahab rode and went to Jezreel. The children
of God discerning the wrath of God afar off, when it is but a little, even in
the first appearance, prepare themselves by prayers and tears, confession,
contrition, and humiliation, and make all have to draw nigh to God, that they
may be safe with the Lord, when the cloud of Gods anger shall rain upon the
earth. When I heard (says Habakuk) the threatenings of the Lord, H^b. 3.18.
the dreadful judgments, the great destruction, and grievous desolation which
God had appointed to bring upon the people, what then? how was he affected with
the hearing of this: My belly (says he) trembled, my lips quivered at the
voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I
might rest in the day of trouble, when he comes up unto the people he will
invade them with his troops. Here is a declaration of his great sorrow and
humiliation at the hearing and foreseeing of a judgment yet to come; and here
is the reason why he did it, and the fruit arising from it, even rest in the
day of trouble, sweet and sure acquiescence in God, gracious and mighty
protection under God, when the trouble foreseen should come. Although the
fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no heard in the stals: There is the
great desolation and devastation of the land, all this notwithstanding the
Prophet having humbled himself, is confident of comfort in this great
distress: Yet (says he) I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my salvation; the Lord is my strength, my helper, my shield, my comforter; he
shall make my feet like Hinds feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high
places, making me secure and safe, comfortable and cheerful in the day of
trouble. Unfeigned humiliation in the days of peace ministers great comfort and
confidence in the hour of distress. He that sees the evil afar off, and is
humbled, shall have comfort when the evil comes.

6. This arises from the distress which Gods children see upon the Church of
Christ; 6. Sense of Churches misery.
they say not of the Church as Cain did of Ab^, am I my brothers, am I the
Churches Keeper? they answer not the Church complaining in her afflictions, as
sometimes the Priests and Elders answered Judas in his anguish, what is that to
us, see thou to that; Mat. 27.
but Gods children have a sympathy and fellow-feeling of the troubles of their
brethren; Amos 6.
they are not of their number who are at ease in Sion, eating the Calfes of the
stall, drinking their wine in bowls, Amos 6.
etc. but are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph: But they like the
members in the body natural, if one member suffer all the members suffer with
it; weeping with them that weep; Heb. 13.
remembering them that are in bonds, us bound with them, and them which suffer
adversity, as being themselves in the body. Such is their love to the Church of
Christ, such is their desire after, and pleasure in the Churches welfare; such
is their conjunction with the Church, and their apprehension of the estate of
the Church, that the Churches miseries are their sorrows.

CHAP. XXVI.
THe consideration of Christ's living in all Gods children, may give us just
occasion to examine our selves, and to get good and clear evidence of Christ's
living in our souls. This is the crown and comfort of a Christian to have
Christ living in him: The more we are assured of this, the more sweet and
comfortable will the meditation of Christ be unto us, and the greater our
courage against all opposing powers, and the more cheerful shall we be in
Christ's service. And this we shall discern.

1. Purity.
1. By the purity of our conversation. The order of our life without is suitable
to the root and Principle of our life within; he that has a humane soul, and
life within him, does outwardly walk, speak, and work as a man; he that has
Christ living in him, converseth, walks, works, does all things outwardly
as a Christian, conformeth himself to Christ, is acted, moved and guided by
Christ living in him, as the body is moved and guided by the soul living in
the same: Ier. 31.33.
Christ living in him, writes his Law in his heart, new moulds, new fashions
and frames his whole man, and makes it suitable to the Law, causing him to be
holy in all manner of conversation as he that has called him is holy, Romans
6.11.
making him alive to God; receiving all his direction from God, to be wholly
subject unto Gods will, totally devoted to Gods service, to do every thing for
God, and to intend God above himself, or any thing else; as Christ in the
days of his flesh did all according to the Commandment his Father gave him,
he sought not his own but his Fathers honor. Thus he in whom Christ lives,
makes Gods word the rule that guides him, he seeks God and not himself, he
purifieth himself as Christ is pure, and strives what in him lies, that he may
approve himself to God by walking humbly and holily with God.

2. By man's invinciblenesse. He that has Christ living in him is very
victorious, even as Christ is victorious, 2. Invinciblenes
Christ is his life, and as Christ is invincible, so is the life of Christ in
them that are his, sin and Satan may now and then foil them, but can never
extinguish the life of grace in them; because Christ who lives in them is
stronger then all that does oppose them. 1 John 4.4.
Ye are of God (says Saint John) endowed with the life of God, and have
overcome, because greater is he that is in you then he that is in the world
Christ living in his children, is greater then Satan who lives in carnal men,
and therefore they are invincible. 1 John 5.18.
We know (says the same Apostle) that whosoever is borne of God sins not,
is not under the power of sin, gives no allowance to sin, makes not a trade
of sin; but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one
touches him not, he keeps himself; that which is proper unto God, is
transferred to the children of God, and they are said to keep themselves who
indeed are kept of God, being kept (as Saint Peter says) through the power of
God unto salvation, having Christ living in them, the whole armor of God put
upon them, the gifts of the Spirit communicated to them, giving themselves to
the study and practice of godliness, and being frequent and fervent in holy
and humble supplication unto God, they are kept that the evil one does not
touch them, his temptations are resisted, he cannot extinguish the life of
Christ in them, in all assaults, afflictions, temptations, and trials, they are
more then Conquerours through Christ loving them, and living in them; Romans 8.37.
Christ sustaines them in the deluge of affliction, as the Arc sustained Noah
in the deluge of waters: And though they sometimes slip through the infirmity
of the flesh, yet they grieve under the burden of their corruption, they are
displeased with themselves, they depart not from the fear of the Lord, they
recover and revive, they prevail as Joshuah over the Amalekites, they grow
stronger and stronger like the house of David, they go forward like Israel in
the way to Canaan, from strength to strength, until they appear before the
Lord in Sion, they shine more and more, like the light unto the day of
perfection; The longer Christ lives in them, the more perfection of life is
ministered to them.

3. Preservation from sin and the world.
3. By man's preserving and keeping himself from sin, and from the world. Life
preserves the body from putrefaction, when the life is gone the body putrifies
and rots; but whiles life is strong and vigorous in the body, the body is fresh
and comely; Man without Christ does putrify and rot in sin, he grows worse
and worse; Romans 6. Gal. 5.
but Christ living in man, he is preserved from sin, sin does not reign
over him; they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections
and dusts, their souls are purified by Christ as the gold by the refiners
fire, and the cloth by the Fullers soape; they are kept by Christ as the
Garden by the dresser, as the house by the dweller; they are purged from sin
as the air is purged from clouds and vapors by the wind and Sun; they are
washed and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.
and by the Spirit of our God. Christ communicates spiritual health, and
heavenly beauty to their souls, he purifies them to be a peculiar people to
himself, he makes them shine as lights, he will not suffer sin to remain
like a mortal wound or loathsome ulcer upon them; but he ministers spiritual
healing to them by the wings of his ordinances outwardly, and of his grace
inwardly. Secondly, they in whom Christ lives are preserved from the world;
life inables man to lift up his body from the earth, to tread upon it with his
foot; they in whom Christ lives have their conversation in Heaven, they mind
the things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, they
first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof: This is the
fountain after whose waters they thirst, the Sun in whose light they
rejoice, the treasure with which they desire to be enriched, the thing which
they desire suites with the quality and nature of their life; Christ living in
them, they chiefly desire the things of Christ, their hearts and thoughts are
taken off from the world, they prize it as a thing which is not, they
undervalue it as dung and dross in comparison of Christ, and the things of
Christ; and they use it as if they used it not, Like Gideons three hundred men,
they lap a little, but bow not down to these waters; Christ does marvellously
innoble their disposition in whom he lives, he will not suffer them to be
carnally affected, nor worldly minded. The world is crucified to that man in
whom Christ lives.

4 Expulsion of what is contrary to Christ.
4. By man's oppugning and expelling out of himself whatsoever is contrary to
Christ. It is the property of life to expel what is contrary to it, whatsoever
does oppose or prejudice it: The life of nature labors to the utmost the
expulsion of diseases tending to the dissolution of nature, and the life of
grace, or Christ living in man expels what is contrary to Christ, and to the
life and work of grace. Such a man is sick of the least sin, he complains
of it, he strives against it, the Law of his mind strives against the Law of
his members; as Jacob strove against Esau: so does the spiritual part in him
strive against the carnal and fleshly part; and as the living fountain
strives against, and works out the mud which falls into it, so does he that has
Christ living in him, work out the vain thoughts which fall into his mind,
and the carnal lusts which rise in his soul, and is never at rest until he
has cleared himself of them; as Sarah was at no rest until she had freed her
house of the bondwoman, and her son. Nothing is so displeasing to him that
lives the life of grace as that which displeases Christ, his choicest care is
to keep his heart a clean house for Christ to dwell in, and to make his soul
the plenary possession of Christ, that Christ may dwell and reign alone there;
he allows himself in no sin, as a chaste wife allows of no strange lover
in her heart; his soul is entire with Christ, hating what Christ hates,
loving what Christ loves, expelling daily more and more whatsoever does oppose
Christ's kingdom within him; he is as impatient of sin in his soul, as of a
moate in his eye, as a loyal Subject of a traitor in his house, as a King of a
foreign enemy in his Kingdom. If sin do but once begin to show it self,
he raises all his forces to drive it out, and is at no peace until he has
emptied himself thereof.

5 Imbraceme^t of what suites with Christ.
5. By man's assuming and taking to himself that which is most suitable, and best
agreeing with Christ. Every life draws unto it self that which is most
suitable, and most agreeable thereunto, on that it feeds, with that it is
maintained, and therein it delights. Thus he that has Christ living in him
takes unto himself that which suites and agrees with Christ, in this he
delights, on this his soul feeds: As his life is a spiritual life, so he
draws to himself spiritual food, and exercises himself in spiritual
duties; he desires like a newborn babe the sincere milk of the word, as his
food, and to dwell in the house of the Lord, as in the banqueting house of his
soul, where the ordinances of God are unto him, as a feast of marrow and of
fat things, and of wines well refined upon the Lees: Nothing so fits and suites
with the soul where Christ lives, as the word, and other ordinances of Christ;
therefore such men desire this as their appointed food, pant after this as the
chased Heart after the waterbrooks, and long for it as the dry ground does
thirst for waters: This is the food which maintains the life of grace in their
souls; this is that wherein their life delights it self as in its proper
element; this is sweeter then the honey or the honey-combe; this is better then
thousands of gold and silver; he hides it in his heart as good seed in good
ground; he suffers it to work upon him, as fire upon the metal, purifying
him, and working a gracious change within him; he exercises himself in duties
of godliness, he takes upon him Christ's yoke, applies himself to Christ's
precept, walks in all the ordinances of Christ; he lives not to himself, but
to the Lord; he delights himself in the meditation of Christ; the doing of
Christ's will is his meat and drink, and thus drawing to himself what is most
suitable and agreeable, most pleasant and delightful unto Christ, he makes it
manifest that he lives by Christ living in him.

6 Thriving by ordinances.
6. By man's feeding, nourishing, and strengthening himself by the ordinances of
Christ. The living man in whom is life and health does not only eat, but
gathers strength by his eating: The man in whom Christ lives, does not only
use the means of grace, but is perfected in grace by them: Many there are who
are frequent in the use of Gods ordinances, and yet for want of spiritual
life, and an inward gracious digestive faculty, they are as a man in an
Atrophy, that eats much, and yet is lean and meager, as if he had eat nothing;
Like the lean Kine in Pharaohs dream, that eat up the fat, and yet were as
lean and ill-favored, as if they had not eaten at all, of whom Saint Paul
says, they are always learning, 2 Timothy 3.7.
and yet never come to the knowledge of the truth; but they in whom Christ
lives, do thrive by use of Gods ordinances; 2 Pet. 3 18.
they grow in grace, as a child by the mothers milk, as a field by the dew;
they increase in knowledge, as a Scholar in learning; they wax strong in
says, as a Tree in roots; Rom 15.14.
they grow fervent in love, as a fire in heat by the multiplication of wood;
they abound and are full of goodness, as a Tree planted by the waters side, is
green and flourishing, and full of fruit; and this is a comfortable argument
and evidence of Christ living in us, when we thrive by the means of grace, and
are filled with all those fruits of righteousness which are to the praise and
glory of God in the day of Christ Jesus.

7. By the sweetness of Christ to the soul of man. 7 Sweetness of Christ to
soul.
Life is sweet to the living, Christ is more sweet to them in whom he lives;
honors are sweet to the ambitious, pleasures to the voluptuous, and wealth to
the covetous; Cant. 2.3.
but Christ surpasses all sweetness to them that are true Christians: As the
Apple tree among the trees of the wood (says the Spouse) so is my Beloved
among the sons; I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste. All the fruits of Christ's Prophecye, Priesthood,
and Kingdom, his death, resurrection, and all the benefits of them
communicated to the Spouse by the Gospel, on which she feeds by faith, to
the revivement and refreshing of her soul, are very sweet unto her. Christ is
all sweetness to true believers; the knoweledge of Christ is sweet to their
understandings, as the light is sweet unto the eye; the meditation of Christ is
sweet to their imagination, as the meditation of the husband is sweet unto the
wife; the love of Christ is sweet unto their souls, as the wine is sweet unto
the palate: The word of Christ is sweet unto their ears, as a joyful sound,
his mouth is sweet and altogether lovely: Cant 5.16.
The presence of Christ is sweet unto them, as the presence of the bridegroom
unto the bride: The Spouse affirms of him, Cant. 5.13.
that his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, and his lips like
Lillies dropping sweet myrrh, declaring the surpassing sweetness, which
believing and holy souls do find in Christ's manifestation of himself, and in
the gifts and comforts which he communicates to them by the Gospel. The more
clear and strong, sweet and comfortable apprehensions we have of Christ, the
greater is our assurance of Christ's living in us.

8. Heavenly heat.
8. By the spiritual warmth and heavenly heat which man has within him. Heat
is an evidence of life, Christ warmes the soul where he lives; they that have
Christ living in them, are not like David in another case, having many clothes
and no heat, much means of grace and no spiritual warmth; they are not like
Hoseah's Cake half baked, nor like the Laodicean Angel neither hot nor cold;
but as the flesh of the Shunamites child waxed warm when the Prophet spread
himself upon him: 2 King 4.
Thus their hearts in whom Christ lives are heated, and warmed by the labor
of the Prophet, by the Ministers opening and applying the word of life unto
them, Luke 24.321 Ier. 20.9. Mat. 3.11.
their hearts burn within them, with indignation against sin, with love to
God, and with zeal for God: The word is like fire in their bones, the whole
man is set in a holy flame, they are baptized with the Holy Ghost and with
fire: The Holy Ghost like fire enlightening and purging their souls, and
warming them with holy and fervent love, making them fervent in prayer, and
burning in spirit serving the Lord. All the duties they perform have a sacred
fire mixed with them, a holy heat put into them, as the sacrifice under the
Law was off^red up with fire: Thus their whole service is no dead carcass
without fire, but a burnt offering unto the Lord, they do all in love to God,
and in zeal for God; holy men like Eliah, in their hearing, prayer,
meditation, are carried in a fiery chariot; their religious exercises kindle a
fire in them, which burns up their corruption like stubble, purifies their
souls like silver, and puts their heart into a very sweet and gracious temper;
lukewarmnesse is far from them that are enlivened by Christ Jesus; Man's
deadness in the duties of godliness argues man's alienation from the life of
Christ; Man's zeal for Christ is proportionable to the measure of life received
from Christ; he does in vain assume the name of a Christian, who joins not
zeal to his profession: For as to him that desired to know what manner of man
Basil was, there was presented in a dream a pillar of fire, with this Motto,
talis est Basilius, such a one is Basil, and such in deed in some measure may
be the Motto of every true Christian, because he that is enlivened by Christ,
and has his whole dependence upon Christ, and graciously filled by Christ's
ministrations, he must of necessity have his thoughts taken up with Christ, and
his heart burning with zeal for Christ.

9. By the price which man does put upon Christ. 9. Christ prized.

Job ^.4. 2 Samuel 18.


Life is valued at a high rate, above all the residue of man's temporal
possessions: The Devil could say, skin for skin, and all that a man has will
he give for his life. Christ to them, in whom he lives, is more dear then
temporal life; he is the choicest of all their possessions; as the people
esteemed David, so they esteem Christ better then all their thousands, whether
honors, riches, liberty, life, or whatsoever else; he is to them in respect of
all things else, as the Apple Tree among the Trees of the wood, as the Prince
among the beggars, as the Sun among the gloe-wormes, as the jewel among the
dross: Man that has Christ living in him, so prizeth him, that he will sell
all to enjoy him, as the Merchant did for the precious pearl, he will leave
all to keep communion with him, as the bride to keep her fellowship with the
bridegroom; Christ is to his apprehension the fairest of ten thousand, the
Paradise wherein he is delighted, the crown with which he is honored, and the
fountain in whom his soul finds all satisfaction.

10. By man's care to keep Christ. 10 Care to keep Christ.
Man is very careful to preserve his life, he contendeth much to maintain
this, he will part with any thing rather then with his life. In like manner, a
man that has Christ living in him is very careful to keep Christ; he will
endure any hardness rather th^n be deprived of Christ; he will lose his goods,
his credit, his liberty, and his life rather then lose Christ; because Christ
is the life of his life, Christ is the rock on whom he builds, the root by
whom he lives, the royal Roabe with which he is clothed, the precious pearl
in which lies all his riches, the Paradise wherein grow all his comforts, the
friend in whom he chiefly delights, and the husband with whom his soul is
joined in everlasting wedlock; and therefore his greatest care is to keep
Christ, he lays hold on Christ, as the woman of Shunem upon the Prophet, and
will not be thrust away, as Joah on the Horns of the Altar, and will rather
dye then leave his holdfast on Christ; he resolves to be with Christ, as Ittai
with David, whether in life or in death, whatsoever be his estate: Nothing is
sweet and dear to him as Christ is, and therefore strives by prayer, hearing,
conference, meditation, holy and humble walking, and the use of all holy means
to keep Christ, neither loss nor gain, threatenings nor persuasions, Romans 8.38.
peace nor trouble, life nor death, can work him to a desertion of Christ. And
in these particulars as in so many lively characters may we discern the living
of Christ in us.

CHAP. XXVII.
Care to see Christ living in us.
AS Christ lives in all Gods children, so let all that profess Christ, and call
God Father, see and discern Christ living in them. This is the crown and
comfort of a Christian to have Christ living in him, and without this he has
but the naked and empty name of a Christian, like an Idol that has the name
of a man, and is no man, a name that he lives, and yet is dead: Feel Christ
therefore living in your understanding, by prizing the knowledge of Christ
above all learning, by determining to know nothing in comparison of knowing
Christ, and him crucified, by learning Christ as the truth is in him, being
filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding: Feel Christ living in your will, in making your will free to
choose and embrace him and the things of God, to intend and will him and the
glory of God above every thing, making his will the rule of your will, and
fashioning and framing you to be a willing people, in and about his work and
service: Feel him living in your imaginations, by thinking upon him with more
frequency and delight, then of any other thing, by having more high,
honorable, and sweeter apprehensions of Christ, then of all the creatures:
Feel Christ living in your affections, by being rooted in Christ by a lively
faith, as a Tree in the Earth; by fearing Christ above all earthly powers, as
the Subject his Sovereign above all Civil Rulers; by loving him, as the Bride
the Bridegroom, above all other persons; by rejoicing in him, as the rich man
in his jewel above all the residue of his Substance: Feel him living in your
members, by circumcising, and preparing your ears to hear with meekness and
reverence, by returning to your tongues a pure language, that your speech may
minister grace to the hearers, by restraining your eyes from beholding vanity,
by disposing your hands to work that which is good, and by making your feet
swift to every good duty; as you discern your soul living in your humane
body, moving all the members to humane services; so discern Christ living in
your bodily members, disposing, and framing them to religious duties: Feel
Christ living in all your services, as the chief worker of them, and inabler
of you to them, doing all in his name, by his assistance, and for his glory:
Feel Christ living in the Prayer which you make, praying by the Spirit of
Christ, in the name of Christ, and for the honor of Christ: Feel Christ
living in the Word which you hear, making it an immortal seed to regenerate
you, a sacred Fire to purge you, a heavenly Light to guide you, and a message
of peace to comfort you: Feel Christ living in the Sacrament which you
receive, making it a Celestial Manna feeding you; a Seal of Righteousness,
assuring you of your Justification; an obligation binding you to new obedience,
and a pledge of Gods unchangeable love toward you: All holy Ordinances, if
Christ live not in them, show not himself powerful by them, are but an empty
shell without kernel, and a dry breast without milk, ministering no
nourishment. All the Religious Duties we perform, if Christ live not in them,
are but a Sacrifice without Fire, a dead Carcass, of no esteem with God: Our
affections, if Christ live not in us are a charet without wheels, they sink
and fall unto the earth, they cannot incline nor move toward the Lord: All our
best abilities, if Christ live not in them, are as standing Waters without a
living Spring, they putrify, and rot, and prove unprofitable: If Christ live
not in us, our knowledge is ignorance, our wisdom foolishness, our faith
presumption, our love dissimulation, and our obedience no better then
rebellion: If Christ live not in us, our understandings are blinded, and we
cannot savingly know God; our will is inthralled, and we cannot intend God;
our faith like Jeroboams arm is withered, and we cannot lay hold upon the
promise of God: The whole sufficiency of a Christian is from Christ's living in
him. Christ's living in man, makes him wise in discerning the things of God,
sincere in intending the glory of God, powerful in withstanding what does
oppose him in the ways of God, fruitful in the work of God, meek and humble
in submitting to the hand of God, faithful in keeping the Covenant of God,
joyful in hearing the Word of God, fervent in invocation upon the Name of God,
patient in waiting for the Comforts of the Lord, contented with the portion God
gives, constant in running the race which God has set before him, and
graciously persuaded of living the life of Glory for ever in Heaven. *

MAN'S MISERY WITHOUT CHRIST.

OPENING The sinful, perplexed, dishonorable, and Soul destroying Condition
of Man without CHRIST, tending to the driving and drawing of every man out of
himself unto CHRIST.

By Alexander Gross, B. D. Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of Bridford
near Exon in Devon-shire.

Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ has not
God,

2. Epist. Ioh. ver. 9. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your
sins,

Ioh. 8.24. If any man abide not in me he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered, and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bartlet, at the Sign of the Gilt Cup near
Saint Austins Gate. 1642.

MAN'S MISERY WITHOUT CHRIST OPENED.
EPHESIANS 2.12. At that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope and without God in the world.


CHAP. I. Showing man's alienation from CHRIST, misery without CHRIST, and
opening the scope of the words.
ADam after his eating the forbidden fruit, was without the Garden of Eden,
disabled to come to the tree of life; man feeding on the forbidden fruit of
sin, is a stranger to the Paradise of all spiritual and heavenly comforts,
wholly excluded from the true tree of life Christ Jesus. There is no sweet and
gracious communion between the Lord Jesus, and carnal persons; The men of the
old world were without the Arc, and perished in the deluge of waters; men who
are in their old corrupt estate, who have not put off that old man which is
corrupt according to diverse lusts, are without Christ, and shall certainly
perish in the deluge of their impieties, and the Lords vengeance; the fruition
of Christ is man's happiness, man's crown and comfort; alienation from Christ
is man's misery, man's shame and the souls great distraction and trouble: of all
estates on Earth man's natural and corrupt condition is most wretched and
miserable, a condition of death without spiritual life, of darkness without
divine and heavenly light, of bondage without Christian freedom, of
uncleanenesse without sanctification, of emptiness without all celestial
fullness, of alienation without all comfortable communion with Christ, without
all interest in Christ and his benefits, without either claim or title to Gods
Promise, to Heaven or eternal happiness, an estate of exclusion from all holy
and gracious society with Gods children, an estate of profaneness without God,
without the knowledge of God, without faith in God, without love to God, and
without zeal for God; for at that time, in that estate and condition, We are
without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.

Scope of the Apostle.
The Apostle in these words declares and amplifies the miserable and wretched
estate of man, the uncomfortable and dishonorable condition of the soul of
man without Christ, without the knowledge of Christ, without faith in Christ,
without incorporation into Christ, without participation of Christ and his
benefits: Analysis. 5. fold alienation.

1. From Christ.


And this misery and wretchedness of man, the Apostle does open, set forth and
amplify, by a five-fold alienation. 1. An alienation from Christ; at that time
ye were without Christ. Christ was not preached to you, Christ was not known
of you, Christ was not embraced, nor believed in by you; this is the first
alienation and the ground of all the rest; He that is an alien to the Lord
Jesus is a stranger to all things appertaining to life and happiness; man's
interest in Christ gives him interest in God and in all good things of God:
there is no way for man to come to God and eternal happiness, but only by and
thorough Christ Jesus; the neglect of Christ is the less of all.

2. An alienation from the Commonwealth of Israel, from that form of Religion
and divine worship, which God had prescribed to the Israelitish people, they
alone at that time having the oracles of God among them; Very miserable and
shameful is carnal man's ignorance of Gods worship and service; the carnal
man's adoration is after the rules of his own invention, and not according to
Gods prescription, being a stranger both to Gods Gospel and faithful people.

3. An alienation from the covenants of promise; the promise of the covenant of
grace, the promise of remission of sin by the merit of Christ, and of
regeneration and renovation of heart by the efficacy of Christ, belonged not to
them. Man remaining under the power of corruption remains a stranger to the
promise of Salvation; the promise of Gods free and gracious wages, belongs
only to Gods holy and gracious laborers; he that regards not Gods
commandment, has nothing to do with the Promise of Gods covenant,

4. An alienation from hope, the of hope eternal life, a hope arising from
faith which they wanted. Carnal men's hopes of eternal happiness are very
rotten, false and groundless; no truths, but mere fancies and vain
imaginations: The estate of corruption is an estate of desperation.

5. Alienation from God, without God, Atheists in the esteem of God. That man
has nothing of God in him who does not embrace Christ as the author of his
salvation. Every man that lives under the power of profaneness is a very
stranger to God in his way and work of grace and holiness.

First of the first of these alienations, 1. Alienation. 1. Tempus.
an alienation from Christ, At that time ye were without Christ: Wherein we
have. 1. The time or season of their alienation or estrangement from Christ; at
that time, when you were in your Paganism and profanenes, when you had not the
Oracles of God among you, when you had not Christ preached to you, when you
sat in darkness and the shadow of death, without light, when you lay dead in
sins, without the life of grace, when you walked after your own lusts, and the
vain imaginations of your own hearts: then ye were without Christ: The time
and season of man's being without the Gospel and under the power of his
corruption is of all times and seasons the most unhappy and miserable; Note.
it is not the time of man's trouble and affliction, but the time of man's being
left under the power of Satan and his own lusts, which is man's most wretched
and accursed time; it is far better to be exercised with the greatest
troubles, and filled with all sorts of sorrows, then to be left under the
power of profaneness in a paradise of carnal pleasures; there is more wrath
in being left under the dominion of one sin, then in being put under the
burden of all afflictions.

2. Subjectum
2. Here is the Subject or parties alienated, ye; the Gentiles before the coming
of Christ, and all men before their receiving of Christ by faith and love, all
corrupt and carnal, unregenerate and unsanctified people, ye, without
exception, of whatsoever outward condition or calling. Note.
All men abiding under the power of their corruption are without exception
miserable; no outward prerogatives and privileges can exempt reigning
profaneness from ensuing woes and curses

3 Terminus a quo.
3. Here is the object and term of their alienation, from whom they were
alienated, not from worldly riches, earthly fulness, humane helps and fleshly
comforts, they might have enough of these; but they were alienated from Christ,
the Sun and the shield, the fountain and the treasure; the paradise and the
crown of the soul of man: they were without Christ; they were without him
ecclesiastically and ministerially, Christ was not preached to them, they had
not the Oracles of God amongst them, they had not the Ministers of Christ to
instruct them; they were without Christ spiritually and efficiently. Christ did
not enlighten and sanctify them: Christ did not communicate himself unto
them, they had nothin of Christ within them, and thus are all corrupt and
carnal men without Christ, Showing us,

That all men in their natural and corrupt condition are altogether strangers
to Christ Jesus: Doct.
Carnal men within the pale of the Church have Christ Ministerially preached
to them in the outward ministry of his Word, sacramentally offered to them in
the administration of the Sacraments, and ecclesiastically frequenting the
sacred Assemblies, and taking on them the name and profession of Christ Jesus;
but they have not Christ internally, really and spiritually. He does not dwell
within them by faith, he does not live in their souls by grace, he does not
fill them with his fulness; he does not minister the saving gifts of his
Spirit to them. In this respect they are altogether strangers to Christ Jesus:
this is represented in the Parable of the foolish Virgins, they had Mat. 25.
Lamps, but no oil. Carnal men profess Christ, but they have not Christ,
they take up the name of Christ, but they have not the oil, the saving gift
and grace of Christ. Many profess Christ who are neither enlightened nor
sanctified by Christ; this alienation of man from Christ, Alienation from
Christ illustrated
the Scripture does illustrate by diverse similitudes, by the similitude of a
Tree Jude v. 12.
twice dead and plucked up by the roots. Carnal man being originally and
actually dead in sin, and participating no more of Christ then a tree plucked
up by the roots does partake of the Earth^ by the similitude of a Io 15.6.
withered branch. Unregenerate man receiving no more of Christ, then a withered
branch receives joyce and nourishment from the tree; by the similitude of an
Romans 7.18.
empty house, in an empty house there is no dweller, no implement, in an
ungracious soul there dwells no good thing, neither Christ nor any saving
gift dwells there; by the similitude of an Iam. 4 4.
Adulteress; an adulteress is estranged from her husband, her heart is gone
after strange lovers. Corrupt and sinful man is alienated from Christ, the
husband of his soul, his heart is gone a whooring after the creature, and many
strange lusts: by the similitude of a 1 Pet. 2.25.
straying Sheep, a straying Sheep is gone from his Shepherd, and from his
pastures, wandering among strange flocks in the wilderness; unholy man goes
astray from the womb, he has forsaken Christ the Shepherd, and the
ordinances of Christ the pasture of his soul, wanders in the wilderness of
the world and comes himself to the assemblies either of heretical, erroneous,
superstitious or profane persons, and by the similitude of a Isa. 30.1.
rebel; a rebel is fallen from his lawful Sovereign, and either makes
himself his own King, or betakes himself unto some foreign Prince; profane
man rebelleth against God and Christ, he magnifies and exalts himself, becomes
his own Lord and commander, and betakes himself to the Prince of darkness,
the world and his own vile affections, these he makes the Sovereigns to whom
he vailes and bows; very various and open, manifest and shameful are corrupt
man's alienations from Christ Jesus; and such are plainly said to be estranged
from the Psa. 58.3.
womb, and to go astray as soon as they be borne: They go astray from God,
like Rebels from their Sovereign, like fugitive servants from their Lord and
Master; they go astray from Christ, like wandering sheep from their
Shepherd, and harlots from their husband; they go astray from the way of God,
like erring travelers and blind men from their path: the whole way and walk
of carnal persons is a sinful aberration from God and Christ Jesus. Reigning
profaneness dissolves all communion between Christ and the soul of man, If
any man 1 Ioh. 1.6.
walk in darkness and say that he has fellowship with Christ, that man is a
liar and there is no truth in him, and the Apostle testifies of such, that they
are a Ephesians. 2.13.
far off, far from the life of Christ as the dead are far from the life
of nature; far from the knowledge of Christ, as the blind is far from the
sight of the Sun; far from spiritual union with Christ by faith, as a branch
cut off is far from natural conjunction with the vine; far from the love
of Christ, as a harlot is far from the love of her husband; far from the
fullness of Christ, as a dead member is far from the fullness of the head;
far from the fear and obedience of Christ, as a disobedient servant is far
from the fear of his Master; and* far from the sweet and blessed presence of
Christ, as exiled Absalom was far from the presence of his Father David's
face: Very great and unhappy is the distance between Christ and all carnal
persons. Of such therefore the Apostle pronounces, that they are aliens and
enemies by their evil works; not only aliens, but also enemies: The very
whole of corrupt and carnal persons is an opposition against God, and the Lord
Jesus: The gate of their hearts is ^hut against Christ, their whole way a very
contradiction of Christ.

CHAP. II. Laying down four grounds of carnal Man's Alienation from Christ.
THe Alienation of corrupt and sinful men from Christ is very apparent and
manifest. 4. Grounds or demonstratio^s of this Alienation.


1. In regard of corrupt and carnal man's plenary and total subjection under
sin: Gal 3. 2. 2.

Subjection under sin.


The Scripture (says Paul) has concluded all under sin. All men, and all
the services of men, in their unregenerate estate, are concluded, demonstrated,
and determined by the Scripture to be under sin, under the plenary possession
of sin, as a house is under the possession of the dweller: The whole house
and all the rooms thereof are possessed and ordered by the dweller; the whole
of a corrupt and carnal man, all the faculties of his soul, and all the
members of his body are possessed and ordered by sin; under the dominion of
sin, as a servant under the dominion of his Lord, and a dead man under the
dominion of death, therefore styled the 2 Pet. 2.19.
servants of corruption, and dead in sins and trespasses. Under the captivity
of sin, as a 2 Timothy 3.6.
slave under the command of the Conqueror, as voluntary slaves borne under the
bondage of corruption, ignorant of, and despising Christian freedom: Under the
love of sin, Ier. 5.31.
as an Adulterer is under the love of the harlot. The young man in Solomon was
under the power of the whorish woman, Prove. 7.
she caused him to yield with her fair speech, and forced him with the
flattering of her lips, and he went after her as an Ox to the slaughter, and
as a fool to the correction of the stocks: The corrupt and vicious man is
under the power of his lusts, he yields to them, is led by them, follows
after them, and fulfils the will of his flesh, as an Adulterer the will of the
harlot; and also under the guilt and condemnation of sin, as a guilty,
convicted, and condemned malefactor is under the sentence of the Law to dye;
and carnal man being thus under sin, he cannot be under Christ; fullness of
subjection under sin annihilates Christ's gracious dominion in the soul of
man: The more man applies himself to his lust, the more he is estranged from
Christ. He that is the friend and servant of sin, is an enemy and opposer of
Christ. The fullness of sin leaves no room for Christ in the heart of mere
natural and corrupt man.

2. Vncapablenes of Christ.
2. In regard of carnal man's uncapablenesse of Christ. The kingdom of Israel
was incapable of David until Saul and his house was deposed: The soul of man
is incapable of Christ, until sin is deposed: There is no setting up of
Christ and his Kingdom, as long as sin does bear dominion; Mundus neque
duos soles, Asia neque duos Reges simul capere potest.
Alexander told Darius that the world was incapable of two Suns, and Asia
could not endure two Kings: Christ will not divide his Kingdom with man's
corruption, the soul is not at once capable of the Kingdom and dominion of
Christ, and of sin: If the one reign the other must fall, there is no
competition between Christ and an unregenerate heart: The Fort of Sion was
incapable of David, until the blind and lame were removed: The heart of man is
a Fort incapable of Christ, until the blindness of the understanding, and the
lamenesse of the affections are removed, and taken away. Causes of this
uncapablenesse
Such is the blindness of carnal man's understanding, that he is incapable of
the knowledge of Christ, as the blind eye is incapable of the Sun. The light
(says the Evangelist) shines in the darkness, and the darkness Ioh. 1.5.
comprehends it not. The Egyptians darkness was so thick, that it
comprehended not the light which shined thereupon. Such is the darkness of
unregenerate man's understanding, that it comprehends not the Sun of
Righteousness shining in the Gospel: 1 Cor 2 14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually
discerned. The carnal man's heart is so Ezekiel. 33.31.
wedded to the world, and his lusts, that as a woman joined in wedlock is
incapable of a second husband, until her former husband is dead: so is man
incapable of Christ, he cannot receive Christ, as the husband of his soul,
until his lusts are mortified and put to death: Such is the John. 5 44.
infidelity of corrupt man, that as Jeroboam could make no use of his withered
hand, he could neither put it forth, nor pull it in, no more can carnal man
make any use of faith, he cannot put it forth to the receiving and embracing of
Christ; and because of unbelief, when Christ came among his own, his own
received him not; and such is their Col. 2.13.
death in sin, John 1.11.
that as the dead are incapable of the voice of the living, they hear it not,
of the society of the living, they rejoice not in it, and of all feasts and
provision made for them by the living, they feed not upon it. Thus are they
incapable of Christ, they cannot hear him speak to them in the Gospel, they
have no communion nor fellowship with him, they feed not upon him: He is a Rev.
2.17.
hidden Manna of whom they taste not, and a sealed Well of whom they drink
not: There is no sutablenesse between their souls and Christ, all his
Ordinances are unto them as an empty vessel, they savingly partake of nothing
of Christ in them.

3. 3 World has full possession in carnal man
In regard of that full possession which the world has taken in corrupt and
carnal man. The Inn where Christ was borne was so full, that there was no
room for Christ, but in a manger. The hearts of earthly men are so taken up
with the world, so filled with the creature, that there is no room for Christ;
carnal persons give every worldly business pre-eminence above the Lord Jesus.
The world affoords Christ a very dishonorable entertainment; unholy men are in
such subjection under the creature that they cannot serve Christ: He that
serves the creature cannot have Christ for his Lord and Master, ye cannot Mat.
6.24.
serve God and Mammon, says our Savior; the world has so many Luke 14, 15.
employments for them, that they have no leisure to come to Christ, their
inclination to things earthly is so strong, that they cannot come at Christ's
invitation, they are so wedded to this that they cannot come to the wedding
feast, which Christ makes for his friends, and Spouse in the Gospel; Or if
they do come, they bring no Mat 22.12.
wedding garment with them, and therefore are unwelcome: The creature is so
glorious in their eyes, that they see no glory nor beauty in Christ for which
they should desire him: Or if they have some weak and low apprehensions of
Christ, some slender inclinations after Christ, now and then stirred up within
them; yet the price of enjoying Christ is so great, that rather then leave the
world, they will Mat. 19 21.
go away sorrowful. It is impossible that the soul of man can receive Christ
until it is emptied of the world; Christ never appears glorious and precious,
till the world appears Phil. 3.8.
base in our apprehensions. When the world becomes bitter to our palates, then
our souls relish much sweetness in Christ Jesus.

4 Repugnance against Christ.
4. In regard of the repugnancy of a carnal man's heart against Christ. There is
no answerablenesse, no sutablenesse between Christ and an unsanctified heart,
the unregenerate soul is full of antipathy and opposition against Christ: The
house of Saul opposed the house of David, the house and family, all that is in
a corrupt and carnal man, does oppose Christ in his Ordinances, in his
Offices, and in his operations: As darkness opposes light, sickness health,
and death life: so does corruption in sinful man oppose Christ, The carnal
mind or wisdom of the flesh, the counsel, discourse, reason, purposes,
desires, motions, and all the actions of carnal wisdom, the very Principles
and beginnings of them, in unregenerate man, with all the lusts and afections
of the will, as anger, wrath, envy, covetousness, pride, emulation, etc. are
all enmity against God, set in full and perpetual opposition against God and
Christ, the very whole of a carnal man, is an armed, and fighting enemy
against God, it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; loving
that which Christ hates, hating that which Christ loves, practicing that
which Christ forbids, and eschewing that which Christ commands. The
carnal man like an untamed Haifer, breaks Christ's Psalm. 2.
yoke, and casts away his cords. The man in the country of the Gadarens
possessed with an unclean spirit, mentioned in the Gospel, was so fierce that
no man could bind him: He Mar. 5.
plucked asunder the chains which were put upon him, and brake in pieces the
fetters which tied him, so that no man could tame him. Corrupt and carnal man
is possessed with such a spirit of uncleanness, and power of profaneness,
that he breaks asunder all the chains and fetters, all the Laws and precepts
which God has given to bind him, his lusts are so rebellious and unruly that
no man can tame him; the Job 41.
Leviathan laughs at the spear, and cares not for barbed irons; the horse
mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns back from the sword;
the carnal man laughs at the judgments denounced against him; he fears not
the word of God, though sharper then a two-edged sword: No exhortation moves
him, no invitation affects him, all instruction is but as the sounding of a
trumpet to the deaf, and the setting of a candle before the eyes of the
blind: Nothing can work him to subjection under Christ's Scepter, till God
makes him a new creature. Every unregenerate person is unchangeable in his
opposition against Heaven. Very great is the distance between Christ Jesus and
carnal persons: There is not a greater Antipathy between fire and water, then
between Christ, and profane man's corrupt nature, and thus you see man's
Alienation from Christ in his corrupt and sinful estate.

CHAP. III. Setting open the dolefulness and danger of Man's estate without
Christ.
Dolefulness and danger of carnal man's estate.
Man's Alienation and estrangement from Christ, declares and lays open the
misery and wretchedness, the danger and dolefulness of man's estate and
condition by nature, a condition in which he is without Christ, and to be
without the Lord Jesus is the misery of all miseries. It is not the man that is
without the crown of worldly dignities to honor him, without the treasury of
earthly abundance to enrich him, without the sensual and seeming paradise of
carnal pleasures to delight him, or without the presence and countenance of
fleshly friends to solace him, but it is the man that is without Christ, who is
of all men the most miserable. The estate of Israel without the Arc was very
uncomfortable, their 1 Samuel 4.22.
glory was departed, the wife of Phineas took no comfort in the birth of a
son, the ordinary joy of Mothers: The condition of man without Christ is very
doleful, his glory is departed from him, all that man has, not having Christ
with it, is but an Ichobod, there is no glory in it: For man that is without
Christ, is,

1. Without Life. The woman of 2 King. 4.
Shunems son was without life, until the Prophet came, and spread himself
upon him. Man is without the life of grace, alienated from the life of God,
Col. 3.
until Christ comes and applies himself to the soul of man: For Christ is
our Life. Declaratively he reveals it, meritoriously he has purchased it,
originally and efficiently he communicates it, as the head communicates life
unto the members. Christ Jesus is the dispencer of the life of grace and glory
to all Gods faithful servants; and 1 John 5.12.
he that has not the Son has not life, says Saint John: He that has not
the Son by clear and saving knowledge, as the eye has the Sun in the
Firmament, enlightening and guiding by true and lively Faith, as the living
branch has the Vine by incorporation into it, by receiving juice and
nourishment from it, by fervent and unfeigned Love, as the wife has the husband
by wedlock with him, by matrimonial affection to him, and by holy and humble
subjection, as the Subject has the King, by vailing and bowing to him: He who
thus has not the Son, he has not life, his soul is not spiritually
quickened, Christ not living in him, spiritual death bears dominion over him.
He is Ephesians. 2 1.
dead (says S. Paul) in sins and trespasses: A Tree twice dead and plucked up
by the roots, according to Saint Jude. Every man is a sinful dead man that
has not Christ graciously enlivening him, and this is a great misery,
Unhappinesses of this estate.
a condition of manifold discomforts, an estate of great unhappiness; the dead
according to the flesh, sees nothing of all that sweet and glorious light which
the Sun casts forth upon him; the dead in sin has no comfortable
apprehension of Christ shining in the Gospel more gloriously then the Sun; 2
Cor 4.3.
Christ in the Gospel is altogether hidden from them that have not Christ
living in them: E^el. 9.5.
The dead (says Solomon) know not any thing: The dead in sin know not any
thing of the wisdom of Christ guiding them, of the death of Christ mortifying
their lusts, of the resurrection of Christ quickening their souls, of the
dominion of Christ reigning in their hearts, of the holiness of Christ
sanctifying their affections, nor of the fullness of Christ satisfying their
desires. Profane persons are altogether empty of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus: In death (says the Psalmist) there is no remembrance of thee, in the
grave who shall give thee thanks: Under the death and in the grave of sin,
Psalm. 6.5.
there is no remembrance of Christ, he is not in all their thoughts, they
think not upon him, as the traveller upon the guide leading them, as the rich
man upon the treasure enriching them, as the Bride upon the Bridegroom
marrying them. Christ with carnal persons, like David among his carnal
acquaintance, is Psalm. 31.12.
forgotten as a dead man out of mind, and like a broken vessel. Can a maid,
says the Lord, forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her attire, yet my people have
Ier. 2.32.
forgotten me days without number. Christ the ornament and attire of the soul
of man is forgotten by carnal people, as dead men are unmindfull of their
apparel. 3. The dead are unsensible of all diseases, they have no feeling of
any burdens; Man alienated from Christ and the life of God is past Ephesians. 4.10.
feeling, he feels not his sin, as a heavy burden oppressing him; he feels
not Satan, as an enemy buffeting him, as a Tyrant molesting and captivating
him; his conscience, as a witness accusing, and a Judge condemning him, it is
1 Timothy 4.2.
seared with a hot iron. Man's unsensiblenesse of his own wretchedness argues
his unhappy and great estrangement from Christ Jesus. 4. The body separated
from the soul is an unprofitable lump, a loathsome carcass; the soul
separated from Christ is an unfruitful branch separated from the Vine, an
unprofitable member rent from the body, a loathsome object in Gods sight,
unclean, Psalm. 141.1, 3.
corrupt, abominable, and doing no good, as the Psalmist speaks. The whole man
separate from Christ Jesus, is a vessel full of all uncleanness; his best
service like the savor of a dead man is unsavory in Gods nostrils. 5. The
dead is incapable of the food set before him, his body falls to the ground,
cleaves unto the earth, and resolves into dust. Man that has not Christ
living in him, is incapable of the means of grace, his souls food, Genesis 41.
he thrives not by the ministry of the word, his soul is lean and
ill-favored still; like Pharaohs lean Kine after their eating of the fat; the
Quails choked the Israelites, they proved not a nourishing, but a destroying
food unto them. The word proves the savor of death unto 2 Cor 2.14.
death, to him that is separated from the Lord of Life. All that are without
Christ are fallen from God unto the world, they mind only Phil. 3.19.
earthly things, they resolve into the very dust, they are buried under the
world, as a dead man under the earth. The World has the full possession of
them, the sole Lordship over them, nothing but the World suites with them,
nothing but the earth is savoury to them. 6. The body without the soul moves
not, walks not: Man without Christ has no motion, no inclination unto God,
John 11.
makes no progress in the way to life. Lazarus moved not, walked not until
Christ raised him: Man moves not in the way toward God and Heaven until
Christ gives him part in the first Resurrection: Man in the state of
corruption, like Israel in the Prophet is bent unto Hos. 7.11.
backesliding; Man's continuance in sin increases his estrangement from God.
The longer man lives in the state of corruption, the farther he removes from
Heaven, the greater is the distance between him and salvation. Lastly, in a
word, a dead man is offensive to the house where he is, has no communion with
the living, has lost all his dignity and privileges which he enjoyed in his
life time, can do nothing for his own defense, but is exposed to the foot to
tread upon him, to the fowls of the air to devour him. Thus the carnal man
that is without Christ, is an offense to them that live the life of grace, has
no spiritual communion with Gods children, is estranged from all the
Prerogatives and dignities belonging to the living members of Christ, unable to
do any thing in defense of himself against the adversaries of his soul,
being exposed and laid open as a very prey to Satan: And thus man's Alienation
from the life of grace and holiness shows his great misery in being estranged
from Christ Jesus.

2. Man that is without Christ, is without Light. He that is without the Sun
is in darkness: He that is without the Sun of Righteousness is in darkness
and the shadow of death: There is no oil of saving knowledge, no Star of
spiritual Light shining in the house and region of his soul: John 16 3.
Of such our Savior says, they have not known the Father nor me: They have
not known the Father as a spiritual Parent regenerating them, as a heavenly
King reigning and ruling within them, as a gracious dweller, possessing,
furnishing, and adorning their souls with his gifts and graces, as a dweller
possesses and furnishes his house: They have not known the Father in his
Word, adoring him according to his prescription; in his Sacrament, as the
Master of a feast in his banqueting house, feasting and feeding them; in his
precepts as a Lord and Master fearing him nor in his promises as a sure and
faithful friend resting and relying upon him; Neither have they known me;
they have not known me in my natures as God and Man in one Person; in my
Offices, as their Prophet instructing them; as their Priest, offering my self
a sacrifice for them; as their King, bearing spiritual dominion within them;
as their Mediator, bringing them night to God, making reconciliation between
them and God; they have not known me in my sufferings, being crucified
together with me; in my exaltations being planted with the likeness of my
Resurrection; in my communications, being filled with my fullness, solaced with
my comforts, and revived and cheered up with my blessed presence; very
miserable is the carnal man's ignorance of God and Christ Jesus. Therefore
styled Ephesians. 5.8.
darkness, not dark, but darkness: it self. Ye were once darkness,
universally dark, wholly dark, having no mixture, or glimpse of spiritual
light. Very sad and sorrowful is that souls darkness which is estranged
from the Sun of Righteousness.

3. Man that is without Christ is without grace; without holiness. Naaman
without Jordan was overspread with a loathsome leprosy; 2 Kin 5.
there is a very filthy leprosy of uncleanness upon them that partake not of
Christ: For Christ, as the Apostle says, is our 1 Cor. 1.30.
Sanctification effectively, as the worker of it, originally as the head and
spring from whence it is derived, without whom our souls are as empty of grace
as the cisterne of water without the fountain; as full of error,
superstition, pride and profaneness as Baals house of Idolaters, as full of
earthly mindedness, and covetous practices, as the sluggards field of thorns
and briars, as full of hypocrisy, deceitfulness, and unrighteousness, as the
Pharisees Sepulchers of dead men's bones, or the Temple of money changers before
Christ whipped them out. Our souls are indeed a very sink of uncleanness
until Christ does possess us.

4. Man that is without Christ is without Liberty: Peter without the Angel
continued in Herod's prison, without the Lord Jesus man remains the prisoner of
Satan, the world, and his own corrupt affections Every unregenerate man is a
miserable bondman, led away captive at the will of Satan, unable to make any
resistance against him, a voluntary slave refusing liberty tendered to him,
loving darkness more then light, and Satan's prison better then Christ's
Palace; having no liberty in his understanding to discern the things of God,
in his imagination to meditate and think upon them, in his will to choose them,
or in his affections to love, prize and delight himself in them: The Liberty
of the soul estranged from Christ Jesus is nothing else but bondage. He that
is most free to sin is the greatest slave to Satan; where Christ is not,
there is no Life quickening, there is no Sun enlightening, there is no
Conqueror dissolving the holds of Satan, there is no dew suppling and
softening the hard and fallow ground of man's heart. There is no fire warming
the cold and frozen affections, and therefore no liberty from corruption, no
inclination to the ways and works of sanctification. It is only Christ Jesus
that ministers to the souls of Gods servants freedom from uncleanness, and
liberty to true holiness.

5. Man that is without Christ is without acceptance with God. Christ is Gods
beloved, in whom man is accepted; Man that is out of Christ, bears not Gods
Image, is not Gods gracious workmanship, is estranged from Gods Covenant, has
no love of God within him; is the slave of Satan, the servant of the world, and
a very sink of corruption. He is no Tree of Righteousness of Gods planting,
no child of Gods begetting, no loyal Subject of Gods Kingdom, no vessel of
Gods gracious filling, no partaker of Christ's Righteousness to cloth and
cover him; he brings forth no fruit to God, but all to himself, to the flesh,
and to the world, and therefore can have no aceptation with God. Joseph his
brethren might not look him in the face, unless they brought their brother
Benjamin with them; Man cannot look God in the face with my confidence, or
acceptance, unless he bring Christ with him in the arms of his faith; Man's
person and service finds acceptance with God only in and through Christ Jesus;
without Christ man is stubble, and God a consuming fire to destroy him; Man is
a guilty malefactor, and God a severe Judge to condemn him; the whole of man
without Christ Jesus is a very abomination in Gods presence.

6. Man that is without Christ is without Contentation. In Christ the soul
meets with all satisfaction and fullness. He is a Sun in whom the believing
soul beholds all fullness of light, a precious Jewel in whom he finds all
fullness of worth, a rock in whom he feels all fullness of strength, a
fountain from whom he draws all fullness of satisfaction, and a Paradise in
whom he enjoyes all fullness of pleasures; but without Christ the soul finds
vanity and emptiness in the greatest abundance; the wife finds an emptiness
in a rich and full house, the husband being absent, Christ wanting, the soul
meets with vanity in the largest possession. Christ is the marrow and the
f^tnesse, the fullness and the sweetness of all our endowments, separate
Christ from them, and they are bitter, and do not please us; weak and do not
sustain us; empty and do not fill us; dumb and do not comfort us. It is not
the abundance of any thing, but Christ coming with it, that gives contentation
whether the thing be much or little. Without Christ the desire is enlarged as
hell, and never satisfied; the Lord Jesus is the choice and only fullness of
all Christians.

7. Man without Christ is without all spiritual splendour and beauty. The Sun
is the glory of the world; the eye is the glory of the head; the soul of the
body; the jewel is the glory of the Ring; the Flowers, Herbs, Trees and Fruit,
are the glory of the Garden and the Field; the Arc was the glory of Israel,
and Christ is the glory of the Christian; styled the Luk 2.32.
light of the Gentiles, and the glory of Israel, being both the Author and the
matter of their glory. Their glory in respect of instruction, as the teacher is
the glory of the School; in respect of vivification, as the soul is the glory
of the body; in respect of Redemption, as the ransomer is the glory of the
captive; in respect of Conquest, as David was the glory of Israel, overcomming
the great Goliath; in respect of Justification, as the garment is the glory of
him that wears it; in respect of Sanctification, as Jordan was the glory of
Naaman, cleansing him from his leprosy; in respect of repletion, as the
fountain is the glory of the cisterne; and in respect of wise and powerful
gubernation, gracious and plentiful ministration, as the King is the glory of
the Kingdom, the shepherd of the flock; and as Joseph was the glory of the
Land of Egypt, ministering provision to it: He that partakes most of Christ
Jesus, is the most beautiful and glorious of all others; but man without
Christ is without all spiritual beauty, in regard of ignorance, as a dark
house without light, even Ephesians. 5.8.
darkness it self; in regard of nakedness, as a man without a garment, Rev.
3.17.
naked, miserable and wretched, having no other clothing then a menstrous
clout to cover him, led by Satan like Egypt by the Assyrians, naked, Isa. 20.4.
barefoot, his buttockes, yea the whole man uncovered; in regard of spiritual
contagion and foul-sicknes, his soul like the body of Lazarus full of sores,
Luke 16.
or like the body of Job full of sore boiles, from the sole of his foot unto
his crown; loathsome and incurable are the soules-maladies which has not
Christ as a Physician to heal him; in regard of the plenitude and fullness of
all sin, like the sluggards field (in Prove. 24.^0.
Solomon) full of nettles, thorns and briars, wanting Christ the great husband
man to manure and dress him, and in regard of the residence of Satan in him,
as a cage of unclean birds; in regard of the presence and inhabitation of
loathsome lusts, as a sepulcher full of dead men's bones; in regard of the
dominion of corruption, as a dead man under the power of death, in whom is no
beauty left; and in regard of the sordidnesse and baseness of his practice,
way and order of his life, as a Sow wallowing in the mire; foul and shameful,
horrid and loathsome is man's uncomelinesse without Christ: The greatest sinner
is the fowlest monster; bodily beauty without Christ is but green grass upon
a rotten grave, or a fair garment upon a leprous back. Did man see his
uncomelinesse and deformity without Christ, he would style himself as the
Prophet styled Pashur, Ier. 20.4.
Magor-missabib, fear round about, every way a terror to himself.

8. Man without Christ is without honor. He is no Son of God, but one of
Satan's spurious brood; no Free man, but a slave to Satan and his own
corruption; no Spouse of Christ, but a spiritual harlot committing fornication
with the world; no Conqueror, but a captive led away by diverse lusts; no
friend nor favorite of God, but an alien and enemy in Gods account, likened to
the dung and the dross, the chafe and stubble; for their emptiness,
baseness, and vileness in the sight of God, being base in their corrupt
original; In their carnal disposition, base in their Ier. 4.22.
understandings, wise only to do evil; base in their wills, choosing the evil
and refusing the good; base in their Phil. 3.21.
imaginations, minding only low things; base in their fear, trust, love, joy,
fearing where no fear is, fearing man that shall Isa. 51.12.
dye, and the son of man which shall be made as grass, trusting in an arm
of flesh, leaning upon a withered reed, loving and setting his eyes on that
which is not, and rejoicing in a thing of naught, and base in all their
intendments; the satisfying of the lusts of the flesh are the highest mark, to
which they level the arrows of all their endeavors. The whole way and
practice of man without Christ Jesus, savours of nothing but baseness: He that
has not Christ to innoble him is most ignoble in his inward disposition, in
his outward condition, in all his undertaking: We may say of them, as Job did
of some of his time: They are Job 30.8.
children of fools, yea children of base men, they are viler then earth. He
that is the greatest stranger to Christ Jesus, is the most base of all
creatures.

9. Man without Christ is without peace. Christ is the Prince of Isa 9.6.
peace, his Subjects are the only Subjects of peace. God is in none, but in
Christ, 2 Cor 5 19.
reconciling the world unto himself. Joseph's brethren found favor with
Pharaoh only through Joseph; Christ alone is the Author of reconciliation
between God and man, peace is Act. 10.36.
preached only by Christ Jesus. God Ministers are the instruments of peace
only to such persons as embrace the Lord Jesus, and Christ (says the Apostle)
is our Ephesians. 2.14.
peace, the revealer, the procurer, and the worker of peace in al^ the children
of peace. Man that is without Christ is an enemy to the God of peace, a
stranger to the Covenant of peace, incapable of the word of peace, an alien to
the way of peace, and full of sin, the maine impediment of peace, to him
therefore that wants Christ there is no peace. No true, no spiritual, no
heavenly peace, no joy and peace in the Holy Ghost; Sin is man's trouble, but
Christ is man's peace; He that is full of sin and empty of Christ, has
nothing to do with peace. Joram once asking, is it peace, Jehu? was answered,
2 Kin. 9 22.
What have thou to do with peace so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Iezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many. Carnal man asking, Is it peace, O
Messenger of God? can look for no other but Jehu's answer, what have thou to
do O carnal man with peace, so long as thy lusts are so strong within thee,
thy fornications with the creature so many, and thy estrangement from, and
rebellions against the Prince of peace so great: His thoughts of peace are all
vile and base delusions, who continues empty of Christ, the sole dispencer of
peace to all believing souls.

Lastly, and in a few words, Man without Christ is without protection. He has
no shield to defend him in the day when Satan makes war upon him: He has no
helper to rescue him when the prince of darkness, the world, and his own
lusts besiege him. He is without supportation, and must sink like the house
built upon the sand, in the hour, when the winds and waves of affliction do
beat upon him. He is without remission, the Law stands like the hand writing
in Belshazzars wall against him, and fills him with dismal fear and trembling,
his sins are upon him, and he must dye in them. He is without blessing, all
becomes a curse unto him, all without Christ is bitter, like the waters of
Marah without the Tree. He is without salvation, there is no other name given
under heaven whereby he may be saved. He that is without Christ is a child
without nurse, his soul does starve; a City without a Watchman, the enemy
makes a prey of him; a Ship without a Pilot, his soul splits upon the rocks
of desperation, when the stormy tempest of an accusing conscience begins to
toss and shake him: He is a sick man without a Physician, he dies in the
disease that is upon him: He is a withered branch without root, prepared fuel
for everlasting burning: Surely man's baseness, wretchedness, woes and
miseries continuing a stranger to Christ Jesus, do even surpass the
expression of the tongues of men and Angels. O how are they beyond measure
stupid, blockish and senseless, who please and bless themselves in their
impieties, in an estate of estrangement from Christ Jesus! O how should the
meditation of man's misery without Christ set his soul on work to get interest
in Christ.

CHAP. IV. Declaring man's great cause of humiliation for being without Christ,
and also discovering the cause of man's undervaluing Christ.
Cause and matter of humiliation.
THe meditation of man's alienation from Christ in his natural estate, ministers
matter of Humiliation unto man, man in his natural condition having nothing of
Christ within him; and this is the misery of all miseries to be empty of Christ
Jesus, neither does the want of any thing minister such cause and matter of
humiliation, as the want of Christ. Hagar wept because her bottle was empty of
waters, Hannah was in great bitterness, because her womb was barren, shut up
from childbearing. The women in the day of Famine cried help o King: Micah
ran too and fro, like a man besides himself, when his Idol, his imaginary God
was taken and carried from him; what is the want of children, of bread and
water, to the want of Christ? or the loss of an Idol, an imaginary God, to
the loss of the true God? The want of all things is as nothing in comparison
of the want of Christ: man that has Christ has great matter of rejoicing in
the want of every other thing; man that wants Christ has great cause of
humiliation, in the presence of all worldly fulness: And every man in his
natural estate, is as empty of Christ as the foolish Virgins lamps were of
Oil, or the tree which Christ cursed was of fruit, even wholly and altogether
without Christ. Without the life of Christ, Christ lives not in them any more
then the root does live in a dead and withered branch: How carnal man is
without Christ.
Without the knowledge of Christ, the mystery of Christ is a sealed Isa. 29.11.
Book, which they cannot open, or a book written in a strange language which
they cannot read, the treasures of wisdom hidden in Christ are hidden from
their understanding; as the light of the Sun is hidden from the eyes of the
blind; without the fruit of Christ's death, it does not mortify their lusts,
their old Romans 6.
man is not crucified with Christ; their lusts are not dead with Christ, as the
Philistines dyed with Sampson: Without the benefit of Christ's resurrection,
they are not planted into the likeness of Christ's resurrection; they rise not
from sin and from the world, as Christ rose from the grave; Sampson rose at
Jud. 16.1, 2.
midnight and carried away the gates of Gaza, but the Gazites were quiet all
night, they rose not: Christ is risen and has made an open way for us to pass
from death to life, but carnal men continue their sleep and slumber in sin,
they rise not to newness of life and conversation; they are without the fruit
and benefit of Christ's offices, Christ is not to them a Prophet revealing Gods
will, and enlightening their understandings; a Priest expiating their sins,
and reconciling them to God; a King subduing Satan and their corruptions, and
reigning graciously within them, and making them truly subject and obedient
unto God: They are without the apprehension of Christ's beauties, and taste of
Christ's sweetness. Christ is to them like the Manna to Israel, a light Number.
11.5.
bread; they see no Isa. 53.2.
beauty nor comeliness in Christ, he is no more to them then Cant. 5.9.
another Beloved: then gold and silver, the covetous man's beloved: then honors
and high places, the ambitious man's beloved: then idols and humane rites and
ceremonies, the superstitious man's beloved: they are without the righteousness
of Christ, he does not justify them, he does not cloth them with the garments
of salvation: Without the presence of Christ, as an empty house without the
dweller; Christ dwells not in their hearts by faith: Without the love of
Christ, as a Harlot without the love of her husband; without the dispensation
of Christ, he does not communicate himself, and his saving gifts unto them,
any more then the head communicates it self to the members which are dead;
Christ suspends his gracious influence from their souls: There is not the
least character or cognizance of Christ upon them: they are without the power
of Christ strengthening them, without the holiness of Christ sanctifying them,
without the fulness of Christ satisfying them, and without the goodness of
Christ sweetning their troubles, and turning all for the best unto them: and
man thus being without Christ is matter and occasion of great abasement and
humiliation to the soul of man: man that is without Christ has nothing
whereof he may truly glory. The want of all things is nothing to the want of
Christ: If Moses want a guide in the wilderness Hobah may be instead of eyes
to him; if Noah have not where to rest his foot upon the Earth, the Arc may
bear him up in the waters: If Hagar have no water in her bottle, her eyes may
be opened to see a well: If there be no corn in the Land of Canaan, Egypt may
supply them: If the Gibeonites be besieged, Joshua may rescue them: If Peter be
in prison the Angel may free him: If the woman of Shunems son be dead, the
Prophet may raise him. There is a supply in Christ Jesus for all man's
necessities, a help for all man's distresses, a comfort for all man's sorrows;
but if man want Christ there is none to quicken and restore him to the first
resurrection, there is none to free him from the bondage of Satan, there is
none to guide him in the way to Heaven, there is none to replenish him with
grace and sanctification, there is none to rescue him from the spiritual
enemies which do besiege him. In the absence of the Lord Jesus there is no
redress for soul-distresses, no help against soul-discomforts; the having of
all things is as nothing if man have not Christ with them; what if thou have
the stature and armor of Goliath? yet without Christ, thou will fall in the
battle: what if thou have the favor and honor of Haman? yet without Christ,
all this will avail thee nothing, and at length shame will be thy portion:
what if thou have the riches of him in the Parable? yet not having Christ, thou will eat the bread of sorrows, be in straights in the midst of thy
sufficiency, and at last the evil spirits will take thy soul from thee: What
if thou have the wisdom of Achitophell? yet not having Christ, thy wisdom
will be turned into foolishness, and thou may fail of wisdom in thy head
to restrain thy hands from being thine own executioners: What if thou have
all the Ordinances of God to feed thee, all the Ministers of God to instruct
thee, all natural and moral indowments and common illuminations to adorn
thee, and all Ecclesiastical privileges to honor thee, and yet have not
Christ, all these like Pharaohs Chariots without wheels, will suffer thee to
sink and perish in the red Sea of Gods vengeance; the presence of all worldly
abilities is very frivolous in Christ's absence, and man should never so abase
and humble himself for the want of any thing, as for the want of Christ and
his communication of himself unto him; all that can be said to demonstrate
man's being miserable, or to move man to humiliation, is briefly comprehended in
this, that he is without Christ.

3. Man's alienation from Christ in his natural and corrupt estate does
discover and lay open the cause, 3. Cause of undervaluing Christ.
why Christ is of no more esteem with the men of the world, no more precious
in the eyes of carnal men; here is the ground of it, they are without Christ,
they are strangers to Christ, and Christ is a stranger unto them. For this
cause. 1. They have no clear and comfortable knowledge, no true and gracious
discerning of Christ, Christ is hidden from them, as light from the blind. He
was in the world (says the Evangelist) and the world was made by him, and the
world knew him not. He was in the world by his great and mighty works of
Creation and Providence, as a maker and a ruler; by his universal presence, as
a dweller; by his general and common influence, as a root in the branches,
ministering preservation to all creatures, and by his Ordinances and Prophets,
as a teacher in his School; yea, he came among his own, among the Jews, by
incarnation, in the visible ^orme of a man, but the world neither knew him, nor
his own received him; they know not the necessity of Christ, the men of the old
world knew not the necessity of the Arc, until it was too late, and therefore
they entered not into it: The Elders of Gilead at first knew not their necessity
of Iep^ta, and therefore expelled him out of his Fathers House: Men's ignorance
of the necessity of Christ makes them regardlesse of getting interest in
Christ, and causes them profanely to reject Christ; they know not the worth
and excellency of Christ; and therefore they set the empty things of the world
above Christ; as the Philistines set Dagon above the Arc; and Esau preferred a
mess of pottage above his birthright; they know not the holy and gracious
dispensations of Christ; and therefore they prefer the ministrations of the
Earth, above the ministrations of Christ, as the men of Shechem pref^rred the
bramble above the Vine: They know not the Alsufficiency and fulness of
Christ, and therefore they exalt the creature, a vain and empty thing above
Christ, as Israel in the Prophet preferred the Jer. 2.13.
broken cisterne above the living fountain: They know not the sweetness and
pleasantness of the face and love of Christ; and therefore they prize the love
and favor of the world above the love of Christ; as Harlots sometimes do the
love of base and deformed strangers, above the love of their own honorable
and comely Husbands: Christ is never precious in the eyes of such persons as
are under the power of spiritual blindness.

2. Men being without Christ, do not taste the sweetness and goodness of
Christ; 2. No taste of Christ.
he does not relish well with their palates: He is not sweet and savoury to
their souls; they have not tasted how 1 Pet. 2.3.
good Christ is; there is a goodness of illumination, of regeneration,
sanctification, spiritual freedom, consolation, contentation and pacification
flowing from Christ to the souls of men, which to carnal men is a sealed
well, whose waters their palates never tasted: an ecclipsed Star with whose
light their eye was never affected, they taste not the sweetness of Christ, in
the illumination of their understandings, as the eye tastes the Eccles. 11.7.
sweetness of the light: Christ is not sweet to them in his ordinances; as the
Master of the Feast to the guest in his dainties, these are not to them a Isa.
25.6.
feast of marrow, of fat things, and of wine well refined upon the lees, for
the delight and refreshment, comfort and contentment, which they minister:
Christ is not sweet to them in his Ministers, as a merciful King in his
Ambassadors, bringing tidings of peace to the people; Christ is not sweet to
them in his gracious distillations, as the cloud in the rain is sweet unto the
dry earth: They cannot say of Christ as the Spouse did, As Cant. 2.3.
the Apple Tree among the Trees of the wood, so is my Beloved among the sons,
I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste. Nothing savours well with their palates, but things carnal and worldly,
to them the bread of deceit, and stolen waters are sweet; but they savor not
the things of God. Barzillai excused himself from going to David's house, from
eating of David's meat, because he could not taste what he did eat or what he did
drink, nor could hear any more the voice of singing men or of singing women.
Carnal men decline the House of God, and the Feast which Christ there makes,
because they cannot taste the things of God, nor hear the spiritual melody
which Christ there makes to the souls of his servants: Men's not tasting of
Christ in his ordinances and in his graces, makes him of no esteem with their
souls.

3. Men being without Christ have no love to Christ, 3. No love to Christ.
he is not the Cant. 5.10. 1 Cor. 16.
fairest of ten thousand in their eyes; they love not the Lord Jesus, as the
Bridegroom to whom their souls are married, as the choicest pearl by whom
they are enriched, as the son of consolation, with whose beams their souls
are comforted, as the fountain by whom their hearts are refreshed, and their
desires every way satisfied: Their love to Christ is not like the love of
Jonathan to David, a love wonderful, and 2 Samuel 1.26.
passing the love of women; there is no sutablenesse between Christ and their
souls, as between the hearts of lovers; they meditate not upon Christ, as
lovers upon their love; they delight not themselves in Christ as the rich-man
in the treasure, and the bride in the bridegroom which they love, their hearts
and their thoughts are upon the world and not upon Christ, they 1 John 2.15.
love the world, and the love of Christ is not in them, and where love to
Christ is wanting, Christ is of no estimation; he will put himself upon no
service, nor undergo no difficulties for Christ, Amor Dei si est operatur
magna, siopera^ renuit amos non est, Greg.
who is destitute of love to Christ. Man's prizing of Christ is ever suitable to
the love of man toward Christ, he that has great love to Christ will do
great things for Christ, he that has no love to him will give every base thing
pre-eminence above him.

4. No pleasure in Christ.
4. Men being without Christ take no pleasure in Christ, they do not delight
themselves in Christ; diseased eyes have no pleasure in the Sun; distempered
palates have no pleasure in the choysest wine, Christ is a trouble to men that
are corrupt and carnal, as the Star was to Mat. 2.2.
Herod and the men of Jerusalem. Christ is a very great cross and trouble to
their corruptions, he falls heavy upon them, they cannot stand before him, no
more then Dagon before the Arc; and therefore Christ is a great offense to
them, as the Ark 1 Samuel 5 4.
to the Philistines; Christ is not to them a plain and pleasant way; they
cannot according to the Apostles phrase Col. 2.6.
walk in Christ; by believing Christ's Promises, by obeying Christ's Precepts,
by conforming themselves to Christ's Example, with fullness and cheerfulness,
as a Travellor walks fully and joyfully in a plain and pleasant path: they
cannot walk in the light of Christ, as a man walks joyfully in the light of the
Sun; in the strength of Christ, as the Rider moves speedily in the strength of
the Horse which carries him, as the Ship rows in the strength of the wind which
drives him, and the Prophet walked to Mount Horeb in the strength of the Barley
cake which fed him; they cannot walk in the love of Christ, as Jacob walked
thorough his service, in the love of Rachel; Christ and his way and work, is
not thus pleasant to them, they can no more walk in Christ, then David could in
1 Samuel 17.
Saul's armor, they do no sooner try it, but they are presently weary of it.
We cannot say of them and Christ as David did of Saul and Jonathan, They were 2 Samuel 1.
lovely and pleasant in their lives and in their death they were not divided,
they were swifter then the Eagles, they were stronger then Lions. No they take
no pleasure in Christ in their lives, and they are divided from Christ in their
deaths; the way of Christ is to them a way of thorns, they move slowly in
Christ's service, like Pharaohs Chariots without wheels, the waters of Gods
wrath overwhelming them at the last, Christ is to them a rock of 1 Pet. 2.8.
offense, and a stone of stumbling: to believers he is an elect and precious
stone for his great worth in himself, the price they put upon him, the
enrichment they receive from him, a living stone quickening them, a stone of
strength supporting them; but to other men thorough their infidelity, pride and
profane refusal, he is a stone of offense; they have no delight in his Ier.
6.10.
Doctrine; they are Mat. 13.57.
offended in him, they guash their teeth at him; they think dishonourably of
him in his offices, in his ordinances, in his Ministers, and in his attendants:
Under the Law if a man Deuteronomy. 21.14.
delighted not in his wife, he gave her a bill of divorce: The man under the
Gospel, that takes no delight in Christ, divorceth himself from Christ,
observes not his Covenant, with-draws himself from Christ, puts no more price
upon him, has no better esteem of him then a hard hearted Israelite of his
divorced wife. Man does ever evidence his high esteem of Christ by his
pleasure, delight and joy in Christ. He that does not rejoice in him puts a
very unworthy price upon him.

5. Men being without Christ have no longing after Christ, 5. No longing after
Christ.
it is the having of Christ in measure and in truth that breeds fervent and
unfeigned longings after Christ; no man more desires Christ then he that enjoyes
most of Christ: No man so contents himself without Christ, as he that never
savingly enjoyed any thing of Christ; he that never knew what liberty was is
well pleased with a servile estate; he that never saw the Sun pleases himself
in darkness; man that never discerned the beauty and brightness of the Son of
Righteousness, that never knew the liberty and comforts which Christ
ministers, pleases himself in his spiritual bondage, applauds himself in his
blindness and ignorance, and says with them in Job, Job 21.14.
Depart from us, we care not for the knowledge of thy ways: 1 Samuel 23.15. Genesis
30.1, 2.
He does not long after Christ, as David after the waters of Bethell; he does
not cry for Christ, as Rachel did for children; he thinks like Esau in another
case that he has enough already; he imagines that he is rich and full and
wants nothing; the soul that is wholly estranged from Christ is far from
longing after Christ; the Disciples did first eat of the bread which Christ
gave them, and then they cried, Lord give us Ioh. 6.34.
evermore of this bread: It is man's taste of Christ, man's feeding upon Christ,
that makes him long after Christ: The experience which the Spouse in Solomon
had of the bridegroomes love, moved her to entreat the Cant. 1.2.
kisses of his mouth, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy
love is better then wine. Christians are first Passive and then Active in their
love to Christ-ward; love like the heat of the Sun first descends, and then it
ascends. Christ's love to us begets our love to him, Christ's love was first over
the Spouse as a Banner, and then she was Cant. 2.5. Ioh. 11.44.
sick of love to him: Lazarus lay fast in the grave, the Earth was his bed,
his palace, his resting place, and all in all, till Christ raised him; Man lies
fast in the grave of sin, the world, the Earth, the things here below are his
bed, his palace, his Paradise, he minds nothing else till Christ does quicken
him. The strange woman in Salomons Song marvelled what Christ the Churches
Cant. 5.9.
Beloved was, they mused why she should be sick of love toward him, why she
made such great inquiry after him. Carnal men think Gods people besides
themselves in being so earnest after Christ, so zealous for Christ, they
marvel why they are so inquisitive in their hearings, prayers, fastings,
meditations and conferences after Christ Jesus: they wonder what Christ is more
then any other Beloved, as gold, silver, honors, pleasures; having no love nor
longings in themselves after Christ, they muse at the love and longings of
others; and as they long not after him, they put no price upon him, show no
respect to him, but set him with David behind the Ewes, give him the least and
lowest, yea, even no room at all in their hearts. Christ is of no esteem with
man, until he comes within man, and makes the soul of man his gracious
habitation.

CHAP. V. Opening the folly of man in retaining his sin and contenting
himself without Christ.
4. THe meditation of man's estrangement from Christ in his natural and corrupt
estate, opens the exceeding great folly of man in being loath to change his
corrupt estate, to put off the old man, as unwilling to forsake his carnal
condition, as Micah his Idol, though this separate and keep him from Christ,
make him incapable of Christ, exclude him from all claim and title to Christ;
and this is the folly of all follies to retain any thing which may exclude man
from Christ, or hinder man's fruition and enjoyment of Christ; he that by
retaining his sin keeps himself from Christ, abides in darkness and chooses
darkness rather then light, sickness rather then health, bondage rather then
liberty, famine rather than fulness, woes and miseries rather than joys and
comforts, curses rather than blessings, baseness rather than honor, the
leprosy rather then beauty, what shall I say death rather than life, hell
rather than heaven, and evelasting consortship with the Devil in endless
burnings, rather than communion with God and Christ in everlasting rejoycings.
Men are easily persuaded to leave sickness for health, darkness for light, straw
for pearls, thraldom for liberty, the tempest for a calm, etc. But men are
uneasily persuaded to leave their sin for Christ, to deny themselves, and
forsake the world for Christ, as Elisha left his friends and his yoakes of Oxen
to follow Elijah. This is a persuasion beyond the Rhetoric, Art and Eloquence
of man and Angel, yea of Christ himself, as he was man and a Minister of the
Gospel: for thus may you here him in the days of his flesh expostulating and
pleading with, reproving and upbraiding the men of Jerusalem, O Jerusalem
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered you together even as a Hen does gather
her Chickens under her wings, and you would not; and again you may behold him
weeping over that City, and saying, O that thou had known in this thy day,
the things belonging to thy peace, but now they are hidden from thine eyes! And
of old also may you hear him complaining in the mouth of the Prophet, I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain: None but
God can persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Such is man's averseness
from Christ, that God alone can work man into Christ: But perhaps some will
say, What is this to us? We are all borne within the pale of Christs-Church, we
are all baptized into Christ, we have all put on Christ, therefore no such
folly, no such estrangement in us and our souls from Christ?

How man is in Christ.
To this I answer, It is one thing to be in Christ by an Ecclesiastical
Generation and birth within the Church: Another thing to be in Christ by
spiritual Regeneration and new birth, being borne again of Christ; it is one
thing to be in Christ Sacramentally, by participation of the outward ordinance
and element, another thing to be in Christ spiritually, by participation of the
inward grace; it is one thing to be in Christ by an outward and formal
profession: another thing to be in Christ by an internal and gracious
incorporation, Romans 9.6, 7.
They are not all Israel, which are of Israel, neither because they are the
seed of Abraham are they all children.

Characters of man being without Christ
If you demand therefore how a man may discern his being without Christ?

I answer, a man's being out of Christ may among many be discerned by these
Characters or marks thereof.

1 Without the Spirit and grace of Christ.
1. By being without the Spirit and Grace of Christ. He that is without the
light of the Sun is without the Sun; If any man (says S. Paul) have not the
Spirit of Christ he is none of his: He is without Christ, he that has not the
Spirit of Christ enlightening him, savingly to know God, as a child his father
with an affective knowledge; regenerating and endowing him with a child-like
affection to God and Christ; reviving and quickening him to live to God and
Christ Jesus in true holiness; incorporating him into Christ, and making him
partaker of Christ's fulness: Sanctifying and cleansing him from his sin, as
the water does wash the spots from the flesh; directing and guiding him to
walk aright in the ways of God, and to do the things pleasing to God, as the
hand of the teacher guides the hand of the learner to write according to the
copy: He that has not the Spirit thus working upon him, thus framing and
disposing his heart, has not Christ; for he that is in 2 Cor 5.17.
Christ, as a living member, by spiritual union, as a son by adoption, he is a
new creature, old things are passed away, and all things are become new: When
Christ came into the Ioh. 2, 15.
Temple, he purged his Fathers house, he overturned the mony-tables, he drove
out the buyers and the sellers. When Christ comes into man, takes his holy
habitation in the soul of man, he throws down the holds of sin, he drives
out all corrupt and carnal lusts, he purges the heart of man and makes it a
holy house: 2 Kin. 5.14.
when Naaman put himself into Jordan, his Leprosy departed from him. Man that
is put into Christ by Faith, is cleansed from the Leprosy of his sin; Faith
Act. 15.9.
purifieth his heart, and every man that has this hope 1 Ioh. 3.3.
purifieth himself even as Christ is pure; 1 Ioh. 16.
his thoughts of being in Christ Jesus who remains under the power of
profaneness are mere delusions. Reigning ungodliness disan^ls all communion
with Christ Jesus: He that walks not in Christ is a stranger to Christ. Where
there is no expression of true and saving grace, there is no evidence of being
in Christ.

2. By being in Subjection under any lust; 2 Subjection under lusts. 2 Kin 4.40.
one reigning sin destroys the life of the soul; an evil Herb made the
Prophets pot, a pot of death, one ruling lust makes the soul the Subject of
spiritual death; the breach of one Covenant forfets the whole Lease, allowance
of the soul in the breach of one Commandment makes forfeture of whole Christ.
^ Sam. 20.1, ^. Iam. 2.10.
One Sheba blew the Trumpet and drew all Israel into Rebellion against David:
One ruling sin makes the whole man a Rebel against Christ: One reigning sin so
blinds the understanding that it cannot savingly discern Christ, as one moat
so blinds the eye that it cannot comfortably behold the Sun* one allowed sin so
distempers the soul that it cannot receive any benefit by the ordinances of
God; as one strong disease, so disaffecteth the body, that it frustrates the
use of the food: One swaying corruption so alienates the heart, that it cannot
love Christ, as one stranger in the bosom of the wife so takes up her
affection, that she cannot love the husband. One person in the house so keeps
the possession that another can take no possession. One domineering sin so
possesses the soul, that Christ has no possession there: One chain disables
the prisoner to come forth and return to his own house: One fettering and
binding lust holds man fast in Satan's prison, and disables him to come to
Christ, though a woman have but one husband, yet she cannot marry a second
until that husband is dead; the soul married, though but to one lust, cannot
marry it self to Christ, until that lust is mortified and dead. One covetous
lust in Judas; one incestnous lust in Herod; one ambitious lust in many of the
chief Rulers; one worldly lust in the young man, was of strength enough, to
withold each of them from Christ, to continue them all without Christ; man's
thoughts of interest in Christ remaining under the power of any one lust are
but vain and idle dreams. He that comes not universally from the world, from
himself and every sinful lust, never comes truly unto Christ. Israel came not
to Canaan until they forsook Egypt, renounced the service of Pharaoh, saw
the Egyptians drowned in the waters, and left not a hoof in Egypt behind
them. Man comes not to Christ until he forsakes the world, renounceth the
service of Satan, drowns every lust in the tears of true Repentance, and leaves
not a hoof, not one affection of his soul behind him, under the jurisdiction
and command of the world; the love of the world is enmity with God, the service
of any sin is Rebellion against God.

3. Man's confining himself within himself
3. By man's terminating and confining himself within himself, not going out of
himself, nor looking beyond himself to Christ, but doing all things for
himself and referring all unto himself; That (says our Savior) which is
Ioh. 3.6.
of the flesh is flesh; he that is altogether fleshly and has nothing of
Christ in him, he is fleshly in his disposition, in his affection, in his
intention, in his undertaking he minds himself and his own fleshly ends and
nothing else, he cannot look beyond himself, his own flesh is the
circumference within which he moves, and the Center wherein he terminates his
motion: Nihil agit ult^a suum genus.
Nothing in the course of Nature works beyond the Sphere of its own activity,
a thorn bears not grapes, a Sparrow begets not an Eagle, the corrupt Mat.
7.17.
Tree brings forth corrupt fruit; the waters move no higher in the cisterne
then they are in the fountain: He that is not of Christ by a holy and gracious
Original, cannot sincerely intend Christ, but himself in his undertaking; and
he that looks not beyond himself, has nothing of Christ within him, he has
no principle, root nor spring of grace in his heart. Were he a tree of Christ's
planting, he would bring forth his fruit to Christ. Were he a child of Christ's
begetting he would incline and moove toward Christ in his affection; he would
primarily intend Christ in all his doing, as the Rivers coming from the Sea,
return and Eccl 1.4.
empty themselves into the Sea, thus they who are of Christ return and empty
themselves into Christ, do all for Christ, for the filling up* and making of
Christ glorious; he that confines himself within himself, Evils of
selfe-intendment.
has no love of Christ within him; Jonathans love to David caused him to strip
himself for David, 1. No love. 1. Sam, 18.1.
love to Christ will make a man as occasion requires strip himself of all his
honor, favor among men and earthly riches for Christ, according to the
measure of man's love to Christ, are his manifestations of himself for Christ:
For love seeks not 1 Cor. 13.5.
her own: He that loves Christ will abase himself for Christ, put himself
and all that is his under the feet of Christ; he that seeks himself, that
terminates his thoughts within the circumference of his own flesh, 2 A base
spirit.
has a very low and base spirit, Christ's Spirit which is a Spirit of 2 Timothy
1.7.
power, a Spirit of magnanimity and courage, a Spirit of 1 Pet. 4.14.
glory, a most glorious and excellent Spirit does not rest upon him. 3. No
comfortable discerning of God
He that minds himself and his own ends has no clear apprehension and
comfortable discerning of Christ and his beauties, he that minds straw and
stubble does not discern the worth of gold, silver and precious stones: such a
man has no faith in Christ, 4. No faith.
he takes not Christ unto himself to be the rock on which he builds, the
Counselor by whom he will be guided, the King to whom he will be subject, and
the husband to whom he joins his soul in wedlock; he has not this faith in
Christ; for as man by faith receives Christ to save him, so he gives himself
again to Christ to love and serve him, to intend and honor Christ above
himself and every creature; and thus man minding and intending himself,
demonstrates his alienation from Christ. When man in the doing of works of
mercy blows a Trumpet, Mat 6.2.5. Mat 23.5.
seeks himself and his own applause among men, and in the performance of the
duties of piety, stands praying in the corners of the Street, hunts after the
praise of men; ^ Sam. 15 30* Phil. 2.21.
when a man with the Pharisees does what he does to be seen of men; or with
Saul to be honored before the people. When man in his ordinary and common
employments seeks his own things and not the things which are Christ's, he
declares himself to be a stranger unto Christ.

4. Four ^old fullness.
4. By man's fulness of himself. Self-fullnesse ever inferres an emptiness of
Christ; he that is filled with himself is empty of Christ: There is a
fourfold fulness which argues an utter emptiness of Christ in man.

1 Self-fulnes.
1. Self-fullnesse, which is a high opinion of man's self, a conceit of
sufficiency in himself; ambitious thoughts of fulness enough at home in the
House of man's own heart, which our Savior terms a Lu. 18.9.
trusting in a man's self. Man's leaning upon his own arm to sustain him, upon
his own righteousness to justify him, upon his own ability to do all things
for himself; this the Prophet calls a being Isa. 5.20.
wise in man's own eyes; man taking upon him to be his own guide, his own
instructor and counselor; this was an unhappy adjunct of the Laodicaean
Angel, Rev. 3.17.
rich, full and wanting nothing, not knowing that he was poor, blind, naked,
miserable and wretched. He that has highest thoughts of his own fulness is
most empty of Christ Jesus, the rich (says Luke) are sent Luke 1.53.
empty away; the rich, they who in their own eye are full of wisdom to guide
themselves, full of power to correct themselves, full of righteousness to
justify themselves, full of worth to obtain every good thing at the hands of
God for themselves, these are sent empty away, empty of Christ, empty of all
saving knowledge, lively faith, fervent love and of every good gift and
blessing which comes by Christ: Self-fullnesse disables man to discern any
beauty or worth in Christ: the Pharisees were great self-admirers, very deeply
guilty of self-fullnesse, and they had very low opinions of Christ:
Self-fullnesse disables the soul to taste any sweetness in Christ, The Pro.
27 7.
full stomach loatheth the honey comb: This makes man incapable of Christ;
the full vessel is incapable of other liquor; the man that is full of himself
cannot receive Christ, there is no room in their hearts to entertain Christ;
Christ came among his own: a generation of men ful^ of the thoughts of
self-sufficiency, dreaming of fulness enough at home in themselves, ignorant
and unsensible of their necessity of Christ, and therefore they Ioh. ^.11.
received him not.

2. There is a fulness of sin, 2. Fullness of sin.
which argues an emptiness of Christ, there is no competition between the
fulness of sin and Christ in the soul of man: If sin have the possession,
Christ has no dominion. David did not reign until Saul was deposed, there
must be a deposition of sin, before Christ can reign in the heart of man;
there is no sutablenesse between Christ and a heart full of sin: Christ will
not dwell in a soul so sordid and defiled with sin, he abhorres all
fellowship and communion with unclean and vicious people; he delights in none,
but in them that excel in Psalm. 16.3.
virtue; the Sun shines not where the house is full of darkness; the physic
works not where the body remains full of diseases; the Husbandman sows not,
where the field is full of thorns and briars. Christ shines not into that
soul, works not upon that heart which is full of ignorance, earthlinesse,
infidelity and spiritual maladies. Such as are full of sin, as Naaman was full
of leprosy, as the Pharisees Sepulchers were full of dead men's bones, are
far from Christ; it is a thing altogether vain and fruitless once to
mention or name, the 2 Timothy 2.19
Name of the Lord Jesus, unless there be a departure from ungodliness.

3 Fullness of man.
3. There is a fulness of man, which argues an emptiness of Christ. Many are
so addicted unto man, their hearts and thoughts are so taken up with man, that
there is no entertainment for Christ in them; their souls are so possessed by
man, that Christ has no possession in them: some are so devoted to the service
of man, that they cannot serve Christ, contrary to the charge of the Apostle,
They make themselves the 1 Cor. 7.23 1 Samuel 5.4.
servants of men; not the civil, but the profane and sinful servants of men;
they exalt and set up man above Christ; as the Philistines did set Dagon above
the Arc, they study man more then they study Christ, they do more to
ingratiate themselves into the favor of man, then into the favor of Christ,
the precepts of men are of more authority with them then the precepts of
Christ: they accommodate and apply themselves more to men's lusts then to
Christ's service; they adore and magnify man more then they adore and magnify
Christ; they abolish the worship of Christ, by making men's dictates the rule of
their service, as our Savior himself faith, In Mat. 15.9.
vain do you worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men; the
observation of men's inventions, subjection to men's dictates in the matter of
divine worship, is not only vain and fruitless, but also pernicious and
dangerous, a very profanation of Christ's worship and service, a shameful
abasement of Christ below man, and a superstitious and idolatrous exaltation of
man above Christ; a wretched separation of the soul from Christ and
inthralment of man to man; therefore the Apostle says of such, That they Col.
2.18.
hold not the head which is Christ; they are not subject to Christ, as the
members to the Head; they are not guided by Christ, as the members by the head;
they do not exalt and lift up Christ, as the members do the head; they are not
enlivened, acted and moved by Christ, as the members by an influence from the
head, but they are subject to ordinances after the commandments and Doctrines
of men: men's inthralment of themselves to men's lusts and inventions, utterly
excludes them from Christ Jesus, If I yet pleased men (says St. Paul) I should
not be the Gal. 1.10.
servant of Christ. If I studied and observed men, made my self obsequious to
the lusts of men, did haunt after the favor of men, or did make the wisdom
and invention of men my guide in things spiritual, I should not be the servant
of Christ. Christ has no gracious Lordship and dominion in the souls of such
persons, as are superstitiously devoted to men's inventions.

Some again are extraordinarily delighted in and taken up with the applause of
men: All their works of charity and piety are levelled to this mark, they do
all to be seen of men, to be praised of men, their Mat. 6.2.
Alms, Prayers, Fastings are as lost labors, if men do not observe them, if
they gain not the applause of men by them; men's praises are the first mover in
all their services, They love the Ioh. 12.42.
praise of men more then the praise of God, and when man is thus full, thus
swollen and puffed up with the applause of man, thus ambitious of the praise of
man; there is nothing of Christ in man, How Ioh. 5 44.
can you believe, says Christ, how can ye embrace me, partake of me, subject
your selves to me and quiet and content your selves with me, satiate and
delight your selves in me, which receive honor one of another and seek not
the honor that comes from God only. He that is ambitious of the applause of
man is incapable of Christ; the man that is vainglorious is far from all
sweet and comfortable communion with Christ.

Some likewise Mat. 16.23.
savor only the things of men, and not the things of God, the Word and
Ordinances of God, the ways and works of God, the gifts and communications of
God to the souls of men, have no savor with them: These things are to them as
the words of Eliphaz unto Job, Job 6, 6, 7.
Unsavory things, having no more taste then the white of an Egg; sorrowful
meat which their soul refuses to touch, they taste no sweetness, they find
no pleasure in these things, they loath and leave them, as the Israelites
loathed their Manna, and as the full stomach does loath the hony-combe; they
savor and relish only the things of men, that which is humane, corrupt and
carnal, that which has it is original and spring from the wisdom of the
flesh, this they savor, this suits with them, as meat with the palate, as
water with the dry ground; the carnal counsel and persuasion, the corrupt
practice and example of men, is very pleasing to them, this is wholly of man,
and therefore fully agrees with man, is no offense to man, but a pleasing and
delightful thing to vain man: They savor nothing in the labor of Gods
Ministers, but their humane art and eloquence, or some needless speculations,
which are of man, these they relish, but the 2 Cor. 11 3.
simplicity of Christ, preached and published in the Gospel, they savor not:
What they hear of Christ tending to the honor and exaltation of man, that
they like according to their apprehension, but what they hear of Christ,
tending to the mortification of their lusts and prostration of themselves under
Christ, in this they take no pleasure, this is a hard saying, it suits not with
them; what they discern in the worship of Christ externally pompous and
glorious, carrying something of man in it, that they approve and like, but the
truth and sincerity, faith and love, humility and self-denial enjoined in the
worship, and required in the worshippers of Christ, they relish not, they have
no pleasure in these: the charity, mercy and bounty which they discern in the
children of God, they can approve that which is humane and moral in them, and
tending to the outward and common preservation of man, they savor, but the
purity and preciseness, power of godliness, holy walking and zealous
observation of Gods precepts are things which they relish not, but distaste in
Gods servants: So that as Abimelech showed kindness to Abraham for Sarahs
sake; Abraham was savoury to him by reason of Sarah: thus these men show
respect unto Christ, his Ordinances, his Ministers and servants, only for man,
for something which they discern and find of man there; they savor nothing
but man in them: and thus their faith stands in the wisdom of man, and not
in the power of God and Christ; and this their savouring of man, declares their
not favoring of Christ, their total alienation and estrangement from Christ.

Some also are full of reioycings in man, contrary to the charge of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.21.
They rejoice in men; in the wisdom of men, in the learning of men, as in the
only light which guides them; in the authority of men, as in the obligation
which binds them; in the traditions and inventions of men, as in the rule of
their religious worship and service; in the eloquence of men, as in the
loadstone which draws them, as in the music which affects them; in the
en^icing words of man's wisdom, as in the only Rhetoric that delights them;
in the countenance and favor of man, as in the only Sun that warms them; in
the applause and approbation of man, as in the only Trumpet that makes a
joyful sound in their ears; in the Abilities, gifts, industry and labors of
man, as in the prime and maine causes of their salvation, welfare and felicity:
And thus their whole acquiescence is in man, their choice dependence is upon
man, their glorying and rejoicing is terminated in man, the glory of their
whole welfare is ascribed unto man: the Israelites rejoiced in the 1 Samuel 4.5.
Arc, not in the Lord, and vain men rejoice in man, in the presence of man,
in the ability, favor, power and help of man, and not in Christ; Thus among
the men of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.4.
One said J am of Paul, and another I am of Apollo, looking with a humane eye
upon, and glorying after a carnal manner in those holy Messengers of God, even
idolizing and abusing the appointed instruments of their salvation, robbing
Christ of his glory by an inordinate dependence upon, and glorying in the
Messengers of Christ, ascribing that to them which was proper unto Christ,
exalting them into the very room of Christ; so glorying in them that Christ
was not glorious in their apprehension; the carnal overvaluing of the
instruments is a shameful undervaluing of the Lord Jesus. He that does not
according to the expression of the Prophet, Isa 2.22.
cease from man; from the wisdom and counsel, devise and invention, art and
ability of man, sees little or nothing of Christ, has no comfort nor joy in
Christ; he that does not cease from dependence upon man, from glorying and
pleasing himself in man, from resting upon the authority of man in matter of
spiritual instruction, is very ignorant of Christ, a mere stranger to Christ;
Christ ever proves uncomfortable to them whose rejoycings are in man.

4. Fullness of world.
4. There is a fulness of the world, which argues an emptiness of Christ in
the soul of man. The Inn where Christ was borne was so full of guests, that
there was no room for Christ, but in a manger, a dishonorable lodging for
such a glorious guest, in the heart which is filled with the world, there is no
room for Christ. Worldly minded men give a very unworthy entertainment unto
Christ; the world so blinds them, that they cannot discern the beauty, worth
and excellency of Christ, any more then an eye full of dust can discern the
brightness and beauty of the Sun, they see no Isa. 53.2.
comeliness in Christ for which they should desire him; this so fills their
hearts, that they are incapable of spiritual instruction, as Mat. 13.22.
thorns and briars make the field incapable of seed; this bears such authority
and dominion within them, that they cannot veil and bow to Christ, they cannot
take Christ's yoke upon them, they cannot set themselves about Christ's work
any more then a servant can put himself from his Masters service into another
man's work, No man (says Christ) can Mat. 6.24.
serve two Masters; no man can be the servant of God and Mammon: this so
alienates the heart of a man from Christ, draws the soul of man into such
spiritual fornication, that man can no more love Christ then a harlot can love
her husband, for, if any man (says Saint John) 1 Ioh 2.15.
love the world the love of the Father is not in that man, And the love of the
world (says St. James) is Iam. 4.4.
enmity with God: This does so take up the thought, care, study, delight,
strength, labor, time and the very whole of man, and does so fetter and bind
him, fasten and incline him to things here below, that with the invited guests
in the Parable, he Lu. 14.18.
cannot come to Christ; he cannot embrace Christ, he cannot attend on Christ;
he cannot marry his soul to Christ; this does so distemper their palates that
they cannot relish Christ: The fleshpots of Egypt were so savoury to the
Israelites that they could not long relish their Numb. 115.
Manna. Christ is a distasteful dish where the world is a sweet feast; this
fills the heart of man with dishonorable thoughts of Christ. The over-prizing
of the world is the under-prizing of Christ. He can never apprehend Christ as
all in all, that does not apprehend the world as nothing; the young man's
over-prizing the world caused his departure from Mat. 19.21.
Christ: the lovers of the world are very inconstant in their following of
Christ; if Christ and the world will not stand together, Christ is soon
forsaken, the world alone has their attendance, service and affection: So that
Christ has no spiritual and gracious being, where the world has such full
possession. And these four sorts of fullness in man are so many clear
demonstrations of Christ's estrangement from man.

5. By man's spiritual emptiness: 5. Spiritual emptiness. 1. Empty of life
He that is empty of Christ is without Christ; the Cisterne which is empty of
water is without the fountain; he that is empty of grace is without Christ
the author and fountain of grace; he that is without the life of Christ, who
has not Christ living in him, as the root in the branches, Gal. 2.20.
graciously enlivening him, as the soul does naturally enliven the body,
endowing him with spiritual principles of holy, and gracious life, enabling
him like a living man to feel his sin, as a living man his disease; to rise up
from the world, as a living man arises from the Earth; to feed upon the
Ordinances of God, as a living man upon the food which is set before him; to
walk in the ways of God, as a living man does move and walk in an earthly
way; to follow Christ, in attending his Ordinances, in believing his Promises,
in obeying his precepts, as Lazarus followed Christ when he had raised him from
death to life; he that has not Christ thus living in him, thus framing and
disposing him to live to God, to consecrate himself to Gods service, to
conform himself to Gods precepts, to intend God and his glory, To live (as
the Apostle says) 2 Timothy 3.12.
godly in Christ Jesus; in Christ enlivenining him and according to Christ's
prescription. He that does not thus live is without Christ.

2. Of knowledge.
2. He that is empty of the knowledge of Christ is without Christ; the eye which
is empty of the light of the Sun is without the Sun; the soul which is empty
of spiritual and heavenly light is without the Sun of Righteousness; he that
does not know Christ as a Prophet instructing him and making him wise unto
salvation; as a Priest sanctifying and purging him from his corruption; as a
King bearing spiritual dominion within him, bringing his whole man into a holy
and humble subjection; he that does not know the death of Christ in the
crucifying of his affections; the resurrection of Christ in the rising of his
soul to seek the things which are above; the Ephesians. 1.19.
power of Christ in working his heart from obstinacy and hardness, from
captivity and bondage, from pride and haughtiness to softness and
tenderness, to liberty and freedom, and to humility and meekness: He that
does not know the beauties of Christ ravishing his soul with joy and delight
in him; the love of Christ in being espoused to Christ; the worth and
excellency of Christ in accounting all but Phil. 3.8.
dung and dross in comparison of Christ, and the fulness of Christ in
feeling and finding all contentation in Christ he that does not thus know
Christ is without Christ, in Christ are hidden all the treasures of Col 25.
knowledge and wisdom, and he that has Christ is full of spiritual knowledge
as the Sea of Isa. 11.6.
waters.

3. Of power.
3. He that is empty of the power of Christ is without Christ: When the body is
empty of the power of the soul, the soul is departed from it, become a
stranger to it: thus when man is altogether empty of the spiritual and
heavenly power of Christ, then is man without Christ, a mere stranger to
Christ, all they that are partakers of Christ have experience of the power of
Christ, in casting down the strong and mighty holds of sin in their souls, in
humbling their hearts, in bringing the thoughts of their hearts into the
obedience of Christ; in overcomming and casting Sat^n out of their hearts; in
sanctifying and cleansing their souls; in persuading them to believe and lay
hold upon the promise of life; in pacifying and quieting their perplexed
consciences; in making them able to endure afflictions, and in causing them to
grow and increase in all heavenly graces: He therefore that has not experience
of this power of Christ, in the 2 Cor. 10.4.
casting down of the holds of sin, as Israel had experience of the power of
the Lord, in casting down the walls of Jericho at the blowing of the trumpets;
he that feels not this power of Christ in making him victorious over Satan, as
the man in the Gospel had experience of Christ's power in Mat. 17.21.
casting the unclean spirit out of him: Ioh. 17.17.
He that does not discern Christ powerful in sanctifying him; as Naaman
dis^rned the virtue of Jordan in purging his Leprosy from him, and the lame
man discerned the power of the Angel in Bethesda healing him: He that knows
not the efficacy of Christ in persuading him to believe, in reconciling him to
God; as Joseph's brethren discerned the esticacy of his Intercession with the
King of Egypt for them: He that perceives not Christ pacifying his troubled
spirit, binding up his broken Isa. 61.2.
heart, and healing his wounded conscience; as the Disciples felt the power of
Christ Mat. 8.26.
calming the stormy tempest; and the wounded man in the Parable felt the
Samaritan Luke 10
pouring wine and oil into his wounds and binding up the same: He that
discerns not Christ Phil 4.13.
strengthening and sustaining him in temptations and trials; as the Arc bare up
Noah in the deluge; he that feels not Christ Psalm. 72.6.
coming down upon his soul like rain upon the mowen grass, and as showers
that water the Earth, making him fruitful in every good gift and grace: he
that is empty of these powerful and mighty ministrations of Christ is without
Christ, under the power of his corruption in his natural, and carnal
condition.

4 Of liberty.
4. He that is empty of the Liberty which Christ ministers is without Christ,
he that does not feel Christ freeing him from the death of sin, as the woman
of Shunems son felt the Prophet freeing him from bodily death, 2 Kin. 4.34.
his flesh waxing warm and his eyes opening: freeing him from the thraldom
and imbondagement of sin, as Peter Act. 11.7.
felt the Angel freeing him from his fetters and Herod's prison; freeing him
from the servitude of the world, as Israel discerned Moses, freeing them from
the servitude of Egypt; freeing their understandings from ignorance, as the
Sun freeth the air from darkness; freeing their wills from perverseness,
their thoughts from vanity and their a^fections from coldness and deadness,
as the fire freeth the house from cold and fills it with heat: making the
whole man free to know, believe, love and rejoice in God, as the clear eye is
free to see, the Brides heart is free to love the Bridegroom, and the Sun free
to run the race which is set him: He that is a stranger to this freedom,
remaining a captive under the power of his lusts, and the world, is far from
Christ, an empty house in whom Christ has no dwelling.

5. Of love.
5. He that is empty of the love of Christ is without Christ: He that does not
discern the love of Christ, as the Bride discernes the love of the
Bridegroom: He that perceives not Christ Can. 1.2.
kissing him with the kisses of his mouth (it is the Churches expression in
Salomons Song) applying the doctrines of his Love, Mercy and Peace to his
conscience, making him sensible of his love in the use of his Ordinances, as
the Bridegroom^ makes the Bride sensible of his love in his Can 2.4.
banqueting house, making him joyful in the House of Isa. 56.7.
Prayer, inabling him to pray with confidence, returning a gracious answer to
his holy and humble petitions: He that perceives not the love of Christ in the
clear and comfortable revelation of his secrets to his understanding; in his
holy and sanctified working upon his soul, in sealing up the pardon and
forgiveness of his sin; in the free and plentiful communication of himself,
his gifts, graces and benefits unto his heart; in the sanctifying and sweetning
of all his trials, in making all to work for the best unto him, in giving him
water out of the rock, meat out of the eater, and sweet out of the sour. He
that is thus empty of the love of Christ is without Christ. Where Christ is,
there his love is, and his love is not idle but operative, manifesting it self
in the div^ne and heavenly fruits and effects thereof to the soul. And thus by
these marks and characters, man's being without Christ, man's abiding in his
corrupt estate and carnal condition is plainly discernable.

CHAP. VI. Exhorting to come out of our natural and corrupt estate.
5 Exhortation to come out of natural and corrupt estate*
5. THe consideration of man's misery in being without Christ, in continuing
still in his corrupt and wreched estate, should set every man on work, with
all diligence, with all assiduity and carefullnesse to labor his deliverance
and freedom out of that condition: the estate of corruption is of all estates
the most miserable, better live in any servitude, misery, poverty, disgrace or
trouble, then under the power of sin without Christ; better live in ignominy
without honor, in prison without freedom, in hatred without the love of man,
in poverty without riches, in exilement without humane fellowship, in famine
without bread, in darkness without light, in trouble without peace, in pain
without ease enjoying Christ, then to live in all the fulness of the world
under the dominion of corruption without the Lord Jesus: Therefore out of this
estate does the Lord call us, Joel 2.12.
Turn you even unto me (says the Lord) with all your heart, and with fasting
and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your hearts and not your
garments, and turn to the Lord your God. Turn from your sin, as a Traveller
from his wandering path, and walk in the ways of God, turn from the service
of sin, as Rebels from the service of a foreign Prince and serve the Lord your
great and highest Sovereign; turn from the love of sin, as a Harlot from the
love of strangers, and love the Lord Jesus your spiritual Bridegroom with all
your hearts, with all your souls and with all your might: This is the labor of
all Gods Ministers, the fruit and honor of all their endeavors, To open the
eyes of men, and to Act. 26.19.
turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith which is in Christ: The translation of the souls of men
out of their natural and corrupt estate into Christ's Kingdom, is the most
sweet and blessed fruit of the Gospel: To this also the Lord persuades by
the proposal of many favors and mercies; Turn you unto me says the Lord and
I Zach. 1.3.
will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hoasts: Turn you unto me as Scholars
to your teacher to learn my laws, as children to your Father to reverence my
name, as Subjects to your Sovereign to obey my Statutes, as Servants to your
Lord and Master, to do my will: turn you unto me by repentance, sorrowing for
your sins, by faith believing my Promises, by love embracing me and my
testimonies, and by obedience keeping my Commandments; and I will turn unto
you as a King of mercies pardoning you, as a loving Father receiving you, as a
kind and gracious Husband embracing you, as a glorious and shining Sun,
dispelling all the clouds of sorrow from you, as a powerful and mighty
Redeemer, delivering you from all them that do conspire against you. God does
ever manifest himself very good and gracious to them that turn from their
impieties. To move men to this the Lord likewise uses very sweet and powerful
expostulations: Ezekiel. 31.32.
Repent and turn your selves (says the Lord God) from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin; cast away from you all
your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart and
a new spirit, for why will ye die o house of Israel, for I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, says the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves and
live: The forsaking of sin is the obtaining of life. Sin is the cause of man's
ruin, repentance the way to peace and eternal happiness; though the ability
to repent be Gods gift; yet it is the duty of every man to repent; and the
changing of the heart from sin to holiness is ever attended with sweet and
sure mercies. All blessings attend them that come from their natural and
corrupt estate, to walk with God in newness of life, and for this, says St.
Peter, God having raised up his Act. 3.26.
Son sent him to bless us in turning away every one of us from our iniquities:
the translation of man from the state of sin into the state of grace is one of
the choysest benefits that comes by Christ, and they are the most blessed and
happy among all people, whom Christ delivers and turns from the power and
service of their corruption; therefore as Sampson burst his withs and came away
from Dalila, so let us burst asunder the withs and fetters of our sin, and come
forth of our natural and corrupt estate. Evils of corrupt estate.
Of all estates to live under the power of sin and to continue a stranger to
Christ is the most miserable and unhappy estate.

Barrenness.
1. An estate of Barrenness, the carnal man is a bad tree, Mat. 7. 2 Samuel 6.23.
and can bear no good fruit, a loathsome fountain and can send forth no
clean water; Michals womb was shut up and she had no child, till the day of
her death; the heart of a carnal man is shut up, and continuing in that
estate, he brings forth no good fruit all the days of his life; he is, says
Jude, a Jude ver. 12.
tree twice dead and plucked up by the roots, void of all the fruits of grace.

2. Exilement. Genesis 3.
2. His estate is an estate of exilement from God. Adam was exiled Paradise for
eating the forbidden fruit; the carnal man is exiled Gods presence, shut out
from all communion with God for feeding and feasting his soul upon sin,
because stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant unto
him; such men have no gracious relation unto God, no claim nor Psalm 50.16. 1
Ioh. 1.6. Mat. 7.2^.
title to the covenant of God, no unfeigned love to God, no likeness with God,
and therefore God disclaimes all communion with them, he will not acknowledge
them.

3. Enmity.
3. It is an estate of enmity, the carnal mind is Romans 8.7.
enmity against God; man opposes God and God opposes man, corrupt men are
Romans 1.29.
haters of God, they hate the very being of God, and wish there were no God;
they hate him in his attributes; because he is a wife God, and beholds all
their impieties; because he is a holy God and abhorres their ungodliness;
because he is a just God, threatening destruction to their ways; because he is
a powerful God, able to dash them in pieces as a Potters vessel with a rod of
iron: they hate him in his Ordinances, in his Ministers, in his Servants, in
all that bear his Image of holiness and true righteousness, and God hates
them in their qualities, in their services, in their prayers, their best
Sacrifice is a loathsome carcass in Gods nostrils, a very Pro. 15.8.
abomination before the Lord.

4. Slavery.
4. It is an estate of slavery to Satan, to the world, to corruption, he that is
most sinful is the veryest slave in the world, as many lusts so many Lords and
Masters, yea cruel tyrants over him, leading him captive at the will of Satan.
Peter's being fettered in Herod's prison; Jeremies lying in the Dungeon; Isreal's
servitude under Pharaoh; and the Egyptians being led captive by the Assyrians,
naked and barefoot to the reproach of Egypt, is but a slender shadow and
weak representation of this thraldom.

5. Curses. 2 Kin. 4.40. Mal. 2.
5. It is an estate of curses; the whole pot was a pot of death, where the evil
herb was, all is a pot of death, a pot of curses, where sin rules, very
blessings are turned into curses, to them that turn not from their impieties,
the Psalm. 69.22. Jonah 1.
table is a snare, and what should have bin man's welfare becomes his ruin, all
the means of grace are perverted, all the labors of Gods Ministers
frustrated. Jonahs being in the ship disabled the Mariners to bring the Ship
unto the shore; the dominion of sin in the soul disables the Minister to bring
it to the haven of peace, we row in vain, all our labor is lost, if you
forsake not your sin, we cannot profit you; the holding fast of your impieties
turns the ministry of salvation into an increase of condemnation, working
death instead of life, the very best things, proving evil to them that
continue without change in their corrupt estate; therefore as 1 Samuel 1. 2 Samuel
14. Exodus 3. Act. 12.10. 2 Kin. 4.
Hannah prayed to be delivered from her barrenness, as Absalom longed to see
an end of his exilement, and to behold the Kings face again; as Israel sighed
and groaned to be eased of their bondage; as the men of Tire and Sidon made
Blastus the Kings Chamberlain their friend, and desired peace with Herod; and
as the Prophet powered meal into the pot, and there was no harm in the pot;
but the pot of death was made a pot of wholesome food, a means to preserve
life. So let us be earnest with the Lord to deliver us from this estate of
barrenness, and make us fruitful, from this estate of exilement, and bring us
to the enjoyment of the heavenly Kings face and countenance; Let us make Christ
our Friend, that there may be an end put to the enmity between God and us, and
that we may be set at peace again with God; let us sigh and groan under our
sinful bondage, and labor for spiritual freedom; Let us labor to have true
and saving grace powered into the pot of our souls, that all our possessions
and undertakings may be sanctified unto us, and that the Word which our sin
has made the savor of death unto death, may through grace become the savor of
life to life to every one of us.

And to the end we may be translated out of the state of corruption into the
state of grace, Means of freedom. 1. Attend the Word.
let us, 1. Attend upon and hide the word of God in our hearts: This is the
Phil. 2.16.
Word of life, by which our souls are quickened, this is the Seed of 1 Pet. 2.9.
Regeneration by which we are new born, this is the voice by which we are
called out of the Kingdom of darkness into mavelous light; this is the 2
Cor. 10.4.
warlike weapon by which the holds of sin are cast down, as the walls of
Jericho were cast flat to the ground at the ^ounding of the Trumpets; this is
the fire, by which the dross of sin is purged out of our souls; this is the
word of Ier 23.29. 2 Cor. 5.18.
Reconciliation by which we are set at peace with God. On this therefore let us
wait, this let us treasure up in our souls, that thereby a gracious change may
be wrought in us.

2 Sense of sin.
2. Let us labor for the sense and feeling of our sin, as of a loathsome
disease, as of a heavy burden. Complain of sin, as Sarah did of the
daughters of Heth, be weary of sin as a sick man of his disease; Cry to the
Lord as Paul did, O miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body
of death, the more sense and feeling we have of sin, the more assurance of a
discharge from sin. When Israel sighed and groaned, then their deliverance from
Pharaohs bondage drew nigh; when sin is a trouble and man grows weary of it,
as of a hard servitude, then the hour of the souls spiritual deliverance
approaches; therefore to such our Savior speaks, Come unto me all ye that
travel and are heavy laden and ye shall find ease unto your souls.

3 Godly sorrow for sin.
3. Let us get our hearts filled with godly sorrow for sin; turn all your
sorrow into sorrow for sin: Mourn for this as for the death of your
firstborn; Mourn secretly without ostentation, mourn unfainedly without
dissimulation, mourn universally without the reservation of any sin; as the
deluge overflowed and drowned all the Earth, hill and valley, so let your
sorrow drown all sin; they that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Godly
sorrow is ever attended with the joy of conversion, remission and spiritual
consolation, They that mourn shall be comforted.

4. Serious view of corrupt estate.
4. Be very frequent and serious in the view and examination of your natural
and corrupt estate; consider the baseness, the loathsomeness, the
unprofitablenesse, the cursednesse and the perilousnesse thereof, men could
never quiet themselves in this estate, were they not inconsiderate of the evil
thereof: A Travellor that is out of his way would never go on therein did he
consider that every step he treades is one step further from his home; did
carnal man consider that every action of his removes him one step farther from
God and Heaven, and brings him one step nearer to Satan and damnation, he
would never please himself in this estate; inconsideration makes way to all
evil: the Lord having mentioned the great impieties of Israel, lays down
this as the ground thereof, They are Deuteronomy. 32.29.
a Nation (says the Lord) void of counsel, neither is there any understanding
in them. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end; they do not consider how they are in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity, in the thraldom of Satan under the
wrath of God, in the state of damnation, subject to a thousand easelesse and
endless woes and miseries, did men consider this, they would awake out of
their sleep and stand up from the dead, that Christ might give them light:
They would with David, consider their ways, Psalm. 119.60.
and turn unto the testimonies of the Lord.

5 Address to Christ by prayer. ^os^ 10.6.
5. Address your selves to Christ by faithful and fervent Prayer; the
Gibeonites sent to Joshua and he rescued them from the Amoritish Princes. We
must send by prayer to Christ, to rescue us from the Prince of darkness; the
woman of Shun^m came to the Prophet, cast her self down, took hold of his
feet, 2 Kin. 4.
would not let him go, and he went with her and raised her dead child: thus
must we come to Christ, cast our selves down, humble our selves under the hand
of Christ, lay hold on Christ, and never let him go, that he may raise us from
the death of sin to the life of grace.

CHAP. VII. Persuading to thanksgiving for deliverance out of our natural and
corrupt estate.
Thanksgiving for deliverance out of our corrupt estate.

Deliverance of greatest cost.


LAstly, this ministers matter and occasion of great praise and thanksgiving to
all them whom Christ has delivered out of their corrupt and carnal estate,
and translated into the state of grace and holiness. Of all deliverances
deliverance from sin is the greatest, the sweetest, the choicest: A
deliverance of the greatest cost, other deliverances are wrought by the power
of God, this is a deliverance wrought not only by the power of God, but also
by the blood of God, by the blood of Christ, who is God and Man in one person
Feed (says Saint Paul to the Bishops, the Ministers of Ephesus) the Church of
God which he has purchased with his own Acts 20.18.
blood. Col. 1.12.
Give thanks (says the Apostle) unto the Father which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, who has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in
whom we have redemption through his blood; the deliverance of Israel out of the
bondage of Egypt, and the captivity of Babylon, the deliverance of Jeremy out
of the dung^on, of Peter out of Herod's prison, of Jonah out of the belly of the
Whale, or the three children out of the fiery furnace, or whatsoever
deliverance else you can mention, cost not God so much as the deliverance of
man from sin; Rom 8 32. 2 Of choicest Love.
for this God gave his own, his only Son. This is a deliverance which
argues more of Gods love to man then all the deliverances which God has
wrought besides for man; Therefore of this the Evangelist says, God so John
3.16.
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son; And Christ (says Saint
Paul) loved the Church, and gave himself for it. From greatest evils.
This is a deliverance from greater evils then all other deliverances; a
deliverance from Satan, the worst of all Tyrants; a deliverance from Hell, of
all prisons the most loathsome, of all places of torment the most painful; a
deliverance from sin, of all fetters the strongest, of all burdens the
heaviest, of all spots the fowlest, and of all diseases the most mortal and
dangerous; a deliverance from the curse of the Law, of all condemning sentences
the most terrible, and full of soul-anguish; a deliverance from death, of all
the Kings of terror the most dreadful, all other deliverances are but slender
shadows and representations of this deliverance: To greatest happiness.
This is a deliverance restoring man to greater felicity then all the
deliverances beside which God ever wrought for man; a deliverance by which man
is made a living member in Christ's body, a loyal Subject in Christ's Kingdom,
a spiritual Freeman of the new Jerusalem, a child of God by Adoption, the
Spouse of Christ by holy wedlock, a glorious Conqueror over all the enemies
of his salvation, and an heir to a heavenly and incorruptible Kingdom. Man's
deliverance out of the estate of corruption comprehends matter and cause of all
joy and thanksgiving. Look therefore every gracious and sanctified soul upon
this blessed work of Gods power, love and mercy, and say with the Psalmist,
Bless the Lord, O my Psalm 103.1, 2.
soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who
heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies. The woman of Shunom receiving
her dead son restored unto life, fell down 2 King 4.37.
at the Prophets feet, and bowed her self unto the ground. Thus receiving thy
soul that was dead in sin, restored to the life of grace, fall thou down at
the feet of Christ, adore and worship him, laud and magnify him, prostitute
thy self and all that is thine by way of gratitude under him. The blind man
whose eyes Christ opened, believed and John 9.38.
worshipped him: Christ having opened the eyes of thy understanding to know the
hope of thy Ephesians. 1.19.
calling, the riches of Christ inheritance, and the exceeding greatness of his
power toward thy soul; believe thou in Christ, embrace him, cast thy self on
him, have thy whole dependence upon him, and worship him, by an honorable
apprehension of his perfections, a sincere and fervent love unto his person, a
humble submission to his precepts, and thankful celebration of his great and
glorious Name for all his mercies: The lame Acts 3.8.
man's feet and ankle bones receiving strength, he leaped up, stood and walked,
and entered into the Temple, walking, leaping, and praising God. Christ having
healed thy affections, having strengthened thee with all spiritual might, rise
up from the earth, walk in the ways of holiness, enter into the Temple,
attend Christ in his Ordinances, let thy soul rejoice in Christ, and praise
him for thy spiritual abilities. Naaman being cleansed from his leprosy,
returned unto the Prophet, and entreated him to take a blessing from 2 King.
5.15
him. Christ having cleansed thee from the leprosy of thy sin, return to
Christ, and render to him the blessing of spiritual and hearty thanksgiving.
The woman in the Gospel who had a spirit of infirmity bowing her down, being
made straight, Luke 13.13.
glorified God Christ having raised and rectified thy heart, which was
altogether bowed down to the world, and the things here below; Christ having
enabled thee to look up, to seek the things which are above, to mind God, to
love his truth, to hunger and thirst after the gifts and graces of his Spirit,
glorify Christ for this his gracious work: Exodus 15.1.
The Israelites seeing the Egyptians drowned, and themselves delivered from
their servitude, sang and triumphed; Man seeing his sins drowned in the
tears of godly sorrow, and buried in the grave of Christ, his soul set free
by Christ from the servitude of Satan, the world, and his own corruption,
should sing and triumph in Christ, and say, the Lord has triumphed gloriously,
the horse and the rider, Satan and my corruption has he thrown down
together: The Lord having of barren made Hanna fruitful, she said, my heart
rejoices in the 1 Samuel 2.1.
Lord, my horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies,
because I rejoice in thy salvation; Christ having opened our hearts, and of
barren made our souls fruitful in all heavenly graces, our hearts should
rejoice in Christ, our mouths should be enlarged with his praises, and our
souls should rejoice in that salvation which Christ has brought unto us. Man
has not greater cause of thanksgiving for any thing, then for his
Sanctification, this work of Christ makes him a living man, puts such a life
into him, that the second death shall never have power over him: This makes him
an honorable man, one of the royal seed, a King and Priest to God: This makes
him a beautiful and comely man, as the Lilly among the thorns, as the Sun,
Moon, and Morning among the clouds: This makes him a victorious man, a
superabundant conqueror over all temptations and afflictions: This makes him a
rich man, the least mite of this grace is better then all the abundance of the
earth, as the Judge. 8.2.
gleanings of Ephraim were better then the vintage of Abiezer: This makes him a
joyful man, regeneration is the matter and ground of the souls fullest,
surest, and sweetest rejoicing. The Kingdom of God, the work of grace, Rom
14.17.
the spiritual reign of Christ in the heart, is righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost; Therefore praise Christ for this above all his favors,
as Theodosius gave God greater thanks that he had made him a member of the
Church, then head of the Empire; warm thy heart therefore with the frequent
and serious thoughts of this work of Christ, and praise him for this, as for
the brightest Star shining in the Firmament of thy soul, as for the most
rich and orient pearl in the storehouse of thy heart, as for the most
beautiful and comely slower adorning the garden of thy inner-man. O praise him
for this, as for the sweetest freedom, the noblest crown, the choicest
workmanship, and liveliest evidence of his love communicable to the soul of
man. As this is the best, and most soule-reviving influence of Christ into the
heart of man: so for this pursue, and follow Christ Jesus with free and
frequent, cordial and joyous, gracious and everlasting praises? for without
this we are strangers to Christ, to the number of his faithful servants, to
all the Prerogatives and privileges which God ministers to his children, even
aliens to the commonwealth of Israel.

CHAP. VIII. Showing how all Gods people are but one.
THe second Alienation, expressing the misery of men in their corrupt and
carnal estate, an Alienation from the Commonwealth of Israel. Israel were
once the peculiar people of God, set apart by a holy Covenant unto God to be
his people above all the people of the earth, from the commonwealth of these
Israelites, the Gentiles before the coming of Christ were strangers, and
before their calling and conversion by the ministry of the Gospel, they were
wholly excluded from the Privileges and Prerogatives belonging to the
Israelitish people, as being strangers unto their commonwealth. And the
Apostle expresses their misery and dishonorable estate, by a Metaphor taken,
a iure Civitatis, from the Rights and Privileges belonging to a City, being no
Citizens, no members of this spiritual commonwealth, they were excluded from
the Laws, Immunities, Freedoms, and Privileges belonging to the same.

In the words we may observe,

1. The Title given to the Church and people of God, a Commonwealth.

2. The Exemption of all profane men from this Commonwealth, called Aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel.

1. Of the Title, which is not proper but metaphorical, and it may teach us,

Doct.
That Gods faithful people are a spiritual and mystical Commonwealth. As
they are termed a body consisting of many members of which Christ is the head;
a house consisting of many lively stones, whereof Christ is the head corner
stone; an Orchard composed of many Trees, of which Christ is the planter: so
they are also a spiritual, a mystical Commonwealth, whereof Christ is the
supreme Governor: And Christ's Church and faithful people are a spiritual
Commonwealth.

1. In respect of multitude. A Commonwealth consists of many persons, the
Church of Christ of many believers, as a body of many members, a house of many
stones, an orchard of many trees, a flock of many sheep, and an army of many
soldiers; though they be but few, a small number, comparatively in respect of
the profane multitude, like Gideons three hundred men to the Midianitish
Host, A little flock, a few, a remnant, one of a City, and two of a Tribe, as
the Scripture speaks; yet considered simply, and in themselves they are many.
One hundred forty and four thousand were Rev. 7.4.
sealed, Rev. 7.4. And the Prophet foretold of the conversion of the Isa 60.
abundance of the Sea, and of the coming of the forces, of the Gentiles to the
Church of Christ.

2. In respect of Submission and Obligation to one Law. The people of a
Commonwealth, though they be many, yet they are all guided by one Law. Thus
the Church of Christ, though they be many, and dispersed far abroad upon the
face of the earth, yet they are all subject to, and guided by one divine and
sacred Law; They walk all (as the Apostle says) by Phil. 3.
one Rule: All Israel were guided by one fiery pillar in their journeyes; All
the nations of the earth have one and the same Sun, ministering light unto them,
to guide them in their several goings: The believers of all Nations have one
and the same word of God, to be the light of their feet, and the lantern of
their paths. Christ prescribes one Law to all his Subjects, one rule of
believing, obeying and adoring him.

3. In respect of Subjection under one Governor. In a Commonwealth there is
one chief Ruler; in the Church, Christ is the supreme Governor: He is the
Head of this body, the King of this Commonwealth. As the body has but one
Head, and the commonwealth but one King: so the Church but one spiritual
Head, but one divine and heavenly King, which is Christ; therefore styled the
Ephesians. 1.21. Psalm. 26.
head over all things unto the Church, and a King set upon the holy hill of
Syon: The Church is the Spouse, and Christ the Bridegroom; the Church the
slocke, and Christ the chief shep heard; the Church the ship, and Christ the
Pilate; the Church the family, and Christ the Master of the house, styled by
^nt James, Iam. 4.12.
one Lawgiver, and we by voice from Heaven are commanded to hear him.

4. In respect of mutual and common interest in all spiritual good things.
All the members in a commonwealth have interest in the common privilege and
liberties belonging to that commonwealth. All the living members of the Church
of Christ, have claim and title to all the good things of Christ; they are all
sons of God, they are all the Lords freemen, they are all Citizens of the
new Jerusalem, they are all members of the same mystical body, they are all
heirs to the same inheritance, and partakers of the same promises and benefits
by Christ; All is theirs, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, all is theirs, and they are Christ's. There Sun is alike open and
obvious to the eye of the poor, and of the rich. Christ the Sun of
Righteousness is alike open and free in the communication of himself to the
soul of the poor, and rich believing Christian; yet this parity of believers
participation of Christ, takes not away the imparity of dominion and subjection
between themselves. He that is inferior in sanctification, may be superior in
external estate and jurisdiction: For as there are various degrees of state in
a commonwealth, so there are in the Church of Christ on earth.

Ex medico and medico* ex rustico and rustico; sed ex medico and rustico
5. In respect of Constitution and composition. A commonwealth, as Aristotle
observes, consists not of a Physician and a Physician, nor of a country man,
and a country man; but of a Physician and a country man: so the Church of
Christ consists not of a Pastor, and a Pastor, nor of a hearer, and a hearer;
but of a teacher and a hearer, they are neither all teachers, nor all hearers,
but some Pastors, and some Disciples, some teachers and some learners; as in an
army some are soldiers, and some are Captains; in a family, some are nurses,
and some are sacking babes; some therefore in the Church are commanded to
teach, and some are enjoined to learn.

6. In respect of separation and distinction. A commonwealth is separated and
distinguished from other Lands, by Laws, language, habit, privileges, etc.
The Church of Christ is separate and destinguished from all the residue of the
world; they are called out of the world, they are a 1 Pet. 2 9. Deuteronomy. 7.
royal Priesthood, a chosen generation, a peculiar people, called out of
darkness into a mavelous light. They are a holy people unto the Lord their
God, the Lord their God has taken them to be a special people unto himself,
above all the people that are upon the face of the earth: And they are
distinguished from all other people by their Original, they are borne of God;
by their Country, they are Citizens of the new Jerusalem; by their language,
they speak the language of Canaan, God has returned to them a pure language:
By their habit, they put on righteousness as a garment, their adorning is not
the putting on of gold, or plaiting of the hair, but the adorning of the
hidden man of the heart: To be glorious within is their choice, and special
ornament; they are distinguished from others as the living from the dead, as
the vine from the thorn, as the lamb from the wolf, as light from darkness:
God is their God, and they are his children, and they have privileges which no
other people have besides them.

7. In respect of unity. A commonwealth consisting of many particular persons,
makes but one politic body. All true believers are but one mystical body in
Christ; therefore the Church is called One. My beloved (says Christ) is one,
and there is one body, and one spirit (says the Apostle) one Calling, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of us all. The Church is of
one Lord, by one Baptism, into one mystical body, under one head, ruled by
one spirit, bound with one bond of hope and love, professing one faith, and
called with one Calling, to one heavenly Kingdom, built upon the foundation of
one Doctrine. As one soul does quicken the many members of the body: so the
Spirit does animate and enliven the whole Church. As in one Pomegranate there
are many kernels within one rind: so does one Church contain innumerable
people, through the unity of faith; having one Father regenerating them, one
spirit enlivening them, one light guiding them, one spiritual food nourishing
them, one Law binding them, and one Head ruling the in, they are most sweetly
and entirely one among themselves.

CHAP. IX. Persuading Subjection under one Head, Submission to one Law, and
unity between our selves.
THe Church and faithful people of Christ must learn from hence, Subjection
under one Head, Submission under one Law, and unity between themselves.

1. Subjection under one Head, Christ. To Christ is all power given both in
Heaven and in Earth, and to him must all be Subject. His dominion is from Ps.
72.8.11.
sea to sea, an I from the river to the ends of the earth, all Kings must fall
down before him, and all Nations must serve him, To him the Church must be
subject spiritually, their obedience must arise from a principle of grace, they
must worship him in John 4.24.
spirit and in truth: To him they must be subject heartily, not in show but in
truth, obeying from the Romans 6.17.
heart root that form of Doctrine which Christ has delivered to them: To him
they must be subject voluntarily without compulsion, they must be a willing
Psalm. 110.3.
people, his Law must be in their hearts, and they must delight to do his
will: To him they must subject themselves universally, in respect of the rule,
they must have respect unto all the Commandments, as Noah in building the Arc
had an eye to the whole pattern which was set before him; and in respect of
the whole man, all the faculties of the soul, and all the members of the body
must be obedient to him, as the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars did obeisance to
Joseph in his vision: Christ must be glorified both in our body, and in our
spirit: To Christ we must be constantly subject, our hearts must be Ps 119.112.
inclined to perform his statutes always even unto the end. Christ is the Head,
and we the members; Christ is the shepherd, and we the slocke; Christ is the
husband, and we the Spouse; and as all the members are fully subject to the
head, the slocke readily follows the voice of the shepherd, and the Spouse is
lovingly subject to the Bridegroom: so must we be fully, freely and lovingly
obedient unto Christ.

2. This teaches Submission unto one Law. The Church is one mystical
commonwealth, and must be subject unto one Law of Christ. All that builded the
Arc built by one pattern. The whole Church of Christ has one pattern,
according to which they must build their faith and their love, even the whole
Fabric of their worship and service. The ship has one compass by which it
roweth, and one Pilate by which it is guided: The Church is the ship, the Word
the Compass, and Christ the Pilate; by Christ and his Word must the whole
Church of God be ordered and ruled. The Word of God is a sure word, to which we
must give heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place. The Law of the
Lord is perfect, it needs no addition, as the Sun needs not the help of any
candle to increase his light in shining on them that travel. The Scriptures
are a complete and perfect School, profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. God gave Moses a perfect
pattern for the building of the Tabernacle without addition or dimunution.
Gods word is a perfect pattern, comprising the whole frame of man's
conversation: It is Gods prerogative to prescribe, and man's duty to conform.
Ye shall not add unto the word Which I command you (says the Lord) neither
shall you diminish ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of the
Lord your God which I command. All other Doctrines are darkness, and not
light, they cannot guide us, they are false plants, of man's, and not of Gods
planting, they bear no good fruit to feed us, and God the great Husbandman of
the vineyard will pluck them up; they are sand, he that builds upon them
sinks; they corrupt and adulterate the Doctrine and Religion of Christ, as the
tares the wheat, as the evil herb the Prophets pot. Man's service is no
service of Christ if it receive not it is rule from Christ; in vain, says
Christ, do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men. He
that mingles humane devices with his religious duties, makes it a humane, and
no divine service; As the Elements once mingled in a compound body do lose
their proper forms: so Religions mingled with humane traditions, and made
compounding parts of a mixed worship and service, do lose their forms, and
cease to be religious in Gods account. As silver mingled with brass does lose
the nature, and name of silver, and current coin, and will not pass with men,
the touchstone discovers it, and the skillful Goldsmith rejects it: Thus the
worship of God mixed with the dress of man's invention, loses both the name
and nature of true worship. The word discovers it to be counterfeit, and God
does not regard it, nor the performers of it: Of such therefore the Prophet
says, reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them. This alienates from Christ, it divides the heart, and places the fear,
trust, love, and joy of the soul upon some foreign thing, some Idol of man's
devising. A woman that embrace a stranger with her husband in her bosom, and
mingles strangers with her husband, is no more a chaste, and loving wife, her
heart is divided, and she is become an adulteress. The mingling of foreign
inventions with Christ's precepts in his services, is in Gods interpretation,
spiritual fornication, their hearts are gone from Christ their husband, they
are taken up with strange lovers. To this purpose is that of the Prophet Esaias,
the faithful City is become an Isa. 1.21.
harlot; and what other but this was Judah's whoredom for which the Lord
upbraideth her by the Prophet, saying, thou have played the harlot with many
Lovers, thou have embraced many foreign doctrines, thou have adulterated my
worship with many novell and strange inventions, these have drawn thy love
from me, and my truth, and thou have committed adultery with them. When humane
devices are made ingredients and compounding parts of Gods service, they are in
Gods account very shameful pollutions; and doubtless, he that in Gods worship
is an admirer of humane inventions, is no lover of the Lord Jesus: Oil will
not mix it self with water, nor iron with clay, no more will true Religion be
mixed with that which is corrupt; the Arc and Dagon cannot stand together;
Religion is not like lead, you cannot bow it, but like glass, break it you
may, bow it you cannot, mingle it, and you destroy it, it is no more Religion
but superstition, as silver mixed with dross is no more accounted silver but
dross, though it has some silver in it: Besides, it is treason in a
commonwealth, for any man to mingle the Laws of a foreign Prince with; the
Laws of his own Prince, no King will endure it; and what is this but
spiritual treason against Christ, to mingle humane devices, and foreign
traditions with Christ's precepts, the Lord will never endure it; therefore
mark what Christ says, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book; Therefore as we are a
spiritual commonwealth, so let us observe the Laws of Christ the spiritual
King of this Kingdom. Let us walk according to his rule, And peace shall be
upon us as upon the Israel of God.

3. This also teaches the Church and children of God unity between themselves.
A commonwealth must be at unity, as one body, they must join as one man: Thus
the Church, the spiritual commonwealth of Christ must be as a City that is
compact together, that is at Psalm 122.3.
unity within itself; First, they must be at unity in judgment, of Phil. 2.^.
one mind, as Saint Paul speaks, 1 Unity in judgment.
in all fundamental and necessary truths; as they have one word informing and
instructing them, one Spirit of God enlightening them: so they must be of one
mind, of one judgment and understanding in things belonging to salvation,
having (as Saint John says) the same anointing, teaching them all things; the
same Spirit, though not all in the same measure, enlightening them to judge and
to discern aright of the mind and will of God: Unity in judgment is very
effectual to breed unity in affection; discord and difference in the
apprehension of the truths of Christ proposed in the Gospel, does ordinarily
make an unhappy breach in men's affections; therefore let us all strive for one
and the same clear and through understanding of Gods revealed will, as
Scholars learning one lesson, by one and, the same rule, Let us as many (says
Paul) as be perfect, as have a true and clear knowledge of God in Christ, be
thus minded, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you. God by degrees so enlightens his children, that he makes them at
length men of the same understanding in things profitable to their salvation.

2. Unity in Affection Volumus and nos pacem, and non solum volumus, verum
etia^ rogamus; sed pacem Christi, pacem veram, pacem sine mimicitijs, pacem in
qui non sit bellum involutum pacem que non adversarios subijciat, sell inimicos
ju^gat. Hieron.
2. Labor for unity in affection, let the sacred fire of Christian and mutual
love be always burning upon the altar of your hearts. See (says Saint Peter)
that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. This is an ointment of a
sweet savor in the nostrils of God and men, like the ointment which the woman
powered on our Savior, that made the whole house where she was to cast a sweet
smell; Love makes both the persons and services of Gods servants very sweet and
odoriferous. This argues Gods gracious inhabitation in us, regeneration of us,
and holy workmanship upon us; for God is love, and he that loves, dwells in
God, and God in him. This is the character and cognizance of our being Christ's
Disciples. By this shall all men know (says Christ) that ye are my Disciples,
if ye love one another, and as the heat of the body is a Symptom of life in
the body; and as the light of the Sun assures us of the rising of the Sun: 1
John 4 16 John 15.35.
so this light and heat of love gives clear and comfortable evidence of our
spiritual quickening and interest in the first resurrection. By this (says the
Apostle) we know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren. 1 John 3.14.
As therefore our spiritual commonwealth is a commonwealth of peace, our
Prince a Prince of peace, our Law of faith and love, a Law of peace, our
Calling a Calling of peace, and all our fellow Subjects the Subjects of peace,
Let us love each other, and be at 1 These. 5.
peace amongst our selves.

3. Unity in Religion. Vna via ^veritas ad ^am Christus.
3. Labor for unity in Religion. As the whole commonwealth obey the King by
one Law: so let us worship and serve Christ by one Rule, the word of God; let
us all walked by one Light, the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; let us
all build upon one rock, Jesus Christ; other foundation then this can no man
lay; Let us all hearken to the voice of one shepherd, Jesus Christ, speaking
to us in his word; Let us all feed in one pasture, the Ordinances of God; Let
us all be clothed with one royal roabe of Christ his Righteousness, for the
justification of our souls; Let us all invocate and call on one God in the
name of one Mediator, Jesus Christ; Let us all worship God after one manner, in
truth and sincerity, according to Christ's own prescription, not having our
minds corrupted, and hearts adulterated, and alienated from 2 Cor. 11.3.
the simplicity that is in Christ, by carnal doctrines, and humane
observations; Let us receive all our direction from Christ, as the traveller
receives all his light from the Sun; Let us yield all our Subjection unto
Christ, as the soldiers were fully subject unto the Centurion; Let us have our
full and sole dependence upon Christ, as the house in the Parable was wholly
built upon the rock; Let us seek for all perfection in Christ, as the people
in the famine came all to Joseph to supply their wants; and let us refer all
our services to the honor and glory of Christ, and so shall we give testimony
of our happy union in Christ's Religion.

4. Strive for unity in opposing sin and Satan's Kingdom. 4 Unity in opposing
Sin.
A commonwealth is united against a public and common adversary; Satan and
sin are the common adversaries of our souls, against these let us unite our
forces, by mutual watchfulness one over another, fervent prayer each for
other, and by the ministration of holy instruction, gracious admonition, and
Christian encouragement one toward another, considering one another, and,
provoking one another, according to the Apostles rule, to love and to good
works. The children of Israel arose as one man, and went up against Gibeah. The
Lords people should arise as one man against the powers of ungodliness, to
suppress the Kingdom and works of the Prince of darkness. Joab and Abishai
made a Covenant to help one another against the Syrians, and the children of
Ammon: thus should Gods children covenant together, and help each other against
their corruptions, and temptations, every man endeavoring the welfare of
another man's soul, as his own. Were the souls of Gods children thus happily
and graciously united, they would undoubtedly prove a flourishing
commonwealth, a glorious people, and a great honor to Christ, who reigns as
King over them.

CHAP. X. Pressing the seeking of the welfare of Christ's Church.
4. THis likewise presses on us the ministration of our best help and
assistance to the Church of Christ. Pressing to seek of the welfare of the
Church with the grounds thereof.
The members of a commonwealth endeavor the welfare and safety of the,
commonwealth, they prefer it above their own private good: The members of
Christ's spiritual commonwealth should do the like for Christ's Church; It is
the Lords injunction, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, be instant with God for
the prosperity, safety, increase, and flourishing estate of his Church. What
though God watch over it, and have promised protection to it; yet thou must
also pray for, and labor the prosperity thereof, otherwise how can thou
rejoice in the welfare of the same. To this duty the very relation between us
and the Church should lead us; the Church is the body whereof we are members,
do not all the members in the body natural labor the welfare of the whole?
How can the members of the mystical body of Christ do less, unless they
will prove themselves unnatural. Our Sympathy with the Churches, afflictions
should persuade us to this, we must apprehend, the calamity which rests upon
the Church, as resting upon our own persons: If one member (says Saint Paul)
do suffer, all the members suffer with it. A dead member indeed has no
sympathy with the rest; but the living member has a fellow-feeling, a quick
and exquisite sense within, when any of the members are pained or hazarded. Who
is weak (says Paul) and I am not weak, who is offended, and I burn not. The
blessing which is attendant on our endeavoring the welfare of the Church, is
an Argument of great force to move us to this work; hereof the Lord says,
they shall prosper that love thee: They that love thee, they that are careful
for thee, solicitous and studious to maintain soundness of Doctrine and
purity of divine worship in thee; they that humble themselves in thy behalf,
when troubles are upon thee; they that put themselves forth to the utmost, to
relieve thee in thy wants, to comfort thee in thy sorrows, to assist thee
against thy opposers; they shall prosper, it shall be well with them, they
shall not go without a blessing, their work and labor of Love shall not be
forgotten. Besides, our welfare is very much dependant upon the welfare of the
whole Church of Christ: The welfare of every member in a commonwealth, and in
a body natural, is deeply interested in the prosperity and good success of
the whole. Thus the prosperity or fall of the Church in general, is our fall
or prosperity in particular. The strengthening of some part of a building is a
strengthening and a beautifying of the whole building; the fall of any part is
a weakening, a disgrace, a prejudice to the whole; and thus it is in this case,
We live (says Paul) if ye stand fast in the says, if ye abide in Christ,
thrive in grace, and make a gracious progress in the ways of life, then we
live, then we rejoice, and are full of comfort, then our hearts are much
strengthened in the Lord. Our Subjection to changes, miseries, and troubles,
should very much quicken us to the present commiseration of the rest of Christ's
afflicted members, the Lord may make us drink of the same cup, as in the
prophecye of Jeremy the Lord caused the cup of his wrath to go round, he made
all the Nations to drink thereof, and if we have no compassion on others now,
who shall have compassion upon us then, if we withdraw our helping hand from
others, who shall reach forth the hand of assistance unto us; for God does so
order it in the course of his providence, that look what measure we meet to
others in their distress, the same shall men measure again to us in our
necessity. Besides, this is a work very acceptable to God, and very profitable
to the Church of God; doubtless it pleased David well when Joab sought to
bring home Absolon to him, and when Abner undertook to bring about all Israel.
Thus when we endeavor to reconcile God and his Church, to bring men about to
God, by our prayers, exhortations, and their repentance, is a work very
pleasing unto God; and herein we prove instruments of the greatest honor,
game, and comfort to our fellow brethren. O therefore I as we are all one
commonwealth, let us labor the good of this our commonwealth, Let
Magistrates and Ministers be to the Church like the siery pillar to Israel, a
light, and a defense; Let Ministers like Bees make the honey, compose sweet and
wholesome Doctrine, gathered from the flowers growing in the garden of the
sacred Scriptures, and so frame it that it may be sweeter then the honey or the
honey-combe unto the palate of the Church; and let Magistrates like hives
preserve this honey of wholesome Doctrine, that nothing do adulterate it; Let
Ministers by the executive power of the Word and Sacraments, and Magistrates by
their directive and coactive power demean themselves to the great behoof and
benefit of Gods Church; and as Moses and Aaron brought Israel out of Egypt, so
let both Magistrate and Minister labor the spiritual and corporal freedom
of the Lords people: And as every member, joint and sinew in the body natural,
performs his office for the good of the whole; so let Christ's members from the
highest to the lowest, according to their several places, stations and
abilities, promote the welfare of Christ's Church and servants.

CHAP. XI. Treating of Carnal man's Alienation from Christ's Church.
THe second thing is the Exemption of all profane men from this commonwealth,
from the Church of Christ, and all the spiritual prerogatives and privileges
belonging thereunto. The Gentiles before the coming of Christ were altogether
aliens hereunto, having no place at all in this commonwealth: Profane men
since the coming of Christ, though they be in this commonwealth, living
within the pale of the visible Church, as the unclean beasts within the Arc
yet they are also aliens to this commonwealth, aliens to that holy and
e^ectuall vocation wherewith this commonwealth is called, aliens to the
heavenly and saving power of that Word and Spirit, by which this commonwealth
is ruled and guided, aliens to that sweet and gracious Communion which the
members of this commonwealth have with Christ by faith, and among themselves
by love; and this is one great misery of all corrupt and carnal men, being
without Christ, they are also aliens to the commonwealth of his Israel; as he
that is an alien to the King, is an alien to that commonwealth which is under
the King. Whence observe, That,

All Profane and carnal persons are aliens to the true Church of Christ and
all the spiritual privileges thereof. Doct.
The Lepers under the Law were excluded the camp, separated from the society of
clean persons, showing the effect of the Law in sinners, which drives them
from the communion of God and his people, till by repentance and faith they
come unto Christ; and also figuring the putting and excluding of all unclean
sinners, from the Church of Christ, and the privileges thereof, according to
the charge of the Apostle, put away 1 Cor. 5.13.
from among your selves that wicked person. Adam eating the forbidden fruit was
debarred from the Tree of Life, and shut out of the Garden of Eden: The
posterity of Adam feed^ng upon the forbidden fruit of sin, making a trade and
practice of sin, are excluded from Christ, the true Tree of Life, and shut
out of the Church of Christ, the enclosed Garden of which Christ is the Keeper
and dresser. Hence profane men living within the pale of the Church, are
likened to Mat. 3 12.
chafe mingled among the wheat in the floor, which though it be among the
wheat, yet it is not of the wheat: To a man at the wedding feast, without a
Mat. 22.12.
wedding garment, who though he was among the guests, yet he was not of the
number of the true and welcome guests, and therefore was cast out, as having of
right no place there; and to thorns and briars, which thou^h they sometime
grow within the Orchard, yet are not Trees of the Orchard, not planted,
watered, and manured by the Keeper of the Orchard, as other Trees are. And for
this the Church is styled a Cant. 4.12.
Garden enclosed, in respect of Gods protection, and preservation of her, in
respect of her separation from them that are profane and carnal, by grace and
holy calling, and for the Churches care and vigilance, that no enemies invade
her, that no unclean thing, or vicious persons pollute and defile her. And for
this cause the Church is termed a chaste virgin, 2 Cor. 11.2.
for her internal and external purity, for her holy chastity, for her
fidelity and fervent love to her husband Christ, for her alienation from the
world, from all idolatry and false worship, and for her separation and
distinction from all that pollute and defile themselves with Idols, the world,
or any carnal lusts. And the Church is charged to preserve and keep her self
from all intimate and familiar communion with them that are openly scandalous
and unclean. I have 1 Cor. 5 11.
written unto you (says Saint Paul) not to keep company, If any man that is
called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or
a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, no not to eat, not familiarly
and friendly to converse: He forbids not the exercise of the necessary offices
of humanity and charity toward them, but the having of intimate communion with
them. And if any man (says the Apostle to the Thessalonians) obey not our Word
by this Epistle, but be rebellious and obstinate against the holy and wholesome
Doctrine delivered, 2 These. 3.14.
note that man and have no company with him: Whereby we see, that the Lord
denies them that are obstinate and carnal, communion with such as are truly
holy, and spiritual; there can be no sweet and seemly fellowship between
common harlots and chaste virgins. What 2 Cor. 6.14.
fellowship (says Paul) has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? Wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters: Carnal men are not spiritual brethren to them that
are Gods children, they are not begotten of the same heavenly parent, they are
not united to the same spiritual head, they are not endowed with the same
gracious qualities, and therefore are aliens to Gods sons and daughters. And
Rev. 21.15.
without (says Christ) are dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and
murderers and idolaters and whosoever loves and makes a lie: these are
without, without the number of Gods holy and sanctified Church and people,
without the Prerogatives granted to Gods gracious children, without the company
of the Citizens of the new Jerusalem here, and without glory and happiness
hereafter; and of such S. John says expressly, however they have a place within
the Church, yet they are not of the Church, They went 1 Ioh. 2 29.
out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would
no doubt have continued with us, but they went out that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us.

CHAP. XII. Laying down the grounds of carnal man's alienation from the true
church of Christ.
THe alienation of profane men from the true Church of Christ is manifest.

1. By their alienation from the Head of the Church; Grounds of alienation from
the Church of Christ.

The head.


they are strangers to Christ, they Col. 2.18.
hold not the Head (says the Apostle) from which all the body by joints and
bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together increases with the
increase of God; they hold not Christ, but are strangers to the Ephesians 4.18.
life of Christ, as withered branches are strangers to the life of the root,
Christ does not live in them; they are strangers to the Ioh. 1.5.
knowledge of Christ, as blind men are strangers to the light of the Sun, the
light shines in the darkness, but the darkness comprehends it not, the
Gospel is hidden to them; they are strangers to the dominion of Christ, he
does not reign spiritually within them, though they profess they know Christ,
yet they be reprobate and Tit. 1.16.
disobedient to every good work; they are strangers to the holy and gracious.
Mat. 23.33.
presence of Christ, Christ does not dwell in their hearts by Faith,
possessing, protecting and beautifying then souls, as a dweller his house;
directing and guiding their goings to the haven of peace, as a Pilot his Ship:
they are strangers to the love of Christ, they are not espoused to him as a 2
Cor. 11.2.
chaste Virgin; to the operation of Christ, he is not unto them as a Mat. 3.
Refiners fire and Fullers soap purifying them as gold and silver to offer unto
the Lord an offering of Righteousness; and also to the fulness of Christ, he
is a sealed well of whose waters their souls drink not; though they live
within the pale of the Church, and come to the ordinances of Christ, yet as
Solomon spoke in another case, Of the way Prove. 30.18
of a Ship in the Sea, of an Eagle in the Air, and of a Serpent upon a stone;
so ^^^y we say of the way of Christ in his ordinances with the souls of
carnal men, it leaves no track behind it, works no change, imprints no
character of holiness, they still continue strangers to Christ, and having no
communion with the Head, they are far from fellowship with the Members.

2. Seed of the Church.
2. By their being d^stitute of the Seed of the Church: the Church of Christ is
begotten of a holy Seed, the word of God and virtue of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.23.
Begotten (says St. Peter) of an immortal Seed; the Word of God preached,
sown and received into their hearts, becomes the instrument of their
regeneration and new birth; and whosoever (says S. John) is borne of God does
not commit sin, for his 1 John 3.9.
seed, that is the virtue of the Holy Ghost, working faith and holiness by the
word preached, abides in him: Now of this seed carnal men are altogether
destitute, they are without the seed of the word, they hide it not in their
hearts, they let it lie as seed above ground, it takes no root in them, either
the stoninesse of their hearts will not admit it, or the thorns of worldly
cares choke it: it is as dew upon the Rock, it does Heb. 4.2. Rom 7.18.
not profit them, it brings forth no saving effect within them, and for the
seed of the Spirit, they have no principle of grace, or new life within them;
their souls are houses empty of all spiritual good; They are Jude v.19.
sensual (says S. Jude) corrupt, carnal and earthly in their understandings,
imaginations, affections and practice even in the very whole frame, fabric and
disposition of their souls: Not having the Spirit, regenerating and quickening
them, enlightening and sanctifying them, having no seed, no principle of grace
within them, and being destitute of the seed of the Church, they are
undoubtedly strangers to the true Church, they are in the Church, but as John 8
35. Heb. 12.8.

Quality of Church.


Servants or Bastards in a Family, they are not the genuine and proper children
of the Church.

3. By their being aliens to the condition and quality of the Church of Christ:
the Church of Christ is qualified with grace, a chosen 1 Pet. 2.9.
generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, called out of darkness
into a mavelous light, likened for their spiritual splendor of sanctity to
the Cant 2.2.
Lilly among the thorns, to the Cant. 4.9.
Dove among the birds, to the Cant 6.10.
Sun, Moon and Morning among the lights, to the Psalm. 45.
Queen in gold of Ophir among women, and to a Rev. 12.1.
Woman clothed with the Sun, having twelve stars upon her head, and the Moon
under her feet: The Church being very beautiful and glorious thorough Christ's
communication of his graces to her; the Church receiving of his fulness Ioh
1.16.
grace for grace, as the child receives of the Father limb for limb; but all
profane and carnal men are far from this quality and condition of holiness,
being likened unto Swine for their uncleanness and wallowing in the mire of
sin, Mat.7.
to Goats for their breaking over the hedge of Gods commandments,
troublesomenesse to others and unsavourines of their conversations; as full of
sin as a Serpent of poison, a rotten sepulcher of dead men's bones, or the Sea
of waters, full of all unrighteousness, says S. Paul, though they live within
the pale of the Church and take upon them a form of godliness, yet they are
but like the Beast in the Revelation, which had two horns like a Rev. 13.
Lamb, but spoke as a Dragon; thus these men pretend Christ, but serve Satan.

4. 4. Exclusion from the Covenant.
By their Exclusion from the covenant which God has made with his Church, to
give it life, reconciliation, happiness and every good thing by Christ; a
covenant made with believers, and such as fear God, my Mal 2.5.
Covenant, says the Lord, of Levi, was with him of life and peace, and I gave
them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me and was afraid before my
name. Gods Covenant is not promiscuous to all sorts of persons, chosen,
reprobates, believers and infidels, but to such as are truly gracious, his
Covenant is with them that are his friends, and not with his enemies, God
sanctifies all them whom he intends shall have benefit by his Covenant. This
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their Ier. 31.33.
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Such alone are within the Covenant of God, as are
sanctified by the Spirit of God: The Promise indeed is general, but the
condition is special, He that Mar. 16.16. Ios. 15.
believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned, though he be baptized, Caleb made a general Promise to all his
Soldiers, whosoever should smite Kiriath Sephar and take it should marry his
Daughter Acsah, yet Othniel took it, and he alone had her to wife: God makes
a Promise whosoever believes and repents shall be saved by Christ, yet not
all, but only he that believes and repents, he that smites Kiriath Sephar,
that overcomes Satan, himself and the world, has Christ to husband; to him
that Rev. 2.17.
overcomes is given to eat of the hidden Manna; but to the wicked God says,
Psalm 50.
What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth and hate to he
reformed. Wicked men therefore being strangers to the Covenant between God and
his Church, are also aliens to the Church.

5. By their estrangement from the life, light, faith, liberty, wedlock of the
Church with Christ, and her gracious receivings from Christ. Estrangement from
1. Life.
They are estranged, 1. From the life of the Church; as the dead are estranged
from the life of the living, Gal. 2 20. Romans 6.4. Romans 14.8. Ephesians. 2.
so are corrupt and sinful men from the life of Gods Church and children, Gods
children are quickened by the Spirit, Christ lives in them, as the root in the
branches, as the head in the members, 1 Timothy 5. Rev. 3.1.
they walk in newness of life, they live to God and Christ; but carnal men
are dead in sins, dead whiles they live like the wanton widow, though they
profess Christ and are reputed the members of Christ, yet with the Angel of
Sardis, they have but only a name that they live, they are spiritually dead
indeed.

2. They are estranged from the light of the Church, 2. Light.
though they have the same light of Doctrine shining on them, which shines on
Gods children, as the blind has the same, light shining on him, that shines on
such as have their eyes open, yet they see nothing of God and Christ clearly
and comfortably by it, the Isa. 8.16.
testimony is bound up, and the Law is sealed among the Disciples. Such alone
as are taught of God, have the clear and saving knowledge of his will and
counsel. The mystery of godliness is to carnal men like Sampsons riddle to
the Philistines, Judge 14.
they cannot interpret it without the help of Gods Spirit, it is a strange
language which they understand not, a Isa. 29.11.
sealed book which they cannot open; carnal men live in great blindness
under plentiful means of Knowledge, They stumble at the noonday as at the
midnight.

3. They are estranged from the faith of the Church; 3. Faith. 1 King 13 4.
their Faith like Jeroboams arm is withered, they cannot lay hold upon Christ,
they cannot build upon Christ, as the Wiseman built his house upon the Rock:
Their souls are not rooted in Christ, as the tree is rooted in the Earth; they
do not cleave to Christ, as the heart of the wife cleaves to the Husband, 2 Samuel 20.1.
as sometime the men of Judah clave to David; they do not single out Christ,
and take him to themselves as their Rock, as their glory, as their strength
and refuge, they do not betake themselves to Christ, as the chickens betake
themselves to the Hen, the Bees to the hive, the Conies to the Rock, and as the
men that were in debt, distress and discontent betook themselves to David, 1 Samuel 22.1
and made him their Captain; they do not stay on Christ, put on and apply
Christ unto themselves, and themselves to Christ, as the Church and children of
God do as the Spouse of Christ does; their faith is a temporary and vanishing
faith, a Tree without roots, that soon withers, a dead faith, there is no life
and power in it, no saving fruit grows upon it.

4 Liberty.
4. They are estranged from the liberty of the Church. Christ's Church and
children are Gods 1 Cor. 7.
freemen; and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is 2 Cor. 3.17.
liberty: Liberty from the power of sin, tyranny of Satan, and servitude of
the world; liberty to know God, as the open eye is free to see; to move, and
incline to God, as the River is free to move and slow toward the Sea; to
believe in Gods promise; to receive Christ, as the sound hand is free to
receive the gift, and free to love Christ, as the heart of the Bride is free to
love the Bridegroom: All carnal men are great strangers to this freedom,
they are captives to Satan, servants to the world, prisoners to their own
lusts, bowed down to the world, like the woman in the Gospel that had a
spirit of Luke 13.13.
infirmity, as unable to look up to God, or to the things which are above, as
unable to discern the things of God, as the blind to discern colors, as
unable to walk in the ways of God, Acts 12.7.
as the dead are unable to walk upon the earth, as fast shut up in the prison
of Satan, and their own corruption, as ever Peter was in Herod's prison.

5. Wedlock.
5. They are estranged from the wedlock of the Church with Christ. True
believers are Christ's Spouse, betrothed unto Christ, Ephesians. 5.
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, one mystical Christ, as man and
wife are one matrimonial flesh; but carnal men are far from this wedlock,
they take not Christ unto themselves as the husband of their souls, they have
not the love and joy of a Spouse in Christ, they keep not their souls chaste
and pure to Christ; Iam. 4.4.
they commit fornication and adultery with Idols, and the world, and are
divorced from Christ, they shamefully de^ile themselves, and make themselves an
abomination in the eyes of Christ.

6. Receivings.
6. They are estranged from the Churches receivings from Christ. True believers
receive of Christ's fullness; they receive life, and light, and power from
Christ, as the eye receives light from the Sun, the branch life from the root,
and the body power from the soul; they receive the Spirit of Christ, and are
quickened; they receive the word of Christ, and are edefied; they receive the
promise of Christ, and are established; they receive the forgiveness of sins
by Christ, and are comforted; but carnal men like a company of broken
cisternes, and withered branches, receive nothing from Christ Jesus, Christ
comes among them in his Gospel, but they receive him not; he comes to them
by his Ministers, but they receive not their witness, they shut the doors of
their hearts against Christ, he stands without, and knocks, but they open not,
they give him no entertainment. Christ spends his strength in vain, and his
labor for naught amongst them; and by all these things they make manifest
their Alienation from the Church of Christ, and all the special privileges
and prerogatives thereof.

CHAP. XIII. Discoursing of the unhappy condition, and impossibility of their
salvation who are strangers to the true Church.
THis discovers the unhappy condition of all carnal and unholy people, Unhappy
condition of strangers to the true Church.
though they live within the pale of the Church, yet they are all aliens to the
Church; though they be in the Church, yet they are not of the Church, as nasty
humors are in the body, yet no member, no part nor parcel of the body; though
they be within the School of Christ, yet they are no true Disciples of Christ,
they are like them of whom Saint Paul speaks, who are always learning, and
never come to the knowleege of the truth: Though they are within the pale of
Christ's Orchard, yet they are but false slips, no Trees of Righteousness of
Christ's planting: Though they be in Christ Sacramentally, yet they are but as
dead members, or wooden legs in a body, or withered branches in a vine;
wanting the Spirit of Christ, they have no spiritual life, sense, or motion in
them: Though they take upon them the name of Christ, yet they do not partake
of the nature of Christ, as blazing Stars have the name, but not the nature
of Stars: Though they verbally profess Christ, yet they actually deny
Christ, in works (says the Apostle) they deny him; they are seeming, but no
true Christians; they do but with Jeroboams wife, disguise, and feign
themselves to be others then they are: As they in the Church of Smyrna said,
they were Jews, and yet were not so, but a Synagogue of Satan. Thus many say
they are Christians, who indeed are not in Christ Jesus, but are the Synagogue
of Satan, a cage of unclean birds; and though they be ecclesiastically holy,
by virtue of their natural generation of Christian parents, yet they are not
spiritually and truly holy, because they want that regeneration, which is the
work of Gods Spirit; and though they enjoy some outward privileges by their
being within the Church, yet they enjoy not Christ and his benefits, because
they are not truly living members of the Church: And this is a great misery, to
be an alien to the true Church of Christ; he that is an alien to this Church of
Christ, is an alien to Christ, Christ does not enliven nor enlighten him,
Christ does not profit him. A member separated from the body is separated from
the head, has no influence from the head; he that is a stranger to the
Church, is a stranger to the promise, for the promise is to them whom God Act.
2.39.
calls outwardly by his Word, and inwardly by his Spirit; he is a stranger to
the love of Christ, Christ's Church is the object of Christ's love, Christ Ephesians.
5.25.
loved the Church, says Saint Paul, and gave himself for it; he is a stranger
to the blessed and gracious presence of Christ, Christ's presence is with his
Church, he delights to walk among the Rev. 1.13.
candlestickes, sanctified souls are his Temple, his dwelling, his Isa. 11.10.
glorious rest; he is a stranger to the comfortable communications of Christ,
Christ reveals and opens himself to his Church and children, as a glorious
Sun, as a loving Bridegroom; to them he communicates himself, as the Psalm.
72.6.
dew upon the ground, and as the rain upon the grass; he gives them his Cant.
7.12.
love, and all the comforts of his Spirit; but to profane men, Christ is as a
sealed fountain of whom they drink not, a hidden Manna of whom they taste
not; he that is an alien to the Church is without the protection and salvation
of Christ; they that were without the Arc, had no safety from the waters, and
surely they that are without the Church, I mean, without that faith,
holiness, love, and gracious communion, which is proper to Gods children, are
without salvation. And this is the misery of carnal men living in the Church,
and not living the life of them that are the true Church of Christ indeed, and
such men indeed are a great dishonor to the Church, as spots in the face,
spots and blemishes, as Saint Peter terms them; a burden to the Church, as
dead members to the body; a trouble to the Church, as Jonah to the ship,
raising the stormy tempest of Gods wrath against it; and therefore should be
wiped away, cut off, and cast out, by the censures of the Church; not for
everlasting condemnation, but for their humiliation and reformation; for the 1
Cor. 5.5.
destruction of the flesh, that their spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, according to the Apostles rule.

This opens the impossibility of the salvation of corrupt and carnal men, as
such, and as long as they continue such, Salvation of carnal man how
impossible.
for being such, they are aliens to the Church of Christ, to the spiritual
commonwealth of Christ's Israel. As all that were out of the Arc perished in
the deluge of waters: so all that are out of the Church, not living members of
this commonwealth, do perish in the deluge of Gods wrath. Such as are by the
power of their profaneness alienated from the Church of Christ, the company
of them that are effectually called and sanctified, they are,

1. Without God. 1. Without God.
He that has not the Church for his Mother, has not God for his Father; he
that is not of the new Jerusalem, whom the Apostle terms the Gal. 4.26.
Mother of us all, for her bringing forth children spiritually unto God; he
that is not of her, is not of God; he that is not a child in this spiritual
and heavenly family, is not borne of God; therefore the Apostle says of them
that are the true members of this Church. Ephesians. 2.19.
Ye are no more strangers and forrainers, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God.

2. 2. Without Christ.
He that is by his profaneness an alien to the Church of Christ, is an alien
to Christ; he that is an alien to the commonwealth, is an alien to the King;
he that is not one of Christ's flock, cannot have Christ for his Shepherd, and
without Christ there is Acts 4.12.
no salvation.

3 Without Regeneration.
3. He that is an alien to the Church of Christ, is estranged from regeneration,
renovation, illumination, sanctification, remission, donation of the Spirit,
and the promise of the eternal inheritance. Effects and fruits of the Word and
Spirit in them that are effectually called, properties and prerogatives
belonging only to Christ's holy and gracious people, and without these there is
no salvation: These (says Chemnitius) God, 1st a, Deus, verbum, fides,
Ecclesiae salus, vita aeterna, etc. Ephesians. 4 3, 4.
the Word, Faith, the Church, salvation and life eternal are very intimously
knit and joined together; and accordingly the Apostle, there is one Body, and
one Spirit, one Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of all who is above all, and through all, and in you all. To him therefore that
is not of this sacred company and Church of Christ, the Spirit is no
Sanctifier, Christ no Redeemer, God no Father, Baptism no Seal, and Faith no
Instrument of Justification; and therefore unless man be of this sacred
company, there is no salvation; they that leap out of the ship into the Sea
perish; they that forsake the ship of Christ's Church, and hold not communion by
faith and love with Gods Saints, perish in the Sea of this world; all the
Citizens of Jericho who were out of Rahabs house, perished with fire and the
sword. All that are out of Gods house, or to speak in the Apostles words, who
are not built up a spiritual house to God, are liable to the fire and sword of
Gods wrath.

CHAP. XIV. Discovering the vanity of carnal man's applauding and pleasing
himself with being borne within the Church.
The vanity of sinful man's boasting of being within the Church.
HEre may we likewise see, how vain, nay how dangerous it is for man to applaud
and please himself in being borne within the pale of the Church, and having
the external use of Gods Ordinances, continuing under the power of sinful
lusts, because remaining under the command and power of sin, he is an alien
to the Church, even whiles he lives within the Church; bless not therefore
your selves in this, build not your salvation upon such sandy ground. There was
in Abraham's house a child of the bondwoman as well as of the free, they are
not all Romans 9.
children (says Saint Paul) because they are Abraham's seed. There are within
the house of the visible Church, children of Hagar as well as of Sarah; they
who are the bondmen of corruption, as well as they who are the Lords freemen.
Man's outward participation of Gods Ordinances is no assured evidence of his
inward participation of Christ Jesus: The hearts of Ezekiels hearers went after
their Ezekiel. 33.31
covetousness; Herod lived in Mar. 6.
incest when he attended the ministry of the Baptist; the Sadduces were a very
generation of Mat. 3.
vipers, when they came to the Baptism of John; the very City of Jerusalem,
even whiles it had the glorious name and title of Gods Church, was become an
Isa 1.
harlot, her silver was become dross, and her wine mixed with water. It is an
easier thing to wait on Gods Ordinances, then it is to lay aside our
corruptions. Men's outward profession is not always seconded with a spiritual
change and reformation. Iether had a Judge. 8.22.
sword, but he had no strength, no courage to draw it, to slay Zeba and
Zalmunna with it. Many have the Word and Sacrament, the Oracles of God, the
Sword of the Spirit; but they have no heart to use them, they do not apply
them to the mortification of their corruptions. It is not the having, but the
gracious working of the word of God, which proves a man to be the child of
God. The lame man lay many years at John 5.4, 5.
Bethesda, his lameship not cured; many live many years within the pale of the
Church, under the powerful ministry of the word, and yet no spiritual cure
wrought upon their souls; the disease of sin still continues and increases
upon them: Do not therefore boast and glory that you are the children of the
Church, as the Pharisees sometimes boasted, that they were the John 8.
children of Abraham; for as Christ said to them, if you were the children of
Abraham you would do the works of Abraham: Thus if you were the genuine and
natural children of the Church, you would do the works of them, that are the
Church and children of God; and be assured of this, though thou live within the
pale of the Church, yet if thou live under the power of any profane lust, thou
art,

1. Carnal man living within the Church, is 1. An unbeliever.
1. An unbeleever, thou receivest not Christ into thy soul, thou buildest not
upon the rock, but upon the sand, and thou will sink at the last; for faith
where it is, is victorious, it overcomes Satan, the world, and every lust, it
purifies the heart, and makes man a holy Temple to the Lord, it overturnes all
the holds of sin, it drives all base lusts out of the heart, as Christ
overturned the Tables, and drove the buyers and sellers out of his Fathers
house.

2. An hypocrite
2. Thou art a very hypocrite, a cursed counterfeit, a whited sepulcher, full of
dead men's bones within, like the Locusts which had the face of a man, and the
hair of a woman without, but the teeth of a Lion within, and the tail of a
Scorpion behind: Thus though thou have the face of a Christian without, yet
thou have the rapine of a Lion, and the poison of a Scorpion, the venom of all
sin within, and wilt have the portion of an hypocrite at last.

3. A defiler of sacred things.
3. Thou art a defiler of things sacred, an abuser of Gods Ordinances, one that
turnest the means of life into an occasion of death; the evil herb turned
the Prophets pot into a pot of death; the evil of sin swaying in thy soul,
turns the word of life into the savor of death; Like the spider, thou suckest
poison out of the flower of that Word and Sacrament, which in it self is
sweeter then the honey, or the honey-combe.

4. A scandal to the Church.
4. Thou art a scandal to the Church of Christ where thou live; thou art a
blemish to the Christian name, as an ulcer to the face, as a dead member to the
body; for through such, as the Apostle says, is the name of God blasphemed;
misliving Christians are of all persons the greatest dishonor to Christ Jesus.

5. Greatest condemnation.
Lastly, be assured thy condemnation will be greatest, thy torment the severest;
They that come nearest to Heaven by their outward calling and profession, and
yet are strangers to the life and power of godliness, shall sink lowest into
hell, and drink deepest of the cup of Gods vengeance; To such therefore our
Savior says, it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment then for them.

4. Exhortation to the putting away of sin.
4. Are all profane men aliens to the Church of Christ, though they live within
the pale thereof? Then let all such as live within the Church, learn by this,
to purge out, and put away all profaneness, to search and seek for, and
furnish themselves with all saving gifts and graces, the proper characters of
the living members of the true Church of Christ, knowing as the Apostle says,
that he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which
is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, whose
Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of men, but of God. It is not man's naked profession of Christ,
but his inward sanctification that makes him a true Christian, and holiness is
the honorable and inseparable Adiunct of Christ's Church, called by the Apostle
a Church 1 Cor. 14.33.
of Saints; because Christ who is the head of this Church is holy, and makes
them partakers of his holiness, separates them from the world by a holy
calling, commits his holy word unto them, causes it to dwell in them, and
bestows his holy Spirit upon them, and works holiness within them; and as
Christ who is the head of the Church, was according to the flesh, conceived of
the Holy Ghost: so is the Church the mystical body of Christ, sanctified by
the holy Spirit; and as the fullness of the Godhead dwells personally in the
personal body of Christ: so dwell the three Persons of the Trinity mystically
and spiritually in the mystical body of Christ, and all the living members of
the same; therefore as we profess our selves to be the children of God, a God
absolutely and infinitely holy, so let us be holy in all manner of
conversation, as he that has called us is holy; as we profess our selves to
be the members of Christ, who is a holy head, so let us conform our selves to
Christ, as the members in the body natural are conformed to the head; and as
we are styled the Bride of Christ, so let us feel in our hearts the sweet and
heavenly motion of the holy Spirit, the pledge of Christ's love; and as the
Bridegroom loves, cloatheth, adorneth and defends his Bride, thus let us
labor to discern Christ's shedding abroad his love into our hearts, clothing
us with his righteousness, adorning us with his graces, and defending us by
his blessed power, and presence; and as we are called children of light, so let
the light of grace in us, like the light in the firmament, shine more and more
unto the perfect day; the more we shine in holiness, the more sweetness shall
we find in Gods Ordinances, the greater tranquillity shall we have in our own
consciences, the more amiable shall we be in the eyes of Christ Jesus, the more
shall we beautify the Church of Christ, whereof we are members; and as the
vessels of the transportative Tabernacle were at length translated into
Solomon's Temple, so shall we after our ambulatory and mutable condition in the
Church militant, be translated to rest, and reign for ever in the Church
triumphant.

CHAP. XV. Handling carnal Man's estrangement from the Covenant.
THe third Alienation, declaring the misery of carnal and sinful man, is an
Alienation from the Covenants of God, termed strangers from the Covenants of
promise. Man's happiness is built upon his interest in Gods gracious promise;
the strangers to this promise are the most unhappy of all persons. Carnal men
are aliens to Christ, to the members of Christ, to Christ's commonwealth, and
to all the prerogatives and privileges thereof; strangers to the Covenants of
promise made in and through Christ: God made, and often renewed, and repeated
his Covenants and promises with the Israelitish people, concerning their
salvation in and by Christ. In the beginning the Lord made this Covenant with
our first Parents, promising that the Gen ^ 15.
seed of the woman, which is Christ, should break the serpents head; the Lord
renewed it with Abraham, and his seed, saying, I Genesis 17.7.
will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting Covenant to be a God unto thee, and thy
seed after thee; and of the Israelitish people in this respect, speaks Moses,
What Nation is there so great who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our
God is in all things that we call upon him for, and what Nation is there so
great that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law which I
set before you this day. Now to these Statutes, Oracles and Promises, the
Gentiles before the coming of Christ were strangers, they no way appertained
to them; and to the saving fruit and benefit of this Covenant of Grace,
Salvation and everlasting life, all profane men since the coming of Christ,
remaining without Christ, being no living Members of the mystical body of
Christ, no loyal Subjects in the commonwealth of Christ: To this Covenant, I
say, they continue strangers: it does not appertain unto them, they cannot
claim Salvation by it: Whence observe, That,

All corrupt and carnal persons are strangers to Gods Covenant of Grace and
Salvation in and thorough Christ Jesus: Doct.
Adam feeding upon the Tree of forbidden fruit, was excluded from the Tree of
life; man feeding upon, and filling himself with the forbidden fruit of sin,
is excluded from Christ, and all the promises of God in Christ, and all benefit
coming by Christ. Unto the Psalm. 50.16.
wicked, to the man whose heart is empty of grace, void of the true fear of
God, and far from the life and power of godliness, God says, What have thou
to do to declare my Statutes, to talk of my Doctrine, or of the rules and
ways of my worship, or that thou should take my covenant into thy mouth,
that thou should vaunt and boast thy self to be of the number of that
sacred people, whom I have adopted to my self by peculiar Covenant, or that
thou should expect Salvation by my free and gracious promise, wherein thou
have no interest; Such as keep not Gods precepts, presume in vain of
Salvation by Gods promise; he that observes not Gods Commandment, has nothing
to do with Gods Covenant: Therefore such men though they live within the pale
of the Church are termed Number. 20.10. Isa. 30.1. Ezekiel. 2.8.
Rebels, rebellious children and a rebellious house; a Rebel though he live
within the kingdom, yet has nothing to do with the privileges of the
kingdom, these belong to the loyal and obedient Subjects of the Kingdom:
under the Law a Deuteronomy. 21.10.
rebellious Son, though he had a place of abode in his Fathers House, yet had
he no title to his Fathers goods, nor to any immunities belonging to the House,
but being stubborn and rebellious, a glutton or a drunkard, one that would not
obey his Fathers voice, he was to be stoned to death: Profane and carnal men
though they live and have their abode within the pale of Christ's Church, yet
rebelling against Christ, breaking the bands in sunder, and casting away the
cords of Gods Law from them, being stubborn and rebellious, and refusing to
obey the voice of the Lord, the Privileges of Christ's Kingdom, the Covenant
of salvation by Christ, appertains not unto them. Sometimes they are termed
Heb. 12.8.
bastards; bastards have a place within the house with sons, but the
inheritance belongs not unto them; Ishmael had a place in Abraham's house with
Isaac, yet being the son of a bondwoman, the inheritance came not to him,
but to Isaac; thus carnal men not being regenerate and borne of God, not being
the genuine and true children of God, but hypocrites and bondmen to Satan, and
their own lusts, they are no heirs nor co-heyres with Christ, they are
strangers to the Covenant of grace. Of them therefore the Lord says, that they
Hos. 6.7.
like men, or like Adam have transgressed my Covenant, and have made forfeiture
of all, as Adam did, or they have transgressed my Covenant, as the covenant of
a man, regarding their covenant with me no more then a covenant between man
and man, and they have dealt treacherously against me; they have slighted me,
they have not desired friendship and consortship with me; but they have
depraved my worship and apostatized from me, and of such the Prophet Jeremy
says, They Ier. 22.9. Prove. 2.17.
have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their God, as the Harlot in Solomon
forsook the guide of her youth, and forgot the Covenant of her God; thus these
men committing spiritual fornication with the world, forsake Christ, the guide
of their souls, and forget the Covenant of their God, become altogether
unmindfull of that new obedience, which they have vowed and promised, losing
all claim and title unto, and outing themselves of all the benefit which the
Covenant of God imports, because as the Psalmist says, they Psalm 78.10.
keep not the Covenant of God, and refuse to walk in his Law; and to this
Saint John speaks fully, If we say that we have fellowship with Christ,
interest in Christ, communion with Christ, promise of salvation by Christ, and
1 John 1.6.
walk in darkness, live sinfully, and converse profanely; we lie and do not
the truth, we deceive our selves, we presume of interest in Christ, and claim
to Gods promise, which belongs not unto us. The profane man's estrangement
from the Covenant of God is manifest.

1. In regard of Ignorance, Grounds of carnal man's estrangement from the
Covenant.

1. Ignorance.


which makes them incapable of entering into Covenant with God. All carnal men
are ignorant men, the 1 Cor 2.14.
natural man receives not the things of God, they are foolishness unto him,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. He that wants
a bodily eye, discernes not bodily things; he that wants a spiritual eye,
perceives not spiritual things; where there is no sutablenesse between the
sense and the thing to be perceived, there is no perception, according to the
Logicians rule, quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. The
natural man having no spiritual eye, no principle of heavenly and sacred
light within him, he cannot truly and savingly perceive the things of God: Of
such therefore the Psalmist says, they are all gone aside, they Psalm. 14.3, 4.
are altogether become filthy, all the workers of iniquity have no knowledge;
they know not their sins, as a sick man his disease, grieving for them,
complaining of them, and desiring ease and freedom from them; they know not
their nakedness, and emptiness of all spiritual good, desiring to be filled
with the good things of God, as Hagar knew the emptiness of her bottle, and
wept for water; they know not their necessity of Christ, hungring and thirsting
after him, as the Elders of Gilead knew their necessity of Ieptha, and desired
him to be their Captain, and made him head over them: they know not God, as a
Father regenerating them, as a Physician healing them, as a King of mercies
pardoning them; they know not Christ, as a Prophet instructing them, as a
Priest sanctifying them, as a Prince of peace ruling within them, and
reconciling God unto them; they know not the word of God, as a light guiding
them, as dew softning their hearts, as fire purging their souls, as food
nourishing and strengthening them in all grace, and being thus ignorant, they
are far from Gods Covenant; such blind men are in covenant with Satan the
Prince of darkness: Nahash the Ammonite would not make a covenant with the men
of Iabesh Gilead; but on this condition, that he might 1 Samuel 11.2.
thrust out all their right eyes. The God of this world, the Devil, 2 Cor. 4 4.
blinds the eyes of the understanding of all that are in covenant with him,
that the glorious light of the Gospel may not shine into them; but such as are
in covenant with God, are men of knowledge and sacred understanding: God gives
them the means of knowledge outwardly, and works knowledge in them inwardly: I
Ier. 3 14, 15.
am married unto you (says the Lord) there is his covenant with them, and I
will give you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding, there is the ministration of the means of
knowledge to them. Thy maker (says the Prophet) is thy Isa. 54.5, 13
husband, there is the covenant of wedlock between God and his Church, and all
thy children shall be taught of God, there is the inward illumination of their
understanding; and again, this says the Lord shall be the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel, I will Ier. 31.34.
put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and they shall
all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them. Natural fools
are unfit to enter covenant, with men, spiritual fools are as unfit for Gods
covenant, there is no communion between light and darkness, there is no
covenant, no fellowship between God, who dwells in light inaccessable, and them
that are overwhelmed with the darkness of ignorance.

2. In regard of Alienation from Christ the foundation of the Covenant All the
promises of grace and salvation are in Christ, in him they are 2 Cor. 1.20.
Yea and Amen, sure and certain, firm and durable; incline your ^are, and come
unto me (faith the Lord) hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the Isa. 55.3.
sure mercies of David, which is Christ, in and through whom God shows
himself a father of mercies to all believers: Ye (says Saint Peter) are the
children Acts 3.25, 26
of the Prophets, and of the Covenant, which God made with our fathers, saying
unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
Unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you in
turning away every one of you from your iniquities: God communicates all
blessings through Christ Jesus, every thing turns to a curse to him that is
without Christ, the choicest Nectar proves bitter as gall to him that has not
Christ to sweeten the same unto him: Now every profane man is Ephesians. 2 12. Romans
16 18. Luke 16 14. Luke 19.14.
without Christ, an enemy to the Cross of Christ, a despiser of the Doctrine
of Christ, an opposer of the Kingdom of Christ, no friend of Christ, no true
member in Christ, no lively stone built upon Christ the living stone; and being
out of Christ, they are strangers to Gods gracious promise.

3. In regard of Enmity against God, who is the Author of the covenant, and
the fruition and enjoyment of whom is the supreme substance, and comfort of
the covenant, the chiefest and choicest good of the soul of man, Ier. 32.30.
They shall be my people, and I will be their God, says the Lord, and I will
make an everlasting Covenant with them: I will be their God, says he, I will
be all in all unto them; I will be their King to command them, their Father to
make provision for them, their Husband to marry them, their Friend to solace
them, their shield and buckler to protect them, their Captain to fight for
them, to vanquish all that does oppose them, the Psalm. 7^.26.
strength of their heart, and their portion forever, as the Psalmist speaks.
Now carnal men are without God, alienated from the life of God; and as our
Savior said in another case, God is not a God of the dead, but of the living:
so in this case, he is not the God of them that are dead in sin, but of them
that live the life of grace. Profane men are aliens and enemies to God by
their evil works, haters of God, hating him in his Laws of holiness which he
has prescribed to them; in his works of holiness upon the souls of his
children, Romans 1.29. Romans 8.7.
and in the holy labors of his faithful and holy Ministers, and having enmity
against God, they have nothing to do wi^h the covenant of God.

4. In regard of Agreement with sin, which is the breach of the Covenant:
Carnal man and sin are at a very full agreement, with this they agree as the
palate with sweet meat, stolen waters (says Solomon) are sweet, Prove. 9 17.
and bread eaten in secret is pleasant; with this their hearts accord, as the
hand with the glove, the ^are with the music, the foot with a plain path, or
the fish with the water, it is no burden, no trouble to them, their foot is
Rom 3 ^5.
swift to run this race, it is a Prove. 10 23.
sport to them to do evil, you drink up iniquity like Job 15.16.
water, it is the center to which they move, it is the element wherein they
desire and delight to live. Now sin is the breach of the covenant between God
and the soul, as adultery breaks the covenant of wedlock between man and
wife, They are Ier. 11.10.
turned back (says the Lord) to the iniquity of their Fathers, and have
broken my covenant. Reigning profaneness undoubtedly excludes man from Gods
promise; Isa 28.18.
he that is, as the Prophet speaks, at an agreement with death, and in
covenant with Hell, sinning securely, and without fear, cannot be in covenant
with God; he that is not afraid to offend God, cannot be at peace with God.

5. In regard of the absence of the Spirit, the principal applying cause of
the covenant and promise to the soul of man: He (says our Savior of the
Spirit) John 16.4.
shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you; that is, the Spirit shall
make application unto you of the benefits which come by me; he shall make my
death effectual to mortify your lusts, and my blood efficacious to purge away
your sin, and my resurrection powerful to revive and quicken your souls; he
shall make you partakers of all the promises, favors and blessings of God,
dispensed through me to man; and for this the Spirit is called the Spirit of
Romans 8 15.
adoption, assuring us of the fatherly love of God in Christ toward us: The 1
Cor. 1.21. Ephesians. 1.13.
earnest and Seal of our inheritance, assuring us of our salvation through
Christ: Now carnal men are destitute of the Holy Ghost, they are Jude v. 1^.
sensual (says Jude) having not the Spirit; having not the Spirit as a
dweller possessing them, as a teacher instructing them, as water washing them,
and having not the Spirit of God, they have nothing to do with the Romans 8.9.
Covenant of God, because God gives his Spirit to all such as he receives into
his Covenant.

6. In regard of the want of faith and obedience, the condition of the covenant
on man's behalf. The promise is made to them that believe, Gal. 3.9. Mar. 16.
received through faith, and they which be of the faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham (faith the Apostle) And he that believes, faith Christ,
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned: Faith apprehends
the promise, and purifies the heart, and makes man capable of all the promises
of God, godliness having the promise of this life, and of the life which is to
come: Now carnal man is destitute both of faith, and of a godly life, his
faith like Jeroboams hand is withered, he cannot reach it forth to apprehend
Christ, and the promise of life in Christ. Though carnal man live within the
pale of the Church, and come to the House and Table of the Lord; Mat. 22.
yet like him in the Parable that came to the wedding feast without a wedding
garment, he has not put on Christ, Christ's righteousness does not cloathe
him, and therefore is an unwelcome guest, the dainties there provided do
neither profit him, nor belong unto him; his faith is a dead faith, Iam 2.20.
it does not purify him, it makes him not victorious over Satan and the world;
he continues as a dead man in the house, having no claim nor title to the
things of the house: Mat. 25.
The foolish Virgins wanting oil in their lamps were not acknowledged by
Christ, he did not open to them, he gave them no admission: Profession without
faith and obedience gives no interest in Christ, nor finds any acceptance with
Christ; he that breaks the conditions of the covenant, can justly claim
nothing by the covenant.

The covenant from which profane men are excluded, is the Covenant of grace,
by which God appoints a heavenly inheritance to his adopted children, through
the death of his Son Jesus Christ interveening.

The matter of this covenant, is the promise of God, to become our God in
Christ, and the promise of man to believe in God through Christ, and to walk
with God in newness of life.

The form of this covenant consists in a mutual obligation of God to man,
and of man to God: The Object of this covenant is properly the elect
effectually called, it is offered to all to whom the Gospel is preached, the
elect alone have the true and comfortable fruition of it. The moving cause of
this covenant is the mere mercy and free favor of God; the impulsive cause
hereof, is the merit of Christ, by whose intercession alone all the elect are
reconciled unto God; the final cause, is the glory of God, and the salvation
of his chosen; the Adiunct of it, is perpetuity, an everlasting covenant, a
covenant of wedlock which never shall be ended. And to this covenant all
corrupt and carnal men, as long as they continue such, are strangers; they are
strangers to the comfortable and experimental knowledge of it, they do not
know themselves reconciled unto God in Christ Jesus; they are strangers to the
matter of it; they do not know God to be their God, their treasure, their
crown and comforter, neither do they know themselves to be Gods peculiar
people, by a lively faith in God, by fervent love toward God, by holy and
humble walking, and gracious communion with God, nor by Christian application
of themselves, with all their might to the service of God; and strangers they
are to the fruits and effects of the covenant mentioned by the Prophet Jeremy,
as inscription of the Law in their hearts, illumination of their
understandings, remission of their sins, holy and constant fear not to
offend God, steadfast perseverance in the ways of God, and divine dispensation
of all things to work for the best unto them, and thus they are very unhappy
strangers to the covenants of promise.

CHAP. XVI. Displaying the misery and uncomfortablenesse of Man's estate without
the Covenant.
IN this is very fully opened the misery and uncomfortablenesse of every
corrupt and carnal man's estate. Misery of carnal man's estate opened.
Man's sole and only hope and expectation of comfort, is from the free and
gracious Promise of God in Christ, he has no other staff to sustain him, no
other Star to send forth any glimpse of consolation to him, He that is out of
the Covenant, is, 1. A stranger to Christ.
no other well from whence to draw any water of refreshment; yet even from this
is the carnal man excluded, he has no interest in this covenant: and having
no interest in this covenant; He is 1. A stranger to Christ and to that
salvation which comes by Christ; Christ saves only such as come within the
covenant, the Romans 2.39.
Promise of salvation by Christ is to them whom God shall call, from death to
life, from darkness to light, from bondage to liberty, and from uncleanness
to holiness, according to that of the Lord by the Prophet to our Savior, I
the Lord have Isa. 42.6.
called thee, to the Office of a Mediator; in righteousness, my Justice
moving me to fulfill my gracious Promise; I will hold thine hand, I will help
thee, I will minister strength unto thee, to fulfill this office; I will keep
thee, from suffering until the time appointed, and in thy suffering that thou
despair not; and give thee for a Covenant, a Mediator of the people, and a
light, a Savior to the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to enlighten their
understandings by the preaching of the Gospel; to bring out the prisoners from
the prison, and them that sit in darkness from the prisonhouse, to set mine
elect free from the power of Satan, dominion of sin and fear of Hell: Now
carnal men who are without the covenant have not Christ a Mediator
reconciling them to God, an enlightner of their understandings, nor a restorer
of their souls to spiritual freedom: Christ is not unto them life quickening
them, a Rock supporting them, Righteousness clothing them, a Husband
marrying them, and a Fountain filling them; but they are without Christ, as a
House without a Foundation, as Members without a Head, as Captives without a
Ransomer, and as a forsaken woman without a Husband: The woman which is not
under the covenant of wedlock, has no Husband; the soul which is not under
the covenant of grace, has no Jesus, no Deliverer, no Salvation by Christ.

2. Empty of heavenly gifts Romans 7.18.
2. He remains empty of all spiritual and heavenly gifts, his soul is in
empty house, wherein dwells no good thing; he is a stranger to all Gods gracious
and soule-saving communications; he that is not in covenant with the King, that
refuses the Oath of Allegiance to the King, is excluded from communion with
the King, and from all such Prerogatives and favors, as the King grants to
them that are in covenant with him; such as are not in covenant with God, like
Absalom in another case, cannot see the 2 Samuel 14.32
Kings face, the face of God does not shine, but frown upon them; they sit in
darkness and the shadow of death, God does not reveal himself clearly and
graciously unto them; the great things of his Law are a strange thing unto
them: they have no discerning of the things of God, Hos. 8.12.
the Lord sends them away Lu. 1.53.
empty from his house and from his Ordinances, after their long living within
the pale of the Church, and long attendance upon the Gospel, and often being
at the Lords feast of marrow and of fat things, they continue like Pharaohs
lean kine after their eating the fat, as lean as ever, blind, poor, naked,
Gen 41.
miserable and Rev. 3 ^7.
wretched, as Christ speaks Gods graces are dispensed with his Covenant; thou
shall break forth on the right hand and on the left, says the Lord; thou
shall multiply abundantly and be very fruitful, Isa. 54.3.5.
a mother of many spiritual children, there is the fruitfulness of the
Church; for thy maker is thy husband, there is Gods Covenant; the souls
wedlock with the Lord Jesus is ever attended with spiritual fruitfullnesse;
but the strangers to this Covenant, continue barren, like a Woman without a
Husband.

3. He is without the Lords gracious and sure protection: God is a Sun and a
Shield to them that are within his Covenant, 3 Without supporta^on
that walk ^sal 84 11. Z^h. 2.5. Isa 27.
uprightly, as the Psalmist speaks; to these he is a wall of fire round about
them, these he keeps as the apple of his eye; these he waters like a
Vineyard every moment, and keeps them day and night least any hurt them; but
them that are without his covenant, he leaves them as a Vinyard without an
hedge, as a flock without a Shepherd, and a City without a Watchman; these the
Lord leaves to their Romans 1.^4.
sins, as a sick-man to his disease, to Psalm. 109.6.
Satan, as a wandering Sheep to the Lion, Ier. 34.18, 20
as a barren field to the wild Boar and Beast of the Forest, these he
leaves to their: enemies to spoil them; these have no hiding place under the
shadow of Gods wings, when dangers do assault them: The men of the old world
which were without the Arc were left to the waters to swallow them, they that
are without the Covenant of God in Christ are liable to a deluge of woes and
miseries to surprise them.

4. Without title
4. He is without all spiritual claim and title to any blessing: The woman
which is not in matrimonial covenant with the Master of the house, has no
title to the things of the House. Christ is the Heb. 1.3.
heir of all things; he that is not in covenant with Christ, not married to
Christ, though he has a civil right in respect of men, yet he has noe
spiritual right in respect of Christ to any thing; God as a bountiful Master
feeds him as a Ioh. 8.35.
servant, but he possesses nothing as a Son, he can claim nothing, he enjoyes
nothing as a Son, an Heir and Co-heyre with Jesus Christ.

Without blessing.
5. He is without the blessing of God, Gods blessing goes with his Covenant,
They (says St. Paul) which are of the Gal. 3.9.
Faith, true believers, partakers of the Covenant, they are blessed with
faithful Abraham; they are blessed as in the Justification of their souls, so
in their persons, in their possessions, in their civil and religious
performances, and in all their sufferings and several changes; but such as are
without the Covenant are ^s 109.17.
far from blessing; Ioh 3.36.
The wrath of God (says St. John) abides on them: on their persons, on their
possessions, on their undertakings; the Lord sets his Ier. 21.10.
face against them for evil and not for good, that which is good in it self,
turns for evil unto them, their very blessings turn to a curse, as the meat
of diseased bodies turns to evil humors: their very Table becomes their
snare, yea, the word of life becomes to them the savor of death unto death,
and Christ himself who is the way, the truth and the life, becomes a stone of
stumbling and a rock of offense.

6 Without peace.
6. He is without peace; there is no peace (says the Prophet) to the wicked; no
spiritual, no true peace to them that are not within the Covenant of peace;
they are as the tossed Sea which has no rest, but is in continual agitation
casting up mire and dirt; there is gravel in their bread which makes it bread
of sorrows to them; there is a thorn in their bed, which causes their sleep
to depart from them; with Belshazar they have a handwriting appears in the
wall of their Banqueting House, which turns their merry feasting into dismal
fear and trembling, and in the midst of their sufficiency they are in
straights; there is a worm within them continually biting and gnawing them,
causing their hearts to meditate terror: the thought of God is terrible to
them, as the thought of a severe Judge to a guilty malefactor; the thought of
the Word affrights them, as the light a thief, having stolen goods about him:
and by this you may in part at least discern the uncomfortablenesse of their
estate who are without the Covenant.

CHAP. XVII. Proposing certain marks and characters of man's being within the
Covenant.
Marks or characters of being within the Covenant.
Carnal man's estrangement from the Covenant of grace, and misery in being
without it; should occasion every man to examine his own estate in this
behalf, and strive to find in himself sound and clear evidence of his
interest in this Covenant, which may be discerned,

1. God all in all to man.
1. By Gods being all in all to man; this is a prime parcel of the Covenant, I
will be their God; the husband is to the woman joined in matrimonial covenant
with him, instead of all and more then all other men; God is to him that is in
covenant with him, instead of al other things, as Elkana said to Hannah, Am not
J to thee better then ten sons, thus is God to the soul espoused to him,
better then all things, to such a one God is a Father regenerating, a Sun
enlightening, a dweller possessing, a King commanding, a Guide leading, a
Treasure enriching, a Friend comforting, and a Fountain filling; he is such a
souls summum bonum; his shield for defense, his rock for supportment, his
Counselor for advice, his Paradise for comforts, his Bridegroom for love,
his Friend for communion, and his Portion for satisfaction; he is able to say,
Whom have J in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee, my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever. God his making himself ours, in the way of
sanctification, satisfaction and spiritual comfort, is a sweet assurance of
our being within his Covenant.

2 Full application of man to God.
2. By man's full application of himself to God; this is another branch of the
Covenant, they shall be my people: Scholars in my School learning my will;
servants in my house doing my work; Soldiers in my army fighting my battles;
Subjects in my Kingdom receiving my Laws, and studying the exaltation of my
name; Children in my Family abiding in my house, delighting in my presence, and
rejoicing in their communion with me; and trees of Righteousness in my
Orchard, bringing forth all their fruit to me; they shall be all that they are
unto me, as a wife is what she is unto her husband, bringing forth children
unto her husband, and caring how to please her husband: thus they who are in
covenant with God, strive to be all that they are unto God, do all for God,
their full and constant care is how to please God, they are 1 Cor. 6.19.
not their own; they live not after their own fancy, they intend not themselves
in what they do, but they are the Lords, in their understandings to know him,
in their wills to intend him, in their imaginations to think upon him, in their
affections to fear and trust him, to love and rejoice in him, in their tongues
to speak of him and plead for him, in their hands to work that which is good
and honorable unto God, and in all their abilities therewith to honor him,
prostrating all under the feet of God, referring and using all to the glory of
God, Romans 14 8,
living and dying (as the Apostle says) unto the Lord, living as Gods
servants, framing the whole way and order of their life according to Gods
prescription, referring their whole life to the glory of God, and resting in
all the labors and troubles of their life upon God, with a firm confidence,
being assured that God takes care for them, and dying as Gods peculiar people,
patiently submitting to the hand of God in the time of their dissolution,
firmly depending upon God in the hour of their change, heartily desiring that
God may be glorified by their death, and resting fully assured, that their
temporal death shall be an entrance into eternal life; he who thus fully
applies himself to God, may assure himself of his being in covenant with God.

3. By man's participation of the spiritual and heavenly benefits which the
covenant comprehends, as,

1. The donation of the Spirit, it is the Lords promise to Joel. 2.28.
power out his Spirit upon all flesh, to put his Spirit within us, and to cause
us to walk in his ways, so that he who is within the Covenant of God, has
the Spirit of God quickening and enlivening him, as the soul does enliven the
body; Ioh. 16.12, 13
enlightening and teaching him, guiding and leading him into the clear and
comfortable knowledge of all truth, as the guide leads the Traveller into the
knowledge of the way wherein he is to walk, regenerating and Ioh. 3.5. Ezekiel.
36 25
renewing him, sanctifying and cleansing him, as the water does the flesh, and
the fire the metal; Mat. 3.16. Ioh. 1.32.33.
revealing Christ in him, and making Christ appear very glorious and amiable
in his apprehension, as the most glorious Sun, the choysest pearl, and most
renowned Prince, even the fairest of ten thousand, making the soul full of
longings after him, and sick of love toward him; 1 Cor. 12.13 1 Ioh. 3.24.
uniting and joining him unto Christ as the branch to the vine, as a member to
the head to be enlivened by Christ, and to participate of all the benefits
which flow from Christ; Romans 8.1, 14.
ruling and guiding him as a Pilot his Ship, framing and working his heart to
an universal, holy and humble submission to the will of God, as the hand of
the learner is guided by the teacher to write according to the whole copy set
before him. To him that is within the Covenant, the Spirit of God is a Spirit
of life, mortifying the old and quickening the new man. Water washing, Romans 8.2.
refreshing and making his soul spiritually fruitful. Fire, purging and
consuming his remaining lusts, and making his heart to burn with love to God
and man; oil of gladness, filling his soul with spiritual alacrity and
cheerfulness, and a seal and earnest penny, assuring him of his future bliss
and peace in Heaven, and this communication of the Spirit is an undoubted
pledge of man's being within the Covenant.

2. Communion with Saints.
2. A second benefit comprised under the Covenant is Communion with the Saints;
all that are within the Covenant have a mutual sweet and gracious fellowship
with God and among themselves, That which we have seen and heard (says S.
John) declare we unto you, that you may have fellowship with us, and that our
fellowship may be with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ: He that is
within the Covenant has communion with God the Father by adoption, as a child
with the Parent by participation, receiving of the Fathers fullness and bearing
his Image; by holy walking, having his conversation in Heaven, walking with God
as Enoch and Noah did; by invocation, as a Petitioner with the King, being a
daily earnest suter to the throne of grace; by Faith, living and walking by
faith and not by sight, and also by Love, God dwelling in love, as the Apostle
speaks: He that is within the Covenant has communion with Christ, by
participation of Christ and his benefits, by dwelling in Christ and Christ in
him, being joined with Christ in a spiritual wedlock, Christ assuming him
into his grace, and making him a member of his body, bone of his bone and flesh
of his flesh, as S. Paul speaks, expressing their near union and sweet
communion with Christ, who are within the covenant of God: He that is within
this covenant has also communion with the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of God
dwelling in him, regenerating and renewing him, witnessing his adoption,
helping his infirmity, sealing up the pardon of his sin, and restoring him to
more spiritual liberty and freedom; and he has likewise communion with all
the Saints and faithful Servants of the Lord, being partakers of one Spirit,
living members under one Head, having the same love, being of one mind and of
one accord, their prayers meeting mutually each for other at one and the same
throne of grace, all building by one rule, all traveling by one light, all
acting and moving by one Spirit, all feeding upon one word, all fighting under
one Banner, all running one race, and all serving one Prince of peace; they
have fervent love one to another, Psalm. 16.3. 1 Ioh 3.14.
singular delight each in other, and a very sweet and gracious communion one
with another; and this holy and joyful communion with the Saints of God
abundantly argues man's being within the Covenant of God.

3 Regeneration.
3. A third benefit comprised under the Covenant is Regeneration, the
sanctifying and restoring our corrupt nature to the image of God, a work of
God in all that are within the Covenant, a parcel of Gods promise to put his
law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, to make a sutablenesse
between them and his Law, to work such holiness in their hearts, as should in
some good proportion answer that holiness which the Law prescribes, and this
is requisite to man's being within the Covenant, because without this he cannot
know God, he cannot be the friend of God, he cannot please God, nor have any
communion with God: he that is far from holiness is far from interest in
Gods Promise: The captive woman under the Law had her apparel changed before
an Israelitish Soldier could assume her into a covenant of wedlock; man under
the Gospel must put off the old man and put on the new, ere he can have
interest in Gods Covenant; the more fully, freely and constantly man conformes
himself to Gods precepts, the surer is his evidence of title to Gods promise.
He whose obedience to the Law of God is voluntary without compulsion, cordial
without dissimulation, universal without the allowance of any evil, humble
without all ostentation, cheerful, free from all repining, sincere without any
by or sinister intention, and constant without backsliding may rest assured of
being received into Gods Covenant.

4. A fourth benefit comprised under the Covenant by which man may discern his
being within the Covenant, is spiritual liberty and freedom, a liberty of
grace whereby the whole man is set free from the command and servitude of all
sin; the understanding is free from ignorance, able to know God as a Father,
with a clear and comfortable submissive and affective knowledge; the will is
free from perverseness, able readily and freely, fully and sincerely to intend
God and his glory; the imagination is free from vanity, able with much joy to
meditate and think upon God; the affections are free from base fear carnal
confidence, worldly love and fleshly joy, able to scare God filially, to trust
on God soly, to love God unfainedly, and to rejoice in God spiritually; the
whole man bent and disposed to run the way of Gods commandments, as the Sun
rejoices to run his race, and as the Rivers flow toward the Sea; this the
Psalmist calls an enlargement of the heart, to run the way of Gods
Commandments, and this he mentions as a fruit of the inscription of the Law in
his heart, Thy Law o Lord (says he) is in my heart, and I delight to do thy
will. Man's assurance of being within Gods Covenant is suitable to his free and
ready disposition in observing Gods precept.

5. Perseverance
5. A fifth benefit comprised under the Covenant ministering assurance of man's
interest in it, is perseverance in the state of grace, daily growth in the
gifts of the Spirit, and a steadfast striving to more perfection. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them (says God) and I will put my fear in their
hearts that they shall not depart from me: they shall not depart from the
knowledge of my truth to error, from the faith of my promises to infidelity,
from the ways of my Commandments to by and wandering paths; from the love of
me and my testimonies, to the love of earthly vanities: God ever preserves in
the state of grace, whom he receives into the Covenant of grace; he that is in
covenant with God abides with God, as the wife with the husband, he follows the
Lord fully with Caleb, he is with God in every estate, in all changes as Ittai
resolved to be with David both in life and in death, the longer he is in Gods
Covenant, the more beauty he discernes in God, the more sweetness he finds in
the Word of God, the more pleasure he takes in the service of God, the more
comfortable communion he gains with God, and the more plentiful and
soule-ravishing receivings of grace, love and peace he has from God, and
therefore shines more and more like the light unto the perfect day, grows
stronger and stronger like the house of David, He waits upon the Lord and
renewes his strength, he mounts up as the Eagles, he runs and is not weary,
he walks on and does not faint; he goes from strength to strength, until he
does appear before the Lord in Zion.

Exhortation to get interest in the Covenant.
The carnal man's estrangement from the Covenant, and his misery in being out of
the Covenant, ministers matter and occasion of labor and industry to every man
to get into the Covenant, to be partaker of it, and to have assured interest in
the benefits flowing from it, as Noah entered into the Arc to be preserved from
the deluge of waters, so should we enter into the Covenant of God, that we may
be preserved from the deluge of those miseries which attend and wait upon the
breach of Gods precepts. The men of Egypt hearing of the fall of a grievous
hail, such as would destroy both man and beast, Exodus 9.20.
He that feared the word of the Lord amongst them, made his servants and his
cattle flee into the house: Men hearing of the hayle, fire, brimstone and
horrible tempest, which God will rain down upon the wicked, should hasten
into this Covenant, have sure interest in Gods free and gracious Promise, that
they may be hid from the Lords wrath. And to the end we may have part in Gods
Covenant. Means ministering interest in the Covenant. 1. Forsaking of sin.


1. We must forsake our sins, there must be war against sin, or there can
be no peace with God, Moses might not come nigh the burning bush until he had
put off his shoes from his feet, Because the ground where he stood was holy
ground. Man cannot come nigh God, enter into covenant with God, unless the
old man, his old lusts be put off, because the Covenant of God is a holy
Covenant, a Covenant belonging only to the godly, Godliness having the
promise of this life and of the life to come. Joseph shaved himself and
changed his raiment, and then he came to Pharaoh, and Pharaoh took him to
himself, and made many honorable Promises to him; man must shave himself,
remove the ignorance and error of his understanding, and change his raiment,
Put off the old man which is corrupt, according to diverse lusts, and put on the
new man which is renewed in holiness and true righteousness according to Gods
image, and then come nigh t^ed, and partake of all Gods gracious promises,
according to that of the Lord by the Prophet, wash you make you clean, put
away the evil of your ways, cease to do evil, learn to do well, and then
come ye and we will reckon together, and though your sins were as red as
scarlet, yet will I make you white as snow. I will deal mercifully with you,
be reconciled to you, forgive your sins and receive you into my Covenant of
peace: The more the soul is emptied of sin, the more capable it is of Gods
Covenant, the more assured of interest in it: He that holds fast his sin,
cannot lay hold upon the Covenant of God; he that gives not a bill of divorce
to his lusts, is incapable of weddlocke with Christ.

2. We must forsake our selves, we must deny our selves, 2. Forsaking of our
selves.
cease from our own wisdom, as from a blind guide, from our own strength, as
from a withered reed, from our own righteousness, as from a rotten ragg, and
from our own ends, as from low and base marks. Thus must we deny our selves,
or we can be no Disciples of Christ, no partakers of the mercies of God in him:
Such as entered into Covenant with David were in debt, in distress and
discontent. He that will enter into Covenant with God, must see his debt, be
sensible of his sin, feel the distress and anguish of his soul, and be
very much discontented with his corrupt and carnal estate: God communicates
his mercies to them that are sensible of their miseries; the Lord loves them
that are out of love with themselves; he esteems them that loath their own
ways; whom does Christ invite and call but the heavy laden, Such as are
sensible and weary of their sins as of a heavy burden; to whom is Christ sent
with tidings of comfort, but to the broken hearted. When Ephraim repented,
smote upon his thigh, and was confounded; then the Lord remembered him, then he
was dear and pleasant to him, then he said, Ier. 31 19, 20, 21.
I will surely have mercy upon him, then he proposed and set before him the
Covenant of Salvation in Christ, promising him that a woman should compass a
man; contrite and broken hearted sinners are the proper subject of Gods
sweetest mercies.

3. Relinquishment of the world.
3. We must relinquish the world. Abner fell out with the house of Saul, and
then he entered into Covenant with David. Man must first fall out with the
world, take off his heart from the earth before he can enter into covenant with
God; because the love of the world (as S. James speaks) is enmity with God,
and he that is a friend of the world is an enemy to God; the first husband must
be dead before the woman can join her self in wedlock with a second man; man
must be crucified to the world, and the world unto him, before he can be
married unto Christ, enter into Covenant with Christ; when Zacheus received
Christ into his house, he gave the half of his goods to the poor, and
restored fourfold to them from whom he had wrongfully taken: The world is
much slighted where Christ is truly received: The soul is never filled with
Christ, unless it be emptied of the earth, Dagon falls where the Arc is
erected, the exaltation of Christ is the prostration of the world. Man's
communion with Christ is suitable to his separation from the world. He that will
enter this Covenant and associate himself with Christ, must with Matthew leave
the receipt of custom; he must with Solomon look upon the world, as upon a
thing of naught; he must according to the Apostles rule, use the world as if
he did not use it. He must forget his own people, and forsake his Fathers
house, that will have consortship with Christ.

4. Rejection of ^ntimate communion with carnal persons
4. We must renounce all intimate communion with corrupt and carnal people,
come out from among them (says the Lord) there is the separation, and I will
be your Father, and ye shall be unto me for sons and daughters, there is Gods
receiving them into covenant and communion with him, the Prodigal deserted and
repented of his fellowship with Harlots and riotous persons, and then his
Father lovingly received and embraced him. God is very propitious to such as
repent of their sinful fellowship with his enemies: God ministers many
comfortable expressions of his love to them, who withdraw themselves from such
as do not love him: when Moses left Pharaohs Court, the Lord appeared to him
in the wilderness, saying, I am the God of thy Fathers, the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob; the declination of fellowship with
profane persons, is usually attended with a sweet enjoyment of Gods presence,
and the ministration of many spiritual comforts; were we more thoroughly
alienated from vain men, we should be more fully and sweetly acquainted with
God, could we give a bill of divorce to profane persons, we should have a
blessed and honorable wedlock with Christ Jesus.

5. Attendance on the Word.
5. We must with all diligence attend the Ministry of the word. Incline your
ear, Come unto me (says the Lord) Hear and your soul shall live, and J will
make an everlasting Covenant with you. God by the labors of his Ministers
brings men into covenant with himself, by their labors he opens the beauties
and perfections of Christ, he makes them see their necessity of Christ, their
misery without Christ, and their happiness in the enjoyment of Christ, by
their labors he woes and persuades them to come to Christ, fills their hearts
with earnest longings after Christ, with fervent and unfeigned love to Christ;
and so espouseth them unto him, as Abraham by his Servant brought Rebecca to
his son Isaac: Thus does God by his Ministers, bring men to his Son Christ
Jesus: Did we not shamefully undervalue and profanely estrange our selves from
the labors of Gods Ministers, we could not be such strangers to Gods
Covenant, nor so empty of those blessings which Christ ministers to true
believers. Attend therefore Gods Word, if ever you mean to enjoy the benefit
of Gods Covenant.

6. We must readily and fully receive Christ. 6. Fully receiving of Christ.
Christ is the foundation of the Covenant, the promise is in Christ, Joseph's
Brethren came nigh to Pharaoh by Joseph, man comes nigh to God by Christ,
finds favor with God, and partakes of all the mercies of God through Christ;
through him we are made the Sons of God, thorough him we are accepted of
God, thorough him we receive of Gods fulness grace for grace; the receiving
of the Lord Jesus is the receipt of all mercies, in him we are blessed with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places; without Christ we are strangers to
all Gods mercies, in Christ we have title to all Gods blessings. Joseph's
brethren were lovingly entertained of him, bringing Benjamin with them,
without whom they might not look him in the face; bringing Christ with us, God
will graciously receive us, without Christ God will be a consuming fire to us?
And therefore let us all labor thus to interest our selves in Gods Covenant,
for hereby shall we have interest in all Gods Promises, as in so many pillars
to support us, as in so many wel-springs to refresh us; in all the creatures,
as in so many Servants, to minister their assistance to us; in all the
Ordinances of God, as in so many Stars to enlighten us, as in so many dishes
of spiritual dainties to feed us, as in so many heavenly Bethesda's to heal
us, and in all the attributes of God, as in so many branches of the tree of
life to shelter and shadow us, interest in the power of God to uphold us, in
the wisdom of God to guide us, in the mercy of God to pardon us, in the
presence of God to encourage us, in the love of God to solace us, and in the
All Sufficiency of God every way to satisfy and content us. Sweet and sure,
full and everlasting, joyous and honorable are the Prerogatives and comforts
which are obtained by interest in Gods Covenant.

CHAP. XVIII. Declaring the misery of natural Man without Hope.
THe fourth Alienation declaring natural and carnal man's misery, is an
Alienation from Hope. Without hope: The hope of salvation by Christ, from this
hope man in his corrupt and carnal estate is estranged. Hope is a grace
inclining and disposing a regenerate and believing soul with assurance and
patience to expect and wait for the accomplishment of such good things as God
in Christ has promised, and faith apprehends. Gird up (says Saint Peter)
the loins of your minds, 1 Pet. 1.13.
be sober and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at
the Revelation of Jesus Christ, all grace is dispensed through Christ, the full
communication hereof is reserved till Christ's second coming, and hope waits
for the receiving of it in and through Christ: The cause efficient of this hope
is God, the Author and giver of all good, it is not a work of nature, but of
grace, not of man, but of God. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Wherein you have
the Author of this hope, God, a gracious and loving Father in Christ; the
moving cause, the mercy of God; the antecedent, regeneration; the foundation,
prop or pillar of it, Christ risen from the dead, the full accomplisher of man's
welfare; the inward isntrumental cause, Heb. 11.1.
or root of hope, is a lively and saving faith; Faith is the ground of things
hoped for; the object of this hope is God in Christ, all good things flowing
from the grace of God in Christ to the soul of man; therefore is Christ called
the hope of glory, Col. 1.27.
and we are bidden to hope for grace by Christ. The Seat or Subject of
Christian hope is a regenerate and renewed heart, therefore termed the hope of
the godly: Of this hope carnal men are destitute, having no hope, no hope of
salvation; the Gentiles before Christ was preached to them, having no promise
of life, no Mediator between God and them, had no hope of salvation. Carnal
men under the Gospel, being no children of God by regeneration, no members, no
partakers of Christ by faith, having no interest in Gods covenant of life and
peace, no title to Gods promise of grace by Christ, they have no hope Whence
you see, That,

Doct.
Corrupt and carnal man has no true and assured hope of salvation. There is
no hope of that man's salvation that continues corrupt and carnal; there is no
salvation in that estate: In Paul's shipping toward Rome, when neither Sun
nor Stars for many days appeared, Acts 27.20.
and no small tempest lay on them, all hope that they should be saved was then
taken away. When neither Sun nor Star, neither Christ nor any saving grace
appear in the soul of man; and when the conscience of carnal man works like
a tempest within him, then however he flattered himself in the hour of his
spiritual slumber, and promised salvation to himself; yet now all hope of
being saved is taken away; now he sees he is in the state of damnation; Acts
8.21, 23 Psalm. 119.155. Isa. 30.1.
now he sees, as Peter told Simon Magus, that he is in the gall of bitterness,
and in the bond of iniquity, and that he has no part nor lot in Christ; but
is, as the Psalmist says, far from salvation, far from the knowledge,
faith, hope and sense of salvation; they look not to the holy One of Israel;
they look not unto God as to their King to command them, as to their
Counselor to guide them, as to their Physician to heal them, as their rock
to support them; their hope is not in him, their expectation is not from him;
their estate who live under the power of corruption, is no estate of Christian
hope, but of desperation, having no ground to hope or look for salvation by
Christ: For,

Grounds hereof. 1. Vncapablenesse.
1. The carnal man is incapable of Christian hope. Hope is a heavenly guest,
and dwells not in an unclean and unregenerate heart; the carnal soul is an
empty house, wherein dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18.
no saying gift, and grace of God; He that is not of God cannot hope in God; he
that is not in Christ, cannot expect and wait for salvation by Christ; the
carnal man is dead in sin; the corporally dead have no more any humane hope,
their breath goes out of their nostrils, Psalm. 14.4.
and as their thoughts, so their hopes perish, the spiritually dead have no
spiritual hopes, where there is no life of grace, there is no hope in Christ;
the carnal man is blind, and cannot discern Christ, he is ignorant of
Christ, he knows not the things belonging to his peace, and how can he hope in
Christ whom he knows not; the carnal man is proud, he trusts in himself, in
his own abilities, in his own worth, in his own duties, and therefore cannot
hope in Christ; No man has or can have a lively hope in Christ but he that is
begotten again by the resurrection of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.3. 2. Want of
isntrumental cause.


2. The carnal man wants the isntrumental cause, and root of hope: Faith is
the mother, and hope the daughter; Faith is the root, and hope the branch;
Faith is the cause, and hope the effect; Faith apprehends the promise, and hope
expects and waits for the thing promised; Heb. 11.1.
therefore the Apostle terms Faith the ground of hope: Now the carnal man
believes not, he builds upon the sand, and not upon the rock; he is wedded to
the world, and not to Christ; he confines himself within himself, and comes
not out of himself to Christ; he brings forth his fruit unto himself, and
not unto Christ; he rests in the creature, in himself, in some gift, Hos.
10.1.
or duty of his own; he takes not up his full and everlasting rest in Christ,
and therefore believes not; and as where is no root, there is no branch, so
where there is no faith, there is no hope.

3. The carnal man is alienated from the props, pillars, 3. Alienation from
pillars of Hope.
and supporters of Christian hope; that is to say, the promise of God, the
grace of God in Christ, and the merit of Christ: These three support, and bear
up the hoping and waiting soul, as the three pillars bore up the hangings in
the Tabernacle: These three are like three Cities of Refuge, appointed by
Moses, to which the pursued malefactor betook himself; to these does the
guilty believing soul, pursued with the sense of Gods displeasure, the noise
of his sin, and cry of his conscience, betake himself, hoping and expecting
consolation from them. Now to all these the carnal man is a stranger, they
belong not to him, they are childrens bread, dogs may not taste them, they are
Doves wings, Owls and Ravens have no hiding place under them; Ps. 50. 2 Cor.
6.1. Heb. ^ 4.
He that hates to be reformed, has nothing to do with Gods covenant; carnal
men receive the grace of God in vain, they embrace not the mercy of God in
Christ tendered to them in the Gospel, they reject it, they are no more
changed, nor bettered by it, then the rock by the rain, or the blind by the
Sun, not being mingled with faith, it does not profit them; the merit of
Christ does not advantage them, his righteousness does not justify them, his
death does not mortify their lusts, his resurrection does not quicken their
souls, his intercession does not reconcile them unto God, his ransom restores
no spiritual freedom to them, and therefore they have no hope of salvation.

4. Estrangeme^t from the way to salvation.
4. The carnal man is a stranger to the way to salvation. There is a way of
faith in Christ, Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, him the carnal
man knows not, he never studied, never learned Christ, as the truth is in him;
he knows not Christ living in his soul, as he knows his soul living in his
body; he knows not Christ enlightening him, as the eye knows the Sun, whose
light is sweet unto the eye; he knows not Christ ruling and reigning within
him, as the soldiers knew the Centurion commanding them, and they yielding
ready subjection to him; he knows not Christ conquering and subduing Satan and
his own lusts, as the Israelites knew Joshuah vanquishing and treading upon
the necks of the Kings of Canaan; he knows not Christ sanctifying, and
cleansing his soul, as Naaman knew Jordan washing his leprosy from him; he
knows not Christ ministering the fullness of God unto him, as the people of
Egypt knew Joseph ministering to them, and supplying their wants. Carnal man is
very ignorant of Christ, far from sweet acquaintance with him, and comfortable
experience of his soule-saving ministrations: There is a way of spiritual
poverty, and self-denial, Mica. 6.
wherein a man walks humbly with his God, ceasing from himself, from his own
wisdom, will, reason, purpose, and affection, abased below the dust, in the
apprehension of his own uncleanness, emptiness, and unworthiness,
renouncing himself, his own gifts, abilities, and performances, going clean
out of himself unto Christ; laboring to be found in Christ, and not in
himself, Phil. 3.10.
making Christ all in all unto him, seeking his whole salvation from Christ,
and prostrating himself with all that is his under Christ; this is a way in
which the carnal man treads not, he is still full of himself, he dreams of a
self-sufficiency at home, and looks not beyond himself; he stays in his
legal righteousness, and is shamefully guilty of self-love, and self-seeking:
There is a way of new obedience, and true holiness, in which the carnal man
walks not; he wanders like an erring traveller from this path, and stumbles
like the blind; Isa. 59.7.
their feet (says the Prophet) run to evil, and they make haste to shed
innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and
destruction are in their paths, the way of peace they know not, and there is no
judgment in their goings, they have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes
therein shall not know peace. He that runs not the race, has no hope to
obtain the prize; he that fights not the battle, has no hope to win the
crown; he that sowes not his field, has no hope to reap it, he that runs not
the race of Gods Commandments, he that fights not Gods battles, has no hope
to win the prize, which is eternal life, nor yet to wear the crown of glory:
He that sowes to the Spirit does of the Spirit reap life everlasting; Gal. 6.8.
but he that sowes to the flesh does of the flesh reap destruction.

CHAP. XIX. Showing the vanity of profane Man's hope of salvation.
THe carnal man's estrangement from the hope of salvation, discovers and lays
open the vanity and deceitfulness of profane men's hopes of having life and
glory by Christ: Though they have no true and saving faith in Christ, though
they have no experience of the espousall of their souls to Christ, though they
have no fervent and unfeigned love to Christ, no evidence of Christ's living in
them, no knowledge of Christ's holy and gracious working upon them, no fence of
Christ's love to them; H^st. 6 6.
yet they hope Christ will save them. Haman hearing that King Ahasuerus had a
purpose to honor some man, concluded presently, that himself must be the man
whom the King delighted to honor, though the issue crossed his expectation.
Carnal man hearing of Gods mercy, Christ's merits, and the Lords purpose to
exalt and honor man, presently feeds and fills himself with hopes that he
shall be the man, presumes that God will honor him, though in the end he meets
with Hamans portion, a gallows in hell instead of a crown in Heaven. As the
foolish man in the Parable built his house upon the sand: so do all the
carnal men in the world, build their hopes of salvation upon some sandy and
rotten foundation, which at length sinks and suffers them to fall shamefully,
fearfully, finally, as the house did which was built upon the sand. Now if you
ask what those false and deceitful props and pillars are, upon which carnal
men usually build their hopes: I answer,

1. Superstitious Hopes.
1. Some build their hopes upon superstitious observations, they receive for
Doctrines the commandments of men, the traditions of their superiors and
predecessors. In the observation of these they are very full and frequent, very
precise and punctual, and hereupon they promise themselves salvation: Thus
Paul before his conversion, after the strictest sect of their Religion lived a
Pharisee, Acts 26 5. Romans 7.5.
and was very zealous, and thought himself alive when he was dead, persuaded
himself he was in the state of grace, when he was in the state of damnation; a
child of God, when he was one of Satan's brood; a friend of God, when he was an
adversary of the Lord; a pillar, when he was a destroyer of the Church. The
observers of humane Doctrines are very full of miserable blindness, possessed
with an overweaning opinion of the goodness of their condition, shamefully
mistaking their estate, persuading themselves that that does much endeare them,
and highly commend them unto God, which makes them a very abomination before
the Lord. Luke 10 15.


2 Formal Hopes. Iud. 17 13.
2. Some build their hopes upon a formal profession of Christ, and Christian
Religion. Micah had great hopes that God would bless him, because he had
gotten a Levite to his Priest, though he continued an idolater: Many men
promise themselves great peace and glory, because they have the Gospel, hear
the Word, receive the Sacrament, are called after the name of Christ, though
they live in all profaneness: Mat. 25.
The foolish Virgins were very secure, and promised much unto themselves from
their lamps, though they were empty lamps: Many a vain and foolish man is
secure and consident of his salvation by reason of his profession, Hos. 10.1.
though an empty one; though he be an empty vine, bringing forth all his fruit
to himself, doing all for himself, T^t. 1.16.
and nothing for God and Christ, professing, as the Apostle says, that they
know God, being the mean while disobedient and reprobate to every good work.
This is the common foundation on which all carnal Protestants build their
hopes; Ioh 8.
like the Pharisees boasting that they were the children of Abraham, though
they did the works of the Devil, Rev. 9.7, 8.
being like the Locusts in the Revelation, which had outwardly the face of a
man, and the hair of a woman, but within the teeth of a Lion, and behind, the
tail of a Scorpion: Thus these men have outwardly the name of Christians, a
profession of Christ, but as savage and indomitable as the Lion, as full of all
sin, as the Scorpion of venom; and what a fond thing is it for a man to
build his hopes upon an empty profession? Will a husband delight himself in
his wife, because she professes him to be her husband, living the while in
adultery with strangers? Will the King honor a man for professing him to be
his King, not ceasing to plot treason, and act rebellion against him, Is there
any hope that Christ will take pleasure in a man, or honor him, because he
calls him Husband, Lord and King? in the mean space committing fornication with
the world, plotting spiritual treason, and acting open rebellion against him?
Dan. 2.
Surely such men are like Nebuchadnezzars Image, and it will be with them as
with Nebuchadnezzars Image at last; his Image had a head of gold, but feet of
clay, and the stone hewne out of the mountains without hands brake it in
pieces: Such men have a golden profession, but an earthly and unclean
conversation, and Christ at last will dash them in pieces, Mat. 21 19.
as an iron rod a Potters vessel. As Christ cursed the Fig Tree which had
leaves and no fruit: so will he curse them that have the leaves of Christian
profession, but want the fruit of a good conversation; a barren profession does
but aggravate the condemnation of a Christian.

3 Mercinary hopes.
3. Some build their hopes upon their elymosynary duties, and works of charity;
because they are bountiful to the poor, they hope they shall be saved, they
trust in their good works, and hope to purchase heaven by their beneficence,
excluding Christ's merits: As the builders of old, by raising a Tower thought to
preserve themselves from an after deluge, Gen* 11.4.
and scale the walls of Heaven; but as their hopes perished, God confounding
their work, so will the hopes of these mercinary and proud workers, their best
works without Christ will bring confusion instead of salvation upon them; The
sword in which Goliath trusted, 1 Samuel 17.
cut off his head; whatsoever a man does rest upon besides Christ, he is
confounded by that wherein he trusts. It may seem strange, and yet is very
true, that many men's good works prove more prejudicial to them then their
evil works; their bad works prove an occasion of humiliation to them, and
drive them wholly out of themselves unto Christ; their good works puff them
up, and make them stay in themselves, and never come to Christ; and such men as
have no better foundation then their works of charity to build upon, the
Apostle will tell them, that a man may give all his goods to the poor, 1 Cor.
13.
and yet be nothing.

4 Comparative hopes.
4. Some build their hopes upon their not being so bad as the worst, they
compare themselves with such as are worse then themselves, and thereupon
conclude they are in a good estate, this is, as if a man having many ulcers,
should yet persuade himself he is very beautiful; because he is not as
leprous as Gehezi was: As if a man guilty of many small felonies, should
persuade himself the Judge will save him, because he is not so notorious a
malefactor as Barabbas was, or as if a man indebted an hundred pounds more then
he is worth, should persuade himself he is rich, because he is not indebted so
many thousand pounds as some others are: This was the deceit and false flattery
of the Pharisee, I thank God (says he) I am not as other men are,
extortioners, Luk 18.
unjust adulterers, or as this Publicane. Men dye not all of one sickness,
some have more pestilentiall diseases then others, yet all dye, the wages of
all sin is death: It is not he who is not so bad as others, but he that is a
new Creature in Christ, Romans 6.23.
that bath assured hope of life and peace, to them that are in Christ there is
no condemnation who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit.

5. Presumptuous hopes.
5. Some build their hopes upon the mercies of God and merit of Christ,
presuming they may be securely sinful, because God is merciful, and that they
may still run on upon Gods scoare, because Christ has given himself a
ransom; and thus they turn the grace of God into wantonness, and harden
themselves by those mercies which should lead them to repentance, turning
their physic into poison, and the means of their freedom into chains and
fetters to tie them the faster in their thraldom; and what is this, but as if
a man should tumble himself in the mire and dirt, because there is water
enough in a Well to wash him, yet a sealed deep Well whereof he has no bucket
to draw: Or as if a man should give himself many mortal wounds, because there
is a Surgeon that can cure him, of whose help he has yet no promise; Gods
mercies and Christ's merits minister pardon and peace to such alone as turn
from iniquity, and walk in the ways of peace: All mercies prove curses which
lead not the soul to God and Jesus Christ; The meditation of Gods mercy can
never truly comfort thee unless it humble thee. Benhadads servants hearing
that the Kings of Israel were merciful Kings, came not before Ahab with their
bows bent, and swords drawn, but with roapes about their necks, and sackcloth
about their loins. He that comes to God in the confidence of his mercies, must
lay aside the weapons of his sin, and come with tears in his eyes, and godly
sorrow in his heart, because there is mercy with the Lord that he may be
feared: Romans 2.4.
not to encourage man to continue wicked; not knowing (as S. Paul says) that
the goodness of God ought to lead thee to repentance, but after thy hardness
and impenitent heart, treasurest up against thy self, wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

6 Humiliation hopes.
6. Some build their hopes upon their Humiliations and Repentance, they have
been in affliction of conscience, they have been humbled for their sins,
and have been many days in great anguish of spirit, and in this they rest,
here they stay and hope by this to be saved; Isa. 58. 2.
thus the people in the Prophet, We (say ye) have fasted, and we have afflicted
our soul, and for this they thought to be heard and accepted of the Lord; but
there is a legal, as well as an Evangelicall repentance, a sorrow arising from
fear and not from love, from the apprehension of Hell and not of Heaven, from
the sense of wrath, and not from the working of love, from the feeling of
terrors and not from the hatred of sin, a sorrow of slaves and not of
sons, 2 Cor. 7. Genesis 4.
a sorrow which works unto death, and not a sorrow which works Repentance
to Salvation: a man may with Caine cry out of the greatness of his iniquity,
and his sorrow sink him even as low as Hell; he may with Ahab put on
sackcloth and walk humbly many days; he may with Pharaoh in his anguish, send
for the Minister of the Lord, and acknowledge his sin, and entreat the prayer
of Gods servants, on this he may build his hopes and deceive himself; that
repentance which does not supple and soften and change the heart is little
worth; the Lord smote the Rock and waters gushed out, yet it continued a
Rock; God smites the heart of many a man with perplexing and terrifying
strokes, to the drawing of many tears, and yet it continues a hard and stony
heart; that sorrow which works not the mortification of sin, gives no
assurance of the remission of sin. Is it such a fast (says the Lord,) that I
have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his soul, is it to bow down his head
as a bull-rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him; will thou call
this a Fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord; is not this the Fast that I
have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness? etc. that sorrow which does not
lead a man out of himself to Christ, which dissolves not the chains of his
sin, and ^les him to come freely and fully home to Christ, and fill him with
the sense of Christ's comforts, Mat. 11.28.
which emptieth not man of his sin and of himself, and puts him upon Christ
for all fulness, is a sorrow ministering no other then false and deceitful
hopes of salvation.

7. Some build their hopes upon their Reformations, 7. Reformation hopes.
they are escaped from many pollutions, they have forsaken many of their evil
ways, and they are not the same they were in time past, and therefore hope to
be saved, and with this they please and deceive themselves. 1 Samuel ^5.
Saul destroyed the refuse of the stuff, but spared the lowing Oxen and the
bleating Sheep, and yet thought he had done an acceptable work, but be was
deceived, God rent the Kingdom from him; the Reformation which is not
universal is hypocritical; the Traveller that forsakes not every false path,
loses his labor, all his turnings and returnings are in vain; he that
returns not from every sin, never returns to God; the woman which reserves
one stranger in her bosom, her heart never returns to her husband; there is
no returning to Christ without the deposition of every sin, Christ has no
being where any one sin has allowance and dominion; besides he that stays
in his Reformation, and looks not beyond it unto Christ for salvation, makes
an idol of it, and deludes himself in hoping for Salvation by it; man's
Reformation destroys him, if it makes not Christ more sweet and precious to
him.

8. Duty hopes. Lu. 13.
8. Some build their hopes upon their use of sacred and religious duties;
because they hear and pray and fast and confer of holy things; in this they
rest and by this they hope to be saved, Lord (say they) have not thou taught in
our streets? and have not we eat and drunk in thy presence? Genesis 41.
Have not we been hearers of thy word, frequenters of thy house, receivers of
thy Sacrament, and shall not we be saved? 2 Timothy 3.7.
though they be like Pharaohs lean kine, eating the fat and yet still lean,
like them of whom the Apostle speaks, Ezekiel. 33.31.
who were always learning, yet never came to the knowledge of the truth, like
Ezekiels hearers, whose hearts went after their covetousnes, yet they hope for
their frequency in these duties, to be saved, though their prayers still return
like Noah's Dove at the first empty, bringing home no treasure from Heaven to
the soul, though they return from the word and Sacrament, as the children of
the Nobles in Jeremy, Ier. 14.
from the pits, with their pitchers empty, yet they flatter themselves and hope
for this to be saved, as the Harlot in Solomon for her peace offering; but as
the man at the wedding feast without his wedding garment, though at the feast,
Prove. 7.
was bound hand and foot and cast into outer darkness; thus men using holy
duties, coming to Christ's wedding feast, staying in the duty and not putting
on Christ, Mat. 22.11.
will be cast into utter darkness at the last. Many deal in this behalf with
Christ, as other wedding guests do with the Bridegroom, they are invited, they
accompany the Bridegroom, they see and hear the wedding, but they receive him
not in wedlock, because either they are already married, or else there is no
contract between them and the Bridegroom; thus Christ inviteth men to holy
duties, his wedding feast, they accompany Christ to the feast, to the
Banqueting House, they go along with him in the use of the duties, but
further they go not, they are already wedded to the world, and to some lust of
theirs, at least they have no matrimonial love to Christ, they take him not to
husband, they return without him: Now as it were a great folly in a woman to
persuade her self, that such a man were her husband, and that all his
dignities and riches were hers* because she was at his wedding feast: thus it
is a great deceit in man to hope that Christ is his, that salvation and all the
benefits of Christ are his, because he has bin at Christ's wedding feast, done
the sacred duties, but not taking Christ in wedlock to his soul; the use of
holy duties, do no further give man hope of salvation, then as they take a man
off from the world, empty a man of sin and of himself, espouse man to Christ,
derive and draw from, and fill the soul with Christ's fullnes, and make Christ
more glorious and amiable in man's apprehension: and thus you see a few of the
many rotten and sandy foundations, whereupon carnal man builds his hopes of
salvation.

CHAP. XX. Showing how a Man may discern the soundness of his Hope.
THe carnal man's having no hope of salvation, building his hopes upon rotten
and deceitful pillars, ministers occasion to every man to see that he build
his hopes of salvation by Christ upon firm and sure grounds, and that he have
clear and lively evidence hereof in himself.

The Question therefore here will be, how a man may discern the truth and
soundnes of his hope? For answer whereunto you must know that whereof true and
^ound hope is, there is,

1. Preparation to Christ.
1. A preparation fitting and disposing of the whole man to Christ and the
things of Christ, for Christ, and the service of Christ: This the Apostle calls
a guirding up of the loins of the mind, Gird up (says he) the loins of your
mind, and hope perfectly: Do as travelers that wear long garments, as they
gird up their garments, that they may not hinder and tire them in their
travel, that they may walk freely and cheerfully in their Journey: Thus take
off your hearts and thoughts from the world, disburthen your selves of all
carnal lusts, and worldly distractions, raise your thoughts and desires to
Christ, and the things of Christ, cast aside all impediments, and come
speedily, fully, freely, and joyfully unto Christ. It is said of Rebeckah,
having resolved to join herself in wedlock with Isaac, upon the motion of
Eleazer, Abraham's servant, that she rose up and her o damsels, and they rode
upon Camels and followed the man. The soul being upon the motion and
persuasion of Gods Minister, resolved to take Christ to Husband, and having
assured hope of enjoying everlasting consortship with Christ, rises up from
the earth, and all the faculties, thoughts and affections thereof rise together
with it, and come speedily, not slowly but on horseback, with all readiness
to Christ, following the holy and wholesome instruction of Gods Ministers, she
forsakes (as the Psalmist says) her fathers house, and forgets her own
people, rejects her old ways, customs, and carnal acquaintance, and
comes unto Christ in her garment of needle-worke, prepared and beautified by
Gods Spirit: The more a man does hope in Christ, the more he prepares himself
for Christ, the more fully he applies himself to Christ, and the more he
strives for full communion with Christ.

2. Study and practice of holiness. 1 John 3.3.
2. There is an earnest and constant study and practice of holiness. Hope of
salvation by Christ works conformity with Christ: Every man (says Saint John)
that has this hope, purifieth himself as Christ is pure. He that has most
hope of being saved, is most laborious to be sanctified; whosoever has this
hope, sin is the fowlest spot in his eye, the heaviest burden to his back,
and the most troublesome inmate in the house of his soul; and therefore he
puts himself to it to the utmost to purge this out, and again holiness is
to his eye the most glorious Star, to his nosthrill the sweetest flower, in
his estimation the choicest pearl, and the noblest crown, and therefore
strives to excel in this; and to be like Christ, is taken by him for the
greatest happiness; he that says, he hopes to be saved, and yet labors not
to be sanctified, does but dream and not hope, whosoever waits for Heaven
waits for it in the way of sanctification.

3. Holy Patience.
3. There is a holy patience toward God. The soul constantly and quietly
cleaving to the Lord, in seeking and waiting for all bliss and happiness from
the Lord, though for the present exercised with many temptations and trials,
and having it is comfort many times eclipsed and much obscured, never repining
against God, never prescribing to God, never stepping aside to any forbidden
means from God, Isa. 8.17.
but quieting it self in the will of God, wa^ing upon the Lord when he hides
his face from him, and looking for him, as he that has seen the Sun in the day
time, and has assured hope of the Suns return, waits for him patiently in the
darkest night, until his rising and re-appearing: thus he that has felt the
light of Gods countenance shining upon him, and has assured hope of the
sensible return of Gods favor, waits for it with patience in the darkest
night of his distress, Psalm. 30.
being assured that his anger endures but a moment, and that in his favor is
life, that weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. He
that has the most assured hope of receiving good things from God, is best able
to quiet himself in the will of God: Man's hope of enjoying future comforts
does very much mitigate and sweeten man's present sorrows: If we hope for that
we see not, Romans 8.25.
then (says Saint Paul) do we with patience wait for it.

4. There is joy and delight in God and Christ. 4. Delight in God and Christ.
He that assuredly hopes and waits for the receiving of all good from God and
Christ, for a full, a sweet, and everlasting communion with God and Christ,
cannot but rejoice and delight himself in God and Christ: The betrothed woman
which has assured hopes of enjoying a comfortable wedlock with such a man,
has many joyful thoughts of him; the betrothed soul assuredly hoping for a
comfortable, honorable, and everlasting wedlock with Christ, has many
joyful and soule-ravishing meditations touching Christ, rejoicing and
delighting in him as in the root which gives him life, as in the Sun which
sends him light, as in the treasure where he finds all riches, as in the
Paradise wherein he meets with all comforts, and as in the Arc which bears
him up in every deluge; Christ is the only joy of such as hope in him, Romans
5.2.
rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, and being begotten again to a lively
hope, we rejoice therein with joy glorious and unspeakable. His hopes an Christ
are dreams, falsehoods, and carnal presumptions, who does not delight himself
in the Lord Jesus.

5. There is holy Security and boldness of heart, 5. Holy security.
and a sweet acquiescence in the favor of God shining upon the soul through
the face of Jesus Christ, inabling a man to possess his soul in peace and
patience in the midst of all troubles, as the ship lies safe at anchor in the
haven, in the midst of the stormy tempest; inabling man after many
difficulties, Psalm. 116.
and sharp conflicts to say, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord
has dealt bountifully with thee; apprehending God as a Father, Christ as a
Husband, the promise of God as a firm and sure rock to support him, the
Attributes of God as so many Crystal streams to refresh him, as so many
beams of the highest and most glorious Sun to warm him, as so many hiding
places to shadow and shelter him, and all the several acts and passages of
Gods providence, as so many outgoings of Gods love and mercy toward him,
causing him to glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation works patience,
and patience experience, and experience hope, Romans 5.3.
and hope makes not ashamed.

humbly of himself, and highly of Christ, hoping for nothing from himself but
for all things from Christ, it emptieth man of himself, and causes him to
fetch all from the fullness of Christ; it causes him to have his whole
dependence upon Christ, as the house upon the rock, depending upon him for
life to quicken him, wisdom to direct him, power to uphold him,
righteousness to justify him, holiness to sanctify him, mercy to forgive
him, peace to quiet him, and blessing to make all successful to him, etc.
True hope makes a man, Psalm. 31.24.
a man of courage in all holy undertakings, in the open profession of God and
his Testimonies, in the patient tolleration of all afflictions, in the
Christian and constant abiding of all reproaches and contradictions for the
Lord Jesus: This inables man to possess his soul in a holy silence, when the
world loades him with the heavy burden of many wrongs and injuries, Ps. 38 14,
15.
this fills him with fervent and frequent Prayers, and supplications; the more
he hopes, the more he prays, and the sweeter answer he receives to the
Petition which his soul makes, hope of finding much quickens and strengthens
man in seeking, unfeigned hope in God is ever attended with some comfortable
manifestation of God. God will not leave that soul in darkness which hopes in
his mercies, the hoping soul ever meets with matter of praises and rejoycings
after long sorrows and patient waitings.

CHAP. XXI. Showing the carnal man in his corrupt estate is altogether
alienated from God.
THe fifth and last Alienation, declaring the carnal man's misery, is an
Alienation from God, without God in the world. Atheists, either not believing
there was any God at all, or not believing aright, but embracing and adoring an
Idol, instead of the true God; but in as much as neither the Ephesians, nor
other Gentiles were void of all Religion; but all acknowledged and adored some
Deity, how does the Apostle call them Atheists, and say they were without God
in the world?

Answ. 1. They were without the Scriptures, the light by which God shines from
above into the souls of men, the spiritual and heavenly glass by which God
does reveal, and show himself plainly and clearly unto man; and being without
the word of God, they were without God, as Israel being without a preaching
Priest, and without Law, 2 Chro. 15.3.
is said to have been without the true God. He that is without the word is also
without God.

2. They were without the knowledge of God, as the blind is without the Sun,
they walked in the vanity of their mind, Ephesians 4.18.
having their understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God
through the ignorance that is in them.

3. They had false opinions of God, their apprehensions of God were corrupt and
carnal, Romans 1.
that which they apprehended was not the true God, but an Idol, their foolish
heart was darkened, and they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an
Image made like to corruptible man: And as an Idol is nothing, of no divine
power and virtue, so the Apostle reputeth their opinions, and adorations of God
as nothing, and says they were without God: Not God, but an Idol is the
object of superstitious odoration.

4. They knew not, believed not, loved not, adored not God in Christ; God is no
where rightly and truly known and served but in Christ; whatsoever is adored
out of Christ, is an Idol, and not God; He that is without Christ, is without
God; no man comes to God, that makes not Christ the way; no man knows God,
that beholds him not in the face of Christ, John 3.21.
He that denies the Son has not the Father (says Saint John) And thus they
were without God in the world; and hence observe, That,

Doct.
Man in his corrupt and carnal estate is altogether estranged from God, he
has nothing of God within him, God does not shine into his heart, God lives
not graciously in his soul, God works not powerfully and savingly upon him: He
has no spiritual commerce and communion with God; he is estranged from the
thought of God, Psalm. 10 4.
God (says the Psalmist) is not in all his thoughts, he thinks not upon God as
upon the Creator that formed him, as upon the rock that supporteth him, as
upon the King commanding him, as upon the Moderator dispensing and ordering
him, and all things else, as upon the Judge rendering to every man according to
his works; but all his thoughts are, that there is no God, no God beholding,
observing, registring and judging the ways and works of man; The soul of
every carnal man is overwhelmed with Atheism, running headlong into all
impiety, as if there were no God to punish him; he is alienated from the fear
of God; Psalm. 36.1.
he is full of dishonorable, low, and unworthy apprehensions of God, ready to
say with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice, I know not the
Lord. He thought the God of Israel inferior to the Idols of Egypt, he was so
puffed up with his worldly fullness, that he thought himself sufficient of
himself without God; Corrupt and carnal man through his ignorance, pride, and
profaneness, has a very base opinion of God, and most shamefully sleights
and undervalues God: Psalm. 73.
He sets his mouth against the Heavens; he speaks reproachfully, against the
Law and Doctrine of God delivered from Heaven; against the authority and
dominion of God, whose Throne is in Heaven; against the Saints and faithful
servants of God, whose spiritual original is from Heaven; against Gods
worship and Religion, which is of a heavenly institution: Of all this he speaks
basely and presumptuously, this he treads and tramples under feet, and inthrals
it to his proud and sinful lust; he is alienated from the knowledge and
belief of God, either he has an opinion that there is no God, as the fool in
the Psalmist has said in his heart, there is no God The fool, Psalm. 19.1.
the man in whom the light of grace shines not, in the lamp of whose soul the
oil of saving knowledge burns not, he has said in his heart, resolved and
concluded with himself, that there is no God of wisdom discerning the ways
of men, no God of Justice taking vengeance upon men, for their impieties: Or if
he think there is a God, he believes not that he is such a God, as indeed he
is, so glorious in his Essence, in his Attributes, in his Persons, and in his
works: so holy in his ways, so faithful in his promises, so gracious to his
servants, and so severe against his enemies; and therefore such men say unto
God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14.
what is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit shall we have
if we pray unto him. God the chiefest good is of no esteem with them that are
empty of all spiritual good. Holy and religious services are in their opinion,
the most frivolous and fruitless undertaking, who are altogether corrupt and
carnal: Man's profane, and base sleighting, and undervaluing of God, and the
ways, worship, and service of God, openly proclaim man's miserable and cursed
ignorance of God, man's unhappy and sinful Alienation, and estrangement from
God.

Carnal man's wretched and soule-destroying estrangement from God, 7 Grounds of
man's estrangement from God.
is moreover manifest, described in such characters that he that runs may read
it: As,

1. By carnal man's enmity and opposition against God, 1 Opposition and
contrariety to God. Romans 8.7.
and his contrariety to God, as contrary as death to life, darkness to light,
evil to good, bitter to sweet; The carnal mind (says Saint Paul) is enmity
against God, opposing God, sighting against God; It is not subject to the Law
of God, neither indeed can be; It breaks the bands, and casts away the cords
of Gods Law, as Sampson sometimes burst his withes; as the man in the Gospel
possessed with an unclean spirit, Mar. 5.
plucked in sunder the chains, and break in pieces the fetters which tied
him, neither could any man tame him: Thus the carnal man possessed by Satan,
and his own unclean and profane spirit, breaks all the chains and fetters
of Gods Law, no Minister, no friend, no counsel, no persuasion, no comination
can tame him, and make him humble and subject to the Law of God; Job 24.
but he rebelleth against the light, he shuts his eyes, and will not see, he
stops his ears, and will not hear, and is altogether contrary unto God;
God is light, but he is darkness; God is holy, perfectly, absolutely,
infinitely holy, but he is corrupt and altogether filthy; God is good, the
fountain of all goodness, but he is evil, a root of bitterness, all the
thoughts and imaginations of his heart are only and altogether evil; God is a
God of knowledge, perfectly knowing himself, and all things else, but carnal
man neither knows God nor himself; God is a God of love, he loves himself,
and them that bear his Image, but the carnal man hates God, and all them that
are like God, he loves evil, and hates good; God is a God of truth, a true and
faithful God; the carnal man is full of hypocrisy and deceit, his heart is
deceitful above measure; God delights himself, he takes pleasure in them
that fear him, he delights in them that are upright in the way; To the
carnal man the thought of God is terrible, he takes pleasure in
unrighteousnes, and delights in the frowardnes of the wicked, and thus his
contrariety to God proclaims his alienation from God.

2. Estrangeme^ from the life of God. Ephesians 4.
2. By carnal man's estrangement from the life of God, alienated (as Paul says)
from the life of God, without the life of grace. God lives not in him by his
Spirit regenerating and quickening him; The body alienated from the soul,
without the soul living in it, is dead, unprofitable, unsavory, an
uncomfortable spectacle; Man alienated from the life of God, is dead in sin,
unprofitable to God, to his Church, to his own soul, unsensible of his sin,
incapable of the word, unsavory and abominable in the nostrils of God, a very
monster in the eyes of God, more ugly then any leper, toad, or loathsome
creature; the dead body is earthy, inclining to the earth, fit only for the
grave; The carnal man is earthly, minded, inclining only to things here
below, and is ready to be cast into the grave of Hell, fit for an infernal
funeral with the damned in outer darkness; He that wants the life of grace,
is far from the God of grace, whosoever is not spiritually quickened by God, is
miserably estranged from God.

3. By the carnal man's estrangement from the knowledge of God: Of such the
Psalmist says, they have no knowledge; no knowledge of God as a Father, of
Christ as a Husband, 3. Estrangeme^t from the knowledge of God.
of the Spirit as a Sanctifier and comforter, of the word as of a light
guiding, and food feeding, and nourishing them to life eternal; they have no
spiritual knowledge, no principle of spiritual light to perceive the things
of God which are spiritually discerned; Psalm. 14.4.
no experimental knowledge of Gods work upon their souls, in the
vivification, illumination, sanctification, and gracious change of their
hearts; no affective knowledge, 1 Cor, 2.14.
they know not God as a child knows his father, as a wife knows her husband
with fervent love and hearty affection; no submissive knowledge, they know not
God as a Subject his Sovereign, a soldier his Centurion yielding hearty,
free, and cheerful obedience unto him no appretiative knowledge they know not
God as the rich man knows his jewel, esteeming it far above all his straw
and common lumber in his house, as the people knew David, accounting him better
then many thousands of themselves, they do not prize God above the creature
and themselves, they do not repute all base and vile, as nothing in respect of
God; no appropriative knowledge, they know not God, as the wife the husband,
selecting and taking God unto themselves, and making him their God, as the wife
does the husband, they take not God unto them, as their King, Crown, portion,
and as all in all to their souls; no consolative and delightful knowledge,
they know not God as the (...) the Sun, rejoicing in the light of the Sun, they
delight ^n God, their souls take not up their sweet repose in the botome of
God, the meditation of God is not sweet unto them; no satiative knowledge, they
know not God, as the thirsty the full fountain, they are not filled with God,
they meet not with contentation in God, their desires are not terminated in
God, and satisfied with God, they know not Gods All Sufficiency, they take not
up their full and eternal rest with God, they are still stepping out from God,
with Judas they are not content with Christ, but they must have the bag too;
and as the blind is a stranger to the Sun, so is the blind soul a stranger
to God.

3 Estrangeme^t from the l^ve of God.
3. By the carnal man's estrangement from the love of God, he is a stranger to
the love of God: Passively, it is a Sun, with whose beams his soul was never
warmed, a wine which his palate never tasted, a banner under which he was never
covered; God never communicated the sweet sense and feeling of his love unto
him; none but the Bride has the sense of the Bridegroomes love; he is a
stranger to the love of God actively; he is a stranger to the love of union
with God, he declines not the things which separate from God, he delights not
in the means which unite the soul to God, he desires not spiritual
conjunction and communion with the Church and people of God, he grieves not at
the absence of the efficacy of the Spirit, he longs not after the full
fruition, of the blessed and gracious presence of God; he is a stranger to the
love of Complacency in God; he neither abhorres the things which are adverse to
the will of God, nor highly prizeth the Society of the Saints of God, nor is
sensible of that joy and sweetness which is found in the exercises of
godliness, nor knows that delight which a gracious soul meets with, by holy
walking, and maintaining a sweet communion with God, he is not comforted and
well-pleased in and with God, as the eye with the Sun, and the thirsty palate
with the clear and full fountain, but has more pleasure in the creature then
in the Creator; he is also a stranger to the love of benevolence, and
welwishing toward God; having no zeal for Gods glory, nor yielding any
filial and sincere obedience to Gods precepts: Whatsoever be the pretenses of
a carnal man's love^ God, he loves himself more then God, his love is the lov^
harlots, whose love is more to strangers then to their husbands. Want of free,
full, and fervent love to God, ever argues an unhappy estrangement from God.

4. Estrangeme^t from the spiritual ministrations of God.
4. By the carnal man's estrangement from the spiritual soule-sanctifying and
soule-saving ministrations of God. The carnal man is an empty house, there is
nothing of God dwelling there; he is a Tree twice dead, and plucked up by the
roots, Romans 7.18. Jude v 12.
there is no ministration of spiritual life, Christ does not live in him, he
sits in darkness, and the shadow of death, the God of this world has blinded
the eyes of his understanding, as the Philistines put out the eyes of Sampson;
there is no ministration of spiritual and saving knowledge, God has not
shined into his heart, he has not the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ; he lies in the prison of the prince of darkness, like
Peter in Herod's prison, his lusts fettering him, Satan on his right hand, the
world on his left hand, like two strong and vigilant soldiers keeping him;
There is no ministration of spiritual freedom, he is led captive by sin, the
Devil, and the world; he is full of sin, as Naamans flesh of leprosy; there
is no ministration of grace and sanctification, God has not powered out his
Spirit like clean water upon him; Isa. 57.20.
he is like the troubled Sea which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt, his conscience accusing, his heart condemning him; there is no
ministration of spiritual peace, no seal of the pardon of sin, no
atonement between God and his soul; where there is no light, the Sun appears
not, where there is no ministration of grace God dwells not, without grace,
without God.

6. Estrangeme^t from Christ. Ioh. 1.11.
6. By the carnal man's estrangement from Christ, he receives not Christ as a
dweller to possess him, as a King to command him, as a Lord and Master to be
every way serviceable to Christ, as a friend to love Christ, as a husband to
marry his soul to Christ, as a Physician to be healed by Christ, as a
fountain to be filled with Christ, as the root of life to live in and by
Christ; Every carnal man is a sinful, and a Christlesse creature, having
nothing of Christ in him; and being without Christ he is without God, God is no
God of grace, of mercy, of peace to the soul without Christ. Whosoever (says
Saint John) denies the Son, embraces not, loves not, honors not the
Son, has not the Father. And again, whosoever transgresses, and abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ has not God. God is truly and comfortably
known, rightly adored, and sweetly and savingly enjoyed only in Christ. Man
has no way to God but Christ, he is the glass in whom God is clearly seen, he
is the fountain whence the fullness of God is received, he is the beloved, in
whom alone man is accepted. God is an utter stranger to the soul of that
person, who has not Christ dwelling in him.

7. Estrangeme^t from the remembrance of God.
7. By the carnal man's estrangement from the remembrance of God: In the grave
(says the Psalmist) there is no remembrance of thee. Among the carnal men,
the dead in sin, there is no remembrance of God, God is not in all their
thoughts, their thoughts are worldly thoughts, Psalm. 6.5. Psalm. 10.4.
vain thoughts, evil thoughts, thoughts of iniquity, Every imagination of the
thoughts of their hearts is only evil continually; they remember not, they
think not upon the Lord: He is forgotten (as he speaks by Jeremy) days
without number: Jer. 2.32.
The carnal man's thoughts of God are erroneous thoughts, superstitious
thoughts, doubtful thoughts, low thoughts, dishonorable thoughts, seldom,
cold, and flitting thoughts, no serious, dwelling, abiding and working
thoughts: He does not remember God as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, with
high, honorable, transcendent, awefull, and reverent thoughts, disposing his
soul to the fear of God; He does not remember God, as the rich man his
treasure with joyful and delightful thoughts; as the captive his Ransomer,
with gratulatory and praise rendering thoughts; as the Bride her Bridegroom,
with loving, soule-warming, and heart-affecting thoughts; as the thirsty man
the fountain, with longing and incessant thoughts; He does not remember the
dominion of God to be subject to him, the Wisdom or God to be guided by him,
the power of God to repose himself upon him, the presence of God to walk all
the day long as in Gods sight, nor the Al-sufficiency of God to seek all
satisfaction in him; Perhaps like Mariners in a storm, in a time of trouble,
he has some constrained thoughts of God, but otherwise he forgets God as
Pharaohs Butler forgate Joseph; as men in time of peace lay aside their
weapons, and think no more upon them till war be renewed: Thus carnal men
lay aside all thought of God, make no use of God until some dismal distress
ceaze upon them; and as they are strangers to the remembrance of God, so they
must of necessity be estranged from all interest in God, and from all communion
with God.

CHAP. XXII. Opening the Atheism of Man, and the haynousnesse thereof.
IN carnal and natural man's estrangement from God, in his being without God,
we may see and behold a deluge of Atheism overflowing and drowning the men of
the world, as once the deluge of waters overflowed and drowned the earth. Sorts
of Atheists.


Some are Atheists in opinion, concluding, 1. In Opinion.
or at least supposing that there is no God at all, saying in their hearts,
there is no God; against the great and glorious workmanship of God in the
Creation of the world, wherein he that runs may read as in lively characters
the invisible things of God, the power, wisdom, and goodness of God.
Transgressing against the providence, authority, dominion, and wisdom of God,
clearly shining in his most wise, and powerful preservation, moderation,
dispensation, and ordering of the whole universe, and all the particulars
thereof, as a great Centurion his army, as a prudent Lord and Master his
family. Subverting and overthrowing all Religion, and divine worship, as if it
were but a politic devise to keep men in awe, as children with tales, and
stories of bug-beares, and hob-goblins, there being no God to be adored, no
supreme and eternal Lord and Sovereign to be served, no Hell to be feared,
no Heaven to be desired. Letting loose the raines to all licentiousness, as if
there were no Law to be transgressed, no punishment to be inflicted, offending
against the honor and dignity of man's condition, equalizing the very beasts
with man, as if man were to perish like the beasts, partaking king after death
of no greater glory then the beasts partake of, extinguishing the very light of
nature, by which the very heathens of all ages have acknowledged a supreme,
divine being; as if they were either so many empty lamps or false lights set up
for show and not for truth; sinning also against Christ: if there be no God,
then was Christ's undertaking with God for man in vain, then he suffered to no
purpose, then had he no authority, no commission from above, and so is made the
greatest Imposter and deceiver that ever the earth did bear; a generation of
men these are worse then the Devils, for they believe and tremble. O the
miserable condition whereinto sin has cast man, causing him to deny the
being of that God who gave him being, the fruition of whom was the Paradise of
man's soul at his first Creation, and is now the sweetest joy and glory of
mankind, being either in the state of grace, or in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Some are Atheists in practice, professing (as the Apostle says) that they
know God, but in works deny him. Some make Idols their God, bowing down before
a stock and a stone, as the superstitious; some make worldly goods their God,
as the covetous; some make meat and drink their God, as the drunkard and
glutton; some make honors and high places their God, as the ambitious; some
make carnal delights and pastimes their God, as the voluptuous and
pleasure-hunters; some make whores and harlots their God, as the wanton and
adulterous; some make their works their God, as the merit-mongers; some make
their naked attendance upon holy Ordinances their God, as the the
carnall-Gospellers; some make their moral virtues their God, as the civil
man; some make their forms of godliness, and outward shows their God, as the
hypocrites, etc. All these, and such like, though they profess God, yet in
practice they are Atheists, and do deny God: Atheism in practice
demonstrated. 1. Loose-living
He that discernes not the seeds, relics, and movings of this abomination in
himself, never yet knew himself, nor the state of his own heart; And what
does 1. men's loose-living under the Gospel, men's running into all excess of
riot, contrary to their holy calling, the nature of the Gospel, and such
plain and powerful persuasion from Heaven proclaims? but the Atheism of
their souls, not believing the truth of God, reputing Gods messengers as
bablers, and the sacred truths which they deliver, as fables.

2. What does men's sinning so freely in secret, 2. Secret sinning.
taking such pleasure in contemplative wickedness, within the closer of their
own hearts, and taking such liberty to do evil in the dark, where the eye
of man beholds it not, what does this argue? but a secret Atheism lurking in
their souls, having no apprehension of Gods presence, of Gods Al-seeing eye,
having no remembrance that God is every where, filling all places, privy to all
the movings and stirrings of their hearts. Were not the hearts of men very
Atheistical, they would not dare do that in the sight of God which they will
not do in the eyes of men.

3 Fearlesnesse of Judgments
3. What does men's fearelesnesse of denounced judgments, men's putting off the
evil day far away: Men's sinning securely, men's flattering themselves in an
estate wherein they are ready to drop every moment into Hell, hanging by the
weak thread of their frail life over the bottomless pit, what does this
declare? but Atheism, not believing that God is such a just and righteous God,
such a hater and revenger of sin as indeed he is.

4. What does men's seldom praying, cold praying, 4. Seldom and cold praying.
irreverent praying proclaim? but an Atheistical ignorance, unsensiblenesse,
and unapprehensivenesse of Gods greatness, glory and presence: Kings and
Monarchs are served in great state, because men apprehend their Majesty; men
address themselves to God, as to their fellow, because they are neither
powerfully persuaded, nor workingly apprehensive of his glorious presence.

5. Sleighting of divine knowledge.
5. What does men's sleighting of the means of the knowledge of God, men's
neglecting of the salvation which God proffers them, men's undervaluing of
Christ, men's seeking of the applause and favor of men, more then the
approbation and favor of God, men's exalting of their lusts above God, man's
seeking after and resting upon the creature, man's sacrificing to an arm of
flesh, man's superficial performance of the duties of Religion, what do all
these, and many such bewray? but abundance of Atheism in the heart; for were
this truth thoroughly rooted in the heart of man, were the meditation of this
principle powerfully operative upon the soul of man, That God is, and that he
is a God so glorious, so powerful, so gracious, so all-sufficient, and so far
surpassing all creatures, as indeed he is, it would move man to prefer the
knowledge of God above all learning, the approbation of God above all praise,
and the love of God above all favor, it would make all the lusts of the soul
fall as Dagon before the Arc, were this predominant in, and effectually
working upon the heart of man, no sin could stand before it, the creature
would appear to the eye of the soul as a thing of naught, man would be
ashamed of his best abilities, grieved for the imperfection of his holiest
services, and apply himself to the work of his God with seven fold more
diligence. O then complain often, and pray to God against thy secret Atheism,
as against the great plague and pest of thy soul, as against a beam in thy
eye disabling thee to see God, as against a fetter about thy feet, disabling
thee to come to God, as against a partition wall, hindering thy sweet and
comfortable communion with God. In carnal man's estrangement from God, in his
being without God, we may see the miserable and wretched condition of corrupt
and carnal man; we repute the body miserable without a soul to enliven it,
the world miserable without the Sun to enlighten it, the besieged City
miserable without a Captain to rescue it, or wall to defend it, the thirsty
miserable without a fountain to refresh him, the wandering traveller miserable
without a guide to direct him, the forsaken miserable without a friend to
comfort him, etc. But here is the misery of all miseries to be without God, to
be estranged from God, who is the soul enlivening, the Sun guiding, the great
Centurion rescuing, the wall of fire defending, the fountain refreshing, the
guide leading, and the friend solacing man: We see Hagar weeping, when her
bottle is empty, and has no water, Rachel mourning for her children, and will
not be comforted, because they are not, the wife of Phin^as refusing to be
comforted, because the Arc is carried away, Idolatrous Micah running and
crying as a man undone, because his Idol, his imaginary God is taken from him,
but what is the loss of these, and a thousand such things as these are to
loss of God, surely no more then the loss of a gloe-worme to the loss of the
Sun, then the loss of a straw to the loss of a precious pearl. Here is cause
indeed of mourning, crying, complaining, Evils of being without God. 1. Full of
Satan.
lamentation to be without God: For he that is without God, is 1. Full of
Satan, he that is empty of one is full of the other, when God forsakes the
house of man's soul, Satan takes the possession, he becomes the dweller, he
like an armed man keeps the Fort in man's heart, he like a Prince sets up his
Throne, and keeps his Court in the City of man's soul, when God is gone Satan
enters in, the less of God, the more of Satan in the soul of man: When the
house in the Parable was empty, Mat. 12.
then the unclean spirit entered with seven others worse then himself, when
the soul is empty of God, Satan fills it with a troop of all abominations, then
he blindes the understanding, that they cannot see nor God, nor Christ, nor
themselves, then he gaggs their mouths, that as the man that had a dumb
Devil, they can neither speak for God, nor to God, then he bows them down
to the world, and makes them drudges and slaves to the earth, like the woman
that had a spirit of infirmity, that they cannot look up to God, they cannot
think on God, nor the things which are above, then he casts them into the fire
of rage, fury and anger, Mar. 9.22.
and into the waters of drunkenness, sensual lusts, and carnal pleasures; as
he cast the man's son in the Gospel into the fire and water, then he fills
them with fraud, falsehood, hypocrisy, and spiritual treason, as he put it
into the heart of Judas to betray Christ: Vnconceavable is that man's misery
that is left of God to Satan, that is empty of God, and full of the Devil, he
that is full of Satan first must look to be full of Hell at last.

2. He that is without God, is full of the world, 2. Full of World.
he minds earthly things, he bows down to these things, as Gideons thousands
to the waters, these command him, sway over him, lead him away captive, as the
harlot in Solomon did the young man, he commits adultery with them, and as a
man by means of a whorish woman is brought to a morsel of bread: so these by
means of their fornication with this whorish woman the world, they become very
beggars in grace, and get a blot and a stain which cannot be wiped off; being
without God he overprizeth the world; in the siege of Samaria Doves dung was
sold at a high price, because they wanted bread; he that wants God, the bread,
the staff, and stay of his soul, highly prizeth the dung and dross of the
earth, and wanting God, the world with her cares, honors, pleasures, customs,
fashions, and allurements overwhelmes him as the deluge did them that were
without the Arc; miserable is their slavery and servitude to the world, who
have not God graciously possessing them, spiritually reigning and ruling within
them.

3. Full of Sin.
5. He that is without God is full of sin. The sluggards field in Solomon
being without a diligent husbandman to manure it, was full or thorns and
nettles: He that has not God the great husbandman of the soul to manure him,
is overgrowne with the thorns, briars and nettles of all sorts of vices, full
of all abominations, as Baals house was full of Idolaters, and the Pharisces
Sepulchers full of rottenness and dead men's bones; his lusts bind and chain
him as the fetters did Peter in Herod's prison; his understanding is full of
blindness, Exodus 10.23.
as the Egyptians houses were full of darkness, he sees nothing of God, of
Christ, nor of his own unhappy estate; his will is full of perverseness and
frowardness, no liberty, no inclination there to move Godward, to intend God,
his glory, or his souls welfare; he is led away captive by his lusts, Isa. 20
4. Rev. 3.17.
as the Egyptians by the Assyrians, naked and barefoot, poor, blind, naked,
miserable and wretched; His thoughts are full of vanity, pride, baseness,
covetousness, fraud, beastliness, and what not, these trade and traffic,
and travel up and down within him, as swine in a stithe, and make him a very
dunghill, and loathsome habitation, as the buyers and sellers made the Temple a
den of thieves; his affections are full of all pollution, base fear, carnal
confidence, worldly love, and fleshly joy, his soul like the cup in the woman's
hand upon a skarlet colored beast, Rev. 17. full of abominations and
filthiness; and his ways, works, and particular passages of his life,
superscribed with names, titles, and characters of blasphemy against God,
Christ, Heaven, the Gospel, and Christian Religion; He that is without God and
the Lord Jesus is the most loathsome of all Creatures.

4. He that is without God, is full of curses. 4 Full of curses
Where God is not, the curse goes: man's very blessings are turned into curses,
his moral and temporal abilities, all his possessions, the wife in his
bosom, the children in his house, the meat on his table, the apparel on his
back, is a snare to him. Psalm. 69.22. D^ut. 28.15, 16
Cursed is he in the City, and in the field, in his basket, and in his store,
in the fruit of his body, and in the fruit of his land, in the increase of his
kine, and flocks of his sheep, in his coming in, and in his going out: Yea the
very word which he hears, Sacrament which he receives, and Prayer which he
makes, becomes a curse, the savor of death unto death, yea Christ himself,
the medium of all blessings to the soul, 2 King. 4.40.
becomes a stone of stumbling, and a rocks of defense. The Prophets pot before
the meal was powered in, was a pot of death, the very whole of man without God,
turns to a curse to man. O the folly of them that bless themselves in their
havings, not having God with them, within them, regenerating, renewing, and
purifying, and sanctifying all unto them! Man's blessedness consists not in any
havings, but in the having of God: to him that has God for his God, the Lion
proves a hive of honey-combs, the greatest cross a sweet blessing, to him that
has not God, the choicest Paradise becomes a wilderness, the calmest river a
tempestuous Sea, his greatest prosperity, his heaviest misery.

5. He that is without God, is without all, 5. Empty of God, naked of all true
good.
the having of all things is as nothing, if we have not God with them; God is
the fullness of every thing, what is the having of a lamp without oil, a bone
without marrow, a vessel without liquor, such is the having of all things
without God; he that with Senacherib has Lordship over many Nations; he that
with Absolon has all bodily beauty; he that with the rich man in the parable,
has more substance then his house can hold; he that with the false Prophets
has all the applause of the world, every man's tongue a trumpet to sound his
praises; he that with the man at the wedding feast has all the Ordinances of
God, yet if with all this he has not God, he may say as Haman did in another
case, all this avail me nothing. He that is without God, is a house without a
foundation to uphold him, a besieged City without a Captain to rescue him, a
sheep in the mouth or a Lion without a Shepherd to deliver him, a chased Heart,
his sins like a thousand arrows sticking in him, the venom of the infernal
fiery serpent boiling and burning within him; his conscience with a hideous cry
pursuing him, and no water-brooke to refresh him, and a condemned malefactor
ready every moment to come to his heart-rending, soule-torturing, and never
ending execution, without a King of mercies to pardon him: The loss of God is
of all losses the greatest, no darkness like the want of this Sun, no famine
like the want of this bread, no storm comparable to the want of this calm. O
the blessedness of the soul which enjoyes God! O the slavery, baseness,
misery of the soul which is without God! Saul in his distress cried out, the
Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me. The carnal man
will one day cry out, the Devils make war against me, the fiends of Hell are
come upon me, and God is departed from me: Had man the lively sense and feeling
of future woes, terrors, and perplexities, whereinto his being without God will
cast him, he would give himself no rest until he had gotten the sweet and
sure fruition of him. O therefore be as loath to live now without God
enlightening, enlivening, sanctifying, and possessing you, as you will be loath
at last to perish, without God pardoning, helping, saving, and delivering you.

CHAP. XXIII. Declaring that God is, and the excellency of our interest in God.
THe carnal man's estrangement from God, his being without God, ministers
matter of excitation to all men to labor 1. for clear, sure, and invincible
evidence of this truth, That God is, and 2. for sure and infallible interest in
this God.

1. Labor for clear evidence, a lively, powerful, and working persuasion of
this in your hearts, that God is, and that he is such a one, as in his word he
has revealed himself to be; this is the pillar and ground of all Religion,
Satan labors much to undermine and shake it, and the Atheism of man's heart is
very prone to suspect and doubt it, and men's weak and feeble, lame and halting
apprehension of this truth, is one maine cause of the great abundance of
Atheism, and profaneness: For the effectual and invincible persuasion,
resolution, and through settling of your hearts therefore in this truth, that
God is, look 1. into the book of Scripture, and 2. into the book of Nature.

1. Look into the book of the Scripture, and there fasten your eyes, 1. upon
the plain and apparent Testimonies which it gives of God. By the mouth of Job,
1. Testimonies Ioh. 12.7, 8, 9, 10.
ask now (says he) the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the fowls of
the air, and they shall tell thee, or speak to the earth, and it shall teach
thee, and the fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. Who knows not in all
these, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this, in whose hand is the soul
of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind: By the mouth of David,
The Heavens (says he) declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handyworke: By the mouth of Paul, God Act 1^.16.
(says he) who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways, nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did
good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness. And again, As I passed by (says he to the men of
Athens) and behold your devotions, I found an Altar with this Inscription, Act.
17.23.
To the unknown God, whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto
you* God that made the world, and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands; Neither is
worshipped with men's hands, seeing he gives life, and breath, and every thing:
And most evidently writing to the Romans, he says, That which may be known
of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them, for the invisible
things of him from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they
are without excuse.

2. Fasten your eyes upon the miraculous and mighty works recorded in
Scripture, as the dividing of the waters of the red Sea, and making the
children of Israel to pass through them, the giving of waters out of a stony
rock, the raining of Manna from Heaven, the sending of Quails in the
wilderness, the restraining of the fire in Nebuchadnezzars furnace, that
though it burned, yet it hurt not the three children cast into it; the shutting
of the mouths of the Lions, that they hurt not Daniel cast in among them; the
curing of diseases, which no Physician could heal; the raising of the dead,
which no created power could do; the feeding of many thousands with a few
loaves and fishes, and many such like, evidently declaring, that there is an
Almighty hand doing such great and mighty works.

3. Meditate upon the prophecies and predictions there, receiving their full,
and sure, and certain accomplishment, in many ages after, according as it was
foretold, arguing an eternal and All-seeing Spirit by whom they were inspired.

4. Observe the punishments there, miraculously inflicted upon the old world,
the Sodomites, the Israelites in the wilderness, Pharaoh and many others, and
you shall read the Justice of an Almighty God punishing the wickedness of man.

5. Consider well a way revealed to life and salvation above the capacity of
man and Angel: God appearing to the Patriarckes, entering into a Covenant of
life and peace with them, sending his Prophets with tidings of a Savior to
come, and at last sending his own Son, conceived by the Holy Ghost in the
womb of a Virgin, the humane nature assumed into the unity of the second
person, Christ God and Man in one Person, a perfect Mediator between God and
man, a work so strange and wonderful, that the Angels do admire it, and
desire to pry into it, a singular demonstration of Gods infinite and
unsearchable wisdom.

6. Observe also the mighty efficacy of this word of God upon the hearts of
men, piercing their hearts, dividing between the bones and the marrow, the
joints and the spirit, presents as in a glass the most close and secret sins
of man before him, filling them with terror and amazement, humbling and
abasing them below the dust, raising them out of the grave of sin to a new
life, fetching them forth of Satan's prison, as the Angel brought Peter out of
Herod's prison, turning their stony hearts into hearts of flesh, making their
leprous souls pure and clean, as Naamans flesh in Jordan, healing the wounds
of their consciences, which no worldly balm could cure, plainly declaring that
an holy and Almighty Spirit did both inspire them, and work by them.

7. Observe in the sacred Scriptures a generation of people so changed by the
use of the word from what once they were; That they are now distinguished from
all the world besides, as the living from the dead, as the light from
darkness, as the Vine from the thorn, and the Lamb from the Wolf; men
called out of darkness into light, men hating their former estates, ways and
works, more then ever they loved them; Men choosing to live in any misery,
rather then in the allowance of the least sin; Men contented to be hated of
father, mother, and all their friends according to the flesh, that they may
please Christ, taking the spoiling of their goods joyfully, reputing the
reproach of Christ greater riches then all the treasures of the world; Men
pleasing, contenting, blessing and applauding themselves in the having of
Christ, though they have nothing else, willing rather to lie in prison, and dye
a thousand deaths, then deny or leave Christ, Now whence is all this, were they
borne so^? no they were once as others are. Is it of themselves? no, the
Leopard cannot change his spots, it is indeed no other but the work of a holy,
gracious, and mighty God, it is his work which makes men to differ. Had not
this generation of men a clear understanding, and a lively and sweet
apprehension of the Majesty, power, beauty, and goodness of this God, they
would never for his sake endure such reproach, hatred, and trouble from the
world.

Turn from the book of the Scripture to the book of Nature, and here you
shall see a Deity shining as the Sun in the Stars, and putting it self forth
as the root in the branches, and appearing as the Artificer in his workmanship:
And thus look,

1. Upon the whole universe, the great house of the world, the Earth as the
floor, and the Heavens as the roof and covering, plainly demonstrating the
eternal power, wisdom, and Godhead, as the Apostle says. When we see a
great and stately house builded, artificially composed, several pieces of
stone, timber, lime, earth, and other materials skilfully and strongly joined
together, variety of rooms framed for the entertainment of many guests, and
other offices belonging to the house, and windows made in fit and convenient
places, to give light thereunto, we all know that some skillful workman has
been laboring there, the house having no power nor wisdom to raise it self;
and thus when we look upon this great and mighty house of the world, and see
it composed of several creatures, Heavens, Air, Waters, Earth, etc. variety
of rooms fitted for men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and all other guests belonging
to this house: The Sun, Moon, and Stars set on high, as great lamps and
lanthornes to give light thereunto, we cannot but acknowledge that some
Almighty and All-wise workman has been the builder thereof none of these being
able to create and set themselves in this orderly manner; this we must needs
acknowledge though we see not the builder: When we see the body and branches of
a Tree springing, we know there is a root, though it be hidden in the earth,
and we see it not: When we see as that noble Duplesses observes, a river
flowing, we presently conclude there is some Spring or Fountain whence it has
Original, though we see not the same; and thus from the Creation, and the
things seen, we must of necessity conclude, there is a Deity, though invisible,
and not seen, otherwise then as we see the cause in the effect.

2. Look upon the order of things moving. We discern many things moving in
the world, as Sun, Moon, and Stars in Heaven, the Birds in the air, Men and
Beasts upon the earth, Rivers running, Seas ebbing and flowing; and every thing
that moves must of necessity be moved of some other, by the consideration
whereof we are necessarily led to acknowledge a first mover, which is God,
giving motion to all, himself not moved: When we see the body moving, we know
there is a soul within moving it, though we see not the soul: When we see the
wheels of a watch moving, we know there is a spring that sets them all on
going. Thus the motion of the creature plainly demonstrates a first mover,
though our eyes behold him not, according to the Rule, Secunda moventia non
movent, nisi per hoc quod sunt a primo motu.

3. Look upon the Series and succession of all efficient Causes. We see in
sensible things there is an order of efficient causes, yet among all these
there neither is, nor can any thing be found which is the cause of it self,
because so it should be before it self, which is impossible: As for instance,
the Son is begotten of the Father, the Father of the Grandfather, the
Grandfather of the great Grandfather, and so upward; yet amongst men, no man
ever was, or can be the begetter of himself; the branch comes from the Tree,
the Tree from the root, the root from the kernel, the kernel gives not being
to it self, and thus we must of necessity ascend unto, and rest in some first
cause, which is God, all second causes working in the virtue of the first cause.

4. Look upon the Consent and agreement between things different and
disagreeing between themselves: Fire and water are one contrary to another;
one fighting against another, destroying one another, yet these you shall see
concurring and agreeing together in the building of the universe, and in the
body of man and beast, which plainly shows the wisdom and power of some
supreme Commander, making such a sweet harmony between disagreeing creatures,
as between dissonant strings upon a musical instrument, we acknowledge the
art of a skillful Musician in the latter, and can we do less then acknowledge
an infinite wisdom and power of some supreme commander in the former.

5. Look upon the degrees of excellency and goodness among things: Some are
more good and more excellent; some less good, and less excellent; the Sun
has more light then the Stars; the Vine is more excellent then the Bramble;
man has more noble endowments, then the unreasonable creatures; and whence is
this, but as every creature has more or less good communicated to it, as it
does more or less approach unto some chiefest good, so that there must be some
chief and most excellent good communicating freely more or less good to every
kind of creature as he pleases.

6. Look upon the suiting and the fitting of one thing to another: As in a
building, when we see one piece of timber fitted to another, we say there has
been a skillful Carpenter: When we see a garment made up and suited to every
Member of man's body, we instantly conceive some artificial Tailer has had the
ordering of it, and that neither timber nor cloth did thus suit themselves
together: Thus in this great workmanship of the world, observe how light is
suited to the eye, the sound unto the air, meat to the palate, water to the
fishes, the earth to plants, and grass to beasts, and so of the rest; and when
we see this, how can we but acknowledge a divine finger thus suiting and
fitting one to another.

7. To be short took upon the subordination and dependence of one thing upon
another, one ministering to another, the Heavens to the Earth, the Earth to the
Corn, the Corn to man: Consider also the operation and working even of
creatures void of reason for a certain end, working constantly after the same
manner, and accomplishing their ends by due and apt means, producing effects
above their own abilities, as the Ant which gathers her meat in Summer for the
Winter, they working by a rule which they know not, and aiming at an end which
they understand not, declare that a higher understanding directs them; what
also do many strange and unexpected events and issues of things beyond the
wisdom, power and imagination of man argue, but an Almighty hand working and
disposing all things at his own pleasure; what shall we think of the
preservation and ministering of provision for so many ages to this great Family
of the world, but that there is some most wise, and able governor over this
house; what may we conclude from the preservation and continuance of a Church
upon the face of the Earth, against the fury of all Devils, and against the
power and malice even of the whole world, but that there is a God that stands
in the burning bush and keeps it, that the fire does not consume it, a rider
that sits upon the flood and restraines it from drowning his Church, a great
commander whom the winds and waves obey, one setting bounds to to men and
Devils, as to the Sea; and let these and such like considerations persuade you
and strengthen in the belief of this, That God is.

And be assured that the more your hearts are over-powred, wrought upon and
warmed with the study and meditation, and settled in persuasion and belief of
this truth, Benefits of this persuasion that God is.
That God is an eternal, omnipotent, most wise, holy and omnipresent being,
one that is ever present with you.

1. The more humble and abased shall you be in your own eye, 1. Self-abasement.
able to say with the Prophet, Woe is me J am undone, I am a man of unclean
lips, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hoasts.

2. The more ashamed shall you be of your former loosenes, 2. Shame for former
looseness.
smiting with Ephraim upon your thigh, ashamed and confounded for the reproach
of your youth, the more ashamed shall you be of your present uncleanness
abhorring your self with Job below the dust and ashes.

3 Suppresment of sin.
3. The more powerful shall you be in the suppression of all sin, in the
repelling of every temptation, able to say with Joseph, how shall I do this
evil and sin against God.

4 Fervent prayer.
4. The more fervent and reverent shall you be in your hearing, prayer and
supplication, standing with Cornelius, as before the Lord in hearing his
messenger, and praying like Paul with the understanding and with the spirit.

5 Industry in Gods service.
5. The more diligent and industrious shall you be in Gods service, knowing the
terror of the Lord, running like the Sun the race which God has set before
you, serving the Lord with fear and trembling, doing the will of God from the
heart.

6 Gracious speech.
6. The more gracious shall you be in all your speeches, speaking the words of
God, and as in the fight of God.

7. Circumspection.
7. The more circumspect shall you be in your carriage, being all the day long
in the fear of God, and walking with God as Enoch and Noah did.

8. Courage.
8. The more courageous and undaunted shall you be in all difficulties and
oppositions made against you, not afraid of the many thousands that set
themselves against you, remembering and apprehending as Ezekiah did that God is
with you, a present help in trouble for you.

9 Sleighting of world.
9. The more shall you in a holy manner slight and undervalue all the glory,
dignity, wealth and fullness of the world, having with you and within you that
God who in your eye and apprehension transcends the world more then the most
orient pearl the bafest dross, the choicest Paradise the most loathsome
prison, or the brightest Sun the rotten glocworme.

10. Easy coming off from the creature.
10. The more easily, fully, freely, joyfully and permanently shall your hearts
and thoughts come off from the creature, from your self, and from every thing
here below, as the eye comes gladly from the candle to the Sun upon the
appearing and apprehension of the same; as the Bride comes gladly from her own
people, and her fathers house, to her most honorable, amiable and lovely
Bridegroom; or as the Prodigal came readily from the Swine, and the husks to
his Fathers house, where he apprehended fullness of bread.

11. The more patient shall you be in all trouble, 11. Patience.
apprehending God as a Father in love chastising you, as a Physician launcing
you, and as a Refiner purging you, you shall say with old Eli, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good.

12. The more content shall you be in every condition, 12 Contentation.
contentedly able with Job to receive the evil of affliction as well as the
good of peace at the hands of the Lord the apprehension of Gods presence with
you shall satisfy and quiet you, when every other thing is taken from you, the
apprehension of this shall powerfully and sweetly dispose you to quiet your
self in the will of God, humbly and readily to submit your self to the hand
of God, thankfully to take that portion which God gives you, assuring your
self it is that which God in his wisdom sees best for you: Thrice blessed
is that person who has this apprehension of God still ruling and affecting
him, setledly dwelling and working within him; there is nothing more availeable
to keep the soul of man in a holy frame and disposition then the sense and
feeling of Gods ever being present with him.

Secondly, this should also move man to labor for infallible and sure interest
in God. It is the misery of man to be without God, the happiness of man to
have God for his God, to be able to say with Thomas, My God and my Lord, and in
all estates to cry with David, O Lord thou art my refuge, and my portion in the
land of the living. It is man's having of God that makes the meditation of God
sweet and comfortable to man. What does the shining of the Sun advantage man
if his eye receive not the light thereof? What does plenty of water in the well
benefit the thirsty, if he neither draw nor drink of it? What did fullness of
bread in his Fathers house profit the prodigal son living among the swine,
and ready to starve with lack of broad? What does it avail the soul that God
is an eternal, an Almighty, an Al-seeing, an alsufficient God, if he live like
the swine, and feed upon the husks of the world, and come not unto God, have
no interest in God, no taste, no sense, no feeling of the goodness of this
God, he must starve, dye, perish, and be damned without God: The charge
therefore given to the children in Solomon concerning wisdom, let me give to
you concerning God, Get God, get the Lord, forget him not, neither decline from
the words of his mouth, forsake him not, and he shall preserve thee, love him
and he shall keep thee, God is the principal thing, therefore got God, and
withal thy getting get the Lord. The gain of all is loss without God, the
loss of all is gain with God; have all the power of the world without God
thou art weak; have all the wealth of the earth without God thou art poor;
have all the learning, art and policye of men and Devils without God, thou art
foolish, blind and ignorant; have all the honors of Nobles, Kings and
Emperors without God, thou art base; have all the beauty of the comeliest
creatures without God, thou art ugly, loathsome and monstrous; have all worldly
and fleshly joys and pleasures without God, thy soul is in a condition of
torments; have all the liberties, immunities, and prerogatives of the freest
Cities, States and Kingdoms, yet without God, thou art in the most
dishonorable, slavish and basest bondage; have God, and though thou have
nothing else, thou have the strongest rock to support thee, the brightest Sun
to guide thee, the noblest crown to honor thee, the choicest pearl to enrich
thee, the fullest fountain to fill thee, the sweetest Paradise to solace and
delight thee, even God himself to be all in all, in stead of all, and ten
thousand times more then all for ever unto thee. *

FINIS.
A Table of the chief things contained in this Treatise, on Psalm. 118. v, 26.
CHAP. I. AN Illustration of Christ's coming and entertainment, and opening the
words, Page 1. Note 1. Christ coming proves most joyful to them that savingly
receive and entertain him, p. 4. Note 2. Man has greatest cause of all
creatures to rejoice in, and for the coming of Christ Jesus, ibid. Note 3.
Whosoever truly rejoices in Christ, does also wish well to the Cause and
Kingdom of Christ, p. 5. Note 4. The Lord Jesus ought to be the prime and
complete Object of man's ioyfulnesse, ib. Note 5. Blessed is that person that
knows the way and manner of Christ's spiritual and gracious coming, p. 6.
CHAP. II. Declaring the joyful receiving of Christ, p. 6. Doct. Christ
coming in his Gospel and spiritual Kingdom ought to be received with much
thanksgiving and rejoicing, ib. 5. Grounds hereof, p. 9. 1. Clear and
comfortable Revelation of God in Christ. 2. Spiritual Liberty by Christ's
coming. 3. Heavenly Victory. 4. Spiritual peace. 5. Soule-refreshing
Communion with God, obtained by Christ's coming, p. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
CHAP. III. Relating their miserable Condition to whom Christ is unwelcome, p.
15. 5. Grounds of Christ's unwelcomnesse. 1. Ignorance. 2 Earthly mindedness.
3. Insensibleness. 4. Contrariety to Christ. 5. Infidelity, p. 18, 19, 20.
CHAP. IV. Persuading to a joyful entertainment of Christ, p. 22. Manner how
Christ must be entertained. 1. Spiritually. 2. Speedily. 3. Cordially. 4
Cheerfully. 5. Humbly. 6. Chiefly. 7. Fully. 8. perpetually, p. 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30.
CHAP. V. Prescribing means disposing and inabling man to receive Christ
joyfully, p. 31. The means. 1. Full deposition of what is contrary to Christ,
as sin, the world, our self. 2. Holy preparation to hear Christ in the
Gospel. 3. Gracious interest in Christ. 4. Clear discernement of Christ's
worth. 5. Holy making use of Christ in the Gospel. 6. Heavenly sense and
experience of Christ's work upon our souls, p. 34 to 39.
CHAP. VI. Inducements to a joyful entertainment of Christ, p. 39 6.
Inducements. 1. The Condition of the Creature without Christ being empty,
uncomfortable, inthralling, and polluting. 2. A through view of man's estate
without Christ. 3. The terrible apprehension of God without Christ. 4.
Frustration of all Gods Ordinances Christ not entertained 5. Excellency and
utility of Christ received; giving life, light, health, honor, riches,
prosperity, sweetness, comfort, satisfaction, and abiding substance. 6.
Fastening thoughts on brevity of life, p. 39. to 51.
CHAP. VII. Manifestations of Christ's welcome, p. 52. Christ's welcome
manifested. 1. By opening the heart to him. 2. By garnishing the heart for him.
3. By offering our selves to Christ. 4. By exalting Christ. 5. By faith and
love to Christ, conformity with Christ, and acquiescence in Christ, p. 52, 53.
Want of joyful receiving of Christ, shows want 1. of knowledge. 2. Of Love.
3. Of Faith. 4. Of prizing Christ. 5. Of relishing Christ, p. 54, 55, 56. Joy
in Christ's coming persuaded, p. 57.
CHAP. VIII. The necessity and excellency of advancing Christ's Gospel and
Kingdom is demonstrated, p. 58. Doct. It is the duty of all people, unfainedly
to desire, and earnestly to endeavor the welfare, promotion, and advancement
of Christ, his spiritual Kingdom and Gospel, ib. 5. Grounds hereof. 1. The
Covenant between Man and Christ. 2. The Relation^ 3. Christ's interest in Man.
4. The Subversion of Satan. 5. The glory and crown of the Church, p. 62, 63,
64, 65, 66, 67.
CHAP. IX. The impiety of three sorts of men is opened, p. 68. 1. Non re^arders
of the welfare of the Gospel. 2. Opposers of the Gospel. 3. Grievers at the
prosperity of the Gospel, p. 68, 69, 70. Grounds of not regarding the welfare
of the Gospel, p. 69. Grounds of opposing the Gospel, p. 70, 71.
CHAP. X. The setting up of Christ's Kingdom and Gospel is persuaded, p. 72.
Parties by whom Christ's Kingdom and Gospel is to be exalted, Magistrates,
Ministers, Masters of families, private persons, p. 73, 74. Inducements to the
exaltation of Christ's Kingdom and Gospel. 1. The honor of a Christian. 2.
Love to Christ. 3. The peril of not endeavoring the welfare of Christ's
Gospel. 4 Christ's withholding of nothing which makes for the exaltation of man.
5. The blessing which attends the exaltation of the Gospel.
CHAP. XI. Proposing means to frame and work the heart of man to advance
Christ and his Gospel, p. 79. 4. Means hereof. 1. Distaste of sin. 2. Holy
fear. 3. Sense of the necessity of Christ. 4. Inabling and raising the heart
to a spiritual temper, p. 80, 81, 82, 83.
CHAP. XII. Christ's being furnished with authority and ability to minister
salvation is handled, p. 84. Doct. Christ is furnished with authority and all
divine abilities to minister all peace and salvation to Gods servants, p. 85.
4. Grounds hereof. 1. Christ's power. 2. Christ's exaltation above all. 3.
Christ's repletion of all. 4. Christ's proposing his Fathers glory, p. 88, 89,
90.
CHAP. XIII. The dispensation of salvation by Christ is showed, p. 91. 4. Evils
of leaving Christ, and betaking our selves to humane traditions. 1. A
derogation from Christ's authority. 2. Self-exaltation and Presumption. 3.
Disparagement of Christ's wisdom. 4. Peril of the soul, p. 93. 94. Christ's
authority and ability presses to 4. Duties. 1 Subjection. 2. Dependence. 3.
Love. 4. Acquiescence in Christ, p. 95, 96, 97, 98.
CHAP. XIV. Gods dispensing of blessings by his Ministers is fully evidenced,
p. 99. Note. Holy and saithfull Ministers are the isntrumental Causes of great
blessings to Gods Church and servants, p. 99. Note. It must be the care of
Ministers so to demean themselves in their function that they prove a
blessing, to the people, p 100. Note. The labors of Gods Ministers prove a
blessing only to such people as rejoice in, and endeavor the advancement of
the Gospel, ib. Doct. God by his holy and faithful Ministers dispenses very
great, sweet, and heavenly blessings to his Church and servants, ib. 3. Grounds
hereof. 1. Gods communication of Christ to the souls of men by the labors of
his Ministers. 2. The evils from which God delivers man by the labors of his
Ministers. 3. The blessed estate whereinto God puts man by the Labors of his
Ministers, p. 104. 6. Communications of Christ by the Labors of Gods
Ministers. 1. The Knowledge of Christ. 2. The Faith of Christ. 3. The Life of
Christ. 4. The Love of Christ. 5. The Peace of Christ. 6. The whole treasury of
Christ, p. 104, 105. Deliverance from 5. evils dispensed by Gods Ministers. 1.
From spiritual death. 2. From blindness. 3. From bondage. 4. From
uncleanness. 5. From soule-tortures, p. 106. Man put into a condition of 6.
Excellencies by the industry of Gods Ministers. 1. Of Wisdom. 2. Of
Sanctification, 3. Of Freedom. 4. Of Exaltation. 5. Of Satisfaction. 6. Of
Duration, p. 107, 108.
CHAP. XV. Opening man's unhappines not enjoying Gods Ministers, p. 109. Man's
estate without the Gospel an estate 1. Of Death 2. Of Darkness. 3. Of
Servitude. 4 Of Emptiness. 5. Of Uncleanness. 6. Of Sorrows, p. 110, 111.
The folly of Estrangement from the Gospel, with the grounds and evils of it,
p. 112. Cure of Non-estrangement from the Gospel urged. Evils of Estrangement
opened, p. 113, 114, 113. Gospel not to be ^leighted, worthy of full and
honorable embracement, p. 115.

A TABLE of the chief things contained in this Treatise on Galathians, CHAPTER
2. VERSE 20.
CHAP. I. Illustrating the state of man by Sin and by Christ, and opening the
scope of the Apostle, p. 117, 118. Christ man's comforter, helper, happiness,
and the Author of man's welfare, p. 119, 120. Note. Such alone as are truly
sanctified and gracious people, are the complete and proper Subject of that
life which is heavenly and spiritual, p. 121. Note. All life is as no life,
yea as a very death in comparison of a holy and gracious life, ib.
CHAP. II. Declaring the holy man's prostration of himself and all that he has
under Christ, p. 122. Doct. 1. He who lives the life of grace and true
holiness does wholly deny himself, his own counsels and affections, and
altogether prostrates himself and all that is his under Christ Jesus, p. 123.
CHAP. III. Laying down the grounds of Self-deny all, and putting all under
the feet of Christ, p. 125. 6. Grounds hereof. 1. The carnality, vanity, and
baseness which a man sees and feels in his own flesh, affections, ends and
counsels. 2. The holy inclination of a gracious heart unto Christ. 3. The
vanity and nothingnesse which a gracious man sees in himself, and in all
things without Christ. 4. The holy, powerful, and universal reign of Christ
in a gracious soul. 5. The holy and fervent desire of a gracious soul to
exalt and set up Christ. 6. A gracious souls acquiescence and contentation in
and with the approbation of Christ, p. 126, 127, 128, 129, 131.
CHAP. IV. Discovering the danger of the want of Self-denial, p. 132. 5. Sorts
of Non-denyers of themselves. 1. Self-Wise. 2. Self-willed. 3. Self-lusted. 4
Worldly minded. 5. Voluptuously and ambitiously affected, and superstitiously
devoted, p. 133, 134.
CHAP. V. Proposing the grounds or causes of men's backwardness in denying
themselves, and putting all under Christ, p. 135. 7. Grounds hereof. 1.
Self-prizing. 2. Overswaying lusts. 3. Inordinate disposition toward the
creature. 4. Over-prizing of man. 5. Carnal judging and mistaking of Christ.
6. Corrupt framing and devising of false Christ's, and false ways to life. 7.
Ignorance of the nature and sweetness of Christ's yoke, p. 136, 137, 138, 139.
CHAP. VI. Relating certain very great evils and inconveniences arising from
the want of Self-denial, p. 142. 9. Evils issuing hence. 1. Vncapablenesse of
Christ. 2. Alienation from the benefits and comforts of Christ. 3. Vanity,
emptiness and hollownesse of profession. 4. Subjection and abasement under the
creature. 5. Annihilation of the fruit and benefit of Christ's death. 6.
Deprivation of the heavenly fruit and soule-refreshing comforts of Gods
Ordinances. 7. Great and manifold losses attending the want of Self-denial,
and Subjection under Christ. 8. Apostasy from Christ. 9. Christ's denial and
relaction of such as will not deny themselves for him and his sake, p. 14^,
143, 144, 145.
CHAP. VII. Persuading man to work his heart to a full and through
Self-denial, p. 147. Qualifications of Self-denial. 1 Spiritual. 2.
Voluntary. 3. Universal. 4. Continual, p. 148. Subjection unto Christ
accompanies Self-denial, p. 149. Qualifications of Subjection. 1. Holy. 2.
Cordial. 3. Full. 4. Perpetual, p. 149. 7. Inducements to Self-denial. 1.
Christ's interest in a Christian. 2. The relation between Christ and Christians.
3. Gods subiecting and putting all things under Christ. 4. The abuse of all
things which are not made subject and serviceable unto Christ. 5. Sweet and
heavenly comforts arising from Self-denial to the soul. 6. The mitigation and
sweetning of all disasters. 8. The Contentation which Self-denial ministers
with the least earthly portion, p. 150, 151, 152.
CHAP. VIII. Propounding certain clear and apparent characters of true and
Christian Self-denial, p 153. 5. Marks or characters hereof. 1. Captivation of
Self-reason. 2. Cessation from Man's own Self. 3. Full and free application of
Man's Self to Christ. 4. Humble and hearty ascribing of all Man's good to God.
5. A low prizing and Christian undervaluing of Man's Self, and all things else
in comparison of Christ, p. 150.
CHAP. IX. Setting down other marks and characters of Christian Self-denial, p.
161. 5. Other marks. 1. Voluntary and cheerful desertion and leaving off all
for Christ. 2. Man's pleasing and delighting himself in Christ under the
Cross. 3. The prizing of Christ's Cross above the worlds Crown. 4. Man making
it his greatest honor to honor Christ. 5. A heart sincere, humble, pious,
plain, grieving at evil, and rejoicing in good, p. 162, 163, 164, 165, 166,
167.
CHAP. X. Detecting diverse deceits in and about the work of Self-denial, p.
170. Man is apt to deceive himself in this work of Self-denial 8. ways, by
denying himself. 1. Superstitiously. 2. Covetously. 3. Partially. 4.
Constrainedly. 5. Hypocritically. 6. Sinisterly and politickely. 7.
Vaine-gloriously. 8. Temporarily, p. 171, 172, 173, 174, 175.
CHAP. XI. Showing how a Christian may comfort himself in this work of
Self-denial against remaining and rebelling lusts, p. 176. 1. By the
troublesomnesse of them to his soul. 2. By the godly grief of his heart for
them. 3. By his holy and constant contestation against them. 4. By his being
humbled for the want of humility. 5. By his frequent and fervent prayer to be
purged and emptied of all pride and self-love, p. 178, 179.
CHAP. XII. Laying open the shameful and dangerous evil of Self-seeking, p.
180. Self-seeking a root of 12. bitter branches, being 1. Insatiable. 2.
Hypocritical. 3. Polluting. 4. Alienating. 5. Full of unlawful means. 6.
Unthankful and discontented, p. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 181, 182, 184,
185, 188, 189.
CHAP. XIII. Repeating other evils of Self-seeking, p. 191. Self-seeking is 7.
Attentive to evil counsel. 8. Servile and abasing. 9. Idolatrous. 10.
Self-loosing 11. Undervaluing holy things, and 12. the cursed mother of many
unhappy children, as 1. Imbondagement. 2. Enmity. 3. Cruelty. 4. Causeless
Jealousy. 5. Soule-torturing grief. 6. Vnsuccessefulnesse, and 7. Loosing the
comfort of present havings, p. 192, 193, 194, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201.
Self-seeking how to be handled, p. 201.
CHAP. XIV. Mentioning the danger of Self-admiration, p. 202. 6. Evils of
Self-admiration. 1. Self-ignorance. 2. Non-apprehensivenesse of the perfections
of God, and beauties of Christ. 3. Ingratitude and Sacrilege. 4.
Vncapablenesse of Christ. 5. Alienation from God 6. Shame and confusion. Cure
of Self-admiration prescribed, p. 203, 204, 205. 206.
CHAP. XV. Handling the danger of Self-exaltation, p. 207. 9. Evils of
Self-exaltation, being 1. The root of many foul impieties. 2. The Patron and
protector of all other vices. 3. The most invincible of all vices. 4. The
corrupter and destroyer of all other gifts. 5. Keeping the soul barren. 6.
Abusing God. 7. Self-deceiving. 8. Shamefully abasing man. 9. Alienating from
Heaven, p. 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213. 214, 215.
CHAP. XVI. Opening the grounds of man's pronenesse to exalt himself, and
backwardness to exalt and set up Christ, p. 215. 5. Grounds hereof. 1. Man's
ignorance of his own corrupt and base estate. 2. Man's inconsiderateness of
his receivings. 3. Forgetfulness of man's place and station. 4 Misprision of
the true glory of man. 5. Insensibleness of the unhappy fruits of
Self-exaltation, p, 215, 218. Self-exaltation cured by 7. considerations. 1.
God makes the difference. 2. Not the having, but the well using of the gift is
the honor of the receiver. 3. Gifts puffing up, prove a curse. 4. Man's tenure
is a tenancy at will. 5. The glory and fullness of man is Christ. 6. The issue
of all is not so much dependent upon the excellency of man's abilities, as upon
the all-disposing hand of God. 7. Sudden and unexpected changes, may and often
do come, p. 219, 220.
CHAP. XVII. Rehearsing the prerogatives and privileges of Self-denial, and
their happiness who deny themselves, p. 221. 7. Prerogatives of Self-denial.
1. Full and comfortable fruition of Christ. 2. Invinciblenesse in assaults. 3.
Endearement of man to God. 4. Exaltation of man. 5. Sweet and blessed freedom.
6. Peaceablenesse. 7. Fruitfulness in all graces, p. 222, 223, 224, 225.
CHAP. XVIII. Manifesting man's having of spiritual life not of himself but of
Christ, p. 228. Doct. It is plain and manifest to the experience of Gods
children, that they have not the life of grace and holiness from themselves
but from Christ Jesus, p. 230. Grounds hereof, ib. Such as have no experience
of new life are no children of God, p. 231.
CHAP. XIX. Demonstrating Christ's being the Author of spiritual life, p. 232.
Doct. Christ is the Author of spiritual life to all Gods children, ib. 6
Grounds hereof, 1. Man's Alienation from the life of grace. 2. Christ's
Ordination to minister life. 3. The insufficiency of any created power to give
life. 4. The excellency of spiritual life. 5. he Medium of spiritual life. 6.
The opposition made against the working of spiritual life, p. 233, 234, 236.
CHAP. XX. Declaring man's inability to quicken himself, persuading to come to
Christ, showing the unworthiness of his services without Christ, p. 239. Man's
inability to quicken himself made apparent. 1. By having no principle of
grace. 2. By his utter blindness. 3. By his declination of the means of
grace. 4. By his enmity against the ministry, 5. By the sweetness of sin to
his palate. 6. By his dishonorable opinion of holiness, p. 149. Men without
Christ dead men. For 1. Blindness. 2. Insensibleness. 3. Weakness. 4.
Separation from Christ. 6. Growing worse and worse, p. 242. Man's best works
without dead works. 1. Proceeding from a corrupt principle. 2. Moral and not
spiritual, formal and not powerful. 3. Cold, 4 Tending to base ends, p. 242,
243. The praise of spiritual life due to Christ, p. 244.
CHAP. XXI. Showing that Christ lives in all Gods children, p. 246. Doct.
Christ lives in Gods children by his holy and powerful work of Sanctification,
p. 247. 5. Grounds hereof declaring Christ's living in Gods children, 1. By way
of Original, 2. By way of Conjunction. 3. By way of Influence. 4. By way of
Gubernation. 5. By way of preservation, p. 248, 249, 250, 251.
CHAP. XXII. Describing what is the living of Christ in Gods children, with the
manner of it, p 252. The manner of Christ's beginning to live in man, is 1. By
awakening man. 2. By humbling man. 3. By making man restless until he is
translated out of his corrupt estate. 4. By the Revelation of himself in man.
5. By working a gracious change in man, p. 253, 254, 255, 256.
CHAP. XXIII. Manifesting the nobleness of a Christian life above all other
lives, p. 258. The honourablenesse of Christian life evidenced, 1. By the
original. 2. By the nature. 3. By the rarity. 4. By the pleasantness of it.
5. By the dignity to which it exalts. 6. By the lowness of man's estate
without it. 7. By man's honorable walking in whom Christ lives. 8. By the
term to which a Christian lives, ib. Living to God, what, 259, 260, 261, 262.
CHAP. XXIV. Causes obscuring the honorable life of a Christian are laid
down, p. 164, 165. 7. Causes hereof. 1. Secrecy of spiritual life. 2.
Ignorance of carnal men. 3. Reproach. 4. Remaining corruption. 5. Misiudging.
6. Base outside. 7. Afflictions, p 266, 267.
CHAP. XXV. Proving the life of a Christian to be a cheerful life, p. 269. In
the life of a true Christian there is a 7. fold joy, the joy 1. Of Life. 2. Of
Light. 3. Of Liberty. 4. Of Victory. 5. Of Regeneration and Sonship. 6. Of
Riches. 7. Of Peace, p. 270, 271. 8. causes or grounds of Sorrow in Gods
children. 1. Remaining corruption. 2. Particular aberrations. 3. Satan's
assaults. 4. Impiety of others. 5. Foresight of future calamities. 6. Sense of
Churches miseries, p. 272, 273, 275.
CHAP. XXVI. Christ's living in man characterized, p. 276. 10. Characters of
Christ's living in man. 1. Purity of conversation. 2. Man's invinciblenesse. 3.
Preservation from sin and the world. 4. Expulsion of what is contrary to
Christ. 5. Embracement of what suites with Christ. 6. Thriving by the
Ordinances. 7. The sweet relish of Christ to the soul. 8. Heavenly heat. 9.
High prizing of Christ. 10. Care to keep Christ, p. 276, 278, 279, 280, 281.
Exhorting to discern Christ living in us, p. 284. Latitudes of Christ's living
in man, p. 285. All things vain and uncomfortable not discerning Christ living
in them, p. 123.

A Table of the chief things contained in the Treatise on the second of the
Ephesians, VER. 12.
CHAP. 1. Showing man's Alienation from Christ, misery without Christ, and
opening the Scope of the words, p. 191. Note. The time and season of man's being
without the Gospel, and under the power of his corruption, is of all times and
seasons the most unhappy and miserable, p. 294. Note. All men abiding under the
power of their corruption are without exception miserable, p. 294. Doct. 1. All
men in their natural And corrupt condition are altogether strangers to Christ
Jesus, p. 295. Man's Alienation from Christ illustrated, p. 294.
CHAP. II. Laying down 4. grounds of carnal man's Alienation from Christ, p.
297. 1. Plenary Subjection under sin. 2. Man's uncapablenesse of Christ. 3.
The Worlds full possession of carnal man. 4. Carnal man's repugnancy against
Christ, p. 298, 299, 300.
CHAP. III. Setting open the dolefulness and danger of man's estate without
Christ, p. 302. Man without Christ is without Life, without Light, without
grace, without liberty, without acceptance with God, without spiritual
beauty, without honor, without peace, without protection, supportation,
remission, blessing, and salvation, p. 303, 304. to 311.
CHAP. IV. Declaring man's great cause of humiliation for being without Christ,
and also discovering the cause of man's undervaluing Christ, p. 312. Latitudes
of carnal man's being without Christ, p. 313. to 320. Grounds of disesteeming
Christ, want of knowledge, no taste of Christ, no love to Christ, no pleasure
in Christ, no longings after Christ, ib.
CHAP. V. Opening the folly of man in restraining his sin, and contenting
himself without Christ, p. 321. 5. characters of man's being without Christ. 1.
His being without the spirit and grace of Christ, p. 322. 2. His Subjection
under any lust, p. 323. 3. His confinement of himself within himself, p. 324,
4. By a fourefold fullness, 1. Self-fulnesse, 2. Fullness of sin. 3. Fullness
of man. 4. Fullness of the world. 5. Man's spiritual emptiness of Christ, as
of the life, knowledge, power, liberty and love which Christ dispenses, 326,
327, 328, 332, 333.
CHAP. VI. Exhorting to come out of our natural and corrupt estate, p. 337.
Evils of mars corrupt estate, barrenness, exilement from God, enmity against
God, slavery to Satan, the world and corruption, curses and woes, p. 339.
Means of freedom from this corrupt estate, attendance on the word, godly
sorrow for sin, frequent and serious view of the evil of this corrupt estate,
and addressement to Christ by faithful and fervent prayer, p. 341.
CHAP. VII. Persuading to thanksgiving for deliverance out of our natural and
corrupt estate, p. 344. Deliverance from the state of corruption is the
choicest of all deliverances, being a deliverance of the greatest cost, arguing
the sweetest and surest love, freeing from the greatest evils, and restoring to
the choicest happiness, p. 346.
CHAP. VIII. Showing how all Gods people are but one, p 348. Doct. All Gods
faithful are a spiritual and mystical Commonwealth, p. 348. Gods Church a
mystical Commonwealth in 7. respects. In respect of multitude. In respect of
obligation. In respect of subjection. In respect of common interest. In respect
of constitution and composition, In respect of separation and distinction, and
in respect of unity, p. 349.
CHAP. IX. Persuading Subjection under one head, Submission to one Law, and
unity between our selves, p. 352. Qualifications of Subjection, spiritual,
cordial, voluntary, universal and constant, p. 352. The word of God a sure, a
perfect, a profitable word, ib. Mixing of humane inventions with Gods word and
worship perilous, ib. Unity in judgment, in affection, in Religion, and in
opposing sin and Satan's Kingdom, ib.
CHAP. X. Pressing the seeking of the welfare of Christ's Church, p. 358.
Inducements to seek the welfare of Christ's Church, Gods iniunction, relation,
fellow-feeling, attendant blessing, dependence of ours upon the Churches
welfare, our subjection to changes, and the acceptablenesse of this work with
God, ib.
CHAP. XI. Treating of carnal man's alienation from Christ's Church, p. 360.
Doct. 3. All profane and carnal persons are aliens to the true Church of
Christ, and all the spiritual privileges thereof, p. 50, 51. Communion with
carnal men to be shunned, p. 361. Carnal men aliens to Gods children, having
neither the same parent, the same head nor the same gracious qualities, ib.
CHAP. XII. Laying down the grounds of carnal man's alienation from the true
Church of Christ, p. 161. 5. Grounds hereof. 1. Alienation from the head of the
Church. 2. Want of the seed of the Church. 3. Privation of the qualities of the
Church. 4. Exclusion from the covenant of the Church. 5. Estrangement from the
life, light, faith, liberty, wedlock, and receivings of the Church, p. 364,
365, 366.
CHAP. XIII. Discoursing of the unhappy condition and impossibility of their
salvation who are strangers to the true Church, p. 369. He that is a stranger
to the true Church, is a stranger 1. To Christ. 2. To the promise of grace. 3.
To the love of Christ. 4. To the presence of Christ. 5. To the communication of
Christ, and 6. To the protection of Christ, p. 370. A stranger to the Church, a
stranger to salvation, being without God, without Christ, and without
regeneration, p. 371.
CHAP. XIV. Discovering the vanity of carnal man's applauding and pleasing
himself with being borne within the Church, and exhorting to sanctification,
p. 372. Man living within the Church in profaneness is 1. An unbeleever. 2. A
very hypocrite. 3 A defiler of things sacred. 4. A scandal to the Church. 5.
Liable to the severest condemnation, p. 374. Comfortable fruits of holiness,
ib.
CHAP. XV. Handling corrupt and carnal man's estrangement from the covenant of
grace, p. 376. Doct. 4. All corrupt and carnal persons are strangers to Gods
covenant of Grace and salvation by Christ, ib. 6. Grounds of carnal man's
alienation from the covenant of Grace. 1, Ignorance. 2. Alienation from Christ.
3. Enmity against God. 4. Agreement with sin, 5. Absence of the Spirit. 6. Want
of faith and obedience, p. 377.
CHAP. XVI. Displaying the misery and uncomfortablenesse of man's estate without
the covenant, p. ^85. Man without the covenant is 1. A stranger to Christ. 2.
Empty of heavenly gifts. 3. Without Gods gracious protection. 4. Without
spiritual title to any good thing. 5. Without the blessing of God, and 6.
Without peace.
CHAP. XVII. Proposing certain marks and characters of man's being within the
covenant, p. 388. Man's boing in the covenant evidenced. 1. By Gods being all in
all unto man. 2. By man's full application of himself to God. 3. By man's
participation of the benefits comprised under the covenant, as 1. The donation
of the Spirit. 2. Communion with the Saints. 3 Regeneration. 4. Spiritual
Liberty. 5. Perseverance, p. 389. Exhortation to get interest in the covenant,
p. 394. Means interesting in the covenant. 1. Forsaking of sin. 2. Forsaking
of our selves. 3. Relinquishment of the world. 4 Reiection of intimate
communion with carnal people. 5. Attendance on the Word. 6. Ready and full
receiving of Christ, p. 395.
CHAP. XVIII. Declaring the misery of natural Man without hope, p. 399. Doct.
Corrupt and carnal man has no true and assured hope of salvation, p 400.
Grounds hereof. 1. His uncapablenesse of Christian Hope. 2. His want of the
isntrumental cause of Hope. 3. His alienation from the pillars of Hope. 4. His
estrangement from the way to salvation, p. 400, 401, 402.
CHAP. XIX. Showing the false props upon which carnal men build their hopes,
p. 403. 1. Superstitious observations. 2. A formal profession. 3. Elymosina^y
duties. 4. Not being so bad as others. 5. The mercies of God and merits of
Christ. 6. Humiliation and Repentance. 7. Their reformations 8. Their duties,
p. 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409.
CHAP. XX. Showing how a man may discern the soundness of his hope, p. 411.
1. By preparation to Christ. 2. By a constant study and practice of holiness.
3. By a holy patience toward God. 4. By a delight in God and Christ. 5 By a
holy security. 6 By thinking lowly of our selves, and highly of Christ, p. 411,
412, 413, 414.
CHAP. XXI. Declaring man's estrangement from God. p. 415. Doct. Man in his
carnal estate is altogether estranged from God, p. 416. Grounds hereof. 1. His
opposition and contrariety to God. 2. His estrangement from the life of God. 3.
His estrangement from the knowledge of God. 4. His estrangement from the love
of God. 5. His estrangement from the spiritual ministrations of God. 6. His
estrangement from Christ. 7. His estrangement from the remembrance of God, p.
417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422.
CHAP. XXII. Opening the Atheism of man, and the heinousness thereof, p. 423.
Atheists in opinion, ib. Atheists in practice, p. 424. Atheism in practice
demonstrated. 1. By Loose living. 2. Secret sinning. 3. Fearlesnesse of
judgments. 4. Seldom and cold praying. 5. Sleighting of divine knowledge, p.
424 425. Evils of being without God. 1. Full of Satan. 2. Full of World. 3.
Full of sin. 4. Full of curses. 5. Naked of all true good, p. 427, 428, 429.
CHAP. XXIII. Declaring the Godhead. 1. By Scripture. 2. By the book of
nature, p. 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436. Benefits of persuasion that God is,
437, 438, 439. Excellency of interest in God, p. 439, 440.

FINIS.
Errata in the first Treatise.
For imply read employ, page 2 line 20. for grace r peace, p 8 l 16. for love,
r. live, p 17. marg. for ministry, r. Ministers p. 23 l. 17 for repairing r.
preparing p. 26. l. 4. del. of p. 28. l. 30 between object and the insert of p.
33. l. 13 for man, r in all, p 34 l 4 for things r. springs, p 4^.31. for their
r. the p 42 l. 1. the, r ye, p 42. l. 33. for Redeemer, r redeemed p 65. l. 18.
for ex^tion, r. ex^anition, p. 7^ l. 1. for reasoning. r raising, p 83. in the
superscription p. 94 at the end of line 17 insert wisdom for every r. very, p
100. l 15 for the work says* r they work faith, p 105. l. 1. for without, r
with* p 1^1 l. ^ for blessings, r. tossings, p. 111 l 10. for where, r. when, p
112. l 32. for conveyed, r conveyeth p. 115 l 10 for head, r bread, p. 115 l 13.

Errata in the second Treatise.
For love, r leave. p 125 l. 13. for presence, r present p. 136. l 16. for its,
r it p 138 l 1. for overpiercing, r. overprizing, p. 138 l. 27. for us* r them,
p. 147. l. 20. for donei, r. donee, p. 149 l. 3^. for here, r not. p. 150. l.
13. for Israel, r. Egypt, p. 159 l. 6 for obscuring, r off-skouring, p 160 l.
28. for cause, r effect, p. 196 l. 15. for that, r. thus p. 250 l. 32.


