A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CITY OF LONDON By a Lover of Truth. Touching the
Power of a KING, and proving out of the Word of GOD, that the Authority of a
King is only from GOD and not of Man.

ECCL. 8.4. Where the word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto
him, what do thou.

London Printed 1643.

Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is there is power, And who may say unto
him what do thou.


BEfore I shall adventure to apply this Text (for to expound it is needless)
to such persons both in Town and Country who make it their only Religion to
but prate rebellious questions concerning the privileges and actions of Kings;
I were best be assured I can prove my Text to be the express Word of God, or
else those people who question Kings will be sure to question me.

There is but one that ever questioned this Preacher, and if Tertullians rule
be true Quicunque est unus est haereticus, we must rather assent to the
general tradition of antiquity: by the words you will know that one to be
Martin Luther, he says this book is like a man on horseback without boots
or spurs, never keeping a certain pace: but you all know the driving of that
man was like Iehu, he drove furiously both against Church and Kings. Every
spirit that moved not Luther pace, be it the spirit of Solomon the wisest
prince in the world, yea although that spirit be a fresh inspired by Gods
spirit, yet Cessator est and ego: calcaribus but of the two rather think
Luthors tongue wanted a bridle we therefore in the fear of God and authority
of his holy Church will acknowledge the spirit and power of God to be in this
book, and in this Text (...), and will say unto our King in the words of the
Psalm Ride on we wish thee good luck in the name of the Lord.

Where the word of a King, etc.
IT is well we find in Scipture terminis terminentibus, or else we might
have lost him. Ego dixi dij estis, there might be some evasions hence, there is
mention of Judges and under-Magistrates in the Land Psalm 82.6. they might
assume this unquestioned power and question those whom we call Kings. Saint
Paul he names some in authority, but the Pope may come in for his supremacy.
In the latter time there are Calvin's, Magistratus, Populares, Beza's,
superiores potestates, Brutus, Iunius optimates regni, Daneus ordines regni,
Buchanus publica administrationis participes. Althasius, Ephori, Paraus
inferiores potestates, so many names as head of the beast in the Apocalip. But
here we have Melecke a King, be not subject to subjects or inferior
Magistrates, but subjecti estote regi tanquam supereminenti, 1 Pet. 2.13.

Whence and what Kings are, are doctrines I think suitable both to this Text
and these times, their original is from God a good beginning. Per me reges
regnant (...) says Saint Chrysostom. The ancient form of salutation used by
the Bishop of Rome was In eo per quem reges regnant, then was it not his own
holiness Rex regum is written upon Christ own thigh Apoc. 19.16. and
Melchisedeck his own first type and King was (...), without father or Mother.
Kings are not the offspring of man but the generation of God, Ego dixi Dij
estis. God help Kings if people undertake to make them, if they may turn Gods
verse, to nos diximus Dij estis; if they may change Christ's words, from thou
should have no power over me unless it were given thee from above, to,
thou should have no power over me unless it were granted thee de subter,
from beneath. No all Kings and Kingdoms are Gods. Cujus jussu nascunter
homines, ejus jussu Constituuntur Principes, Iraen: Inde suis potestas unde
spiritus. Tert. Even all their ornaments and imperial ensigns are from God.
Diadomae regis in manu dei, Esaias 62. His their Crown, Tuposuisti, Psalm 21.
He puts it on. The Emperors stamp on their Coins was a hand coming forth
out of the Clouds holding a Crown, putting it on their heads. His is their
Scepter, Virga dei in manibus ejus, His their Throne, Reges in solie coll^cat
in perpetuum, says Job. He fastens them in it for ever; His also their
anointing, Touch not mine Anointed, I have anointed David my servant,
anointed with oil for supremacy and continuance in his Throne, not uncti. as
Priests, but Christi Domini, says the Bishop of Winchester thirty three
times, so styled in the Old Testament, and once in the New. Their manner of
anointing also was diverse from the Priests. They were anointed on the
forehead, Kings on the head says Erotius in his annotations to Cassenders
consultations, in a word says Saint August. they are uncti ante unctionem,
before we can touch them. v. e. decreto.

Kings whether good or bad they are from God, Per me Reges regnant was spoken
when there was but one good King upon the face of the earth Solomon. Haec dicit
Dominus Cyro uncto meo. He a Persian a Heathen. It repented God of what? that
he had made Saul King. Ego dedi vobis in ira mea regem, Hos. 13.11. Angry I was
when I gave you, I gave him through, and there in that honor he must remains
though he become Onus Populi, an heavy burden upon the neck of all his
subjects. Nebuchadnezar who slew and kept alive whom he pleased, I gave him,
His Majesty, Dan. 9. I have raised up Pharaoh and placed him in his Throne, to
make my power known on him who had deserved it, that is one sense whatsoever
is the other. And the Holy Ghost in Scripture styles not only David and Solomon
Kings, but takes in the rest: Hiram, and Pharaoh, and Hadad, and where the
Scripture does not distinguish neither may we, be their religion or manners
what please them, by God they are made, and may not be marrd by the people --
In nature every thing is dissolved by the same means it came together, in Law
institution, and destitution belong to one: in Divinity also the Prophet in one
and the same verse says, Ego dedi vobis regem, in the former, and in one
breath, abstuli eum, in the latter, Dominus dedit and Dominus abstulit, and
then, and not till then, the people to say benedictum sit nomen dei. And well
it is that God has placed them so near himself, post Deum primus secundum
Deum proximi, Tert. Humani Jove's Plant: the subject then may not come so near
him as Nathan, to tell him tu es homo without Nathans Commission, but tu es
Rex, tu es Deus Terra, a God on earth, so near and so one are Kings with God,
that the accusation of Naboth, whereby the story he spoke nothing of God, but
of the King, they bring in the verdict. Naboth, Maledixi: Deo and Regi, as if
he could not bu blaspheme God that spoke ill of his King, though of Ahab
Nequissimus regum. They are much mistaken who think that God was offended with
the Jews for chosing royal government in opposition to the jud^ciall or the
Shawhedrim established by God under Moses, for Royal government has been
most ancient and universal in the world, in the Law of nature, before the
Ta^les. Saint Chrysostom says therefore, Eve was taken out of man, not out of
the earth, that mankind might acknowledge one head, one Superior, one King,
and Sir Wall. Raleigh in his second book of the Hist. of the world, Royal
Government from Paternall, which indeed are or ought to be both in one effect,
and so we read of Abraham the Patrarch is termed a Prince, Genesis 23.6. And
David the KING is named a Patriarch, let me speak boldly to you of David the
Patriarch: jus regum comes from, jus paternum, both have one commandment,
Honor thy Father, as God alone rules the whole world, and as the Sun gives
light to all creatures, so the people of one Land do most naturally yield
obedience to one head, one King. All Nations were first governed by this form,
Assyrians, Gresians, Egyptians, Jews, Percians, Scythians, Turks, Tartares,
English, French, Spaniards, Poles, Danes, and in the Judges; Neither does
sacred Scripture make mention of other Rulers then Kings. He that will know
more in so clear a case, may if he please read Plato, Herodotus, Zen^phon,
Saint Cyprian, Saint Jerome. Sovereignty in one person, is most natural, most
reasonable, most honorable, most necessary, most divine; So that God was not
angry at the choice of the kind of government, but that he thereby was cast
forth from being King of the Jews, whom he in the place of a King had
governed for above three hundred and fifty years, for neither Moses nor the
Sawhedrim nor any Judge in Israel had in themselves, jus imperatorium the Right
of a King, but only jus hortatorium and punitivum, if they transgressed the
written Law of God. God only was their King, who feign would still (besides the
general protection of the world) have ruled as an earthly King among the rest,
and a pattern to them: but they would no longer live by faith and expectation
of his wonted direction in government and deliverance, but rather to be as the
Nations round about them, they chose a man and refused the living GOD, He is
ejected from his immediate Royalty. This the ground of Gods displeasure at the
Jews for choosing them a KING. Ancient and universal has been the
government of the world by Kings. Saint Ierom^ in one of his Epistles, says
that two Governors in a Commonwealth are like Esau and Jacob, two Princes in
the womb of Rebecca so they in one Kingdom, rend and tear in pieces: Rome
would not endure two brothers, In navi unus guberrator in Ecclesia unus
Episcopus, in Domo unus Dominus, in exercitu unum signum, in imperio unus
imperator. The only way to recover and preserve unity and peace among us, is
one King. This for the Original and antiquity of Kings whence they are and
when.

Now secondly, what they are, which is best known by that whereby they are
formaliter, or finaliter tales, their power: Where the Word of a King is, there
is power, etc. Solomon the wisest of men as well as Kings, Proverbs 8.15.
places Kings before the Creation of the world, better not to be at all then
under no Government, which is none without power, and that power if to any
purpose must be such, as with which no earthly power may contest, the owner of
it, is evermore Alkum one against whom there ought to be no rising, nor any
rebellion at all.

Darius his three servants in Esdras wrote their wise sentences.

1. Forte est vinum.

2. Fortis est Rex.

3. Fortiores surt mulieres; sed supra omnia est veritas. I am somewhat afeard
it was a Prophecy, they are indeed at this day, stronger then our Darius.
Their fond Pharasaicall, and seditious religions are as ridiculous and as
changeable as their fashions and attires, their ungrounded zeales, their
nourishing and feeding of the vulgar and rebellious of the Clergy, those
illiterate talkers in the Pulpit will, nisi supra omnia sit veritas, if the God
of truth do not speedily offend, be stronger then either King or Church David
although a man of valor and piety, yet complains he that the sons of
Zervia were to hard for him. But our Kings and Church may both complain of the
daughters of this Land. That they are and will be to hard for us, nisi supra
omnia veritas, unless God support the integrity of our King, and the sincerity
of the Protestant Religion. A more pregnant place for the power of Kings is in
Wisdom 26 2. speaking of the extreme vengeance which God will bring upon the
heads of evil Kings at the last day, he proves the certainty thereof by an
argument which will seem very strange in these rebellious days: Quoniam
Dominus non vevebitur faciem cujusque, unto you O Kings do I speak, he is
not afraid of the persons of Kings, he dares call them to account: A very
vain idle argument to prove his unmastered deity, and power in that he is not
afraid of Kings. Who is afraid of them? Does God indeed say, Ego dixi Dij
estis? We can take up the next verse and be even with him, he shall fall when
we please) like one of the Princes. No such great matter of fear is the person
or power of a King now a days, when every poor ignorant pesant, or shop-man
can define, confine, and pinch up the prerogative of the King, when the vulgar
Clergy, those Gibeanites, not fit to draw water for learned men, can prick
and gird the person of the King for the space of three or four hours. When
every petty but insolent Town can neglect, if not contemn his presence when
be vouchsafes to come and see us. So that if God will prove his security to
us, he must quit the old argument of fear due unto Kings, from all but
himself, and fetch one suitable to our late religions and governments in Church
and Commonwealth; As that he is not afraid of the Popes holiness, or of a
presbysteriall discipline, or a popular discipline. Thus Scripture and reason
the arguments of the wise must be turned to and fro, to follow the unconstant
humor of this present world. But we in fear of God, and honor of his King,
will lay the ground of our allegiance fast, and such as whereupon we may build
up a piece of obedience that may procure us a Crown of immortality at the last
day, by Saint Gregory's rule, arcessemus Rivum fidelitatis de font pietatis,
not only from customs and fundamental laws in a private land, who are
most-what both imperfect and obscure, but from the plain and easy Text of
Gods own Law, which as it is sufficient for any man's salvation, without the
blasphemous expositions of these times. So in the point of obedience unto Kings
(a maine principle in Christian doctrine) without which no man shall enter into
the Kingdom of heaven) it is very plentiful and plain among the rest, this
is one, Where the word of a King is, there is power.

The word of a King.
IT is as the roaring of a Lion. It is Divalis jussio, say the counsels,
Eloquium divinum est in ore regis, says Solomon and Barclay cites, three
fundamental laws in Scotland, in honor of the word of a KING. Si quis in
alterius quam regis verba juraverit capitale esto. Si quis in jussu regis
(without his word) homines in armis habuerit, morte crimen, expiatur. Solius
Regis nomine jus onme redditur, conventus judicatur, concilia convocanter. But
I chose rather to apply my self to Gods Word, and then will prove the power of
the word of a King.

There are two powers of Kings plain in two places of Gods Word, the first is
Potestas. What he may and ought to do in equity, That is set down, In
capite volum, Deuteronomy. 17. The second is Potentia jus impunitatis, what he may
do, and yet may not be questioned by his subjects for so doing. This is in, 1 Samuel 8.12. and to the 19. The former is his own rule, as he will answer God if
he transgress, the latter is his peoples rule for their obedience. The former
power what is religious and just toward God and his people, his grave Divines,
and skillful Lawyers who are about his person are bound to explain. The one to
rehearse. Otho Frigensis his sentence to him or such like concerning the day of
judgment. Cum horre dum sit omni mortali incidere in manus dei viventis,
Regibus tamen eo erit horribilius, quo ipsi caeteris possent peccare liberius.
They should be informed that Kings come from Christ's own thigh, Apoc. 19. On
his thigh is written King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, That they come from the
thigh of God, their government ought to be paternall and easy, to use his
subjects as his own Children, as God uses man; that they ought not to wear
Reheboams fingers, much less his Fathers loins, but Abraham's, yea Christ's
loins more compassionate and kind to his people under the time of
Christi^nitie then before: That their Scepters are not given them to dish out
the brains of their innocent subjects, but that it was derived from David's
sheep-hooke to lead his people by the waters of comfort, that the people are
not to be goared with whips and Scorpions, and intolerable taxes and
oppressions but to be led like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron. That
they are anointed with oil, in token to make glad the hearts of all their
subjects, not besmeare them ore with Vinegar. And not only religion, but also
in Policy his Councillors, and Lawyers are bound in Conscience to exhort him
to keep within the bounds of equity and imperrall right. Catose counsel often
repeated to him. Potentes parce uti debere potestate ut diu possint They ought
to advise him that few Laws whether in Church or Common wealth are admirable
preservatives both of Kings and kingdoms The government of the Jews had not
continued long under the Ceremonial Law (the burden too heavy for them to
bear) had not God watched over them with severe judgments. And if many Laws
be enacted, and those not closely united to reason, but only depending on the
placitum of the Lawmakers, if also thereby he tie both their Consciences and
purses (to which the Consciences of most men are tied) it is not morally
possible, but such a kingdom by the malice of men will shortly after be
confounded. They ought to inform that he ought to rule more Turcico His people
are not mancipia, nor more valdesiano, they have possessions under him; neither
(...) nor (...), without fault in the subject to be in his power: But that his
subjects are (...), in subordination and subjection only. That a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump a little oppression makes all his subjects source,
especially if the people be aforehand seasoned with the leaven of the
Pharisees, with hypocrisy, who have nothing of Religion ssave names of faith
and tread-water-grace inspirations, marks of Election of their own choosing,
reprobating all besides themselves even Kings if they please them not, having
the form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, even the power the
Kings. The power they are bound to advise the King of who are employed about
his person; We who have to deal with the people are bound to deliver his
secundam power nifi impunitatis, who may say unto the King if he do amiss,
What do thou, Kings are not to be questioned.

The first we find in this sacrilegious, form to Moses a Deputy, no King
was, Corah and his accomplices, and as their way was not the common way of
obedient subjects, so neither was their death the common death of men. For say
they could charge Moses and Aaron with intrusion into their rights, must the
form needs be by the way of question interrogative. Cur elevamini, there are
many other ways to have done it more meekely: and if you mark it, it is no
ordinary quare lamma, but an imperious term, umaddans, what is the reason;
Ephori like, we require an account of the administration of the Common wealth.
This saucy form of questioning the Jews kept till our Saviors time: Is not
this the Carpenters son. Is it lawful to pay tribute unto Caesar, who made
thee a ruler over us. It was the Donatists form in Saint Augustine: Quid nobis
imperatores? It is the Popes form. It is the Presbyterians-factious form. It
is the devils form of coming to Kings with insolent questions? Quid agis, we
expect satisfaction not the word of a King only, for what has bin governed
amiss. Quanquam dignus sit haec contum lia, etc. Here in the Text is an answer
as large, though not as unreasonable, and that in the same way by way of
question. Who may say unto him? 1. Quis e clero? 2. Quis ex optimatibus. 3.
Quis e Magistratibus regni. 4. Ques e Populo? may dare say to Him, Him
anointed with oil for supremacy and continuance in his Throne! Him! unctum
but Christum Domini, Him? Not man but God? what subject? what profane person?
what mortal man may dare say unto him? What do thou.

I. Quis e Clero
WHo of all the Church for matters of Religion or Sacrilege may question the
authority of a King. Begin we with our Lord and Master of Religion, our
Savior Christ, he suffered not Saint Peter to resist the Magistrate: Saint
Austin reprehends both Moses and Saint Peter, Contra Manich: ille fraterno, hic
domanico amore peccavit: nec pro fratre, nec pro Christo, itaque nec pro
Christi Religione est adversus principes machinandi locus. Baronius to the
year of Christ 350. says that in the purer times of Christians non
cogitaverunt de vindicta, for says Tertul. If malum malo dispungi, were
lawful in Christians, Nos implevimus castra urbes, oppida, etc. we had all
the Garrisons and fortes of the kingdom, una nox pauculis faculis, we could
have lighted our cruel Tyrants to their graves. Saint Basil gave up the Town
to Julian the Apostate even when they might have defended themselves against
him, he rather by tears, and prayers, beseeches him to spare the Christians.
Famous is Saint Ambrose in his obedience to Theodosius, Suadeo rogo, hortor,
admoneo, no more to a King Ego in te contumaciae animam non habeo, sed habeo
timoris, and when Valentine demanded his Church, he answers the King, that by
right, thou can not take away the house of a private man (neither can be) and
think you by your power to take away the House of God, yet mark, imperatori
non done, sed non nego, tradere basilicant possum, sed pugnare non debeo,
volens nunquam jus deseram coactus repugnare non novi, dolere potero, potero
gemire, aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere But excelling all these is the
practice of holy Samuel toward, Saul who was neither Priest nor Christian, I
Sam. 15. when Saul's kingdom was rent from him, decreto divino, he requested
Samuel to stay and entreat God for him. No, Perjecisti Sermonem domini and
projecit te dominus ne sis Rex super Israel, Saul catches at him and rent his
mantle. Samuel replies, The Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel from thee
this day. Then says Saul, I have sinned, honor me I pray thee before the
Elders of my people: Here Samuel stayed, and returned and followed after Saul.

The vices of Idolatry of a King may not be remonstrated or declared down to
the people, by any member of the Church of God, we must honor him before the
people and Elders in Israel. Yea though he rend off our mantles from our
backs, although he deprive us of all our revenewes, we must with St. Bernard
say, if all the world should importune me, to dishonor the person of Lodovicus
for his sacrilege, Ego tamen Deum timerem. Oh that our popular Clergy either
would or could look beyond Luther. They might then learn more manners toward
Kings, from Irenaeus, Tertullian, Chrysostom, Basil and to qualify their
ignorant zeales or their malicious knowledge. Let them take one rule for all to
speak honorably of the persons of KINGS from Nazianzen, in his discourse with
Constans the Arrian. He does not proclaim him Pharaoh, or an Idolater, or (
quod quidam fecit) That Tophet is prepared of old, and for the King. I dare not
begin to reckon, opus erit viatico. But benignifica natura tua, Domine Auguste,
intelligit singularis and admirabilis sapientia tua, aequum videri debet
sanctitati tuae gloriosissime Auguste, dignantissime imperator, sancte Rex,
loquuturus sum tecum, cum honor regni and fideitus, and these honorable
terms to an Arrian. And 4. hundred Fathers of the Church spoke no other
language at Ariminum to an Arrian.

But the Church of God is as the Jewish Temple twice built. And as at the
latter raising of it, the old men who had seen the glory of the former wept in
memory of it, for I doubt not but the grave Divines in this, and other
Churches, who have seen the glory of the former part of the Church in the
writings of the fathers, do weep to see it in this latter age built up indeed
of specious names, and outsides of Religion, but all operative faith, devotion
Chastity, Temperance, Patience, Obedience even to Kings is made a question. The
Pope he lead is in the front of the latter part of the Church against the right
of the Kings. He that in former times swear, in eo per quem reges regnant, He
whom the Florentine History can inform, that his supremacy was not derived
from an obscure place of Scripture or two. But from the Emperors removing his
Court from Ravenna; since which time not Kings, but Popes are Gods; and the
Society of Jesus, that Slaughterhouse of Kings, can change a Text for his
holiness, My sone fear thou God and the Pope, Churchmen are exempt from the
power of Kings says Samuel Sa. A Jesuit: A Roman Catholic rebelling is no
traitor says the same Samuel Sa. Sexcentis versibus eorum impuritas traloqu
nemo potest, in so much as it is a proverb in Quiccardine it is the property of
the Church to hate the King.

There is in these latter times another faction against the King who cry, but
with the Donatists, Quid nobis imperatori? And as the Papists. Dominus Deus
noster papa, so these Dominus Deus noster consistorium, presby^erianum. But
that you ever sufficiently detest that kind of government, I will give you one
of their phrases from the Bishop of Winchester, their Church (say they) is the
house (or rather their private houses the Church) and the Commonwealth but the
hangings, now the hangings must be made fit for the house not the house for the
hangings. And if the King and his Princes be too high for their holy house,
they must cut them shorter and with the help of an Anabaptist lay them even
with the ground But we have as yet no such rebellious custom, nor I hope ever
shall; nor the Churches to God. Let the Clergy for their obedience imitate
holy Samuel to Saul, Eliah to Ahab, who by special commission told him, not
his people of his sins. Imitate Jeremie in the prison, Daniel in the den.
Amos struck through the Temples, Zacharias murdered between the porch and
the Altar, Christ our Master under Herod, Tiberius, suffering under Pontius
Pilate, the Apostles under Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Domitian, Saint John in a
Tubbe of Oil, Christian Bishops for many hundred years under Tyrants,
Idolaters, Atheists, none of all these reviled their Princes, while they were
alive. Last of all remember that Saint Bernard, Fidem ^onorum amissione,
exilio, morte non prodam, terramincolo, quasi semper migraturus. And Saint
Chrysostom. In Epistola ad Cyrac: will the King or the Queen banish me. The
earth is the Loras and the fullness thereof; will he cut me in pieces? I can
remember Esaias, will he cast me into the Sea? Jonas. If into the furnance? The
three Children. If to the Lions? Daniel. If stone me? Saint Stephen. If behead
me? Saint John, Lastly (for I dare not rebel) will he take away my whole
estate and substance from me? that of Job, nudus exivi ex utero matris meae
and nudus revertar. This for the Church: Quis e clero, if like the Primitive
Fathers, may say unto the King, Quid agis? What do thou?

2. Quis ex optimatibus regni? May say unto the KING what do thou.
Were it not think you a very ungrateful sight to behold a Bull or an
Unicorn pushing at the Lion? or the Falcon to seize upon the Eagle? So, and
much more unseemely were it for the Princes of the Land to question their
natural King, or to reprehend his government, otherwise then by advise and
humble entreaty. And here I have no mind at this time to undervalue the
persons and honors of the Princes of the Land, though but in a comparative
way, in that the people will conceive all spoken absolutely, which may be
delivered by way of comparison, and with the King only, pro quo caeteri, etc.
And so have their lives in no honor. And their deaths in contempt and
derision, a fault too general in this kingdom at this day.

John a Prince ^n Israel slew his Master, he had peace because he had a
Commission says Justin Martyr. But had Zimri peace that slew his Master? David
a Prince under Saul took up four hunddred men, but with no intent to oppose
the person of Saul, but to preserve himself: And Hugo Grotius grants that to
have been lawful under the government and law of the Jews, which is not
under the law of Christians we being bound to more perfect patience and
obedience in regard of better promises concerning another kingdom, so that
David case is no president for us; moreover there is no necessity to think
that David intended so much as a defensive war against Saul, but rather as the
Jews under Antiochus to depart into the wilderness; and defend himself
against the wild beasts, or to take some towns of the Philistims, until the
day of the death of Saul; Thus dum timuit oleum servavit inimicum: All that
David did when he could have cut his throat, was that he cut off the skirt of
his garment, and even of this he repented, percussit eum cor ejus: And it is
this day a tradition amongst the Jews says Lyranus, that David was punished
in his death respectively to this sin, that no clothes could keep him warm,
quia oram vestis Sauli abscidit, in vestibus, quibus opertus erat, non
calefiebat. There is ground for this in the book of Kings: But whether true or
no, ficta arguunt, the moral is good. Princeps non est austeroris verbiense
faedandus, nec vel ultimae super fluae actionis little quasi finbriam
vituperando decorpere presum^mus. Absalom a Prince David's son rebels with
the rairest pretense, that both Religion and Justice could make for him,
forsooth that neither were duly executed in the land; he would do it, yea and
that speedily, in the gates of the City; but mark his end, suspensus erat
quasi in patibulo, he was gibbeted without a Hangman, transfixus tribus
sagittis. 1. For disobedience to his natural Father, 2. For opposing his
natural Sovereign. 3. For spoiling both Church and state, under show of
Religion and Justice even when he lay with his Fathers Concubines upon the
house top: And let all the enemies of the Lord the King be as the young man
is.

3. Quis e Magistratibus regni? May say unto the King what do thou?
A vinculis delictorum liberi sunt reges says Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austin,
to moderate the zeal of any inferour Magistrate affirms, if they command any
thing, it is not to command but a presumption, and obedience to them, proficiet
ad paenam non ad premium quam ad contumeliam pertinet creatoris ut contempto
Domino colamur serai and spreto imperatore adorentur comites. No counsel or
Sanedrim could lawfully question Moses; who was no King but Legatus Dei.
Howsoever Philo in honor of him styles him King. There is no question but the
general counsel of a kingdom is the most incomparable medium of preferring
both King and people, that the reason of man can possibly invent: But then the
power of it must be only directive not coercive. For I would ask by what law?
by the Kings? No man is bound to give a prejudicial judgment against
himself, and if any equal have no power over an equal much less an inferior
over a superior. Laws made by the King are not Buchanans, to tie him down
under the judgment and censure of his people, but they are Organs or
instruments of the power that governs, at once thereby to reach the whole
people, not coactively to bind the legislator, for the K. In whom humane power
does reside, is a person that cannot by his own power be controlled much lest
by the power of any subject; moreover every active ability whether in nature
or in morals is (per se) cause or principal of alteration corruptively in
another body, not in the body in the which it self resides. Wherefore if
Divines or Lawyers affirm obligation in Princes to their laws, they teach
herein only the bond of conscience. They are not Idonei judices, they appeal
straight to God. Tibi soli peccavi. But to put an end to all questioning of
Kings by any under Magistrate whatsoever; I require an answer to the Law of God
in these following questions. Who questioned Saul for slaying the Priests? did
the Sanedrim? who questioned Solomon for his revolt to Idolatry? did the
Sanedrim? who questioned Ioram a Paracide, and 6. times a murderer of his
Nobles? did the Sanedrim? who Ioas for his Idolatry and slaying the High Priest
did the Sanedrim? who questioned Theodosius for murdering 6000. innocent
souls? who questioned Constance, Valens? Julian the Apostate? who traduced
their persons and dignities? who offered them tumultuous affronts? unless we
will skill more in Religion then the former part of the Jewish and Christian
world, Desinamus ogganire, and plura reges percontari. Remember that of Cicero
Regum haec sunt imperia animadverte, and edicto pare, and preter rogitatum si
loquare moriere. And that of the Persian King, mementote parendum vobis esse
magis quam suadendum, even the fundamental laws of this kingdom, are by
chance or good providence, plain for the unquestioned power of the King, by
any lower Magistrate; Thomas of Walsingham speaks from a Parliament held at
Lincoln, An. 130. That the King of England from their preeminence and custom
at all times have not to answer before any Judge either Ecclesiastical or
civil. And Henry or Brachton cites a fundamental of this land, that if any
thing be to be obtained of the King (Cum breve non currat contra Regem) there
is nothing left to them but entreaty and prayers, that he would correct
himself; which if he please not to do it is enough that he expect the Lord
from heaven as his only revengers. De Chartis Regis facta Regum nec justiciaris
nec privatae personae debent disputare. For certainly if there be in a
Commonwealth, a reluctancie between two governments each watching its
advantage and prioritie, it cannot be but as Esau and Jacob strugled in the
womb; so these in the state will breed convulsion fits, each contending who
shall come forth in government, one of them at length will come forth with
scarlet strings on his hands and bloody banners. If a body have two heads they
will not easily agree upon motion. To end this questioning by Magistrates we
will call Tertullian. Reges sunt super omnes homines and ante omnes Deos: And
that proverb of the Rabines, Nulla Creatura Iudicat Rogem.

Quis e populo, May dare say unto the KING what do thou.
GOd bless this poor people, it is totus in questionibus, busy in
speculations and questions concerning things that do not much concern them,
they have been in Divinity long ago, as whether faith only, or good works
justify, and such like questions, the Divines have been vehement in those
disputes, and the people conceivd straight matter of salvation to be in the
knowledge of them, then they undertake to discuss the question, in conclusion
believe nothing but their own fantasies, and resolve to do no good works at
all: Then whether the Common Prayer be not diservice, new English, for the new
Religion, of whom it may be fitly said as Tullie of Antho^y, for his
pientissimus, quod verbum latino sermon non est, id ad tuam singularem
pretatem exprimendam inventum est: Whether kneeling at the Sacrament (that
tremendum mysterium of the commemoration of Christ's passion be not Idolatry;
whether Jesu-worship be lawful, and that resolved to their hands, whether to
worship God in entrance to his house in the presence of his Angels, says
Terullian, be not superstitione, O tempora. Whether we may repeat the Lords
Prayer that Idol? O mores, whether the sign of the Cross, used in Tertullians
time be not now popery. O ridiculum! but I may not excusse the rest by name so
few, come we nearer to the Text, whether if our Clergy will not preach unto
us such Pharisiacall, seditious, ignorant, Diabolical doctrine, we may not
choose others in a case so concerning the destruction of our souls. And then
whether if the King Himself will not conform to our vain senseless
religions, (so many now for number infinite, for quality so blasphemous that
it is impossible for one man to know them all, and for rational man to
practice any of them) we may not question his government? whether to make the
question more semblable) a King in a State, be not like a Mariner in a ship?
if one will not, another must. The Mariners thought so in the last tumult, vix
vera esse nisi cunctanter crederem, nisi his oculis videram. In sum, whether
both for Religion and civil policy we may not as we have done to the Clergy,
so to the King put up insolent questions. Quid agis? Why do thou rule
otherwise then we please to be ruled our selves. O that my head were a
fountain of tears, etc. Jerem.

1. For Religion.
We read of rebellion intended against Ahashuerus, 2 Hester ver. 21.22. No
reason set down, but in diebus illis, and what were those days? you might
know them by the story. Ahasuerus had married Ester his Queen a virtuous
woman, but of another Religion. Bigthan and Thares, It Is like were crossed in
the match, but see they draw their arguments from popular heads, to interest
127. provinces in the rebellion. Ahasuerus our King matcheth with a Jew, one of
a Religion hated among us, one that cares neither for Mithra nor Wamasdres, one
brought in to ruinate the established religion in Persia, which by our Law
ought not to be altered. Thus they are zealous on the sudden, as the fashion
of the world is; This jealousy delivered down and digested by a prevailing
faction in the people, they forthwith (although there be no cause) are ready
tumultuatim to run up to the King with Quid agis? Why do thou change our
Religion. Good people) for so I may rhetorically call them) if you intend a new
religion take not rebellion in your way, for a thing that I will tell you in
Luthers reformation, when was more need then now is, the rule of obedience was
not duly observed, and there fell in or upon that reformation 100. thousand of
the people, before then that you need a reformation, before you adventure upon
the dangers. Barclay accuses Luther for it, I dare not defend him, I find him
in his book, Contra regem Angliae, very familiar and impudent to the King,
stoliditas vestra, asinitas vestra, cornicula avum, aut regem nasci aut fatuum;
and I wish there be no such Sheimies such felly tounged reformers abroad in
this our pious reformation. Barclay charge Luther, yet farther of the death
of all those people, that when he had moved them to rebellion, and could not
accomplish his own ends, he was the first that moved the Magistrate to ruin
and destroy them, all how true God knows, but this the people may know is true
in Policy in States men, under the larve of Religion to draw the people to one
side, but if they fail in their plots and ambitious Projects, they to prefer
themselves must be the first and most active in cutting the peoples Throats
whom they have stirred up.

Again, in the Reformation after the death of so many thousands, and there
issued forth so many Schisms from the Anarchie, that holy Melancton who loved
not Popery confessed for unities sake, they must all return to the Church of
Rome again and Prot: in his An: on Cass: Porf: speaks little less, better to
endure one extreamitie then Twenty, better admit of one tyrannical Religion
then a hundred. And I pray God it be not the effect, and resultance of our
many Schisms and distractions in our Church at this day. To come with
questions contradiction to a King, for Religion was not heard of in the Jewish
Government. The Law in Deutren mie 13.6. was if thy brother or thy son, or
thy wife, or thy friend entice thee to Idolatry, sistas coscoram judice, not if
thy Father, or thy Husband, or thy Judge, for certain not thy King. The manner
of Balthasars deposition for abusing Gods Religion and Temple, is very
remarkable by all good Subjects. None of his Subjects must dare to draw up the
order no, a hand writing out of the wall from God, must declare it, and when it
was there none of all the people were able to read it, so strange a thing to a
subject is a deposition of his King, no nor the Astrologers nor South-sayers,
no nor the Devil himself is able to understand it. Daniell is sent for, he
only by divine revelation is able to read, and what is it. Mean, Mean, tekell
uparsin, God not the people has numbered thy Kingdom and finished it, Joseph
17. chap. 36. Tells us of the sect of the Pharisees, who to the number of six
thousand in zeal to their hypocritical Religion, were in a covenant by
themselves against Caesar, some of that number came to our Savior with that
question (for that is still their form) is it lawful to give Tribute unto
Caesar. They are resolved not to do it before, and these Sectaries proved the
ruin of the Jewish Government, with whom Docter Iackson compares the
Schismatics, of his, and these times, growing on so fast, that both he and Sir
Walter Ral. 2. Hist. spoke out of propheticke wisdom, that they would hazard
the ruin both of this Church and State, and they would force it into (...) and
confusion. For indeed what else can be expected, when every one may assume his
own Religion, and such a one as may encourage him to contradict the
established government of the Church, on the one hand, and the fundamental
Laws of the Land be obscured on the other, and the Majesty and power of the
Kings person contemned, what remains but we may say over this Church as
Iugurtha over Rome. O urbem venalem and lite perituram si emptorem invenerit.

2. For Civil Government.
As the people for Religion may not question the King, so neither for the
policy and civil affairs, may they say unto him, what do thou. And here
the people are furnished (I know not whence) with as many questions to molest
the quiet of the state, as they have been of late to disturb the peace of the
Church. And first may not his own Laws say unto him Quid agis? Directive they
may coactive, they neither may nor can; if the King be in an error, he can
make new laws to defend his error, says Saint Augustine, and Sir Walter
Ralleigh, reprehends Bracton though a Philachrist, for saying that a King is
King by the Law, Me ito debet res tribuere regi quod lex attribuit ei nam lex
facit ut ipse sit Rex. Whereas says Sir Walter, Bracton ascribes this power to
humane Law, he is mist ken, for Kings are made by God, and Laws Divine, and
by humane Laws are only declared to be King. But is he not a King by our
election? Election does not make him King although, unless he had been chosen
he had not been such. As they are to say of good work, they are via ad regnum
non causa regnandi, so may we of election, it is not the cause but the way to
the kingdom, and so we find in Scripture, where the people chose, God made the
King it is not nos, but Ego posui regem super Israel, and it was Gods admirable
wisdom, when the world could no longer subsist under paternall Government, in
that men and malice increasing in the world, paternall indulgences would not
do right respectively, every man's injuries both expressly in the Jewish
government and in other States by the Law of reason do prompt them to elect
one man as their common Father, that this one man, this common Father, this
King not interested in private respects might distribute Justice impartially,
and punish offenses in equity: and also that the people by their own act of
election might be obliged the more to obey him, although he proved rigid and
austere, as they would and ought to obey their natural Father, which act God
evermore confirms in Heaven, this may appear better in a similitude.
Original sin is remitted in Baptism, but not ex opere operato, yet if there
be no opus operatum there is (by virtue of the covenant ordinario, no
remission of the sin; and after opus operatum it is impossible for the Priest
to revoake the sin again remitted in heaven. So is it in elective kingdoms,
and all are such naturally) the opus operatum of the people, sc. there election
does not make the King, neither is he made King without it, and after election
he is so made and confirmed in Heaven that their act cannot ex jure be reversed
again. For election according to Gods Laws, right, reason, is not a
conditional of tying of Kings down to the peoples ends: so as if he answer
not their ends, he shall be no longer King, but it is a resignation of our
natural and private interest of revenge of all our paritie, which we have
with him, by the Law of nature into the hands of God, that he would place him
super nos. It might have been said, as to Ananias and Saphira was it not your
own before such election and resignation of your rights? If now you shall
demand your right again, and question his Prerogative and immunitie, it may be
said as to them, why have ye lied to the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, what if he break the fundamental Laws of the Land, to which he
is sworn. It is an old principle, Perjurium iure non solvit regnum, Solomon
answers, Eccles. 10. Rex insipiens prodet populum, not populus insipiens prodet
regem, as it is now this day. Now a King by changing the Laws, and ancient
government does civilly destroy the kind of his people. But what if be be not
of capacity to understand the Laws? As if the laws be not to be understood:
such there be in the world. But if they be the Prophet Hosea 13. tells you,
V^^ ibi terracujus Rex puer est, not (...) ubi Rex cuius terra, etc.

Thirdly, what if a Tyrant? may we not question him then? for that injuria
Tyranni est in facto, usurpation of a Kingdom, not his own. Ius regis est in
facti impunitate. God will reckon with Kings one day, for abusing his Image in
the meanest of his subjects. But if touch him; you may Athenian like expel one
Tyrant, and gain thirty if not more. Peritt Nero sed nullo successu, one
year after his death proved worse than fourteen of his Tyrannte. And it was
the Country-mans proverb, I wish they had it again, Antigonum effodio, we
shall have a worse master, a worse King when this is gone.

The Jewish Government was more subject to tyranny then any Nation, then in
the world or since, in that they lied under a spec all form of punishment, to
keep them in more perfect obedience: As if a private man offended, many of the
people suffered death, either meritory in themselves, for their sins, though
occasionaliter, from the sin of another person, or else from Gods absolute
dominion over the temporal life of man. But if a King transgressed, many
thousands perished. 70. thousands dyed for David's sin in numbering the
Soldiers, here is a strange tyranny over the lives of the subject, and yet
David was not chased too and fro in his kingdom, and the power of calling his
soldiers taken out of his hand. And yet as David spoke, I have sinned, let me
be punished, as for this people, quid fecit? So the people may invert the
words, we have sinned and one wickedly, but for this righteous King, quid ille
fecit? Daniel under the names of beasts, foretells certain Kings degenerating
into tyranny, according to the several qualities and kinds of tyranny. In
the New Testament, Tell Herod the Fox. But we read not that they were deposed
of their kingdoms by their subjects. Pharaoh suffered ten plagues for his
tyranny, God suffers not rebellion to be one, but Frogs, Locust, Caterpillars,
Famine, sc. Herod is destroyed not by subjects, but by Lice. It seems God
would not do them the honor, as to perish by the hands of men, not by women,
Abimelechs fear, not by enemies, Saul's fear, much less by subjects, but in
simili, as they lived like beasts, so must they be consumed. Rebel not then,
do not Tyrants that to much honor expect, a while Gods potent and just
revenge; he is best skild how to suit and proportion punishments to the persons
of Kings, he can take them away by some contumelious death, and can send Arm
es of Locusts, Frogs, and such base Vermin to destroy them. You see how easy
it is for God to take vengeance of his own Kings. No need of deep plots of
many years contrivance, no need of hearing of encumbrance, and distractions
of your own making, and the wrath of God to the rest, when Flies, and Lice,
and Frogs in Pharaohs Chamber may serve the turn. When as God, not the
people says Calvin may turn Nebuchadnezzar to grass among the beasts or the
field. And also that if notwithstanding this you will destroy your Kings,
remember whose places you supply of the most contemptible vermin living, you
who remaining in obedience are men, not Jews but Christians one day not men
(...), Kings in Gods own kingdom, by rebellion ye make your selves, not
Angels, not Christians, not Jews, no not men, no not beasts of the better
sort, but Locusts, but Frogs, but starved Kine and Lice, Nay ye shall be as
the dust of which God made the Lice, and the Angel of the Lord scattering you.

It was an evil custom among the Goths to destroy their Kings upon any small
displeasure, and Barclay tells us of a custom in Burguney if they year
brought forth no Corn they removed their King contrary to the proverb. In
Tacitus, malum regem and ster^lem annum aequo feramus. Kings ruled with
Burgandians by a prophetique Almanacke, I pray God we in this Land prove not
Burgundians. If our luxurious and earthly pleasures and profits be crossd by
the doctrines of the learned and pious Clergy, or by the commands of the King
though for our own security and peace, if we miss any of our former
delights, then Burgundian like, Terra non peperit hoc anno, nos ilaque
pariamus; what novum clerum, novum, Kegem, noves leges, new nothing, but new
confusion, new distractions, new schisms, new incests, new (for number,)
adulteries, and when after lamentable experience you shall compare the old and
new government together, ye will say, as our Savior did of wine, no man
drinks new Wine, but faith the old is better.

I do not here reprehend the whole people, I have learned more Rhetoric from
Quintili^n, I know many went along with Absalon to the paying of his vow who
were not in the rebellion, many both menand women are like the Disciples going
to Emaus whose hearts are warm within zealous for the truth, but their eyes
are holden by the seditious ignorant Ministers of the times, that they cannot
see the true face of Christianity: No I speak not to these, but I speak to
Burgundian Subjects, Almanacke subjects who would feign change their King with
their Religion and that once a year at least, I speak to men engaged to this
earth, to their covetousness, to their lusts, drunkenness, swearing,
gluttony, not in the University only, but in the Town and Country; where
not, who when any rate or subsedie for the public good, either curb their
customs in expensive v^ces, or cross their tenacious humors then Burgundian
like, Terra non poperit hoc anno; Etevestigio, there arise under thoughts of
the King, they expound his actions with disadvantage to his honor, at length
come up to him boldly to him with impudent questions, Quid agis? why are we
governed otherwise, then we have a mind to be governd our selves.

Hard, to hard is the condition of Kings, if so much liberty be allowed to the
Subjects, if they at their unbounded pleasure may report a religious King to be
superstitious, a devout King a hypocrite, if grave and serious austere and
sullen: if pleasant dissolute: if merciful, to be defective in spirit and
valor: if severe against rebellion, tyrannical; if bountiful (though in
policy) profuse; if provident, for his Royal posterity covetous; if such
insolent disgraces may pass uncensurd on the persons of Kings, then actum est
de regibus, down with Kings and kingdoms, Church and State, and all union
among the sons of men.

Fourthly, May we not by natures principles question and remove evil Kings
from us as we do evil beasts, for the security of our estates and lives. An
answer from nature shall consure the question. Drink naturally quenches
thirst, but if you take it in a fever it will more inflame you, then you may
not consult with the inferior appetite, but with reason, let blood, purge, and
potion directed by the direction of the Physician, not your own sense so in a
Commonwealth diseased by Tyranny; the people may not use the inferior right
of private nature, for in a Commonwealth private persons have given up their
private right of punishing, they cannot punish a private person, for certain
not the King, to whom their right is resignd; what then, if the disease be hot
upon us we we must be let blood, purge our luxuriant passions, our inflamed
rebellious humor, remove each man his particular sins, consult with the
Physician of States by prayers and tears, beseech the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, who has the hearts of Kings in his own hand, and can upon submission
to himself and his King, either remove him or amend him. Haec est expedissima
via reprimendi tyrannidem says Salibur. Peccata enim delinquentium sunt vires
tyrannorum.

Fifthly, may not the people say unto the King what do thou? Or what art
thou, without the people? Are not we the strength of a King? Did not Pyrrhus
say to his Soldiers they were his wings, and he but the body? I desire no
greater honor to be given to the King, then to be thought the body to a pair
of wings, go see if he can fly without that body, so it may be said next unto
God, in the King your body ye live and move, and have your being, and for your
strength, it is true, ye have enough, but for what? even to eat up one
another alive, as it is in the Jewish proverb.

Sixthly, But if the people have not those rights and privileges which they
enjoyd under his predecessors, may they not come then to him with quid agis?
First, all Kings in an elective kingdom by successionare pares, they enter
naturally upon jus integrum, so that if any rights have passed from former
Kings pejudiciall to the Crown, jure regni, they return again; yet,
Secondly, if any right of the subjects (for rights they have) have passed from
them to former Kings in consideration of such privileges, it is both
honorable and just that they be recompensed or restored back again.

Seventhly, what if he violate the conditions propounded to him and his
predecessors upon his entrance to the Crown? may not the people question him
for that? Not so far I believe as is commonly thought summum imperium and
conditionatum, may very well be conseniasanea, and not opposites. In the
Persian kingdom he is sworn to the laws of the Persians, which ought not to
alter, and yet none may question him, if he violate these laws. In the Jewish
government wherein Kings were absolute and uncontroleable by their subjects,
there were some cases and conditions in which jure he had no power to Judge, as
de Tribu, de pontifice, de propheta, as is plain, Ier. 38.5. yet although these
conditions were delivered by God Himself, if the K. (as appears in many
places of the book of Kings and Chron.) did intermeddle it was not in the power
of the Jews to question or derrive him of his government. But what if it be a
condition that if he break these laws he shall ipso facto, void his kingdom,
as it has bin in some States. This will be found a most prejudicial condition
both to King and people, for we living in this world not by mathematical
demonstrations, where there is no medium between rectum and ^^rium, but by
moral rules, where there are many formae interjectae between rectum and
curvum, vice and virtue. Some virtuous actions coming near vice are deemed
vicious, and some vicious coming mere virtue, are reckoned virtuous, it will
be very hard to know what when a King punctually keeps al his conditions, but
at the pleasure of a prevailing faction in the people, he will be judged either
directly or by consequence to have broken the conditions on which his kingdom
depends, this kind of government must be very doubtful and destructive to a
Commonwealth.

Lastly, may not the people come unto the King with quid agis? if he intend and
threaten to destroy the whole State, as Nero and Caligula, or if he intend to
give up himself and his kingdom without the subjects consent not only in
Patrocinium but in ditionem, to another Prince. In both these cases, ex
hypothesi, that there has been no rebellion in the subject, and then the cases
are morally impossible; Grotius, Barclay, and Abbas, Winzelus, are of opinion
that the Law of nature does return unto the people again, both for to defend
themselves and elect again. But the holy Abbat is of a better opinion that the
Law of Nature is not always to be resumd by Christians, especially here where
it cannot be taken, but with many inconveniences and uncertainties both from
our not knowing what is a full intention and for defect of a lawful Judge, and
in regard of appeals to other Nations, and beside these a breach of many Laws
of Christianity. His advice is rather than to injure our Christian profession
to betake our selves to fasting and prayers, and removing from us our
particular lusts and wickedness provided thus for death, expect Gods
providence who never fails religious men and kingdoms in this general
preparation for death; either God may turn him and his armies from us, put a
hook in his nostrills, or else confound his person with some sudden judgment,
even Lice may consume his unnatural bowels, or if not, non ^^cet sed purgat,
Saint Ambrose he does but hasten us to a better kingdom, an everlasting one
in heaven. Durus est Sermo sed tulit Iudeus, and f^rat Christianus.

Now in the name of Religion, in the name of the peace of the Commonwealth,
and the honor of the King let me ask you these questions.

You that come up so boldly to the face of a King for the Relion who should
clamare a facie ejus are ye sure the Religion ye question him for is the
right Religion? are ye sure your inspirations are not from the Devil? are ye
sure your Ministers are both for learning and manners, such as in whom ye may
conside in a matter that so concerns your souls? And that they do not humor
you contrary to their own consciences, out of respect to preferment in the
Church which at another time either their poverty in parts, or poverty in
manners could not attain.

Are ye sure that those that from your Pulpits declaime so fervently against
superstition and Idolatry, have not themselves been leaders in that which they
now condemn in others, and so cannot be fit Judges what is Idolatry? Or else
themselves are (...). Again are ye all of one Religion that the King may
satisfy you all at once? If ye be not all of one Religion, tell us how many
your are of if you can? And if you should chance to be one Religion at any time
hereafter, are ye sure to continue in it? That the King may not be troubled
Burgundians like to establish a new Religion once every year for you. If you
be not certain of all these, as I am sure you are not, how dare ye certainly
confound King, Church, and State, for an uncertain Religion.

Again for your Policy and civil government are ye certain of the
fundamental laws of the land? Are ye sure ye cannot digest an Arbitrary
government under the notion and term of fundementall laws? It is not an
impossible thing in nature that, are ye sure, if the King be not absolute and
sole judge of fundamental laws to be freed from avarice and ambition in the
interior Judges and Magistrates two inseprable vices in Aristocracy: Both
which are satisfied in a King ambition in that he is summu, Avarice, in large
estate. Are ye sure of the same Senate always, and if you be extreme now time
may come when others may be as extreme now time may come when others may be as
extreme, and so the kingdom hurried between two extremes, the peoples rule
being to run from one extreme unto another. Lastly are ye sure if ye put any
more insolent questions to the king, you may not turn a meek and pious King as
ever sat upon this Throne, into a Tyrant. A learned Church as ever any in this
Kingdom or else where into ignorance. Aflourishing stat as any in the
Christian world into a confusion, a long and happy peace into as long and
unhappy war? a fullness into famine? your wives to widows? your children to
Orphants? your selves into your grave, and you leave this nation behind you a
Desolation a hissing a reproach a by word to the nations round about us.

And now God forgive me if in this discourse I have not intended rather the
liberties and rights of the subject, then the prerogative of the King, I
remembered all this while what Saint August says Toll Iura Regum et quis
potest dicere haec volla mearst, take away the Kings sole and absolute
government, and who can secure his own life and estat, they must needs, be
subject to a thousand alterations, I beseech you therefore by your dear and
many Children, by the ancient Protestant Religion, by the ancient and
fundamental laws in this land for obedience King, sit down with prayers and
tears, for these many distractions Saint Bernards way non scuta sed fletu
reparate rempub: Amend your lives be charitable and kind on to another fit
down together in peace under your vines, as people who hope hereafter to fit
down in the kingdom of heaven. In a word fear God honor the King neither
people nor Church nor Nobility, nor inferior Magistrate of the land lay unto
the King by the way of rebellious contradiction, What do thou.

FINIS.

