TWO SPEECHES, SPOKEN In the Honorable House of Commons. THE FIRST BY Mr.
Grimston Esquire: THE SECOND, BY Sir Benjamin Rudiard. Concerning the
Differences between the Kings Majesty, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON Printed for H. Hutton. 1643.

Mr. Grimstons Speech, IN The House of Commons, concerning the distempers
between the King, and both Houses of Parliament.
Master Speaker,
I Would fain bring one stone to our building now in hand and it is but a
caveat to the Master builders, to beware of those who hinder the work, and
pull down by night, what is built up by day.

Master Speaker, there are that speak loudly to the King, and in agitating of
all matters, seem very tender of him, but substances, and semblances, essences,
and apparences, are opposite: Multa Videntur quae non sunt, these would make us
believe, that our redressing of some grievances, is the pulling out of some
flowers from the Crown, and hereby they cast maine and intricate doubts,
wherewith to retard and perplex our proceedings, and to lay an ill favored
imputation upon us, as if we were regardlesse of our Gracious Sovereign, and
these good men, the only Battresses of his Royalty: by this they endeavor to
endeare themselves to the King, for their own advancement, to have him guided
by their own Councels, and to take off his affection from his best, and most
Loyal Subjects, Assembled in Parliament.

Master Speaker, The King and his Subjects are Relatives, and we know that in
Logic; ne lato sublato tollatur Correlatum, they that disjoynt the King and
his People, do neither better nor worse but do their utmost, to un-King him.

M. Speaker, The King is the Parentthe Husband solemnly espoused at his
Coronation, the head of the Republike, as it is with the natural parent,
Husband and Head: So it is with the public: the natural parent bestows on
his Child, protection and love, with all his fruits: the Child returns him
filial reverence with all due respects, and he that labors to break this
intercourse, by possesseing the parent with an evil opinion of the Child, is
equally an enemy to both.

There is a sweet echo of conjugall affections between the married, and he
that shall go about to interrupt it, is a hater of them both, and a subverter
of their Family.

In the natural body, such is the connection between it and the Head, that a
separation is destructive to both, where as otherwise, the head in the body,
being the seat of the vitalls, and the brain in the Head, of the Animal
Spirits, reciprocally communicating preserve the whole: Our gracious Sovereign
is the common parent, Husband, and Head, if therefore there shall be any found
to be as undermining Pyoners envying to disaffect our parent to us, to divorce
us from this our Husband to divide us from our head.

My just motion is, that upon a watchful discovery, whereon I would have every
man's good intent, they may receive the extremity of severity as they deserve,
and if any of them shall prove member of this House, that the Furnace may be
heated ten times hotter, for betraying the trust reposed in them, by their
County that sent them hither.

A Speech spoken in the House of Commons, by Sir BENJAMIN RUDYARD.
M. Speaker,
IN the way we are, we have gone as far as words can carry us: We have voted
our own rights, and the Kings Duty: No doubt there is a Relative Duty between a
King and Subjects; Obedience from a Subject to a King, Protection from a King
to His People. The present unhappy distance between His Majesty and the
Parliament, makes the whole Kingdom stand ama^^d, in a fearful expectation of
dismal calamities to fall upon it: It deeply and conscionably concerns this
House to compose and settle these threatening ruining distractions. M. Speaker,
I am touched, I am pierced with an apprehension of the honor of the House, and
success of this Parliament. The best way to give stop to these desperate
imminent mischiefs is, to make a fair way for the Kings return hither; it will
likewise give best satisfaction to the people, and will be our best
justification. M. Speaker, That we may the better consider the condition we are
now in, let us set our selves three years back: If any man then could have
credibly told us, that within three years the Queen shall be gone out of
England into the Low Countries, for any cause whatsoever: The King shall remove
from his Parliament, from London to York, declaring himself not to be s^fe
here: That there shall be a total Rebellion in Ireland, Such discords and
distempers both in Church and State here, as now we find; certainly we should
have trembled at the thought of it: wherefore it is fit we should be sensible
now we are in it.

On the other side, if any man then could have credibly told us, That within
three years ye shall have a Parliament, it would have been good News; That
ship money shall be taken away by an Act of Parliament, the reasons and grounds
of it so rooted out, as that neither it, nor any thing like it, can ever grow
up again; That Monopolies, the High Commission Court, the Star Chamber, the
Bishops Votes shall be taken away, the Council Table regulated and restrained,
the Forests bounded and limited; that ye shall have a trienniall Parliament;
and more then that, a perpetual Parliament, which none shall have power to
dissolve without yout selves, we should have thought this a dream of
happiness; yet now we are in the real possession of it, we do not enjoy it,
although His Majesty has promised and published he will make all this good to
us. We stand chiefly upon further security; whereas the very having of these
things, is a convenient fair security, mutually securing one another, there is
more security offered, even in this last Answer of the Kings, by removing the
personal Votes of Popish Lords, by the better education of Papists children,
by supplying the defects of Laws against Recusants, besides what else may be
enlarged and improved by a select Committee of both Houses, named for that
puapose. Wherefore Sir, let us beware we do not contend for such a hrzardous
unsafe security, as may endanger the loss of what we have already; let us not
think we have nothing, because we have not all we desire, and though we had,
yet we cannot make a Mathematical security, all humane caution is Susceptible
of corruption and failing; Gods providence will not be bound, success must be
his, he that observes the wind and rain, shall neither sow nor reap, if he can
do nothing till he can secure the weather, he will have but an ill harvest.

Master Speaker, It now behooves us to call up all the wisdom we have about us,
for we are at the very brinke of Combustion and Confusion: If blood (once
more) begin to toueh blood, we shall presently fall into a certain misery, and
must attend an uncertain success, God knows when, and God knows what. Every
man here is bound in conscience to employ his uttermost endeavors to prevent
the effusion of blood; blood is a crying Sin, it pollutes a land: Let us save
our Liberties and our Estates, as we may save our Souls too. Now I have
clearly delivered mine own conscience, I leave every man freely to his.

FINIS.

