THE THRONE OF DAVID, OR AN EXPOSITION OF THE Second of Samuel WHEREIN IS SET
DOWN THE Pattern of a Pious and Prudent Prince, and a clear Type of of the
Prince of Princes CHRIST JESUS the Son of DAVID and his Spiritual Kingdom

By WILLIAM GUILD D. D. and Minister of Gods word at King Edward in Scotland.

OXFORD, Printed by W. HALL for ROB. BLAGRAVE, Anno Salutis 1659.

A Letter written in order to the now mentioned Society or little
Commonwealth; By some well affected persons, whose hearts and hands have
already joined therein: to stir up all such who are truly sensible of the poor
and needy, to carry on this so necessary and charitable a work.
HAving not only considered the poverty, afflictions and streights of many well
minded people; Together with the evil consequences that arise from the corrupt
customs and ways of most employments, and the general disorder proceeding from
riches and poverty: But also the way propounded by the endeavors of our friend
Peter Cornelius; to rectify all such and many other inconveniences, by
bringing together a fit, suitable and well qualified people into one Household
government or little Commonwealth, wherein every one may keep his propriety,
and be employed in some work or other as he shall be fit, without being
oppressed, as is more at large expressed in a Platform to that purpose.

Whereupon we are resolved, judgeing it to be necessary, and our duty to
promote so good and pious a work, with the assistance of other merciful and
rational men, to lay such a foundation, as may tend to the relief of the
oppressed, the preserving of such as are in danger of falling into snares, and
the increase of understanding and mutual love, as also the exemplary ordering
of such acts as may be accomplished by prudential charity.

And hereunto we do earnestly invite all Persons that have a willing mind to do
good according to their abilities; some by their Wisdom and Council, others by
money and credit, or by both, as they shall be able and free, that so a stock
may be raised for the carrying on of this good and beneficial work.

To which end we have subscribed our names, and the sums of money which we are
willing to give. Hoping that all such as are for so general a work, will upon
due consideration likewise subscribe for such a sum of money as they are
willing to give toward the accomplishment of the Premises, and meet together
to confer and order the said sums of moneys into the hands of some trusty
Persons for the use and benefit of the Society only, and what else shall be
found conducing to the perfecting of this work, till the Society can subsist of
it self in order, which we believe may soon be from the credible information of
diverse persons, relating that many hundreds in Transylvania, Hungaria, and the
Paltsgraves Country, from a small beginning have attained, not only to a very
comfortable life among themselves, but also ability of doing much good to
others, not of their Society.

subscribed toward the raising of a Stock.
I. S. 100l. W. R. 100l.
To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe ensuing Commentary, was about a year since sent unto me out of Scotland,
it was intended by the Author to have been published with a Preface, or
Dedication to my self. Being a stranger unto me, some mistaken apprehensions of
me, which may easily happen at such a distance; it seems put him on that
resolution after the finishing of the whole work, and prefixing the Epistle
mentioned unto it with his own hand, the Author himself dying, his Relict sent
the Book and Epistle with a Letter of her own, fignifying the commands of her
dying Husband to that purpose unto me; both his Epistle and her Letter, as
expressing many things concerning me, which I dare not own, or arrogate to my
self, much less be a means of publishing them to the world, I thought meet to
suppress. But for the Treatise it self, finding it written with perspicuity
and clearness, handling a subject of great and delightful variety, with a
choice mixture of spiritual, moral and political observations, tempered by a
good and sound judgment unto common capacities, and not knowing but that the
only copy of it was in my hand, that public good might not by the learned
Author's respect to me be hindered, I thought meet to further the publication of
it; which being offered, I make bold to recommend it to the Christian Reader,
as I do him also in the perusal of it, to the grace of him who is able to make
it useful.

John Owen.

THE THRONE of David: Or An exposition of the second book of Samuel. Wherein is
set down the pattern of a pious and prudent prince, and a clear type of the
prince of princes Christ Jesus the son of David, and of his spiritual
Kingdom.
THE PREFACE.
TO omit any general or prolix discourse concerning the utility and
delectation of history, and in special of these registered in Holy Scripture,
and to come in particular to this present History contained in this second of
Samuel. In it we have the pattern of a pious and prudent prince, and in the
estate of the Kingdom of Israel under David we have typified the estate of the
Church militant under Christ Jesus.

But before we come to the particular explication of this Book, we will speak.
1. Of the Author and penman thereof. 2. Of the inscription and reason thereof.
3. Of the Subject and matter thereof. and 4. The utility and profit thereof.

First then, there is no doubt of the Author, but as is said of the whole
Scripture in general: so of this in particular, that the same is by divine
inspiration, and that the spirit of God is the Author and indyter thereof. But
as for the penman, some suppose that the same was written by the Prophets Gad
and Nathan who lived in the reign of David. Others that Samuel, from whom it
has the denomination was the writer of it till the 25. chapter (where his
death is recorded) and the rest supplied by some of the forenamed Prophets. But
the most probable is thought to be that it was the office of the highpriest to
register the History of the Jewish church and what fell out every one in his
own time. But herein seeing Scripture is silent, we need not curiously inquire
further hereof.

2. Concerning the title and inscription. The Hebrews give this reason thereof,
because they contain the whole course of the life of Samuel, and of these two
Kings Saul and David, whom he (according to Gods ordinance) anointed. But the
Greeks (as the 70. or septuagint) whom Jerome and most part of the Latins do
follow, rejecting the inscription of these two books from Samuel, they call
these two, the first and second book of the Kings, because of the life and acts
of the Kings that are set down therein, to wit, Saul and David: as in the other
two books that follows the lives and acts of the rest of the Kings of Judah
and Israel are set down therein.

3. As for the argument or matter contained in this second book of Samuel, the
same is the whole History of the estate of the Church of God, of their Kings
and Commonweal, from the death of Saul to the decrepit age of David, which is
the space of 40 years, wherein is declared, the noble acts of David, his
entry to the kingdom, and how he enlarged the same, also what troubles he had
both intestine and foreign, from all which at last the Lord did deliver him,
and gave him victory over all his enemies, and how in the end, in peace and
rest, he finished his days.

4. The utility and profit which this History affords is manifold, which may be
reduced to two heads, the first for confirmation of Faith, the second for
example of Life, which Paul joyneth. 2. Tim: 3. 10. The first appears in the
verifying of the promise made by Samuel to David in the Lords name, that he
should be King after Saul, albeit (for the trial of his faith) after many
great sufferings, and desperate like dangers, the same came to pass, and he all
this while did rely on the Lords promise. The second appears in the prudence,
piety, zeal, humility, equity and good government of David, and all other his
heroic and godly virtues worthy of imitation. As also is set down David's
infirmities and falls, as examples of the weakness of the best when they watch
not over themselves, or are left to themselves, proponed to be eschewed, ut
majorum ruina sit minorum cautela, as likewise his repentance to be imitated,
and the sharp corrections notwithstanding, as medicinal corrasves, wherewith
he was chastised: as we see in the Lords dealing with his dearest sons and
servants. Heb: 12. 6, 7. And therefore what sharper punishments may the
impenitent, and Satan's slaves expect?

In this History likewise of David's reign and kingdom, we have typified
Christ Jesus the Son of David his condition, and estate of his Church to the
end of the world. for,

1. As David was anointed to be king over Israel: so was Christ anointed to be
King over his Church.

2. But as David endured many troubles, persecutions and sufferings before he
entered into his kingdom, so did Jesus Christ here on earth before he entered in
his.

3. After his entry he was mightily opposed and oppugned by them of Readiness
house, his enemy by arms force and violence, and so was Christ Jesus, and his
Church, and Gospel, by the bloody persecution of the heathens Roman Emperors.

4. Notwithstanding David's house waxed still strong and Saul's house weak: so
the Christian Church and profession did the more flourish, and heathenish,
idolatry, and heresies decay.

5. Hiram also a Gentile, and King of Tyrus joined in Amity with David, and
contributed to the building of his house in Sion, both furniture and workmen,
typifying thereby how the gentiles should come into the profession of the
Gospel, and should contribute to the building of the Church of Christ, as
mystical members thereof.

6. Then does David bring home the Ark of God, and set it in his house at
Sion: and then in like manner was the true worship of God established in his
Church, which is the true Sion.

7. But hereafter did Absolon craftily under a fair pretense of the good of
Israel rise against David and stole away the hearts of David's people, who
joined themselves with him in rebellion, many following him in the simplicity
of their hearts, and being deceived by his simulat and fair pretense of piety:
even so did Antichrist arise against Christ under a like fair pretense to be
for him, and therefore is said to be horned like the lamb, though speaking like
the dragon, and who fraudulently stole away the hearts of Gods people, who in
like manner (except a few like those who followed David) followed him in the
simplicity of their hearts, till the time of evocation out of Babel, Revel. 18.
2. And that as David was thereafter brought back to Jerusalem by his people, so
that the truth of the Gospel and professors thereof was brought back in like
manner, which seemed before to be exiled, as David and his followers were, and
driven, like him, and the church, Revel. 12. 14. Into the wilderness and desert.

But as Absolon was at last overthrown, and David's kingdom under him was
thereafter peaceably established: so shall Antichrist according to that
prediction Revel. 18. And the Church of Christ shall thereafter enjoy peace and
quietness.

II. SAM: Chap. 1. to the 17. Verse.
THe principal argument of this chapter, is the report of the event of the
battle between the Israelites and Philistines under Saul upon mount Gilboa,
which generally comprehends these two particulars. 1. The report it self from
the first verse to the 17. The second is, what fell out thereon, from the 17.
verse, even to the end.

In the report we have to consider. 1. The matter and circumstance thereof. 2.
The trial and how it was accepted. And 3. the just reward of the reporter and
actor therein.

1. The matter reported is the loss of the battle on Isreal's side, and death
of Saul and Jonathan. The first circumstance set down in the report, is, of the
time, to have been the third day after David's victory against the Amalikites,
wherein the swiftness of the fame of the battle on Gilboa is to be noted,
seeing in less then the space of three days; It is divulged from Gilboa which
is situated in the territory of Isachar, at the border of Jordan, in the east
march of Canaan, to David, in the land of the Philistines, dwelling then at
Ziklag situate near to the mediterranean, upon the Westpoint of Canaan,
esteemed to have been each part distant from the other, the bounds of a hundred
miles or thereabout in the latitude of the land.

Next, the person reporter is called herein general, one, and there after in
special, an Amalekite, probably the Son of one of that Nation whom Saul had
formerly unlawfully spared in his expedition against Agag, and therefore God
had reserved him now to be his murderer.

2. His carriage or behavior is very crafty and cunning, he covers his head
with ashes, he rents his garments, and does most humble curtesy to David, as to
his King. This gesture of his was used ever by such, who were displeased for
the public calamity of the Lords People, as may be seen in the example of
Joshua, Joshua 7. 1 Samuel 4.
and of the messinger that came to report the event of the battle to Heli. But
as they used this form uprightly, so does this Amalekite use the same
Hypocritically.

3. His Oration testifies his further Hypocrisy, which he uses very elaboratly
and artificially, by degrees beginning at the general, and coming to the
particulars, ascending from that which was most grievious, and ending with that
which he thought unto David should be most acceptable, and good news. in this
manner, the People are fled, and many of them overthrown, also Saul and
Jonathan his Son, are dead, so that both the King thy persecutour, and Enemy,
and Jonathan though thy friend, yet apparent Heir, between thee and the
Kingdom, are both out of the way, and therefore this last news may assuage the
grief of the former, the slaughter to wit, of thy Countrymen and People, (a
crafty flatterer indeed.)

The King also as a prudent Prince, not facile to credit rumors, inquires,
once and again, the certainty, he answers, that he speaks as an ejewitnesse
that which he saw, and he affirms the thing which he asked, and to seal up the
truth of his speechs, he makes a real exhibition of the royal ornaments of
the crown, and bracelet whereby he concludes with himself, liberally to be
rewarded of David.

Concerning the matter of his report and verity thereof there are diverse
opinions amongst the learned, some thinking it a manifest lie, made to gain
favor, thanks, and reward, in respect that it seems directly contradictory to
the verity of the form of Saul's death, 1 Samuel 31. and 1 Chronicles. 10.

Others (as sundry of the Rabbis, and Josephus holds the opinion) that he
spoke truly, granting (as is said in the forenamed places) that Saul run
himself upon his own sword, and of that wound especially he dyed, and that the
Archers had formerly hit him, and wounded him likewise, but that immediately not
dyeing of these wounds especially by this last given by himself, not entering so
deep into his body, as he speaks himself, ( nam detinuit me The Hebren word is,
Shabatz, etc. See, Exodus 28. 4. 11. 13.
haec ocellata chlamys v. 9. And life being as yet within him, as he also in
the same verse testifies, therefore he desires this Amalekite to stand upon
him, (as being formerly fallen) and to kill him outright, which he performs,
and thereby altogether is made to give up the ghost.

After that David has tried, and found it to be of truth that Saul and
Jonathan are dead, with great heaviness and regret does he receive this news,
and with great mourning and fasting, he bewails Saul, Jonathan, and the People,
which mourning is upon two respects, the one natural, the other godly and
spiritual, this first was the sorrow, 1. for the King, his Father in Law, and
Lord, 2. for Jonathan his faithful friend prevented by immaturity of violent
death, before he could get occasion of acquitting his former favors, and 3.
for his People, his dearest kinsmen and of one country with him. The
spiritual, is the apprehension of Gods wrath thus punishing Church and
Commonwealth for sin, and making his People to fall so before their Enemies
whereby the honor of the name of God would be reproached and blasphemed
amongst the heathen.

The reward of this messenger, is death, by orderly process, first David
accuses, how durst thou put thy hand on the Lords anointed? Next, he convicts
him by his own confession, which uncoactedly given, and not enforced by
torture, is by all Laws holden pro confesso, then he condemns and commands
execution, upon good reasons, the crime was capital, the party confessed,
David was a Judge, in Siklag, and the title by the death of Saul is increased,
to the Kingdom.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. BEfore, David had newly gotten a notable Victory over his Enemies the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30.
and recovered the prey of Ziklag, and now the Lord takes Saul his persecutor
also out of the way, and makes the news thereof speedily to be brought unto
him, by whose death he is promoted unto the Kingdom, so that the Lord heaps
good things upon his chosen, and renewes his benefits to the godly, who rely
upon him, and in patience possesses there souls, witness Jacob, and a cloud
of others, that may be brought out of Scripture.

2. That Victory over the Amalekites was not without a preceding heavy
disaster, and this news contains likewise a sad theme, Jonathan his trusty
friend and the Lords People, his dear Countrymen over whom he was to reign,
was likewise overthrown with Saul in battle, thus temper's the Lord the Cup
that he gives his own, comfort with the cross, and the mixture of some
tartness with his sweetest morsels, least they should overcloy us, or we too
much delight in them, therefore with extraordinary Revelations Paul must have
some buffetings of Satan, least he should be puffed up above measure, and least
we should put our felicity in them here, or not thankfully with Job, be
content, when he takes them back from us again, our sweetest roses must have
there sharp prickels.

3. God stirs up an Amalekite, (verse 8.) an infidel in Religion, an
adversary to Israel, and particular Enemy to David, to become his favourer, and
with all diligence to carry this message, whereupon we collect the general,
that when the Church of God, or any members thereof, has been in greatest
adversities amongst foreign Enemies, then God has moved the hearts of there
very adversaries to be there best friends. Examples, Abraham with Abimelech,
the Patriarchs with the first Pharaoh Moses preserved by the Daughter, and
brought up in the court David with the King of Gath, and Moab, of the Prophets
of God in Achabs time fed by the governors of his house, Obadiah, Daniel, the
3. Children, Ezra, Nehemiah, Ester, Mordecai, and sundry others; Then let us
not fear the loss, or want of friends, the Lord who framed the heart, has the
hearts of Kings and private men in his hands, which he will turn (as he did
the heart of Esau in an instant) to the comfort of such as depend with David
upon his protection and providence.

4. Verse 2. This messinger is a pattern of a cunning Hypocrite, and crafty
flatterer, brought up in the Atheist Schools of profane courts, temporizing in
Religion, and in matters of state composing his ingenie, gesture, manners and
speech to the perfiting of that altogether which he thought should please the
Prince, upon the respect of his own advantage without all care of conscience.
Such an intelligencer was Doeg unto Saul, and such are may courtiers about
Princes and great men now adays, few Mordecaies, Nehemiah's, or Daniels being
promoted, or few Ebed-melech's, or Obadiah's to be found in courts.

5. In his first report, of the fall of Prince and People in Battle, we see
what is the miserable estate of a People under a wicked King, oftimes they
imitate his example, as is said Regis ad exemplum, etc. and are punished with
him, yea, he is punished in the person's, and body of his subjects, witness
70000 of Israel falling by Pestilence, for the presumption of David's numbering
of the people, and there Saul for going to the witch of Endor, not only dies
himself alone, but the people of the Lord are overthrown with him, on the
contrary, O happy people that has a godly Prince.

6. Verse 10. Saul dies by the edge of the sword, even by that same death which
he had intended against David, and yet, David is alive, thus is it verified
that the wicked dig a pit for the godly but they themselves shall fall therein,
and the souls of the Lords chosen shall escape as a bird out of the snare,
witness, Hamans Gallows, Daniels Lions den, the 3. Childrens fiery Furnace,
and Susannas Judgment turned over on the two elders with many more, and recent
practic^s of the adversaries of Religion, discovered, disappointed, and
punished death: which they prepared for others, 2 Chr. 20. 12.
being first made there own portion. It is good then for us, ever to have our
eyes with good Jehoshaphat toward the Lord, and his protecting providence,
committing our causes to him, for he will repay, and we expecting his good time
to possess our souls in patience. Also 1 Samuel 22. 18. He slew the Lord Priests
and Levites with the sword, and now by the sword their blood is avenged on him.

7. The wonderful providence of God herein likewise may be seen, that David
being amongst the Philistims, and in such credit with the King of Gath, yet his
hand is kept clean of the blood of Saul, and of Israel, being commanded by the
remanent Princes of the Philistims to go back, because they distrusted him,
which albeit he thought it a disgraceful reputation, yet at last he found that
it turned to the best (as all things do to the godly) being hereby delivered
from the guilty imputation of the blood of Saul, and of Israel, by the
provident grace of God, which he should have incurred, if he had gone foreward,
and in respect that he went back by command, eschewing on the other part either
the blame of timorous cowardlinesse, or any other of ingratitude, or whatsoever
the Philistims could charge him withal.

8. V. 5. David in his frequent inquisition, is here an example to all men (but
to Judges especially) not to trust before they diligently try, for too hasty
credulity and facility to credit whatsoever is obtruded to believe, whether in
temporal, or spiritual things, without due trial foregoing, is and ever has
been hurtful. Therefore the men of Berea are commended for searching the
Scriptures, if those things which Paul taught were so, or no, and it is the
Apostles command to try the Spirits whether they be of God, or no, before we
believe them, Solomon would wisely try which of the two harlots spoke truly
before he would adjudge the Child to either of them, 1 King. 13.
and for lack of trial by what Spirit the old Prophet spoke. Iddo was seduced
and destroyed by a Lion in the way.

9. Verse 9. In the second more particular report of Saul's death, we see qualis
vita, Judge. 9.
finis ita, a wicked life has oftenest a godless and desperate death,
witness Abimelech of Sechem, Achitophell, Zimri, 1 King. 16.
Judas and others, and in this place Saul wounded by the Archers, next running
himself on his own sword, and to be dead outright, urging an Amalekite to come
upon him for that effect, let men live then the life of the righteous if they
would dye the death of the righteous, and if they would dye in the Lord, let
them live in the Lord, Revel. 14. 13.

10. We see here, that blood requires blood at Gods hands be what privileged
Person a man will be before the World, Saul had shed innocent blood, especially
that of the Lords Priests, upon a wrong accusation by the information of Doeg,
therefore though a King, his blood must be shed partly by the hand of his
Enemy, 2. by his own hand, and lastly, by the hand of a base Amalekite. So ever
like sins almost craves alike punishments, witness Pharaohs land plagued with
blood, for the blood of the Israelite males, his first borne destroyed, as he
destroyed theirs, and he with his Army drowned, as he drowned their Children in
water, likewise Adonibezeks just retribution Judge. 1. 7. Which he there
acknowledges, confirms the same.

11. The fearful terror of a desperate accusing conscience appears in Saul's
death, making him weary of his life; for anguish is upon me (says he) and
makes me greedily to expostulat and seek after death, thinking somewhat
thereby to be eased, but (alas) that worm dies never, the gnawing thereof
rather beginning after death, then ending by death, witness the like terror
and torture of this fury, Judas, and many more, who have become reuthlesse
butchers and burrean's of themselves, fugare conscientiam, and ab ea frustra
fugere nitentes, essaying but in vain to chase away from the conscience, as if
it were possible to fly from themselves, and falling in the flame (as we say)
by flying the frying pan.

12. Verse 8. Herein is the just judgment of God manifest, that Saul is now
murdered by an Amalekite, whom he had against Gods express command by Samuel,
preserved. Let no man therefore be wiser, nor (through preposterous pity) seem
more merciful then God, but spare where he commands to spare, and strik, where
he commands so to do, otherwise they shall find it to be true, which
experience too well has taught, that those whom Magistrates spare is by
indulgence, and abuse of the sword they become their cutthroats, or griefs, as
the Cananits which being tolerated in the Land, were to the Israelites thorns
in their sides, and pricks in their eyes, to condemn therefore the Innocent,
and let the guilty go free, are both alike abomination to the Lord, (says
Solomon) and this David also found in sparing incestuous Amnon, and murdering
Absalom.

13. V. 9. This Amalekite obtrudes Saul's own desire to be the warrant of his
fact, which hereafter we see is admitted no excuse by David, wherein as we see
the nature of the wicked to be ready to commit villainy upon slender motives, so
we see that a wicked command upon no pretext ought to be obeyed, neither can it
be free from the check of conscience, nor punishment of upright justice, all
pretenses being but like Adams figtree leaves, or his naughty excuse of his
wifes entisement.

14. The respects of David's mourning for Saul, Jonathan, and the People, both
internal, or spiritual, and external, or natural, I mentioned before, only
this is to be observed, that there is a double death to be lamented of
Magistrates, the one corporal, as here, the other spiritual, which is the
corruption of their manners; and as it is most prejudicial, to Church, or
Commonwealth, so is it most to be deplored of all, 1 Samuel 15. 35.
and this made Samuel to go home to Ramah, and lament for Saul, all his days,
this spiritual death is a sure fore runner oftimes of a fearful temporal.

15. V. 15. We see here the happy beginnings of a godly Kingdom, in the reward
of this reporter, consisting in two points. 1. in the rejecting of dissimulate
Hypocrisy, and cunning flattery, whereby this Amalekite had covered his greedy
design of reward by counterfeiting the behavior of those who deplored a
public calamity, by doing humble observance to David, by reporting a piece of
acceptable service done unto him as he supposed, and by bringing Saul's Crown
unto him, 2. In executing upright Justice upon him, who had confessed with his
own mouth Ces-majesty, or treason, whereby David, does as he would be done to,
and clears himself hereby of all desire he had of Saul's death by any indirect
means, confirming so his innocence, so frequently before attested to Saul
himself, and the integrity of his heart.

16. It is not Lawful then (we perceive) to any one subject for what cause
soever to put violent hands on their Lawful Prince and supreme Magistrate, for
if he be evil it is for our sins, therefore return to God by unsained,
repentance, and pray for him and then he will either remove, or reform him in
his good time, and if he command things unlawful, let us obey rather God then
man, and eschew his unjust wrath so far as we can, but if God call us to
suffering, therein let our care be that we suffer not for evil doing, and yield
patiently and constantly to the Lords calling, never in all this lifting up our
hand against the Lords anointed, nor resisting by violence, but according to
David's example in all his behavior toward this wicked King Saul, conforming
our selves, and according to the rule prescribed unto us in the word of God,
Romans 13.

17. Last of all, we see how wonderfully the wicked are disappointed of their
purposes, this Amalekite looked for favor, thanks, and benefit, but by
wickedness and an unjust fact to attain thereto, especially at the hands of a
godly man, was the wrong way, and therefore he is justly rewarded according to
his desert, by death, thus Satan ever blindes, and deceives the wicked, like
Laban, making them to serve for one thing promised, but changing their wages
and giving them another thing in performance. You shall be like God, (said he
unto Eve) but the contrary was found true, and Pharaoh thought that he wrought
wisely, by burdens and bondage to waste Israel, and redact them to a few
number, but they increased the more, and when he had essayed all means, he
proved the fool notwithstanding, making his Land to be plagued, his first borne
slain, and himselfs with his people drowned.

11. Also we see the wicked are the cause of there own perdition, and a guilty
conscience snares it self, therefore does David conclude, thy blood be upon thy
own head, for thy own mouth has confessed, etc.

II. SAM, Chap. 1. from the 17. verse to the end.
WE show in the Preface before the Chapter that the general subject of this
Book is the History of the reign of David, begun at the death of Saul, while
the institution of Solomon.

The utilitie declares itself in the particulars, as in the confirmation of
faith by the infallible performance of Gods promise to David, in the raising of
his Kingdom, albeit after great troubles, and in the example of life and
manners, as in the patience, piety, righteous government, magnanimity in
adversity, prudence in prosperity, and others his virtues, and albeit as man
feeble, and subject to infirmities, and falls, yet rising again by true and
earnest repentance.

But because David's Kingdom is the type of Christ's Kingdom in the comparison
we have the chief utility to be remarked, that as the one rose, triumphed, and
dilated it self in great amplitude after the cross, so has the other, and
shall enlarge it self more and more to the confusion of Antichrist and all
adversary power in the revelation of the time decreed. Let thegodly only
imitate David in his constancy, patience, piety and fortitude till Gods decreed
time come. Rev. 18. 2.

As for the general subject of the first Chapter, and first part thereof, with
the three parts whereinto it was subdivided, we have also treated of the same,
which was the report, the trial of the report, and the reward of the reporter,
now follows the second part of the Chapter from the 17 verse. to the end,
containing David's disposition upon the report, and in general the text says,
that he composed a lamentation upon the miseries of this battle, and especially
upon the death of Saul and Jonathan.

This lamentation is proponed, as we speak cicloeidos, circular ways, or by
circumductions of periods and sentences, and amplified according to David's
manner poetically, and therefore has a difficult reduction to a certain order
or method, Yet all that is diffusedly spoken here, may be reduced to two heads:
the one, is the lamentation for the calamities fallen upon all Israel, taken
from the events of the battle, from the 17. verse. to the 22. The second is the
special lamentation for Saul and Jonathan, taken from the commendation of
their virtues, from the 22. verse. to the 27. wherein is added the conclusion
poetically set down, and by way of Threnodie.

In the first period we have the title or inscription of this funeral oration
called the lamentation of David, for Saul and Jonathan. It was the custom of
all Ages that the friends and favorers lamented the defunct, as in the
examples of the Patriarch's, Abraham lamented Sarah, Jacob, Rachel, and Joseph,
whom he thought to have been dead, so his sons with the Egyptians lamented
him in Abel-mizraim, Israel lamented Moses and Aaron, Joshua, and Samuel,
Jeremiah by his Threnodies lamented the death of Josias, so in the Gospel Mary
lamented Lazarus her brother, yea our Savior wept also, the disciples lamented
Christ, John. 10. Act. 8.
the godly lamented Stephen, and the ancients had anniversary lamentings for
the Martyrs in the primitive Church, with recordation of their deaths,
constancy, and conrage, for the imitation of others who should be likewise
called to seal the truth by their sufferings, and with regret of the Churches
want of such excellent and painful Men, and holy patterns of life, without any
invocation of their names, which corruption (as Augustine testifies) was not in
his days crept into the Church of God, nomina enim martyrum apud nos (inquit)
comm^morantur, non invocantur, answering the objection of the heathen, de
pluralitate deorum, which by the honoring of the Martyrs memories, they would
have the Christians likewise guilty of.

As for the causes of this lamentation, or twofold respect, thereof, the same
has been already spoken of in the explication of the 12. verse.

In the second period, it is said that David proposes this lamentation, that
thereby Israel should learn to shoot in the bow, as is written in the book of
Justice, which sentence because it appeared not to agree with the purpose,
therefore the Hebrews excluded this verse by parenthesis out of the
lamentation, yet considering aright, we shall find this period to agree well
with the inscription, as the recents resolve, David proponing this lamentation
to be a warning to Israel to learn the exercise of Archery, because by that
form of armor especially (as is evident. 1 Samuel 31. 3.) the Philistims had
slain Saul, and overcome the Lords people, and whom herein in time coming he
would have to match their enemies in the military skill of using that sort of
armor.

By the book of Jasher, or righteous, is to be understood most probably, the
book of the common Laws which then was written for the formal proceeding in
Judgment and warfaire, containing the art and discipline military, together
with the record of the Lords battles, as mention is made likewise thereof.
Joshua 10. 13. Which book, with diverse others that were composed by Solomon
were burned in the first destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, and so the
whole Bibliothek hebraick fell not into the hands of Esdras.

In the third period we have the general pathetick proposition of this
lamentation proponed by poetical figures of Apostrophe, turning his speech to
God and the people in a verse interrogative, which the Greek poets call
Amoebeus, by fiction of persons, which we call Prosopopeia, and by a
description of the calamity, which is called Periphrasis.

The verse is, O honor of Israel, in thy high places how are the mighty slain
and overthrown! by interpretation, O God who art the honor of Israel, and O
Israel that had the honor to have so many mighty men, how miserable is thy
calamity, by the which thy God is dishonored, and thou art spoiled of so many
honorable and strong men? the cause of all this (doubtless) is thy manifold
sins. For we must understand that the scope of this oration is to bring
Israel to understand that this calamity proceeds from sin, and can not cease
but by unfeigned repentance.

In the 20. and 21. verses, which is the fourth and fifth periods, he amplifies
this calamity by the events, the first in the twenty verse, containing a
deprecation, proponed by Enallage of the Imperative mood, for the Optative
after the manner of poets, Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets
of Ashkelon, by which as the capital Cities, he means the whole land, the
reason assigned, is, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised Philistims
rejoice, and in praising their Idol gods, dispraise the name of the true God of
Israel, and so the end of this deprecation is the glory of God, which he does
tender.

But how does he will here, a thing which is impossible, in saying, tell it
not, or let it not be told? It is answered, this comes from a perturbed mind,
wherein falls no certain deliberation, and to testify his care of the glory of
God, is spoken not as assured of performance, but optative, and as he would
wish it.

By Daughters, some means the little towns of Palestina, but the common
opinion and literal sense is more simple, and better, and confirmed by the
custom used after victories in those days both amongst the faithful. 1 Samuel:
18. 5. etc. And amongst the infidels. Judge: 16. 23. By the Philistims rejoicing
over Sampson.

The second period of amplification of this calamity, contains verse. 21. An
imprecation, against Gilboa, by the figure of Prosopopeia and Apostrophe,
cursing that place, wherein that misery befell to Israel, with drougth and
barrenness to remain so, as monuments of that calamity.

In the five verses following is the special lamentation for Saul and
Jonathan, taken 1. From their courageous acts against Gods enemies, and happy
victorious success. 2. From their mutual love, and lot to dye together. 3.
From their provident diligence and undaunted courage in prosecuting the
affairs. 4. From the effects of the government, that thereby they enriched
their subjects. 5. From his private interest and damage received by the loss
of Jonathan, with whom he had such conjunction, that he compares his love which
he did bear to Jonathan to the love of brothers, and prefers Jonathans love
toward him to the vehement love of women, which they can or do bear to
Husbands, Children, or any others, whereunto he subjoynes the conclusion by way
of interrogation, called Amoebeus, O Israel, again I must say, how great is
thy calamity, whereby thy God is so dishonored, and thou spoiled of men of
such qualities? surely sin has thus provoked God to deal with thee,
therefore timely and truly reconcile to him, least he altogether consume thee:
where, as we saw upright justice before, so here is true piety, O happy
beginnings therefore of a happy King!

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 17. WE see here, by the example of David, and practice of the primitive
Church, that the use of funeral orations amongst Christians is indifferent and
lawful, if without flattery, partial affection, and ostentation, they be made
to the glory of God, encouragement and example of virtue and godliness,
stirring up to the consideration of our mortality, and duty of repentance, and
for confirmation of the doctrine of the resurrection, all tending to the
instruction of the living, and not to the superfluous or unjust praise of the
dead.

2. Here is a most Godly and imitable example in David, who mourns not only
for the death of Jonathan his friend, but likewise for Saul his foe, and
adversary, whereby we see that the rule of godly or Christian love, extends not
only to thy friends natuturall or civil, but to all men, (albeit in the first
place to the family of Faith,) yea to thy very enemies, as is confirmed by
Christ in the disputation he had with the corrupted Pharisees, Math: 5. 44. The
chief cause hereof is the honor of God which we ought to tender, and the
enlargement of his kingdom, which by the fall of men in defection is hindered,
Gods truth slandered, and the Lord stirred up in wrath for to punish, but on
the contrary by their conversion God is glorified, the kingdom of Christ so
far amplified, and the Church comforted, But what shall we say of the
unnatural world now, and the manners of men, who would be called Christians in
this latter age, who not only attaines to the Christian perfection, but on the
contrary proponing their particular passions to Gods glory are not only
rejoiced at the calamities of men, their adversaries, but also are void of
natural affection to parents and friends, and are so full of envy and ungodly
emulations, that they are sorry for the good same and estimation of their very
brethren, these are they of whom the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy: 3. 3. Let us learn
then to be compassionate with the calamities of all men for Gods cause,
following the example of the godly herein, and that Apostolical precept, 2
Pet: 3. 8. But especially mourning for the affliction of Joseph, Amos, 6. 6.

3. Verse. 18. David teaching Israel to learn the exercise of the bow, gives
the argument of the right use of arms as lawful to invade or defend in
lawful ways, against the erroneous opinion of the Anabaptists, and agreeing
with the chief part of a Kings office, to whom is said to be given the sword,
by which is understood the Jurisdiction and power, and the execution thereof at
home and abroad as just cause requires, Examples, of Abraham, Moses, Joshua,
the Judges: Samuel, David, and constant practice received in Israel by divine
command warranting the same. Let no man doubt therefore in lawful causes to
follow the Supreme Magistrate and lawful Authority in just persuit or
defense, where they are required.

4. Verse. 19. The honor of every Nation consists in these two; God, and
valiant men, or true religion, and righteous Judgment, piety and courage, the
dishonor in the opposite, A rule then to discern between honorable kingdoms,
estates and houses, and the contrary, Math: 5. 35 s and 27. 52.
for these two, it was then, that Jerusalem was called the glory and beauty of
the whole earth, the Holy City, and City of the great King, of which many
excellent things were spoken besides, and for the want of the true worship of
God without which no true fortitude can be, Elisha disdaines so an Idolatrous
Jehoram, (though a King) that he protests were it not for the presence of good
Jehosaphat he would not have looked toward him. 2 King: 3. 14. As also for the
same defect and guiltiness, the Nations were then called, the dogs of the
Gentiles, Then if men would have themselves or their houses truly honorable,
seek God, and righteousness: otherwise without him they are but mancipat slaves
to Satan, sin and their own beastly affections.

5. Verse. 20. In David's deprecation we see what care the godly should have of
the Lords glory and honor of his name, that the same be not blasphemed amongst
the adversaries, so far as we may hinder or stop the same, being jealous over
the same with a Holy zeal, that thereby we may show our selves affectionate
and true Children to our heavenly Father, and not by our words or actions to
open their mouths against that holy profession of his blessed truth, to the
triumphant rejoicing of the adversary, and scandalizing of the weak: as we
would eschew that fearful condemnation of Hypocrit's, and that terrible woe
pronounced against all those by whom offense comes.

6. The rejoicing of the wicked is evil, and in the calamities and affliction
ever of the godly, as this same prophetical prince testifies and shows
plainly also in the 41 Psalm, Job: 30. 9, 10. etc.
of his enemies and false friends, thus Shimei railed against David in his
flying from Absalom, Rev: 11. 10.
and those that were more vile then the earth made their song and talk of holy
Jobs affliction, and took pleasure at his calamity, so did the earthly sort
(spoken of in the Revelation) rejoice over the Lords Prophets that were slain
by the beast, and left unburied, and were glad and sent gifts one to another,
for these two Prophets vexed them continually, which rejoicing proceeds from
the hatred of the Godly, and it again from the dissimilitude of their manners,
no society being between light and darkness, and an inveterate enmity being
between the Serpent, and the seed of the woman.

7. The right consideration of all calamities whether public or private, but
especially such as befall the estate of a whole Nation as this, is in the right
respect of the causes, consequents, and right remedy, the material being
sin, or procurer the Lords anger being the efficient or just inflictor, the
form is punishment, and the final cause, to bring men to repentance, the
sequel that follows upon our sinning, and procuring God so to punish, being
the slander of Gods glory, disgracing of our profession, and making the name of
God to be blasphemed amongst the adversaries and the taking away of good men,
with eversion of republics. No remedy being to amend all this, but speedy
repentance and reformation of our Lives.

8. Verse. 21. The blessings and privileges of places are not perpetual, but
temporal and alternative, sometimes to be monuments of Gods benefits, and
sometimes of his wrath, witness Jerusalem, sometime the glory of the earth, and
now for it sins, and crucifying the Son of God, the map of ruin, and
utter desolation. Chorazim and Bethsaida let them testify the same.

9. Wickedness or sinful facts committed in places, is the cause which
brings alterations and curses upon them, cursed therefore (says the Lord)
shall the earth be for thy cause, to Adam, when he transgressed, consider
likewise what made that pleasant valley where Sodom and Gomorrha with the
other Cities stood, a stinking lake even until this day, Pharaoh's cruelty
and induration brought plagues upon Egypt, the iniquity and pride of Babylon
literal, Revel: 18.
brought utter devastation upon her, and as is is surely prophesied, the same
for the like causes, shall be the lot of that City mystical, even as for the
slaughter of the people of God, upon it a curse of perpetual barrenness is
pronounced as here against mount Gilboa.

10. Verse. 22. The benefits of God bestowed upon men, when we see them altered
and changed to the contrary, should give us an example to beware least we
procure the like by our ingratitude, and should make us to lament their fall,
and to acknowledge in any temporal thing, that befalls to man, that there is
no perpetuity whereof he ought to dream or presume, but as the Moon our life
is led by changes, and time goes by turns, thus Jonathans bow and Saul's sword
once fail them, and they are overcome, though ever victors before, and the
weapons of the strong men are cast down in battle.

11. A notable example of David's godly modesty who with dead Saul buries the
remembrance of all his faults and infirmities, speaking only good of him,
albeit his foe, and reporting these things only that tended to his praise,
whereby he shows his heart (out of the abundance whereof the Mouth speaks) to
be void of all malice or hatred ever carried toward him, although he
oftentimes sought his life, and hunted him to and fro, as a Partridge in the
wilderness, and therefore as before his hand would not touch his person, so
neither will he have his tongue now for to touch his fame, thinking he could
not seem conscionable of the one, if he show himself careless of the other.

12. Verse. 23. In turning to the daughters of Israel, he would testify not only
his great grief, which makes him to exhort others to assist him, (especially
that sex which by nature are most prone to be pitiful, in a matter chiefly so
nearely concerning themselves) but also thereby he would show what loyal love,
and respective duty affectionate subjects owe to their Prince, rejoicing for
his happy life over them, and mourning for his doleful death from them, he
being the common parent under whom they enjoy peace and prosperity. Thus was
Josias lamented by his people as the breath of their nostrils, and the crown of
their head, that had fallen, Lam: 5. 16.

13. Verse. 24. The effect of prudent and good government is riches and plenty,
therefore Saul is said to have clothed them with scarlet, and to have hung
ornaments of Gold upon their vestures, witness this especially, the government
of Solomon under whom his subjects had such affluence, that Gold was counted as
brass, and silver as stones: the contrary, towit, a defect of people and
furniture, 2 King. 13.
see in the wicked government of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu; under whom all
Israel was brought to 50 horsemen, 10 chariots, and 10000 footmen.

14. Verse. 25. In David's bewailing of Jonathan by a particular lamentation, we
see that as we ought to be sorry at the calamity of all men, so especially of
our friend to whom by a more particular bond we are tied, natural or civil,
except we would be accounted (...) without natural affection, as the Apostle
speaks, and so, insensible, as blocks. David's love then, you see, 2 Timothy 3.
dies not with the dead, but to be vigorous and lively is hereby testified, and
indeed and in effect more plainly his love and thankful mind are manifested
hereafter to his son Mephibosheth: benefiting the son there, and bewailing
the Father here. So far is he from hypocritical duties either to God or man,
or from that odious sin of ingratitude.

15. In his comparing the love that he bore to Jonathan to the love of
brethren: and the love that Jonathan bore him, to be greater then the extreme
love of women, we learn in humble and holy modesty to think of our own
virtues, and ever of the virtues of others, as greater in measure then ours.

II SAM: Chap: 2. from the first verse to the 12.
THe argument or matter contained in this chapter, is the civil broiles which
did fall out between David king of Judah, and Ishboseth Saul's son King over
the remanent tribes of Israel, and is the history of the estate of Israel, the
first two years after the death of Saul.

The history is divided in two parts, the former is the history of the
elections, David to be King over Judah, and Ishbosheth over Israel from the 1.
verse. to the 12. The second is the history of the civil wars between them,
and the event thereof, from the 12. verse. to the last.

The first part is subdivided in two again; the one is the election of David
in Hebron over Judah, the second, the election of Ishboseth in Mahanaim over
Israel. In the election of David we have first his consultation with God. 2.
His election where? and by whom? 3. His first action when he begins his reign,
all which is proponed from the 1. verse. to the 8. In the election of Ishboseth
likewise: we have by whom, and over whom he is elected, and where he made his
residence, whereunto is continued the Chronology and Supputation of the time of
both their reigns; David's over Judah in Hebron, and Ishboseths over Israel in
Mahanaim.

Now to return, first to David's consultation, It is probable that David and his
followers were wearied in the long and continual troubles of Saul's persecution
by the space of 18. years, and now being a long time exiles, had a great desire
to return to their native Country, as also that David after the death of Saul
called to mind the promise of Samuel and right made to him of the Kingdom, by
the Ceremony and Sacrament of holy unction, and now reasoned with himself, that
God had offered the opportunity, which wise men should not neglect, but because
he considered that it was not enough to have a good cause, but the same
likewise should be rightly managed, or used, and albeit the substance of his
title was good, yet the circumstances of attaining thereto being uncertain,
therefore godly David for his own, direction and confirmation of his associats,
begins to consult with God, of the time and place, where and when he should
make entrance into his Kingdom.

This custom to consult with God before weighty enterprises in all times has
been practiced by the godly, as before the Law the Patriarchs without the
warrant of Gods instinction and Revelation attempted no matter of any moment,
as at large we may view the truth hereof in their lives and actions, and after
the Law it was set down by Moses in the 27. of Numbers verse 21. That Joshua and
his successors should undertake nothing without consultation with Vrim and
Thummim, by the mediation of Eleazer the Highpriest and his successors, which
also by all the faithful was carefully followed, as a cloud of witnesses may
testify in the Register of holy writ, while the exhibition of the only true
Highpriest who is the perfect light and lamp of the World, who after his
ascension gave his Spirit to his Apostles, and now presently by his word and
spirit cease not to reveall the will of his Father to his Church with whom he
has promised to be present till the consummation of the World. The gentiles
and infidels, as their Master Satan is a counterfeiter of God, so were they
herein apes of the godly, they attempted in like manner no wars nor no
weighty matter, as they speak, in auspicato, so that it was an opinion amongst
the heathen, a Jove principium, as well as amongst the godly, albeit they
varied in the form, and knowledge of the right God, and that nothing should be
attempted, without consultation with the sacred oracle which should first go
before; And there is many examples in all Histories that even good matters have
not prospered when this form has been neglected. But whether this consultation
of David's was by the extraordinary way, of Prophets, as Josephus thinks, or by
the more ordinary way of consulting with Vrim and Thummim by mediation of the
Highpriest Abiathar, who was with him, or by both, for his greater
confirmation, it is not to be controverted, only this is enough, that we know
that David in this action would do nothing, by his own wisdom, or will, but by
the Counsel of God, Genesis 31.
as Jacob did in his flight from Laban.

Then the first interrogation is, shall I go up? or is it fit time? and the
second is whether? or which is the most convenient place? to both which
concessively, or affirmatively the Lord, answers, Go up, to Hebron; This City
of Hebron, was famous for the sepultures of the Patriarchs (and called Kiriath
arba) to whom the promises of the Kingdom was made and it was in the tribe of
Judah, Joshua 21. and 14.
distant from Jerusalem 20. miles, that place where the spies Joshua and Caleb
came, and was a City of refuge there after, which did fall in lot to the
Levits, and was possessed by the posterity of Caleb.

Unto this City then, according to divine direction David goes up, together
with his wives, whom he would not leave in Ziklag, being an unsure place for
them to abide in, without his presence and protection, as late experience had
taught, as also he takes his men with him, whom wisely and carefully he places,
distributing them and their families amongst the Cities, or Suburb's of Hebron.

Thus being come up to Hebron, by the men of Judah (whose hearts the Lord had
inclined toward him, and prepared) David is anointed King, which is done by
divine providence, for his further confirmation in the assured expectation of
the full performance of Gods promise of the whole Kingdom, and to testify
their approbation and willing consent to receive him to rule and reign over
them.

His first action enseving, is, upon the report of the fact of the men of
Jabesh Gilead in burying Saul, (after whose bodies probably he had caused, or
was of purpose to cause to inquire, to bestow upon them honorable burial, and
by this occasion got notice of this piece of kind service) he sends a loving
message unto them, wishing mercy and truth from God, which is, that they might
have their part in the Lords gracious promises, and assured performance, and
promising reward and recompense on his part toward them and subjoyning
withal, a comfortable exhortation to be of good courage, seeing the Lord had
not left them destitute, but had raised him up, as a head and Protector over
them.

Concerning the anointing of Ishboseth, first we have by whom it was, to wit
Abner, secondly over whom, to wit, all Israel, except Judah, as for the first,
it is like Abner did this as a subtle and arrogant person, to make Ishboseth a
shadow, being of a timorous and base mind, and he alone to command all,
besides against all right he does this, seeing if it should belong to any of
Saul's posterity, Mephiboseth the son of Jonathan, eldest Son of Saul, had the
true title, and against conscience likewise he does herein expressly, knowing of
the promise that God had made unto David of the Kingdom, as he confesses,
Chap. 3. 18.

The place Mahanaim, is a City on the other side of Jordan in the Land of
Bashan a fruitful Country so called at first by Jacob, because there he met
the Lords host. Genesis 32.


The description of these over whom he is made King, is from their several
habitations, containing in a manner a description of all Israel on each side of
Jordan, Judah only excepted.

As for the supputation of the time of both their reigns subjoyned, whereby an
interregnum, or vacancy of 5. years and a half would seem to be imported, which
is unlike; the best exposition therefore is, not that Ishboseth reigned only
two years in all, but that he did reign two years before Abners going out
against Ioab, in persuit of David, as Saul is said to have reigned two years
over Israel, 1 Samuel 13. 1. Not simply, but as Lawful King unrejected by God,
he reigned no longer.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. WE see here in David, holy prudence and wisdom, in not omitting
that fit occasion of entry to the Kingdom, which the Lord by the death of Saul
had offered, but embracing the same, and addressing himself to make good use
thereof, for as the Lord will have us not to run before him, but patiently to
wait while he offer occasion, and open a door of entry, so likewise will he
have us not to slip occasions offered, but laying hold on the hoary fore head
thereof, to work and walk with him in Christian wisdom and serpentine
prudence, having a judicious eye to mark them, a holy heart to reverence them,
and a diligent hand to make use, and lay hold of them, and this both in the
occasions and offers of grace, with the wise virgins, and of our temporal
estate, with Salomons diligent man in his affairs, who stands before kings,
we may see clearly, Prove. 12. 24.

2. In that orderly he begins at God, we see that it is not sufficient to
have good causes public, or private, but in like manner it is requisite to
prosecute them aright, otherwise a good cause in the matter may become evil in
the preposterours form, albeit the reciprocant be never true, that a good
form, may make an evil cause good in substance, Genesis 34.
bona been ergo agantur. The cause which the Sons of Jacob had to revenge the
rape and abuse of their Sister was good, but the form wicked, to do it by
private revenge, and under trust and cloak of circumcision, the cause likewise
of Saul against the Philistines was good, but the form, in consulting with a
Witch in the persecution thereof unlawful. So the causes of Josias against
Necho King of Egypt, of Jeconias and Jehojakim against Nebuchadnezzar, with
sundry others. Let all men therefore know the right warrant of their causes to
be in the matter, and then in the form; the right rule whereof is to be had in
the sacred oracle of Gods will and word, which we ought reverendly to consult,
and not to proceed without the warrant thereof, otherwise men will be
disappointed of their expectations and aims, as in Ioshuas example against
Hai, of Israel against Benjamin, and in Saul consulting with a Pythonesse, and
in all them who consults flesh and blood.

3. As David inquires, so the Lord answers, yielding he should go in general,
and in particular directing him to Hebron, where we may behold the great
clemency of God, who is most attent unto the suits of his own, and more ready to
give a comfortable answer, and resolution to his Children in their
perplexities, then they are bent to crave the same of him, and will ever give
the direction of his word and Spirit to all those who earnestly call upon him
for the same, witness a heap of testimonies contained in holy Scripture, Genesis
25. 22. 32. 28. 46. 1. 2. etc. Exodus 3. 9. and 14. 15.

4. In that he inquires not once only, if he should go? But again, whether he
should go? We perceive how precisely in each thing he desires to have a warrant
and information, and how fully he would follow the Lords direction, that he
would have every step, as it were, of his progress in this purpose pointed out
by God, and would not in any thing lean, or rely to his own brain, or wisdom,
in holy humility distrusting thus the counsel, or course of flesh and blood,
and submitting himself, as a Child, to be led by the hand of so wise and
careful a Father, whom if he obediently followed, he was sure he should
neither stumble nor stray, but should see a prosperous success and end of the
matter he had in hand, whose example herein every Child of God ought to imitate
in all the course of their lives, and actions of any importance especially.

5. As he inquires often, so is he to every interrogation answered, for we
shall first be weary and (like Abraham sueing for the Sodomits preservation)
leave of to speak, before the Lord cease to hearken, or be weary in answering
and granting the requests of his own, if we ask it shall be given us, if we
seek, we shall find, and if we yet knock it shall be opened unto us, and
whatsoever we shall desire of the Father in Christ's name, if it be according to
his will and our will, it shall be granted to us, No importunity then can
trouble this righteous Judge, therefore pray continually, and let this comfort
be, as that stone set under Moses heavy hands, to uphold our hearts, that we
saint not, and weary not in prayer.

6. In all this proceeding of David's, we see, that he was void of a greedy
mind to the Kingdom, or any gain, or glory thereof, not using preposterous
have as many do, not consulting God nor conscience, but walking in a right and
in a slow course, expecting by inquisition and direction, the Lords thrusting
him forward to undertake that place and function upon him, where unto formerly
by Samuel he had been anointed. Knowing well, where the warrant of Cods
direction is had in acceptance, there the comfort of his aidfull protection
shall never be wanting in the execution of an office, which should teach us how
to behave our selves in the entry to our particular callings in like sort, and
not to run before we be sent.

7. Verse 2. According to the Lords direction, so David goes up to Hebron,
Jerem. 42. 5. 43. 2.
so, as he is careful to know Gods will, so is he diligent to practice, and to
obey the same, Not like to Johanan and his company, who would enquire the Lord
by Jeremy, what way they should walk in, and what they should do, with a
solemn protestation, to obey the Lords direction, whatsoever it were, but when
the Lords direction was declared unto them, they said unto the Prophet that he
spoke falsely, and that they would do what pleased themselves, like most men now
adays in like manner, who will hear, but neglect to do; labor for science
but omity conscience, are whole, in words of professing, but nothing in works
of practicing, and will acknowledge Christ to be a Priest who has offered up
himself for them, and a Prophet to teach, but will not admit him to be a King,
and to rule over them, subdueing their affections unto his holy obedience;
those, and their faith are alike, dead, though they would seem to live, let us
practice then, as we pray, Fiat voluntas tua, and do as we are directed.

8. In bringing up his wives and men with him with their families, to Hebron he
shows his equitable and thankful mind, in that, he would have those who were
Portioners with him in his adversity, pertakers likewise with him in his
prosperity and preferment, his honors not changing his manners, much unlike to
the arrogant forms of many ungrateful great men and courtiers and others now
a days, who are forgetful (like Pharaohs Butler) of courtesies and good deeds
formerly done unto them, when they were shrubs like other, albeit they are
become since, like tall cedars, and in their advancement consider neither from
whence preferment comes, nor yet remember Joseph. As we should be thankful
therefore to God for his benefits, and careful of the first table, so let us
be likewise unto men, as good instruments, and practice the duties of the
second, God has joined them, let no man then separate them.

9. Verse 3. David distributeth his men and followers with their households
amongst the villages of Hebron, wherein his royal, wise, and loving care at
his first entry appears toward his subjects, in respect that he will not over
burden Hebron it self, nor any other one part with a multitude, but so
prudently appoint the places of their habitations, that both they should be
eased, and those amongst whom their abode should be, should have no
overcharging, whereby he saves himself from giving occasion of grudging, and
gains greatly the love of their hearts, as afterward appears. A good example
for all Princes and Magistrates to follow, and not like foolish Rehoboam to be
reguardlesse of their ease, and not to overburden their subjects, or like
tirannous Pharaoh to make them marks, to deal so in holy discretion, and loving
prudence, with others, as having a due and compassionate regard to the strength
and ability of every one, not straining nor straitning them above the same.

10. Verse 4. David is no sooner come up to Hebron, but the men of Judah came
also and there they anoint him King, where we see, that to them who obey Gods
direction, all things shall succeed, albeit though Laban be following after,
and Esau be meeting Jacob before, both of a cruel intention toward him, yet
seeing he was following the Lords direction in his return, Labans tongue and
Esaus hand is so restrained, that the one is commanded to speak nothing but
good to him, and the others heart so turned, that he embraces Jacob, and his
journey becomes prosperous, let every one therefore who would have a blessing
and happy success in their callings, or affairs obey the Lords direction, and
then things expected, yea and things unexpected to their comfort shall fall out
and come to pass, and who does otherwise contrary to that direction, shall with
Jonas find crossings and disappointments unawares, so that they shall never
attain to their aims, more then he did to Tarsis, but was forced to go unto
Niniveh.

11. In that he is formerly here elected and accepted to be the King, by the
men of Judah, and albeit that David had the undoubted right, yet he will not
proceed but by the consent and the ordinary way, his practice herein serves
sufficiently to condemn all these who intrude themselves in any eminent place
in Church or policy, Magistracy or Ministry upon whose government and labors a
blessing cannot be expected, nor in their crossings can they be sure of
comfort, witness, Abimelech and the men of Sechem, because they entered not in
an orderly way.

12. Judah who does anoint David King, dissenting therein from all the tribes
of Israel, who refuse him, and accept Ishboseth, and yet David's right and
election is better then Ishboseths, neither does Judah's paucity serve to
improve David's title, nor Isreal's multitude to approve Ishboseth's personal
succession, therefore multitude is no sure note of the true Church, nor of a
good cause, therefore a wise caveat is set down in Scripture, follow not the
multitude to do evil, but try the quality and warrant of the cause, and
resolve with Joshua, albeit all should forsake the Lord, yet for thy part still
to obey and serve him, Joshua, 24. 15.

13. In respect likewise that Judah apart from all Israel, anointeth David
their King, being warranted herein, both in general by the promises of God,
made concerning the pre-eminence of that tribe, and in particular by the
manifest declaration of Gods will concerning David by the Prophet Samuel,
therefore having and following the warrant of Gods will and Word herein, they
are not the division or Schisme-makers, but Israel wanting the same though the
greater multitude by far. It is not they then, who separate themselves from
the company or persons of men, but who separate themselves from the truth, and
Gods Word (which is the touchstone thereof) that are schismatic or
rent-makers in the Church, and all those who follow the direction of it (as
Judah does here) assuredly shall go aright, where such as contemn the same,
and with Israel glory in multitude shall be seduced and go astray.

14. David long ago had gotten title unto the kingdom, but after many years
till now, he gets no entry unto the same, and not now unto the whole, but a
small part, till afterward, but at last he gets possession of all; So by
degrees does the Lord perform his works, to exercise the faith, the hope, the
patience and constancy of his chosen, but at last to the full he accomplisheth
whatsoever he promises, that still we may learn to depend upon him without
fainting, being assured in his own time he will come, and not delay, mercy and
truth shall kiss one another, and one jot of his word shall not fail, let
that performance of the promises made unto Abraham concerning his seed, Joseph's
preferment, Isreal's deliverance and many others be witnesses hereof.

15. In all the foresaid things, we have the kingdom of Christ represented,
for, as by Saul's tyranny, David was persecuted, so was Christ and his Church:
yet as Saul was overthrown and an entry made to David, so were the Churches
persecutors taken out of the way, and she began to be advanced, as David did
not his own will, but followed Gods, so Christ wrought not his own will, but
his fathers, as David ascended to Hebron, so has Christ to heaven, as David
carried thither with him his wives and servants, so has Christ made his Church
and servants participate of all his benefits, and does daily bring them to that
same place to which he has gone before them, as David was received only by
Judah, but rejected by the greatest part, so is Christ and his kingdom, as
David's kingdom is not accomplished at one time, so neither Christ's, as it had
is it own competitours, so has Christ's, but as the kingdom of Ishboseth is
short and declining, but David's longer and flourishing, so is it between Christ
and Satan's kingdom, and as David was often times anointed, by Samuel, by
Judah, and at last by Israel, so was Christ, which Paul reduces to three, the
Spirit of power, sanctification, and first resurrection.

16. Verse. 5. Concerning the report made of the men of Jabesh Gilead unto
David, concerning their burying of Saul, after whose body probably he had
caused to inquire (as is aforesaid) others are of opinion, that it was to
inflame him against them, others that he should beware of them (seeing they
were professed favorers of Saul) or reconciled with them, but David lays all
sinistrous opinions and suspicions of them aside, charitably construing their
fact, and for their fidelity and kindness to their Lord, he honors them with
an embassage congratulatory, and a promise of his favor and assistance,
whereby we are taught not to give ear and credit to detraction, but being slow
to misconceive of men's actions, rather charitably to make the best construction
of them, till more manifest experience prove them otherwise, thus greatly shall
we disappoint Satan that ill seed sower, stop dissension, maintain unity,
approve our selves to God, and readily win our neighbor.

17. In the men of Jabesh we see the loyal and sinceer love of subjects to
their prince obeying him being alive, and honoring him being dead, which fact,
as pleasing to God, and approved by man, is registered in Scripture, (like Mary
Magdalens anointing of Christ) to be recorded for ever, for the memorial of
the just shall flourish, that the name of the wicked shall be put out, either
with the silence of oblivion, or else the black dash of the record of their
foul deeds, innumerable examples hereof may be collected in holy writ, where
they are recorded.

18. Verse. 6. That which David wishes to them from God, is mercy, and truth in
the assured performance, but that which he himself promises, is reward, the
one is free, the other of debt, no merit then will he ascribe unto them at Gods
hands, but will yield the same at his own, in regard by his princely office he
was bound to cherish the good, as well as to chastise the bad, and not to
suffer such kind loyalty to his Father-in-law, and predecessor, which they
with such care and hazard of their lives had shown, to be misknowne,
uncommended and rewarded, as being assured, that they who were loyal to one
would be so to another. Let this therefore inform aright the minds of all men,
how to esteem of their own actions, in all holy and humble sobriety, never
urging merit upon God, howsoever we deserve at the hands of man, but suiting
free mercy, and with Jacob professing our selves unworthy of the least of his
mercies, being but unprofitable servants, and our goods deeds (wherein as in
the way to the kingdom ever we should walk) extending no ways to him, but to
the Saints on earth (as the Psalmist says) Psalm. 16. 2. And availing our own
souls, but not God, as we likewise see, Job. 22. 2. and 31. 7.

19. We have also in David here, the pattern of a good King and loving, who as
he was careful before to execute justice upon the Amalekite for his wicked
fact, so is he diligent here to practice kindness to the men of Jabesh for
their godly deed, thus ought all Magistrates who are the Lords deputies, and
gods on earth, cherish virtue, and chastise vice, that so the one may grow, and
the other may be repressed, being as an awful Lion to the one, and a mild Lamb
to the other, rewarding the virtuous and godly, and punishing the vicious and
wicked, so shall their throne be established, their Crown glister, and their
Scepter flourish, In the Church let Abiathar therefore be cast out and Zadok
set in his room, 1 King. 2. 34, 35.
and let Joab suffer for his fault, and Benajah in the policy be surrogat in
his place.

20. In respect that he promises unto them protection and therefore exhorts
them not to be discouraged, by the Philistines late victory, or Saul's death,
seeing God had raised him up, and he was anointed King, we see not only the
duty of a lawful prince, which is to maintain and defend his subjects, but
likewise that the Lord suffers never his own to be altogether destitute of
comfort, for if he humble with the one hand, he will raise with the other, and
if he take one benefit from us, he will give us another in the place thereof,
yea perhaps a greater as he did here David for Saul, or as he restored holy
Job, if with thankfulness, patience, and constancy we depend upon him.

21. Verse. 8. In the election and anointing of Ishboseth who was made King by
Abner, we see no consulting of God, against whose ordinance, and express
notified will (confessed c. 3. 18.) they were going an indirect course,
therefore they knew, either with Saul they would get no answer, or else
contrary to their intended proceedings; thus against God, conscience, and
right, they rebelliously prosecute that course which turned thereafter to their
own ruin, like many now adays, who if they may attain to a pretended right,
and possession, by policy and power to defraud the right owners, and withhold
their due from them, whether it be holy things separate from the common use, or
man's good and profane, they will never consult Gods Word, nor conscience, how
lawfully they attained or detain the same, yea although the oracle of the one,
and prick of the other, most evidently contradict and convince them, yet Achan
will take the execrable thing, and Ahab will have Naboths vineyard, though they
should make sure with it, Gods curse, and heavy judgments unto themselves, and
theirs.

II SAM: Chap: 2. from the 12. verse to the 17.
THe election of these two Kings by whose contrary authorities great dissension
was raised in Israel being formerly treated of, till the 12. Verse. Now from the
12. to the end, we have the history of the first civil debates between Abner,
General of Ishboseths Army, and Joab General of David's. In the which we have
proponed these particulars; first, the singular combat between 12. on every
side of the companies conducted by Joab for David, and Abner for Ishboseth, and
the circumstances thereof. Secondly from the 17. Verse. to the 24. We have the
battles between the Armies, and the event thereof, which is a bloody victory
which befell to Joab.

Thirdly, from the 24. Verse. to the end, we have the retreat from the battle,
occasioned by the conference between the two Captains Joab and Abner.

In the first, which is the singular combat, from the 12. Verse. to the 17. are
to be considered these circumstances, the persons, place, time, occasion, act,
and consequence.

The time is observed to have been after the election of both the Kings, David
in Judah, and Ishboseth in Israel, the which time David appears to have
dedicate himself to quietness for three reasons, First in regard of his oath
made to Saul concerning his posterity. 1 Samuel: 24. 22. The second is grounded
upon prudence, seeing he was followed as yet by the fewer number, whom he would
not hazard, as being prodigal of their lives. The third is from faith,
patiently abiding Gods time, and referring his further advancement (whereof he
was assured) unto Gods opportunity and work, where Ishboseth on the contrary
breaks Faith, and depends upon the opportunity and power of his forces.

The persons occasioners are Joab, David's sisters son, and Abner kinsman to
Ishboseth, the one provoking, the other yiedling, both men of great courage and
experience, the one having an evil cause, and relying on carnal respects, the
other defending a good cause, and relying on God, and the equity thereof, the
actours are 12 on each side.

The place is at the poole of Gibeon in the lot of Benjamin.

The occasion is Abners provocation, Joab being defender.

The act is a singular combat, 12. against 12. with great eagerness and cruelty
fought.

The event is, they are all slain, and therefore the place receives a new
imposed name in memory of the fact, and the two Armies mutually join in battle.

It is to be resolved then whether this form of singular combats be lawful
amongst Christians and the godly, or not. Whereto I answer it is simply
unlawful.

First, because it is altogether without warrant of Gods Word, and therefore is
an action without Faith and consequently sin, whereof also it follows, that
doing it without Gods command we cannot look for his aid or protection therein.

Secondly, it is altogether against Gods command, Thou shall not murder, which
thou hereby committest on thy neighbor if thou kill, and so is ever after
haunted with the conscience of blood, or of thy self if thou be killed,
desperately running thy body on the sword of thy enemy, and thy soul on the
sword of Gods punishment.

Thirdly as it is without precept, yea against precept, so is it without
laudable practice in all Gods Word, never a one but a barbarous Philistine
making offer thereof, and David by an extraordinary providence and motion, upon
extraordinary former experience, by an extraordinary weapon and way, for the
glory of God, and honor of Gods people, being brought thither, and stirred up,
does undertake the same.

Fourthly, it is against the law of man, likewise in all Christian and well
established kingdoms.

Fifthly, it is altogether brutish, seeing that is the form of beasts to push,
and tear, or kill each one another, from whose practice man endued with
reason, but much more with grace should altogether abhor.

Sixthly yet more, it is divelish seeing he has been a manslayer, and defacer
of Gods image from the beginning, and all man-slayers are his children, and
consequently inheritors of his portion reserved for him.

Seventhly, Matthew. 5.
it directly impugnes that evangelicall command of Christ Jesus forbidding
private revenge, and so is an antichristian practice.

Eighthly, it is a high wronging of God, and contempt of the Magistrate to whom
he has committed the sword, disturbing them both from their places (as it
were) of repaying revenge, and so is a practice hateful to heaven and to earth.

As for the maintaining of thy credit thereby, let the credit of thy person,
yield to the credit of thy profession, which above all things thou ought to
maintain and obey, and as for trial in doubtful cases, there are 4 ways in
Gods Word, by witnesses Deuteronomy. 17. 6. By writ, Jer. 32. By confession, Josh. 7.
And by oath of the party, Exodus 22. 11. Besides these there is none other
lawful, but the party and matter must be left to Gods just judgment, and time
of further light, and better that some truths a while be unknown, then
unlawfully searched.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN these troubles that are raised by Abner against David and his people, we
see the truth of that royal sentance which he afterward upon manifold
experience pronounced, many are the troubles of the Godly, but the Lord
delivers them out of them all, as our master Jesus Christ affirms, In the
world you shall have affliction etc. And as the Apostles testify, whosoever
will live Godly in this present world must suffer persecution, and by many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven, this is confirmed by
reason and experience, the first reason is taken from Gods Fatherly care, by
this way exercising his children, and his gifts in them, that like Moab they
settle not upon their lees, and containing them in discipline to make them
conformable in sufferings with their Savior here, that they may be so in glory
hereafter, yea and to witness thereby (which is strange!) his love to them, for
whom the Lord loves, them he chastises, the other reason is from the nature of
Satan and the world, ever opposite to the quietness of the faithful, which
experience taken from all ages of the Godly, and consideration of the estate,
especially from David's in this present history, and Christ and his Apostles in
the Gospel, does evidently confirm.

2. In respect that David is only defender, his intention is commendable, not
meaning to amplify his kingdom by trouble, oppression, blood, and
faith-breaking but by Godly, peaceable, and honest means referring the work to
God, for the farther promotion, and amplifying of his kingdom, But Ishboseth
and Abner are the contrary, and use the contrary means, whose example, (albeit
the most part follow them) in enlarging the bounds of their commandment, should
be eschewed, therefore also it is, that many like unto them fall and decay, and
as few follow David, so few stand and grow like unto him, as may be amplified
by the fall of sundry Tyrants, and standing of Godly princes. An exhortation
therefore to conquer by lawful and conscionable means, not joining house to
house, nor field to field by iniquity, least so, (as the Prophet says) they
conquer shame and destruction to themselves; as the Psalmist likewise found by
experience, I looked after the ungodly, and he was not, but the just inherit
the earth.

3. Verse. 14. The cruel and barbarous nature of the wicked, is seen in Abner,
delighting to feed his eyes with bloodshed and slaughter, and counting no more
of it but as a game, whereas the Godly man regards the life of his beast, but
the very mercies of the wicked are cruel, this nature they participate, of
their several masters; the Godly who are called the meek of the earth, of that
meek Lamb Jesus, and the wicked, the giants of the earth, of that roaring Lion
Satan, who ever goes about seeking whom he may destroy, and has been a
manslayer from the beginning.

4. Verse. 16. The sad and unfortunate event of this singular combat, all of
them on both sides being slain, proves the unlawfulness of such practices,
whether they obtrude the trial of a title, or right, that otherwise cannot be
decided, for a warrant, or a means to stay further effusion of blood, neither
of which is here effectuate, for albeit David's title be undoubtedly good, yet
all of his men here do fall, as oftimes in Monomachies it happens the
innocent to receive the foil, not that hereby we should accuse God for not
regarding innocence, but justly so that he punishes presumption, and will not
be holden to bless with good success unlawful practices, without and against
a warrant of his approbation, not staying for his time of clearing what is in
doubt, but thrusting ourselves into his room, and as for the battle it joyneth
hereupon presently, so that it was rather a spur than a bridle, to further
effusion of blood, than hinder the same.

5. In Ioab, yiedling to Abner, and in the young men obtempering them both,
Ioabs loss of such valiant twelve Champions, and their loss of themselves,
teaches what it is to obey an unlawful challenge, and ungodly command rashly,
ad aras, then let our obedience be to superiors, and ever Marshall God aright,
giving him the first place to obey rather him than man in election, and him
before man in Location, and with holy wisdom, and Christian care of others, of
whose life, or welfare we ought not to be prodigal, laying aside, pride,
foolish temerity, and lavish carelessness of the estate of them whom we may
command, and to behave, and impale our selves in offer, or acceptance within
the Limits of the Lords command.

6. In denominating the place, the field of the strong men, Helkathhazairim,
(to wit, where they were slain) we see that inconsiderately oftimes, without
any such intention of the Authors, by the providence of God, monuments of the
memory of things are erected, whereby God will not only have good things to
keep record, but the facts of turpitude, for their further detestation, to have
there own remembering, thus was the field which was bought with the price of our
savior named Aceldama, that proud tower of Nimrod called Babel, the place
where Israel murmured for wa- termed Meribah, with sundry the like examples,
seeing therefore post fata facta, after death deeds have their own remaining by
record and remembrance, let us be careful that they be such as rather may be
blazed with happy fame, then blotted with hapless infamy, and seeing this
place is so called to testify the enormity of the fact, let us fight that good
fight only, whereof the Apostle speaks, which is between the flesh, and the
Spirit, which only has the profitable end, the glorious theater, the godly
armor, and the blessed reward of assured triumph.

II. SAM. Chap. 2. from the 17. verse to the 26.
COncerning the ensueing battle, we have to resolve, whether wars are
Lawful, or unlawful? we answer that public wars undertaken by public
authority are Lawful, as that answer of the Baptists to the soldiers, Christ's
direction to give Caesar that which was Caesar's, the commendation of the
centurion, the Laws of warfare set down by God himself to the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
20.
the practice of their godliest Patriarchs, Judges and Kings, the title of God
himself, the Lord of hosts, that which is said, 1 Samuel 25. 28. And the
Apostolic Canon of the Magistrates sword, all do testify, providing they have
these four causes and caveats, the matter be punishment of vice, the form,
right proceeding, the efficient, Lawful authority, and the end, that peace and
piety may be obtained. The Anabaptists hold the contrary, because it is
forbidden (say they) to revenge, or resist evil, and it is against Christian
patience, recommended by Christ and his Apostles, as also against the nature of
Christ's Kingdom, Isa. 2. 4. Micah. 4. 2.

To all this it is answered, that private revenge is only forbidden, and in
that place of the Prophets, he speaks not against public Lawful wars, but
shows how the hearts of the godly shall be affected one to another, albeit of
diverse nations, which peace and love shall begin and grow here, but be
perfected hereafter. And in some sort too even private wars in defense, or
resistance are Lawful, when by circumstances, the Magistrates help cannot be
implored for protection, in which case (as one of the ancients affirms) the
Magistrate seems quietly to consent to the deed, and which is called,
inculpata tutela.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 17. A sore battle ensues on this former combat, whereby we see that of
smal-provocations, and unfortunate beginnings, great troubles oftimes arise,
witness the abuse of the Levites wife, Judge. 20. 2 Samuel 20.
and the Benjamites froward answer, the event, which was the occasion of the
pitiful overthrow of that whole tribe, which might at first (if the like
practice as that of the men of Abel, had been followed) been wisely prevented.

2. The servants of Abner fall before the servants of David, so that a right
and just cause may ever ordinarily look for Victory, being prosecuted aright,
for as Hezekiah said, concerning the King of Ashur, 2. Chro. 32.
there are more with us, then with him, for with him is the arm of flesh, but
with us is the Lord our God to help us, even so that same protecting presence,
albeit the eye of the body (like Gehezies while it was opened) cannot perceive
the same, does still attend and give a happy success to all upright affairs,
so that if God be with us, who can be against us, and if that captain of the
Lords host that appeared unto Joshua stand armed on our side, Josh. 5.
we need not doubt of Victory ordinarily in any just cause, and quarrel between
us, and any adversary whosoever, witness Abraham against the 5. Kings. Isreal's
deliverance from Pharaoh, their battles under Moses, Joshua, and their Judges,
David against Goliath, and here against Abner with sundry others.

3. Yet Abner here has the greater forces, eleven tribes against one, The arm
of man therefore is vain to trust unto, neither is the race to the swift,
Eccles. 9. 11.
nor the battle to the strong* but the Victory is of the Lord; who will have
the glory of things unto himself, and will impart the same to none other,
therefore albeit Midian be scattered like Grasshoppers on the field, yet a barley
cake shall overturne their tents, and Gidion with a few, having Trumpets and
Lamps in earthen Pitchers shall suddenly make them aghast. Let Joshua then trust
in the Lord, and with compassing only Jericho, he shall enter the City,
whereas Pharaoh trusting in his chariots, or Rabshaketh boasting of his
invinceable Armado, shall perish, or return with shame to his own place.

4. Verse 19. The confidence that Abner had in his experience and strength, and
that Asahel had in his swiftnes and agility, (being said by a hyperbolicall
kind of speech to have been as swift as a roe, as Saul and Jonathan are said to
been swifter then Eagles, Chap. 1. 23.) a^ailes them nothing now, but rather
turns to their ruin. So that those things wherein above others, men have
gotten a preferment, being abused, God turns them to their confusion,
examples Goliath, Sampson, Saul, Achitophel, Haman, Absalom, Judas, and others,
such as Arrius confiding in his subtility, Milo in his strength, Cicero in his
eloquence, Pompey in his greatness, and Julius Caesar in his courage, as we
desire, to get therefore gifts, or benefits outward, or inward from God, let
us likewise, desire the right use of them, that we abuse not the talent that he
gives us, else our blessings shall be turned to curses, and at last to our own
destruction.

5. Verse. 22. In Abners dehortation to Asahel, containing a direction to meddle
with any other soldier of the host, rather than him, least otherwise he
repent, and a reason of eschewing further irritation of his Brother Ioab,
whereby he shows his unwillingnesse to kill him. We see, as it is a good thing
in him to be slow in revenge, or loath to shed blood, so first, that it is a
very evil thing, to be so careless of those that followed him, in making so
small account of their lives, or spoil. Secondly that he should have more
thought of this, How he should hold up his face before Ioab, if he killed
Asahel, then how he should hold up his face before God, at the last day, thus
the fool has said in his heart, there is no God, or with Pharaoh
presumptuously inquiring, Who is God that I should regard him, therefore
oftimes the fear of man restrains more the wicked, then the terror of God is a
lore unto them, this was Esaus fear, Genesis 27. 41. But let the godly be
contrarily minded.

6. Verse 23. In Asahels death, who was so eager and wilful in persuit, we see,
that it is good to use Victory with mediocrity, and not with too great cruelty
and eager persuit of the yielding and entreating adversary, by making their
minds desperate and to reinanimate them (as it were) with new courage to
assault, and seeing no courtesy to be had, to hazard that altogether, which
otherwise they cannot save; Therefore it was the wise Counsel of that elder
Scipio, non solum praeparanda, sed etiam viae munienda Hosti fugienti.

7. Ioab gets the Victory, but not without the death of Asahel his Brother,
with others 19. So that in all civil wars the very triumphs are lamentable,
and their Victories not without miserable scarres, witness Isreal's lamentation
for the destruction of their Brethren, Judge. 21. 2, 3, 6.
the Benjamites, and David's loss and lamenting of Absalom, with sundry others.

II. SAM. Chap. 2. from the 26. Verse to the end.
THe retraite is caused by four reasons, 1. Gods providence, gathering the
clouds and night, whereby he declared that it was not he will, that more blood
should be shed, otherwise he might have protracted the day as he did to Joshua.
2. The stay and gazing of the people at the body and death of Asahel, which
greatly moved them, the 3. was the recollection of Abners forces on the hill,
taking so the opportunity and advantage of the place, 4. the speech of Abner to
Ioab, taken from three places. 1. Shall the sword devour for ever? The meaning
whereof is, of things, that are not good in themselves, but for the respect of
another, and have the conjunction of peril, there should be some measure, but
wars are such, therefore an end should be put unto them, the argument is
taken from the right fine of war, which is the establishing of peace, and
from humanity. The second argument is from the consequent of commodity and
incommodity, proponed in this form, know thou not Ioab, that the end of all
civil war is but sorrow, and albeit thou have the Victory, yet thou have not
past the peril, for if the battle be renewed, the hazard may change, and it is
hard to bring men to the point of despare, for fury ministrates armor and
bitterness willbe in the end. The third, is from natural and spiritual
necessitudes, we have Abraham one common Father, one God, one faith, one sort
of Sacraments, and are all Brethren, therefore it is most charitable and best
seeming, to desist.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 26. A Fit argument of dissuasion we have here, against all civil
dissentions within any Christian Kingdom, professing the truth, amongst
whatsoever Persons within Church, or commonwealth, let the Midianites thrust
their swords in to one another bowels, and Sampsons foxes carry firebrands
between them looking diverse ways; but let Abraham's voice be heard amongst
professors, let there be no discord between thee and me, for we are Brethren,
and Moses gentle rebuke accepted, to the Hebrew who was in the wrong, why
smitest thou thy fellow. It greiveth Rebecca then the struggling of her two
Sons in her womb, and for the divisions of Ruben are great thoughts of heart,
and so should it greive all godly hearts any schism, or rent in Church, or
Commonwealth.

2. Abner provoked, hoping assuredly to have given the foil to Joabs small
Army, but in the mean while he receives the same, so, man propones but God
dispones, Prove. 16. 9. 1. King. 20. 11.
neither should he that puts on his armor boast, as he that puts it off,
for oftimes he that diggeth a pit for his neighbor does unawares fall therein
himself, witness the sword of Saul brandisht for David, the gallows of Haman
set up for Mordecai, the hungry Lions prepared for Daniel, and the judgment of
stoning given out against Susanna.

3. Verse 27. Ioab in his answer to Abner turning over the blame upon him,
witnesses what was David's part in this battle, towit defensive only, and that
he would never have made persuit, nor sought by bloodshed, or cruelty violently
to have enlarged his Kingdom, but contented him self with his lot, and
suffered that wrong of withholding and usurping his right, till the Lord had
redressed the same. Thus are the godly, patient and peaceable, violent in
nothing, but by holy zeal taking the Kingdom of Heaven by force.

4. Verse 28. Ioab in harkening unto the Counsel of Abner though his adversary
teaches us, to receive the truth at whosoevers hands, non quis, sed quid dicat
attendendo, and to make good use of the speeches of our very Enemies like the
Be which gathers Honey of every flower for the prejudicat opinion of Persons,
has oftimes proved a bar to hold out wholesome admonitions; and for the shells
sake the Pearl has been rejected, as if no good thing could come out of
Nazareth, therefore it has been, that the true warnings of Gods servants have
been despised, their words, counted lies, and their rebukes, malice. Therefore
also it was that Ahab misconceiting thus of Eliah, in saying, have thou found
me O mine Enemy, 1 King. 21. 20.
and so hating the Prophet, rejected that wholesome warning and prediction of
his also, which was his utter ruin. 1 King. 22. 17.


5. Ioab sounds the retrait, and the soldiers according to military
Discipline obey, giving therein a good lesson to all those who are under
commandment, to give ready obsequie to their superiors and Masters, Math. 8.
9.
as the centurion professes of his servants, and their ready obedience to
come, or go, as they were enjoined, and to all of us to obey the direction of
our Captain and Master Christ Jesus, under whose standard we fight, and in
whose family we serve, harkening ever unto the sound of the Trumpet of his
sacred word, Isai. 58. 1.

6. Verse 29. In Abner likewise, we see the laudable diligence of a faithful
servant journying all the night time, albeit wearied in battle to report the
success of this late conflict, of the which his Master was greatly longing to
hear, so careful and painful was he to gratify his Master, and to resolve his
mind which was held in suspense.

7. We see here likewise the truth of that Apostoticall assertion, Romans 8. All
things work together for the best, to them that fear God, for by this battle
and Victory, Abners pride is abated, and his intention disappointed, I
shboseths power is weakened, and his mind dashed, and David's faith and repose in
Gods promise is more confirmed by this new proof of Gods aid and delivery. Let
this therefore comfort Gods Children in all straites, or crosses, and teach
them never to censure Gods works by their beginnings, or first progress, but
patiently and confidently to behold the end, for we shall see oftimes that it
is mere darkness, out of which he is to draw light, life out of death, and
glory out of Ignominy, witness Joseph's preferment, and Christ's exaltation.

8. Lastly, we perceive a great providence of God, in that all this while of
this civil contention, the common Enemies about, lately Victorious, attempt
nothing, for as he stirred them up against Saul for his punishment lately, so
he restrains them now, that they budge not, Prove. 16. 6.
against his servant David, for when the ways of man please the Lord (says
Solomon) he will make also his Enemies at peace with him, and e contra, happy
are they then, that are reconciled with their God, for the stones of the field
shall be in covenant with them, when the Heaven and the Earth in their course
with the hosts thereof, shall fight against their Enemies, witness the
plagues of Egypt etc. And O! what a gracious and wise Father have we also that
will not lay more upon us, then we are able to bear, but will fit his trials
whereby he exercises us, to our strength, wherewith he indewes us, witness
the wrestling of Jacob, and the buffetings of Paul, and David's conflict here
(being as yet weak as he says, Chap. 3. 39. Not with any more at once, but
only with Ishboseth.

Chap. 3. from the 1. Verse to the 6.
IN the former Chapter we have heard the singular combats, the battle ensueing
thereon, with the retrait, moved between Ishboseth King of the 11. tribes
persewer, under the conduct of Abner on the one part, and David King of Judah,
defender, under the conduct of Ioab, on the other part, the end whereof was,
Victory on David's part, yet bloody by the loss of Asahel, through his own
obstinacy, and 19. of Judah besides, but the loss being great on Abners part
to the number 360.

In this Chapter we have the continuation of the civil debates between the
houses of Saul and David, with the death of Ishboseth rehearsed in the next
Chapter.

The general theme of this History is taken from the event of these troubles,
and is set down in form of proposition in the 1. Verse. of this Chapter which
is, in the time of these long debates, the house of David prospered and
increased, and the house of Saul decayed and decreased.

This chapter and history it self contained therein, is divided into two
parts, the former comprehends the means how the one house rises, and the
other declines, from the 2 Verse. to the 28. The second, is the treasonable
murder of Abner by Joab, and the displeasure of David therefore,

The first, which sets down the means, must be considered in six particulars,
1. By the plurality of David's children, from the 2. Verse. to the 6. The 2. By
the variance between Abner, and Ishboseth, from the 6. to the 12. Verse. The* 3.
By the restitution of Micol David's first wife, from the 12. to the 17. Verse.
The 4. By the falling away of the people from Ishboseth, by Abners persuasion
to David, from the 17. to the 19. The 5. Is by the confederacy between David
and Abner, from the 19. to the 22. Verse. And the last means whereby Saul's
house grows weaker, and David's stronger, is by the slaughter of Abner by
Joab, from the 22. Verse. to the 28. of these then in order.

The proposition or general argument of all this history, is the first Verse.
There was long war etc. This is not to be understood of battles, because we
read not of such to have intervened between these houses, except that one
mentioned in the former chapter. As to David he had deliberated to commit the
success of his kingdom to his God, and therefore abstained from invasion and
violence. And as to Ishboseth and Abner their forces by the former foil were
weakened, and their minds dashed, and therefore would not peril the whole cause
upon the uncertain hazard of a battle, Therefore these wars are to be
understood of the jealousies, envies, hatred, diversity of minds, counsels,
and hostile practices between these houses, whereby the whole inhabitants were
divided into factions, and contrary parties, And these wars are called long,
because they continued all the time of David's reign in Hebron after the first
two years of Ishboseth, which was the space of five years and six months.
The end of which wars was, the house of David increased, but the house of
Saul decreased. The reason of this diversity was the contrary nature of their
causes and proceedings therein. The cause of David was the maintenance of a
just kingdom, received from God: The cause of Ishboseth was the maintaining of
an usurped tyranny, received of man. The form of David's proceeding was by
faith and confidence in his God, but Ishboseths was in the arm of man, David
fought, and overcame by patience, and Ishboseth impatient in trouble perished
through despair.

This is the difference of the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of Satan, both
fight, but in great diversity, in causes, form, weapons, conductours, and
therefore in great diversity of end, and event likewise, for albeit Satan
fought against God and his Christ, yet daily (in spite of his supposts) the
kingdom of darkness declines: and shall decay: and the kingdom of light
increase, till at length (as Paul affirms) in that glorious triumph, Satan
shall be trodden under foot, and then shall be accomplished, that which the
Father speaks to his Christ Psalm. 110. The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my
right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN the type between the kingdom of David, and the kingdom of Christ, we
have to consider, that like as there was perpetual war between the house of
Saul, and the house of David, Even so in the kingdom and Church of Christ,
there is not only hostility between the same and the manifest enemies thereof,
but even in her self, and own bosom, there has been, is, and shall be (for
the trial of the elect) perpetual debates, sects, schisms, and variances,
and therefore the womb of the Church is fitly resembled to Rebecca's, wherein
is much wrangling, and this is correspondent to our Saviors warning and
prediction of the estate of the Church in the latter days, as the Apostle
likewise plainly foretold, 2 Pet. 2. 1. etc. And may be amplified by examples
of all ages, before the flood, between the seed of Seth and Cain who were
brethren: after the flood between Shem and Cham: before the law, between Isaac
and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, Joseph and his brethren: between Moses and Kora's
company, after the law David and Saul's house here, Judah and Ephraim: and under
the Gospel, between Christ and his disciples, and the highpriest and doctors
of the Law of Moses, between the Fathers in the primitive Church and heretics:
and this day between us requiring reformation, of religion, and our adversaries
maintaining corruption and men's inventions, and the like debates shall continue
till that glorious coming of Christ Jesus to the full triumph over Satan and
heresy. In the mean time let us with David and all the faithful prepare our
selves for the battle, with constant faith, and courageous patience: that
having fought that good fight, and finished our course, being faithful unto
the death, we may obtain the crown of life.

2. The diverse ends of these two houses offer to us, the diverse ends of the
warfare of Gods children, and their estate, and of the children of the world.
The one leads to prosperity, the other runs to decay, for as David says,
blessed is the man, that puts his trust in God, for he shall not be ashamed
in the day of trouble, and on the contrary as Jeremiah affirms, cursed is the
man who puts his trust in man, and makes flesh his arm. This diversity is
proved in the preservation of Noah, Lot, Abraham, the patriarchs, Moses,
David, and the remanent good kings in Israel, also of Israel it self in Egypt,
and in Babylon, and the Church of Christ in all ages, pressa nunquam oppressa,
whose bow has abiden strong through the mighty God of Jacob, and is so built
on her rock, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, whereby
Daniels stone hewed out without hands, shall and has bruised all her enemies
into ashes, as those sudden and fearful punishments, and wonderful
alterations of the estates of the tyrannies of the world do testify, (like
mighty Islands moved out of their places) sometime by water, by fire, by sword,
and sometimes by other extraordinary plagues, and punishments, being wasted (as
it were) thereby, examples hereof both in holy and profane histories do
testify. Upon the hope of which end, let us be encouraged in our Christian
warfare, that even so shall the estate of Mahomet, and that Roman Antichrist,
have the like decay.

3. The reason of this diversity was both in the matter of the cause, and form
of proceeding, whereupon is noted what is the reason of the increase and
standing of all estates, and what is the true reason of their fall and decay:
righteous conquest and conscionable behavior is the one: and unjust usurpation
and tyranny is the other, this is manifest by examples of all ages, and
histories, and agrees with the nature of Gods righteous Judgments.

Now after the general proposition, the particular means of the increase of
David's house are set down, The first whereof is said to be the multitude of his
Children born to him in Hebron, the eldest was Amnon whom Absalom slew
afterward, the second Chileab, whose proper name was Daniel, 1 Chronicles. 3. And
by accident called Chileab, by interpretation like to the Father, whereof the
Hebrews assign the reason, that he should not be esteemed the son of Nabal
the Carmelite. The third is Absalom the son of Maaca daughter to Tolmai, the
King of Geshur the Amalakite descended of Edom, who is not reckoned amongst
David's wives that came from Ziklag to Hebron, because then she had not as yet
performed all the solemnities requisite in purging her self and renouncing her
superstitious gentilisme, being but lately taken captive, (as is supposed in
that battle, 1 Samuel 28.) and for her beauty joined to David. This Absalom her
son, after rebelled against his Father, and was slain by Joab. The fourth is
Adoniah the son of Aggith afterward executed by Solomon. The fifth,
Shephatiah the son of Abital, which two were supposed to have been Saul's
wives, whereof mention is made hereafter in Nathans reason to David, 2 Samuel 12.
8. The sixth, Ithream the son of Eglah whom Josephus supposes to be Nathan,
of whom descended Christ, which Eglah, is peculiarly and only called David's
wife, some thinking it to be for her obscure birth, that she merited not to
have her progeny nominated, some said that she was most noble, and therefore
has the chief attribute, being supposed to been Micol Saul's daughter who was
restored to him, fruitful now, but barren only after that reproach of David, 2 Samuel 6. 20. And some, because this woman was best beloved, and therefore called
Eglah, which signifies a calfe, but the better opinion seems to be, that this
attribute is to be meant in common with Eglah, and all the former nominated.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 2. WE see the great providence of God toward David, in not giving him
the burden, and care of Children in the time of his hot persecution, when he
was hunted like a Partridge from place to place, to be either a prey to his
Enemies, or whose straits with their Mothers, should have been either a snare
to him, or grieved him more a great deal then his own danger. But now he
gives him Children in Hebron who should not be so much burden, (as before)
but benefits, as props, and pil^ars to uphold his house, thus, is our God a
provident and wise Father to his own Children, he knows the best time, when
to bestow his benefits, which we long for, and if they be for his glory and our
welfare, according to his wise dispensation he will grant them unto us, but not
in our precipitate have, but his own time, that we may know that they proceed
for him, and to exercise our faith, our hope, and our patience, to moderate
likewise our desire of temporal things, and when they come to make us the more
thankful for them, and with Hannah, and Elizabeth, to dedicate them to his
service, Abraham must receive Isaac therefore in the Lords time of visitation
only, so Isaac his two sons after 20. years expectation, Annah, Samuel,
Elizabeth, the baptist; and David here his sons after many years longing,
let not Rachel then grudge and think Jacob can give her Children, nor Sarah
distrust, or say it will not be, but in the matter of Children, of health, of
riches, or any wordly benefit: Let us wholly rely upon the Lords wise
dispensation, both in the thing, and the time, in the giving, and in the taking
back of the same; with confidence, patience and thankfulness always, as did
holy Job.

2. And yet of six wives he has only six Children, albeit by nature he might
have had many more, but very nature abhors Poligamy, and therefore it is
that God gives greater succession in single marriage, blessing so his own
institution at first. So that this practice is tolerated in the Jews, their
Patriarchs and Princes, like that of divorcement for a time, for the hardness
of their hearts, has never been without some stamp of the Lords disliking, as
having flowed contrary to his ordinance at the beginning, Genes. 4. 19.
from that corrupt fact of Lamech, by imitation of his example, and therefore
has been punished sometimes by paucity of succession, as in Salomons example,
who notwithstanding of his many wives, and concubines, had but one Rehoboam who
succeeded, and sometimes by the miscar^ying of their offspring and unfortunate
estate, as in the sa^e Rehoboam, and in sundry of David's sons clearly may be
seen. Let us beware then to presume upon inveterate custom, and warrantless
example* making licet quod libet, but let Gods Word ever be the rule of our
actions.

3. The benefit of David's succession is joined with the cross; Amnon defyling
Thamar, and Absalom killing him etc* Whereupon we observe that there is nothing
on earth that in all numbers, or perfectly may be called happy, or can beatify:
as children, oftimes yiedling discomfort and wicked, as Kain, Cham, Ishmael,
Esau, Dinab, Sime^n, and Levi. So Eli's sons, David's, Salomons, Jehosaphat,
and Ezekias, their sons, with many more, or whether it be strength, wisdom,
honor and riches, as in the examples of Goliath, Sampson, Achitophel, Haman,
Baltazar, and the rich glutton, all do testify that no earthly thing can make
one happy. Then let us pray to God not only to grant us his benefits, but the
right use of them, that so they may tend to our comfort, and not to our cross,
and that we may never think our selves happy by enjoying any creature comfort,
but his favor with David, Psalm. 4. 6. Who is the creator.

4. The marriage of David with a stranger in religion, brings forth Absalom,
who was a great trouble to him, whereupon we mark, that conjunctions with
parties of contrary and corrupt religion, is, and ever has been most
dangerous, therefore such was well forbidden in the law of Moses, and by the
Apostle, commanding us to marry in the Lord, this may be confirmed in Sampson,
David, Solomon, and in the common miseries of the primitive world, when the
Children of Seth, married with the posterity of Kain; therefore the Patriarchs
cared for wives to their sons of their own kindred, and Esdras in the
reduction of Israel, from captivity, caused all the people to put away their
strange wives, which they had married in Babylon, Then in all conjunctions, but
specially in marriages let professors beware of these dangerous associations,
which no doubt will produce such bitter fruit as we see in the former examples.

II. SAM. Chap. 3. from the 6. verse to the 12.
THe second means whereby the house of David is strengthened, and the house of
Saul is weakened, is the variance that falls out between Abner and Ishboseth,
wherein is proponed. 1. The time. 2. The cause. 3. The reprehension made by
Ishboseth. 4. Abners proud answer. And 5. Ishboseth's pusillanimity.

The time is, when Abner was most occupied in the defense of Saul's house, the
cause is, that Abner had defiled Saul's concubine, which act was wicked in all
respects: for if Abner committed the fact, to abuse the Kings concubine, as a
whore, that was disgraceful, and intolerable: otherwise if it was to have her
to his wife: it was an argument of affecting the kingdom. For so read we of
Adoniah affecting the kingdom of David by the like practice. And therefore
Ishboseth albeit he considered not the right opportunity, had just cause to use
this reprehension as if he would say, why Abner have thou presumed either to
make my Fathers concubine, thy harlot, or else hereby why meanest thou to
attempt my kingdom?

Abners answer full of ire, contempt and ambition is: Am I a dogs head etc.
That is such a libidinous person as a dog, or of no more account with thee for
all my great deserts, then the head of a dog, or such a vile thing, that thou
should so snatch and upbraid me concerning this woman, even this day and
time, when I was making all my power for thee, and thy Fathers house. Therefore
after he has amplified his former merits, in his wrath he promises to revenge
his wrong, and Ishboseths ingratitude, by turning, unto David, and aiding him
to get the whole kingdom. Whereunto Ishboseth like a fearful Prince, makes
no answer at all.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. WHen Abner, is making all his power for Saul's house, and for the terror
and assaulting of David, is gathering all his forces together* even then this
variance falls out, wherein we may see the wonderful power, and providence
of God, disapp^inting and laughing to scorn the devises of the wicked, and
over ruling all their actions to the comfort of his chosen, and scattering all
their imaginations with bringing them to naught, even when they are at the
birth (as it were) or point of execution, thus was Pharaoh suddenly destroyed
when he thought assuredly to be avenged on the Israelites at the red sea, 2 Chronicles. 20.
but Jacobs seed escaped; thus also Amnon and Moab combined together in a
fear^ull Army, Revel. 16. and 19.
to have destroyed good Jehos^phat, but the Lord made them help each one to
destroy another in Mizpah: Revel. 18.
and the godly King was delivered; Thus in like manner, prophesies John, in
that high enterprise of that whore, and beast against Gods Saints, when the
Kings of the earth shall be assembled together, the beast and false prophet
unawares shall be taken and cast in the burning lake, and sudden desolation
shall light upon that whorish Babylon, and so the elect company shall escape
the rage, even as here; when Abner and Ishboseth are making all their power
against David, even then, they are divided a sunder, and David is freed from
danger: and in our own time, when that high enterprise of subverting Church and
commonwealth, Prince and people by gunpowder was contrived, and brought to the
point of execution within this land, then the Lord mightily discovered and
disappointed the same, to the confusion of the enemies, his Churches comfort,
and praise of his name for ever: as he had-dispersed also and disappointed that
Spanish invincible armado of Spain in 88* before.

2. As in the time of the highest machinations of the wicked, (being combined
together) the Lord brings all their counsels to naught, so we see that God
makes their dissentions (amongst themselves being divided) to tend to the
peace and quietness of his Church, 1 Samuel 23. 27.
thus God made the incursion of the Philistines upon Saul's borders an occasion
for him to retire from compassing David in the wilderness of Maon; to defend
his land, thus likewise did the Lord put a hook in the nostrills of Sinacherib,
2 King. 19.
and made the invasion of the King of Egypt, an occasion for him to return
from Jerusalem, and persuit of good King Hez^kiah, so Paul's delivery is
occasioned by a dissension amongst his accusers. And here Ishboseths accusation
of Abner is made to be an occasion of variance, for the peace of David. Act.
23. 7.
Let us ever rely then upon our provident and powerful God, who can draw light
out of darkness, sweetness out of the strong, Judge. 14.
(as Sampsons ridle says) and peace out of discord, and who has infinite means
to comfort his own Church with, and has all hearts in his hands to turn them
what way he pleases.

3. In the* variance of these two, we see there is no solid and constant
friendship amongst the wicked, for that which is in God, is only like unto
him, immutable and sure, and worthy of the name of amity: Judge. 9. 23.
the other being more properly conspiracies, as they are called Psalm* 2. Which
God shall dissolve and undo, a clear example whereof we have in that league
between Abimelech and the men of Sechem, between whom notwithstanding, the Lord
sent an evil Spirit of variance, that the blood of Gideons Sons might be
revenged, whereof both were guilty. Let us, not therefore make such friendship
as is spoken of in the 50. Psalm. 18. Nor be like Sampsons foxes tied together,
or Simeon and Levi, Brethren in evil, but let our friendship be in God, and our
concurrance be to holy duties.

4. Verse 7. Saul leaves behind him Rizpah a concubine, who is here the occasion
of all this trouble between Ishboseth and Abner, where we may see the Scorpions
tail of sin stings the posterity of a man oftimes, when he lies in ashes,
witness the immediate former example of base Abimelech begotten in whoredom
who after his Fathers death is reserved as it were, to be the burrean of his
70. lawful begotten Brethren.

5. We perceive that albeit reprehensions be lawful in nature, yet they should
be prudently and timorously used, otherwise they may import more hur than
profit, as we see here in Ishboseths example, this moved the preacher to say, a
word spoken in due season, is like aples of gold, with pictures of silver,
Therefore let our reprehensions be after due trial, spoken in love, observing
the necessary circumstances of time, place, and person, etc. And uttered to
that end, that we may win our Brother from his sin to God.

6. Verse 8. In Abner, we see how impatient the wicked are at the rebuke of
sin, that they altogether misregarding God, and authority, cannot be appeased
till they be avenged on them who reprove them; this is our corrupt nature till
we be reformed by grace, and that strong man who rages within us (being loath
to depart) till he be cast out by that stronger Jesus. Then, rebukes shall be
unto us like sweet ointment and precious balm, this natural hatred to be
reformad we see in Pharaoh, Ahab, Jeroboam, Herod, and many others of all
ranks, 1 King. 13.
2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15.

7. In the ambitious recital of his high deservings, Abner shows here, that
the wicked for wordly benefits would be winked at, in the commission of sin,
else no longer shall the river of their bounty flow, then the fountain of
wholesome admonition begin to be opened, and in all things they shall
willingly hear, till you come to their Herodias, but there you loose them. Let
Gods servants then be free of them, that they may be faithful with them.

8. Also in upbraiding to Ishboseth ingratitude, let us learn never to expect
sure amity nor upright thankfulness at the hands of men, whom we would
benefit, with the detriment of our own conscience, as Abner did here Ishboseth;
But be persuaded that thereby we shall make ourselves vile in their account,
and their favor which we have so hunted after with misregard of God and
conscience, the Lord shall in the end turn into detestation of us, accepting of
the deed tending to their commodity, but hating the doer thereof with an evil
conscience. Let us then approve our selves above all, and in all, to our
gracious God, who will both praise and reward his own.

9. In Abners threatening, we see the nature of high exalted and ambitious
courtiers, who would have, their Princes to serve their appetites, else in
discontentednesse, they will not regard, to hazard (if they can) the estate and
condition both of King and Kingdom.

10. Also we may behold, the admirable presumption and boldness of dust and
ashes against the omnipotent creator, when man is not endued with grace, which
is (...), to fight against Gods known ordinance, and to resist his manifested
decree, albeit the same be confirmed by his oath; therefore (says Abner) as
the Lord has sworn, not considering that the pot is in the hand of the potter
ever, to do there with as it pleases him best. Let this teach us therefore,
the duty of humility, considering what we are both by nature, and corruption,
dust (towit) and repyning clay, void not only, of will, or performance of
good, but highly rebellious and stubborn in evil against God, till grace does
renew us.

11. Verse 11. In Ishboseths timorousness and pusillanimity, we see, where the
fear of God is not, there worldly fear soon dasheth and occupies the mind,
but where Gods fear is, and the maintenance of a good cause, there is true
courage, and wonderful holy boldness, 1 King. 18.
This made Eliah, bid Obadiah go tell his Master Abab, that he was there, and
would show himself unto him, albeit through all Kingdoms about, he had
straitely sought for him, Job 31. 35.
this made Job likewise in his greatest calamity, to say, though mine adversary
would write a book against me, would not I take it upon my shoulder, and bind
it as a crown unto me? I would tell him the number of my goings, and go unto
him as a Prince. This made the Apostles in like manner answer so before
Counsels as they did, and the blessed martyrs not to fear the torments of the
cruelest Tyrants, this is the brazen wall whereof the Poet speaks, Hic murus
aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
and that continual feast which Solomon records. Let us labor for this, and
we may face the greatest tribunal, and awfullest Judge on earth, without being
ashamed, and no whit to be dash't with the scarre-crow threatenings for any
upbraiding accuser.

12. We see likewise in Ishboseth that a base and timorous disposition becomes
not a Prince, who ought to be of a princely and Lyon-like courage, Parcere
subjectis, and debellare superbos, and that as the proverb is, A silly Cat,
makes a proud Rat.

II. SAM. Chap. 3. from the 12. Verse to the 17.
AFter the general proposition of the History of the whole Chapter, concerning
the decay of Saul's house, and the rising of David's, the first two arguments
confirming the same, or means whereby the same was effected, being treated of,
towit, the benefit of succession, by Children borne to him in Hebron, and that
variance which fell out between Abner and Ishboseth. Now follows, the rest of
the means of the waxing stronger of David's house, and the weakening of Saul's,
the first whereof is the restitution of Michol, David's first wife, from the 12.
Verse to the 17. The second, the declyning of Israel from Ishboseth to David by
Abners persuasion to the 19. the third, is an amity contracted between David
and Abner, from the 19. to the 22. Verse. and the last is the slaughter of
Abner by Joah, from the 22. to the 28. Whereof David purges himself, lamenting
him, to the end of the Chapter.

In the first we have the History of a legation, or message sent by Abner to
David, full of all infidelity, presumption and flattery, the words albeit yet
few, are full of persuasion and very pithy. First is set down, as some affirm
the manner: and others, the occasion of the sending of these messengers. Rabbi
Chimchi interprets thus the Hebrew relative tahtau, by the adverb, secretly,
and gathers thereof that Abner used great subtility in his message, which he
made in private manner, that he should not be suspected before his friendship
with David should be concluded, which is an argument of his double and crafty
dealing.

Tremellius exponeth this relative propter hoc, and refers the occasion of this
message to the impatient and vindicative mind of Abner, because of Ishboseths
former reprehension, which is an argument of his implacable ire, and rebellion
against correction, or repro^^.

Others refer it to the Person of Abner, pro se, he sent in his own name, or
for himself only, any of which expositions may be safely followed.

The first Article he gives his messengers in instruction, is this, whose is
the Land? Whereby he will approve David's title to the whole Kingdom, as in
more copious manner they should say, our Master Abner grants in his conscience,
that the whole Kingdom is thine by just title, made to thee by God, conferred
be Samuel, confessed by Saul and Jonathan, also thou have given thy travels for
the preservation of the republic hitherto, and delivered Israel from their
Enemies. And therefore with thy title are joined thy merits, so that by
undoubted right, and good deservings, our Master has given us to grant in his
name, that the Kingdom pertains to thee. This is an argument of his crafty
flattery, for this is done by him to David, not in simplicity, love, or
conscience, but in doubleness, for revenge, and his own promotion.

The second Article is, make a league with me, he calls his corrupt and
treasonable dealing, a league, as the wicked color their ungodly doings by
honest names, and fair shows. Josephus affirms the capitulation of this
league was, that David should promis to Abner the like greatness and
promotion, as he had with Saul, and Ishboseth, which is an argument of Abners
excessive pride and ambition.

The third is, my hand or aid shall be with thee, and I shall reduce all
Israel to thy obedience, an argument of his arrogant self-confidence and
treasonable infidelity to his Master Ishboseth. Howsoever God converteth it to
the advancement of David.

David answers, allowing and accepting the conditions, he perceived they were
profitable service for eschewing of blood, and establishing of his quietness:
and it might be that David was weary after so long delay and expectation, but
he joins a condition, of the restitution of his wife Michal, which David
desires for many respects. 1. She was his first and beloved wife, and he had
experience oftimes of her reciprocal love. 2. She was not divorced by any Law
from him, but coacted to obey her Fathers empire and commandment. 3. David
would have her delivered from reproach of infamy, now bruted as an
adulteress. 4. This was a help to David's promotion and confirming him in that
Kingdom, seeing she was the Kings daughter, and thereby the people would be
the sooner moved, for her cause to incline to David. 5. By this way he would
have a proof of Abners fidelity, for if Abner had meant presently falsehood, or
hereafter desertion, he would not restored Michal. Alwise because (as
appears) this restitution was not altogether in Abners hands, therefore David
sends a message to this effect to Ishboseth, whereunto Abner promises his
assistance. And David herein shows his ire not to be implacable seeing he
directs to his adversary a reasonable commission, the requisition towit of
Michol, whose restitution he urges by two arguments, the one is from the Law
of marriage, she was his Wife, and by force and coaction only unlawfully given
to another; the other, is from the Law of paction, he had bought her with the
dowry of an hundred foreskinnes of the Philistines, (albeit David gave 200. 1 Samuel 18. Yet here he retains only the number craved and covenanted for.)

Ishboseth divorces his Sister Lawfully from the second unlawful Husband and
sends her under the conduct of Abner toward David, Phaltiel follows with
mourning for the abstracting of so noble, virtuous and comely a Wife, to
Bahurim, which is a City in Territory of Benjamin, not far from Bethleem, but
is sent back by the command of Abner, by whose artifice all this is done,
whereby he snareth simple Ishboseth, and means likewise to circumvent David.

Here arises a question, whether this covenant, or condition between David and
Abner be Lawful, or no?

It is answered, there are two parts in the fact, the one is the conditions
offered by Abner, and accepted by David; the other, is the offerer himself, and
the Amity which David makes with him, which we may call the prodition, and
Person of the proditor. As to the conditions, or prodition, there are two
considerations; first is, the nature of the fact. The second is, the mind of
the Author. As to the first it appears that it was not evil, because it was
to render unto David, but his own title and Kingdom, hitherto usurped. But as
to the mind of Abner either toward Ishboseth as vindictive, and treacherous:
or toward David, as insinuating only for his own preferment, it was simply
evil, whereupon follows that the accepting of the condition, which in it
self was Lawful (howsoever it proceeded from an evil author) was Lawful
likewise: and by this reason is excused the fact of Rahab, surrendering Jericho
to Israel as their own City.

But hereon resulteth another doubt, if David consents to that which on Abners
part is evil and sin, by the sentence of the Apostle, he falls in the like
guiltiness with the worker of sin, Answer, Augustine in his writing to
Publius, and in that disputation of his, whether an infidels oath may be
received by a Christian, clears this doubt, where concluding affirmatively,
that it may, he shows that a godly man without sin, may make use of that
which in the actor is sin; approving the same by the example of Jacobs league
with Laban, and accepting of his oath by the God of Nachor, for conservation of
civil peace; and by Paul's saying to the Philippians, that some preached the
Gospel upon envy and evil mind, etc. And yet affirms that he is glad that
Christ be preached, upon whatsoever pretense, for every one shall render their
own accounts, and so the answer of the second question is conformed to the
first, that Lawful conditions should be received, by whatsoever instrument, or
of whatsoever mind, they be offered. But touching the Lawfulness of the
contracting of a special amity with Abner, we shall speak of it hereafter.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 12. IN all this dealing of Abners, both in the manner and matter of his
message to David, we see the crafty nature of the wicked, and that they are
wiser in their generation then the Children of Light, but all their wisdom is
like that of Achitophels, themselves oftimes are ensnared therewith, and the
wild Ass is found in his own month. Let sanctity therefore season wit, and
conscience convey our conceptions; let the doves simplicity, and serpentine
wisdom go together, even the sincerity of the Holy Ghost, and a good
conscience direct our conclusions, and moderat our consultations, and then
assuredly, comfort shall attend our courses, and a happy success crown all our
doings. Let Pharaoh then applaud himself while he is working wickedly, to say,
let us work wisely, but plagues on his Land, destruction of his first borne,
submersion of himself, and subversion of his whole Kingdom shall prove, he
has done foolishly; wit then with wickedness, is Satan's craft, and was never
undisappointed, or punished. (witness Jonadabs Counsel to Ammon, the issue
thereof, 2 Samuel 13.) But wit guided by godliness, is only true wisdom, both
prospered and rewarded.

2. In respect that Abner does this of a vindictive mind, as he threatens
Ishboseth, Verse 9. We see the malicious and revenge-full hearts of the wicked,
which upon small, or no just occasion at all, oftimes are kindled and stirred
up, so that they can get no rest, until they put in practice their malice and
evil will. examples whereof we have in cursed Kain, reprobat Esau, rejected
Saul, cruel Ioab, proud Haman, wicked Achab, hateful Herodias, the Highpriest
and scribes against our savior and his Apostles and sundry others: where on
the contrary the Children of God are meek, patient and merciful, suiting
redress of their wrongs at the hands of the Magistrate, or pardoning the same,
and ever having their hearts, void of malice, and committing their causes unto
the Lord, for he will repay; yea praying for their adversaries, and doing good
in place of evil. Examples whereof we have in Isaac Genesis 26. 19. In Jacob Genesis
31. 41. In Joseph Genesis 50. 17. In meek Moses through all his life, in David
sparing Saul, in our savior praying for his crucifiers, Steven for his
stoners, and the Martyrs for their persecutors.

3. In Abners acknowledging of David's title at last (upon whatsoever mind) we
see the Lords overruling of the wicked to the comfort of his own, in making the
conscience of the wicked to be so convinced, that their tongue in the end,
shall be forced (in a sort) to confess that, which with great reluctation they
have striven against. So did Saul acknowledge David's innocence, and that he was
juster then he, Pilate Christ's, the high priest, the expedience that he should
die for the people, and so confessing him a Savior for others. Likewise that
counsel convocated by Herod, that he should be born in Bethlehem. Gamaliels
advise, Acts. 5. 38. And the extorted confessions of the adversaries, unawares
impugning themselves, and justifying the truth, most frequently do testify, so
that (like the unprofitable servants confession) the very mouths of the wicked,
condemn themselves, and they are caught in their own speeches, like Pharaoh,
crying out that he had done wickedly, Exodus 9. 27.

4. Yet in his Expostulation of a league with David, (the capitulation whereof
as Josephus affirms, was such promotion as he had with Saul, or Ishboseth,)
we perceive the corrupted mind and manners of the wicked, albeit in his
conscience he acknowledges, and with his mouth he confesses that the true
title belongs only unto David, yet he will do nothing, but ex pacto, like
Judas, quid mihi dabitis, sympathising herein with the bribing Judge, and
Simonaick patron.

5. Abner calls here his treasonable and corrupt dealing, a league, covering
foul practices with fair pretenses, and coloring rotten Sepulchers with
pleasant paintings: like the wicked who give honest names to unhonest actions,
and call virtue vice, and vice by the name of virtue: thus is superstition holy
devotion, pride called gravity, Genes. 38.
ebriety good fellowship, deceit wisdom, whoredom youthfulness, bloodshed
manhood, avarice frugality, profusion liberality: and every vice so strangely
masked like whorish Tamar, 1 King. 14.
that Judah cannot know her, and so cunningly disguised like Jeroboams wife
faining her self to Abijah: that except the Lord discover the matter, the
Prophet shall be deceived.

6. In Abners promise unto David, we see the ambitious self-confidence of the
wicked, making their own arm the pillar of their trust, and stretching forth
the same (as if it were) for others to rely upon, therefore mine hand shall be
with thee, (says Abner) to reduce all Israel. This was the practice likewise
of Goliath, Nimrod, Nebuchadnezzar, Sinacherib, Baltashar, Antiochus, Pharaoh:
with sundry others, who all perished. Pride ever more drawing with it, as
sundry sorts of vices, (to be noted here) so likewise the professors thereof
assuredly to their own destruction at last for the apostolic Canon is true,
God resists the proud, and he gives grace to the humble.

7. And in all this, we have an example of Gods inscrutable judgments, leading
the counsels of the wicked to the end of his glory, and to his faithful's
comfort in all their adversities, he brings order from confusion, light from
darkness, honor from ignominy, and advancement from dejection, over ruling
ever all the courses of the wicked, and directing them to his own end; witness,
the perverting of Satan's work in man's seduction, in the work of Jacobs sons
against their brother Joseph: in this work of Abner, and of Judas against
Christ, etc.

8. Verse. 13. In David's yiedling, and acceptance of Abners offer, we see that
albeit he has a good cause yet he neglects no occasion of secondarie means
offered, which is an example of imitation, for as men are said to contemn God
who rely altogether upon seconds; 2 Chronicles. 16.
so are they to be thought, to tempt God, who altogether rejects the use of the
lawful seconds. Asa then ought not to put his trust more in the Physicians;
then in God: neither should Naman despise to wash himself in the waters of
Jordan; Act. 27. Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Math. 4.
our Savior also will not cast himself down from the pinnacle of the temple;
neglecting the ordinary degrees, nor Paul suffer the mariners to depart out of
the boat, albeit it was revealed to him, that both he and his company, all
should be safe; for it is written (says Christ) thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God.

9. Verse. 15. In Ishboseth his fact of restitution of Michol, we see the nature
and practice of the giant oppressors of the world, and violent usurpers of
other men's rights, in a small thing, especially if it concern not them
greatly, like Michol, they will seem very equitable and conscionable, but in a
great thing, which is in their own possession, and very gainful or pleasant
unto them, such as the kingdom which Ishboseth usurpeth here, they will by no
means hearken to the restitution thereof. Herod therefore will hear and obey
John the baptist in many things, Exodus 10.
so he touch not his having of Herodias, and Pharaoh will bear with Moses, and
let the people go, until he deny that their sheep and cattle shall abide; but
then nothing but packing to Moses, and that he see his face no more, under
pain of death. The pythoniss masters can abide Paul and Sylas doctrine very
well likewise, Act. 16.
so long as they loose not the hope of their gain by her divination, but when
they saw that to be gone, nothing but tumult and accusation; the like example
we have in the smiths, Demetrius and Alexander, and in many unjust usurpers
both of God and man's right now a days, who will hear, and be friends in any
thing, so that their gainful Diana, be not oppugned.

10. Verse. 16. In Phaltiel, we have how difficult restitution is of things
unlawfully usurped, there being a blinding and bewitching desperate enchantment
upon the heart ever therewith; so that albeit with Achan, they know that
without a heavy curse, they cannot possess the execrable things, yet with
peril of soul, body, and estate, their coveting heart will take it; and Achab
though he should loose his life and kingdom for it, he will have Naboths
vineyard; while Christ then come into the house, look not that Zaccheus will
make restitution, or while the Idol of covetousness is in the hearts of men,
that they will abhor to commit sacrilege, stolen waters are so sweet, Prove.
9. 17, 18
and hid bread so pleasant, but they know not that death is there, and that the
reward is the depth of hell: Prove. 20. 25. ^^ov. 12. 3. Prove. 11. 4.
for it is a destruction to a man, to devour that which is sanctified, and by
wickedness a man cannot be established, neither shall riches avail in the day
of wrath: but the root of the righteous shall not be moved, and righteousness
only shall deliver from death.

11. In the behavior of Phaltiel, not only following Michol, but mourning
after her, showing by the first, how loath he was to forsake her, and by the
second what grief it was to him, her desertion, we see that illicite pleasures
are like the Scorpion, having ever the sting of sorrow in the end: witness, the
looseness of the primitive world, the voluptie of Sodom, the ravishing of
Dinah, the love of Dalilah, the adultery with Bersheba, with sundry others; but
especially that eternity of weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, which the
voluptuous wicked shall endure for their momentarie pleasure, taking in the
deceivable delights of sin in that great day of exchange and reward; like
Esau. who for the red pottage lost the blessing, and was forced to weep
bitterly therefore thereafter.

II SAM: Chap: 3. from the 17. verse to the 22.
THe persuasion of Israel unto defection from Ishboseth to David, has in it
three arguments used by Abner, a jucundo, a pio, and ab utili.

1. A jucundo, It was your own suit formerly, and your pleasure to have David
to be your King, and in deliberation between David, and any of Saul's posterity,
you choosed rather and preferred him, (as Abner well knew in his familiarity
with them) now therefore take your pleasure and choose him.

2. A pio, It is the will of God that so it should be, and that by Samuel
plainly declared, and notified unto all, for God has said it, whose word is
most true, and which (without gainstanding) it becomes you in piety to embrace.

3. A commodo, He will save you from all your Enemies, which is a great
advantage, and for that end God has appointed him to rule over you, whose
promise is your warrant. And in all this he persuades most carefully and
particularly, the Benjamites, who were harder to be induced in regard of their
natural conjunction with the house of Saul. But at last having cunningly
effectuate his purpose at all hands, he goes accompanied with 20 specialls of
Israel to Hebron unto David, by presence to ratify that, which by message he
had covenanted, and to show unto David his diligence, credit, and convoy of the
errand, and what he had effectuated. Unto whom David makes a royal banquet,
as a symbol of their new contracted amity. Wherein for satisfaction of the
doubt rejected to this place, we affirm plainly that David erred. 1. In
temeritie or form, not consulting with God, according to the command, and
practice of the Godly. And 2. In substance or matter, in entering in
familiarity, and entertaining a notorious wicked man, with whom (according to
the apostolik Canon) he should not have eaten.

In the end, Abner goes, and promises to reduce all Israel, arrogantly
challenging unto himself so great a place in that kingdom, where there was a
King of such simplicity and pusillanimity as Ishboseth was.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN Abners persuasion of Israel to defection from Ishboseth to David, first,
as we see the nature and practice of many ambitious, and crafty wicked men, who
place their chief standing and promotion, in the disquieting of other men's
estates, and fisheth ever best in disturbed waters, by the weakening and
variance of others, strengthening and enriching themselves. So again, we note
the wonderful working of God, in making that same man who persuaded Israel
from David to adhere to Ishboseth, now from Ishboseth to make defection, and
adhere to David; and so to undo that, which he had formerly done, and turn
his course contrary: so powerful is God in overruling the wicked, and here his
Children want comfort, or his work for them, be unwrought, he will make their
and his Enemies the workers. Pharaoh therefore in his Court shall bring up
Moses to be a deliverer of Israel; and Achab shall entertain in his house an
Obadiah, to be a hider and feeder of the Lords Prophets. Out of Saul's bowels
also shall a Jonathan proceed to comfort and preserve David, and Haman
himself, Esther. 6. 7.
shall decree and perform the honor to be done to Mordecaj, whom he thought
to have hanged; yea Tatnaj and his associates shall not only be commanded, not
to hinder the work of the Temple, (far contrary to their expectation) but
also enjoined to further and furnish it. Numb. 24. 10.
Ezra. 6. 8. And out of Balam's mouth, who was sent for to curse Israel, a
blessing shall proceed whether he will or no.

2. In that Abner shows it was their former suit to have David, we see what
it is to have a just cause, even the Lord will incline the hearts of men, whom
we know not; and who seemed adversaries, to favor the same: as Israel did here
David's title, Prove. 16. 7.
though they were under Ishboseth. Therefore says Solomon, when the ways of a
man please the Lord, he will make also his Enemies at peace with him, for the
Lord has the hearts of men in his hands, and turns them which way he
pleases.

3. We note likewise in Abner, damnable hypocrisy, in making Scripture serve
his turn, and abusing Gods Word to sell Ishboseth and buy David, which the
Apostle calls cauponari verbum dei, and under a pretext of reverence to Gods
ordinance (which hitherto he had neglected) and of obedience to the Lords
appointment now concerning David, he will allege a divine warrant out of
malice against Ishboseth, seeking his ruin, and his own promotion; this was
the fault of Simeon, and Levi, so odious to Jacob; and the practice of Satan in
the tempting of Christ, and the followers of this divelish and detestable
example are they who cloak their particular affections and ambition with Gods
Word, and will make religion, to serve their appetite in favor or seade, to
destroy or preserve; not considering that as a heavy curse abides on them who
add or impair, so likewise does it on those who throw and abuse the same;
let holy things then be holily used, (...), and not Gods Word to be forced to
serve man, yea worse, to serve sin and Satan and for wicked ends.

4. In the contracting of this amity with Abner, we find not that David
consulted with God, as he had formerly done Chap. 2. therefore the success of
this, is not as the former, but matter of grief, through Joabs fact, ensues
unto David. Whereby we learn not to rely upon the arm of flesh, or in
purposes of any importance to be unconsulted with God, who more clearly
manifests now his will in his written Word, then ever he did before by
Prophet or vision, so that we need not to go far, but to the testimony, and
to the word which is amongst the midst of us, else look for no happy success in
the end. The cause of all sin, and punishments for sin, is and has ever
been the omission of this duty, amongst all sorts and degrees of men, when not
making God their direction, they have fallen in his correction, and despising
his counsel, they were defrauded of his comfort.

5. Verse. 20. David likewise here entertaineth and confederates with a wicked
man, which society of the Godly with the wicked has ever been displeasing unto
God, as in the alliance of the posterity of Seth and Kain, which procured the
deluge is most evident, Exodus 34. 16.
and not only in the law was afterward prohibited, but by sundry examples made
most apparent, as in that covenant made between Benhadad, 1 King. 20, 2 Chronicles.
18. 1 King. 11. 2 King. 20.
and the King of Israel. Of Jehosaphat with wicked King Ahab. Salomons affinity
with the King of Egypt, Hezekiah's familiarity with the King of Babylon, with
sundry others; and David's league here with a treacherous Abner.

6. Verse. 21. In Abners pollicitation to David at his departure, we see not
only his arrogant self-confidence (noted before) but likewise that there is
nothing more perilous, than to put wicked men in places of great credit;
therefore Achitophell David's counselor, gives counsel against him, and for
Joabs authority in the camp, David dare not execute Justice for the blood of
Abner. So Haman had almost brought Ahasuerus in a fearful guiltiness of
bloodshed. And Rehoboam's wicked young Counselors made him loose his
kingdom. The Roman Senate was likewise troubled by this mean. And the accident
by Phocas, Author of the Popes creation.

7. In like manner we see that the pusillanimity of a Prince makes hardy
Rebels, therefore Abner knew well enough that Ishboseth who durst not answer
for timourousness, his words of proud threatening. Verse. 11. does far less
seek to repress his deeds, of this his headstrong practicing. In a Prince then,
the foxes wit to rule wisely, and Lions heart to rule valiantly should ever
dwell together, parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos; politic carriage,
and polemick courage being as two twins: which like Gemini should be in a
Princes Zodiac.

8. And in regard, as is probable, by wine and good entertainment, his courage
was the more stirred up, so to brag, and presumingly to speak, having attained
likewise to David's favor and high account, in being royally banqueted. Let us
learn in prosperity not to be insolent, but look for alteration, as in the
examples of Haman, Balthassar and Alexander, their banquetings* was seen.

II. SAM. Chap. 3. from the 22. verse to the 28.
THe former part of the Chapter, after the general proposition of the history,
having contained the five several means whereby the house of David waxed
stronger, and the house of Saul weaker. This next part, contains the
treacherous murder of Abner by Joab, which may be accounted a sixth mean,
whereby the house of Saul is weakened, and David's house strengthened, (in having
a new reconciled enemy taken out of the way, and who being full of levity,
would hardly have proved faithful,) together with David's solemn purgation of
himself from the guiltiness of the fact, and his deploration of the form of
his death.

In the history of Abners murder, we have to be considered. 1. David's estate
at that time. 2. Joabs acting of the fact, described from the occasion,
motives, manner of doing, and event thereof. And 3. Abners simple imprudency,
after his return committing his life in a secret conference to an unreconciled
enemy. Concerning David and his estate, the text shows that his Army was in
the wars (as is supposed) against the Philistines without: and within in like
manner was exercised in obviating the practices of the contradictory Authority
of Ishboseth, and his followers, so that David is troubled both with intestine
and foreign Enemies while as yet, he is only King of Judah, and moreover the
fact of Joab, in this murder appears to have a more perilous consequence,
leading to the eversion of David's whole estate present, and rejection from the
promised Kingdom by God, and expected by Abners offer, seeing the murder of
such a person, was likely to beget a general defection of all Israel from the
house of David.

Touching Joab, the executor of this murder, his estate is honorable in
Judah, and has the whole power of David's Army, to whom he is joined in near
consanguinity, being his sisters son. The motives whereby he is impelled to
this murder are two, the one is a vindictive mind, moved upon the slaughter of
Asahel his brother. The second is envy; which Joab conceives upon the
suspicion of Abners friendship and familiarity appearing with his Master David,
to the matching, or outstripping of him: so that private revenge and contention
for honors, are the causes impelling Joab to this Murder of Abner.

These secret causes, are covered with two cloakes, the one is the zeal
pretended to the preservation of the Kings Person and estate. The second (when
that color is not sufficient) is the contracting of a false amity, meaning by
the former to evert Abner by the Kings authority, and by the second under
dissimulate friendship assuring himself that Abner shall not escape either by
one snare, or other.

Joabs speech to persuade David of the evil of Abner, is very sententious,
taken from the suspicious ingyne of Abner, ab ante actis, and from the upright
dealing of David, who measured every one by his own foot and manners, and
therefore might be easily circumvented. And when David replyeth not, partly
suspecting that Abner might be such a one as Joab* described him, and partly,
that Joab for other respects might calumniate; then Ioab goes to the second
work, which is his own subtility, and authority in execution, and so under
color of his friendship, and the Princes authority, he recalleth Abner back
from the Well of Siriah. Which Jerome reckons to be distant from Hebron the
space of 20. stades, where going aside with him into the gate, which is the
public part of the City where Justice was ministered, and counterfiting
friendly conference, there he murthereth him, joined (as appears by the Text)
with his Brother Abishai.

Here arises a doubt to be resolved, whether did Ioab lawfully, or unlawfully
in the Murder of Abner? For the affirmative, first the Law of God seems to
make, Numb. 35. Whosoever he was who after slaughter purged not himself, and
abode not in the City of refuge, might be slain by the nearest kinsman, but
Abner did not so after the slaughter of Asahel, therefore Ioab the Brother of
the defunct might lawfully have slain him. Secondly, the Law Common, where in
wars is permitted the slaughter of unreconciled Enemies, at least, by the
hand of the public Commander, as was Ioab. And thirdly, the will of God it
should be so, and the good that followed thereon seems to approve the same.

The negative in the contrary is established, by these answers. 1. The
priveledge of refuge was no appointed for him that shed blood in public
denounced wars, and open contradictions, but only in private and accidental
manner. 2. Albeit wars, had been sometimes between Ioab and Abner, yet now
they were composed by the authority of the supreme Magistrate David, and Abner
had received the Kings safe conduct, wherefore it was not Lawful for the
Lieutenant, by the Laws of wars to attempt any thing, which might prejudice
the public authority, or infringe the faith which was plighted. And as to the
will of God, albeit it be true, that in respect of Gods will, Abner was justly
punished; yet in respect of Ioabs perverse will, opposite to Gods, and having
its own wicked end, Abner was unlawfully slain. And albeit good came of evil,
that was by Gods extraordinary providence, which comes rather in admiration
than allowance, and the rule of Justice is, the revealed will of God, and not
his secret, and therefore in respect that this fact militates against the
revealed rule of God Justice, and will, it is altogether to be condemned.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN David's estate, having the Philistines his Enemies without, and having
within not only the contradictory authority of Ishboseth, but also the
perilous and scandalous practice of Ioab in his very bosom. We see the
condition of the Kingdom and Church of Christ militant upon earth, and of
every true member and professor therein, having not only the World and Prince
thereof to hate and persecute the same, like that red Dragon, Revel. 12.
avowedly assaulting the Woman; but also false Prophets and Brethren, like
devouring Wolves, not sparing the flock, which according to that Apostolical
Prophecy, Act. 20. 29. Shall enter in amongst Gods saints, speaking perverse
things, and according to that mystical fortelling, that the beast shall be
horned like the Lamb, but speak like the Dragon. And as that scarlet whore shall
propin the cup of filthy fornications unto the Kings of the Earth; her
abeominations being still masked in a hidden Mystery. Genesis 21.
Examples of this estate of the Church we see in Abraham not only subject to
the violence of Ahimelech, and his servants without, but unto the grief of his
own family concerning Hagar and Ismael within. So in Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
David, Christ, his Apostles, etc. The reason of this is partly from God, thus
exercising his servants, and partly from Satan seeking to impead the glory of
God, and propagation of his Kingdom. Therefore we have experience this day of
the like impediments in the open resistance of Jew, Turk and Heathen, and in
the opposition of that Apostatick Sea of Rome, falsely usurping the name of the
Catholic Church: and in the more familiar combats with a number of our more
inward domestic adversaries, Professors, and Preachers following, their own
affections, and some seeking the World with Demas, and others the pre-eminence
with Diotrephes, and so, quae sua sunt, non quae Christi quaerentes. Let us not
be discouraged, but take in patience Gods corrections, and avert his judgments
by repentance on the one part; and on the other oppose our selves by the
Christian armor against Satan, and all his members and machinations, knowing
our profession is a spiritual warfare, and in the mean while let this ever be
our comfort, that as David overcame, so, though assuredly we must fight, yet
the Victory is ours, and this Abraham's family, Genesis 14. Josh. 8.
and Joshuas Soldiers (though against principalities) may assuredly expect, a
deliverance out of all their troubles.

2. Ioab for particular revenge and contention for honor murthereth Abner,
whereby he brings David's Person and whole estate in danger. This is an example
of envyous and ambitious men, who for private quarrels hazard the public
estate either of Church, or commonwealth, and therefore amongst all men are the
most pestiferous sort, for by this mean was Israel undone in the contentions
between Judah and Ephraim, the Greeks likewise in the successors of Alexander,
the Romans amongst themselves, the estate of Christ's Church in the primitive
ages, the empire of the orient and accident, and this day in the contentions
for the like causes in all Christian Kingdoms for the most part, the like may
be seen. Let us beware then to loose in such quarrell's the bridle to our
affections; but ever speak our particular justly with a diligent providence and
care, that thereby we be not offensive unto the estate public.

3. Verse 24. In Ioabs manner of seeking to effectuate his purpose, by dilating
the fraudulent nature of Abner, and that to prye into David's estate, and to
circumvent him he had only come, and so concluding that David had done too
simply in dimitting him, and therefore it were best, that he should be
recalled, we see the godless nature of the wicked, ever misconstruing the
intentions of men, to whom they bear the least grudge, and maliciously, and
most unjustly detracting and slandering their Persons. This Satanicall practice
we see in the Author thereof, Job 1. Chap. And in Achab against Naboth and
Eliah, Daniel and Susannas accusers^^, the blasphemous Highpriest and
Pharisees, their calumnies against Christ, and his Apostles, and the most
unjust opprobries of the Martyrs under the pensecuting Emperors, the members
and supposts of that cruel Dragon. Where the contrary practice is of Gods
Children, not to backbite, and uncharitably to construe men's intentions, or
make the worst of their indifferent actions, but to be careful to abstain as
well from the Murder of the tongue, as of the hand it self, knowing that the
surviving same of man is more precious unto him, then is his peristing life.

4. Verse 26. Likewise, Ioab labors first to make his particular to be the
Kings cause, and when he cannot persuade the godly King in that form, then he
goes to practice, by fained friendship. This then is the nature of Atheists,
and ungodly worldlings, first to color their wicked pretenses by the cloak of
common causes, and so to snare men: and when they cannot this way prevail in
that form of course, to circumvent those, (whose harm they seek) by
dissimulate friendship, or some such crafty means. Let Princes therefore, noble
men and Magistrates learn here of David, through too hasty credit and facility,
to beware that they suffer not their authorities in this manner to be abused.
And let private men be prudently suspicious, and providently wary of the
colored friendships of the subtle and ungodly, because the event is so
perilous. It being ever their nature to cloak their evil purposes with good
pretenses, as the examples of Saul's alliance with David for a snare, Ioabs
salvation of Amasa, Absolons entertainment of Amnon with a feast, and his
treason thereafter, Herod's, speech to the wisemen, and Judas kiss, with sundry
others, do testify.

5. In that he diviseth one snare that assuredly shall entrap Abner (as is
aforesaid) if another fail, we see how plentiful and ripe the wicked are in
their impious inventions to accomplish their godless purposes; and how
diligent they are, and restless in their executions, that one way shall not
sooner misgive, but presently they shall attempt another, that old experienced
Serpent being their crafty schoolmaster, and they docile in his Doctrine. Thus
when bondage and burdens cannot waste Israel, Pharaoh can find out a way by
the Midwives to kill their male Children, and when that succeeds not, causes
his Soldiers to drown them in the River. So look to Herod's ways and plots
how to apprehend Christ, the Highpriests and Scribes how to ensnare him, and
put him to death, and their Counsels. With the practices of heathen Emperors,
how hereafter to suppress his Gospel, what nets were likewise spread by Saul
to entrap David? by the Philistines to get their adversary Sampson? and by
Achab and Iesabel to get Naboths. Vineyard? etc. But in end all their witty
wickednesses run at last amain to their utter ruin, they are caught at last
in their own snares, and are made fast by the fetters of their own devises; the
true wisdom of God in the godly having the contrary success.

6. Verse. 27. Abner had David's protection and safe conduct, whereunto he
trusted, but he wanted the Lords: and therefore is murdered. Let men therefore
labor to be reconciled with God principally, and to have his powerful
protection to watch every where over them, otherwise that of man shall be found
in vain. Seek Abraham's buckler therefore, and unto David's tower of refuge, and
then with Jacob because thou have prevailed with God, thou shall prevail with
man, and he who was with Joseph in the prison, with Daniel in the den, with
the three Children in the fiery furnace, and with Israel in the desert
wilderness, shall show himself to be unto thee, as that Captain of the Lords
host who appeared unto Joshua, armed for thy defense. And as Elisha said unto
Gehezi, there shall be more with thee, then is against thee, though an Army
were come to kill thee, with David's confidence Psalm. 4. 8. Thou shall also lie
down and rise up in safety, and he who has numbered thy hairs shall not let
one of them fall to the ground, without his good providence amd will.

7. Abner was a bloody man, and therefore dies a bloody death: so that blood
cries for blood, though Magistrates draw not the sword, yet it is impossible
that the giants and centaures of the world shall escape Gods punishments,
howsoever they be able to escape the ordinary corrections of men. Examples in
Pharaoh, Adoni-bezek, Saul, Joab, Sinacherib, Achab, Antiochus, Herod and
sundry others, that were punished. Then let not wicked men boast, in their
favors, remissions and oversights, which they have of worldly Princes, for
without serious repentance to prevent Gods just judgments, the Lord has Joabs,
and such like instruments to raise up and correct when he best pleases.

8. The time when Abner is slain, is immediately after his reconcilement with
David, and his coming from the royal banquet, that was made unto him, even
when he was assuring himself of peace, then suddenly came his destruction.
Thus are the wicked in the midst of their security punished, and when they
least look for it, comes their visitation. Examples, the primitive world,
Sodom, Pharaoh, the Philistines smothering by Sampson, Eglons death.
Balthassars overthrow and sentence thereof, Hamans dejection. Sisera's
humbling, the rich fools departing, Herod's consuming, and that glorious whore,
spiritual Jesabel, her abasing Revel. 18. 8.

9. Joab kills Abner, thus is one wicked man made to be another scourge;
Thus also are the Midianites made to kill one another. Ammon and Moab to rise
up first against Mount Seir or the Idumeans, and then each one of destroy
another in Mizpah, Sinacheribs sons to stab him in the Temple of his God
Misroch, Ishboseths two servants to kill him on his bed. And where God want
scourges, he shall make the same not only to proceed out of their own bowels,
as is said of Sinacherib; but shall make themselves, to be so to themselves,
sharp whips, and cruel burrean's; as in the examples of Saul, Judas, and
Achitophel.

10. In all this, we see David's kingdom is not promoted by Abners treason, as
David so expected, but rather by the away taking of Abner. Thus the Lord in the
promotion of his Kingdom chooses not the instruments, nor allows ever the
means, which appear good to men; but by the contrary he takes away the same
instruments and means in whom men have most confidence, and by others more
unlikely without men's expectation he advances the cause of his Church, and
works great things. For God will not be subject to men's counsels, but will
have them to depend upon his wisdom, that the whole glory of executions of
great causes may turn to his own praise. Examples in Joseph's advancement,
Isreal's delivery, Gideons victory, Goliah's overthrow, man's redemption, the
Gospells propagation, and the truth's restitution.

II. SAM. Chap. 3. from the 28. Verse to the end.
THe murder of Abner being hitherto handled, follows now David's solemn
purgation of himself from the guiltiness of that fact, made by many arguments.
1. By protestation. 2. By imprecation. 3. By injoyning public lamentation. 4.
By deduction of his funeral himself. 5. By his own deploration. 6. By
commendation of the defunct. 7. By fasting. 8. By referring the revenge to God,
seeing for the present he was too weak to take it in hand.

First, he protests then according to the form then used by lifting up his
hands, and purging himself, by the witnessing of Heaven above and Earth
beneath; that himself, his Counsel (which he calls his kingdom) or estate,
are innocent of this murder, and all this is done by David to satisfy the
people, who might be in opinion that it was committed by David his Counsel,
seeing Joab was his officer and kinsman, and so might take occasion to make
insurrection.

Secondly, he makes his imprecation upon Joab by five sorts of punishments. 1.
The bloody issue which was a disease filthy in it self, and bringing with it
the extenuation and consumption of the body, as also such were excluded from
the conventions and sacraments in Israel. 2. Is leprosy a horrible disease in
all the sorts thereof, and for the contagious filthiness thereof making such to
be secluded from the society of men to live in solitudes and in desert places.
3. Are the palsy, gout, and such like, impeding and taking away the pleasant
part of man's life, which consists in free motion and operations of the body,
and tying man in the tormenting fetters as it were of self-captivity, and which
leaves to men, not so much as bodies, but rather dead and pained carcases. 4.
Is that sort which cutteth down the unripe harvest of life as it were,
violently, by the cruel sith of the murdering sword. The last is famine which
of all pains is the greatest, for eviting whereof some have put violent hands
on themselves, and have become self-Cannibals. And some more than monstrously
have devoured their own infants, yea their own very dung, and loathsome
beasts and vermin; as sundry histories bear record, but especially that of
the lamentable sacking and strait of Jerusalem.

He makes next a solemn lamentation, both by himself and by others, not so
much for the death of Abner, as for the manner thereof, by treasonable Homicid,
tending to so great consequence, as scandal, and peril of insurrection. He
expresses all the signs likewise of true dolor, by tears of his eyes,
renting his clothes, lifting up his voice, and bursting forth in words
testifying his affection.

He carries him then by the royal dignity of his own convoy to the grave,
even the honorable sepulcher at Hebron, famous for the burial of the
Patriarchs and their wives. Where as in an Epitaph, he sets forth his
praise, taken from the civil virtues, such as prudence and fortitude,
wherewith he was endued.

David fasteth also, and albeit prayed by the people, he refuses to eat; the
custom was in the funerals to join some form of compotations, which the
Greeks called (...), and the Latins coenas exequiales and Viscerationes, which
as Augustine affirms de civitate dei lib. 1. cap. 12. were used ad solatia
vivorum, non ad subsidia mortuorum, and which we call, lykes, but in this place
(...), according to the Etymology of the word, (...), signifies the dinner,
after which men labored, as is probable by the text, because David refuses to
eat while the evening: then this is the dinner, whereunto he is desired by the
people.

David sat last purges himself to his courtiers to let them understand, how he
detesteth ^^od, and excuses himself that he might nor for the present exe^^te
Justice, because his Kingdom is but weak, and he likewise being but a new
King, and his Sisters Sons are stronger then he^ having the Army, and
populary favor, and he feared the example of Abners defection, from Ishboseth,
impatient of a very reproof. In end, he concludes with an Epiphonema, or
exclamation imprecatory, the Lord reward, or God shall reward the wicked
according to his wickedness, which is to be understood of the impenitent,
neither in equality, or proportion of measure, for God rewards more, then the
measure of good deservings, and less than that of evil does merit, neither
yet, are good deservings, the cause of life, or the reward of glory, the same
being a gift and a free inheritance, as evil are properly the causes of
eternal punishment, Romans 6. 23.

Hence arises two questions. I. Did David charitably in these imprecations?
The Hebrews answer, not. But uttering them in wrath carnally, they fell
severally upon his posterity, as Rehoboam had the issue, Osias the leprosy,
Asa the gout, Josios fell by the sword, and Joachin by hunger, but seeing those
were punished so for their own private offenses, we reject the negative. Others
approve David herein, that he speaks here prophetically; and that he
pronounces the words of the Law, wherein such cursings are contained, and some
conclude in general, that imprecations may be lawfully conceived; if these
conditions be observed. First, Gods spirit must be the mover, and not the
spirit of man: next, the form must be conditional, in care of impenitency.
And the and must be, to Gods glory and not our vindict. Then concerning this
fact of David, because his mind is not known, therefore the resolution must be
conditional and disjunctive according to the said rules.

The second question, was this omitting of Joabs execution by David lawful or
not? Some answer it was, moved by these arguments, 1. It was perilous at that
time to execute Joab, in respect of the foresaid reason alleged by David, and
other circumstance. 2. The Law of capital executions astricts not to a
certain, or prefixed time. 3. Christ's nature is to remit, whereof David was a
type, and we are commanded to remit the revenge unto God, as David in his last
words here does.

Refutation, Ioab was strong. 1. But David's standing depended upon God who was
stronger, and upon his infallible promise confirmed by an oath, which no flesh
could disanull, his manifold former deliverances out of far greater perils
evidently does testify 2. Is is true, executions ought not to be sudden, and
may be, upon better cognition of the crime, and further trial of others,
con^^ices in conspiracies, as also for saving innocent infants in Women with
Child, till the birth, and in such like cases Lawfully delayed, but they ought
not to be so long postponed, and the no^ent party tolerated and overseen. 3.
Christ remits his servants in his Ecclesiastical Kingdom, but David had a
politic. And the argument from the type to the substance does not ever
follow, not yet from comparisons; and as for revenge it is indeed to be
referred to God, where no other redress can be had, and that by private
Persons; but not by public Magistrates, who are his deputies on Earth. Again
this fact of David is against the office of a Magistrate, described, Exodus 18.
and 21. And against the use of the sword. Set down by Paul, Romans 3. 4. And
against his own former example likewise in the execution of the Amalekite, and
against the common Law of all nations, beside the express Law of God in his
Judicials to Israel. And how this omission upon diffidence, and carnal fear
was the occasion of the polluting of the Land with further bloodshed, the
murder of Amasa may testify. Yea it was a way to hinder the establishing of
his Kingdom, for the Kings Throne (says Solomon) is established in Justice,
Prove. 25. 5.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 28. DAvid diligently purges himself here by a solemn protestation,
flowing. 1. From the testimony of a good conscience, which, unrequired makes
him to burst forth so, and lay open his innocence to all men. This testimony
making ever bold, and not to be a hamed, as we see in Job chapter 31. 2. From piety
and detestation of the fact, this ever being the nature of the godly not only
to eschew wickedness themselves, but to hate and detest the same in others, so
that sin both in action and affection dies to them, and they to it. 3. From
wisdom, least the people should rebel, counting David cruel, dissimulate and
false, or treacherous, therefore, he solemnly by many arguments and evidences
clears himself before them of any such suspicion, or that in any sort by
knowledge, devise, or practice, he is any way guilty of the blood of Abner. An
example of imitation to all men but especialy to such as bear public
offices, in Church, or Commonwealth, that they be careful and provident they
fall not in suspision, or just slander of public offenses like the Sons of
Eli. For how the same severely has been punished, not only in the wicked, as
in Saul, Achab and sundry others, but likewise in the dearest elect, the
example of David's corrections for his whoredom with Beersheba, and the blood
of Vriah, most clearly does testify.

2. It is, before the Lord for ever, that he attests here himself and his
Kingdom to be guiltless. So that it is to Jehovah that the godly have ever
their chief respect. For he is the Judge of the whole World to whom we ought to
approve our selves, and if not to him it matters not to whom else, this was
Jobs comfort, that concerning his innocence, his record was on high, and the
care of his approbation before God, was his restraint from evil, therefore,
does not he behold my ways (says he) and tell all my steps, Job 31. 4. 23.
for Gods punishments were fearful to me, and I could not be delivered from
his Highness. Therefore Jacob names him, the fear of his Father Isaac, Genesis
31. 53.
and Abraham feared wrong in Gerar for Sarah his Wife, only because the fear
of God was not in that place, Genesis 20. 34.
and no other reason obtrudeth Joseph unto his Brethren to assure them that he
would deal uprightly with them, then that which restrained him from whoredom
with his Masters Wife: For I fear God (says he,) and no better assurance can
he give also of Brotherly dealing after his Fathers death, unto his Brethren
who feared just recompense of their doing to him, then this, Genesis 50. 19. Exodus
5. 2.
fear not, for am not I under God? And comptable unto him? Where on the
contrary, the fool has, said in his heart, there is no God, and Pharaoh
blasphemously dares enquire, who is God, that I should obey him? The careless
regard of this approbation before that unpartiall and eternal Judge being now,
and ever hitherto, the only cause of the desperate course and continuance in
sin, as if there were no God, no judgment, no reward.

3. Verse 29. In his imprecation, by laying over the blood, to abide upon the
head of Ioab, and on his Fathers house, we see 1. The nature of sin, the act
whereof is soon accomplished; but the abiding guiltiness of the act not no
soon transitory, but remaining upon the eaters of the sour grape, afterward
to set their teeth on edge. Let the short indurance of the pleasure, and the
long extended guiltiness of the first trangression of Adam and Eva, even unto
their posterity testify the same, together with other examples, as of Kains
bloodshed crying for a curse, Sodoms lust for fire, Pharoahs oppression for
plagues, with many more such like. And let us learn hereby not to be deluded
therefore, by the momentary pleasure of swallowing the alluring bait, that has
annexed with it so sharp and permanent a hook of guiltiness and destruction,
but remember when the pleasure is soon gone, the never dying worm shall then
begin to gnaw and the record of the fact, enrolled in the book of our
conscience, and Gods register shall recently abide in the guiltiness thereof
upon us, unto fearful punishment, and inevitable judgment for ever.

4. Next, in that he wishes the guiltiness of this blood, not only to abide
upon Joab, but upon his Fathers house also, (both the Brethren as Verse. 30.
being culpable thereof) we see the propagation of the punishment, and fruit of
sin according to that threatening of the Law; I will visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation of them, that
hate, me. Being thus as an evil blood, or spreading leprosy, a consuming mothe,
and eating canker, making not only the heart sick, but troubling the bowels,
and the rod seasing not only on the back, but also on the Loins. Thus we see
the sin of Amalek, Exodus 1 Samuel 15.
17. 15. long after in their posterity, called unto remembrance before the
Lord, and Saul commanded to go, and by temporal pnnishment to avenge the same.
1 Samuel 2. 32.
So for the sin of Eli, because his Sons came in slander and he stayed them
not, the Lord pronounces, Judge. 8. 27.
that in all his house, or posterity, there should never be an old man for
ever. Gideons ephod likewise, after which Israel went a whoring, was not only
his destruction, but of his house after him, and Salomons poligamy and Idolatry
was punished by the rods of men in Rehoboam his Son and all his succession. As
on the contrary, Genes. 22. 15. Numb. 25. 13. See 1 King. 15. 4.
the Lord will show mercy upon thousands of them that love him, and keep his
commandments. As in that promise concerning Abraham's obedience, and Phineas
zeal evidently may be seen, O happy gain therefore is godliness, and blessed
conquest is the savor left unto posterity which the Lord has promised.

5. Amongst the punishments that he wishes to befall unto Joab, and his house
he imprecateth blood twice, either that the hand of God do it by a bloody
issue: or that the hand of man shed it, by the edge of the sword. Where we see
that like sins crave alike punishments frequently, as I have done, therefore so
has the Lord rewarded me, Judge. 1. 7.
(says Adonibezeh) thus the fiery lust of Sodom was purged by fire, Kain
fears killing, because he had killed, Pharaohs males of his Land are
destroyed because he destroyed Isreal's males, he shed their blood, and his
waters are plagued with blood, and as he drowned them, so is he and his host
drowned. So Saul killed the Lords Priests with the sword, and so is he killed
by the same. And David as he had abused the bed of Vriah, so is his bed abused
by his Son Absalom, even as Job, if he where guilty, wishes the same
retribution, Job 31. 9, 10. And our savior declares, That with what measure,
we measure to others, with the same, it shall be measured to us again. See also
Revel. 16. 6.

6. These visitations we see are imprecated and were to be inflicted for sin,
to learn us what fruit that bitter coloquintida brings forth, and when any
kind of temporal judgment, or visitation comes, to acknowledge that it is
our sins that has procured the same. And therefore by true repentance (as
the nearest way to have them taken away) to turn unto God that he who has
wounded may make whole again. Not that all troubles come for sin, some being
trialls, only for exercise, as these which did befall unto holy Job, being
both honorable, as not inflicted for iniquity; and profitable as tending to
the stirring up, manifestation, and greater grouth and strengthening of Gods
graces in the elect, to the glory of Gods mercy and confusion of Satan's malice.
And such are seldom now adays, so few being such as holy Job, who may say,
that their sins has not procured their chastisment, some again are
dishonorable as inflicted for sin, but yet profitable as tending to conversion
like those afflictions whereby David was reduced home, and the poor prodigal.
And such are all the sanctified corrections of the Lords chosen. And last of
all, some are both dishonorable; being for sin, and improfitable because they
tend not to conversion, but rather final eversion, such as Sodoms overthrow,
Pharaohs drowning and the like. The former two sorts being in love, God dealing
with the elect either as a goldsmith with the fine gold, or as a Father with
the Child. But this last, which is properly called a punishment, being in
wrath, as the Axe in the hand of the just Judge, or executioner to punish the
malefactor, and cut down the evil Tree.

7. In the method that David uses before that by these imprecations he will
show his detestation of the fact; in that first he purges himself to be
altogether guiltless of the same. We observe, that it is the duty of a
rebuker, or of one who would seem to be a detester of any wickedness in
others; first to labor to be free thereof himself, turpe enim doctori, cum
culpa redarguit ipsum. Thus Judah ought to have been free himself of that fault
which so severely he would have punished in Tamar, Genesis 38. See 2 King. 9. 31.
and David in pronouncing that sentence against the man who took his neighbors
one sheep unto Nathan, ought to have been careful, that he had not been
pointed at, himself to be the man. Thou therefore that preachest a man should
not steal, do thou steal? thou that fayest, a man should not commit
adultery, do thou commit adultery? And thou that abhorrest Idols, committest
thou sacriledges. Romans 2. 21.

8. Verse 31. David commands Ioab with the people, to solemnize a public
lamentation for Abner, and by a custom then used to express their grief,
which is enjoined to Ioab, either as a part of punishment, that he is forced to
lament him, whom in his rage he had slain, and for the greater detestation of
the fact, as Moses caused the people to drink of the water, whereupon the
powder of their Calf was strawed. or else hereby to bring Joab to a deeper
consideration of his sin; seeing the great lamentation, that the whole people
that were guiltless thereof altogether made for the same, and therefore much
more should he lament grievously his fact, David then in requiring him with
mourngin and tokens of repentance to celebrat this funeral, (wherein if he
dissembled, the fault was his own) does herein as Princes and Magistrates ought
and may do, in the outward exercises of Gods worship and Religion, to compel
their subjects to give their bodily presence, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13.
as we may see in the examples of Asa, Josiah; Hezekiah, and other godly Kings
of Judah, wherein if there be Hypocrisy, 2 King. 23. 21. 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. Matthew.
22.
the blame rests upon the dissembled themselves, and their condemnation with
that guest, that was compelled unto the wedding, and wanted the wedding
garment, abides them.

9. In David's mourning for Abner, we see here the nature of the godly, not
rejoicing, but compassionating the evil of their very Enemies, even as Job
protests the like of himself, If I rejoiced at the destruction of him, Job
31. 29.
that hated me, (says he) or was moved to joy when evil came upon him, neither
suffered I my mouth to sin, Prove. 24. 17.
by wishing a curse to his soul. And according as the Lord commands; Be not
thou glad when thy Enemy falls, and let not thy heart rejoice when he
stumbleth. This David did likewise show at the death of his perfecutor Saul.
And went about all the day mourning when his Enemies were visited, and this is
the surest badge of a true Christian, whose heart is so free from malice, that
they love their very adversaries.

10. In that David does all those duties to a foe, giving him the honor of
burial, and that in so famous a place, and in so solemn a manner, as that he
himself will follow the beer. We see not only the humility of the godly,
wherein they imitate Christ, dimitting themselves in duties toward their very
inferiors, but also that their practice is usually, to recompense evil with
good, according to that precept of our savior, Mat. 5. 44. And as the Lord by
Solomon commands. Prove. 25. 21.
If he that hate thee be hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty
give him water to drink, for so thou shall lay coals upon his head, and the
Lord shall recompense thee; This recompense gave Joseph to his Brethren in
feeding them and their families in the Land of Goshen. David unto Saul, and
here unto Abner not remembering his former injuries, and our savior in healing
the ear of Malchus who came against him, and praying for those that cruelly did
Crucicy him.

11. In all this behavior of David's, he shows that no ways he allows this
sin of Ioab, though importing his quietness (by ding him of such a foe that
troubled him) and commodity likewise, (having thereby the more easy access
unto the rest of the Kingdom) but altogether abhors it, far unlike to the
Pythonesse Masters, Act. 16. Or Demetrius the silver smith, Act. 19. Who
fearing the loss of their gain, resisted the Gospel. Even as sundry now a
days will not forsake the errors of Papistry, because pardons, p^rgatory and
suchlike, are lucrative Doctrines. Thus Pharaoh will not let^ Israel go, albeit
God has commanded, because it is against his commodity, and if they go, he
will have the cattle and sheep to remain. And Ahab (though against conscience
and equity) will have Naboths Vineyard, because it is fruitful and commodious.
Even so sacrilege must be so universally practiced, because (though a sin) it
is very gainful, But what if a man gain the whole World, if he loose his own
soul, says our Master Christ.

12. Verse 34. In David's regrating the treacherous form of Abners death, and
commending his courage, we see the very wicked have their own good parts, and
many excellent natural gifts, wherewith God has endued them* for their
greater conviction, when they abuse the same, and whereunto otherwise is due
their own praise. As we may see in the examples of the ingenious ^inding out of
arts in the posterity of Kain, Goliahs strength, Saul's tallness, Absoloms
beauty, Achitophels wisdom, Asahels swiftness and such like. And that the
godly has ever been accustomed (omitting the evils of their very private
Enemies) to speak the best of all men, not like the curious spiers of the more
in their neighbors eye, and sluggish neglecters of the beam in their own: or
like that unclean spirit delighting to record the turpitude of others, and
accuse man to man, as he does man to God.

13. Verse 35. In the peoples coming to refresh David with meat, as we see the
loving and tender care of subjects toward their Princes, worthy of imitation,
so in his answer again, and protestation, we see what true fasting is, not an
abstaining (towit) after a Popish and ridiculous form from grosser, and some
more common sorts of meat, or flesh, and in the mean while feeding on such more
delicate, rare, and pampering dainties, but as David did here, from all manner
of food till the evening.

14. Verse. 36. The success of his purgation is set down, that as he wished so
were the people satisfied, and all Israel did surely acknowledge that it did
not proceed any way from the King, so to kill Abner. Where we observe what
happy issue the Lord gives unto upright dealing, David uses the ordinary
means of clearing himself on the one part, and the Lord who had the peoples
hearts in his hands: persuades them inwardly and assuredly by these means,
that David was altogether innocent, and so the peril of insurrection upon any
contrary suspicion or detestation of the fact, is quite taken away, and happily
prevented. Let us labor then to have a good cause, and lawfully with wisdom
to prosecute the same, referring the event to God, which certainly shall be
prosperous.

15. In David's sparing of Joab, notwithstanding of the odiousness and evidence
of the fact, fearing Joabs greatness, and the arm of flesh, (having Gods
warrant of his law, his frequent promises, and assured protection, also a good
cause, and happy beginnings already in the contrary) we see the weakness of
Gods Saints oftimes, and how by carnal fear they are dash't in execution of
their callings, and wave in that assured confidence they ought to have in Gods
doings, and relying upon his own assistance, and powerful protection: for as
Jehosaphat says in that exhortation of his unto the Judges of Judah, 2 Chr.
19. 6.
take heed what you do, for ye execute not the Judgments of man, but of the
Lord: and he will be with you in the cause and Judgment, wherefore let the
fear of the Lord be upon you. It is he then on whom men ought to rely, and
him they should fear who can cast soul and body into hell fire. Wherefore the
oversight of Magistrates, their respits, reprivings, and remissions for blood
are like odious and capital crimes, which can have no allowance by this
unlawful example, and that because in the moral law of God, and judicial
concerning the punishment of the prevarication thereof, there is not permitted
(...), or arbitrium, but whatsoever God commands in the Laws of his Word is
stricti juris, and may not be dispensed withal; albeit in the constitutions of
men, that it be otherways.

16. As in this sparing of Joab we see the weakness of the saints (as is said)
so likewise we see the cause, why many wicked men go free of ordinary
punishment, and what abuse is of Justice in this latter age, Dat veniam coruis,
vexat censura columbas.
even the worldly grandeur of these giants, and fat kine of Bashan, till the
wind of Gods wrath shake bare the tops of these tall Cedars of Lebanon, and
cast them up by the root at last; as David says here, The Lord shall reward
the evil doer according to his wickedness, and this is the hope of the
oppressed, and patience of the Saints.

II SAM: Chap: 4. from the 1. verse to the 8.
IN the first verse of the former Chapter, the general proposition of the
third and fourth Chapters was laid, to be the history of the Civil wars
between the houses of Saul* and David, the end whereof was that Saul's house
decayed, and the others waxed stronger. This was confirmed by six arguments in
the last Chapter, and now in this Chapter we have the seventh, importing the
full and final decay of the house of Saul, and David's advancement thereby. For
at this time there were but two males lawfully descended of Saul, who could be
contesters with David in the challenge of the Crown, Ishboseth Saul's son,
and Mephiboseth Jonathans sonne^ (for as for the sons of Rispah, they were
borne of concubinage, and therefore according to the custom, they received no
inheritance, but only a portion of goods; as Abraham provided for the Children
of Keturah) now of these two, Ishboseth is impotent in mind and unworthy;
murdered by his servants of that same tribe with him; and Mephiboseth is
impotent in body, and lamed by a fall which he got by his nurse, and so not
only young, but crooked and unable to travel in the office of a King: and
therefore the house of Saul being thus totally decayed, all Israel were forced
to offer themselves to David. Then in this present Chapter we have in general,
the last and extreme decay of Saul's house, by the misfortune of these two
fornamed.

This general has three particulars, the first contains the decay of
Ishbo^eth unto the 8. Verse. The second is the inability of Mephiboseth
interjected in the 4. Verse. The third is the justice and piety of David, in
revenging of Ishboseths death, and burying his head; till the 12 and last Verse.

In the decay of Ishboseth, we have three things to be considered. 1. Is
himself. 2, His murderers. 3. His murder. As to himself or his estate: It is
said, that after he heard of the death of Abner, his hands were feeble and all
Israel seeing the pusillanimity of their head: and that their captain Abner,
by whom they hoped to be reconciled to David was slain, thinking themselves
now exposed to a greevous danger, knowing the magnanimity of David, they are
likewise afraid.

By the feeble hands of Ishboseth, according to the Hebrew phrase, is signified
the discouragement both of his heart, and external members of his body: as we
say of a man altogether dejected, he has neither heart nor hand: so that here,
he is set forth as a man destitute of all help, or comfort either from
himself, being so affected; or from his people, being so afraid: and so this
usurper now is fallen in extreme, and irremediable misery. The causes of this
his desperate dejectedness, being 1. Inwardly his guilty conscience fighting
against himself, and outwardly the sword of David, the strokes whereof he
likewise did fear. And 2. the awaytaking of Abner, on whom he reposed for
defense, and on the force of the Army, and therefore when that fails him, he
falls into desperation.

The second thing to be considered in him: is, that being thus desperate of his
matters, he gives himself to sleep, and sluggish security: The cause of which
sleep at noontide, some assign to the custom so used in those hot countries,
as Josephus affirms. Some to the extreme heavyness of his desperate mind,
making his eyes likewise heavy to sleep, like Jonas in the ship, or the
disciples in the garden, and others attribute it to his sluggish and negligent
nature, against the duty of a good Prince who should be vigilant, domi and
foris, to administer his kingdom aright, and to prevent both private and
public perils, either of his person or estate, which he here does not, as we
may see in the history of his murder.

His murderers are described. 1. From their names: Baanah which signifies
affliction: and Rechab, a rydar; thus affliction overtook him, and that
speedily as a post or ridar. 2. They are called his men, and of one tribe with
him, so nearly were they joined with him, in service and kindred. 3. They are
said to have been Captains of bands, which some understand to be, of
companies in the Camp, over which they were set by Abner; and others (as the
Rabbines) expone these bands to have been such, as were, when there was no King
in Israel, and when (as Debora says) the high ways were not occupied, and the
travelers went through by paths, even robbers and common oppressors of men. 4.
Their parentage is pointed at, they were the sons of Rimmon, and of the City
of Beroth, which then was usurped by the Philistines, since the battle of
Gilboa, albeit within the territory of Benjamin, according to the division,
Joshua. 18. 25. From hence these fled at that time to Gittaim, another town in
the same tribe, as Nehemiah. 11. 33. 5. The carriage in this business, is
dissimulate; for they feign themselves to be of the most peaceable sort of men,
even merchants, whereby they might so be into the less suspicion.

The fact of the murder is very odious in all the circumstances. 1. The person
murdered is a King, and a Kings son. 2. The murderers are of his own
subjects, of one tribe with him, and his men. 3. The place and time, is, even
in his own Chamber, and bed: and while he is a sleep, in the noontide of the
day. 4. The form is by treason, and cruelly by cutting off his head. 5. The
cause (as may be seen in their journey and speech to David) is to gratify him,
whom they perceived entering in the whole kingdom, and so to work their own
promotion; being encouraged to this fact by David's banqueting of Abner for
persuading Israel to make defection from Ishboseth, and thinking that much more
will the killing of his person be acceptable and rewarded; as also, by the
impunity of Joab for the death of Abner: and so concluding, that if David did
oversee the slaughter of Abner who was reconciled; and now David's sworn
servant, to bring all Israel to him: assuredly he will reward the slayers of
Ishboseth who stood out, and had the only claim of the whole kingdom.

In the fourth verse is interjected the history of Mephiboseth, how that upon
the news of the discomfiture of Saul and Jonathan; his nurse flying with him,
when he was a child of five years old, he did fall: and thereby became lame of
his feet; and so by that impediment was made unable for royal government:
chiefly in Israel, whose King was required to be without inability either in
body, or mind, seeing they were compassed about with so many enemies to
withstand. This fall of Mephiboseth is recorded to show Gods special
providence therein; that so the kingdom might come to David according to the
promise. Some think that this history is rather interjected; to let us
understand the government of the estate of Israel, when Ishboseth is so
unworthy, and feeble in mind: and Mephiboseth so feeble in body; therefore no
marvel, that such wicked men banded, and rose against the estate and quietness
of the land, and took such ^udacity to commit the like insolences and treason.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN the feebleness of Ishboseth, we see how powerful the dashing of a
guilty conscience is, when any trial, or trouble occur, the terror of this
inward and homebred tribunal, shaking the very foundations of all the
faculties, and powers of the soul: Judge. 16.
and making the pillars of the body, (like those of the house of Dagon which
Sampson overthrew) to bow, Dan. ^.
and smite one against another, as did the knees of Belshazzar: so bitter
things does this spiritual hand write in the register of that book: which
fully at that last day shall be opened: and by which every one shall be judged.
That the very glanse of one account, given by a wakening trouble disquieteth,
and dismayeth so, that the person touched, is like that house foolishly built
upon the sand: which, when a storm comes, cannot abide the same, but falls.
Where the testimony of a good conscience on the contrary, is both a feast and a
fortress. Examples of this dashing power, when trial or trouble comes, we see
in Joseph's brethren, in Achan, Saul, Belshazzar, Judas, and many more.

2. The second lesson is instruction likewise, for confirming of faith in Gods
infallible promises, and is taken from this ground, Ishboseth in an evil cause
and course, relying only upon Ab^er, and the people: so soon as Abner is
slain, and the people are afraid, he falls into despair, whereupon we
gather. That as in all causes, and especially evil, the way to desperation is
to contemn Gods protection, and rely altogether upon man's, and worldly
means. As we may see in the examples of the Philistims, when Goliath is slain,
in Haman when he loses Ahasuerus favor, and others; so in all good causes
the only way to constancy and comfort, is to depend upon the assured promises
of Gods blessing and favor, and to use and esteem the second ordinary means,
whereby God works in their own rank and place: otherwise they shall prove but
like the rotten reed of Egypt, which shall break, and wound the hand of him,
who has leaned thereon: of this diversity David prophesies in the 1. Psalm.
and examples of them who have found comfort relying upon God, when the seconds
has failed them. We have, in Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Job, David,
Daniel, Christ's Apostles, and sundry others in Scripture.

3. In the time when Israel is commanded by Ishboseth an unworthy man, without
courage, negligent and sleeping in his office: and has Mephiboseth, young, and
unable in body to travel: then the land is possessed with violences and wicked
men, whereupon we gather a doctrine for reformation of manners. That when such
as are the supreme Magistrates, or subordinate, Nobles, and great Men in any
land or state, are either simple or unworthy, either sleeping and neglecting
their offices, either young in years, or lame in feet, sparing their travells;
it is then that oppression, murder and every sort of vice defiles the land,
and inquieteth the estate both in private and public: and this confusion is in
Gods justice, who threatens in his ire to give a people for their sins,
children and women to reign over them. Therefore the exhortation is that where
such misgovernment is, and such inconveniences fall out: subjects should not
betake themselves so much to the misliking and invection against their
superiors, much less in putting violent hands on them. As was done to
Ishboseth as to be displeased with themselves, and their sins; whereby they
have provoked God in his justice, thus to punish them, and seek their
reformation, by tears and prayers from God in mercy, who has the disposition
of the hearts of all superiors, to make them fierce Lions, Foxes, and such
like beasts in his justice: and meek lambs, and courageous rulers again in his
favor. Of this we have the examples of the first Pharaoh, Cyrus, Constantine,
and the like: and of the contrary, Abimelech, Saul, Achab, Joas, Herod. Julian,
and others.

4. Through the impunity used toward Joab by David, these wicked men are
encouraged to murder Ishboseth. Where we see, what are the dangerous fruits,
which grow from impunity of any vice, especially of blood. This was the fault
laid to Eli's charge, that he suffered his Sons to run into a slander, and
by correction he stayed them not, therefore the Lord threateneth, that he
should do to him a thing, whereof whosoever heard it should make his ears to
tingle. This impunity made Joab thereafter to kill Amasa, and Absalom his
brother Amnon: so that the oversight and winking at any vice, and tolerating of
sin by Magistrate, or Minister, is nothing else; but the encouraging of men
to go forward in the further practice thereof, whereof they cannot be
guiltless, nor free from the blood of such, who grant such impunity.

5. Abner is slain, the people make defection, and now at last Ishboseth
himself is likewise murdered. Thus like Jobs messengers, when God has bent
his bow, and when his sword, then the arrows of the Almighty, and the strokes
of his justice one after another redouble upon the wicked, till they be
consumed: examplified by the plagues on Pharaohs Land, and at last his own
submission. Which teaches us not to abuse his long suffering patience, which
should not imbolden us, or harden our hearts, and make us secure in sin, but
rather in fear to break off our sinful course, and lead us to repentance; for
otherwise assuredly he comes, and his reward is with him.

6. Ishboseth is murdered, and that by two men of his own, Captains of bands:
and of that same tribe and kindred with himself. Where we see not only that
Kings are privileged from the Lords punishments, when they offend more than
others: as the examples of Pharaoh, Saul, Achab, and sundry other wicked Kings
of Israel, Antiochus, and the three Herod's etc. do testify. But likewise how
that he draws Arrows out of their own quiver to strike them through withal:
thus Sinacheribs own sons are made his burrean's; and when David offends,
Absalom shall be made his rod: and as the vipers own brood are the destroyers
of their own damme, in gnawing forth her belly; so when the ways of a man
displease the Lord, he will make his servants, his sons, his kindred, and
familiars to be his scourges; as when the ways of man please him, he will make
his very Enemies at one with him, Prove. 16. 7. As also we see, where grace ties
not, the bond of nature (like Sampsons cords) is easily burst; Ka^ will slay
Abell: Esau persecute Jacob, and Sinacheribs Sons will kill their own Father.

7. In his very bedchamber, this murder was committed: so that we may see
that no place, so close, so retired, fenced, nor privileged, can hold out
Judgment when it comes: thus the Froggs crawle upon Pharaoh himself in his
Chamber, Exodus 8.
and on his bed^ and the destroyer enters within the Kings Palace, and
kills his first borne. Eglon is stabbed in the summer parlour. Sinacherib
murdered in the Temple of his God. Nebuchadnezzar visited in his great Babell.
Belshazzar made stupefact at his royal table. And Herod stricken with the hand
of God on his glorious throne. For that God, who is God not only of the hills,
but of the valleys has every where a reaching hand, and where can a man fly
from his fearful presence?

8. The time when Ishbosheth is murdered, is while he is a sleep on his bed;
where we have to observe not only how the wicked oftimes into their greatest
security are visited: but likewise how careful men ought to be, to implore the
watchman of Israel, even the Lords protection at all times: but especially in
the time of our sleep to be stretched over us, without which what perils may
over take us. The examples of Ishboseth, Sisera, Olofernes and others may
delare; but having the same, we may in a joyful assurance say with David, I
will lay down, and sleep in peace, for thou O Lord only make me to be in
safety, Psalm. 4. 8. As likewise where a sleepy and negligent King is, we see
here what peril is both to himself, and the state. Royal administation is the
Lords work, and woe be unto him that does the same negligently.

9. These two, (like Simeon and Leui) Brethren in evil, and like Ananias and
Saphira, or the two wicked elders, agreeing together in wickedness do not
only show the unity, or rather consenting conspiracy of the ungodly to do
evil: whereof the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 50. 18. And that agreement of Herod
and Pilate, (though at variance before) to Crucify Christ does testify, but in
their disguising of themselves, we see the crafty and masked dealing of such in
their pretenses, who Proteus-like, as their Master can transform himself into
an Angel of light, when he intends to bring into greatest darkness: so can the
the wicked cover themselves in their most impious proceedings, with least
suspicious, and best be seeming shows, like Jael giving the sweetest milk,
when they intend most bitter destruction, and under subtilest Hypocrisy
evermore harboring most dangerous impiety.

10. The fall of the house of Saul after this manner in himself and in his
posterity, represents last of all unto us, the example of Gods Justice against
Tyrants, and persecutours of his Church, and Kingdom of Christ, agreeable unto
that in the first Psalm. The wicked shall not stand amongst the just, but as
the wind blows the chafe, and dust to and fro, so shall the wicked perish
and decay, this consenting unto the frequent other Prophecies of the Lords
words, Job 18. Psalm. 2. 37, 110. Isa. 13. 18, 23, 44. Jerem. 25. Revel. 17. 18.
As the examples of Pharaoh, as of all ages clearly can testify; and as we may
evidently remarke, when in Gods judgment we see by treason, and violence one
after another, the Enemies of the Church cut down by the siccle of justice, and
cast in the Winepresse of Gods wrath till they be made all at last, his
footstool to tread upon.

II SAM. Chap. 4. from the 8. Verse to the end.
THe second part of this Chapter, which begins at the 8. Verse. has the
honest part of David in condign revenge of Ishboseths Murder, wherein are
three things. 1. The oration of the Murderers. 2. David's reply. And 3. the
punishment of those, and the honor exhibited unto the head of Ishboseth in
burying the same.

As for the Murderers, they carry with them the Kings head, and in great have
they fly from Mahanaim beyond Jordan, in the Territory of Galaad, and passing
the River, through all the Territory of Benjamin journing by night, they come
unto David in Hebron, and their diligence, as an argument of their good will to
David, thus traveling by night to be the first reporters.

Being come they have a short accurate speech, the end whereof is to persuade
David of their well doing, and good intention in that fact to his advancement,
and the butt whereat they aim, is, hereby to acquire some high place, and
authority, with the new King, or else to get a rich reward from him.

The persuasions are from three places of Rhetoric a Jucundo, honesto and
utili. 1. The fact (say they) is pleasant, because hereby we have brought unto
thee the head of thine Enemy, who sought they life: and there is nothing more
pleasant to natural man, than the destruction of his capital Enemy. 2. God
has wrought this by our hands, and there is no purpose more honest, then that
which he has ordained, and is an actor in the same. 3. By this work thou art
fully avenged on the house of Saul, so that there is none left of his seed
(save an impotent boy) to quarrel with thee now in the Kingdom, or seek after
either thy life, or honor, which is to thy great profit and commodity.

David answers and refuteth their speech by two arguments, the former he
takes from the true cause of his preservation, and replyeth in this manner. It
is not by your deed that my life is preserved, or by the taking away of
Ishboseth, that so I am freed from trouble, or adversity, and henceforth may
live secure. But it is by Jehova, who lives by whose favor I have been raised,
directed, and protected in all my ways hitherto, upon whose promise I depend,
and not upon any indirect means to have my advancement, or establishment
wrought thereby, and this argument is couched in words set down in form of an
oath, or solemn protestation.

The second argument is taken from an example, or preparative, by way of
comparison of the less with the greater, in this manner; Ye suppose (says
David) to abuse my lenity, because I spared Ioab in the Murder of Abner, but I
refer you to remember the execution, which I used upon the Amalekite, who
slew Saul, and brought me the first news with the royal ornaments, hoping
thereby to get a reward, but I took and slew him: how much more then are you
worthy of death, and of a greater punishment, in respect your fact is much more
odious, considering all the circumstances thereof. That man was an Amalekite,
but you are Israelites, yea and of the same tribe with Ishboseth, he slew Saul
at his own desire, but you by a devised treason have slain your Master
unwittingly; he helped him being wounded, and to accelerate his death, which
was a benefit; but you murdered your Lord sleeping on his bed being in his
health, he did the one in the field, and persuit of battle; but you the other
in your Masters bedchamber, and in time of no other peril. Saul also was an
Enemy to the Amalekites, but Ishboseth a just man, and a loving Master to you;
therefore in all respects your fact being more odious, your punishment must be
proportionable, and the greater. Therefore accordingly he commands his
servants to make the execution, (seeing the office of a public executioner
was not then in use.) And in greater detestation of the fact, and striking
terror in the hearts of others to do the like, he adds a form of severity in
cutting off their hands, and feet, instruments of that cruelty, and as a
public spectacle for example to others he hangs the same up in a open place.

In the mean while, David honors the head of Ishboseth, and burieth the
same, wherein he confirms three notable lessons marked before. 1. That a
Prince, or noble man should not take pleasure, or allow any vice. 2. That
nothing can be profitable which is not godly and honest. And 3. that no man
should insult, or rejoice in the misery, or destruction of his very Enemy.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 8. THe nature of the wicked is, ever to measure others by themselves,
and therefore because to flesh, and blood it is a pleasant thing to be avenged
on their Enemies, therefore these two Murderers think that even so here it
will be unto David, and that they both actours, and first reporters thereof
cannot miss both thanks and reward: but they measure David by the wrong line,
and find him contrariwise disposed, for as the natural man knows not the
things which are of God; so neither the work of regeneration wrought in the
Godly; whereby they think, they speak, they do and desire far otherwise then
the Child of Adam, and mass of blind corruption. Witness the contrary
dispositions of Jacob and Esau (though Brethren) and in this place of these
Beerothites and David's.

2. The audacious impiety of these wicked Murderers may be seen, in that they
will in this their vile practice make God to be a worker, and chief actour of
the deed: like Simeon and Levi coloring their bloody fact, with the veil of
Religion, and imbarking divine mercy it self, in participation with Divelish
cruelty. The most odious sin of any is to cover the Devil with Gods garment,
and taint the sacred Majesty of holiness it self, with the menstruous
pollution of monstrous crimes. And too commonly used now adays, when rebellion
against Lawful authority, odious treason, merciless massacres, and such like
are now obtruded for conscience sake, and go current under pretext of Religion,
Jesuiticall Doctrine teaching their emissaries and paricides that they do
merit thereby.

3. Verse. 9. In David's words of protestation, We see that it is the godlies lot
to be in adversity, and under the cross, as his whole life hitherto could have
taught: (omitting other examples) but there is their comfort, which with a
thankful acknowledgment with this godly Prince here, the godly ought ever to
record, as Job said of his redeemer, so, the Lord lives, who delivers their
souls out of all adversity, and though their troubles be many, yet he upholdeth
them in them, Genesis 49. 23.
and from them in his good time gives them freedom, with Victory: like
Joseph, who though the archers grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, yet
his bow abode strong, and the hands of his arms were strengthened, by the hand
of the mighty God of Jacob.

4. Verse 12. In David's adjudging them to punishment far contrary to their
expectation; we see how being blinded by Satan, they are greatly disappointed
of that they looked for: even as our first parents being deceived by that
crafty Serpent thinking to be like God, became to be like the Devil, let none
therefore look for happy fruit of the forbidden Tree, nor think by doing evil
that good shall come of it, which serves greatly to correct those, who by
malefices and wickedness pretend to attain to the favor of Princes and great
men. Let Balams blood, Doegs infamy, Achitophels despare, Hamans hanging, and
these men's execution, bear witness of the issue.

5. We have likewise here in David the pattern of a good Magistrate, and
upright justitiar, who has an eye, not to his own commodity in this ungodly
fact, but to just judgment, and to that which ought to be done according to
the Law: shall I not therefore (says he) require his blood at your hand, and
take you from the Earth, not as usually now it is, quo volunt reges, vadunt
leges, and plus valet favor in judice, quam lex in codice. Far contrary to
good Jehosaphaths admonition to the Judges of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 19. Take heed
what ye do, and let the fear of the Lord be upon you, for ye execute not the
judgments of man, but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and
judgment.

6. In practices we may perceive what is to be followed. There are two here in
this matter of blood: the one is of David sparing of Ioab: the other is of his
justice toward the Amalekite. These criminals though they presume on pardon by
the one, yet David follows the other; hid reason is, the one agreed with God,
and a good Law, the other disagreed. Whereupon we observe in use of practices
what should be followed, and what should be eschewed by Magistrates, decrees
given according to equity, good Law, and conscience should only, and ever be
followed, and the contrary rejected. Let Judges then beware, what decrees they
give out, that they prejudge not the course of upright justice: but if they do,
let them not be ashamed to retrait the same, and follow the best practice.

7. David joyneth that form of severity, by cutting of their hands and feet,
and hanging of them up, for the terror of others: where we see what should be
the end of punishment aimed at by the Magistrate, even to prevent offenses
amongst the people: and like a skillfull Physician making the Phlebotomy of one
member, a preservative to the whole body, as they do in fevers, plewrisies, and
the like.

8. We see how the Lord makes a requital to be given to the wicked, these men
cruelly had deformed the dead body of their Master by cutting off his head; and
now justly are their bodies deformed by the cutting off their hands and feet.
This we see in Pharaoh, as he killed the Israelites first borne males, so are
the first borne of all his land: as he drowned their infants, so is he and his
Army. And this retribution, lege talionis, did Adonibezek acknowledge justly to
have been inflicted upon him, when the thumbs of his hands, and his feet were
cut off, Judge. 1. 7. Let men beware then how they sin, or cruelly behave
themselves, and think that there is a just God who will both require and
requite, this Job wishes of himself, Job. 31. 9, 10. And this Christ Jesus
confirms, For with what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you
again, Math. 7. 2. and this also we see Revel. 16. 6.

II SAM: Chap: 5. from the 1. verse to the 6. and 1 CHRONICLES. 11.
IN the former three Chapters the estate of Israel being treated on, from the
death of Saul to the death of Ishboseth, which history affirms, and confirms
that the house of Saul daily decayed, and the house of David increased: till at
length in the death of Ishboseth, and inability of Mephiboseth there remained
no expectation of the recovery of the same again. Now in this Chapter we have
in general the history of David's increase, after the death of Abner and
Ishboseth; and the extreme, and desperate decay of the house of Saul. This
general is confirmed by two particular arguments, whereinto this Chapter is
divided. The one from the 1. Verse. to the 6. contains the history of David's
inauguration by universal consent to be King over all Israel. The second from
the 6. Verse. to the end, contains four acts, whereby David is renounced, and
made honorable in Israel, done by him soon after his inauguration.

The first is the expugnation of Sion, and Jerusalem, proponed from the 6.
Verse. to the 11. The second is the amity contracted between Hiram, King of
Tyrus, and David from the 11. verse to the 13. The third is his marrying Wives,
and assuming to him Concubines in Jerusalem, by whom he procreated many
Children, from the 13. verse to the 17. The fourth is two notable Victories
obtained against the Philistines, treated on from the 17. verse to the last.

The inauguration of David (written also 1 Chronicles. 11. Chap. from the 1. to the
10. verse, and in the 12. from the 23. to the end of that Chap.) it is
amplified from all the circumstances of time, Persons, place, persuasions, and
solemn form of the action.

The time is observed in the particle (then) that is after the death of Abner,
and Ishboseth: and an end is now put thereby to the civil dissentious, and
jarres between the house of Saul, and of David, between Judah and Israel.
Others extend this to the first beginning of the promise and anointing of
David, made by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. Unto this time of the performance thereof,
which contains at least the space of 20. years, that after so long delay,
after so great troubles, and adversities moved by Saul and Ishboseth, after so
many offers of ungodly helps made by Joab, Abner, and the Murderers of
Ishboseth, rejected by David, and after God had tried him in the furnace of
diverse temptations, and found him a golden David, and a man according to his
own heart, then the Lord remembers his promise made by Samuel in convenient
time to accomplish the same.

Of the place called Hebron* it was spoken before, Chap. 2. It was situated in
the Northwest of the Land of Judah, distant from Jerusalem 20. miles, as Jerome
affirms, and at this time was the rovall seat of the King, the space that he
reigned only over Judah: and so being situated in the extremity of the Land,
the affection must be thought great, both which all Israel, and their Princes
bear unto him, from the most distant parts of the Kingdom running thus to
Hebron, a border town in the utmost march of Judah, a remarkable act of Gods
special instinct!

The circumstance of the Persons is in the number, and in the quality: in the
number he says, all Israel, that is a certain number selected out of every
tribe, the which is reduced to a particular, 1 Chronicles. 12. 25. making in the
whole sum 300000. men. In quality, he says the elders of every tribe came to
the conference with the King, and to the solemnity of his inauguration, that
is, the chief men and Princes of every tribe, who had the authority and place
of the primogeniture.

The Person to who in all these do come, is despised David in time past, and
now by Gods instinct, universally honored, for as God has the hearts of
superior Persons at his disposition, so has he the hearts of subjects, and
inferiors to bow and bend them at his godly pleasure.

The circumstance of the occasion, is of worthy consideration, wherein as the
Rabbis probably affirm: in the first place, they confess their error, they
purge themselves, and extenuate their former disobedience, craving pardon, and
promising loyalty in the time coming. In the next, they have an oration to
David, the end whereof is to persuade him to accept the universal Kingdom
upon him, which they do voluntarily offer. The places of persuasion are very
proper, and in number three, drawn out of the Law, containing the qualities of
a King in Israel. 1. We are thy bone and thy flesh, by which phrase of speech,
the Hebrews signified their conjunction in consanguinity, Genes. 2. 29. Judge.
9. This is grounded upon the Law. Deuteronomy. 17. 15. The second is taken from
experience of David's qualities in that office, and ability to govern proved out
of 1 Samuel* 18. The third is from Gods choice and direction, agreeable likewise
unto the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 5. That the people should make him their King, whom God
should appoint. This speech of theirs, no doubt was uttered by Samuel unto
David in Gods name: saying, thou shall feed my people, when he anointed him,
and the word went with the seal, albeit though it be not expressed, yet is
repeated by David himself, Psalm. 78. 71.

The solemnity of his inauguration was by the consent of the elders and people
there, representing the whole number and body of the Kingdom: a bond is
mutually sworn, wherein David obliges himself to reign over them as God
commands, and as he protests, Psalm. 101. And the people promise to obey
his lawful commandments, so that the Law of God no doubt, was the rule and
square of his government, whereunto both Prince, and people are sworn: which
was a bridle against his absolute power, or their rebellious manners.

He was anointed according to the received form, and solemnity of the
aspersion of the sacred oil of the Tabernacle, confected and conserved for
that use, by the hand of the high priest, and that before Jehovah, which is
diversely interpreted. Some by mediation of Vrim, and Thummim: some by oblation
of sacrifice upon the Alter in Hebron builded of old by Abraham. Howsoever,
they solemnly as in Gods presence mutually attested God, and required him to be
witness to their covenant: Thus David is thrice anointed: at Bethlehem by
Samuel, in Hebron by Judah; and now over all Israel in this public assembly,
being herein a vive type of Christ Jesus, who is perfectly, and in full measure
of the Spirit: anointed King, Priest, and Prophet of his people, as it were by
a threefold unction.

In the end it is said in the Chronology of his reign, that he was 30. years
when he began to reign in Hebron: (being of that same age that our Savior was
of, when he took upon him likewise his calling) which was a convenient age for
Administration: where otherwise God threateneth to give women, and children to
reign in his ire.

But here arises a doubt upon the Chronology of David's reign, in the
general it is said that he reigned 40. years, and in the particular it is
reckoned that he reigned 7. years and 6. months in Hebron, and 33. years in
Jerusalem. So the question is of the 6. excressing, or odd months: to which
the answer is, omitting other conjectures, that this is spoken after a
customable form of Scripture, by a figure called Synecdoche: where the greater
number is put to comprehend the less; the like being, Judge. 20. 46. and else
where.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. THe promise which God made to David of the kingdom is slowly, and after
great adversities now performed: where, as we see the nature of God who is true
in all his promises, and one jo^ of whose word shall not fail: so, this
particular may be reduced to the general: That the punishments against the
wicked, and rewards temporal to the Godly are slowly executed, and also by
contrarymindes oftimes; the punishment foregoing prosperity, and the rewards
preceding adversity: the reason of the one is to draw sinners to repentance, or
to make them the more inexcusable in the day of the Lords wrath. Therefore the
Scripture gives to the Lord the Epithet of long suffering, and the Apostle
speaking to the same purpose says, Psalm. 103. Romans 15. 5. Romans 3. 4.
Know thou not that the long suffering of God should lead ^^ee to
repentance. And again, Because of his longanimity by thy obstinate impenitency
thou have gathered unto thy self just condemnation against the day of wrath.
And ^he reason also why the Lord is slow to perform his promised benifits, and
that by the midst of adversity, is, that thereby the faith* the hope, and
patience of the Godly may be tried, and by probation they may be made worthy:
upon whom it may please him to show his mercy and bestow his gracious benefits:
as the Apostle Paul, Romans 5. 3. And S. James affirms, Chap. 1. ^. Of the one
we have examples of the delay of Gods punishment, before the deluge: Sodom's
destruction, the suffering of Pharaobs tyranny, of Saul's impiety, Judah and
Israel with their wicked Kings, before their captivity, of bloody Jerusalem,
and this day of Mahomet, the Pope, and others. Of the (...), we have the
slowness of the performing that promise made to Abraham of the holy Land, of
his seed in whom all Nations should be blessed, and multiplying thereof. Of the
whole possession of that land made to Israel in the desert, deferred till the
reign of David, of the reducing of the people out of Babylon after 70 years;
David's inauguration here, and as in our own days is commonly found in the
experience of the estate of many good men and Princes.

2. In the example of David patiently abiding the Lords leisure, and in
adversity neither doubting, nor grudging, neither using any unlawful means; we
have the general rule of the behavior, that the Godly should learn when they
find themselves in the like condition, in good causes which God has promised
to bless, and in following of the same; albeit the promise be slowly performed,
and the mids be troublesome: let them not think that God has not a care over
them, neither grudg, as do impatient men, neither doubt as do the weak in
faith, neither use unlawful seconds as do the worldlings, neither despair as
do the reprobate: but following the examples of David, Abraham, Moses, Joshua,
Daniel, the Apostles, and such: assure themselves upon the conclusion of
Christ, that heaven and earth shall perish, but one jot of Gods promise shall
not alter: and remember what Paul says, Romans 8. 39. That nothing whatsoever is
able to separate Gods chosen Children from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus: and that all things in the end shall work together for their good who
love him.

3. Verse. 1. The whole people are moved by Gods instinction to offer their
voluntary obedience to David, and albeit they had the word amongst them, yet it
was not followed, because they wanted the inward perswader, till now, who is
the holy Ghost: so that the kingdom of David rises not by violence and
compulsion, but by the inward persuasion of the holy Spirit: whereupon we
infer in the general literally, and then mistically: that the hearts of
subjects to temporal princes are in the Lords hands to harden, or mollify
them: as he thinks expedient, to show in them his favor, or his wrath to
their superiors: and therefore if they will have obedience of their subjects,
let them subject their scepters to the obedience of God; for he will honor
them, that honourt him: and they that despise him shall be despised: and
therefore as the tyranny of these in authority is Gods punishment for the
sins of inferiors, so the rebellion of inferiors is a token of Gods ire
against their Magistrates.

4. As this is true in David's temporal, so it is true in Christ's spiritual
kingdom: for it is not the external hearing that moves the heart: albeit
that thereby the incredulous be made inexcusable: but it is the inward
operation of the Holy Ghost which inwardly persuades, and draws the heart as
the Loadstone does the iron, to the obedience of the Lords Word, and so
erecteth the kingdom of Christ into the soul of man. No marvel then, that
the greatest part of the world remain in infidelity and wickedness: albeit
Gods Word plentifully sounds in their ears: because as a sound only, there it
evanisheth. And as a feeling power descends not in the heart to take root
downwards, and bring forth fruit upwards, as Christ therefore spoke of his
body, John. 6. 63. So, it is the spirit which quickneth the Word, without the
same, profits nothing.

5. In this occasion, and election, or inauguration of David, we infer the
general rule of electing of Magistrates, as well in regard of his qualities
and form of election: as of the end wherefore he is to be elected. As for his
qualities. 1. He must not be a stranger in birth, much less in religion: but
must be of a conjunction natural and spiritual, with them whom he governs;
otherwise there can be no sympathy nor symbolizing between them. 2. He must be
able to govern: which is called here, to lead out and in. Next, the form of
his election should be by common and voluntary consent, according to the
constitution of the state and oath or obligation of right administration; the
rule whereof should be the Law of God, and positive constitutions of the
realm. And last the end should be to feed the people, caring that they be
spiritually fed in the food of life: and temporally, that they be not spoiled
or bereft of their means of the life corporal, to be their guider, protector,
father, patron, and to have a regard to all their necessities as the good
pastor has to his sheep, and the Father to his family.

6. By all this history it is evident that he is rather compelled and urged by
the people to reign over them, then they are urged by him to give unto him the
government, for he saw that it was not so much honos as onus, teaching hereby
all those who are to undertake any function in Church or Commonwealth, not to
run before they be sent; nor to thrust themselves in at the window, till they
be lawfully let in at the door: and as they have the inward, and effective
calling of God fiting them for the work; so to expect the outward and
declarative calling of man suiting them to the work. The Lord will therefore
give wisdom and skill to Bezaleel, and Aholiab, but Moses must call them.

7. Verse. 3. The covenant of mutual observance of duty, which they make, it is
before the Lord, who did hear not only the words of their league: but did see
the sincerity of their hearts therein; and whom they acknowledged not only as a
solemn witness to bear record, but as a just judge, and severe revenger of
the breach. So before this same Lord, we ought to consider, that both we, and
our secretest actions, yea the very thoughts of our hearts are patent: and as
in his presence, (whose al-seeing eye beholds all things) watchfully we ought
to walk, fearing to speak or do, either wickedly or hypocritically, seeing as
Elisha said to Gehezi, his heart goes ever with us, and he will make no other,
but our own wickedness to find us out.

8. Verse. 4. In the Chronology of David's life, and reign, as we see that the
people get a great benefit from God, in having a Prince given them of ripe age,
experience, and ability to govern, being 30 year old when he began to reign:
(where women, and Children are given in Gods wrath) so on the other part we see
also, that long life and a prosperous government in a Princes person is a great
blessing likewise: and old age (as Solomon says) is a Crown of Glory, when it
is found in the way of righteousness, therefore honor thy Father and Mother
(says the Lord) that thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God
has given thee: the long life is a reward, and the contrary, as a punishment
is denounced against the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 32.

II. SAM. Chap. 5. from the 6. Verse to the 11.
THe first action of David after his inauguration with the success and sequels
thereof is set down here, which is the sieging and expugnation of Sion, and the
City Jerusalem: then possessed by the Jebusites, Idolators, enemies to God,
and his people; and one of the seven Nations execrated, Exodus 23. Which City
he purposes to reform, and make it the City of the Lord, and the Kings seat:
being in respect of the situation thereof most proper for that effect;
(nobilitated by the habitation sometime of Melchizedek King of Salem, situated
in the marches between Judah, and Benjamin: and divided in these three parts
mount Sion, mount Moriah, and the City) which good intention of David's is
seconded by all good occasions; especially by the Army conveenced there for the
time: who at this present make a perfect conquest of the same.

The answer of the inhabitants of the City, except thou take away the crooked,
and the blind, thou shall not enter in hither: is diversely exponed: omitting
that fabulous Jewish conceit of two ^mages; the one of blind Isaac, and the
other of crooked Jacob: set upon their walls as monuments of the league between
these two, and Abimelech. Without violating whereof David could not invade
them; this assertion being altogether differing from the truth of the story,
for Abimelech was King of the Philistines: who was descended of Miscam Cains
son progenitor of the Egyptians, and not of the Jebusites who were of Canaan
son to Cham progenitor of the Cananites. Some affirm that they were the
images of their tutelar gods, which David and his followers called both blind
and lame, as the Prophet speaks, Having eyes, but see not: feet, but walk not,
etc. And which stood after the manner of Idolaters upon their walls. Josephus
affirms this to be spoken from the confidence which they had in the strength
and fortification of their City, which they thought inexpugnable though it had
no other defenders but blind and lame, and so this to be a hyperbolik speech.
Others (as Tremellius) following the letter of the text, think that they set
indeed blind and some lame men on their wall's to deride David in this his
attempt which they thought to be in vain: therefore says the 6 Verse thinking
that David could not come in hither.

David being thus deluded, or rather derided, he prudently adhibits the remedy:
and promises a reward to him who first should pass over the trench or fousy to
smite the Jebusites, and destroy their idols: which Godly and zealous David did
hate; towit, that he should be chief Captain, which by the inspiration of
Gods Spirit Joab enterprises happily, and so the City: and mount Sion comes
into David's hand; and being in his possession, he dwelt in the fort, and built
round about the same: but there arises some doubt in the exposition of this, in
the 8. Verse. (wherefore they said, the blind and lame shall not come into the
house) some think it a proverb, used after amongst the Jews and that it was
according to the inhabitation that neither blind or lame should enter into Gods
house to officiate; or that it is rather spoken of the Jebusites idols, which
none should have: no, not in their private houses, much less in public places.
And that this was the chief cause of David's Zeal to invade that City: the
same being so full of Idolatry, which David's soul hated.

Lastly, Verse. 10. The cause of David's prospering and growing great is set
down: towit, that God even the Lord of hosts was with him: towit, not only by
his universal presence, whereby he is with all his creatures: sustaining and
upholding them etc. But his particular presence in mercy, Romans 8. 31.
whereby he is with his own, protecting, providing for them, prospering them
and enduing them with all necessary and saving graces necessary to their
salvation and welfare.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. DAvid in the first entry to his kingdom, takes in hand the abolishing of
Idolatry and reformation of religion in Jerusalem, to teach all Princes and
Magistrates the like practice to follow: this was commanded to Joshua, and who
have done so, have ever prospered: as David, Jehosaphat, Josiah and Hezekiah,
Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, and that late worthy Queen Elizabeth. And
who have neglected the same have been punished, as the examples of the
Idolatrous Kings of Judah and Israel can witness.

2. The Jebusites confided in their Idols, and strength of their City: and
therefore vilipend David, which is the manner of all the enemies of Gods truth,
and Idolaters, as of Antichrist and Papists this day, Rev. 18. 7. But in the
end this their confidence shall deceive them, and God shall bring upon them,
and their I^olls utter destruction, and joy to his Church, Rev. 19. 2.

3. We see what all Idols are which Idolaters and Papists so ^uch esteem,
decore, go unto in pilgrimage, and confide in: they ^re all but blind and lame,
etc. and cannot help, nor shall they in ^e day of the Lords visitation.

4. We see also, that as David's zealous soul hated such, so should all Godly,
and zealous do the like, especially pious Princes.

5. We see also that they ought, not only to be prohibited by Godly Magistrates
to be in public places or Churches, but also in private houses or places.

6. Verse. 8. Also we see in David, prudence joined with piety, both which
should be in a Prince or Magistrate, and that as vice should be punished, so
virtue should be cherished and have its own encouragement and reward, even as
the Lord sets before us the rewarding of his own in mercy.

7. In a well ordered Army we see not only Captains, but chief Captains, so
in the Church which is compared thereto^, Cant. 6. 4. There ought to be order
in the government thereof, or (...), and (...), as also in all well governed
other civil societies, Politic, or Canonicke.

8. Verse 10. The prospering and growing great of David is only ascribed to the
Lords being with him, as he was for the Lord, against Idolatry, and for his
true worship. Therefore as this is the constant high way to prosper, so let all
such who grow great and succeed, ascribe their grandeur and success, not to
their valor, or others, but to God only and his being with him in mercy.

II. SAM. 5. from the 11. verse to the end.
Follows now the last two means wereby David grew great and was established in
his Kingdom. 1. The amity of Hiram King of Tyrus. 2. Two great victories
obtained against his Enemies the Philistines, betwixt which two, is inserted
David's polygamy.

In the first it is said that Hiram sent messengers to David, next furniture of
timber for building his house, as also masons and Carpenters, we find the like
affection of this King (or else his son of the same name) in the days of
Solomon, for the edifice of the temple. This City was first founded by the
Phaenicians who being expelled from a City, Sidonia, which they first inhabited
by the King of Askelon, taking the Sea, they landed in an Island where they
founded this City Tyrus out of which there came many colonies after, who were
the foundators of Carthage in Afric, and so the Poet calls Dido Phaenicia, a
speaking of the origin of Carthage he writs, urbs antiqua fuit, Tyrii tenuere
coloni. It was situated betwixt Sidon and Caesarea, and did abound with cedars,
and free stones whereof the holy Land did not so abound, and therefore Hiram
supplies David of his abundance. The substance of Hirams messengers probably
has been a congratulation of David's coming to the Kingdom, and of his
prospering and growing great, therefore now he offers his amity to him, which
he did not before when he was in adversity, according to the Worldly custom,
as the Poet says, Si fueris flix multos; numerabis amicos.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 11. HIram is here commended. 1. For sending messengers to David to
congratulate his prosperity, a good disposition, and not envious, to rejoice at
the prosperity of the godly.

2. He sends furniture and workmen for building his house in Sion, whereof
David stood in need in Canaan, where we see 1. That God in his wise
dispensation has not given all things to every Land, or Person, but as the
Apostles show by the fabrike of the body, there is a diversity of dispensation
that none may contemn another, but keep a seemly and necessary unity and
corespondence together. 2. Whereupon follows the right rule of dispensation,
which is, each land and Person should communicate with others in the benefits
of God the giver; that he may behonoured, and Gods people mutually may be
conforted and mutual charity entertained.

3. In this we have. 1. the mystery also of the increase of Christ's Church
typified, by conjunction of the gentiles in building of the house of David, or
Church of Jesus Christ's. 2. In Hirams commendation, we see that all such who
contribute to he building of the Church and advancement of the Gospel their
memory shall be flesh and fragrant to all ages, like ointment poured out, and
Maria Magdalens anointing of Christ, as we see in the register of Scripture,
whereas the remembrance of the wicked shall ^ot, or stink in the records of
posterity.

4. David has a good work in hand, therefore the Lord moves the heart of a
very gentile to help to promote the same, as he did also to the temple, which
may be an encouragement to do good and be forward in good courses and causes,
Pharaoh in Egypt to Joseph, Cyrus to Serubabell, Ahasuerus to Nehemiah, Darius
to Esdras, and Heathen, Philosophers to defend the cause of God, and of his
servants, as we read of Justin Martyr and others converts.

5. Verse 12. The godly advert the Lords gracious dealing, and with a thankful
and humble heart acknowledge the same, which wicked and worldlings do not.

6. Princes and Magistrates should ever remember for what end (next to Gods
glory and his Churches good) they are advanced, which is, for the good of his
people, and not their own private good, pleasure, or preferment.

Verse 13. Follows how David in his great prosperity mary's many Wives and
Coucubines, which did proceed from wordly wit, and which he chooses as a fit
means to confirm his Kingdom, and setle it in his posterity, and yet this
disagreed from Gods revealed will and institution of marriage, and therefore
did offend God, as the sequels thereof did prove, in the disagreement amongst
his Sons in challening of his succession, Absoloms rising against him, and
defiling his Concubines, which caused David's divorce from them, for
notwithstanding of the diversity of names, it is thought that all the
Concubines were married Wives, for in Israel whoredom was not permitted, and
therefore they make (...) the difference, that the Concubines were not of a
like rank, or authority in the family, and the Concubines Children succeeded
not to the heritage, but ad bona mobilia, as we see Genes. 25. 5, 6.

The observatirn which we remarke on this, is, 1. How ready men are in
prosperity to forget their due obedience to Gods will and commandments: as we
see also in the matter of Vriah. 2. the cause of all error in faith and
manners is the declyning from Gods revealed will, and the following of our own
wit and fancy, being the cause of all Popish superstition and will worship
which ends in Idolatry, therefore said our savior concerning polygamy that
from the beginning it was not so.

Verse 17. Follows the last part of the Chapter, towit, the wars betwixt
David and the Philistines, and his victories over them. In which wars the
Philistines, are persuers; and David the defender. In the time of the civil
wars between the house of David and Saul, these common Enemies were
spectators, beholding the Jews to wrake themselves by their own intestine
dissentious^, but now when they find peace settled in Israel, then they begin
to stir and pursue David, although they should rather entertained peace with
him, being now grown so potent, but by the secret counsel of God they are
drawn to their own destruction, and blinded by Satan.

This war is set forth from all the circumstances, as, time, place, persons,
occasion, form of proceeding, battles, events and final end.

1. The time is when David looks for greatest quietness. 2. The place is the
valley of Rephaim which is a fruitful part betwixt Jerusalem, and Bethlehem
toward the southwest. 3. The persons are the Philistines, David's and the Jews
common Enemies. 4. The cause is, to withstand the rising of David's Kingdom. 5.
The form of proceeding is diverse, for David counsults and follows, Gods
command, the Philistines depend upon their Idols which they carried with them
as Verse 21. 6. The event is victory on David's part, and shame and destruction
on the Philistines, and the last the greatest, from Gaba the Metropolitan of
Benjamin to Gazar a City in the Territory of Ephraim, so that David's honor and
fame is increased by his Enemies troubles moved against him.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. WHen David is in greatest honor and looks for greatest quietness, then
his Enemies make him greatest inquietation, where we see what the estate of
Gods Church is, when she is in greatest peace and flourishing: then she is most
exposed to the fury of Satan, and her Enemies, therefore in time of calm, as
Matthew. 8. 24. prepare for a storm, neither let us be discouraged when we see
Satan with all his displayed forces rise up against the rising and flourishing
of Religion, but consider that this has ever been the Churches lot, and look
to the joyful issue of all Satan's and his instruments opposition, which shall
be joyful to his Church, and confusion of his Enemies.

2. We see here the envious nature of the wicked, by the instigatio^ of him,
that is called the envious man, and envyed our first parents happy estate, and
so here his instruments envy David growing great, and the prosperity of Gods
people under him.

3. The diverse form that is used by David, and the Philistines in their
proceeding, David en^uiring of the Lord, and the Philistines confiding in their
multitude and idols, which shows that the godly in all their troubles, or
enterprises consult with God and his mouth, and rely upon him, whereas
Idolaters confide in their Idols, and have their recourse to creatures, and
rely on the arm of flesh, as in 88. the Spanish did in their invincible Armado.

4. David's faith and obedience is seen herein that as God directs, so he
obeyes, not fearing the greatness of the Philistines host, and on the Lords
word he builds his confidence, as we should in like manner ours.

5. Verse 20. Though David smote them, yet he ascribes all the victory only to
God, saying, The Lord has broken out upon my Enemies, as a breach of waters,
such is the humility of the Godly looking ever up to the Lords hand, and giving
him the glory of all.

6. The calling of the place Baal perazim, or the breach of waters, or plain of
breaches, shows that the godly desire ever to keep in fresh memory the
mercies, and deliverances that he gives unto them, Psalm. 103. 1, 2.

7. Also we see as the Psalmist speaks, though many be the troubles of the
godly, yet the Lord delivers them out of them all.

8. Verse 21. Whereas there they left their images and David and his men burnt
them, we see 1. the vanity of idols that can not help in the day of distress,
as in 88. and 2. We see what should be done with idols, as the Lord has
commanded, Deuteronomy. 7. 25.

9. Whereas Verse 22. the Philistines yet again came up against David, we see 1.
the restles and irreconciliable malice of the wicked, driven on by Satan, which
they have against God and his Church. 2. how blind they are, in not seeing by
their former experience that the hand of God was against them and made a breach
upon them. 3. We see that Satan leads men in wicked courses to their own
destruction in the end.

10. Verse 23. David will do nothing without direction from God, and consulting
with him, this being the only sure way to prosper, which we also should
follow, and therefore the Lord readily answers, and directs him of new what he
should do.

11. Verse 24. The Lord not only directs what David should do, which he obeyes,
but it is said, that the Lord should go out before him to smite the host of the
Philistines, which is a great comfort to the godly who follow Gods direction,
that his powerful presence, as their general, marches before them to prosper
them, and overcome their Enemies, as it is, or may be a terror to their
Enemies, Josua. 5. 14.

12. God fights for David both by ordinary, and also extraordinary means, as
the shaking of the tops of the mulberry Trees, whence we gather how impossible
it is for man to fight against God, and his Church, seeing he is the Lord of
hosts, who has so many armies, and by the most contemptible of his creatures
is able to overthrow the most mighty: as we see in the plagues of Egypt, the
Rams horns, their sound against Jericho, Gideons pitchers, Herod's lice, and
here a shaking of the tops of Trees. A comfort as is said to such as fight
under such a Captain and his colors, as it is a terror to his Enemies, and
such who rise up against him, or against his Church.

II. SAM. Chap. 6. from the 1 verse. to the 17. and 1 CHRONICLES. 13.
IN this Chapter is set down after David's establishment in his Kingdom, and
victories over his Enemies his Religious disposition, and testimony of his
thankfulness to God by fetching the Ark of God from Kiriath Iearim to his
house now in Sion, and the several passages that fell out therein, which
History is likewise set down, 1 Chronicles. 13. This general argument of the
reduction of the Ark from Kiriath Iearim and house of Aminadab, which all the
time of Saul's reign had been neglected, is divided in two heads. The one is
David's care to establish it in his house at Sion, the second is the impediment
that hindered the same for a time, with his prosecution of his godly intention
afterward, till he brought it to perfection.

But before we proceed it is necessary that we speak somewhat of this Arc it
self, what it was, how it is called, and what was the use, and signification
thereof. As for the first it was a chest of Shittim, or fine wood, overlaid
within and without with gold, as we see, Exodus 25. 10. etc. The cover whereof
was called the propitiatory, whereon stood two Cherubims of Gold, looking and
streatching their wings one toward another, and wherein was kept the two
tables of the Law, Aarons rod that flourished, and the pot of Manna. 2. It was
called (as verse 2.) by the name of the Lord of hosts; being only a sign of
his presence, where we see by way of Sacramental speeches, the sign getting
the name of the thing signified, as circumcision is called the covenant, and
the Lamb the Passover, as likewise Baptism the Laver of regeneration, and the
bread in the Lords Supper Christ's body etc. 3. The use thereof was to represent
Gods presence with his people, and from between the Cherubims to declare his
will and oracles. 4. The signification thereof was. 1. It was the keeper of the
Tables and Testimony: and so is Christ's Church the keeper of the Scriptures, to
them the oracles of God being committed, and the same being the Pillar of
truth. 2. In it was also the pot of Manna and Aarons ^od, and so is the
spiritual food of Doctrine, Sacraments and true exercise of Discipline i^
Christ's Church. 3. The propitiatory covered the Arc, and s^ does Christ our
propitiation his Church by protection, an^ covering of all their defects and
infirmities. 4. God manifested hi^ presence with the Arc, and so does he ever
with his Church 5. The Cherubims stood above it continually, and so does the
Angels as ministering Spirits, b. 1. 14.
attending the same. 6. The oracle^ of God were heard from this only, Job. 10.
4.
and so is his voice to be heard in his true Church only. 7. it was moveable
ever in the Wilderness, till at last it was settled in Solomon's Temple, and so
is the Church restles in this World till it rest at last from its labors in
Heaven, Rev. 14. 13.

Now the first beginning of this Religious work in reforming Religion and
settling his Arc in Sion, who had settled him in his Kingdom, he takes it from
a public assembly of 30000. of the chosen men of Israel, with whom he
deliberates, and whom for the better and more solemn performance he
associates, like a prudent, as well as a pious Prince. But in the performance
and bringing of the Arc from its place where it was, the commandment of God
is not remembered, which was that the Levits should carry it on their shoulders,
but they imitate the example of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 6. Who sent it back on
a cart drawn by beasts, which seems to be the fault of the Levi^s; who gave
themselves too much herein to their own ease. And David and all who were with
him, expressed great Spiritual joy in the performance of this Religious
enterprise, but because, though it was bonum, yet not been performed, therefore
their joy is turned quickly into matter of grief, and mourning, by the sudden
death of Vzzah without warrant for taking hold of the Arc, when it seemed to
stumble and fall, being shaken by the oxen that bore it, which as it greeved
David, so it greatly feared him to bring the Arc at that time any further to
his own house at Sion, and therefore carried it aside to the house of Obed-Edom
where it remained three months, during which time David hearing that the Lord
had blessed the house of Obed-Edom, his fear thereby being removed, he was
encouraged to attempt of new the perfecting of what he formerly intended, and
to bring from thence the Arc to his own house in Sion, which accordingly he
performed with all ^olemnity and expressions of joy and gladness, and offering
of sacrifices to the Lord.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. DAvid now being established in his Kingdom and enjoying peace, he applies
his mind to the establishment of the Lord's Ark, and promoteing of his
worship, a worthy pattern to all Princes and Magistrates of imitation, which
whosoever have followed, have prospered, as on the contrary who have done
otherwise, they have been justly punished. For who honors God, them he will
honor, and who dispises him shall be despised.

2. Hence we see the error of such who think, that the care and reformation of
Religion belongs not to Magistrates, or laiks, as they call them, Princes being
custodes utriusque tabulae, and this having been ever the practice of the Godly
Kings of Judah, who as their power was from God, so they exercised it for God,
as the Godly Emperors did so in like manner.

3. This purpose of his touching the Ark and religion, he puts to execution, by
convocating the chief men of Israel of every estate, consulting and concluding
with them, that by common consent and concurrance, the same may be the better
and more solemnly done, every one assisting according to his calling: but
especially the chief part of this action belonging to the Levites, where we
have the example of a prudent King and of a Godly Council and Parliament. As
we see was followed after by Constantine in the Council of Nice, Theodosius in
Chalcedon: In that of Ephesus likewise, and Constantinople, and in those
religious Princes Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of England.

4. Verse. 2. We see that the Ark, which was a sign and symbol of Gods
presence, is called by the name of God himself (the Lord of hosts, which may
serve to the comfort of his own, and terror of his enemies:) as in
sacramental speeches the name of the thing signified is given to the sign (as
has been said) so that it is a wrong and vain reasoning of the Papists to
argue from these words, this is my body: that therefore the bread is turned in
the substance of Christ's body.

5. Verse. 3. The manner of carrying the Ark is by Oxen on new cart: wherein we
see two errors of the Levites. 1. They leave the Word and ordinance of God,
which commanded that it should be carried upon the Levites shoulders. And 2.
They follow the example of the Philistines, their sending back the Ark upon a
new cart drawn by beasts: which they do partly for celerity, and partly for
their own ease. Where 1. we may see what is the rule in reformation or setting
up of religion, that it should not be by warrantable example or practice of
others, but by the direction and warrant of Gods Word. 2. We may see what is
the bane and ruin of religion, when men give themselves to ease, and the
burden of the Ministry is committed to lasie ignorant and unworthy beasts.

6. Verse. 5. The Ark is conveyed with music of sundry sorts and great
rejoicing, which shows. 1. That the prospering of religion, and advancement of
all lawful courses, for the flourishing and establishing thereof, should be
the matter of our greatest rejoicing. And 2. That music, and the art thereof
is lawful in the Church of God for praising of the Lord in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual songs.

7. David is specially and first here named, as ringleader in this holy
exercise: which shows the duty of all Godly Magistrates and others in Prime
place, to go before Gods people in a good and Godly example of piety and
religious exercises: according as is said, regis ad exemplum, etc. And not to
be defective herein, or givers of evil example, as many do now a days.

8. Verse. 6. In the midst of this joy intervenes a sad and tragical accident,
which obstructs the same, by Vzza'hs unwarrantable laying hold on the Ark, when
it was shaken by the Oxen that bare it, and his being suddenly stricken dead for
his error by the Ark of God. Where we see. 1. How soon may our rejoicing, or
joy in this life be changed into matter of grief, and mourning, such is the
vicissitude whereunto we are here subject unto, till we come to that fullness of
joy, Psalm. 16. 11. Which we shall only without interruption enjoy in the
heavens. 2. We see that Vzzah's good intention in holding up the Ark from
falling, when it was shaken by the Oxen, wanting a warrant, and distrusting (as
it were) Gods own care of his Ark, makes not his action acceptable, nor freeth
him from error and punishment. Neither will the good pretended intentions of
my in the manner of Gods worship, or other unwarrantable actions, be an excuse
unto them, or free them from guilt and punishment: as we see in the example of
Nadab and Abthu, and all will worship. Col. 2. 23. 3. Where so good a man as
Vzzah was, so severely punished for such a small seeming error; (as it might
be called) what may those expect who boldly commit gross and scandalous
sins? without any remorse, or amendment of life.

9. Verse. 7. Where it is said, that for this fact of Vzzah, (though upon a good
intention) the anger of the Lord was kindled against him: and he smote him for
his error etc. We see that sin and error kindles Gods wrath, and looses his
hand of justice unto punishment: therefore how watchful, and loath we should
be to sin, as we would be loath, and fear to kindle Gods anger against our
selves, and thereby to procure his judgments.

10. Where it is said, that God smote him and he died by the Arc: we see that
in the Lords hand is life and death, and how suddenly he may inflict the same,
especially when we provoke his wrath: and therefore we should eschew sin; the
wages whereof is death, and fear God (as our Savior exhorts us) Who when he
has killed the body can cast both soul and body in hell fire. Likewise we see
that the Ark brings death and destruction to Vzzah; but (as after) blessing to
Obededom, even so the right use, or abuse of the Word and Sacraments, brings
the like to the right users or abusers thereof. And we should fear with a
profane heart and hands to come and touch that holy Sacrament, that is called
Christ's body and blood, as the Ark was called the Lord of hosts.

10. Verse. 8. This sad accident produces in David. 1. Grief or displeasure,
that the Lord had been so offended, and made such a breach upon Vzzah. And 2.
Fear to bring the Ark of God at that time to his house at Sion. Where we see,
1. David's Godly grief that God should have been grieved at that which Vzzah
unwarrantably had done against the Law, which did inhibite, that the Levites
should otherwise carry the Ark, but upon their own shoulders, and not touch it
otherwise, but only by bearing it by the instruments and bars appointed for
that purpose. 2. That God should have been moved by their not taking heed to
his ordinance and sinning thereby to have smitten Vzzah by so sudden and
unexpected death, which shows 1. The grief that Godly men have at the offense
of God, which is expressed Ezekiel. 9. 4. Jer. 9. 1. and Psalm. 119. 136. And 2. The
sympathy that they have with others who for their errors are justly punished
or chastised by the hand of God, as fellow feeling members of one body. And 3.
How by the punishments of others they are instructed, and fear to commit any
like offense whereby Gods anger may be kindled against themselves.

11. Whereas in remembrance of that punishment inflicted on Vzzah, he called
the name of the place Perez-Vzzah, or the breach of Vzzah. We see that not only
the testimonies of the Lords mercy toward the Godly, and their deliverances
should be remembered, but likewise the testimonies of his justice toward
offenders. The first to tie us to his obedience as by love cords, the other to
terrify us from offending his divine Majesty, as we see Psalm. 119. 120.

12. Verse. 11. This fear that David had of carrying the Ark at that time to
his own house, makes him to carry it aside to the house of Obed-Edom, a Gittite
where it remained three months, during all which time the house of Obed-Edom
was blessed. To teach us, that where religion, and the Word of God and
Sacraments gets footing: there is and will be the blessing of the Lord, as when
Jacob was with Laban, Joseph in Potiphars house, and the widow of Zarephath
for her sustaining of Eliah. Much more also is that soul blessed where Christ
himself is suborned, or his poor members

13. Verse. 12. and 1 Chronicles. 15. 25. Where upon the report of the Lords blessing
Obed-Edoms house, because of the Ark. David of new again enterpriseth the
bringing of the Ark unto his house in Sion. We see that good purposes should
never be left off altogether, although they find some rubs and impediments ^ast
in the way, through the policy of Satan, or men's obstructions.

14. One maine cause of this renewed enterprise is the report of the Lords
blessing of the house of Obed-Edom, not that David envyed the same: but that he
was desirous to be partaker of this blessing of the Lord, by harboring the Ark
in like manner in his own house at Sion. Which shows the disposition of the
truly Godly, like Jacob they will wrestle for the blessing of God, and will
endeavor by all means, and above all things to have the Lord to bless
themselves, and their families, and have the light of his countenance to shine
upon them, as Psalm. 4. 6. As also we see, that it is good to be in a Godly
family, for there is the blessing of God.

15. Verse. 13. In the carrying of the Ark now this second time from the house
of Obed-Edom to the City of David: we see the former error amended; that the
Levites bore the same, as the Law commanded, and therefore it had the better
success. Where we see that it is a token of great wisdom and grace to consider
wherein any error has been, for which God has been angry, and punished a land
or persons: and when they have found out (...) same (as Achan^ fault was) to
redress the same; as is done here.

16. It is said likewise that when they that bare the Ark, (towit, the Levites)
had gone six paces, David sacrificed Oxen, and Fatlings, being mindful of the
Lords anger that burst forth in a temporal judgment against Vzzah for his
error; that the Lord by these legal Sacrifices might be appeased, if any like
error or provocation ignorantly should fall out in this second bearing of the
Ark from the house of Obed-Edom, as we see the like practice of Job. 1. 5.
Which teaches us to be still in fear to offend God in the meanest measure or
manner, and by a watchful care so far as in us lies to prevent his
displeasure.

17. Verse. 14. David also danced before the Ark, girded with a linen Ephod:
white being the color of joy, and linen being light for use. Which fact of
his was extraordinary, and therefore not to be imitated. His dancing being a
sign of the great joy of his heart, upon this extrarodinary action of bringing
the Ark from the house of Obed-Edom to his own house, and this linen Ephod not
being a priestly, or leviticall vesture, but a covering of his royal
under-apparell, made of linen, like to an Ephod, to witness his humility, as
we see Verse. 22. And that he thought no disgrace in the Ephod, as many do the
office of the Ministry. Whence we see also, that with spiritual rejoicing, and
with humility the performance of religious duties should be, but not from
extraordinary outward practices: to argue for the like ordinary performances,
that by David's dancing before the Ark, immodest, lascivious dancing should be
authorized, which is for exciting of lust, or other sinful ends, as that
dancing was of Herodias daughter.

18. The joy and rejoicing that is made by the King, and people at the bringing
up of the Ark, shows us what is, and should be the right cause of the Godlies
rejoicing, even the establishing of Gods true religion, from the highest to the
lowest, and not in things unstable and transitory, as Nebuchadnezzar's storring
was, and the rich fool of the Gospel: but let him that rejoices, rejoice in
the Lord, for there is nothing but this, wherein we may not rejoice, either
unme^sureably, or unseasonably, but in spiritual joy, we can neither be out of
time nor measure.

II SAM: Chap: 6. from the 17. verse to the end.
Follows now the fixing and establishment of the Ark in his place at Sion,
which David had prepared for it, his sacrificing to the Lord, and his blessing
of his people, and royal beneficence toward them: after the performance
whereof, when he came into his house to bless his household likewise. He finds a
new matter of grief and indignation, ministered unto him by a profane woman,
the daughter of a profane Father: Michal, his own wife, and Saul's daughter,
who first Verse. 16. despised him in her heart for dancing before the Ark. And
next, bursts ^orth now in open and unreverent upbraiding and mocking him, is if
in doing as he did, he had forgotten royal dignity, gravity, and suitable
carriage: and had made himself contemptible to the very lowest and basest of
his people, even the hand maids of his ^ervants: and behaved himself not as a
King, but as one of the most rascal multitude; or as one of the vain fellows
shamelesly ^ncovereth himself. Whereby she not only shows her pro^hane
irreligious disposition toward God, and his service; but ^er audacious,
irreverent and unbeseeming miscarriage, both as a subject to her sovereigne:
and as a dutiful wife toward her husband; for which she justly receives a
sharp check, and a bitter reply from her husband, and a sad punishment of
barrenness inflicted upon her from God to the day of her death.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 17. DAvid makes his Palace a Sanctuary by setting in it the Lords
Tabernacle, and Ark of the Covenant: a good example for all Princes, and others
to follow in advancing of religion and to make their house, like a Church, or
house of God, by settling religious exercises therein of the Word, prayer and
praising of God, and a suitable religious practice, as the Lord praised Abraham
for this, Genesis 18. 19. And as Joshua resolved to do Josh. 24. 15. And as we see
here in David, Psalm. 101. 2, 3, 4. etc. All his former victories ending now in
devotion.

2. When David had settled the Ark, and performed his worship to God by
Sacrificing, Verse. 18. He blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts,
which he did both as a Prophet, and as a pious loving Princed praying to God
for them, and wishing from God a blessing to them. Wherein we see the pattern
of a Godly, and a loving Prince, which is not only to rule his people by Laws,
and good Example: but likewise to pray for the welfare of his people, (as they
also should do for him) and to beg a blessing from God upon them, and upon his
government over them.

3. The Lord is called here by David, the Lord of hosts, whereby he thankfully
insinuates, who was the Author of all his former victories, and success of his
hosts, or Armies, even the Lord, who is the Lord of hosts, and has
innumerable hosts of Angels and other inferior creatures ready at his
command, to fight for his own, and be avenged on his Enemies, as we see in
Pharaoh's plagues, and Herod's destruction, Act. 12. and elsewhere. Which may be
a comfort to the Godly, and a terror to their foes.

4. Verse. 19. With blessing of the people David joins beneficence, and
liberality in giving and dealing to the whole multitude of Israel, as well
women as men, a quantity of bread, of flesh, and of wine for their
entertainment; so it is a good thing when benedicere and benefacere goes
together. And when in a Prince, is seen not only piety toward God, but love
and liberality toward his people, and that he is rather careful to supply
their wants, and necessities, then any ways by sad exactions and the like, to
bring them to want and necessity.

5. David, when he is quieted from external troubles, and as he had first
blessed his people (...) now ( Verse. 20.) to bless his house, as a religious
Master of a Family taking special care thereof. He falls now into domestic
discontents, by Michal Saul's daughter, and his wife, her scornful and proud
upbraiding. Thus are the Godly still exercised with some cross, or other,
which like Jobs messengers fall, one on the back of another. Thus we see was
Abraham exercised in the persons of Hagar and Ishmael. Isaac in Esa^ and his
wives, the daughters of Heth. Jacob in the persons of Dinah. Simeon and Levi,
and selling of Joseph, Samuel in his two sons, and David here, and sadly
hereafter. In Amnon, Tamar and Absalom.

6. David here is a type of Christ, who as he was despised, and reproached by
his own, so was Christ when he came into the world, as we see Joh. 1. 12. And
no greater enemies had his Apostles, and Church then the false Apostles, and
his own people the unbelieving Jews, and hereafter the Arrian heretics and
others; who yet professed to be for the truth of the Gospel, and the Church of
Christ. And last of all, Antichrist and his followers who pretend to be the
only true Church of Christ, and yet are the most dangerous enemies, and
persecutors thereof.

7. Verse. 16. It is said, that Michal despised David first in her heart, and
now Verse. 20. She utters her contempt by the speeches of her mouth, wherein
we see. 1. Where Satan and sin first begins: towit, at the spring and root
of the heart, to poison the same; which therefore we should watch over with all
diligence, and remember that which the Lord requires, my son give me thy
heart. 2. We see that where the heart is once poisoned, and possessed, sin and
Satan never rest till they proceed further, and come to a ripe harvest: as we
see in our first parents. In the lusting of the sons of God before the deluge
after the daughters of men. In Simeon and Levies wrath against Sechem, Cains
against Abell, Achans coveting the Babylonish garment etc. And Judas coveting
the 30. pieces of Silver, etc. So that principiis obsta, is a good rule.

8. In Michal's fact we see the profane disposition of irreligious persons,
who count all actions of zeal to be but folly, and who cannot content to be
irreligious themselves, but to sit down (as Psa. 1. 1.) In the chair of the
scorner, and to be the mockers of Religion, and of a religious disposition in
others, which indeed is the putting on the very kepstone of wickedness and
profaneness.

9. In this fact of hers, we see also the gross breach of matrimonial duty,
who being David's Wife, should have reverenced him, as her Husband, as is
commanded, Ephesians. 5. 33. And was done by the holy women of old, 1 Pet. 3. 6. And
not reproachfully, nor scornfully upbraided him: a vice therefore to be
eschewed in all godly Wives, who ought to obey their Husbands in all Lawful
things, but simply, always to reverence them.

10. In this speech of Michal's, we see likewise exorbitant pride, censuring
her Husbands Laudable, and godly practice, as a base, shameless and foolish
fact, more be seeming the basest, and vilest fellows: then the dignity and
gravity of a King, and so she would ascribe to herself greater wisdom, and
care of keeping state dignity then David had, and does impute unto him
baseness and folly. Where we see how great and dangerous (...) sin pride is;
whereby miscarriage on her part, so grossly is produced: whereby also we see
contention comes to be between most conjunct persons, whereby she procures from
David a most sharp, and sarcastike answer; and whereby also she procures from
God a sore and sad punishment, and her name with the black cole of infamy
registered unto all posterity. And therefore this should teach not only
humility to all Women, and observing of matrimonial duty herein, in being of a
meek and quiet Spirit, as is enjoined, 1 Pet. 3. 4. And accounting their
wisdom inferior to their Husbands, who are godly and wise, as David was, but
also it should teach all Persons to avoid pride, as they would the bitter
fruits of that forbidden Tree, and contrary to that, which is Satan's sin, to
learn of Christ to be meek and humble.

10. Verse 21. In David's answer to Michal he show, that what he did, he did it
out of humility, as before the Lord, who had rejected the house of Saul her
Father, and had advanced him to be ruler over Israel, and therefore in regard
that it was before the Lord, who had been such a promoter of him to so high a
place, he could not be humble enough, and therefore he would be more vile yet,
and base in his own fight. Where we see, that it is not the mocking of a
Religious disposition, or bitter reproaching thereof, that will discourage the
truly godly to desist from their duty, but that constantly they will the more
rather insist therein, upon the motive of remembrance of Gods goodness toward
them beyond others, and what he requires therefore at their hands.

11. Verse 22. Where David shows to Michal, that he will be yet more base in his
own eyes, and so study self-denial and humility, and yet by doing so, he
should be had in honor of these maid servants, that she spoke of, who would,
or did contemn him. (as she said) We learn hereby, that humility and baseness
in ones own sight is the readier way to be honored of others: then a puffed up
heart by pride, and hawty, and high looks, which God resists and disappoints,
when he gives grace and ^referment to the godly and humble, as we see in the
example ^f Mordecai and Haman, as also that the heart is in Gods hand, which he
moves to honor them, who honor him.

12. Verse 23. Michal is not only punished for her pride and ^ornfull
reproaching, by David's sharp and bitter reply to her, ^ut likewise she is
plagued of God, by barrenness all her life, and depriving her of the comfort
of Children, or succession: which amongst the Israelits was counted a great
reproach, and doubtless was a great grief to herself. So that we see not only
what is the fruit of sin which it produces, especially prophanity, and
mocking of piety, but likewise how the Lord will avenge the quarrels of his
own, and the wrong, or indignities that is done unto them. Therefore said he,
Saul, Saul why persecutes thou me? And so tender is he and sensible of their
injuries, That who touches them, touches the apple of his own eye.

13. Where it is said that she had no Child till the day of her death, that is,
none all her life time: not that hereby is meant, that she had any after her
death, which form of speech serves to show the meaning of that place, Matthew.
5. 26. Which Papists allege for men's satisfactions in purgatory, where it is
said, That they shall not come forth of prison, till they have paid the
uttermost farthing, that is, never, and as it is said Matthew. 1. 25. Of Joseph
that he knew not Mary, till she brought forth her first borne Son, and called
his name Jesus.

II. SAM. Chap. 7. to the 18. verse and 1 CHRONICLES. 17.
THe general subject of this Chapter is the History of David's deliberation to
build a Temple for God, and the stay thereof, which is comprehended in four
particulars. 1. David's deliberation, and conclusion, with the consent there to,
and approbation of the Prophet Nathan, from the 1. Verse to the 4. 2. The
impediment and reasons thereof, revealed by God to his Prophet Nathan, and by
him to David from the 4. Verse to the 12. 3. The promise made by God to David
that his So^ Solomon should perform that intended work by him, and that hi^
Kingdom should endure for ever, from the 12. Verse to the 18 And 4. David's
thanksgiving to God for his gracious acceptatio^ of his intention, and promise
of his favor to him, and to hi^ house, and for all his past benefits, that he
had bestowed on him* For the more clear understanding of all which former
things, confer with this, 1 Chronicles. 17. and 22. 1 Kings 6. and 8. and Psalm. 89.

First then is set down David's deliberation with Nathan to build a Temple to
the Lord, and his Arc, which he had brought to his house in Sion, of the which
there are assigned three several reasons. 1. From the opportunite of the time,
which is said to be, when David was settled in his house, and God had given him
rest round about from all his Enemies, and which has relation to Deuteronomy. 12. 3.
2. From the duty of gratitude which has a warrant from the word of God, that
seeing God had given him a house, peace and such preferment, therefore he would
build a house likewise to God. 3. Ab honesto, or seemlinesse, by a comparison a
minori ad majus, that it is not seemly and honest that he should dwell in a
house of Cedar, and the Ark of God should dwell within curtains.

Next follows Nathans approbation of so holy an intention, and promise that
the Lord should be with him in the performance, but not having first consulted,
and had warrant from the Lord, he shows herein his temerity and rashness,
therefore the Lord that very night reveals his will in the contrary to Nathan,
and by him to David; not that David did evil in this his intending, for 1
King. 8. 18. The Lord said to him, Whereas it was in thy heart to build an
house to my name, thou did well. But from the performance thereof he
disswades him, by three arguments. The first is, Verse 5. by way of
interrogation equivalent to a negative, as if he would say, thou shall not
build an house to me, not having a calling from me to that work: the reason
whereof is elsewhere set down, because he was a man of blood, and had wars
with those about him on every side, as we see, 1 King. 5. 3. And so ^e was
called to another work, to fight the battles of the Lord. The second argument
is, from the practice of God and David's predecessors: Gods practice being, not
to dwell in any such material house, since he brought them out of Egypt, but
walking in a Tabernacle, and not commanding them to build any such house unto
him, or quarrelling with them for not doing so, but only injoyning them, to
feed his people Israel, and they obeying. The third argument is, after the
rehearsal, of all Gods goodness to David, from a low estate advancing him to
a royal dignity, and giving him victory over all his Enemies, and his people
rest and peace under him, as also that he should establish the Kingdom to him,
and his posterity, then he tells him that he had appointed his Son (meaning
Solomon) to be the man that should build the Temple, Verse 13. To whom he
promises to be a Father, Verse 14. And he should be a Son unto him, etc. Only
in the words, Verse 16. and elsewhere. That his Kingdom, and Throne should be
established for ever, lies a difficulty, seeing we see the contrary now, and
long ago when the Scepter departed from Judah, etc. I answer, 1. This ( for
ever) is interpreted, Verse 19. not to signify properly an eternity of
indurance, as in some other places; but (as the words are) a great while to
come, and so the Scripture does expone it self. 2. This establishment ( for
ever) may be understood not of the external, and temporal Kingdom of David
himself, who was the type of Christ, who is called the Son of David, but of the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ Jesus under the Gospel, who was of the seed of
David, according to the flesh, and of whom it is said, Isai. 9, 7. That of the
increase of his government there shall be no end.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. IT is said, that the Lord gave David rest from all his Enemies, which
shows us that the godly have had, still have, and shall have Enemies to the
Worlds end: this being the emnity that was proclaimed in Paradise between the
seed of the Woman, and seed of the Serpent, which showed it self at first in
the murder of Abell, and proceeds from Satan's malice, and the corrupt nature
of man, Genes. 6. 5. Whence it is that the Church of Christ is compared to a
Lilly amongst Thorns, Cant. 2. 2.

2. We see the curbing, and restraining power of God over all such, that as he
calmed the storm, Matthew. 8. 24. So he can calm the rage of all the wicked
against his Church in his own good time, as he did Esau's against Jacob, and
as he gave rest here to David from all his Enemies.

3. It is said that God gave him rest, which shows: That of rest from
troubles, and of all good things we should acknowledge God to be the Author,
and therefore be thankful to him. For which it is said, Many are the troubles
of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all. And Psalm. 50.
15. call upon me (says the Lord) in the day of thy trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me.

4. Verse 2. In David's intention to build an house to God, we see what should be
the right use of Princes, or others, their prosperity and peace, towit, the
giving of themselves in testimony of their thankfulness to God, to the
establishment of Religion within their dominions, or houses.

5. In the intending to build a house to God, he consults with Nathan the Lords
Prophet, to teach us. That in matters that concern Religion, or the worship of
God, we should consult with the true Prophets and Pastors of God, whose lips
should preserve knowledge, and the people should enquire of the Law of God at
their mouths.

6. We see in David a most religious disposition; Laudable and imitable, who
thinks it an unseemly thing that he should dwell in a house of Cedar, and God's Ark should dwell within curtains. Which should teach many great men to think
so, that their houses should not be like pleasant, and glorious palaces, and
Gods house, or Church wherein he is worshipped should be so base and beggarly,
like cottages.

7. Verse 3. In David's resolution, as likewise Nathans approbation thereof, we
see that both do err, whereby we see. How unsure is that warrant, or direction
in matters of Religion, that is grounded only upon humane authority without
the express and clear warrant of the oracle of God, and of his Word. Though
the intention were never so praise worthy, or plausible.

8. Likewise we see, that the best intentions even of the best are dangerous to
be approved, or followed, without a warrant from the Word of God: as is said,
though never so specious, as we see, Col. 3. 23. Saepe enim coruscat in
conspectu operant is, quod sordefcit in conspectu judicantis.

9. Verse 4. God reduces David from his error, not immediately, by speaking to
David; but mediatly by speaking to him by Nathan, to show. That this honor God
will have his true Ministers to enjoy, that by them, as his messengers, and
Ambassadors he will his people to know his will: as by interpreters Joseph
would speak to his Brethren, though he could immediately (as he did at last)
speak to themselves, and who hears them hears him, and who despises them,
despises him.

10. The Lord manifests his will to Nathan, as a faithful Prophet, that so he
may faithfully deliver the same to David, as there after also he did in the
matter of Vriah, which was David's great happiness. So that happy is that
Prince, and people that has a faithful Ministry, who will reveal to them the
whole counsel of God, as the Apostle speaks, Act. 20. 27.

11. Verse 5. David a King, is called here Gods servant who is King of Kings,
the fairest flower in any Kings crown, and highest and best title they can
claim; to be called the servants of God.

12. The first arguments by which he inhibits him to be the builder of Gods
house, is, because he had not a calling thereto, which should teach us. That
although the work be good in it self which a man may do, yet if he have not a
calling thereunto, he ought not to meddle therewith, or run before he be sent,
as we see in the examples of Vzzah, and Vzziah: and on the contrary, as we see
in Christ, the holy Prophets, and blessed Apostles.

13. Verse 8. The Lord remembers David, that he may be humble and thankful,
from what a low condition he brought him, even from the sheepcoat to so high
and royal dignity: therefore let not men marvel to see the like doing of the
Lord, now adays, in raising some, and throwing down others. And let such with
whom the Lord so deals, remember their low estate, and be humble; and what is
their duty in their higher place, especially to honor him, who has honored
them, and to be thankful. Let us also remember from how low an estate of
Satan's slaves, God^ ha^ advanced us to be a royal Priesthood, Rev. 1. 6. And
to be God servants.

14. V. 9. and 10. The Lord shows that it was he, by his merciful and
powerful presence with David, that had cut of his Enemies, and made him great,
and his people in a peaceable estat^ under him, to teach him, and all Princes,
and others to ascribe their prosperity, and good condition to the Lord, and to
give him the glory of all.

15. V. 11. Where it is told David, that in respect he intended to build a
house to God, the Lord likewise should make him a house. We see that the Lord
will not suffer the good and laudable intentions of the godly to be unrewarded:
much more their pious and commendable actions, no, not a cup of cold water
given to one of his, which shall want its reward. Which should be a great
encouragement to pious and good works.

16. As it is God that raises great houses; so it is he that brings down great
houses for their sinning against him, and this is the cause why many great
houses in the Land are fallen, and their honor laid in the dust, because they
honored not God, as they ought in time of their prosperity.

17. Verse 12. Where it is said, ( when thy days are fulfilled) we see the
shortness of man's life, numbered not like the richfools Arithmetike by many
years, but by days, as Jacob professed, Job 14. 1. and 14.
and these few and evil, so did Job count his life, but by days, as Moses also
taught the people to do, Psalm. 90. 12.

18. Likewise we see here that your life is limited, and there is a fulfilling
of our days, which cannot beyond Gods pleasure be shortened, or prolonged, he
being that secret Palmoni, or numberer, which we see professed by Job 7. 1. and
14. 14.

19. Where it is said, when David should sleep with his Fathers, we see, what
the death of the godly is, as Rev. 14. 13. And therefore no more to be feared,
then sleep which makes us ly down in our beds: or rest to a weary traveller, or
a hard labourer, Job 7. 2. Which made the Apostle to desire to be dissolved
that he might be with Christ, and Revel. 14. 13. to call it a rest from our
labors.

20. The Lord promises after David's death to bless his posterity, whereby we
see that it is true which the Lord says, Exodus 20. 6. That he will show mercy
to thousands of them, who love him, and keep his commandments, and that it is a
happy blessing to come of good, and godly parents, if their offspring insist in
their footsteps.

21. Verse 13. Where it is said, that David's Son, towit, Solomon, should build
a house to his name, which was a greater honor to him, then the honor of his
Kingdom, we see that in like manner it is the greatest honor, that any Prince
can attain unto, to be the builder, not of a material house, but of the Church
of Christ, and promoter of his truth, like a nursing Father to the Church: as
the godly Kings of Judah were, and the godly Christian, and Orthodox Emperors,
which would to God, that all Christian Kings would now adays consider, and
that they would not prop up Antichrists throne, and persecute the true Church
of Christ. For this should be the way of the establishment of their Kingdoms,
as is here promised to him who should build the Temple.

22. Verse. 14. The Lord says moreover that he should be his Father, and he his
son: which is the greatest honor that any King can have, and the only true
nobility which Kings, or any can claim unto, and wherein to their singular
comfort the poorest Godly house has a share and perceive therein the admirable
love of God, as the Apostle shows, 1 John 3. 1.

23. But as this is the ground of singular, and manifold comforts (as of his
love to us, even when he is correcting us, Heb. 12. 6. His care for us, his
protection of us, and granting any good thing to us etc.) So this teaches us
also our duty of sons, to love him, to obey him, to honor him, to serve him,
to be zealous, of his honor, to rely in him, and his Fatherly goodness: for
all things we stand in reach of* and at last, for that heavenly inheritance
which he has prepared for us.

24. And if he commit iniquity, where it is said, I will chastise him with the
rods of men, etc. We see the Godliest may have, and have their own failings and
falls* as we see in David, Solomon, and Peter, when they are ^eft never so
little, or short while to themselves, or force of temptation: and therefore
should eve^ be watchful over themselves with prayer; and as is said, Phil 2.
12. Be working out your own salvation with fear, and wit trembling.

25. Also here we see, what the committing of iniquity procures, even to the
Godliest, towit, sharp correction, as David and Solomon found. And therefore
let not the wicked (though spared for a time) expect impunity, but that
dreadful punishment abides them, who neither repent, as the Godly do: and who
make a trade of sin as, Psalm. 1. 1. and as we see, Psalm. 73. 18. Nor yet let
any think that want of correction, and prosperity here, is a mark of Gods
Children.

26. We see also, when the Godly are corrected, that those whom the Lord
permits to trouble, and afflict them, are called the Children of wickedness,
Verse. 10. They are nothing else but like the rods of men, wherewith they
chastise their dearest Children for their good: and therefore as the Godly with
David in Shimeis railing, and as Job spoke, Job. 1. 21. They should look up to
the hand of God: so when the Lord by such has sufficiently chastised them: he
will cast the rod in the fire; which should be a terror to all wicked
persecutors, and troublers of his Israel.

27. Where it is said, Verse. 15. (But my mercy shall not depart away from him,
as I took it from Saul.) Here we see with what sweetness the Lord tempers the
bitter cup of the sufferings of his own, which should comfort them in their
sharpest corrections, and be their prayer. And what is the difference between
the punishments of the wicked, and corrections) of the Godly: the one is a
mixed cup with the sweetness of mercy, tending to conversion, like the dealing
of a Father with his Child: the other a cup of wrath without mixture of mercy
or love, as we see, Revel. 14. 10. Tending to eversion, like the dealing of a
Judge with a malefactor condemned to death.

28. Verse. 17. Where it is said, That according to these words, and according
to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. We see the fidelity of the
Lords. Prophet, which all his servants in the Ministry should imitate, and that
he is not ashamed to recall, and recant what formerly he had said to David,
Verse. 3. Upon better ground and information from the Lord. Which should teach
all men humbly ever to submit to truth, and quit error; and not to stand upon
their own credit, in maintaining what once they have professed without
retractation: the contrary whereof we see good Aug^stine did to his ever and
singular commendation.

II. SAM. Chap. 7. from the 18. Verse to the end.
Follows the second part of the Chapter, wherein is set down David's
thanksgiving: both for the promise made to himself, as also to his posterity,
and for the benefits past, present and promised, which he concludes with a
petition for the continuance of the Lords favor, and performance of his
gracious promises.

Which Eucharisticall oration has, 1. Its Exordium, or beginning. 2. A
narration. And 3. A conclusion.

1. The Exordium has the place, where David makes it, and his gesture. The
place is the sanctuary now established in Sion, into which now he comes, and
where the Ark was, and to which the Lord had promised his presence. Next his
gesture was sitting, which was to denote the settledness of his mind, in
uttering his oration. Used therefore by Judges in hearing of parties, and
pronouncing sentences, no wise to be taken exception against in David, as
unreverent: more then in us in hearing of Gods Word; and singing of Psalms:
and sometimes in prayer, as at meat and elsewhere. For the special thing that
the Lord looks unto, is the sincerity of the heart, and truth in the inward
parts: as Psalm. 51. 6, ^s declared.

2. The narration it self, has (...) A depressing, and lying low of David
himself, as he says elsewhere, What is man that thou should so respect him?
etc. And here, What was he that the Lord, not only should have brought him to
such preferment, but also promised the establishment of the Kingdom to his
posterity? which is not the manner of men to look so low to their inferiors,
and without their deserving: from a low estate (having no motive on their part)
to advance them, and theirs to a high condition. 2. Next, to depressing of
himself, Verse. 22. He advances God, his greatness, and goodness: both toward
himself, and his people; and thereafter from Verse. 25. He petitions the Lord
to establish his promises to him, and his posterity which he acknowledges to be
true; and that he would of his good pleasure bless his house, and to continue
it before him. And ^is he makes to be the conclusion of this forenamed
thanksgiving.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. WE see that David is not only thankful in heart, but also for the Lords
benefits, he expresses the same by Word: that so by the whole man God may be
worshipped, as it is said, we believe with the heart unto righteousness* and
confess with our mouth's unto salvation.

2. Verse. 18. Where he says, Who am I? etc. We see that the Lords benefits
move David to humility, and dejection, with Jacob, the Godly ever acknowledging
themselves unworthy of the least of all his mercies, Genesis 32. 10. Whereas on
the contrary the wicked are puffed up with them, as we see in Nebuchadnezzar, and
Pharaoh, who said who is God, that I should obey him? And therefore the
benefits of God to the Godly are blessings indeed, whereas to the wicked they
are turned into curses: through their abuse of them unto pride, excess,
tyranny, and the like.

3. Verse. 19. Where the Lord not only promises to establish the kingdom to
David himself, but also to his posterity after him: we see the large bounty,
and goodness of God to his servants, and that he does more to them, then they
could expect: as we see in Jacobs profession, Genesis 48. 11. In Joseph's, David's,
Mordecai's, Daniels and others their preferment. And here in the promise to
David concerning his posterity.

4. Verse. 20. Where David says, thou Lord know thy servant. We see that the
Lord is an omniscient God, and who knows particularly all his servants, and
subjects: and the very secrets of their hearts. The truth whereof in the hidden
and inward parts he does desire, Psalm. 51. 6. And therefore David having this
sincerity of heart can say, what an hypocrite dare not, thou Lord know thy
(...).

5. Verse. 21. All the Lords promises, and goodness to him, (...) it ascribes to
free love only: as the Lord himself speaks, Hos. 14. 4. Which we also should
do, and to no (...).

6. Verse. 22. In David's abasing of himself. Verse. 18. And extolling of God:
both his greatness, and goodness here. We see the disposition of the truly
Godly, they can never enough extol, acknowledge, and praise the Lord: as the
spouse does in the Canticles; and David in the Psalms. Nor can they
sufficiently lie low enough before him in the dust: as we see, Genesis 18. 27. 32.
10. In the Publican, and parable of the Prodigal, and others.

7. This matchless and incomparable greatness, and goodness of God: David
says, is, according to that which he had heard with his ears: showing thereby
unto us (as the Apostle speaks) that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing is of
the Word of God whereunto we should therefore hearken, if we would be truly
instructed, and believe to salvation.

8. Verse. 23. If Gods goodness to his people be so extolled by David here, for
a corporal redemption from Egypt, and from the Nations and their gods: how
much more should he be extolled by us Christians, for that great and spiritual
redemption of our souls from the tyranny and bondage of Satan, sin and
damnation: and for our liberation (who profess the Gospel) from the tyranny
of Antichrist, and his gross Idolatry.

9. Verse. 25. and 26. In speaking of Gods promises he ever makes mention, that
they are made to his servant. Where we see, who have right to the promises of
God, or may justly lay hold upon them: towit, only they who are Gods servants,
and who apply themselves to obey his precepts; these only may apply to
themselves his promises: What God therefore has joined together, let us man
separate.

10. Verse. 28. Where David says to the Lord, That he is that God whose Word is
true; we see that the Word of God is the prop of the Godlies faith, one jot
whereof shall never fail, no has ever failed toward his own.

11. Verse. 29. David closes up all, with an earnest and reiterated petition for
a blessing to himself, and his house forever; so that herein he is like Jacob,
who wrestled for the blessing: and it should be likewise our earnest suit to
the Lord, that he would in like manner bestow his blessing upon us and ours,
and if we ge^ this Fatherly blessing of his, all will be well, and we may say,
I is sufficient.

II SAM. Chap. 8. and 1 CHRONICLES. 18.
IN this Chapter (the General sum whereof is the amplification of David's
kingdom in his own time, and by his own person) are these particulars set
down. 1. The five wars that he had, against the Philistines, Moabites, the
King of Zobah, the King of (...), and the Edomites, all whom he subdued, and
whereby his Empire was enlarged not only from Sichar the river in the South, to
Euphrates in the North, but further almost from Sinai: and mount Caucasus in
Arabia Petra in the South, even to mount Taurus, and Armenia, beyond Euphrates
in the North. This is set down from the first to the 9. verse. and in the 14.

2. Verse. 9. and 10. Is set down Toi, King of Hamath his congratulatory
message of David's victory over the King of Zoba: with the cause thereof, and
what gifts he sent unto David.

3. Is set down what David did with these gifts, and all the rich spoils of
all the Nations which he subdued, verse. 11. and verse. 15. to the end of the
Chapter is set down David's ordering of the Kingdom by administration of
justice, in his own person, to all his people now settled in peace, as also by
electing, and appointing fit officers and rulers delegate, and subalterne to
himself, to govern both in the Church, and in the Commonwealth.

The first war then which David had, was with the Philistines, who were
descended from the Egyptians, whose progenitor was Misram, the second son of
cursed Ham: infidells in religion, and Capital enemies to the people of God,
whom David sublued and took their strongest City M^th^^ Ammah from them, which
is by interpretation, the bridle of Ammah* because being situated on strong
hills, it hindered the Israelites to overcome the same.

The second war was against the Moabites, descended of Lot, that incest ^o ^s
copulation with one of his own daughters in the time of his drunkenness: as we
read, Genesis 19. 37. Of whom it is said, that he measured them with a line, by a
Metaphor from Artizans, that measure their work so: or from measurers of land,
whereby is showed, that he destroyed the two parts of them, and kept only the
third part alive.

The third war was against Hadadezer King of Zobah, whose proper name was
Adad, as Pharaoh was of the Egyptian Kings.

The fourth war was with the King of Syria, whose name is not here expressed,
but his chief City, and country Damascus: lying between the hill Hermon and
Libanus, now called, Caelosyria, the cause of which war was, because they
took part with H^dadezer against David.

The fifth war verse. 14. Is against the Edomites, in whole towns (being
subdued) he put Carlson's, and which was done by Abi^h^i the son of Zerviah,
as we read, 1 Chronicles. 18. 12.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. FRom these several wars here spoken of, we learn. That all wars are
not unlawful: as we have showed before, on 2 Samuel 2. 17. at length, against
Anabaptists.

2. More particularly, that these wars of David against the persons, and
Nations before named were lawful: we may see, 1. Because the destruction and
subdueing of these enemies to Israel, was fore prophesied by Balaam, Number. 24.
17. And God man David the instrument of fulfilling of this prophesy. 2. They
ha^ incroached upon the territories and bounds of the land: whi^^ the Lord had
given to Israel, and was divided unto them Joshua. 3. It is said, verse. 6. and
14. That in all these whether soever he went, the Lord preserved David, which
shows (...) he was walking in Gods ways, to which only his preservatio^ is
promised: and that he had a good cause in hand, and inte^^ded them not either
out of pride, (the mother of contention) (...) covetousness: as we see, verse.
11. But only made these war upon a good ground, and for a right end: to wit,
the glory (...) God, and accomplishing his will; and the good of his people,
and their quiet, and freedom from such insolent and infesting enemies, as they
had at diverse times proved; as we see in the book of the Judges, and late
reign of Saul.

3. The Lord had promised to David to build him a house, and (as he had
hitherto done) to make him a great name ( chap. 7. 9.) yet he is not idle, but
use^ the lawful means, to teach us to do the like, when we look on the
promises of God, of salvation, Phil. 2. 12. Or protection, Act. 27. 31. Or
providing for us, Genesis 3. 1^. etc. So that we should neither tempt God by not
using the means, nor yet distrust God by confiding in the means only.

4. All this which was done by David unto these wicked nations was (as is said)
fore-prophesied by Balaam, and yet before this performance 400. years and more
had intervened, whereby we see, 1. The Lords lenity and long suffering
patience, which should have led them to repentance. 2. The truth of the Lords
threatenings at last, as well as of his promises: therefore let not the Godly be
discouraged that their enemies are not presently, or in short time punished;
for the Lord suffers them to fill their cup, and at last he will come, though
with leaden feet, yet with an iron heavy hand to crush them, as a pot hard in
pieces.

5. David slew the Syrians who came to succor Hadadezer against him. Whereby
we see, that it is dangerous to assist the wicked against the Godly, or to be
pertakers with any in an ill cause or course, as the example of Jehofaphats
association with Ahab, testifies, 1 King. 22. 8.

6. Verse. 6. and 14. David's fortification, and putting Garri^ons in Syria of
Damascus, and in Edom, for conservation of his conquest. Shows that piety and
prudence may well consist together, and as the Poet speaks, Non minor est
virtus quam querere, parta tueri.

7. Where it is said that the Lord preserved David wheresoever he went: we see,
1. Who is the preserver of the Godly from all danger in the midst of perill's,
and from whom therefore they should seek the same. 2. How good and careful a
Master the Lord is of his servants, and their safety: as we see, Genesis 15. 1.
and Psalm. 84. 11. Yea in death it self, Psalm. 23. 4. Which should be a great
motive, and encouragement to serve him.

8. We see by Gods preserving of David whethersoever he went, not only Gods
general omnipresence withal, but also his particular and special presence in
mercy, and for their good with his own: because they walk in his ways, and as
acknowledging this his presence, and alseeing eye.

9. Verse 11. David's giving of the rich spoil of these nations whom he subdued,
and dedicating of them to the Lord, together with the rich gifts of gold,
silver and brass which Toi King of Hamath sent unto him; not only clears him,
that he undertook not these wars for covetousness, but also shows his
thankfulness to God, as author of his victories, and his religious, and
bountiful royal disposition to Religion, and the advancement thereof, worthy
to be imitated by all Princes and others, and far contrary to the disposition
of most men now adays who have no public Spirits, or are for pious works,
but only study to their own private commodity.

10. Verse 14. We see the Edomites are counted amongst these Enemies to Israel,
whom David subdued, who were come of Esau, Isreal's elder Brother, and yet,
though of one blood from Isaac, and should as Brethren been friends to Israel,
they were their infesting Enemies. Whereby we see how weak a band of union, or
amity nature is without grace, which indeed is the strongest tie of love and
true solid friendship, the communion of saints.

11. Verse 15. After he had subdued his Enemies David now gives not himself to
ease and sport, or the like, as many Princes do: but like a good King in his
own Person he Ministers Justice unto all his people, and commits it not
altogether, and only to other deputies under him. A worthy example for all
Kings to follow, as we see Solomon likewise did in judging between the two
harlots.

12. Where it is said, that he executed judgment and Justice. We see that it
is not enough for Princes, only to make good Laws, except also they put them
in execution, as also where it is said, that he did this to all his people, the
meanest as well as the greatest, it shows that he did the same impartially,
which is the worthiest part of a Judge so to do, for a good Judge should. 1. Be
void of affection and partiality. 2. He should have patience to hear. 3. Skill
to cognosce. 4. Wisdom to decerne. And 5. courage to execute, without
partiality.

13. Verse 16. In this prudent and provident distribution of offices for
government of both estates, civil and Ecclesiastical, and setting such over
the Cherethites, and Pelethites, who were his guard, we see the laudable care,
that David had both of Church and Commonwealth, and which all godly Princes
should imitate and follow.

14. We see also that every one has his particular office assigned unto him,
wherein he is appointed to do his duty, without usurpation, or intrusion upon
the office of another: a worthy example to be followed, for every one to be
content with his own charge, and to discharge it well, and to keep within their
own sphere and station: the civil not to usurp, or incroach upon the
Ecclesiastical, as Vzziah did: nor the Ecclesiastical to usurp civil offices,
and meddle in civil affairs not belonging to them, after Christ's example, who
said to the two Brethren concerning the parting of the inheritance, Who made me
a Judge between you?

15. The Allegory of these victories of David and subduing under him these
nations, and dedicating their spoils, and gifts to the Lord: represents to us
in figure, the victory that the Son of David, Christ Jesus should have over
the Gentiles by the preaching of the Gospel, and their conversion thereby, as
we see Prophesied, Isa. 60. And elsewhere, and that their gifts, and these
sciences amongst them, which were before abused by Satan unto Idolatry, as
spoils, Christ should make them thereafter serve for ^he good, and edifying of
his Church, and advancement of his ^tory.

II. SAM. Chap. 9. from the 1. verse to the end.
IN this Chapter is the History of the restitution of Mephiboseth, Jonathans
Son, to the patrimony and Lands of his Father, and of David's further kindness
to him according to that covenant made between Jonathan and David, 1 Samuel 20.
16, 17. This general is divided in three particulars. 1. David's inquisition,
if there were any of Saul's house, to whom he might show favor for Jonathans
cause, from the first verse to the fifth. 2. The coming of Mephiboseth to
David, and his gracious receiving of him, and kindly dealing with him, from the
fifth to the ninth verse. 3. David's restitution to Mephiboseth of his Fathers
Lands, and (...) bestowed on him to eat at the Kings table, and making Ziba
his servant, to be his favourer, or Chamber-lane. Again in the first part,
which is David's inquisition, we have set down all the circumstances, as
likewise the answer, and resolution thereof, 1. Is the time, when David (in the
former Chapter) had pacified his Kingdom, by subdueing the bordering Enemies
thereof without; and within had established the government both of Church and
state, and so had prove a good Magistrate. Now he sets himself to show likewise
that he is a good man, which two when they concur, they make a Land happy. 2.
The Persons at whom he asks, are not named, but it seems to be his counsel, or
nearest courtiers. 3. The matter of the inquisition is, if there be any left of
Saul's house. 4. The end is, not for evil to cut of such for his greater
security, but to show favor unto them for Jonathans sake. For resolving of
which question, or inquisition, these of whom David inquired, call one unto the
King Ziba, a servant of Mephibosheths, who tell David, that Jonathan had a
Son, who was lame of his feet, Mephibosheth (otherwise called Meribaal, 1 Chronicles. 8. 34.) Who was in the house of Machir in Lodebar, which is a little
Town in the Land of Gilead, from which place, where he lived in an obscure and
private manner, glad to have his life saved. 1. David sends and brings him. 2.
Beside his obedience, is set down his humble reverence to David, as his
sovereigne, both by gesture falling on his face, and by word, professing
himself to be his servant. 3. Is set down David's kind, and gracious dealing
with him. 1. Forbidding him to fear. 2. Showing unto him in the general, that
he would show kindness to him for Jonathans sake, and in particular. 1. He
would restore to him all the proper Land of his Grandfather Saul. And 2. he
would so far also honor him, that he should eat at his table continually,
where unto is subjoyned Mephibosheths humble thanksgiving, both by his gesture
of bowing, and words of admiration of such bounty and honor to be bestowed
upon such a dead Dog, as he was, for so he calls himself.

In the third part of this Chapter is set down David's declaration to Ziba; what
he had done, and was to do, to his Master Mephibosheth^, and his appointing of
him, his Sons, who were 15. and his servants who were 20. to till his Land
for him, and bring in the fruits thereof to him, providing so for his ease, as
well as for his honor and commodity, which charge Ziba willingly undergoes,
and so Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem, and did eat continually at the Kings
table.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. WE see in this inquisition of David, verse 1. And time thereof, that honor
changes not manners, nor forgets he that kindness now being King, which
formerly he had with Jonathan, when he was his Fathers subject, and therefore
seeing himself was dead, he resolves to keep this kindness still, and show it
to any of his offspring.

2. In this inquisition and deed of David's, we see three notable virtues
eminent in him. 1. Gratitude and thankfulness to Jonathan for all his love,
and favors, which in his life time he did show to David, which now survives
Jonathan, and he shows it to his Son, Mephibosheth. Which serves to condemn
this generation that is so ungrate both to the living, and to the dead. 2.
Verity, which is the observation of what he promised to Jonathan, and to show
that his promise was a true promise, and not ^lie, and his oath a true oath,
and not perjury, both lying and perjury being most odious in any, but chiefly
in a Prince, the one punishable by infamy, and the other by death.

3. Fidelity, which is different from verity, in that verity has words as the
subject, and fidelity has works. And as verity is called the agreement of the
mind with the word, so fidelity is the agreement of the word with the work.

3. In keeping promise and covenant, according to the Law, we see that David,
though a King and Lawgiver to others, yet he subjects himself unto the Law, to
be an observer thereof himself: as a good example to others to follow, as is
said, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, and as the Apostle speaks, Romans
2. 21. Thou that teaches another, teaches thou not thy self? So thou who
would have another observe Laws, should thou not be examplar in
observing the Laws thyself? A necessary lesson and good example for all
Princes, and Pastors, Magistrates and Ministers to follow.

4. This kindness that David would show to any that is left (says David) of
Saul's house, shows plainly hereby, and by the finding out but of one poor lame
man of it, that the Lord for Saul's wickedness and cruelty, had quite destroyed
that house of his, though a potent King. Which shows what sin does to the
greatest houses, (though royal) and to others inferior, being like the worm
at the root of Jonas flourishing gourd, which made it soon to decay.

5. This kindness that he would show, he says, it is for Ionathans sake,
where we see. 1. That the fruit of well doing lives longer then himself who is
the doer, and thereby he leaves a blessing and good treasure behind him to his
posterity. And 2. that it is a happy thing to be the offspring of a good parent,
chiefly, if they insist in their godly footsteps.

6. Verse 3. This kindness is called the kindness of God, which David says he
was to show for Ionathans sake, to denote first the greatness of the
kindness, as sundry things in Scripture has this denomination for the same
signification, as the montain of God, etc. As also 2. to show that this was
agreeable to Gods commandment, that promises being Lawful, and specially
oaths should be kept, as we see Psalm. 25. And which should be the rule of
all, our actions and motive thereto. And 3. that the sam^ would be acceptable
to God, which should be the scope of all (...) doings.

7. Verse 5. Mephibosheth being lame of his feet, and lurking in an obscure
place, far against his expectation, is called both to riches and honor, so
graciously does the Lord deal with such whom he visits one way, he comforts
them another way, (...) though he suffer some a long time, to lie as it were
low in the dust, yet at last he lifts them up, not looking for it, as he did to
Joseph, as he called Saul also to be King when he was seeking his Fathers
Asses, and David from the sheepcoat, as also the Apostles from their fish
boats, etc.

8. This humility which Mephibosheth shows both in gesture and words, being a
Princes Son, gives a good and imitable example to all others to follow, and
verifies that of Gods Word, That before honor goes humility, but God resists
the proud while he gives grace to the humble, and specially to be humble, when
God has humbled any, as he had done Saul's house. Therefore though he calls
himself not only a Dog, but also a dead Dog, fitter for a ditch, or at best
like a Dog to lie under a table, yet he is honored to sit as a Prince at a
royal table.

9. Verse 7. We see here great liberality in David toward Mephibosheth, which
is a worthy virtue in a Prince, so that it be toward right Persons, for good
causes, and in a moderate measure, not to exhaust their own treasure and lay
heavy burdens on their people, for the enriching of a few, perhaps not well
deserving: as on the contrary covetousness and a niggardly disposition is most
unsuteable to a Prince, or great man.

10. Verse 9. David's not only bestows upon Mephibosheth honor and riches, but
also being lame and impotent to travel, he provids for his ease, by laying the
charge on Ziba of tilling his Land, and gathering in the fruits thereof, which
shows David's care of him, as well as his kindness to him, and his
compassionate disposition to one, that had such a bodily infirmity, as an
example to others to follow the like compassion.

11. Likewise, verse 11. Though he was lame on both his feet, yet he is not
therefore the more despised, or less honored by David, to eat at his table as
one of the Kings Sons. Teaching ^s thereby to despise none, or the less to
regard them because by ^ome bodily infirmity the hand of God had visited them,
but to ^ity them, and be thankful to God for his dealing more indulgently
toward our selves. Also, David looks not on Saul's blood his persecutor, in
lame Mephibosheth, but on Jonathans deserving, how much less will the God of
mercies regard our infirmities, or corrupt blood of our sinful pregenitours,
whiles he beholds (...) in the merits of him in whom he is well pleased.

II. SAM. Chap. 10. and 1 CHRONICLES. 19.
IN this Chapter we have the further proof of David's continuing in his begun
course to gratify, and requit the favor of them to whom he was addebted in the
time of his troubles. This Chapter is divided in three parts, in the first is
David's message to Hanun King of Ammon to comfort him after the death of his
Father. 2. Is set down the Ammonites barbarous usage of David's messengers, Verse
4. and 3. We have the revenge that David took of the Ammonites, and their
associates the Syrians, in two several battles, the one with the Ammonites and
the Syrians, from the 6. verse to the 15. And the other with the Syrians, from
the 15. verse to the end. In both which David is still victorious.

First then in the legation, or message to the King of Ammon, we have. 1. The
time, when this message is sent. 2. The action or message it self, and the
occasion thereof. And 3. the end wherefore it was sent. First then the time,
is, when David was settled in his Kingdom, and had subdued all his Enemies both
intestine and foreign, and was now a mighty victorious Monarch, and yet hereby
he is neither puffed up to despise a meaner neighbor Prince, nor forgetful of
any duty of kindness, or gratitude that was requisite on his part toward him.
2. The occasion of this message was the death of Nahash Hanun's Father, who in
his life time had shown kindness to David, and therefore now upon this
occasion he would likewise show kindness to his Son. And 3. The end
wherefore he sends this message is, to comfort Hanun by the hand of his
servants, for his Father, who was now dead?

But David most ungratefully is requited, and his messengers villanously and
barbarously abused, wherein. 1. Is set down the ground, or motive, towit, the
unjust suspicion that the princes of the Children of Ammon had, and did
apprehend of the end of this message of David's, that it was not (as was
pretended) to comfort Hanun: but really and indeed to spy the City, and to
search and destroy it: and so they censure David as a deep dissembler and
Hypocrite, as also a covetous wicked man, seeking after that which was his
neighbors, not contenting with his own, and imputing unto him cruelty, as
intending destruction howsoever he pretended friendship and love. And so they
first wrong David himself in his name, before they wrong his servants in their
Persons. 2. It sets down the barbarous abuse of David's messengers by the
pernicious and ill counsel of these Princes, upon the forenamed unjust
groundless suspicion, Verse 4. Which was, the shaving off the one half of their
beards, and cutting of their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks,
and sending them away. Whereupon is set down. 1. What David did, when he heard
thereof, Verse 5. Towit, he sent to meet his servants, because they were greatly
ashamed, and directs them to stay at Jericho, the first bordering Town, until
their beards were grown, and then to return. 2. Is set down what the Ammonites
did, who were descended of that incestuous copulation of Lot with his younger
Daughter.) Towit, they prepare for war against David, and for this cause they
hire the Syrians, with a thousand talents of silver (as we see, 1 Chronicles. 19.
6.) To assist them, whereas it had been better and more wisely done by them to
have resented their wrong, offered reparation, and sought reconciliation with
David, so potent and victorious, and a valorous Prince, as the event proved. 3.
We have the motive that made them so to prepare this war, which was, because
they saw that they stank before David, a usual phrase in Scripture to express
the hatefullnesse of any to others, as Genesis 34. 30. Jacob says to Simeon and
Levi, ye have made me to stink amongst the inhabitants of the Land. So Exodus
5. 21. the people say to Moses, you have made our savor to be abhorred in the
eyes of Pharaoh. And so the Ammonits saw that they were become hateful to
David, and their fact abhorred by him. 4. Is set down, Verse 7. to the 13.
David's preparation to meet them, and Joab and his Brother Abishai their prudent
and valiant managing of the battle. Unto which is subjoyned, Verse 13. and 14.
The victory over the Syrians and Ammonits, 5. from the 15. verse to the 19. Is
set down, the Syrians renewed battle against David at Helam, a Town not far
from Jordan, and his victory over them, whereby, Verse 19. they became wholly
subdued, so that they never helped the Children of Ammon any more. From all
which we may see. 1. The cause of these wars that moved them. 2. The persons
who were engaged in them. 3. The military discipline followed by both parties.
And 4. the success and end of them: but before we come to the observations. 1.
We will speak somewhat of the persons whom Hanun hired as mercenary soldiers
to assist him. And 2. of their hire, first then mention is made of the Syrians
of Bethzehob, and of Zoba, who were subjects to Hadarezar great King of
Mesopotamia. Who were moved to follow Ammon for two causes, the one for
commodity, the other to reject their sworn subjection to David, Chap. 8. 6.
Next we have these of King Maacah, which were in that part of Syria, which lies
betwixt Gilead, and on the east, toward that part of Arabia, called
Trachonites: supposed to be a part of the territory of Ammon above Jordan, near
to Mount Hermon, Josh. 13. Thirdly we have these of Ishtob, at the east part
from Ammon toward Arabia called the desert, amounting all to 33000.

Next, then here is said to be a thousand talents of Silver, 1 Chronicles. 19. 6.
Which was a Hebrew weight, each Talent containing 60. pound weight, and each
pound, 25. common siccles, reducing the siccle to a half ounce: so that the
Talent will amount in our Scots money, to a thousand and five hundred pounds,
or 120. lib. Sterlin and above, and the hundred Talents to 150000. lib. Scots,
so that the thousand Talents of Silver will amount unto 1500000. lib. Scots.

As for the discipline used in this war on both parts, the same was very
prudent, 1. On the part of Ammon and his confederates: they divide their Army
in two, the Ammonites place themselves at Modeba, a town in Arabia, belonging
to Ruben, Josh. 13. 16. To be a retreat to them in case of overthrow, (as they
made the same, verse. 15.) As also to encounter with Israel in the front, as
they had appointed the Syrians to charge the Israelites on their rear: and
accordingly Joab in like manner, like a wise and expert General perceiving his
stratagem: he also divides his Army in two, the strongest part whereof he takes
to be under his own conduct, against the greatest number of the Syrians: and
the other part he gives to Abishai his brother to encounter with the Ammonites,
with a direction to help him, if he saw the Syrians too strong for him: and he
to help Abishai, if he saw the Ammonites too strong for him.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. IT is said that the King of Ammon died: where we see, that death is
the common condition of all mankind, Kings as beggars, wise as fools, and
rich as poor, so that (...) pede pulsat regum turres pauperumque tabernus, and
sceptra ligonibus aequat, and neither power, or prayer, and entreaty, wisdom,
or wealth can avoid the stroke thereof, which all Kings and great men should
consider to humble them, and make them think of the account of their
stewardship afterward.

2. Verse. 2. In David's resolution to show kindness to his Son, as he showed
kindness to him, we see his virtue of gratitude, as in the former Chapter to
Mephibosheth, this being the only tribute that the Lord requires for all his
benefits, Psalm. 103. 2. And which we also owe to man, so that the natural man
says that we should receive benefits, as the earth receives seed: and labor
to render the same with increase, Et si ingratum dixeris, omnia.

3. The time of David's remembrance of the King of Ammons kindness to him, when
he was in exile, is now when he is settled in a peaceable and potent kingdom,
so that his high preferment makes him not forget the favors which he received
in his low estate; as Pharaoh's butler did, and as many do now adays.

4. The kindness that he could not requite to the Father, partly because of his
inability before: and partly because of the death of this King, he now resolves
to show to the son, where we see, 1. That parents leave to their Children by
their charity and good deeds a good treasure. As also, 2. That with honest and
thankful persons, the remembrance of benefits dies not, with the benefit
receavers.

5. Where it is said that David sent to comfort Hanun by the hand of his
servants. We see, that Children should be naturally affected with moderate
sorrow for the death of their Pa^^nts, although most part now inwardly rather
rejoice at the death of those, by whom they may get a rich inheritance left
unto them: howsoever by external show in their garments they pretend sorrow,
such are worse then this Ammonite, or Esau, Genesis 27. 41.

6. Hereby likewise we see in David's sending to comfort Hanun for his Father,
that it is a Godly and good part to comfort them, whom we think to stand in
need thereof, or to be in any sort of distress, and to have a Christian
sympathy with such, mourning with them who mourn.

1. V. 3. and 4. We see in the misconstruction of David's message, and abuse of
his servants, the disposition of the wicked in rendering oftimes evil for good,
like those lifted up the heel against David who sat at his table, and as Judas
did to Christ: whereas the godly on the contrary are ready to requite good for
evil, as they are commanded, Matthew. 5. 44. etc.

8. This misconstruction and miscarriage that followed thereon, did flow from
an unjust suspicion of David's intention, to try, and search their City, that
he might come against it, and destroy it, so that unjust suspicion and
misconstruction, is the very Child of Satan, and whereby he procured the fall
of our first parents, Genesis 3. 5. And that fearful bondage and Tyranny against
the people of Israel by Pharaoh, to his utter destruction, Exodus 1. 10. And is
so dangerous a pest, that it dissolves, where it once enters all bonds of
Society Politic, or Oeconomicke, whereas on the contrary a favorable
construction of men's meanings and actions is a conserver of peace and amity in
all and every Society.

9. The first wrong that hereon ensues, is to David himself, whereas by this
supitious misconstruction they censure him as a deep dissembler, and a cruel
and covetous Hypocrite, by sending under pretense of friendship to spy their
weakness, and to come thereafter to subdue and destroy them. Which wrong done
hereby to his name and fame is the greatest wrong of any, as it is in like
manner to any other, the same being the murder of the tongue, and of that
which is dearest to any ingenuous Spirit.

10. Upon this suspicion of David's intention the Princes, of Ammon gives a
pernicious counsel to their young King, barbarously to abuse David's servants,
which was the cause of there and his ruin, in the subsequent wars that he
had with him, and of the expense of much treasure and blood. Whereby we see in
this (and in that counsel that Rehoboam got their after, by his young
Counselors) what bitter fruits evil Counsel to Princes (specially who are
young and unexperimented) produces. Both to the givers, as also to the takers,
whereas on the contrary it is a great blessing to a Prince to have wise and
godly grave Counselors about him, and a pliable heart and ear to hearken to
them, and obey there Counsel, and to stop his ear to the contrary, which
blessing therefore all people should pray for, to their Kings and rulers.

11. We see that this young King Hanun is far unlike to his Father Nahash:
who showed kindness to David, when he was in exile. Which teaches us that
goodness, nor grace, nor any moral virtue, comes not by generation; as we see
in Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Ammon, Absalom, and others: good parents oftimes having
bad Children.

12. In the abuse done to David's messengers, we see the very Law of Nations
(let them be Gods) violated, which ordaines no wrong to be done to messengers,
or ambassadors: because they declare only the message of their Master; and
what wrong is done to them, is counted done to them who sends them: and i^ no
wrong should be done to the messengers of an earthly King, much less should it
be done to the messengers of the King of Kings. Who will account the same done
to himself, and will avenge it severely on the doers, as David did on the King
of Ammon: especially when they shave not the half of their bread away, which
would soon grow again, or cut their garment by the middle: but when they shave
the most of all their living away, which by Gods law is due unto them: and
makes them go oftimes with a bare and thin garment.

13. Verse. 5. David sending to meet his servants, who were sore ashamed of
their abuse: and directing them to stay at Jericho till their beards grew, and
then to return: shows his tender sympathy toward them, and care to comfort
and council them the best way: till he thereafter should repare the injury;
wherein he shows a good and imitable example of a loving Prince to his loyal
subjects.

14. Verse. 6. It is said, that when the Children of Ammon, saw that they stank
before David, they prepared for wars, whereas it had been more wisely done,
to resent their error, offered reparation, and sought reconcilement: but
herein we see it to be true, quos deus vult perdere iis mentem adimit, and that
the wicked in Gods just judgment, runs ever further and further into snares
and mischief, going from ill to worse. Satan so drives them, as we see in
Pharaoh, Judas and others; till they come to utter destruction: and God in his
secret justice hereby meaning to punish their idolatry.

15. This fact of theirs, made them stink before David, and to be hateful, and
abhorred by him. Then much more does sin, and abuse of Gods messengers make
men stink before God, and to be hated and abhorred by him.

16. Upon this, that was done to David's servants in their beards, and garments
(though no hurt was done to their persons,) we see beside expense of treasure,
what bloody wars ensue. Which shows, of small beginnings (as suspicion
first, and then ill Counsel, and thereafter this abuse) what great mischief
arises, and therefore how warily we should take heed to our words and actions,
the mother of mischief (as the proverb says) not being greater than a midge
wing, and that greatest trees do grow from the smallest seeds.

17. David is against his will, and beyond his expectation forced to new
wars. Which teaches, that no man may dream of long peace or prosperity, but
when he looks for greatest peace and tranquillity, as David did, when he sent
this message, greatest trouble and disquiet may ensue, so mutable and uncertain
is our estate here.

18. David revenges this wrong done to his servants by lawful wars, the rule
whereof is the punishment of sin, especially committed against God, and the
Republic: and being undertaken by the Authority of the lawful Magistrate;
this being a part of the right use of the sword, which is committed to him,
against the error of the Anabaptists.

19. We see also here, that actions are not to be measured or censured by their
events, for David's sending to comfort Hanun for his Father, was laudable and
good: though sad events followed thereon, by the misconstruction of this his
pious action by those who measured him by themselves.

20. The Ammonites by hyring the Syrians to assist them. We see, they confide
in the arm of flesh, and in their wealth and confederacy, and therefore we see
what was the end of such vain confidence: and as is shown, Hos. 14. 3. And by
many examples registered both in sacred and profane history.

21. Ammon is joined to Israel in consanguinity by Let their progenitor, and
David seeks to show them favor, and the Syrians are bound to David by oath,
Chap. 8. 6. Yet neither blood, merits, nor oath has any place when they have
occasion to trouble David. Whereon we observe, that it is impossible that the
true worshippers of God can have firm or long peace with Idolaters. The reason
whereof is assigned by Christ, There can be no agreement between God and
Belial. The proof whereof is manifest by infinite examples, and this in
particular. Which shows to for-warne all such who serve God, and fear him
truly, to expect no quietness nor security from Idolaters, and Papists longer
then they may have a fit occasion to execute their cruelty, as the Massacre of
Paris, the Gun-powder-treason, and the late Massacre of Protestants in Ireland
can testify.

22. The Syrians for hire, join with the Ammonites without respect either to
honor, conscience, danger, or death, that might ensue, only for commodity.
Which shows that covetousness is the root of all evil, and produces sad
effects: as we see in Achan, Judas, and these Syrians here. Which serves to
warn men to beware thereof, and specially men who follow the wars, that they
engage upon warrant of conscience, and a good cause, and not merely for hyre,
or preferment: the one flowing from covetousness, and the other from pride, and
both from Satan, as father of these vices.

23. Verse. 7. In David's preparation to meet the Ammonites when he heard of
their raising an Army. We see the vigilant care that a good King should have of
the safety of his people, and repelling their enemies, and of using lawful
means, besides the confidence in God.

24. Verse. 11. In Joab's managing of this war. We see wisdom joined with
valor, both requisite in a general commander, and in the mutual support and
help one of another, against the common enemy, the stronger to help the weaker.
We may also learn a common Christian duty to do the like, as the Apostle
exhorts, Romans 15. 1. The rich to help the poor, and the wise the simple, etc.
Especially pastors, and leaders of Gods people to join as brethren in Unity,
and lend their help one to another against their common enemy.

25. Verse. 12. In Joabs oration to his Army, he joins with selfe-preservation,
the cause of religion (for the Cities of God) that is, wherein Gods worship is
established and professed, and which the enemies would pollute with idolatry,
as the Romans used to say pro aris and focis. Whereby we see that in all
lawful wars the cause of God, (who is the Lord of hosts and gives the
success) and of religion is to be regarded, and then (as we see here) the event
proves the more prosperous and happy.

26. Joab here does according to his vocation, and leaves the success to God.
Whereupon we collect, that the duty of every one in his calling civil, or
ecclesiastical is to labor faithfully, and to commit the success to God, as
the husband man does in sowing his ground, and as Paul did plant, and Apollos
watered, and left the grouth unto Gods dispensation. Which serves to reform two
errors; the first of those who use not the lawful means, but rely on Gods
providence, and live on idle speculations. The second, who rely only on the
means, without seeking and depending on the Lords blessing on their labors.

27. Verse. 13. The success of the battle, which is victory on David's side, and
overthrow on A^nmon, and the Syrian^. Shows 1. What is the end of giving, and
taking evil counsel, and pertinacy in evil courses on Ammons part, as also
what is the punishment of perjury and perfidy, as also of coveteousness on the
Syrians part. 2. The victory in David's side serves for the comfort of the
Godly, that are in a good course, and have a good cause, though in greatest
perils of enemies, and that it is just that they who abuse favors, should
smart at last with judgments.

28. Verse. 15. The Syrians gather themselves again to battle the second time,
to their greater destruction and fall, and final overthrow. Whereby we see
what it is to persist obstinately and proceed in an ill course, and that
thereby they draw on upon themselves greater destruction: for they might have
seen Gods hand against themselves before, when they were subdued, chap. 8. As
also now again, when they were stronger, being joined with Ammon: but Satan so
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts like Pharaohs, that no bygone
punishments would make them wise, being driven on by Satan to their own
destruction.

29. Verse. 19. At last being overthrown, they make peace with Israel, in
granting whereof after so many provocations, and perfidie, beside this last
victory, we see the peaceable and pious disposition of David, as also his noble
and royal inclination, like the Lions, Parcere subjectis and debellare
superbos.

30. They make their own peace only with David, not including their late
confederates, who hired them the Ammonites, whom they resolve not to help any
more. Whereby we observe what a vain thing, and unsure it is to trust, or
rely on the arm of flesh, or friendship of men.

II SAM: Chap: 11. from the 1. verse to the 14. and from thence to the end.
FRom the fifth Chapter to this present, we have seen many moral virtues in
David, as piety, magnanimity, prudence, gratitude and the like. And now in this
Chapter we have his fall and sins both of uncleanness and murder, adultery,
and bloodguiltiness, whereby he declined from the law of God, altered his
former course, brought scandal upon religion, many judgments on his house,
incurred Gods wrath, and shame and confusion before men.

In the exposition of this tragical history we shall consider, 1. The
circumstances of time, places, and persons, when, where, and betwixt whom this
Action is committed. 2. The occasion and antecedents of this ungodly fact, both
on David's and the woman's part. 3. The fact it self, adultery, and that of the
highest kind. 4. The consequence and things coincident with it, and fifthly lay
down some observations, that arise there from.

Among the genuine circumstances, that of time comes first, expressed verse. 1.
When the year was expired, at the time when Kings go forth to battle: that is,
at the end of the former year, and beginning of the year following: at which
time the heavens and air begin to be temperate, and the pastures afford
grass for horses, which made the season convenient for war. Then David had
directed Joab, (whilst himself abode at Jerusalem) with the Army to go
against Ammon, whom he destroyed, and beseiged Rabbah, their Metropolitan City,
called afterward by the Greeks Philadelphia, even then when David's estate is
most prosperous, and all his troubles near an end, in place of thankfulness to
God therefore, he gives himself to ease, security and uncleanness.

2. The place, is his Palace, and plateform, or roof of his house, from whence
he beholds with lusting heart, and eye, Bathsheba the Wife of Vriah.

3. The Persons are David a great and godly King before, whose life and manners
were sometimes a mirror to his subjects, and called a man according to Gods
own heart, and who was invincible in his wars with external Enemies, yet is
overcome in the battle betwixt the flesh and the Spirit, and by his own bosom
and inward Enemy of his carnal corruption, as Lot was in Zoar, who could not
be overcome in the City of Sodom. The second person is Bathsheba, the Wife of
Vriah the Hittite, called, 1 Chronicles. 3. 5. Bethshua the Daughter of Ammiel. The
third is Vriah himself, called a Hittite, because he was a stranger borne and
now a proselite in Religion, an Republicke of Israel, a faithful and valiant
soldier in the wars, as he gives the proof thereof, Verse 11.

Secondly, the antecedent causes which moves this ungodly and unhonest fact,
are as well on David's part, as on the Woman's. On his part their be chiefly
four. 1. His great prosperity, which brings him to a careless security, as well
in matters concerning God, as in his office to the Republicke, the evidence
whereof is, that afternoon he gives himself to sleep, and ease, when hi^
subjects are in danger of their Enemies, far contrary to a Kingly care and
duty. 2. His idleness, Satan's cushion and Mother of all vices, and the sin
of Sodom, as it is said? Diuturna quies vitiis alimenta ministrat. And
especially to uncleanness, therefore says the Poet, quaeritur Egestus, quare
sit factus adulter? in promptu causa est, desidiosus erat. Whereas on the
contrary, otia s^ tollas periere Cupidinis arcus. 3. The loosnesse and lust of
his eyes looking with delight and concupiscence upon the beauty of the Woman,
contrary to Jobs practice, Chap. 31. 1. And that precept of Gods to turn away
our eyes from vanity, Christ telling us also that to look upon a Woman and to
lust after her, (though no more) is adultery for God. 4. The object of the eye,
the Woman's beauty. In it self being good and the gift of God, as we see in
Joseph, Moses, David, Esther Sarah Rebecca, Rachel and others, but being abused
either to pride, as in Absalom, or to turpitude as in David's practice, and
Potiphars Wifes, to be ensnared thereby, or to ensnare, it turns to such a
curse, and drawer on of most heavy judgments.

In the Woman likewise we see these occasions. 1. Immodesty in discovering her
nakedness, and washing herself in an open view of the Kings palace, which
rather should have been done in her private Chamber. 2. Facility in yielding to
David's motion of uncleanness. 3. Arrogance, counting it an honor to be
courted by a King, and to be his Concubine. 4. Breach of duty and fidelity to
her honest Husband. And 5. lubricity and sinful frailty was seen in the fact.

Thirdly, the act it self was double adultery, a married man with a married
woman; also the man, a King who should have given good example to his subjects,
as is said, Regis ad exemplum, etc. As likewise a Prophet, and so should have
been eminent beyond others in holiness. And one who had not only one wife, but
many wives and Concubines, as Nathan told him. All which aggravates this fact
of his adultery.

Fourthly, the consequence was, the matter is revealed by Bathsheba to David of
her being with Child. Who strives by many ways to cover his adultery. 1.
Subtily by sending for Vriah; and moving him by indirect inticements to color
his crime. 2. By a more cruel device of his murder. To effectuate the first,
David. 1. directs Joab to send Vriah to him, who now was at the siege of
Rabbah. 2. When he comes, David in all Hypocrisy, as intending to know by him
how affairs went, he asks of the estate of the Captain, and Army; and then
entreats him more familiarly, not after the manner of Kings, to wash his feet,
whereby in the Hebrew phrase was signified, all which belongs to a man's
entertainment and ease, and so to visit his house: and for the more inducement
he sends after him a mess of his own meat. But good Vriah being governed by
Gods providence, rests that night in the Kings gardhouse. 3. Which when David
perceives, he uses another slight, and feasts him, and makes him drunk,
thinking thereby to make him lie with his wife, and so to be Father to a
bastard, or as the Law calls it, Partus suppositus, and bring in an unlawful
heir into the inheritance of Vriah. Yet worthy Vriah guided by Gods Spirit,
disappoints this policy of the King also, David by his worldly wisdom and
authority thinking to color vice, but God resolving to bring it to light; and
therefore at even went out to lie on his bed with the servants of David, but
went not down to his house at all. Whereupon David writes with Vriah to Joab,
directing how he should be killed, which Joab accordingly obeyes, and so Vriah
is killed: and David advertised thereof; which when Vriahs Wife understands,
she mourns for him, and is thereafter taken by David to Wife, and bears him
a Son, but this thing displeased the Lord.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. BY these falls of David, Peter and the like, let not any excuse themselves
in their sins, for they are registered not for imitation, or excuse of the
like; but as Beacons for evitation, and their repentance only for imitation,
Et ut majorum ruina sit minorum cautela, and that the best may see, how weak
they are, and how prevalent their natural and sinful corruption will be, if
they be left never so little to themselves, and to the force of temptation,
which finds time to lay siege to the secure heart of David in his house, and
surprises it, while Joab is laying siege to Rabbah of the Ammonites in the
field to take it.

2. If such a strong and tall Cedar as David did fall, how ought weaker
Christians to fear, and pray; that God would deliver them from temptation, and
as we are exhorted, 2 Phil. 12. To work out our own salvation with fear, and
trembling.

3. Verse. 1. When David after diverse Victories is now in peace by the mercy of
his God, he falls to fighting against God himself, when he has subdued many
nations to his great credit abroad, to his far greater shame, he is subdued
by, and inslaved unto his own filthy lust. Whereby we see, that prosperity is
more dangerous then adversity, and that sanctified correction is more
profitable, then a prosperous condition, with a remission of Gods assisting
grace 119. Psalm. 67. and 71. And as is further shown to us, Heb. 12. 6.

4. We see that bosom Enemies, of our own sinful corruption and
concupiscence, are the worst and most dangerous, like Dalilah and Judas ready
to betray us, and subdue us to them. Thus Saul who at first overcame the
Philistims, was overcome thereafter by his own pride, envy and cruelty, Sampson
by his lust after so many noble victories as also here, David is subdued by his
carnal lust. 5. V. 2. When David is idle and at ease not fighting the battles
of the Lord, nor ministering justice to his people, as Chap. 8. 15. Then Satan
prevails against him. Which teaches every one to be diligently exercised in
some lawful and particular calling, if they would eschew temptation, and the
snares of the Devil.

6. David from the roof of his house beholds the beauty of Bathsheba washing
herself, and is ensnared. Which should teach us to watch, over our senses that
they be not like open doors to let in temptations to our hearts, as we see by
the eye and care Satan entered into the heart of Eve, by the eye likewise he
entered into the hearts of the Sons of God, who saw the daughters of men and
took of them to wives, which brought the deluge on the first world, so did
temptation enter into the heart of Potiphars Wife, into Achans heart, and here
into David's. Whereas Jobs practice was contrary, Job 31. 1.

7. Bathsheba's washing herself in so public a place gives occasion of
committing uncleanness with her, and of the murder of her Husband. Which
should teach modesty, and care to all Women to eschew the occasions of sin, and
that they make not their beauty, or curtizan dressings, or any other unseemly
behavior to be snares to uncleanness, but that they be of a chaste
conversation, coupled with fear, as Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3. 2, 3. And whose
adorning may not be that outward of platting the hair, and of wearing of gold,
or of putting on of apparel, but the hidden man of the heart, in that which is
not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the
sight of God is of great price, and to make that description of a virtuous
woman, Prove. 31. 10 etc. A pattern to follow.

8. V. 4. She yields to temptation, wanting grace to resist, and so David
commits adultery with her against the express, and known Law of God, a heinous
guiltines indeed, which Job describes, Cha. 31. 9, 10, 11. and 12. And the
bitter fruits thereof, and as may be seen in that bloody war between Israel and
Benjamin, Judge. 20. And what fornication produced, Genesis 34. 25.

9. In this fact of David's we see also the progress of sin till it come to the
highest perfection. 1. He is idle, then beholds a woman washing herself, and
lusts after her, because of her beauty, thereafter sends and brings her, and at
last he lies with her, as is said, hanc vidit, visamque ci^pit potitunque
cupita. The like progress we see also in Achons sacrilege, whereby we should
learn to resist the beginnings of sin, to crush the Cockatrice in the egg, and
dash Babels babes against the stones, choking the seeds of sin in the bryer
before it come to a ripe harvest of guiltiness, and procure a harvest of wrath.

10. It is said that she was purified from her uncleanesse, which was
Ceremonial only, but in the mean while she was committing a moral
uncleanesse, to keep herself free from which she was not so careful, being
herein like the Pharisees who cleansed the outside of the cup only, and were
like painted tombs. But had much hid uncleanesse and corruption within, as
there are likewise many now adays who content with an outward formality and
show of Religion, who otherwise deny the power thereof.

11. Verse 8. David labors first with all subtilty to cover his sin from the
eyes of the World, but considers not what this would avail, when the all seeing
God did know the same, and whom he should rather fear then man, seeing he has
power both of soul and body, as our Savior speaks, to cast both in Hell fire.
Therefore let no man sin in secret, and think all is well if it be concealed
from men. For either God discovers it here, as he did David's, or else at the
day of his account and judgment before men and Angels, as he shows, Psalm. 50.
21. For there is nothing so bad (says or savior.) which shall not be revealed.

12. David's dissembled kindness to Vriah, and his mess of meat that he gave
her, was but for a snare, even as Michal Saul's Daughter for the same end was
given to himself, and as the Serpents dissembled kindness to Eve was to be a
snare to her. Even so the baits of unlawful profit, or pleasure, which Satan
holds out, they are but snares to entrap men in guiltiness.

13. Verse 9. Vriah notwithstanding of the Kings direction, guided by secret
providence goes not down to his house. Whereby we see that God disappoints the
policy of the subtle, as he did Pharaohs working wisely, Exodus 1. 10. And
Herodes, Matthew. 2. 16. For there is no Counsel nor wisdom against the Lord.

14. Verse 11. Good Vriah shows a godly and tender sympathy with the Lords
people and Joab, who with the Arc were lying in tents, and in the open fields,
and therefore he would not take ease and daliance with his Wife. Which should
teach us the like sympathy with the Church of God in danger and distress, and
to regard the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6. 6. As we see was the practice of
Nehemiah, Daniel, Esther and others, far contrary to yours, who if themselves
be well and at ease, they care not for the distress of Gods people and Church.
As also we see, as Eccles. 3. That there is a fit time for every thing, and
that even Lawful and best actions are not ever seasonable, therefore it is
said, That a word spoken in due season is like apples of gold with pictures of
silver, neither does this abandoning of Vriahs Lawful pleasure more magnify
his zeal for God's Ark and people, then it does aggravate David's sin, and
taking unlawful pleasure.

15. Whereas Vriah says to David that he would not do that thing commanded, we
see that the unlawful commands of Princes are not to be obeyed, as we see in
the examples of Daniel and the three Children, in the Midwives of Egypt, and
Saul's servants, 1 Samuel 22. 17.

16. Verse 13. David devises another sinful subtilty and makes Vriah drunk,
that so he might have a mind to his Wife, being inflamed with Wine, wherein
also he is again disappointed, wherein David for covering one sin falls into
many, and which we see to be the practice of Satan by one sin to draw on men to
another, as from drunkenness to draw to whoredom, or bloodshed, and from
unjust anger to draw to murder, as he did Cain, and the like he does by
covetousness. As we see in Judas.

17. By Vriahs being drunk, we may see that the best man may sometimes fail and
fall into sin and excess, as we see in Noah, and Lot, yea David here with
Bathsheba, but they make not a trade of sin, and if they fall throw frailty,
they rise by grace, and their faults are not registered (as is said) for
imitation, but to be fled not followed. As also, we see that David knew that
Wine would be an inducement to lust, as it proved to Lot, therefore who would
eschew lust let them eschew ebriety.

II. SAM. Chap. 11. from the 14. verse to the end. OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 14. DAvid now sends a letter with Vriah to Joab to set him in the front
of the battle, that he might be killed. Where we see (as has been said) that
from one sin he falls in another, and in the last as the worst of all, whereby
we observe. 1. The nature of sin that it never goes alone, but is like a chain
one link whereof is tied to another. 2. That Satan where he may once get in a
foot will never rest, till he get in his whole body. And 3. we see that oftimes
God punishes sin by sin, and man by his own iniquity till there cup be full,
and then follows judgment, as we see in Pharaoh and others.

2. Vriah carries with him the letter to Joab which was his own destruction,
and so does the wicked carry in the bosom of their own breast, there dittay
and accusation, of their own guilty conscience before God in the day of their
account, which in likemanner is their own destruction.

3. David began to cover his sin by subtilty and fraud, and now he comes from
fraud to force and cruelty. Thus does Satan himself act, first as an
insinuating and subtle Serpent, and who can transform himself into an Angel
of light to deceive, and hereby if he cannot prevail he turns a bloody Dragon,
by open persecution, as we see, Revel. 12. And thus to do he teaches others
whom he misleads, as he did Pharaoh, and in this place David.

4. Hereby likewise we see that in the best of men their are the seeds, and a
natural inclination to the grossest sins, all the imaginations of the heart
being only evil continually, which should serve to keep us humble, and
watchful, and to be earnest with God by prayer for grace and strength to
resist the temptations of the Devil, that we be not ensnared to commsit sins,
which otherwise we would seem to abhor in others.

5. We see, as in this, so that adultery and unlawful lusts is the chief
argument of all tragical Histories almost, as we may see in the examples of
the first World. Sodom, Sechem, Israel with the Moabitish Women in the desert,
the wars between Israel and Benjamin, Sampson, and here in the example of
David, omitting profane Histories, as the destruction of Troy, Thebes,
Carthage and others, which teaches us that whoredom is not so light a sin, as
carnal men take it to be, who call it but a trick of yo^th, or the like,
seeing we see it punished with such sad judgments here, and excluding from the
Kingdom of Heaven hereafter, 1 Cor. 6, 9. Revel. 22. 15.

6. Verse 16. As David directed Joab, so he obeyed this wicked direction of the
King, and so becomes guilty likewise of the innocent blood of Vriah (which was
avenged on him, 1 King. 2. 28.) Which should teach us, not to obey the unjust
commandments of superiors, but as Peter said Act. 5. 29. We ought to obey
rather God than man, and to give unto God that which is Gods, and then to
Caesar, that which is Cesars. Honor also is pretended to Vriah, but death is
meant, so does Satan in his temptations.

7. V. 17. Vriah an innocent man suffers and is killed, whereupon we observe,
that it is not ever the will of God to give temporal deliverance, from the
cruelty of Tyrants, or of Enemies, as we see in the examples of the Prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs, the reason is, that thereby God will be glorified in
their constant integrity, good example of the like may be left behind them, God
may have just matter to punish Tyranny and cruelty, and the innocent sufferers
may be translated to a better life in glory.

8. We see in this fact first of uncleanesses, next of David's subtilty, and
last of cruelty, whereunto he was instigated by Satan the properties of the
Devil, that he is an unclean Spirit, full of subtilty and cruelty, and that he
makes them who obey him, to take on his image, and to be like himself.

9. Verse 26. Batsheba mournes for her Husband when she hears of his death, as
for a Worldly loss, but we read not that she mourned for her sin that
procured his death, which shows that many will be more grieved for any Worldly
loss, or cross, then for that which should grieve them most, the offense of
God, the killing of their own souls, and the loss of a heavenly Kingdom, her
sin then was more worthy of her sorrow then her loss.

10. Verse 27. Where it is said; that the thing which David had done displeased
the Lord, which should teach us the like disposition to be ever displeased with
sin in any person whatsoever, and to hate the same: it being Satan's image,
but not to hate the person who is created to the image of God, as the Lord
hated not David's person, but his sinful action. Therefore Paul affirms That
the end of excommunication (the last of discipline) should be to the
destruction of sin, but that the soul may be pre^erved in the day of the
Lord. Last, consider that God had neversuffered so dear a Saint, so foully to
fall: if he had not meant to make him an example to all: neither to presume
that they may not sin grossly, nor to despair if they sin, when they see
David so to have fallen, and so to have risen.

II SAM: Chap: 12. from the 1. verse to the 13.
IN the preceding Chapter was the Tragical history of David's fall, to be
evited and fled, and in this Chapter is the happy history of David's rising by
repentance to be imitated and followed. This Chapter had these parts. 1. The
Lords commission to David by his Prophet Nathan, to the 13. verse. 2. David's
penitent confession, and Nathans absolution of him in the name of the Lord,
from his sin: howsoever because by his unclean fact, he had given occasion
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the Child that was borne to him should
die, verse. 13, and 14. 3. The sickness and death of the Child, as Nathan had
foretold, with his deportment in the time of the Child's sickness and after the
death thereof: together with the reasons thereof, which he gives to the Elders
of his house. 4. From the 24. verse. to the 26. David's comforting of his wife
Bathsheba, concerning the Child that was dead, and the Lords giving unto him
another son by her, who was beloved of God, whose name was Jedidiah, by
direction from God to Nathan, and by Nathan to David. And 5. David's taking in
of Rabbah of the Ammonites, and the tortering of the people thereof, and all
other their Cities: and then his victorious return to Jerusalem, From the 26.
verse. to the end.

First then we see that the first actor in David's repentance is God his
commission to Nathan, and not that David seeks to God first, by any act of his
free will: but God by his preventing grace seeks David, who had gone astray
like a lost sheep, and follows him with tender mercy to reclame him, and bring
him back again, therefore faies Gods people, Lam. 5. 21. Turn thou us unto
thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned. Next, the Lord does this not immediately,
but by the Ministry of his Prophet Nathan, with which he did concur by the
secret operation of his spirit, and converting grace: which is his usual
dealing in reclaiming of sinners, whereby he gives repentance: as we see, Act.
2. 37. And begets faith in their hearts, Romans 10. 17. The impulsive cause of
this, next to the forenamed efficient and isntrumental, is Gods free love,
Hos. 14. 4. Without, yea, against David's deserving: and the final is, the
glory of the riches of Gods mercy, and David's salvation whom he takes (as David
did the sheep out of the Jaws of the Lion) so he out of the power and paws of
the devil.

The cause also wherefore the Lord did not send and admonish David sooner, and
before he did fall. Is, 1. That he would let him have a proof of his own
natural corruption, and see how soon and foully he would fall, being left to
himself: and not being assisted by his special grace; that so he might ever
walk humbly, watch carefully, and pray for grace more earnestly. 2. That others
might with the greater fear and trembling work out their own salvation:
considering how so great a Cedar sell, they being but low shrubs. 3. That the
greater glory and riches of his grace and mercy might appear, in his
conversion and pardon: tha^ so none may despair, either of pardon to
themselves if they repent, or of the conversion of others in Gods own time.

In this coming of Nathan to David, and excepting so perilous a commission, to
so great a King, with a sharp accusation, reprehension; and commination, as we
see his laudable and greater obedience to God. So likewise we see. 1. His
prudence in the forming of his accusation and rebuke: the scope whereof was to
make David out of his own mouth to pronounce sentence against himself,
therefore he propones it by way of parable. 2. We see his dexterity in the
amplification. 3. His courage and boldness in the application. And 5. His
fidelity in the denunciation.

In this parable which he uses, David is compared with the rich man, and his
many wives and concubines, to his many flocks and herds, and Vriah is compared
to the poor man and the ew-lamb to Bethshebah: and the traveller is David's
lust that entered into his heart, for satisfying whereof, he would not take one
of his own wives or concubines, but the wi^e of Vriah. To this general as it
was proponed, David answers with an oath, that he is worthy to die and restore
the fourfold of the Lamb, according to the Law, Exodus 22. 1. Who had done this
thing. Whereupon the Prophet makes a plain application, saying, Thou art the
man, and so makes David to have pronounced just judgment against himself. The
major of the argument he takes from David himself. thou says, that such a
wicked and merciless offender should die, But thou art the man, therefore thou
should die. Hereafter he aggravates David's sin by many amplifications. 1.
From the argument of ingratitude, in repetition of Gods benefits, formerly
bestowed upon him: and his readiness to have bestowed more. 2. After this he
sets down the root of the sin to be the contempt of God and his Word: which
he amplifies by the repetition, and particular accusation of David of these
crimes. 1. That he had killed Vriah with the sword. 2. Had taken his wife to be
his. And 3. That he had killed Vriah with the sword of the Children of Ammon,
the common enemy of the Lords people, and made them to be the instruments of
his cruelty, and not having pity on his own faithful subject. Whereupon he
subjoynes the denunciation of the Lords punishing his sin by lex talionis,
relative both to his sins of cruelty against Vriah, as also his sin of
uncleanness with Bethsheba, according to his threatening, Deuteronomy. 28. 30. And as
sad experience in the person, and actions of Absolon afterward proved:
whereunto he adds this aggravating of the punishment, that what David did, he
did it secretly in sinning: but what God should do, it should be openly in the
punishing.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN this history of David's rising by repentance after his fall, we see the
difference between the Godly and the wicked, they fall, but by grace they rise
again: but the wicked they fall, and lie still in impenitency and careless
security, to their own destruction: as we see in the examples of Cain, the
first world, Sodom, Pharaoh, the obstinate Jews, Herod, and others.

2. Verse. 1. In the Lords sending Nathan to David sleeping in security, we see
the Lords preventing mercy, whereby like that sheapherd that left the 99. and
went to seek the ^rayed sheep, so likewise he seeks us first, and turns to us
before we can turn to him: as we see in his calling of Abraham out of Vz from
Idolatry, Matthew from receipt of custom, Zaccheus from an forged ca^iller, and
Paul from a persecutor. And that as our Savior says to the obstinate Jews,
How feign would I have gathered you as a Hen does her Chickens under her
wings, but ye would not. So how feign the Lord is to reclaim sinners.

3. In the work of David's conversion, instrumentally by the Ministry of Nathan,
and efficatiously by the concurrance and cooperation of Gods spirit: we see
that the Ministry of the Word, is the ordinary means, by which the Lord will
have men converted from sin and damnation, to righteousness and salvation: so
that it is a great blessing where men enjoy these means, and profit thereby:
as it is a great curse and punishment, when either the Lord removes the
candlestick thereof out of his place, as he threatened Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. Or
where the Ministry of the Word is contemned: as we see, 2 Chronicles. last, 15. 16.
Or where it is unprofitable, as Jer. 8. 6. and 20. 8.

4. With the external Ministry of the Word and means of conversion, we should
earnestly beseech God to concur with the operation of his blessed spirit to
make the same powerful, and thereby to work in our hearts repentance and
faith, else as Peter fished all night and caught nothing till Christ came: so
Peter may preach and not prevail, till the hearts of his hearers be pricked by
him who opened the heard of Lydia, while Paul did preach, Act. 16. 14. For Paul
may plant and Apollos water, but God only gives the increase. And Nathan here
might carry the Lords message of David's ear, but God only could thereby work
upon (...) heart, (...).

5. It is said here, that the Lord sent Nathan to David, where we observe the
duty of all faithful Ministers of Gods Word, not to run unsent, or rush into
that sacred calling (as many do) until they be sent, and have the warrant both
of an inward calling, and sufficient furniture of gifts and grace, as Aholiab
and Bezaleel with skill, were fitted for building of the Tabernacle, Exodus 31.
6. As also a lawful outward call from the Church and the people of God over
whom they are to be set.

6. In Nathans coming to David, and delivering of his message as he did,
(though it would have seemed dangerou^) as the Baptists proved to Herod, and
Eliah's to Ahab, we may behold many singular virtues requisite in the Ministers
of Gods Word. As 1. Obedience to the Lords call, though the burden of the
Ministry, and charge of souls, may seem justly formidable to Angels, let be
weak men. 2. Wisdom in the discharge of their message, and in doing that which
may best fasten a conviction on the conscience of sinners, and bring them to a
sight of their sin. 3. After general doctrine to bring in the same to
particular application, as the Chirurgian after the making of the plaster,
does apply the same to the sore. 4. Courage and fidelity, not only in the
rebuking of sin, though in the greatest without partiality, but in denouncing
Gods judgments against every sort of sin, whereof they have warrant in the
threatenings that are contained in the Word of God. 5. (As we see, verse. 13.)
where they see evidence of repentance, and humble confession to be as ready to
comfort, as before to have rebuked and threatened, imitating herein Paul's
direction, 2 Cor. 2. 7. And our Saviors practice Who would not brake a bruised
reed, nor quench a smoking flax.

7. Verse. 5. It is said that David's anger was greatly kindled against the man,
of whom Nathan spoke in the parable, who had done such wrong to his poor
neighbor: and declares that he should be punished according to the Law. Which
shows that it is a good part in a magistrate to be angry at sin, and the
committing thereof, as Moses was at the peoples Idolatry while he was in Mount
Sinai. Though otherwise the meekest man on the earth, and to punish the same
according to the Law: and as our Savior also was angry, at the abusing of his
Fathers house, and making it a done of thieves, and therefore overturned the
Tables of the many cha^gers, and with whip-cords drove these abusers out of the
Temple.

8. David is severe in judging, and censuring another, whereof in the
application of the parable, verse. 7. He is only guilty himself, which shows
that oftimes men are like the Pharise's, who were clear-sighted to spy the
mote in their neighbors eye, but blind in spying the beam that was in their
own, or like Judah, Genesis 38. 24. Who gave out a severe sentence against Tamar
for his whoredom, when he thought that it had been with another, till he heard
and knew thereafter that it was with himself: which shows the deceitfulness
of the heart of men, our own self-love, and hypocrisy, who should rather
search themselves, and their own stuff what is in them, and to judge
themselves, that they might not be judged: ( Omni enim vitio debet carere, qui
in alterum paratus est dicere,) rather than to be severe justitiers in others,
of the very crimes whereof they are guilty themselves.

9. Verse. 7. Where Nathan says, Thou art the man. We see that particular
application is necessary, when men are not moved or touched with generals, so
that the same be done wisely for the good of a sinner his conversion, and not
out of humor or malice against the person: but out of love to the man, and
only hatered to his vice, which would be his self-destroyer: and such prudent
rebukes, seasonable given, and particular applications, are like medicinal
potions, or wholesome corrasives, necessary for spiritual health: though to
flesh and blood, bitter and sharp: and must be sometimes applied as the case
requires by their souls Physician, as we see here in Nathan the Baptist, and
Ezekiel. 33. 6, 7. And which is a part of the cutting the Word a right, 2 Timothy 3.
16. And the very life of doctrine.

10. In Nathans rehearsal of the Lords benefits to David, we are taught what
use we should make of the benefits which the Lord bestows upon us: towit, we
should not only remember them continually as we see, Psalm. 103, 2. And chiefly
his spiritual benefits, as there: but likewise they should be to us, like so
many love-cords, to bind us to his obedience, which is the only true and real
evidence of our thankfulness for them.

11. Verse. 9. Nathan shows to David, that by his sin he had despised the
commandment of the Lord, whereby he shows what is the very root of sin:
towit, the despising of the Lords commandments. Which if men did regard as they
ought, considering whose commandments they are* even his, who has power both of
soul and body, to cast both in hell fire: and to the obedience whereof they
are bound by so many ties: they would not despise, nor break them as they do;
especially seeing by despising of them, they despise also the Lord himself: as
we see, verse. 10. and how high a crime this is, a worm of the earth, to
despise the God of heaven, any one may judge, and what the same deserves, and
yet sinners are so blind, and misbelieving, that if this were laid to their
charge, that they are despisers of God, none would confess the same.

12. Nathan likewise tells David in the aggravating of his sin, that he was not
only ungrateful, and a despiser of Gods commandment, but a bold transgressour,
in doing this evil in Gods sight; this being the blind boldness of all other
sinners and wicked men: even when they commit sin secretly, as Nathan says
to David, verse. 12. Yet they do it in the sight of God, whose all-seeing eye
beholds them, and all-reaching hand shall find them out, and what boldness,
yea desperation, dacity would this be thought, for a thief to steal, even in
the sight of the judge? but hence is it, that men sin so securely, because
they think God to be like the Idols who have eyes, and see not, or that he is
not all-seeing, and when they sin, that they are doing evil in his sight.

13. Nathan also lays this to David's charge, that he had killed Vriah, though
it was their Ammonites that killed him: as we see in this same verse; because
David had written to Joab, to set Vriah in the forefront of the battle before
Rabbah, and to retire from him that he might be killed, as Chap. 11. 15. Where
we see that the devisers, counselors or abetters, in any sin or wickedness,
or who have any hand in committing thereof directly or indirectly, or are airt
or pairt (as we say) they are before God guilty of the deed: as we see also in
Ahabs murder of Naboth, 1 King. 21. 19. Where it is said, thou have killed,
and taken possession: though it was, by a formal process of Law, and the
ordinary executioners, so Act. 2. 22, 23.

14. Verse. 10, 11. In Nathans denunciation of punishment for David's sin. We
see that sin draws ever punishment, as we see in our first parents, first
world, Sodom, Egypt, and infinite other examples Scripturall, and profane
histories. And therefore sin may be compared to these Locusts, Revel. 9. 7,
8. Which had men's faces, and the alluring hair of women, but Scorpion tails,
verse. 10. With stings that did both hurt and torment, or like that little book,
Revel. 10. 10. Which was sweet in the mouth like honey, but bitter in the belly.
Therefore let none who sin, dream of impunity: how long suffering soever the
Lords patience be, to suffer them for a while, but in the end resolve if they
eat the sower grapes, that their teeth shall be set on edge. At farthest in
that place, where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

15. Judgment here is denounced against David a King, from the Lord as the
inflicter. Which shows that albeit Kings and great men may escape punishment
by men, in respect of their place and power: yet they shall not escape at the
hands of God, as we see in the examples of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Saul,
Herod, and others. A notable example we have hereof in our own Chronicles (
Bachavan (...). 5.) which is this. The nobility of Scotland, having consulted
to depose King Fer^uhard, for the detestable cruel^ies he had committed, by
Colmanus Bishop of Northumberland, they were diswaded, who told them, that the
punishment of Kings belonged to God; and that he, ere it were long would take
vengeance of his wickedness, which accordingly came to pass* for the King after
a few days being a hunting, happened to be bitten by a wolf: and falling in a
fever, such a putrefaction ensued in his body, that out of every part thereof,
issued such abundance of lice and vermin, which made him loathsome to all; so
that languishing in this Consumption, he sent for Colman, to whom he expressed
his remorse for his wicked life, and would needs be carried to the nex fields
wrapped in sackcloth, where after humble confession, he was absolved, and so
ended his life shortly after his absolution.

16. In Nathans denuncing the sword against David's house, and the defiling of
^his Wives, as he had killed Vriah with the sword, and defiled his Wife, we see
how oftimes by Law of talion the Lord punishes sin, as he did Pharaoh,
Adonibezek, and as we see, Job 31. 10. So that a man may read his sin in his
punishment. As David might here, and as we see performed, Revel. 16. 6.

17. Verse 11. Whereas the Lord says, I will raise up evil against thee,
(meaning the evil of punishment) this teaches us in all punishments,
corrections, or trials, as Job did, and David in the cursing of Shimei, Chap.
16. 11. To look up to the hand of God, and acknowledge that comes from him, as
we see Gods people did, Hos. 6. 1. And therefore to return to him, and humble
ourselves under his hand.

18. Whereas also the Lord says to David, I will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house. We see that the saddest punishments are these which are
domesticke, and so most near unto us, and affects us most, as David shows,
Chap. 16. 11. And as we see in Sinacherib King of Assyrias punishment, 2 King.
19. 37.

19. Verse 12. The Lord says, what David did secretly should be punished
publicly, which shows that it is vain to commit sin in secret thereby to
hide the same, for what is done secretly in sinning shall be made public by
the Justice of God in the punishing, God being thereby glorified, in the
manifestation of his omniscience and Justice, as has been seen in the discovery
and punishment of many secret murders, adulteries, incests, and such like
hateful crimes. But specially such sins are are hid and secretly committed,
if they be not discovered and punished here, in the day of the general
judgment they shall be discovered and punished then, Psalm. 50. 21.

II. SAM. Chap. 12. from the 13. verse. to the end.
FOllows now after Nathans Message, and his accusation of David, and
denunciation against him. 1. David's penitent confession in few words but
weighty, which at more length is amplified in all the circumstances thereof in
the 51. penitential Psalm, which may (...) as a commentary upon this text. 2.
Is subjoyned Nathans absolution, or declaration that God had remitted his sin,
wherein (as Psalm. 32. 1. The blessedness of man consists) and that he should
not dye, towit, that death which his sin deserved, and which the Apostle, Romans
6. 23. declares to be the wages of sin. Howbeit the Child that was borne unto
him of that adulterous procreation it should dye the temporal death, because
by that deed he had given great occasion to the Lords Enemies to blaspheme,
which by the Childs death in the scandal thereof would the sooner be forget,
nor by the life thereof, if it continued, whereupon ensues the performance of
what Nathan herein had foretold. 1. By the Lords strinking of the Child with
sickness, and thereafter, Verse 18. With death, during which time of the Child's
sickness. David's behavior is set down, towit his humiliation by prayer and
fasting, and lying on the Earth (doubtless confessing his great guiltiness and
provocation in the begetting of that Child,) and, as Verse 22. entreating the
Lord, if it were his will, to be gracious to him that the Child might live, but
when he heard by the servants of his house, Verse 19. That the Child was dead,
then he changes his behavior, arised from the Earth, washes, and annoints
himself, changes his apparel; And 1. goes to the house of God and worships,
and then comes to his own house, and refreshes himself by meat, the reason of
which, both his former carriage while the Child was sick, and of his contrary
carriage after the Child's death, he gives unto his servants, who asked him the
reason thereof, and this he donh, Verse 22. and 23.

After which Verse 24. and 25. is set down David's comforting of Bathsheba now
his Wife, and his begetting upon here a Son whom she boor to him, and he called
his name Solomon, whom the Lord loved, and in testimony thereof he sent by his
Prophet Nathan, and he called his nam J^dediah, which is by interpretation, the
beloved of the Lord.

After all which is set down a new document of the Lords favor to David, in
giving him a notable victory over his Enemies the Ammonites, by the expugnation
of there chief and royal City Rabbah, which so long had been beseiged, and at
last the chief part whereof (which was the City of Waters, or, where their
Water was, without which the other could not long hold out) was taken in by
Joab, who hereupon sent to David to come in Person himself with his forces to
take the honor of the Victory, and full in taking thereof, which David
accordingly does, where he is crowned with there Kings Crown, weying a Talent
of gold estimate to 7000. French Crowns, and rich in precious stones, he gets
also a rich spoil of the City, and by several tortures after he had punished
the inhabitants of Rabhah, and all the other Cities of the Ammonites, he
returned victorious and triumphant to Jerusalem.

But before we proceed to the observatious, some questious, or doubts, are to
be resolved.

1. How was David's sin remitted, and yet the punishment thereof which was
threatened, verse 10. and 11. retained. I answer, when God remits the sin, he
remits the vindict, which temporal chastisements are not to the godly,
because. 1. they proceed from his love, Heb. 12. 6. as also are in their nature
medicinal corrasives. And 3. their end, or scope is, their good, and profit
who are corrected, Heb. 12. 10. That they may be made pertakers of his
holiness, and consequently of eternal happiness, verse 14. And seeing of God
in glory.

2. How comes it to pass that David exercises such cruelty after his Victory
against the Ammonites in all their Cities? Which may be thought unbeseeming to
so pious a Prince as David. I answer, that this was not without the special
providence of God, avenging himself by David on such wicked idolatres as those
were, 1 King. 11. 5. And who had ever been capital Enemies to his people,
rising up against them in the wilderness, and in their journey to Canaan*
Deuteronomy. 2. 18. As also rising up against them in the days of Jephtah, Judge. 11.
32. And thereafter coming against Jabesh Gilead in the days of Saul, and who
would not make peace with them, except all the Citizens would thrust out their
right eyes, 1 Samuel 11. 2. Thereafter doing such a barbarous indignity to the
messengers of David, and hyring the Syrians to join with them against oath and
covenant, and making war against David for all these their wi^kednesse and
provocations, the Lord makes David now when their cup is full to recompense
them according to their works, and to be exemplar to others in their sharp
punishment, as they had been in their gross sinning.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 13. UPon the Prophets reprehension and threatening, David humbly
confesses his sin. Where we see the fruit of reprehension, and the efficacy of
Gods Spirit con^urring with the faitfull discharge of the Ministriall function
toward sinners for their conversion, as we see here in David, and Act. 2. 23.
and 37. Let Pastors then do their duty, and leave the event to God. Also, we
see what long and dead sleeps the holiest soul may take in sin, till God
awake them out of that lethargy, as David lay in, near nine months.

2. We see the difference between the godly and the wicked^ when they are
admonished, and rebuked for there sins, the wicked either mock and despise
rebuke and threatenings, as the first World did Noah, and the wicked impenitent
Jews did the Lords Prophe^s that he sent unto them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Or else
they fret and are enraged against them and abuse them, as Ahab was enraged
against Eliah, and Herod against the Baptist, but the godly to whom God minds
mercy and not judgment, they receive the word of rebuke with meekness, as
David did here, and confess their sin, resolving to mourn and mend, as we see
Hos. 14. 2, 3. Gods people are exhorted to do.

3. We see here likewise in David's confession a good example to be followed,
that he lays not his sin on others, as Adam did, nor denies it, as Cain, nor
extenuates it as Saul, but freely acknowledges it, and lays the blame only
upon himself, saying. I have sinned against the Lord, and as he says, Psalm.
51. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy s^ght.

4. In Nathans reply, saying, The Lord has also put away thy sin, etc. We
see here, as also in the parable of the prodigal Son, and as is said, Psalm.
103. 8. Joel. 2. 13. Jonas 4. 2. And Micah. 7. 18. That he is slow to anger,
but ready to forgive, and plentious in mercy, yea who delights therein,
therefore no sooner does David confess, but as soon by his Prophet does he
pronounce forgiveness, and no sooner did the thief on the cross pray for
Christ's remembrance of him, when he came to his Kingdom, but as readily did he
answer, and promised it to him, which is a great comfort to all penitent
sinners, and that a bruised reed he will not break, nor a smoking flax he
will not quench. Also that confession is the way to get pardon from God, which
is contrary before Earthly Judges, Prove. 28. 1. 1 John 1. 9. Note also, that
David's sentence, verse. 5. threatening death, is the voice of the Law, but
Nathans words, verse. 13. Promising life to penitents, is the voice of the
Gospel.


5. Verse 14. Yet Nathan shows David that the Child that was borne to him
should dye, because he had given great occasion to the Enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme, whereby we see, what advantage the scandalous sins of Professors
give to the Enemies of the truth, and what wicked and evil use they make
thereof, which should make all Professors of the truth to walk the the more
circumspectly and holily. Least through their sides the profession it self be
wounded, as well as their own souls, and the Lords name blasphemed.

6. In the death of the Child which is threatened, we see that the sins of
parents are punished oftimes in the Persons of their Children, according to
that threatening, Exodus 20. 6. They being as it were a part of their parents,
flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, which should make parents, who
would wish their Childrens welfare to fear God the more, and to eschew sin:
and when sickness death, or any disaster comes to their Children to examine
themselves, if their sins have been the cause thereof.

7. Verse 15. It is said, that according to Nathans prediction and threatening,
the Lord stroke the Child with sickness: where we see. 1. That Gods
threatenings shall assuredly be accomplished, and therefore are not to be
despised, as those did of the first world, and others, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. But
made use of for our humiliation. 2. That sickness is the Lords rod wherewith
he striks either young, or old, and therefore when it comes, we should look up
to the hand that striks therewith, and kiss the rod by patient submission and
bearing the same, and by humble recourse to him who laid on the rod to seek to
sanctify the same to us for our profit, that we may say with David, Psalm. 119.
71. It I was good for me that I was afflicted, and to take off the same in his
own good time.

8. V. 16. David uses prayer and humilliation for the Child's recovery, if it
were the Lords will to be gracious unto him, as he speaks, Verse 22. Which
teaches us, that the only way to avert, and remove the Lords temporal
judgments, or any corporal visitation on our selves, or ours, is prayer, and
fasting and the humbling our selves before the Lord, as we see we are exhorted,
Joel. 2. Hos. 6. 14. And was practiced by David, 2 Samuel 24. And here, as also
by the King of Niniveh, Jonah. 3. And by others.

9. Verse 17. During which time also, the servants of David labors to comfort
him, as he also comforted his Wife, verse 24. Which shows unto us that it is a
charitable and Christian duty, to comfort such who are any way afflicted, as we
see practiced by Jacobs Sons, Genesis 37. 35. and elsewhere.

10. Verse 18. The Child dies the seventh day, before it could be circumcised,
(as likewise being sick before) and yet, as we see, verse 23. David doubts not
of the salvation thereof, which shows us that it is not the want of Babtisme
(answerable to circumcision then) that is any way damnable to the infants,
(Gods mercy not being tied to the outward means,) but it is the contempt
thereof that is damnable in the parents.

11. Verse 20. David having heard that the Child was dead, he prays nor fasts
no more, whereby he shows the vanity of of those who pray for the dead, as if
prayers or solemasses for such old be any way profitable to them, as they are
not but indeed it is true that they are profitable for the mass Priests who
are living, and who get great gain thereby.

12. David repines not at the Lords doing, but patiently and humbly acquiesces
to his good pleasure therein, and first of all goes to the house of God and
worships, and thereafter to his own house, and takes bodily refreshment. Where
we see how in likemanner in all erosse dispensations we should do the like, by
reverencing Gods providence, humbly submitting to his will as our well, and in
all things giving him thanks. And to prefer first our duty to him in worship,
before we take that which may be for our own refreshment, as also after we know
the Lords determination in any thing, to rest content theirwith.

13. Verse ^3. In David's speech concerning the Child, that he was to go to him,
but he not to return back to him. We see not only a laudable remembrance of
mortality and death in David, but also a good resolution to be imitated by the
living toward the dead of nearest relations, whether Wivers, Children, or
friends, which serves greatly to setle immoderate mourning, and the minds of
such who survive the dead.

14. Verse 24. In place of the Child that dyed, God gives to David another
Son by Bathsheba, who was Solomon, which shows us, what is the fruit of a
humbly, patient and thankful acquiescing to Gods will, and that the Lord is
ready if he take one benefit from us, if we depend upon his mercy, to give us
another, and a better, as we see in his dealing with Job Chap. 42. 10.

15. It is said here of Solomon newly born (as is said of Jacob in like manner,
Romans 9. 11. Having done neither good or evil, that he was loved of God, which
shows, (as is said Hos. 14. 4.) The freedom of Gods love, according to the
election by grace, and that the same is only of his mere mercy and no merit of
man.

18. Verse 27. In Jacobs message to David to come himself in Person, now against
Rabbah near taken in fully, that he might have the honor of the business. We
see in Ioab these virtues, towit, modesty, wisdom and humility, requisite in a
general, or any in high preferment, and which also should teach us, much more
in all our actions to be zealous of the honor of God our heavenly King and
Master, and of his glory to make it the scope of all our enterprise. Seeing
Ioab was so zealous of the honor of an earthly Master.

19. Verse 31. In the torturing several ways of the inhabitants of Rabbah, and
other Cities of the Ammonites, who stubbornly stood out against David, and
would not make peace with him as the Syrians had done, Chap. 10. 19. And had
done such barbarous indignities against the Lords people and David's messengers,
as has been spoken of. We see the truth of that Exodus 20. 6. That the Lord will
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him, and so, that albeit men forget their sins,
God does not so, but keeps them before him in a book of remembrance, till their
cup be full: as he said of the Ammonites, as likewise what an ill treasure, or
portion, wicked men leave behind them to their posterity. And it may in like
manner be considered, what torture and torments they may expect at last, who
stubbornly stand out in impenitency against Christ Jesus the Son of David,
and who will not in time agree with their adversary, and make peace with him,
as other penitent believers do, who is the Prince of peace, and invites all
those; Who are weary and heavy laden to come unto him, and he will give them
rest, Matthew. 11. 28.

II. SAM. Chap. 13. from the 1. verse. to the 23.
IN this Chapter is set down the execution of that correction threatened by
Nathan, to David for his sins of adultery and murder, Chap. 12. 10, 11.
Amnons incest with David's Daughter, Tamar answering to his adultery, and
Absolons murder of David's Son Amnon, answering to his murder of Vriah: as
we likewise see the same, chap. 15. In the person of Absolon, rising thereafter
in rebellion against his Father David, and defiling of his Fathers Concubines.
In which Tragical History we have. 1. The time noted, verse 1. After that
notable victory of David against the Ammonites, and their subduing: which had
been matter of joy, follows now that which is matter of sorrow. 2. We have to
consider the actours first in this fact of incest, and of the crime it self,
and thereafter we shall come to the actours in the murder that followed
thereon: the first person who is agent in this incestuous crime is Amnon David's
eldest Son, begotten on his Wife Ahinoam the Israelite. His firstborne, and
strength of his youth. His delight and hopeful successor to him in his
Kingdom, and he on whom all Israel looked, as the Sun rising after the death
of David, and finally whose appearing greatness should have moved him to
follow virtues agreeable to his estate: yet he falls into this filthy crime to
the dishonor of God, grief of his Father, disgrace of his Sifter, his own
utter ruin, and the regret of all Israel. And in his person, (next to the
death of the Child, Chap. 12. 14.) is David's sin punished. The second agent,
or rather patient in this crime is Tamar, the Kings daughter: and whose mother
was daughter to the King of Geshur, and she Absolons sister german: a virgin,
and forced by Amnon: who is described, verse. 1. Not only by her name, but also
from her beauty, whereby Amnon was allured so to lust after her. For fulfilling
whereof, he takes that wicked course which follows: but first is set down,
how this rage of lust works on himself, verse. 2. and 4. That he was so
vexed, that he fell sick for Tamar, and waxed lean from day to day: whereupon
followed Jonadabs pernicious counsel, how he should fulfill his desire: and so
he comes in as the third actour in this tragedy and wicked crime; and is
discribed, 1. From his name. 2. From his friendship to Amnon. 3. From his
consanguinity with him, being David's brothers son: and so, they being
brothers Children. And 4. From his subtility, which was seen after, like that
of Achitophels in his wicked counsel, verse. 5. The occasion whereof is set
down, verse. 4. Towit, his questioning Amnon why he waxed leaner daily, being
the Kings son, and so not having any probable cause to be so: and Amnons
revealing to him that it was his love to Tamar, whereupon ensues Jonadabs
pernicious counsel, how he might easily compass his desire, verse. 5. Which
Amnon greedily embraces: and does follow, verse. 6. By lying down, and making
himself sick: upon the hearing whereof, David as the fourth actor in this
tragedy, out of Fatherly affection coming to visit Amnon: he desires that his
sister Tamar might come, and dress him some meat, which he might eat from her
hand; whereunto he rashly and inconsiderately consents, and directs his
daughter, verse. 7. to go to Amnons house, to dress him meat: not considering
the peril, which might and did ensue: by reason of youth and lubricity of that
sex, where there is occasion had of enticement and provocation. So that as we
see the four actours in this tragedy, so we may see the four antecedent
occasions provoking and promoting this wicked fact of incest: which are, 1.
Tamars beauty alluring, and coming to Amnons house: whereas abefore she was
carefully kept at home, according to the custom of Virgins; so that as,
verse. 2. Amnon thought it hard to come at her, to do any thing unto her. 2.
Amnons lust inraging. 3. Jonadabs counsel promoving. And 4. David's indulgence
and facility throw circumvention, consenting to Amnon his sons petitioning.
After this, follows the manner of the committing of this wicked fact. 1. By
removing the impediments which might hinder, verse. 9. Commanding all who were
in his bedchamber, to go out from him. 2. By intaeating of her, to lie with
him: and when she could not be so moved, but had refused. 3. By forcing her,
which denial of here is, and dissuading of him, is grounded upon four
arguments. verse. 12. and 13. 1. From natural neareness of consanguinity, he
was her brother, and therefore it would be incest. 2. From being against the
law which makes it capital, Levit. 18. 9. Whereunto Israel, Gods people are
bound to obey, and therefore to do no such thing. 3. From the consequents of
this sin. 1. That Amnon should be counted a fool in Israel: and so, unworthy
to reign after his Father. 2. It should bring not only sin, but shame upon
her: which a brother should not wish; let be, to be the doer thereof. And 4.
That it were better to speak to the King, to give her to him in marriage: which
(she says) he would not refuse. All which arguments have this event, verse. 14.
1. He would not hearken to her. 2. Being stronger then she, he forces her, and
lies with her. Whereupon ensues these sad sequells 1. Having satisfied his
lust, he hates her more then ever he loved her, verse. 15. 2. Uncivilly, and
unbrotherly, he not only bids her begone, but also commands his servant, that
waited on him, to put her out violently, and bolt the door after her: although
she show him that the doing of this unto her, would be a greater wrong then the
other: because the former might be either covered by secrecy, or cured by
future marriage: whereas this disgraceful manner of putting her away, would
tend to her shame and dishono^r, and make any remedy impossible: upon which
this his barbarous, uncivil, and unnatural dealing. 2. She falls into
desperate lamenting, verse. 19. Putting ashes on her head, as the custom of
such was: and tearing her garment, and crying. 3. Absolon her brother, comforts
his sister, and receives her into his house, where she remained desolate: but
conceives a deadly hatered against Amnon, for this wrong done to his sister,
verse. 20. and 22. And the fourth sad sequel or consequence, is verse. 21. When
King David hard of all these things, he was very wroth.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN this tragical history of the performance, what Nathan had threatened,
Chap. 12* 10, 11. We see that one jot of Gods Word, and threatenings shall not
fail: as we see in that of our first parents, the first world: against the
Idolatrous Jews, and the incredulous in our Saviors time: and here, etc.
beware, then to sin, and to hearken to Satan, to put the day of the Lord
far from us, as he said to our first parents, ye shall not dye at all. But
by speedy repentance, either to prevent Gods wrath, as Niniveh did, or to
remove it, as David did, chap. 24.

2. These tragical accidents fall out after that notable victory over the
Ammonites, and David's triumphant return to Jerusalem, which shows the
vicissitudes that are in this life, as are in the seasons of that year: summer
and winter, night after day, ebbing after flowing, and hereafter rejoicing,
sorrowing: no sublunary thing being permanent, nor perfect, and therefore
neither to be trusted unto, or delighted in, but only in God, and only to
expect elsewhere plenitude of joy and perpetuity thereof, Psalm. 16. 11.

3. Verse. 1. The motive and inducement to Amnon to lust after Tamar, is her
beauty, wherewith he is allured and ensnared by a lustful looking thereon, as
we read the like, Genesis 6. 2. Whereby we see, the wrong use that many make of
the benefits of God either bestowed on others, as in the forenamed examples, or
on themselves, as Sampsons strength, Achitophel's wisdom, Hamans preferment,
and the like: and that we should watch over our selves, and the use of our
senses, as Job did, chap. 31. 1. For it was no fault in Tamar to be beautiful
(it being a good gift if joined with grace, Psalm. 45. 13.) but the fault was in
Amnon, lusting thereby: as it is no fault in the candle it burning, but in the
fly that scorches it self in the flame, he making it the occasion of her
disgrace, and his own ruin. Also we see, whither will not lust carry the
inordinate minds of pampered and unruly youth's, if grace do not restrain.

4. We see here* in that Amnon loved Tamar, (not with a chaste love, but a
lustful and unchaste love.) Where sin begins, towit, at the heart and
affections: which are the root and spring, and not being sanctified, and set on
the right object sends forth rotten and filthy streams, and brings forth
wicked and ill fruit: which should make us to watch over our hearts with
diligence, and to beseech God to sanctify our affections, to love what he
loves: and hate, what he hates.

5. Verse. 2. It is said, that this unlawful lust vexed him, that he fell sick:
which shows what an ill guest this was, as we see covetousness was to Ahab,
and pride to Haman, and as these and the like vices, are to those who harbor
them, and thereby makes them become like those demoniaks in the Gospel, before
that Christ dispossessed them, and which shall vex them far worse hereafter in
eternal torment.

6. Amnon likewise is sensible of the sickness of his body, and grows leaner
day by day, but he was not sensible of the sickness of his soul: and so are
many more. But we should pray to God that we may be as sensible of our
spiritual sickness, as we are of our corporal, which should drive us to
repentance, and faith to Christ, to heal our backslidings, as we see it
promised, Hos. 14. 4. But the cause why we are not sensible of the souls
sickness, nor death thereof, is the want of the life of grace, which only makes
the soul sensible of sin.

7. Where it is said, that Tamar was a Virgin, and Amnon thought it hard for
him to do any thing unto her: towit, so long as she was carefully kept, as
Virgins were accustomed to be from access, and private company of men. Which
teaches that as sin should be eschewed, so all the occasions, and
provocations to sin, should likewise be avoided: which when in the contrary,
they are neglected, or (as in this example of Tamars going to Amnons house
through David's simplicity) afforded. We see in this (as also in D^nah's
example, Genesis 34.) what the same through sinful corruption, and force of
temptation produces.

8. Verse. 3. It is said, that Anmon had a friend, named Jonadab (but who really
and truly was his greatest foe, by his pernicious counsel which he gave him,
how to satisfy his incestuous lust with his own sister) so that he was rather
a friend to his vice, and a foe to his person or soul: whereas a true friend,
whose friendship is grounded on God and virtue, will be a foe to their friends
vice, by wholesome admonition and rebuke, and a friend to their souls
salvation: therefore says Solomon, Prove: 27. 6. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful: and Prove. 28. 13. He that
rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor, then he that flattereth with
his tongue.

9. This Jonadab also is called a very subtle man, a property whereof many do
glory, But their glorying is their shame, for wit or subtilty, without true
wisdom: the beginning whereof is the fear of God, is but the Serpents
property: making men wise only to do evil, as he did Amnon here, and as
Achitophel taught Absolon, and as Pharaoh also spoke, Exodus 1. 10. All which
ended and tended to destruction, therefore if we have any quickness of wit or
qualities of mind, beyond others, let us beseech God to sanctify the same, that
they prove not a snare to us, or others, as Joseph's cup was, which was found in
Benjamins sack, or Vriah's letter which he carried with him to Joab in his own
bosom.

10. Verse. 6. Amnon as readily obayes Jonadabs wicked counsel to do evil, as
Jonadab was to give it, whereby we see the corruption of nature, ready like
flax to take with fire: and how soon, youth especially, who fears not God, nor
are not truly wise themselves, are apt to follow rather evil counsel than
good, and flatterers advise, nor real and true friends to their own ruin and
destruction: as we see here, and in Rehoboam.

11. Verse. 7. In David's facility and consent to Amnons petition, that Tamar
might come to his house and dress him meat, that so he might get opportunity to
put his wicked intention and Jonadabs counsel to execution, we see that the
too great indulgence of Parents is the occasion of Childrens much sinning, and
in the end of their destruction, as we see here in Amnon, and the sons of
Eli's, which should be an admonition to Parents, not be too indulgent to their
Children, but to bring them up in aw, virtue, correction and in the fear of
God. Also we see here that even Kings daughters in those times, did not scorn
to put their fingers to some works of house wifery, as here in cooking of meat.

12. Verse. 9. Where Amnon commands that all men should go out of his chamber
before he enterprised the fact. We see, that many think shame that men should
see or know that, which they neither fear, nor are ashamed, that God should
see: such is the deceitfulness and natural Atheism of the heart of man,
therefore the Scripture tell's us, That the fool has said in his heart, that
there is no God, an example also of this we see in Judah, Genesis 38. 23. That
unlawful acts seek the shelter of secrecy.

13. At last, Verse. 11. Amnon discovers his intention in his petition to his
Father, and requiring all to go out from him, and having taken hold of Tamar,
he says to her, come lie with me, my Sister: which shows the progress of
sin from lust in the heart, to persuasion by Word, and at last performance in
the deed. And how impudent the wicked become at last, shaking off all modesty
or shamefaceness: as we see also in Potiphars wife, Genesis 39. 7. As also (as the
proverb says) That time, place, and opportunity makes many whore and thief,
and therefore for avoiding of sin ought to be eschewed. Likewise we see how
unjustly do carnal men misplace their affections: though they be of nearest
relation, where grace is not to restrain and direct them.

14. Verse. 12. Where Tamar says to Amnon, that no such thing ought to be done
in Israel: Which was the only Church of God, and therefore whom holiness does
become, as is said, Psalm. 93. 5. We learn that our lives and actions ought to
be suitable to our profession, and seeing it is holy, and the Church whereof we
count our selves members, is the holy Catholic Church, and the head thereof is
holy, Therefore we should be holy, as he is holy, without which holiness no man
shall see God, Heb. 12. 14.

15. Next, where she calls the sin, folly, and in committing thereof, that
he should be as one of the fools in Israel. We see what sinners are, esteem
of themselves as they please, they are in Gods account, and all truly Godly,
but fools: as they are oftimes styled in Scripture, and especially in the
Proverbs, 18. 6. 23. 9. 26. 1. and elsewhere, therefore the worldly wise man
in the Gospel is called, the rich fool: and so they may, because they
forecast not: nor provide for the time to come, and prefer momentary sinful
pleasures, or profit to everlasting: and so makes a foolish and unwise choice.

16. Verse. 13. Where she says, Whither shall I cause my shame to go? We see
that sin brings shame, as we see in our first Parents, and has brought many
to shameful deaths, and to be shameful spectacles: which though they escape
here, they shall not escape before men, and Angels hereafter.

17. Verse. 14. It is said notwithstanding all her arguments of disswasion, he
would not hearken to her, but forced her, and lay with her, and so committed
that vile act of incest against the laws, both of God and man: and which the
baptist reprehended in Herod, and which the Apostle also, 1 Cor. 5. condemned
as deserving excommunication and giving over into the hands of Satan, where we
see that where Satan prevails, no arguments neither from reason, equity,
damage, or the Word of God will prevail: but what God or man says is
despised, as we see is said, Chap. 12. 9. Yea God himself is contemned, as
verse. 10. is shown.

18. It is said that Amnon forced her, he being stronger then she. Where we
see, when gifts of body or mind, or any other benefit that God gives, is abused
to sin, against the giver; from blessings, or benefits they turn to curses,
and to their destruction in the end, who are the abusers of them: as we see in
the strength of Sampson, the wisdom of Achitophel, he preferment of Judas, the
riches of the rich glutton, and fool, the beauty of Absolon, and here the
strength of Amnon.

19. Verse. 15. Then Amnon hated her exceedingly, more then he loved her. Which
shows the shortness of unlawful pleasure enduring no longer then the sinful
act, and for which like fools they hazard, and loose pleasures for evermore:
and next, wherein the fulfilling of unlawful lust, and carnal sinful
pleasure (as also all ill grounded love and friendship) at last does end; when
once the conscience is touched and awaked, towit, in a bitter hatred, more then
ever they loved sin, as we see 1 Cor. 7. 11. The same being as those locusts,
Rev. 9.

20. Herein also is a resemblance of true repentance, when we are not only
grieved for the committing of sin, but also hates the same exceedingly, and
puts it to the door from us in the practice of our lives, and bolts the door
upon it, that it may never after return to us, nor we to it, like the dog to
the vomit, or the sow to the puddle.

21. Verse. 20. In Absolons speech to Tamar, saying that Amnon is her brother,
and not to regard that thing (for which himself conceaved a deadly hatered
against Amnon, and resolved to kill him though he was his brother) we see the
pattern of a notable and dangerous dissembling hypocrite, who spoke so fair,
extenuating the matter to Tamar, and in that particular spoke neither good nor
evil to Amnon, but on the contrary thereafter invited him to a feast, where he
caused crually to murder him: as hereafter also, chap. 15. He played the
cunning hypocrite, as shall be shown in their own place, whereby he stole the
hearts of the people from his father first, and next would have stolen his
Crown.

22. Verse. 21. When David hard of these things he was very wroth. Doubtless,
both at himself, for his own simplicity, and indulgence: the sad fruit thereof
he now saw; as also at his son Amnon, for his wicked fact of incest, which
proceeded from idleness, pampering the flesh, and carnal delight in the beauty
of women, the pests of Kings courts. Wherein we see that oftimes the Child
which the father loves most: as David did Amnon (as we see, verse. 36. and 37.)
becomes their greatest grief through too much indulgence toward such. As we
see in the sons of Eli, in Amnon here, and Absolon hereafter.

23. Where it is said, that Absolon hated Amnon, because he had forced his
sister: as this teaches us that such wrongs should not be done, lest we incur
the hatred of those, whose love rather we should seek to enjoy. So likewise
this shows where sin, and especially murder here begins, towit, at the
heart: as we see in Cain. And therefore we should resist beginnings, and watch
over the heart, with all watchfulness and diligence. It being like the fort, or
citadell, which if Satan once take in, he will the more easily command all the
rest.

II. SAM. Chap. 13. from the 23. verse. to the end.
FOllows now the second part of the Chapter, and in it, the Tragical history
of Absolons murdering of Amnon for the forcing of his Sister Tamar, and as an
accomplishment of that threatening in part of Nathan, against David for the
killing of Vriah, whose blood did cry like Abels for revenge. In which History
we have to consider. 1. The haynousnesse of this sin of fratricide, and
muther. 2. The persons actors in this Tragedy. 3. Their several vices, or
errors. 4. The manner of this murder and acting thereof. And 5. the
consequences.

First, what a heinous sin murder is, we may see not only in the
prohibition thereof in Gods Word, and the punishments that ensues thereon, as
we may perceive in these wherewith Vriahs blood was avenged, and Naboths, and
the Lords Priests whom Saul caused to be killed, etc. the same making a man
like to Satan, who being a murderer from the beginning, and innocent blood
crying ever to heaven till the same be avengend, as we see in Abels, and Rev.
6. 10. And debarring from the Kingdom of Heaven, as we see Rev. 22. 15. But of
all sorts of murder paricide and fratricide is the most heinous, as we see
that of Cains murdering of his Brother Abel, and Abemelechs murdering of his
Brethren, Judge. 9. And therefore perishing thereafter shamefully, and of
Absolons murdering here, of his Brother Amnon.

Secondly the persons actours in this Tragedy are. 1. Absolon King David's third
Son procreat upon Maacha the Daughter of Talmai King of Geshur an infidel, and
who is the principal actour, deviser, commander, and avower of this cruel
murder. 2. David the King, in his simplicity and indulgence to his Children,
albeit by circumvention, yet he is the exposer by his authority of his Son
Amnon to this murder. 3. Amnon the Kings eldest Son incircumspectly (and yet
by Gods just judgment,) is he who is murdered. 4. Absolons servants are the
burreans and executers of this murder. 5. The Kings other Sons were
spectatours, being invited and present at this bloody banquet. 6. Jonadab acts
the part of an inconstant courtier (his friend Amnon now being slain) implying,
Verse. 32. That the fact was a just revenge of the forcing of Absolons Sister
Tamar, notwithstanding that he had plotted the way how it should be done, and
therefore now he turns to Absolons part who was living, the other being dead
and gone. 7. Gods part is not to be a bare spectatour in all this, or a
permitter only; but also a worker, directing all these evils to a good end.
As he did all that which was done to Joseph by his Brethren, towit, to his own
glory, in the punishment of vice; and fatherly correction of his servant David,
and so to perform what his word was by Nathan threatened.

Thirdly, the vices of these actouns are. 1. In Absolon, we see hatred. Gross
dissimulation, implacable malice, desire of revenge, ambition to the next to
the Crown, treason; effeminate cruelty, commanding others to do, what he durst
not himself, and want of all reverence, or duty to his Father, or his
authority, and herein also his subtilty appears. That Verse 22. he never spoke
good, or bad to Amnon, towit of that subject, of the rape, or forcing of his
Sister, by quarrelling with him for the same: that so he might conceal his
malice, till he found occasion to put the same in execution, and so he was past
Master in the rule of courteous dissimulation: and in all this, and above all,
we see his irreligious contempt of God, or his commandments, and that he
regarded only the wrong that was done to Tamar, but not the offense that was
done to God.

2. In David, we see his errors were. 1. His too great indulgence to his
Sons, whereupon proceeded his facility without suspicion to believe, and obey
them. And 2. his negligence in his office as a Magistrate, who should have
punished Amnon for his incest deserving death; and which he neglecting, is thus
punished and revenged by Absolon to his great grief, and in Gods just judgment.

3. In Amnon his error was, the want of the remorse of conscience for his
incest, and his sleeping in security, seeing for the space of two years,
nothing was said unto him by Absolon, or done unto him, nor expected by him.

4. In Absolons servants, we see their vice and wickedness was, their base
slavery whereunto they subject themselves to betray, and murder the Prince,
upon the only warrant of their Masters command, and authority; misregarding
both Gods command, and the Kings authority, or considering the cause, on
consequence of the fact:

5. In the rest of the Kings Sons, we see their imprudence, to have committed
themselves all at one time to have been at such a banquet, as also their
negligence in being only spectatours, and not seeking any way to hinder the
fact.

6. In Jonathan we see the pattern of a temporising, and dissembling courtier,
favoring and following them, by whom they may best stand, and framing his
speeches all to that end.

Fourthly, the form of the practicing, and execution of this bloody fact is
extended in all the circumstances thereof. 1. The time was after two full
years, and at the shearing of sheep, which was usually celebrated with a
public feast, as we see, Genesis 38. and 1 Samuel 25. At which time Absolon takes
occasion to invite the King, and his Sons, and particularly Amnon, to his
feast of sheepshearing, and then to murder Amnon. 2. The place is Baalbazor
which bordereth with Ephraim. 3. The occasion, is Absolons earnest invitation
of the King and all his Sons to his banquet: which when the King had refused
to go, he presses him, that Amnon should go; which at last the King grants, and
that all his other Sons should also go with him. 4. The manner of the acting
is, when all are come, the banquet is begun with great mirth, and liberal
entertainment, especially in drinking of Wine: that Amnon being drunk might
make the less resistance, and therefore Absolon gives commandment to his
servants, when they saw him so, that then they should kill him, upon his
warrant and authority, which accordingly they wickedly perform.

Last of all, the consequents are, the Kings Sons fly, David and all his
servants mourn: Jonadab mitigates the first report, and in a manner excuses
Absolon for the fact, and Absolon flies, and goes to Geshur, where he
remained three years.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN Amnon before, and now in Absolon, both Israelites, and professors of
the true worship of God, and members of the visible Church. We see gross and
wicked crimes of uncleanesse in the one, and cruelty in the other, which shows
us, that it is not enough to be professors of the truth, and of the Christian
name, or will ever that avail us to salvation, if our practice be contrary to
our profession, but our guiltiness is the greater that we dishonor our holy
profession by our unholy life, mocks God, giving him words, but our real
service to Satan, makes the Enemies to blasphmy, and brings destruction upon
our own souls.

2. Verse. 1. Two full years Amnon sleeps in security before his incestuous fact
is punished, whereby we see. 1. The Lords long suffering patience all this
while, which he abused and should have led him to repentance. And 2. albeit
sinners through Satan's subtilty lie sleeping in security, yet the Lords justice
and their deserved punishment sleeps not, but though he come with leaden feet,
yet he comes at last with an iron hand to crush them in pieces.

3. Amnon had escaped punishment which David as the Magistrate ought to have
inflected impartially according to the Law, which was one of the causes of his
security, but he could not escape that punishment which God in his just
judgment had ordained for him, therefore let none, though never so great
Prince^, as Amnon was, or others, dream of impunity for sin, for assuredly
howsoever they may escape the hand of man, the hand of God in his own time
shall reach them.

4. Absolon had all these two years harbored in his heart, this hatered and
inveterate malice which he had against Amnon, and which now he was to put in
execution, whereby we see where Satan once gets possession of the heart, as he
got also of Cains, and Judas, he will never rest till he bring that wicked seed
sown and rooted there, till a full harvest and perfection, as he did this
inveterate hatered of Absolons toward Amnon. Which ended in a cruel murder.
And that evil determined courses die not, as oftimes the good does. Before
their performance.

5. Absolon invited all the Kings Sons to a banquet, and in special, Amnon
whom he intended to murder, as we see Verse. 26. So that it is no new thing to
see foulest practices varnished over with fair pretenses, as in that fact of
Simeon and Levi against the Sechemites, the fast indicted by Jesabells means
for killing of Naboth, and here Absolons inviting of Amnon to a feast,
intending to murder him. This also is the practice of Satan in tempting to
sin, he lays before them pleasure, or profit, and the like, and invites
them, as it were to taste and take of these baits, intending their destruction,
as it is (...), (...) decipit auceps, whereunto we oppose, omnibus esca cibis
^r^ s^besse puta.

6. Verse. 25. King David being also invited to this banquet refuses to go, but
he blessed Absolon, who was accursed of God, and going about a cursed and (...)
fact. Which teaching us, that man blesses in vain, where the Lord blesses
not, and therefore Children should earnestly desire that with parents blessing
which is only optative, the Lord would join his blessing which is operative,
and so carry in a holy course of life, that the one may concur with the other.

7. Verse. 27. After that David had denied, that Amnon should go, yet through
Absolons ^ressing, he consents at last, that he and all other his Sons,
should go. Where we see what importunity does produce, and especially by
servent and frequent prayer, and waiting what is produced at the hands of God,
our heavenly King and Father: as we see in the answer to the Canaa^itish Woman
at last, and the parable of the importunate friend, and Widow.

8. Verse. 28. Where Absolon directs his servants to mark, when Amnons heart
was merry with Wine, that then they should kill him. We see 1. what is the
fruit oftimes of drunkenness when men are besotted thereby, and both rendered
incapable of perceiving of danger, and unable to resist violence, as is said by
the Poet, enervat vires, debilitatique pedes, then they become an open prey to
any invader. And 2. we see that it is a fearful thing for men, to be taken
away in the very act of sinning, as Zimri and Cosby, were, Core and Dathan, and
here Amnon in the very act of drunkenness. Wherein also appears Absolons
greater cruelty, by making him drunk first to murder his soul, and thereafter
in his security to murder his body.

9. In the executing of this cruel fact, Absolon says to his servants, fear
not, speaking of the fear of man, but he forgets to speak of the fear of God:
and again, have not I commanded you? (says he) as if his command was a
sufficient warrant, though contrary to the commandment of God. So that we see
hereby, that in all ways of the wicked God is no ways before their eyes, and
that presumptuously they prefer themselves unto him, and their unjust
obsequie, to his just obedience.

10. Absolon likewise calls the execution of this base cruelty in his servants,
courage and valor, being indeed but treacherous and cowardly murder. Which
shows, that vices are oftimes colored with the name of virtues; as
drunkenness is called good fellowship, avarice good Husbandry, subtilty to
deceive, wisdom, and pride magnanimity; as treacherous murder is here called
courage and valor: and so on the contrary virtues fair face is besmeared with
the foul aspersion of vice, as humility is counted baseness, modesty hypocrisy,
and charity, profusion, as Judas called that which was bestowed on Christ to be
waste. This being Satan's policy to make vice owned, and virtue counted odious.

11. Verse. 29. It is said that the servants of Absolon did as their Master
commanded them, and killed Amnon. Being hereby rather slaves to his vice and to
Satan the instigator. Where we see the proverb verified, such Masters, such
Man, a godless, bloody and dissembled Master, and they godless, bloody and
dissembled servants, misregarding the fear of God, or his holy commandment, to
please man, and obey his wicked commandment; whereas they should only obey the
Lord, and their Masters commandment so far as it was agreeable to Gods, as
is said, Act. 5. 29. And as we see a worthy example here of in Saul's footmen, 1 Samuel 22. 17. Who at their Kings commandment would not kill the Priests of the
Lord, which wicked Doeg the Edomite did thereafter, in a most cruel and
barbarous manner, as also in the Midwives of Egypt, Exodus 1. 16.

12. Verse. 31. 36. and 37. Upon the hearing of the tragical news of Absolons
bloody and cruel fact, David rents his clothes, lies on the Earth, weeps
sore, and mourned every day. Where we see, that parents too great indulgence to
their Children, (as Eli's was, and David's) who spare the rod which in time
should be used, procures much sorrow and grief to themselves, and destruction
of their Children, whom they spare and indulge.

13. David also not being only a parent, but a public Magistrate, and
according to his office, not punishing incest in Amnon, therefore now in
Absolons fact, and in the grief, that he had for Amnon every day, he is justly
punished by God: Which should admonish all Magistrates to discharge their duty
faithfully, and imparcially in their office, it being a like abo^^ination
before God to punish the innocent, and to let the guilty free.

14. Verse. 32. Where Jo^alab tells David, that Amnon only was dead, and that
by the appointment of Absolon it had been determined, from the day that he had
forced his Sister Tamar. We see, 1. That wicked courses that are carried on
with determination to have them performed* (and are not sudden flashes of
passion, or the like) they are the very light of impiety, and argue a deep
rooting, and possession by Satan, who still forments what is once determined,
till it be accomplished; and is a busy agent to drive on such wicked purposes,
as we see in Judas betraying of our savior, and other his restless motions
and Jehi^like drivings on to sin.

15. Jo^adah also by these words seems to have had knowledge of this
determination of Absolons, and of the cause wherefore; and thus might have made
Amnon more wary, and cautelous: but herein he shows the nature of a
temporising dissembling courrier, who only looks to his own standing, not
caring what becomes of others Wherein also we see what it is to lippen, or rely
on the friendship of any flesh whatsoever, as Amnon did on this Jonadab, a
subtle man, and only for himself.

16. Verse. 34. Upon this fact committed. Absolon fled, towit, from man who
only could kill the body: but he could not fly from blood guiltiness, and an
accusing conscience, nor yet from the hand of Gods justice which did reach him
hereafter, and who had power both of soul, and body to cast both into hell
fire. Wherefore let sinne^s n^ther fly unto God by repentance and faith; for
from him they cannot fly, as David shows, and all other flight they will
find unprofitable.

II. SAM. Chap. 14. from the 1. verse. 10 the 28.
THis Chapter is co^eren^ (...) the (...) verse of the former, which some
Interp^^t^rs therefore make the first verse of this Chapter. Wherein we have.
1. Absolons reduction from his exile in Geshur* where he was three years, to
the 25. verse. 2. His more full reconciliation with David his Father, after he
had stayed two full years in Jerusalem. In Absolons reduction we have again, 1.
the manner of procuring it, to the ^1. verse. 2. David's cond^ionall
cond^^ending, Verse. 21. and 24. 3. Joabs thanksgiving to David, and his
bringing of Absolon to Jerusalem from Geshur, Verse. 22. and 23. Whereunto is
subjoyned a description of Absolon from his beauty* which was matchless, and
from the quantity of his hair, a^ also from his progeny, that he had three
Sons and a beautiful Daughter, called also Tamar.

First then in the proc^^ing of Absolon^ reduction from Geshur, We find. 1.
that the principal procure^ thereof is Joab. 2. The motive, is, that he
perceived the Kings heart was toward Absolon, of whom it is said, Chap. 13.
13. That the soul of King David longed to go for^ou^o Absolon, for he was
comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead. So passionately ^^dulgent he
was toward him, as we see after, Chap. 18. 33. Though a wicked and re^ellions
Son. 3. The means, or Instrument which he uses, is, 1. For sex a Woman who^
he fetc^es from a place called Tekoah, which is supposed by Jerome to be a
little City in the territory of Judah distant some nine milles from Jerusalem*
3. Her estate is, a Widow, burdened with fatherless Children, whose defense
belonged to the King. 4. Her apparel is mourning, by which the King might know
her misery. 5. Her property is, she is a wise (...) and therefore (...)
instrument to bring the purpose in hand to pass, and massage the same
prudently: and therefore. 6. Her action is, humble prostration, with a
patheticall, and short exclamation, help O King, after which upon the Kings
interrogation, what ailed her? she proceeds with her narration, or Allegorical
oration, which subtily Ioab had put in her mouth, using. 1. A parable from the
example of Nathan, whose rebuke of the King after this form had the better
event. 2. The scope whereof is to bring David a simili, to grant to Absolons
reduction. 3. The oration it self consists of a parable, or Protasis; and next
of an application or Apodasis. The first is in the person of her own son. The
second in the person of Absolon, for whose reduction both is intended. The one
is from the 5. verse. to the 12. The other from the 12. to the 18. This oration
of hers, the King hears patiently, and answers graciously. 1. In the general,
verse. 8. 2. More particularly, verse. 10. And 3. Most specially, and plainly,
and for her better satisfaction, and assurance, sealing it with an oath. That
as the Lord lives, There should not a hair of her sons head, fall to the
earth. After which words of the King, follows the application, or Apodosis:
wherein after a cunning conciliating of a patient audience, she out of his own
mouth (as Nathan did) makes him to convict himself of cruel and hard dealing
against Absolon, in not reducing him from exile. In which application David is,
as the widow who had the two sons: whereof the one, towit, Absolon had
killed the other Amnon: and that, being greatly provoked thereto, by the
indignity done to his sister. Now the rest of the Kings sons nearest after
Absolon to succeed to the Crown, they are as the friends of the dead, craving
revenge. For whose satisfaction Absolon has remained three full years in
exile, therefore what David has granted to his poor subject, concerning her
son, who is alive, he cannot with honor and equity refuse to his own son
and successor: seeing the Kings judgment should be a like to all in like
cases, and his oath inviolable. The arguments which more particularly she uses:
are these, 1. Verse. 13. It is against Gods people, their honor and good, to
have the successor to their King, living in exile amongst Gentiles, and
Infidells in Geshur. 2. Verse. 14. Their grief is such, that they are like a
people ready to dye, and like water powered on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again, by the exile of their Prince, whose reduction would both
ease and please them. 3. The Lord has appointed, and divised means for his
reduction, that he remain not still in exile from him, and these means how
weak, or small soever, should not be misregarded. 4. Verse. 15. It is the Kings
gracious disposition, to admit the meanest petitioner to speak unto him, in
behalf of them who are distressed: such is his goodness, though his greatness
might make them afraid. 5. Verse. 16. A simili, the Kings granting favor, to
the son of a poor widow, and subject: much more must move him, to show
favor to his own son, and successour^ And 6. Verse. 17. The Kings pity, and
piety in comforting those, that are in distress: and his prudence, like an
Angel of God, in discerning between good, and evil must show it self in
comforting his people by reduction of their Prince; and in comforting his
exiled some himself, which he cannot but think the same to be the best course.
And 7. By way of conclusion, in doing so, the King will find that herein the
Lord will be with him, and prosper him.

The effect or event of this oration, is 1. The Kings asking this woman of
Tekoah, if Joabs hand was not in this, verse. 18. Who simply and truly grants
the same. verse. 19. Subjoyning as a reason of her granting, by way of
commendation of David, that he was wise, as an Angel of God: and knew all
things that are in the earth. And therefore it was in vain, for her to deny,
or conceal this thing from him. verse. 20. The second effect was, the Kings
concession to Joabs desire by this woman, and his direction to him, to bring
back Absolon from exile: but upon this condition, verse. 24. That he should go
to his own house in Jerusalem, and should not come into the Kings presence^
unto which concession of the Kings, is subjoyned. 1. Joabs humble thanksgiving
to the King, verse. 22. And 2. Joabs speedy going to Geshur, and bringing back
of Absolon to Jerusalem, verse. 23. Whereunto is subjoyned, verse. 28. The
commendation of Absolons matchless beauty, and that he had three sons, and a
beautiful daughter, Tamar.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. IOab perceiving the Kings heart to be toward Absolon, resolves to
deal for his reduction: where we see the nature of Courtiers; that for the
most part, whatsoever they* think will be pleasing to their Prince, though not
agreeable to God, or a good conscience: that they will strive to do. As we see
in that wicked practice of Doeg, 1. Sam. 22. 18. And here in the practice of
Joab.

2. There is no ill cause, but it will find some, for to be pleaders for it:
especially in the Courts of Kings, and great men: as Joab was here for an
unnatural and bloody murdering Absolon, doing so for their own ends. Whereof
therefore Kings, and others should beware, considering what it brought on David
at last, his giving ear thereto.

3. That which gives Joab hope to prevail, we see is David the Judges favor,
that his heart was toward Absolon. So, that which gives us hope to prevail in
our suits toward our selves, or others: although grievous sinners; is the
favor that our heavenly King, and judge, caries toward mankind: his heart in
fatherly affection, and pity, being toward us; whereas he passed by the fallen
Angels, and sent his own son to fallen man, and gave him to the death for us.

4. Verse. 2. Joab for accomplishing his purpose, chooses a fit instrument to
bring it to pass, by fetching a wise woman from Tekoah, and suborning her what
she should say. As Satan made choice of the Serpent in tempting of Eve. Which
should teach men, much more in good causes, and for effecting good purposes,
either in Church or Commonwealth: to choose fit instruments for the work, which
may tend to Gods glory, and the good of his people.

5. This woman is called a wise woman, and yet suffers her wisdom to be
abused, by Joabs suborning her to plead for an ill cause. Which should teach
such, who have gifts beyond others, to take heed that they abuse them not to
ill ends: but to use them aright to the glory of God; and advancing of good
purposes. Else they may be admonished by the Example of Achitophell, what they
may turn to.

6. Joab would not himself go to the King, to suit for Absolons reduction:
fearing to offend, and not being sure of the success. And therefore he subtily
employes, and subornes this wise woman of Tekoah. Where we see oftimes in
Courtiers more policy, than piety, wit, than grace. And not only being expert
in dissimulation themselves, but also teaching others the same art: as Joab
does here this woman of Tekoah.

7. Verse. 4. This woman gets ready ac^ess to the King, faining her self to be
a distressed widow: ^ as also patient audience* and a gracious answer. A
worthy example to be followed by Kings, and inferior Magistrates, who should
pity the distressed, and give them the like access, audience and answer: the
like whereof we see in Job, Chap. 29. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. verses.

8. In her humble gesture also, falling on her face to the ground, and doing
obeisance. We see a good example of inferiors, in reverencing and honoring
their superiors, as is commanded in the first precept of Gods law: and has
ever been practiced by them, who have any civility, let be grace. As also her
saying, help, O King? We see the end wherefore Kings are set over Gods people:
which is to help the distressed widow, and fatherless, and all such who are
oppressed any manner of way, and to redress their injuries: as that former
place, and practice of Job shows, Chap. 29.

9. Verse. 8. 10, 11. In King David's pronouncing sentence, not having heard the
other party: herein he fails in the office of a just judge, who has two ears*
that he may hear both parties, the accuser, and accused: and not (having only
heard the one,) to pronounce sentence against the other.

10. David also herein erreth, that he rashly, and needlessly swears by the
name of the Lord, and so takes his name in vain, against the third commandment.
In observing whereof they who are in primest places, should give good example
to inferiors.

11. Verse. 11. Where she says, Let the King remember the Lord thy God, that
thou would not suffer the avenger of blood to destroy any more. We see that
the remembrance of God, and of his commandments, who is the supreme Judge of
all men, and has power both of soul and body, is, and ought to be before the
eyes of all Judges: and a most powerful motive to duties, and restraint from
sin.

12. Verse. 12. Where David after three several answers, and the last confirmed
by an oath, yet patiently hears this woman: and speaks thus, Say on. We see a
notable example of patient hearing, to the full, in so great a King: and
necessarily to be followed by inferior Magistrates.

13. Verse. 13. and 16. This woman would persuade the King to bring back
Absalom, by reasoning a simili, from that which was granted to her, for her own
son. Whereas just judgment should be ruled not by examples, but by laws: as
it is said, We live by laws, and not by examples.

14. Verse. 14. Where this woman says, We must needs dye, and are as water
spilt on the ground, that cannot be gathered up again. We see the necessity of
our mortal condition, and that dust must return to dust; and no returning to
this life again. This being the common condition of all flesh, sooner or later.

15. Where in like manner she says, That God is not the respecter of any
person: as Peter says, Act. 10. 34. And as is said, Job. 34. 19. He accepts
not the person of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the poor, for they
all are the works of his hands. It should teach all alike to fear to sin,
against God, the righteous judge of the whole world; and not to dream of
impunity at his hands, because of their worldly grandeur, and of men's
respecting their persons, as we see in Pharaoh, Saul, Nebuchadnezzar,
Belshazzar, Ahab, Herod, and others.

16. Verse. 15. Howsoever the people would have made her afraid to speak to the
King, because of his Majesty, and greatness: yet she shows that she was
encouraged to speak to him, in this business, because of his lenity and
goodness. These two being seemly when they concur together in earthly
Princes, as they do in Christ our heavenly Prince: who as he is called the
great sheapherd, Heb. 13. 20. So is he the good sheapherd, Joh. 10. 11. Whose
greatness ought not so much terrify, or his goodness should encourage, and
allure humble and sinful suitors to come unto him, as he invites them, Matthew.
11. 28.

17. Verse. 17. and 20. This woman to attain to her purpose, uses gross
flattery, saying to David, That he was an Angel of God, to discern good and
bad, and according as an Angel of God to know all things that are in the
earth. A vice wherewith usually Princes, and great Men are tickled, and abused,
to the puffing them up with pride. The danger whereof we may see in Herod, Act.
12. 22, 23. And whereof therefore pious, and prudent Princes, and others should
beware.

18. Verse. 19. Upon the Kings asking her, if the hand of Joab was not in this,
she reveals plainly that he was her subor^er. Which should teach men to beware
to reveal secrets to women, for says the wise man, they, and Children can
hardly conceal: but whereof they are ignorant; an example of the danger
whereof, we see in Sampsons revealing, wherein his strength lay to Dalilah. And
the King Midas, who revealed to his wife the deformity of his ears, upon
condition she should not disclose the same to no earthly creature: therefore
she dug a hole in the ground, and would needs tell the same to the infernal
spirits.

19. Verse. 21. David in the reduction of Absolon has inwardly, a great debate
betwixt two Counselors. The one flesh, blood, and affection, moving him to
pardon, and reduce his son on the one part: and the law of God, of good
conscience, and duty of his office to punish him on the other part. In which
debate David yields to affection, makes shipwreck of conscience, and duty of
his office. Which example may be applied by reprehension, to the greatest part
of the world, who in the like deliberations follow flesh, and blood, pleasure,
or profit in sinning, and neglect both God, a good conscience, and their own
good in the end. As we see in the first world. In Jacobs sons their cruelty
toward the Shechemites, and their brother Joseph: in Pharaoh regardding his
utility, and disobeying God, to let the people of Israel go* in David before,
in the matter of Vriah, and here in the reduction of an unnatural treacherous
murderer Absolon.

20. David here is glad that Joab his counselor, consents to his affection in
perverting justice: and Joab is likewise glad, that his master grants his
unlawful petition. Whereupon we collect the infelicity of that estate, where
the Magistrate and his counselors agree in iniqui^y. As we see in Saul, with
Doeg, Absolon with Architophel, Achab with Jezabell, Reh^boant and his young
Counselors. And here David, and Joab: whereas it was better when Saul was
counseled by Samuel, David by Nathan and Gad, that Achab had been guided by
Eliah, Rehoboam by the old Counselors: and when the good Kings of Judah were
ruled by the true prophets, for then was the estate of the republic happy and
prosperous.

21. Verse. 22. Joab humbly thanks the King, for fulfilling his request, though
in an unlawful thing: that (as we hear hereafter) tended to his hurt, verse.
30. How much more then should we be humbly thankful to the King of Kings: who
so often fulfilleth our requests in pardoning us, and in many things that tend
to our good here, and eternal salvation hereafter.

22. Verse. 23. Joab being the Kings General of his Armies, goes himself to
Geshur: and with great solemnity brings back Absolon to Jerusalem: who should
rather have suffered death there, for the murder of his brother, then to have
been so honored. But oftimes this is the custom of the world, that virtue
suffers when vice is rewarded. Whereas the duty of the Magistrate is to cherish
virtue, and chastise vice: as is said, toll malos, extolle pios. These being
the two pillars of a Commonwealth, the reward of virtue, and punishment of
vice: else who shall follow the one, and fly the other.

23. Verse. 24. David's condition upon which he grants to Absolons reduction,
that he should turn to his own house, and not see his face. Proceeds from
worldly prudence to please the people, like Saul's sparing of Agag, and the best
of the cattle for sacrifice: but was contrary to the law of God, any such
mitigation, which required* that the murderer should dye the death; and the
land thereby be purged of blood. Which should teach all Magistrates to make
Gods Word, and the laws, to be the rule of their actions in punishing of
vices: and not to dispense with Gods law through humane policy and wisdom.

24. Verse. 25. Absolon is here commended for his beauty of body, which was
outward: but wanted that inward beauty spoken of, Psalm. 45. 13. and 110. 3. And
without which the outward is but like a ring of gold in a swines snout: Whereas
beauty with virtue (especially humility and chastity) is like a pearl in a
gold ring. Wherefore let every one that has bodily beauty, seek for the inward
beauty of grace and virtue, as Joseph had: without which it will be more
hurtful than profitable; as we see in Dinah, and Tamar, and here in Absolon.
And such as want bodily beauty, strive to have spiritual beauty, that so they
may be like the vine: which though it want outward beauty, yet brings forth
most pleasant and comfortable fruit.

25. Verse. 26. Absalom takes inordinate delight in his hair, whereby he
fostered that, which in the end was his own destruction: it being as the rope
that hanged him. Where we see, that it is the just judgment of God, that
worldly things wherein men inordinately delight, become the occasion of their
destruction: as riches, honor, wit, eloquence, strength, beauty, and the like:
therefore let men to whom God has given any such gifts, pray to God for the
right use of them, to his glory, and their own good: and that they be not like
the rich fool, or Haman, Achitophel, Tertullus, Sampson, or like Absolon here.

II SAM: Chap: 12. from the 1. verse to the 13.
Follows the second part of the Chapter, which is Absoloms reconciliation to
his father David: wherein is set down the time, towit, after two years
dwelling in Jerusalem. 2. The instrument which he uses to procure his
reconciliation. Who is Joab, the same man that had procured his former
reduction from Geshur. 3. The manner how he uses Joab. 1. By sending for him
twice. And 2. When he would not come, by causing his servants to set his barley
field on fire: that what entreaty could not do, coaction might enforce. 4. Is
set down Joabs coming unto him and asking the cause, why he should have caused
his servants to set his field on fire. Whereunto Absalom answers, that it was
only by way of Stratagem, because when he sent for him, he would not come:
therefore he thought upon this occasion, that he would not fail to come. And
then he lays out the cause, why he sent for him, which was to make known his
condition to the King, which he affirmed to be more tolerable in exile in
Geshur; than in that domestic exile from his fathers presence, which he either
desires, or else that he would put him to a legal trial and kill him, if he
were found culpable. In this offer confiding partly in his innocence, who had
done nothing, but that whereunto he was provoked by a notable injury, and
partly confiding in his Fathers indulgence and clemency, whose heart and
affection he understood was toward him, though he restrained his countenance
for a time from him, as Joseph did from his brethren. And 5. follows Ioabs
delivery of his commission to David, and thereupon as the event. Absoloms
reconciliation to his Father, who in token thereof, as the custom was, kissed
him. Having externally given all due reverence to his Father, against whom
notwithstanding inwardly he had hatched a monstrous rebellion, against both his
life and honor, as we shall show (God willing) in the next Chapter.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 26. ABsoloms ambitious heart is mightily grieved (as we see V. 32.) That
he is restrained from the court, and the Kings presence. Which shows us the
torture and disquiet of proud Spirits, that cannot attain to their ambitious
desires: so that it may be said of pride, as is of envy Intactis vorat ossibus
medullas, and that it is a punishment to it self, whereas the wise man says,
Been vixit, qui been latuit. As also what torture shall it be to be deprived of
his presence for ever, who is the King of Kings, and of that fullness of joy
that is therein, Psalm. 16. 11.

2. Verse. 30. Absalom extorts by force and violence what he could not obtain
otherwise. Wherein we see the nature of Tyrants, that where they cannot allure
men to meddle with them in ill courses they menace, or oppress them, as
experience teaches. And so does enforce them.

3. Absoloms servants do as their Tyrannous Master commands them, and burn
Ioabs barley field. Where we see a new example of a wicked Master, and of wicked
servants, as we saw before in the murder of Amnon.

4. We see here likewise that Ioab receives a just recompense at the hands of
Absalom, proceeding from Gods just judgment, punishing men, who with
dispensing with a good conscience, and in ill courses, or causes seek to
pleasure the wicked.

5. Verse. 32. Where Absalom says, If there be any iniquity in me, let the King
kill me. We see the blind and impenitent heart that was in Absalom, that having
committed such a vile murder on his own Brother, in such a treacherous and
base way, yet would plead innocence, and that there was no iniquity in him.
Thus does Satan blind and obdure wicked men after the commission of gross and
scandalous crimes. Which excecation and induration is not the least punishment
of such offenders. Being (as Solomon calls it) the plague of the heart, 1
King. 8. 38.

6. Verse. 33. In David's pardoning of bloody fratricide against the Laws both
of God and man, and reconciling with him and kissing him. We see his too great
indulgence and sinful Lenity, which as Eli's, was punished hereafter most
sharply, Absolon intending next paricide by his rebellion, and bringing himself
at last to utter destruction.

II. SAM. Chap. 15. from the 1. verse to the 13.
AFter the reduction and reconciliation of Absolon to his Father David,
follows now in the four subsequent Chapters the History of Absolons behavior
toward so affectionate and indulgent a Father. Which is expressed in his
horrible act of treasonable conspiracy against the life, and royal authority
of the King his Father, and imbarking the Kingdom in a cruel and bloody
civil war. In the present Chapter we have the first part of this general,
the treasonable conspiracy of Absolon against King David, which I divide in
four parts. 1. The means whereby he prepares and perverts the hearts of the
people, from the 1. verse. to the 7. 2. The act of this mighty conspiracy, from
the 7. to the 14. verse. And under what pretense he goes to Hebron, where he
acts the same. 3. David's ^^eeing from Jerusalem upon hearing of the news, and
Ittai's resolution not to leave him in this his distressed condition, to the
24. verse. And 4. David's prudent deliberations that he takes in this matter,
from the 24. verse to the end.

First then for Illustration of this matter: We shall follow this order. 1. We
shall speak a little of the nature of this crime of treasonable conspiracy, or
les-majesty. 2. Of the occasions that moved Absolon to commit this crime. 3. Of
the subtle practices whereby he alienates the peoples favor from the King,
and acquires the same to himself. 4. Of the particular fact of this conspiracy
it self in all the circumstances thereof.

Concerning the first. 1. This crime is directly against the fifth precept of
the moral Law, where under the name of Father and mother is comprehended the
Magistrate. Who is parens patriae, and of whom we are prohibited in
Deutronomie, not to speak evil, much less to do evil to him: yea, against
whom to devise, or advise evil, although no execution follow, is criminal and
capital in the highest degree, by all Laws, and the punishment whereof
extends not only to the committer being alive, but being dead, and to his very
offspring. Yea, though they be wicked, their persons are to be counted sacred,
and so not to be touched, as we see in the example of David toward Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 5, 6. Or of a contrary profession, yet that looses not the band of
loyal subjection, as our late confession of faith by the Scripture shows: and
if they should command that which is unlawful, howsoever active obedience may
be refused, as the three Children and Daniel did, yet no conspiracy is to be
used against either their persons, or estates, but prayer and tears to God, to
convert their hearts, or dissipate their Counsels.

Secondly, the motives that moved Absolon to attempt this treasonable
conspiracy, was principally ambition and desire to reign, which spurs him on
with such insatiable veheme^cy, like Jehu's march, that he cannot abide till
his Fathers natural death, and the time of his just claim; but as out of
ambition, as well as vindict he had made away Amnon, David's eldest Son, and
nearest to the Crown, he would now also by paricide take his Father out of the
way, that so he might reign, beside this he stomochated his exile. 3. years
in Geshur, and two years after, for his debarring from court, when he was in
Jerusalem, and last he was suspicious that (as it was rumored) David would
appoint at his death Solomon to succeed him, being a pious and a prudent
Prince, and beloved both by God, and his Prophet Nathan.

Thirdly, the means whereby he prepares and perverts the people subtily, are.
1. his Princely attendance, of chariots and horses, and 50. men to run
before him, the novelty whereof and sight was pleasant, and it is said, that
people delight in such shows and novelties. 2. His popularity, for gaining
whereof he uses both words, and deeds insinuating himself by both into the
peoples favors, and in doing whereof his restles diligence was such, that when
others were at rest and asleep, his restless ambition suffers him not to rest,
but he rises early, and to catch all occasions, stands beside the way of the
Kings gate. And 1. By words, when men had any controversy, and came to the King
for judgment. 1. He kindly calls upon them, and asks of what city they were.
Next, he inquires of their errand and gives them an approbation of the equity
of their cause. But blames his Fathers negligence of his royal duty, that no
man was deputed by him to Minister justice. Then he simulates his love to
justice and care of doing the same to all if he once were in place, and vested
with authority. 4. By deeds, or gesture, simulating great humility, he carries
below his rank to his inferiors: and when any came nigh, and did obeisance to
him, he put forth his hand and took him and kissed him. Whereby he deceived the
people, and stole their hearts, for albeit externally he gave a show of
humility and curtesy; yet inwardly he fostered all pride and cruelty, which he
showed hereafter.

The third mean, which he uses to effectuate his rebellion, is his pretense of
piety in going to Hebron. To pay his vow, which he had made in Geshur, that if
the Lord brought him back from thence to Jerusalem he would serve the Lord. An
usual cloak to deceive, and to palliat foulest practices under such fair
pretenses.

Fourthly, the particular circumstances of this wicked rebellion are these. 1.
The time which was ( verse. 7.) After 40* years; 2 Samuel 5. 4.
reckoning after the beginning of David's reign in Hebron; which I confirm by
this demonstration, the whole years of David, were 70. next, Solomon was eleven
years old when he began to reign. 1 Chronicles. 22, 5.
Who was begotten after David's adultery with Bathsheba, and so David is thought
to be 58. or. 59. when he begat Solomon; after this we assign two years before
Amnons incest, and other two years between the incest of Amnon and his killing
by Absalom, to which add. 3. years, that Absalom was in Geshur, and two in
Jerusalem before his reconciliation, and after the reconciliation we assign
two years for the practice of this conjuration, which added makes eleven
years, and so this rebellion falls in the last year of David's life, or
thereabout, when this unhappy Child should have comforted his Fathers age, he
then becomes to him his greatest cross.

The second circumstance, is the place where he begins to act his treason,
which is Hebron in the Territory of Judah. 15. Miles distant from Jerusalem,
where the sepulture of the Patriarchs was, belonging to the Levites, which
place he chooses, not as he pretended for any act of Religion, or serving of
God there, but as fittest to act his conspiracy there, and to set himself down
in the throne, that same place were David his Father began his reign, and so
to serve Satan and his own ambition.

The third circumstance, is the manner how he advances his rebellion, which is.
1. By taking with him in company 200. men from Jerusalem, whom he had invited
to take part of his feast, at the paying of his vow in Hebron, who went with
him in the simplicity of their hearts, knowing nothing of his treasonable
design. 2. He sends spies through the Land to try the disposition of the
people, and who were on his side, or no, and with them he sends Trumpeters; and
that these spies might inform the people, that as soon as they heard him
proclaimed King, they might join with him. 3. He sends for Achitophel David's
prime Counselor, the better to color and promote his conspiracy, and that
the people might see that the wisest of the Kingdom, and his Fathers chief
Counselor was on his side. Whereupon a great confluence of people comes unto
him, and the conspiracy becomes strong thereby. Some being deceived, and
thinking it had been by his Fathers appointment, as was Solomon's afterward,
others affecting novelty, and their own advancement; and others who were not
answerable to the Laws being glad of alteration, and as we say, to fish in
troubled waters.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN the observations, or application of this History I will follow the
method of the actours and persons, which are five. 1. David. 2. Absalom. 3. The
spies. 4. The people. 5. Achitophel.

1. On David's part in History, we see in this act the just judgment of God on
the perverters of justice, especially in the matter of murder, and bloodshed,
in not punishing the same according to the Law, therefore Absalom who first
took Amnons life the Son, being spared, now hunts after the life also, and
estate of the Father. Let Magistrates therefore if they love their own security
draw the sword of justice against vice (and especially against that crying
sin of bloodshed) impartially.

2. In the Mystery, in David's troubles and his adherents here, we see typified
the condition of Christ, and his Church, against whom not only open Enemies
arose and bloody persecuters, but also domesticke Enemies, as pernicious
Heretics professing the Christian name, and yet oppugning the truth of Jesus
Christ, and persecuting the true professors thereof, as did the Arrians
especially, and as now do the Pope, and Papists.

3. Next in the Person and actings of Absalom, in the History, we see the
example of a youth possessed with all sort of vices, like a legion of Devils, as
pride, cruelty, dissimulation, fraud, hypocrisy, unnatural rebellion,
Athiesme, and in a word a Mass of monstrous impiety. Whereupon we learn what
man is by nature being unregenerate. As we see, Genesis 6. 5. And that goodness
comes not by generation, but by grace and regeneration. As we see in the
similitude of the pure grain that is sown, whereof grows that which has both
a win, chafe and straw. Which should teach parents to pray for grace to their
Children, to curb vice in them timely, and to bring them up in virtue, and
correction, not being too indulgent, and to remember that which is said, Quod
nova testa capit, inveterata sapit.

4. Absalom likewise and his followers, in Mystery represents the malignant
Church, persecuting the true, and the rising of Antichrist (resembled here by
him) by counterfeit profession of great humility: as a servant of servants, and
simulate piety, being called therefore his holiness, and going about in deep
hypocrisy to act the Mystery of iniquity, thereby to dethrone Christ, who is
the only head, and King of his Church, and to inthrone himself, as head and
monarch thereof: for which he has his spies and Trumpeters, as his emissary
Priests and Jesuits in all Lands, whereby multitudes, (which he makes a note
of his Church) are made to follow him, which many do, like the 200. that went
with Absalom) in the simplicity of their hearts, and such a few number who
follow Christ, and his truth (like these who followed David) he cruelly did
ever persecute to the death, as the two witnesses were, Revel. 11. Having not
only policy (like Achitophels wisdom) but also power on his side, as we see,
Revel. 17. 12, 13.

5. Absalom likewise we see rises not in open rebellion at first, nor to the
hight of his impiety, but by degrees, getting Chariots, horses, and a Princely
attendance first; and then preparing the peoples affections and fitting all
other things for his purpose. This being Satan's craftines sowing first the
seeds of sin in the heart, (which therefore we are exhorted to keep with all
diligence: Prove. 4. 23.) As he did the tares in the Lords field, and then
fomenting the same by all means possible, till at last it come to the ripe
harvest, and burst forth openly: as we see Judas covetousness did in betraying
Christ, Absoloms hatred in killing of Amnon, and his pride here in rebellion
against his Father. And in Mystery, as we may see in that defection of the
Roman Church to gross idolatry, of worshipping of images, and relics, prayer
to sancts, and Angels, going in pilgrimage, adoration of the host, and the
like; all which rose from small beginnings at first, and plausible pretenses,
as we see, Coloss. 2. 23.

These qualities also which being single, grace others, seem to have conspired
to meet in Absalom, goodlinesse of person, magnificence of state, gracious
affability, humility in greatness, fellowfeeling sympathy, love of justice,
care of the Commonwealth, and exemplary piety, and yet all in hypocrisy,
playing with God, that he may deceave men. O damnable vice justly therefore
adjudged to the lowest Hell.

6. Verse. 2. Absalom to promove his purpose rises up early every day. Which
shows us, the restlessenes of insatiable pride till it attain its intent; and
how busy an agent, the Devil is in driving on wicked men to the acting of
wicked courses, like Jehu marching furiously, till they have accomplished their
design: as we see here in Absalom, as also in Judas selling of Christ, and
betraying him, and as is said, Prove: 4. 16. Of the wicked that they sleep not
except they have done mischief.

7. Verse. 3. and 5. In Absoloms flattering speech, and putting forth his hand
to them that came near him, and taking of them and kissing them. We see the
nature of wicked men, who will be content to use most base flattery, and
dissimulation, and to stoop far under their rank, thereby to attain to their
own ends. Of which therefore it is prudence to beware.

8. In his accusing his Father of negligence in the administration of justice;
and so to bring him in disgust, and malgrace with his subjects. We see that it
is the very first precept and practice in the black art of sedition and
rebellion, to flatter the people, and to accuse the Magistrate, and lay upon
him the foulest aspersions that they can devise, that by blameing the present
Government, and calumniating boldly them who are in place, they may first, (as
Absalom did here) steal the hearts of people from them, and so make them
naked, and thereafter engage them to themselves, and so work the point of their
own preferment. But as is said, Prove. 12. 3. a man shall not be established by
wickedness.

9. Verse. 4. Absalom vaunts greatly, and promises much of himself if he we
made Judge, whereby howsoever he pretended great humility in his gesture, yet
he discovers great pride in his words, for vice cannot hide it self long, and
in a most unseemly way he praises himself, where Prove. 27. 2. It is said; Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger and not thine own
lips.

10. Verse. 7. Near after 40. years that his Father had reigned, Absalom hatches
and brings forth this monstrous brood of rebellion in his Fathers old age and
latter time of his reign, which as it shows his great impatiency who could
abide his fathers death, and his ambitious thirst to reign: so it shows a
wicked disposition of a Son crossing his father most, when most he should have
comforted him.

11. Absolon pretends that his going to Hebron was to pay there a religions vow
to God, and to serve him. Where we see, that the pretending of Religion has
been ever made a cloak to palliatall treasonable and wicked designs, like
Satan who when he intends greatest mischief, he transformes himself into an
Angel of light, and Antichrist to deceive Gods people the more subtly, is
described Revel. 13. 11. By that beast that is horned like the Lamb, but speaks
like the Dragon. This also we may see in that cruel practice of Simeon, and
Levi, against the Shechemites: and here in Absoloms against his own Father, so
that the fouler fact is, it seeks ever the fairest visard.

12. Verse. 10. Thirdly, in the spies and trumpeters that were sent out by
Absalom, through all the tribes of Israel, to proclaim him King. We see that
rebellion and wicked courses, never wants wicked instruments to promote the
same, as we see not only in Scripturall examples but in later times, whereof
Sleidan in his Commentaries, lib. 5. makes mention. And how that Luther in his
speech, and answer, to the desires of the commons in Germany, who rose up in
rebellion against their Princes: speaking of certain preachers who stirred up,
and fomented that rebellion: he says, Satanas enim sub Evangelii pretextu,
multos hoc tempore seditiosos, and plane sanguinarios excitavit doctores, such
as the Pope also sends forth that Jesuiticall brood, who are those unclean
spirits like froggs, which go forth unto the Kings of the earth, to gather them
to battle to the great day of the Lord, Revel. 16. 13, 14. And which I would to
God we had not such, even in our times amongst us.

13. In the 200 also that followed Absalom in the simplicity of their heart,
not knowing any thing of his conspiracy. We see in former times, and even now
likewise, how many follow that Roman Antichrist, in like manner in the
simplicity of their hearts, not knowing the depth of Satan, nor the mystery of
iniquity, and being only of the number, and name of the beasts, that is counted
and called Roman Catholics, but not having the mark of the beast, and the
deep impression thereof, as we see, Revel. 13. 17.

14. Lastly, Verse. 12. In Achitophels joining with Absalom. We see the image of
a temporising Politician and Courtier, quitting his loyalty to his old Master
David, and now cleaving to him, whom he thought to be the sun rising, and
joining his wit with Absoloms forces to promote an ill cause, which brings him
therefore at last to an ill end. Also we see what trust can be in flesh, and
blood; when not only David's Counselor turns traitor; but also he is not
safe from one of his own loins.

II. SAM. from the 13. Verse to the 30.
Follows now the other two parts of this Chapter. The first whereof is David's
patience, and course that he takes by flying: whereby he declines the fury of
his son Absalom. And 2. Ittai the Gittite, his constant and faithful
cleaving to David in his distress, (as Ruth did constantly cleave to Naomi, and
would not leave her, Ruth. 1. 16.) and this is to the 24. verse. The second is,
David's prudence. 1. In sending back Zadok with the Ark to Jerusalem, and
appointing his son, and the son of Abiathar, (who went back with their
fathers) to be David's intelligencers. And this to the 31. verse. 2. In sending
likewise Hushai the Archite, to insinuate himself into Absoloms favor, and
countermine the counsel of Achitophel: and by the sons of Abiathar, and
Zadok to certify him of every thing which he heard.

In prosecuting of the first part of David's patience, and flieing for the time.
We shall consider, 1. If flieing in the time of persecution be lawful, or
agreeable to Christian fortitude. 2. The causes of David's flieing at this time.
3. The fact it self, and circumstances thereof. And 4. The company or
associates of David herein. For resolution then of the first, we distinguish
flieing in time of persecution, in three kinds. The first is desertion. The
second, defection. The third is retreat. I call desertion a desperate
abandoning, and deserting of a good cause. I call defection, not only a
desertion of a good cause: but also the profession of the contrary. And I call
retreat, a necessary giving place, or ceding to violence, or flieing therefore
for time and place. As for the first two sorts, there is no question but they
are unlawful: as well in causes civil, as religious. But as for the third, 1.
We have Christ's precept to his disciples, Matthew. 10. If they persecute you in
one City, fly to another. 2. We have the examples of Jacobs flieing to Laban
from the fury of Esau, Genesis 27. Moses flieing from Pharaoh to the land of
Midian, Exodus 2. David from Saul, 1 Samuel 19. And here from Absalom, Eliah from
Ahab, Joseph and Mary from Herod, to Egypt with the Child Jesus, and his
disciples from one place to another, as they were commanded. Which must be
done, notwithstanding upon these cautions. 1. That above all, respect be had to
the glory of God, and good of his Church which must be preferred to our
personal safety. 2. That respect be had to our lawful calling. And 3. That in
all these two extremities be eschewed, to wit, Temeritie, and Timiditie: that
men neither expose themselves to unnecessary dangers, neither yet for carnal
fear refuse those that are necessary, when God calls them thereto, for
witnessing of the truth.

The second is, the causes which moved David at this time to fly: which are,
1. The fury of the first motions of a deceived, and fiery incensed people; and
of an insolent young Prince now their head, and leader: which fury David like a
prudent and experienced warrior resolves for the time to avoid. 2. David in
this rebellion looks to the correcting hand of God, according to Nathans
prophecy, and therefore flies the fury of the instrument: and (as Verse. 30.)
humbles himself barefooted, and weeping for his sin that had procured the
same, that so God might be first appeased, and then that he might the sooner be
rid of the rod. 3. David chooses rather to fly, than to hazard a number of
innocent people their lives, either who loyally followed himself: or who in
simplicity of their hearts had followed Absalom, like a tender father who
looked to the good of his Children more then to his own credit or safety. 4.
David being now aged, and like the sun setting, he saw that the multitude of
the people, their eyes were on Absalom, as the sun rising, therefore it is
said, Verse. 12. That the conspiracy was strong, and the people increased
continually with Absalom: and therefore it was not safe with the few, that
followed him, to encounter with so great a multitude. And 5. He was exercised
in mind between fear and hope, his fear not being so much upon the conspiracy
of Absalom, as upon the apprehension of Gods justice, and with this he had hope
of deliverance, looking and trusting in his mercy, and relying on his promise
made to him concerning the perpetuity of his kingdom.

Thirdly, the action it self, is David's flieing for the causes forenamed, the
antecedent and first motive whereof, is a messenger that came to him. verse. 13.
With news that all the people were following Absalom heartily, and willingly.
Whereupon David presently resolves withal his servants, to fly out of
Jerusalem speedily: the reasons whereof are two. 1. The eschewing of their own
danger. And 2. The danger of the City if they remained therein, till Absalom
came unto it, verse. 14. Whereunto is subjoyned the yielding of David's servants
to this his resolution, and his and their departure from Jerusalem: leaving
only ten of his Concubines behind him to keep his house, whom Absalom
afterward defiled publicly; that Nathans prophecy might be fulfilled. Chap.
12. 11. The manner of his flieing is set down, verse. 30. In a penitentiary way,
beare-foot and weeping, for his sins, that had procured this punishment: with
whom in a compassionate manner, all the people that were with him also did
weep. The way by which he went is set down, verse. 23. over brook Kidron, which
was in a valley between Jerusalem: and Mount Olivet, famous in the history of
Christ's passion, where he removed till the people who followed him joined with
him. With whom thereafter (as verse. 30.) he went up by the ascent of Mount
Olivet, and from thence to the wilderness toward Jordan, and afterward to
Mahanaim in Gilead where the battle was fought, as we see, Chap. 17. 27.

Fourthly, The company which follows David are, 1. His servants or domestics
who prove loyal to him. 2. His guard the Cherethites, and Pelethites, verse.
18. 3. The people that joined with him, verse. 23. 4. 600 Gittites that came
with him from Gath, with their Captain Ittai: whom David persuades to return
and remain in Jerusalem. Whose reasons are, 1. Because he was a stranger, and
in exile, and it was the Kings office, not to trouble or endanger such: but
rather to provide and care for their peace and quietness; which would be by his
abiding with Absalom, whom by a Catachrestick form of speech he calls King,
because he gave himself out to be so: as verse. 10. 2. Because David had no
certain place to abide in, nor provision, and therefore Ittai and his men,
would be rather a burden to him. 3. Ittai was but newly come, and his men to
him: and therefore no reason that after their late travells, they should be put
to new trouble, and traveling. Wherefore by way of conclusion he gives him,
and them, a kind and courteous valediction, verse. 20. But Ittai (like Ruth to
Naomi) will not be dissuaded from going with David, and therefore he, and his
men, they go forward with him. 5. The fifth sort of persons that follow David:
are, Zadok and Abiathar the priests, with the Levites bearing the Ark. And as
example to others they join with David according to their office: and own
(without regard of danger) his just cause, and they bring the Ark with them,
for consulting with Gods oracle if necessity required: for encouragement also
of the people that were with David that Gods presence would be with them,
whereof the Ark was a symbol: and for making prayers for David, and his
deliverance. Whom David directs back again, upon three several grounds. 1. His
submission to God, and hope of return to Jerusalem. 2. From the priests office
which he will have them to attend there. And 3. From a better service they may
do him there, verse. 28. Whereupon they do obey.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. THe observations on this place, I reduce to the several persons, and their
actions mentioned therein, towit, David, his servants, the people that followed
him: Ittai and his Gittites. And last, the Priests and Levites. And 1. In David
we see news comes to him (like Jobs sad tidings) that Absalom was risen up
against him, and the hearts of all Israel were with him, ( verse. 13.) Where we
see not only the truth of Gods threatenings, Chap. 12. 10. But also when God is
to correct any for sin, before he want instruments, he will raise them out of
their own bowels: as he did Synacheribs two sons, 2 King. 19. 37. Who killed
their Father in his idolatrous Temple, as also vermin out of Herod's bowels,
Act. 12. To consume him, and here Absalom against his Father David, to correct
him.

2. Ver. 14. David's flieing for the time from the fury of his son, and his
followers. Shows the great care he had of his peoples preservation, both those
who were with himself, and those also who were deceived and misled by Absalom:
and that, though he had a good cause, with many to defend it by force of Arms;
and was a skillful, valiant, and victorious Prince himself, yet rather then he
will hazard so much blood, and so many lives of the Lords people, he will cede
for the time, and fly from unjust fury, and prefer that which is Salus
populi and suprema lex to his own particular standing. A worthy example of a
pious and prudent Prince, which serves to condemn them who for their own
standing and preferment, care not to involve Kingdoms, and Commonwealths into
most cruel wars, and to shed oceans of blood with the expense also of
millions of Christian men's lives. As we read in those battles between Caesar
and Pompey, the bloody wars also of many Popes against Christian Princes, and
as we see the bloody miseries of this age every where testify.

3. David fears and flies, yet despaires not, for the extremities of true
fortitude are presumptuous confidence, and desperate diffidence: the midest
being moderate fear with hope: the one whereof breeds tempting of God, and
diffidence is the mother of despair. Therefore let men in afflictions fear
God as a punisher of sin in justice, but yet hope in God for mercy.

4. Where David says to his servants, make speed to depart, lest Absalom over
take us suddenly, and smite the City with the edge of the sword. We see, that
it is the part of a prudent Prince, or any other who are wise: timely to fore
see, and prevent dangers before they come, and neither to contemn appearances
of what may befall, or to sleep in careless security, as those of Laish did,
Judge. 18. 27. As also to be careful for the good and safety of their people.

5. We see here also David's condition contrary to Absoloms, David's being like a
comedy, with a sad and sorrowful beginning, but having a happy deliverance and
joyful ending, whereas Absoloms condition is like a tragedy, a pompous and
joyful beginning, with joyful acclamation as King, and a great following but
a tragical and sorrowful ending, and even such is the case, and condition of
the Godly, and the wicked: as we see, Psalm. 73. And in the example of Joseph,
David and Saul, the rich glutton and Lazarus, etc. And here of David and
Absalom: therefore let no man judge of the Godly by their crosses and
afflictions, that they who are not in Gods favor are unhappy, neither let any
man Judge of Gods Works by their beginnings, as the former examples may teach
us: but look to their end; and as we may see, Psalm. 126. 5, 6.

6. David has a good cause, but few followers, in respect of those who followed
Absalom, with whom was the multitude of all Israel, as verse. 12. and 13. And
yet in the end is victorious: even so it fares oftimes with good causes. And
in special with the cause of God, which in the time especially of Antichrists
prevailing (as before in the time of Eliah, under Ahab) had few followers:
therefore compared unto two witnesses, Revel. 11. And as it was likewise when
the Arrian heresy so prevailed, that as Jeronie testifies, the whole world
groaned under the same, and wondered that it was turned Arrian: but in the end,
the truth has prevailed, and in the end shall prevail more and more: when that
mystical whore shall be made naked, and her flesh eaten, and she burnt with
fire, Revel. 17. 16. and 18. 8.

7. Verse. 16. David's leaving of his ten Concubines to keep the house, (which
was his only intention) was not without divine and secret providence, that by
their defiling by Absalom, the Lords Word by Nathan might be fulfilled, Chap.
12. 11. and his polygamie punished. So that many things falls out beyond men's
intention or expectation for the punishment of sin, wherein we see not the
finger of God, and performance of his word, till they come to pass.

8. Verse. 25. In David's sending back the Priests and Levites with the Ark to
Jerusalem, we see the Jurisdiction that the civil Magistrate has over
Churchmen, according to that Apostolical precept, Romans 13. 1. To command them
to do their office, and punish them if they transgress, either in negligence in
their spiritual function, or against the laws of the republic: as we see in
Solomon punishing Abiathar for his conspiracy with Adoniah, in (...) likewise
in punishing the Arrians, and herein David commanding the Priests and Levites
to return to Jerusalem to execute their office.

9. David likewise for his preservation, relyes only on the mercy of God, and
that God would work that work without the presence of the Ark, albeit it was
the external sacrament and sign of Gods presence, whereupon we ground this
general. That grace or remission of sins, comes from the free mercy of God
in Christ, and is not tied to sacraments: which as they ought not to be
contemned, being necessary, as we say, necessitate precepti: but not that they
are so necessary, necessitate medii: that grace and salvation should be thought
to be tied unto them.

10. Verse. 26. Where David says, Let the Lord do to me what seems good to
him. In him we see the duty of a Godly soul under any cross to submit humbly
to the good will of God, as our Savior said, Let this cup pass from me,
notwithstanding not my will be done but thine, O Father: and indeed this is the
work of one truly humbled and mortified, and is a presage of comfort and
deliverance in the end.

11. Verse. 30. Likewise in David's going barefoot and weeping as he went: we
see his right apprehension that this proceeded from the hand of God, correcting
him for his former sins, before whom therefore he humbles himself after this
manner. Which teaches us the right use of corrections that they serve us as a
Pedagogy to repentance for our sins, for there is no evil (towit, of
punishment) in the City which God does not, and therefore as Hos. 6. 1. We
should turn to him who smites us, and whose fatherly hand chastises us for our
good, as we see Heb. 12. 10. And therefore the Lord uses bloody tyrants, as
Nebuchadnezzar, and the King of Assyria, Herod, and others as Absalom here, but
as rods in his hand to execute his judgments, as he does sometimes insensible
creatures against the wicked, as water, fire, the air, the sea, the earth, and
the basest creatures, as lice and vermin, wherewith he plagued Pharaoh, and
Herod.

12. Verse. 15. Having spoken and observed all the former in David: we see next
in the persons of his Servants a laudable and worthy example of fidelity to
their Master, and of obedience to his just commands, with all promptitude being
ready, and offering to do what he should direct them. The like we see in
Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. And which is enjoined to all others, Ephesians. 5. 6.

13. Verse. 21. In Ittai the Gittite and his 600. men that were strangers, their
constant resolution to abide with David, and take part with him in life and
death, when his own Son had unnaturally rebelled against him, and sought after
both his life, and estate. We see, and collect an argument of courage and
comfort to the godly afflicted, that when those who are nearest foresake them,
or become their Enemies, the Lord will never forsake them, but stir up
strangers to assist them, and be their truest friends, and comforters. As we
see in Joseph when he was hated, and sold by his brethren, in the friendship
likewise of Achish King of Gath to David, when he was persecuted by his own
Father in Law Saul, of Jethro likewise Prince of Midian to Moses, when he was
put in such danger by one of his own people, of Ebedmelech the Ethiopians
favor to Jeremie, chap. 38. And of Ittai's assistance here of David in his
greatest distress and desertion. For the Lord has the hearts of all men in his
hands, and if he be our friend we shall not want friends.

14. Verse. 23. and 30. In the people, and all the countries weeping with David.
We see the tender sympathy that we should have with those who are in distress,
especially who nearly concern us in any sort of relation, as we are commanded,
Romans 12. 15. to weep with them who weep, and to rejoice with them that rejoice:
and a woe is denounced against such who rejoice when the Church of God, or the
members thereof are in distress, or who regard not the affliction of Joseph,
Amos 6. 6. This want of sympathy showing that they are not of the communion of
Saints.

15. Verse. 24. In the Priests and Levites, their loyal cleaving to David. We
see a worthy and imitable example for all Ecclesiastical persons to follow, in
siding with a good cause laying aside all fear of danger, and in being
exemplar to all others by word, and practice of love, and loyalty to their
Prince, and sovereign Magistrate, whom God sets over them.

II. SAM. Chap. 15. from the 30. verse. to the end.
HAving hitherto spoken of David's patience and yiedling for the time to
Absoloms fury and his followers, as also of his prudence in part in sending
back Zadok and Abiathar the Priests with the Arc, and their two Sons to be
intelligencers from Jerusalem unto him, follows now to speak further, both of
his piety, Verse. 30. and 31. As also of his prudence in sending back Hushai the
Archite a wise Counselor of David's, to be an intelligencer in like manner,
and to insinuate himself to this end into the favor of Absalom, and to defeat
the Counsel of Achitophel. From the 31. verse to the end.

First then David's piety appears in these two actions. 1. In his sorrowful
weeping for his sins, that had procured this sharp correction, which we see
also expressed in the sixth Psalm and the other penitentialls. The manner of
which his humiliation is not only set down by his weeping. But by the other
circumstances. 1. of the place, towit, while he is going by the ascent of mount
Olivet. 2. By the manner of his going barefoot. 3. With his head covered. Which
was the Jewish custom of mourners, as we see, Verse. 32. and chap. 13. 12. 4.
It is described from the universality of this weeping by the whole people that
were with him, so that it might have been called, as Genesis 50. 11. A great
mourning to the Israelites. 2. His piety appears in his prayer which he made to
God. Verse. 31, Upon the hearing that Achitophel was joined with the
conspirators, that the Lord would turn his wicked counsel into foolishnes.

Next, David's prudence herein appears that with prayer he uses the means
whereby Achitophels counsel may be disappointed, and therefore when David was
come to the top of the mount, where he worshipped God (being still exercised in
piety and prayer) and that Hushai the Archite, David's faithful friend and
Counselor, came to him in a sorrowful and lamenting manner, he sends him
back to Jerusalem, for three reasons. 1. If he should pass on with him, he
should be no benefit, but on the contrary a burden, Verse. 33. 2. By his
returning and offering his service to Absalom, he might do him better service
by defeating and countermining the crafty Counsel of Achitophel. 3. He might
be a good Intelligencer unto him, by revealing whatsoever he heard in Absoloms
house to the Priests Zadok, and Abiathar, who would send the same to David by
their Sons that were with them Ahimaaz Zadoks Son, and Jonathan Abiathars
Son, Verse. 34, 35. and 36. Which advise of David's Hushai obeyes and returns
to Jerusalem, Verse. 37.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 30. and 31. DAvid in his great difficulties and distress, humbles
himself greatly, and has his recourse to God by prayer, who only could deliver
him, and overthrow the courses and counsels of his adversaries, their plots
though crafty, and their cruel practices. Which teaches us in all our
distresses in like manner to have our recourse to God, as he has commanded,
Psalm. 50. 15. And as we see was the practice of Jacob, Genesis 32. Of Gods people
in Egypt, Exodus 3. 7. Of Moses at the red Sea, of Gods people under the
oppression of their Enemies, Judge. 3. 9. and 15. and 4. 3. etc. Of good
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20. And of David here, and frequently in the time of
Saul. As his Psalms testify, and which was the armor that the Church under
the Gospel in time of persecution used, prayers and tears.

2. In particular he prays, that the Lord would turn the counsel of
Achitophel to foolishnes. Where we see the great overruling power of God in all
humane affairs, that he not only knows the secretest counsels of men, as we
see, 2 King. 6. 9. But also that he can disappoint them, and turn their wisest
counsels into foolishnes. As he did Pharaohs working wisely, Hamans plot
against his people, and all Satan's and his instruments their machinations
against Christ and his Gospel, as we see, Psalm. 2. 4. For their is no wisdom
nor counsel against the Lord.

3. Verse. 34. David sends back Hushai the Archite, by his wisdom to outwit and
defeat the counsel of Achitophel, as he did, so that as he prays to God, to
turn his counsel into foolishness, so he uses also the ordinary means to
have it so done. Whereby we learn, that with prayer to God for any good,
corporal, or spiritual, or avoiding any evil in either we should not neglect
but use the ordinary means, otherwise we but presume and tempt God, against
both that precept and practice of Christ, Matthew. 4. 7. And of the godly from
time to time as we see Jacobs, Genesis 33. 8. And Paul's, Act. 27. 31.

4. Verse. 35. David also sends back Hushai to Jerusalem to give him
intelligence secretly, what Absalom was doing, or intending against him, that
he might prevent the same. Whereby we see that intelligence is a necessary and
laudable state policy, being oftimes the very life of affairs, and wherein for
the good of his the godly, and of his own people, he has made his Prophets
miraculously isntrumental, as we see, 2 King. 6. 9.

5. Verse. 37. At last Absoloms rebellion under color of simulate piety comes
to that hight, that at last he enters into Jerusalem, and possesses the holy
City, being herein a type of Antichrist, who under the like color of simulate
piety, and religious holiness raised his rebellion against Christ, to that
hight by all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, that he
sits in the Temple of God, as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Pretending to be Christ's
vicar, or vicegerent in the Church, and he usurps the power of God, in deposing
of Princes and disposing of their Kingdoms, as also in dispensing with the Law
of God, against incestuous marriages, and the like, and many other ways as I
have shown in my treatise of Antichrist, Chap. 11. and 12. And who is said to
sit in the Temple of God, says Theodoret on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Because he shall
usurp the first and chief place in the Church, (towit, are universal Bishop
thereof) and thus also says their own Aquinas, and Canonised saint, Antichrist
is said to sit in the Church, because many of the Church shall receive him, or
according to Augustine, he shall pretend to be Prince, or Monarch thereof, and
shall rule therein, as if he only and his followers were the Church, or Temple
of God, which Christ only and his, are truly, (says Augustine, cited by
Aquinas) and thus he was prefigured by Absalom sitting in Jerusalem, by which
ordinarily in Scripture, the Church of God is signified. David and his
followers being forced to fly to the Wilderness, as the Church is said to do
under Antichrists prevailing, Rev. 12. 14.

II. SAM. Chap. 16. from the 1. verse. to the 15.
IN this Chapter we have. 1. What befalls to David in his flying, both from a
professed friend Ziba, and from a professed foe, Shimei. The first to the 5.
verse, the second from that to the 15. Next we have Absoloms proceedings after
his entry in Jerusalem. 1. In accepting of Hushai David's fri^nd. And 2. in
committing that incestuous fact with his Fathers Concubines by the wicked
counsel of Achitophel. From the 15. verse to the end. So that this whole
Chapter comprehends fouractions, the first between David and Ziba, the second
between David and Shemei, the third, between Absalom and Hushai, and the fourth
between Absalom, and his Fathers Concubines.

This first action of David's between him and Ziba, is amplified by these
circumstances. 1. Of the time, when David was past a little the top of the hill
Olivet, which comprehends also the place, being yet upon that mount in his
journey toward Jordan, and and from thence to Bahurim. 3. The Persons are
Ziba, the servant of M^phibosheth, mentioned, Chap. 9. And David the King, Ziba
his action being his meeting David now on his journey with his Army, with a
couple of Asses loded with provision for him, and them: a small gift indeed if
we consider either the dignity of the King, or number of his Army; but yet,
great, if we consider the present necessity and condition of David now flying
in haste, and deserving thanks if it had been offered of his own goods and of
an honest mind, and not as a share. 1. To abuse the simplicity of the King.
And 2. by this means craftily to hunt after a greater prey, which was the whole
estate of his Master, and so the ground and motive of his coming was neither
love to David, nor yet liberality, but self love and coveteousnesse: for
satiating whereof, upon David's asking him, where Mephibosheth his Master
Jonathans Son was, most falsely he calumniats and delaites him, as one who
abode at Jerusalem upon expectation to be restored to his Grandfather Readiness
his Kingdom, and so he accuses him of the greatest and most incensing crime of
lesema jesty, where as, like a faithful and honest servant, he should rather
excuse his Masters abode at Jerusalem, because (being lame) of his inability.
Whereupon followed David's rash action of adjudging to the false accuser the
whole estate and possessions of Mephibosheth falsely accused. Wherein he commits
these gross errors. 1. He condemns the party accused, before he be heard. 2.
He is credulous of a false report without any trial of the truth thereof. 3.
He bereaves an innocent man of his whole estate, and gives it to an unjust
calumniator and lier. 4. He incourages calumniatours hereby to follow Ziba's
example upon like hope of reward. 5. Having received a gift from the accuser
and thereafter giving sentence in his favors, he gave an ill example in this,
and in all the former, to inferior judges. And 6. being in choler and passion
upon Ziba's report, he pronounces a rash and unjust sentence, whereby he gains
nothing but a base and ungrateful flatterers thanksgiving.

The second action is between David and Shimei. From the 5. verse to the 15.
Which injurious fact of Shimei against David, is amplified by the
circumstances. 1. Of the place, Bahurim a City chosen by David after his first
travells to rest and refresh himself and his army in being sore weary, as we
see, Verse. 14. 2. Of the person, Shimei by name, and a man of the house of
Saul his old Enemy, whose malice before did lurk, and now upon this occasion of
Absoloms rebellion bursts forth against David. 3. The manner of this injurious
fact is, both by word and deed, cursing David by word, and by deed casting
stones at him as a dog, and at his followers, the particular words of whose
cursing is set down, verse. 7. By ingemination saying, come out, come out,
showing thereby the vehemence of his malice and passion, as if he would say,
lay down thy wrongful title of King, who deserves to be thrust out justly
therefore. 2. In place of due reverence he calls him by two vile titles, a
bloody man, and a man of Belial, that is, a most wicked man, or which is by
interpretation, a rebellions libertine. 3. He declared that it is the hand of a
just revenging God that was punishing him, for the bood of Saul and his house,
and for the usurpation of his Kingdom, and therefore by Lex talionis the Lord
has stirred up his own Son to take the Kingdom from him, as he had taken it
from Saul his Father in Law, and from his house, so that he was taken in his
own snare, and was done unto as he had done to others. Upon which injurious
fact of Shimei, Abishai Iocabs Brother is so incensed that he offers to be
avengend upon him by taking off his head, from doing whereof David disswades
him, and dissents thereto, by three reasons. 1. Affirning that he looks on
Shimei only as the instrument, but on God as the supreme cause, correcting him
so for his sins, and against whom he was not to repine, but abide what his
good pleasure was and patiently to submit thereto. The second reason, is taken
from comparison, that seeing his Son who was come of his loins, was seeking
his life, much more might Shimei that Benjamite do as he did, and so if he
suffered the greater injury, much more ought he to suffer the less patiently.
The third, is from the fruit that by Gods providence, that fact of Shimei
(far contrary to his intention) might bring forth, that the Lord would look
on his affliction, and requite good for his cursing that day. By which
arguments of disswasion David mo^lifies the heart of Abishai and his servants,
and abates their rage. Notwithstanding whereof Shimei still insists in his
injurious fact, until David and his men came to Baharim where they were to
refresh their weary bodies.

Only there remains one doubt to solve, before we come to the observations,
which is this, it is said by David, that Shimei (Verse. 11.) Was bidden by God
to curse David. And therefore it would appear, if Shimeis cursing was
sinful, that God were the Author of sin. Whereunto I answer. 1. That
hereby is not meant, that Shimei had any commandment from God, as a warrant
whereon he could grond that sinful action of his, (which doubtless he had
then alleged, and afterward when he excused himself, Chap. 19.) Because in
Gods Word an express commandment is in the contrary, Ezod. 22. 28. Saying,
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people, and God
cannot be contradictour to himself, and therefore these words, Verse. 10. The
Lord has said unto him, curse. And verse. 11. The Lord has bidden him, are not
to be taken properly as any such warrant of Gods Word, or commandment to do
so, but only to show how David took that cursing, as a correction for his
sin from a just God. See the like Isa. 10. 6. as if he had said to Shimei,
curse David, or, as he had bidden him curse, which made him to be so patient
then and afterward, Chap. 19. 23. And not to suffer Abishai to revenge it. 2.
In this sinful action of Shimei's (as in others the like) we must consider
that these three have a hand, and each one their several ends; towit, Satan,
stirring up Shimei's lurking malice now to break forth in cursing, and casting
stones at David, whose end herein was to afflict and trouble David more and
more now in his distress: the next is Shimei, obeying Satan's instigation,
acts this sinful deed out of the hatred of his heart. Whose end therefore
herein, was wraithfull revenge. The third is God making use of this their
sinful action to the correction of his servant, whose end was his own glory
and his servants good. As Joseph speaks of his brethrens wrong done to him,
Genesis 50. 20. Ye thought evil against me (says he) but God meant it unto good:
the like may be said of Amnons incest with Tamar, and Absoloms with his Fathers
Concubines, as also Absoloms murder of Amnon, and his rebellion now against
his Father, that Nathans prophesy concerning both might be fulfilled, and in
like manner in Christ's delivering up to death, wherein God had an hand, and is
said to have done it, Romans 8. 32. For the redemption of mankind, and Satan had
an hand in it who entered into Judas heart, out of malice to Christ, and as
Enemy to man's redemption, and Judas had a hand in it, for his own wicked end,
to satisfy his covetousness. These wicked ends in these two wicked actours
making the act sinful in them, which in God directing it to his glory, and
man's good is the greatest testimony of his overruling power, and love to
mankind. So likewise in Job 1. 21. and Isa. 10. 5, 6. The same is evident, as
here in Shimei's fact, God wills that, as David's chastisement, which he hates,
as Shimeis wickedness, so that wicked men are never the freer from guilt and
punishment, for that hand which the holy God has in their sinful actions.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN Ziba and Shimej, Absalom and Achitophel, recorded in this Chapter. We
see the memory of their wicked deeds dye not, as themselves did: but the same
survives to the posterity in the public register of sacred history: as on the
contrary the good deeds of the Godly, survive in the same register to their
eternal praise, and for others imitation: as it is said of Maryes breaking of
the box of ointment, which she powered on Christ's head, that it should be
recorded, wheresoever the Gospel should be preached. Which should serve to the
dissuading of men from doing of evil, and to the encouragement of well doers,
especially when they consider at the last day, how both good, and evil works
shall be remembered, and have their several rewards given to them accordingly.
And how they survive men even in this life, as it is said post fata, facta.

2. Verse. 2. Ziba under a fair pretense, and profession of love to David: but
out of self-love only to himself, hunts after his own gain and preferment.
Which shows the disposition of many crafty worldlings, who under a fair show
of religion to God, or love and respect to others, have their own private and
selfish ends which they propose: making their gain to be Godliness, but not
Godliness to be gain; and pretending love to others by their smaller gifts,
which like crafty fishers, or fowlers, they use as baits only to attain to
greater, being (as one says) more skillful in the Ablative than liberal in
the Dative, and like that woman who swept the house, not for love of
clean-lines, but to find out the lost groat, pretending love to religion and
reformation, but intending their own sacrilegious gain, and ambitious
preferment.

3. Verse. 3. Ziba likewise to attain to his forenamed end, by calumnies and
false accusation, he sowes sedition between David, and his loyal and true
subject Mephibosheth. Which shows that they who are greedy of gain, and
preferment, will let loose reins to all sort of wickedness, whereby they may
attain to their end, even to take away the life of man. As we see in Judas, and
here in Ziba accusing his Master of less Majesty and treason.

4. In Ziba likewise we see the pattern of a wicked and ungrate servant,
leaving his impotent and lame Master, at such a time of danger, to which he did
not only expose him, but also did back-bite him falsely, and sought himself to
be possessour, and owner of his Masters estate: whereof before he had the trust
only, and government. So little trust is to be had in men, and especially
worldlings, and such as want the fear of God.

5. Verse. 4. David who had overcome the sword, of many and mighty enemies
before, and Absoloms great Army hereafter. Yet is himself overcome by a small
gift, and a flattering lying tongue of Ziba. Which shows how dangerous, and of
what great power insinuation by gifts, and flattery is, even to the best: and
that oftimes what may not be obtained by force, is obtained by fraud, which
made Satan after his persecution of the Church, like a reed Dragon, to turn
himself next into an Angel of light: and the vicar of his power to be horned
like the lamb, though he spoke like the Dragon. Whereby he attained to so great
and universal a following, as we see Revel. 13. The like effect of which fraud
and flattery, we see also in Satan's deceiving of our first parents.

6. David without trial of the truth, or hearing first the party accused,
pronounces through rash crudelity an unjust sentence, against just
Mephibosheth, in favors of an unjust calumniator, and so sins against the
duty of a just judge or Magistrate. Which should teach all judges, or men in
place, and power, to beware of rash credulity, and to try well before they
trust, or decree in judgment.

7. David under the rod suffers wrong patiently, and yet under the same does
wrong unjustly. Which shows unto us the frailty, and infirmities that are in
the best, that none should confide in their own strength: but be in every
estate, and at all times watchful and humble.

8. Verse. 5. In this second action between Shimej and David, we see, 1. When
King David came to Bahurim, there to refresh himself, and his men: as we see,
verse. 24. in place of rest which he looked for. Behold new trouble, a railing
Shimej persecutes him, and his followers: both with tongue, and hand. So that
we see, as is said, many are the troubles of the righteous: and like Jobs
messengers, one comes on the back of another, as wave follows wave: and as
Jacob was no sooner rid of Laban, that followed him, but he hears of Esau
coming against him, and in the mean time encounters with an Angel that wrestles
with him. No rest then to be expected here, till after our dyeing in the Lord,
we settle in our heavenly Canaan, Rev. 14. 13.

9. This Shimej being a man of the house of Saul, his hid malice against David,
which lurked in the time of David's prosperity, breaks out now by cursing, and
casting stones at David, in the time of his adversity, which shows not only
what a wicked treasure, and unclean ground the heart of man is, which
harbors and preserves what Satan shows therein, till occasion offer of
manifestation, as we see in Cain against Abell, and Absalom against Amnon. But
likewise we see that adversity discovers, who are true friends, as we see those
was to David, who are mentioned, Chap. 15. and Chap. 17. 27. and who are
enemies, as Shemej was here, and Achitophel.

10. Verse. 6. Shimej curses and casts stones at David, and so persecutes
him, both with tongue and hand. Which shows what persecution in like manner
the Godly may expect at the hands of the wicked, as the Prophets found, and our
Savior the Prince of Prophets: and as he told his Apostles, that they should
find, Matthew. 5. 12. and Joh. 16. 33. And therefore not to think it strange, nor
to care for the scourge of their tongue, or causeless cursing or reviling, so
that the Lord bless, and that they have his approbation, and of a good
conscience.

11. Verse. 8. Where Shimej says, that God had returned upon him all the blood
of the house of Saul, and delivered the Kingdom to his son Absalom. We see
that malice so blinds the wicked that they most wrongfully censure the Lords
doings in afflicting or trying his own, and as if they were of Gods counsel,
they allege that to be the cause of their sufferings, which their malicious
hearts suggests, and is not the cause indeed, and by the events, they judge of
the cause, and justifies or condemns the same.

12. Where he says, that the Lord had delivered the Kingdom into Absoloms
hand. We see how foolish they are, who measure Gods doings by their beginnings,
and do not attend the end: as we see in the steps of Joseph's fore prophesied
advancement: and here in David's sad condition, in respect of Absoloms great
following, and hopes, which made Shimej say that the Kingdom was delivered to
him. The contrary whereof was shortly seen thereafter.

13. Whereas in like manner he attributes to God, the returning of the blood of
Saul's house upon David, and the delivering of the Kingdom into Absoloms hand.
We see the impudency of wicked men, who dare ascribe to God, what the wicked
hearts of men do hatch, and their wicked hands for their wicked ends seek to
perform, and so to make him, who is goodness it self, and hates all iniquity,
to be not only accessory, but author of sin.

14. Verse. 9. Abishaj being incensed by this fact of Shimej, out of a carnal
humor, offers to revenge this wrong done unto David. Where we see that a good
cause, is not to be prosecuted by bad means, as here by carnal revenge and
cruelty; which was also the disciples fault, who would have had fire come down
from heaven, upon the Samaritans, for their not receiving of Christ: but as the
cause is good, or bona, so it should be prosecuted by good means, or been. And
as a revenge may be just, so it should be seasonable.

15. Verse. 10. Abishaj looked only to the stone (as it were) an instrument,
but David looked higher to the hand, that was the supreme caster, and
chastiser of him, as all the Godly do, Genesis 50. 20. Job. 1. 21. Which is the
ground of their patience under sufferings, and makes the same a pedagogie, to
lead them to repentance. Therefore David gives way meekly, rather to his own
humiliation, then to the punishment of another.

16. Verse. 11. Where David speaks of his own sons rising up against him, to
seek his life: and therefore much more might Shimej do it. We see that
domestic crosses, and those of nearest relation, are the greatest and sharpest
of any: and such as may justly make men, to be the more patient in lesser, so
that herein David gains by it, and it is the advantage of great crosses, that
they swallow up the lesser, and though a weak heart faint with every addition
of trouble, yet the strong in grace do not so.

17. Verse. 12. Where David says, it may be that God would look on his
affliction, and requite good for Shimeis cursing that day. We see David's faith
and confidence in the Lords goodness toward him, even when he is many ways
now sharply chastizing him: so sharp is the eye of faith, that through the
darkest cloud, it can perceive the light of the sunshine of the Lords
countenance, which David ever did so highly esteem, Psalm. 4. 6. Also the
bestowing of temporal favors go at peradventure (it may be) but eternal are
infallible.

18. Also we see here the truth of that, Romans 8. 28. That all things work
together for the best to them who fear him: even the cursing of a wicked
Shimei, as the hatered likewise of Joseph's brethren, and their selling of him
did to him. As likewise that the wicked are no more bent, and ready to do evil
to the Godly, but God is more bent, and ready to do them good, as David shortly
found by experience after this, even as he projected.

19. Verse. 13. Shimei being thus spared, he continues and increases in his
cursing, and casting of stones, abusing so David's lenity and patience: as the
wicked do also the Lords, which should lead them to repentance. So that the
wicked are like the Wasp, that gathers poison out of that, from which the Be
gathers honey, and make the worst use of best offices, done unto them by Gods
servants, or others: and because of impunity they continue in sin and
iniquity, as all evil natures grow presumptuous upon forbearance, whereas
good are the contrary. Mercy then has need to be guided with wisdom, lest it
prove cruel to it self.

II SAM: Chap: 16. from the 15. verse to the end.
Follows now Absoloms entry into Jerusalem, the chief City of the Kingdom,
and Achitophel as chief Counselor with him. Where we have. 1. Hushaj* his
coming to Absalom, and his gratulatory salutation of him as King, ingeminated
to express his hearty affection. 2. Absoloms Ironicall accusation, verse. 17.
For leaving David his friend in distress, and not adhering to him. Hushais
defense, by acknowledging him now to be King, by a double right. 1. Divine. 2.
Humane. In respect that God, and all Israel had chosen him, whereunto therefore
he subjoynes his promise of loyalty, verse. 18. Next, he argues from equity, why
he should serve the same, because he was the servant of his Father: and
therefore he would serve him also. 3. Is set down, verse. 20. and 21. Absoloms
asking Counsel of Achitophel, what was best to be done for prosecuting this
business of rebellion. Whereunto Achitophel answers by giving Counsel. 1. For
securing the rebellion in the continuance thereof, in this Chapter. And 2. That
it may end in a full and final victory, in the next Chapter.

First then, for the securing, and continuance of this rebellion, his Counsel
is to commit incest with his Fathers concubines, that were left to keep the
house, whereby the people shall hear that he was abhorred now altogether by
his Father, and so their hands should be made strong, which so long as there
were hope of reconciliation would be but faint, and their hearts doubtful. So
that his Counsel runs on this, he suspects that reconciliation may be
between a son that might relent, and a Father that would remit: and so
thereon David might be avenged on his sons prime Counselors, and special
followers, for eschewing whereof there was no way, but to engage Absalom in
some further fact which might be incapable of pardon, and obstruct all hope of
reconciliation; whereupon ensues Absoloms obeying of this wicked Counsel,
verse. 22. Wherein the filthiness of the sin was not so great, as the
impudency of the manner, in an eminent place, and in the sight of all Israel,
whereunto is subjoyned, verse. 23. Of how high estimation and Authority, the
Counsel of Achitophel, was both with David, and Absalom, towit, as an oracle
of God, and therefore so readily did Absalom here follow the same.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 16. HVshaj had a good cause, but uses not lawful means to go about the
same. Which he did, by dissimulation, and taking Gods name in vain, in his
gratulation of Absalom, saying by way of prayer, God save the King, and that
the Lord had made him King. Whereon we observe that the matter of a good cause,
is no sufficient warrant before God, or to the conscience: except also the
means for the accomplishment thereof, be also good and lawful, for we must
not (according to the Apostles rule*) do evil that good may come of it:
therefore Abraham lies for his own safety, and thereby exposing his wifes
chastity to danger, was sinful. So Rebecca's deceiving of her blind Isaac, for
conveighing the blessing to Jacob, and the Gibeonites lie, and dissimulation in
making peace with Israel.

2. Verse. 17. Absoloms accusing of Hushaj, for leaving his friend David in
distress. We see howsoever his judgment was pregnant, to note the sin of
ingratitude in another, and to tax the same, yet he sees it not in a greater
measure, being David's son, and in a grosser manner of rebellion, in himself.
Where we observe, that every man is ready like the Pharisees, To spy the mote
in their neighbors eye, but not the beam in their own, Matthew. 7. 3. and
severely to censure lesser faults in others, than grosser in themselves: as we
see, Judah did toward Tamar, Saul against Jonathan for tasting a little honey,
contrary to his constitution: but making no conscience of persecuting righteous
David, and killing the Lords Priests, even as at this day in the Romish Church:
the breaking of her constitutions are censured damnable, whereas the breach of
Gods laws, are permitted and dispensed with.

3. In Absoloms accusation, we see also who is to be accounted a true friend,
towit, he only, who not only in prosperity: but also in adversity proves so, as
Jonathan did to David, and as is said, Prove. 17. 17.

4. Verse. 21. Achitophel gives counsel to Absalom, to go into his Fathers
Concubines, that by incestuous fact all hope of reconciliation with his Father
might be obstructed. Where we see that profane hearts, so contrives the plots
of their wickedness against Gods law, as if there were no God, or over ruling
power, to cross their designs, or to punish them: and therefore this fool
(though otherwise accounted) had said in his heart there was no God.

5. The scope of this Counsel, we see was to foment and increase the flame of
discord, between David and Absalom: but not to quench the same, which shows
unto us Satan's nature in his instruments, and as he first divided between God
and man, and afterward between man and man, as between Cain and Abell, etc. So
he continues: whereas God is the God of peace so are his Children peaceable, as
we see between Abraham and Lot, and peace makers, as we see Matthew. 5. 9.

6. Where he says, that by so doing, the hands of all who were with Absalom,
should be strong. We see the blind folly of the wicked, who think that to
sin, is the way to prosper: whereas Psalm. 1. 3. and in the examples of the
holy Patriarch's, Joseph, and Godly Kings, we see the contrary, and as is
shown to us, 2 Chronicles. 14. 7.

7. Verse. 22. Absalom is counseled by Achitophel, to commit incest with his
Fathers concubines, as Amnon was, how to commit incest with his own Sister:
both Counselors prevail, and both who were counseled, obey his wicked
counsel to their own destruction. Where we see that it is as easy to one
(wanting grace and Gods Word and spirit to be their Counselors) to take ill
counsel: as it is to them who give it, and pronesse to villainy in great men,
want never either projectours to devise, or Parasites like Doeg, to execute the
most odious sins, at least to excuse them, and so far God gives way to
their sins, as their sins may prove plagues to themselves.

8. The tent is spread on the top of the house, and Absalom goes in to his
Fathers, Concubines in the sight of all Israel. And so that is fulfilled, which
was threatened by Nathan, Chap. 12. 12. So that the Counsel of Achitophel, and
fact of Absalom have fulfilled the judgment of God. Where we may admire the
Wisdom of God that can use the worst of evils well, and most justly make the
sins of men his executioners.

9. Verse. 23. Where it is said, that Achitophels Counsel in these days was
counted as the oracle of God. We see that great parts misimployed proves most
mischievous, as leaning, eloquence, worldly wisdom and the like, and when
wicknesse is armed with wit and power like Nilus it overfloweth all the banks,
so that great need have they who have great parts, to seek the sanctified use
of them, and this makes our condition the more dangerous that we have to deal
daily with a powerful, and subtle Enemy Satan, and therefore, as David did
Chap. 15. 31. In the case of Achitophel, we ought to be devout in prayer, and
to watch as our savior exhorts us.

10. We see also in Achitophel that policy and grace, or piety, lodge not ever
under one roof. And Pharaoh may say, Exodus 1. 10. Let us deal wisely with
them. While in the mean time he was dealing foolishly, and wanting grace to
season and sanctify his wisdom, he was drawing on the plagues of God on
himself and his Land, and in end utter destruction.

II. SAM. Chap. 17. from the 1. verse. to the 15.
IN this Chapter is set down. 1. The consultation had by Absalom concerning the
war against David, how it may be prosecuted and have a full Victory. Till the
15. verse. 2. The intelligence that is given to David hereof, and what use he
makes thereof. Till the 23. verse. 3. Achitophels hanging of himself, Verse. 23.
And the progress of both armies, towit, David's to Mahanaim, and Absoloms to
the Land of Giload, to the 27. verse. And last, the furniture and provision for
his Army which David got being in Mahanaim. To the end of the Chapter.

First in the consultation had by Absalom, we have. 1. The Counsel of
Achitophel, offered by him, to the 5. verse. 2. The contrary Counsel of Hushai
being required thereto* from the 5. to the 14. verse. 3. The approbation of
Hushais Counsel by Absalom and all Israel, and the rejecting of Achitophels,
verse. 14.

First then in the Counsel of Achitophel, we have. 1. The scope whereat it is
directed, verse. 2. Towit the destruction of David, and therefore as cruel as
well as crafty counsel, as Satan is both. 2. To come to this desired end, he
assumes these sure mediums. 1. Celerity and expedition, a thing most necessary
to be used for surprising of Enemies, and obtaining a speedy Victory. 3. Thus
the end being resolved, and the mean in general being concluded, he labors to
prosecute the war by arguments from facility and utility. The facility is
grounded upon the reasons taken from the circumstances of persons and times:
the first person is himself, as he should say, this matter is so facill, that
it needs not the presence of the King; and that I appear not to be the mover of
others to endanger themselves, I offer my self to execute that which I
Counsel, though my profession be not military. The second persuasion is from
the small number, which he craves for the enterprise, in respect of Absoloms
great Army. The third reason is from the estate of the adversaries, whom he
affirms to be weary, and weak. The fourth is from the time of his invasion and
surprisall* the night time, when all are at rest.

Next, his arguments from utility are. 1. By this speedy, and unexpected
invasion the Enemy shall be put to flight, and every one retire to his own
home, leaving David destitute. 2. David being so deserted shall be easily
killed, who is the head of the faction. 3. Hereby the whole people shall be
reduced to Absoloms obedience, and so peace which should be, the end of all
war shall be established, all which sayings at first pleased Absalom, well
and all the elders of Israel.

Next, follows the contrary Counsel of Hushai, who being interrogated, by
Gods providence by Absalom, he lays down the contrary end in mind, and
contrary mean to attain thereto: his end being David's preservation, and the
mean, being delay, which to David being weary, was very advantageous, for
persuading Absalom to which delay, and taking his Counsel which he was to
give, he uses a very artificial oration, wherein 1. he refutes the Counsel of
Achitophel. And 2. confirms his own resolution, before which refutation, he
uses a preface; wherein he shows, that he denies not but Achitophels Counsel
is good, but not at this time: and then shows that this enterprise is not so
easy as Achitophel affirmed it to be, but on the contrary dangerous, by the
reasons following. The first whereof is taken from the known and confessed
fortitude of David. 2. From David's Army who were so enraged like bears robbed
of their whelps. 3. From David's experience, that David had in the wars,
knowing all the Stratagems thereof, and so being not only valorous but wise,
the two properties of a complaet General. 4. From David's subtilty, that he
would not be found in the night with the Army, but lurk in some secret place,
as he had sometimes done when Saul did persecute him. 5. From the peril of the
first overthrow of so few whom Achitophel would lead, which commonly is
interpreted to be the presage of future, and the loss of the whole cause, and
whereby it shall come to pass, that the hearts of the most valiant (like
Lions) who are with Absalom, when they hear thereof shall melt, for all Israel
knows that David, and all who follow him are valiant men.

Unto which refutation of Achitophels Counsel he subjoynes his own. 1. That
Absalom commit not the leading of the Army to any Lieutenant, the matter being
of so great concernment, as also people being the more encouraged by the
presence of their Prince, as likewise it being fitter that the Prince, himself
have the honor of the Victory, which was a powerful argument to a young
ambitious Prince. 2. He Counsels Absalom to go, not with a part of the Army,
but with all the preparation he can, and therefore that all Israel be assembled
from Dan to Beersheba, wherein he uses a^ Hyperbole, from the sand of the Sea.
And draws the matter to a delay. 3. He reasons from the event, which should be
a total overthrow of David and his Army, if they were found in the field, and
if he should get him to a City, that great multitude should, as it were with
cords, drawit into a River, and not leave a stone thereof.

Last of all follows Absoloms, and all Isreal's approbation of Hushais
Counsel, as better than Achitophels, the reason whereof is subjoyned. For the
Lord had appointed to defeat the good Counsel of Achitophel, to the intent
that the Lord might, bring evil upon Absalom. Achitophels Counsel here being
called good, the Spirit of God dimitting himself to the improper speaking of
men, who are accustomed to call that good which is profitable for the person,
and end for which it is intended, and which was better nor the Counsel of
Hushai for the cause of Absalom. The Lords purpose herein being, that the
deserved evil of punishment in Gods justice might be brought on Absalom.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. WIt and experience had taught Achitophel, that in conjurations, and
hostile invasions, celerity uses to produce most successful events, and
therefore he gives Counsel to use speed, whereas delay, or protracting of time
gives advantage to the adverse party, whereby we learn, that it is wisdom in
such cases and all others, to consider the due proportion between actions, and
the fit times of their performance.

2. He offers his service to Absalom, not only as a Counselor, but as a
general, his malice against David not only spurring him on, but also his
ambitious aspiring, not contenting himself with the Counsel table, but to be
also a commander, and supreme in the camp, which has ever been the bane both of
the Commonwealth, as also of the Church: when men cannot content and contain
themselves within their own station, but ambitiously aspire above or beyond the
same, and will have a hand in all causes, and rule both in Church and
Commonwealth, as especially the Popes their practice has been, according to the
saying of one, Ecce duo gladii, and of too many others.

3. Verse. 2. He vants, and like another Goliath bragg's that he will do much,
without saying if God will, where we see the truth of that which is spoken of
the wicked, that God is not in all their thoughts, but they presume of their
own strength and sacrifice to their own net, which tends ever to their own
destruction.

4. He promises that he will come upon David unexpectedly, and will make him
afraid and thereafter smite him, and put all his Army to flight, where we see
the blind pride of the wicked speaking of events as if they were not in Gods
hand, who is the Lord of hosts, but as if events and the lives of Gods
Children were in their hands, Although they have not power of one hair of their
head without the good providence of God, and as David's preservation testifies:
As also as we see, Act 23. 12. etc.

5. He says likewise that he will come upon David while he is weary and
weakhanded, and in the night time, so that like a subtle and sedulous Enemy,
he resolves to take hold of all advantages, and make use thereof against godly
David to his destruction. The like subtle and sedulous Enemy have all the
godly, Satan, who spies all his advantages of our weakness, and makes use
thereof to surprise us, and bring us to destruction, as we may see in Lot, in
Zoar, in David with Beethsheba, and Peter's denial, and other godly men. Let be
in the wicked, which should learn us, to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, and to watch and pray, as our savior exhorts us.

6. Verse. 4. It is said, that this wicked Counsel of Achitophels of smiting
the Father, Verse. 2. Pleased Absalom the Son well, where we see the
unnaturality of a wicked Son, seeking after his life who gave him life, and
that where grace is not, no expectation of duty is to be expected from the
nearest natural relations, as we see in Cham, Cain, and here in Absalom.

7. Verse. 5. Though Achitophels Counsel pleased Absalom, yet he acquiesces not
therein, but calls Hushai and asks his Counsel in this prosecution of the
war, whose Counsel he asked not before, in going in to his Fathers
Concubines. Where we see the Lords merciful providence toward Hushai, and in
him toward the godly, preserving them, from many snares wherein they otherwise
might fall, as he did David from going with Achish against Saul, 1 Samuel 29. And
Hushai here from joining in that wicked Counsel of Achitophels for Absoloms
committing incest with his Father Concubines. O happy then are they who rely on
God.

8. Verse. 7. We see the modesty, of Hushai in relation to the person of
Achitophel, though he opposes his Counsel, or opinion, not denying, but he was
a wise Counselor, and that his Counsel was good, but not at this time. Which
shows that in disputes, or differences of judgments, reflections on persons,
or bitterness and the like should not be used, but such modesty, as verity may
have place, the cause it self handled, unity sought after, charity shown,
humor and spleen avoided, and the way of reconciliation no wise obstructed.
Therefore Hushai to sweeten his opposition, he yields the praise of wisdom to
his adversary in other Counsels, that he may have leave to deny it modestly in
this.

9. Yet in Hushai's boldness and freedom without fear in opposing Achitophels
Counsel. We learn, what should be the like in the servants of God in opposing
themselves with courage and zeal against error, and every wicked course which
is against God, his Church, people, and the Lords anointed.

10. Verse. 14. Absalom prefers Hushai's Counsel to Achitophels, as the
better, Hushai's Counsel being for David's good, and that which he rejected
being for his own good. Where we see the merciful overruling and secret
providence of God, for the good of his own, and comfort in adversity, making
all things work together for their best, but to the worst of their Enemies, Who
dig a pit for others wherein themselves do fall.

11. The likeliest devices we see do not always succeed, God finds the means
to cross the Counsel of Achitophel by a less probable advice of Hushai, who
had neither so deep a head, nor so sure a Counsel as Achitophels, yet his
tongue refutes Achitophel, and diverts Absalom, Hushai's tongue then and
Absoloms heart is guided by a power above their own, who as he gives utterance
to the tongue, so he gives success to the words, therefore Hushai shall
prevail with Absalom, that Absalom prevail not against David, he that works
all in all things so disposes of wicked men, that while they think that they
most please themselves, and think themselves safest, then they overthrow
themselves, as we see, Exodus 1. 10. And their disappointment is surest.

12. The reason why Absalom obeys Hushai's Counsel, and rejects Achitophels
(says the text) was, that the Lord had appointed to defeat the Counsel of
Achitophel, as David had prayed, Chap. 15. 31. And that the Lord might bring
evil upon Absalom. Where we see, the efficacy of prayer, and that the Lord
does hear and grant the prayers of his own, according to, Psalm. 50. 15. Which
have a twofold effect, for the good of the godly, and the evil of their
Enemies, wherefore the armor of his Church most prevalent, has been ever
prayers and tears.

13. We see here likewise that the greatest punishment of sin, and which
brings all other evil with it, is, when men are left to the Spirit of
error, and to reject good Counsel, or courses, and to embrace the worse.

II. SAM. Chap. 17. from the 15. verse. to the end.
Follows now. 1. The action of Hushai, and his accomplices, revealers of his
Counsel to David, and the circumstances thereof. 2. The Tragical and
ignominious death of Achitophel, and the causes thereof. 3. The marching of
both Armies over Jordan, and the several encamping thereof. And 4. the
furnishing of David's Army and provision thereof.

In the first action there are many actours. 1. Hushai who is the revealer of
the Counsel, and first advertiser, according to his promise formerly made to
David. 2. The two Priests directed back, by David to Jerusalem from mount
Olivet to the same purpose. 3. Their Sons Jonathan, and Ahimaaz appointed to
be the bears of this revelation. 4. Two Women, the one a wench, sent by the
Priests from Jerusalem to their Sons, swho abode at Enrogell the other a man's
wife in Bahurim. 5. A young man discoverer of the Priests Sons. And 6. the
exploratours that were sent by Absalom to search and apprehend them.

The next History is, the Tragical end of Achitophel, wherein we have to
consider, seeing he was a man of such wisdom and estimation; what were the
causes moving him to run to so desperate a self murder, which I shall reduce
to three. 1. The guilty conscience of his irremissibile offenses. 2. The
fearful apprehension of the rigor and just punishment, which he expected from
David. 3. The defeat of his Counsel and disappointment of his ambitious
project. Reasoning therefore thus with himself, by Absoloms receiving the
Counsel of Hushai David's real friend, But Absoloms dissembled foe, I foresee
that he and his cause shall perish, But as for me, above all others my danger
is then greatest. For 1. my conscience condemns me that I have given wicked
Counsel against God, my King, and the Commonwealth, and persuaded Absalom to
defile his fathers bed, and persecute him to death, and so am unworthy to be
called an Israelite. 2. Though I should repent and crave pardon, yet I
apprehend no favor but justice to be executed upon me by David, as an open
example to all traitors before the World. And 3. though I were spared, yet I
cannot draw my self to a private life, and live as one justly disgraced, and
discourted: therefore to eschew all these inconveniences, I resolve upon this
only remedy to execute my self. Upon which resolution he departs, deserts his
Master and his cause, returns to his City of Gilo, disposes upon his worldly
estate, and hangs himself, against the Law of God, of nature, and of Nations.

The third, is the History of the passage of both Armies over Jordan and their
camping in Gilead, where it is remarked, Verse. 22. That of all David's Army that
passed over Jordan, when they were mustered by daylight, their lacked not a
man, so sweetened was his troubles with this divine preservation, and so they
came to Mahanaim, a City in Gilead, renowned, Genesis 32. 2. By the vision of
Angels which Jacob saw for his protection. At this time also Absalom collected
his whole forces, who were like the sand of the Sea for number, and followed
after David and his small number, and made Amasa his general, who was Sisters
Children with Joab, and David's Sisters Son, whose ambition made him make no
conscience of all these natural conjunctions, to join against David.

In the last place, we have the History of the furniture and provision for
David's Army. 1. By whom. And 2. what it was. The Persons by whom are three,
Shobi an Ammonite, whom David placed (as is thought) in Hanuns place, who had
abused his Ambassadors, for which cause he meets now David with gratitude in
his adversity, the other is, Machir of Lodebar, and the third Barzillai a
Giliadite.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. HVshaj the Archite, and Zadok and Abiathar Priests, and their sons,
Jonathan and Ahimaaz, neither for fear of danger, nor hope of reward are
diverted from their fidelity and duty to David: but postponing both fear or
favor of man, they look to God, and a good conscience, discharges a loyal and
faithful duty to their Prince, even in his greatest adversity: and leaves the
success to God. A good and imitable example to all subjects and sorts of men?
but alas* few Hushai's are now in the civil estate, but many Achitophels, and
few Zadoks in the Ecclesiastic.

2. Verse. 16. Hushaj discovers to David by Zadok and Abiathar and their sons,
the Counsel that he had given to Absalom, and forewarnes him what to do. It is
commendable then, but the contrary, to reveal the Counsels or courses of a
traitor to a lawful Prince, and to forewarne him of his danger that he may
prevent the same.

3. Verse. 17. This message of so great concernment, is carried from the
Priests, to their sons at Eurogell by a maid: and themselves thereafter are
hid from Absoloms searchers, and preserved by a woman of Bahurim. Which teaches
us, that God who has variety of instruments, both in heaven, and earth, yet in
his wisdom sometimes singles out weakest instruments, to perform greatest
enterprises: that his power in them may be seen, and he may have the glory of
the work. Examples whereof we may see in Pharaoh's daughter, preserving and
educating Moses, the woman of Tebes killing Abimelech, Deborah overthrowing
Midian, Jael killing Sicera, and poor fisher men converting the whole world:
the like may be said of Rahab, Esther, and the late Queen Elizabeth.

4. Verse. 18. The Priests sons are discovered, delated, persued, preserved,
and though many other dangers appear in this matter: yet the Lord delivers
them out of them all. Wherein is seen, the disappointment of wicked and cruel
enterprises, the protecting hand of God of his own, and a great ground of
comfort and confidence to those who follow good courses.

5. Verse. 22. David hearing of his danger prevents it, and albeit he was weary,
and loaded with sorrow: yet he spends the night, in his removing and passing
over Jordan. So that Gods promises of his deliverance, and confirming him in
his Kingdom, make him not neglect the ordinary means of his safety: as we see
the like in Paul, Act. 27. 31. Which teaches us the like, and that we must not
refuse to do what God requires, for furthering of that which he decrees.

6. Verse. 23. In Achitophel we see three causes of his desperation. 1. The
unmeasurable weight of his sins. 2. The severity of David's judgment which he
fears. 3. His diffidence of pardon, and his rejection from any participation
of honor, or advancement in David's Court or Kingdom. Whereupon we collect the
like causes, and degrees of others their disperation. 1. The weight of
guiltines, which with Cain they count irremissible. 2. The apprehension of Gods
wrath and justice, as we see in Judas. 3. Diffidence of pardon, and their
rejection from any part, or place in the Kingdom of heaven. The cure whereof,
or preservative in the contrary, is. 1. Confidence in the mercies of God
exceeding far the number, or weight of our sins, Psalm. 103. 8. 2. Relying
on the merits of Christ, and like the wounded Israelites, by the fiery
Serpents, looking upon him by the eye of faith, Zach. 12. 10. 3. Considering
the freedom of the Lords love, Hos. 14. 4. And that life everlasting is his
free gift, Romans 6. 23. And lastly remembering the examples of the Lords mercy,
to Manasseh, Marie Magdalen, the thief on the Cross, Christ's Crucifiers, Act
2. 36. And to Paul, when he was persecuting him.

7. We see in Achitophel what shameful and comfortles end such may expect who
for their own ambitious, or covetous ends give Counsel, or go on in courses
against God, Lawful authority, and the good, and quiet of Church, and
Commonwealth.

8. Achitophels wisdom was great and highly esteemed, and yet in the end he
proves a furious fool, by his selfmurther, and so his wisdom was turned into
folly, because he abused the same to wicked ends. Which teaches us that Gods
benefits should not be abused to sinful ends, else they will turn into
curses, as the subtilty of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. Pharaohs working wisely,
Exodus 1. 10. Sampsons strength, Absoloms beauty, Haman and Judas preferment.
The Scribes and Pharise's learning, Tertullus eloquence, and here Achitophels
wisdom.

9. We see here likewise that worldly wisdom without grace, and sanctification
can be no protection from shame, and ruin in the end: a worldly loss, a
conceited affront, a vexing fear, an accusing conscience, forseen danger, and
the like, can soon render the life comfortles, and oftimes drive a man to
despair and make him cruellest of any to himself; How vain then is it to be
wise, except in God, whose fear is the beginning of true wisdom, and to depart
from evil is true understanding.

10. By this example also of Achitophels death, whereunto (like Judas) he was
stirred up by Satan, as he had been formerly to sin by pernicious Counsel.
We see what great cause all men have to pray, as Christ has taught us, Lord
lead us not into temptation, and what Satan intends when he tempts to sin,
towit, nothing else but thereby to bring men to destruction.

11. It is said, that when Achitophel saw that this Counsel was not followed,
he hanged himself. Where we see what an ill guest pride is, which causes men to
mis-interpret disgraces, or overrate them, and raise such a storm in the
breast, which cannot hardly be calmed without the death of the conceived
disgracer, or else their own: the one whereof we may see in Hamans spleen
against Mordecai, and the other here in the Person of Achitophel, whereas
humility can easily digest great wrongs, and misregard the misregarding of
others.

12. Achitophel puts his house in order, who could not order his own unruly
passion and affections, and is careful for the world, which he was
notwithstanding presently to leave to others; but was careless of Heaven, and
of his own future and eternal estate. Where we see how foolish and
preposterous are the cares, and courses of Worldlings, who prefer earth to
Heaven, the goods to soul, or body, and the providing for others, neglecting
their own eternal welfare, and running to everlasting ruin.

13. Verse. 22. When David had mustered his men beyond Jordan, who had been
passing it in the night time he lacks not one of them, wherein the Lords
gracious protection was seen to David's great comfort, and those who did follow
him. Whereas Chap. 18. 7. Their fell of the followers of Absalom, 20000. men,
which should be a great encouragement to all men, to follow good courses, and
favor good causes, for such only have the promise of Gods preservation.

14. Verse. 24. It is said that after David had passed over Jordan, Absalom also
followed, and all the men of Israel with him. Where we see that the multitude
is on Absoloms part, and that it is not without cause forbidden, to follow the
multitude to do evil. As we see in the practice of Noah, and Lot, so that
multitude is no note of the true Church, but the contrary, as we see Revel. 13.
12. Seeing it is the broad way that leads to damnation, and many they are who
do walk in it.

15. We see here likewise by Absoloms following David over Jordan with so hugh
a multitude (as it were) close at the back, that when perils are greatest and
near, then also is Gods deliverance nearest, as we see in the next Chapter: as
likewise in Isreal's deliverance at the red Sea, and from that bloody plot of
Hamans, David oftimes from Saul, Daniel from the Lions, and the three Children
from the fiery furnace, so Matthew. 8. 25. Act. 27. 23. and elsewhere.

16. Verse. 27. David from a wealthy and potent King is now brought to that
estate, that he is supported with food from meaner men, his sin brought him
chiefly to this, which shows the mutability of greatest wordly estates,
whereunto none should trust, nor think their mountain so strong that it cannot
be moved, but rely only on the Lord, as David professes, Psalm. 23. 1. And to
eschew sin which is the cause of all misery both here and hereafter.

17. David is persecuted by his own son and people, but is pitied and
provided for by strangers, which is, and ought to be a comfort to the Godly in
affliction, that God being their friend they shall never want friends, nor
provision: but he that fed his people in the wilderness, and Eliah by Ravens,
and the widow of Sarepta, who also provided Pharaohs daughter to be the nurse
of Moses, and Obadiah in Achabs Court to feed the Lords Prophets by fifties in
caves, will also provide for his own, seeing he feeds the sparrowes, and
clothes the lillies of the field, and therefore much more will care for them
that fear him. Heaven then shall want power, and earth means, before that any
such want maintenance, and if God chastise, or take with one hand, he shall
cherish, and give with another.

II. SAM. Chap. 18. from the 1. Verse to the 19.
IN this Chapter is orderly subjoyned the history of the bloody battle between
Absalom as pursuer, and David as defender, which is to be resolved in four
particulars. 1. The discipline used by David in ordering and leading out his
Army. 2. The battle and event thereof. 3. The report thereof made to King
David. 4. How he is passionately grieved for the death of Absalom.

First then the discipline and order which David uses in leading forth his
Army, is commendable, for 1. He musters or counts them, that hereby he may know
their number, see their Arms, and consider their strength. 2. After their
muster he puts them under command of Captains of hundreds, and Colonells of
thousands: that the soldiers may obey their Captains, and the captains their
Colonells. 3. He puts the regiments under three supreme Commanders or
Generals, Joab, Abishaj, and Ittaj: and divides his Army in three battalions,
or squadrons, assigning their leading to the several conductors. Next, when
David has thus ordered the Army, he offers as a valiant Captain to go with them
to battle, in proper person for to show his courage, and for their better
encouragement. But on the contrary, by the secret Counsel, and wisdom of God,
withdrawing David whose preservation was decreed, as Absoloms destruction was
concluded by drawing him to battle, the people dissuade David from going with
them in person, by reasons taken a commodo and incommodo. 1. They being the
body, and he the head: their enemies will not greatly care for them, though
they dye or fly, so long as the head is safe to renew the battle, but if the
head perish, the body will likewise perish. 2. Care should be had of his
safety, for the well of the body, who is worth ten thousand of others, and who
if he should dye, better ten thousand of the Army dyed.

3. If he stay in the City, and need be, he can succor them out of the City.
To which their disswasion David assents, knowing it to be out of love toward
him, and the Commonwealth. And so standing in the gate by which the Army was to
march forth in order, he gives command to the three Generals in audience of
the people, to deal gently with the young man Absalom. Whereof some gives these
reasons. 1. Because of his natural affection which moved him to pity his own
flesh, though rebellious. 1. Because he looked not so much on the instrument,
or rod; as on his own sins of homicide, and adultery that had procured this
his correction by his own son, as the Lord had threatened. And 3. Because he
looked on the double danger of soul and body, wherein Absalom now stood; and
therefore labors for the preservation of his body, that thereafter he might be
induced to repentance, and so his soul might be saved.

Follows next the battle it self, and circumstances thereof, and 1. The
place, the wood of Ephraim in the territory of Gilead, where Ephraim fought
with Jephta, after the defeat of the Ammonites, Judge. 12. 2. The number of
those who were slain on Absoloms side in battle, towit, 20000. besides those
that were devoured by the wood, and in flying. 3. The manner of Absoloms own
death, who flying through the wood on his Mule, whereon he rid, and the Mule
going under the thick boughs of a great Oak, his head caught hold of the oak,
and he was taken up between heaven and earth, and the Mule that was under him
went away.

Which thing when one of David's Army had seen, he told Joab, who challenged
him, that he had not killed him, and he would have rewarded him with ten
shekells of silver, and a girdle: which the discoverer show he would not do,
though he might have a thousand shekells. 1. Because he was the Kings son. 2.
Because of the Kings command, that none should touch him. 3. Because the fact
had been capital. 4. Because it could not be hid from the King, if he had done
it. And 5. Because Joab himself would have been his accuser, and enemy.
Whereupon followed the killing of Absalom, by the hand of Joab himself, while
he was hanging in the oak alive, by thrusting him through the heart with three
darts, and by his Armor bearers their smiting of him, and killing him.
Whereupon ensued Joabs sounding a retreat, from following of the people that
had been with Absalom. And Absoloms burial in a great pit in the wood, whereon
was laid a great heap of stones, notwithstanding that he had in his life time
provided and built a sumptuous pillar, or burial place, for himself in the
Kings dale, to keep his name in remembrance, seeing he had no sons, and which
he called after himself, Absoloms place. One doubt only rests to be solved,
how it is said that he had no sons, seeing chap. 14. 27. It is said that he
had three sons and a daughter: to which it is answered, that those were dead
before the erecting of that pillar or tomb, God so ordering that such a
poisonous stock should not prosper, to have a posterity of such like branches.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. IN David we see an accumulation of most worthy parts, requisite in a good
Prince, to wit, prudence, patience, authority, courage, harkening to good
Counsel, and love to his people, and above all piety and Godliness, to whom
therefore God gives good success, a fit pattern to all Princes to follow.

2. Verse. 2. and 3. We see here in David's offering to go with his Army in
person, and in their dissuading a loving: contest between a Godly Prince, and a
loyal and a loving subject, every one striveing to overcome another by good
offices, David offering his pains, yea the very hazard of his Person, blood
and life for the common welfare, and his subjects highly valuing his safety,
and contenting for the same to hazard their lives and fortunes, O happy state
then, and Kingdom, or other society whatsoever, Ecclesiastical, Politic, or
Economicall where this harmony is found; as on the contrary unhappy is their
condition where the contrary contention is seen.

3. Verse. 5. David desires his Generals to deal gentle with the young man
Absalom, what means this too great indulgence? Deal gently with a traitor, but
of all traitors with a Son, and of all Sons with a wicked incestuous and
bloody fratricide, and an intending pariside. Where we see ever in holiest
parents as Eli was, nature may be guilty of an injurious tenderness, and
sinful indulgence. Or whether shall we not rather think that this was done
in type of that free, and matchles love and mercy of that Son of David, the
King of Kings, and redeemer of Israel, who prayed for his murderers, and said
when they were killing him. Father, forgive them for they know not what they
do. And though we be rebellious Sons, yet still also is he so compassionate
toward us that he intercedeth for us.

4. David speaks so concerning Absalom, as confident of the victory on his
side, though in respect of the contrary Army he was but a few. Which shows
David's faith, and confidence in God, who is able to save by a few, as well as
by many, as Gideons 300. proves, and that he was not afraid of the arm of
flesh, having the arm of the Almighty Lord of hosts to be for him.

5. Verse. 7. The sword devoures 20000. of Absoloms Army, and the wood more than
the sword; which shows how numerous an Army Absalom had, how strong an arm of
flesh, and how universal this rebellion was. Wherey we observe, how easily a
fickle multitude may be transported to the wrong side: and what virtue, or
merits of a Prince can assure the hearts of the vulgar, when so gracious a King
finds so many rebels?

6. We see also how God takes part (as the Lord of hosts) with a just cause,
and the very wood, and insensible creatures conspire with the swords of David's
Army, and lets Israel feel, what it is to take part with an unnatural and
traitorous usurper. Let no people therefore look to prosper always in rebellion,
but in end look for divine revenge.

7. Verse. 9. Absalom in his flying through the wood on his mule, his head takes
hold of the thick boughs of a great oak, whereby he hangs between Heaven and
Earth, as hated of both for his unnatural rebellion and other his wickedness,
as if God meant to prescribe this punishment for traitors, therefore Absalom,
Achitophel and Judas, dye all three one death, and so let all such perish who
are guilty of the like treachery against the Lords anointed, or the Lawful
supreme Magistrate.

8. An oak serves to be both gallows, and hangman to this vile traitor, and
the very mule that he rode upon leaves him to divine revenge, who had left
filial duty to his Father, and loyalty to his sovereign, if there were no
others to pursue and punish wickedness, God will make the very sensles
creatures, and brute beasts to avenge the same, as we see in the plagues of
Egypt, the fire of Sodom, the punishment of Korah, the mockers of the Prophet
Elishai, and others. Let not the wicked then expect impunity some way, or other
in the Lords own time here, or at farthest after death hereafter.

9. Absalom is punished by that wherein he most delighted, for his hair was no
small part of his beauty, nor matter of his pride. Where we see, what it is to
glory and be proud of any earthly benefit, and that, that part which is misused
by man to sin, is commonly employed by God to revenge.

10. Neither is it without special, and divine providence, that the place of
the battle is the wood of Ephraim, that Absalom in a great oak thereof might
finish his ungodly life in an ignominious manner, so that while like Jehu he is
marching toward it in persuit of his Godly parent, he is but hastening thereby
to the gallows, and his own destruction.

11. Verse. 10. A private soldier sees him hanging, and tells it to Joab, but
would not kill him, because of the reverence and obedience to the Kings command
concerning Absalom. A good part in private men, and subjects to reverence, and
obey the Lawful commands of their superiors, and not to do any thing of
concernment without a warrant, or call, from them that are in authority.

12. Verse. 14. Joab upon that intelligence sees him, and smites him through the
heart, in which that hateful rebellion, first was hatched, with three darts, so
that what the soldier forbore in obedience, Joab does in zeal, not fearing to
prefer his sovereigns safety, to his indulgent command, and more tendering the
life of the King, and peace of his country, then the weak and fond affection
of too indulgent a father. Especially seeing by Gods Law, Deuteronomy, 21. 21. A
rebel Child should dye, and by martial Law a public Enemy may be killed in
the field. The which teaches that the public good ought to be preferred
before private interests, or relations. Especially by public persons.

13. All Israel did not afford so firm a friend to Absalom, as Ioab had been,
who but he suborned the Woman of Tekoah, to sue for the recalling of Absalom
from his exile? Who but he went to fetch him from Geshur to Jerusalem? And who
but he, who at last reconciled him fully to his Father David? Yet now he who
formerly was a Solicitour for him, is his executioner, and has justly forgotten
himself any more to be a friend to him, who had forgotten himself to be a
Son, and to such a Father, and turned Enemy to him. So that we see, that with
honest hearts all respects either of blood, or friendship ought to cease in the
case of treason.

14. Verse. 15. Ioab not only peirces his heart with darts, who had peirced his
Fathers heart with so many griefs, after that he was lift up to an oak, who had
lifted himself up against his King: but he is also mangled with many wounds by
Ioabs armor bearers, who had wounded his parent with so many wounds of
sorrows, and mangled and divided all Israel by his rebellion. So that as a man
sins, oftimes like Adonibezek, and Pharaoh he is in like manner punished. As
we see also, Revel. 16. 6.

15. Verse. 16. Ioab at last having obtained the Victory sounds a retreat, and
with holds his Army from persuing Israel. Wherein appears Ioabs prudence, and
what should be the like wisdom of commanders to put a difference between the
heads of a faction, and a seduced multitude, and to pity the one, while they
take revenge on the other.

16. Verse. 17. Absalom is cast in a pit in the wood, and a heap of stones upon
him, who for a glorious and Princely tomb had reared up a simptuous pillar,
like the Piramids of Egypt, for conserving his name, and memory in the Kings
dale, which therefore he called after himself, Absoloms place. Where we see,
how the wicked are oftimes disappointed in their ambitious designs, as the
builders of Babell were, and are more careful for conserving their name in
memory, or remembrance, then in keeping a good conscience, or to be careful of
their souls salvation, and to do that which by showing charity, and doing of
good works would perpetuate their name here, and receive approbation, and
remuneration in the day of their accounts hereafter.

17. We see here that although Absalom had three Sons, Chap. 14. 27. Yet
there is no Son left him, the Lord by their death, having so chastised him,
by which because he would not be amended, and leave off his wickedness, but
rather increase therein. Therefore after the rod he takes now the axe as it
were, and finally destroys him, leaving him no posterity to perpetuate his
memory: but in place thereof a heap of stones upon him, every one whereof to be
a witness, as it were and a proclamer of his detestable villainy, and to
eternize his infamy.

II. SAM. Chap. 18. from the 19. verse. to the end.
Follows now the report of the event of the battle. And 2. how David is
affected for the death of Absalom. In the report we have. 1. A contest between
Ahimaaz who desires to be the first reporter, and Joab, the subject whereof
was, if it was expedient, or not that Ahimaaz should be the first reporter,
Ahimaaz takes the affirmative, and Joab the negative, Ahimaaz reasons are. 1.
From his Person (Let me now run) as if he would say, I have before brought
tidings from my Father Zadok to David, of the event of Achitophels Counsel,
and Hushai's defeat thereof; and therefore it is fittest that I likewise now
run and bring tidings to David of the event of the battle. 2. From the Person
of the King now in great perplexity of mind, till he hear of the event of the
battle, and who has gotten the Victory. 3. From the nature of the report, Good
tidings, that the Lord has avenged him of his Enemies. Which will make him
gracious to his Prince, which subjects desire to be. On the contrary Joab
disswades him therefore, by these reasons. 1. From the time, it is not
expedient thou bear the message this day, seeing another time will offer thee
a more favorable argument, by reason of the mixture of that which will be
sorrowful, with the victory which is joyful. 2. From this subject of the
report in particular, that the Kings Son is dead and therefore the reporter
thereof will not be acceptable, knowing David's great affection to Absalom, as
he show thereafter. Therefore Joab directs Cushi one of the Kings servants,
Verse. 29. With the news to David. But notwithstanding Ahimaaz insists to go
likewise, and through importunity prevails with Joab, and being dismissed, and
running by the way of the plain, overrunneth Cushi, who for a shorter way had
taken the Wilderness, and coming in fight, he is spied by one of David's
watchmen, who was upon the the roof of the gate of the wall of the City, and
who accordingly cried and told the King, and finding that it was but one alone
that was running; the King conjectures, that it was the bearer of tidings, the
reason of this conjecture being from common experience, for if the Army had
been overthrown, not one but many had been seen flying and reparing to the
City, but being victorious, and busily occupied in following and dividing the
prey, as Sisera was thought to have been exercised, Judge. 5. 30. Therefore one
only was sent to report the Victory, who in his drawing nearer being
discovered to be Ahimaaz the Son of Zadok, David conjectures the news to be
good, by the goodness of the bearer, and who first in the general, reports
that all was well, and thereafter most religiously, as became the pious Son of
such a Father, he ascribes the praise of the victory and of the deliverance of
David's Enemies into his hand to God only, and not to the wisdom of David, or
valor of Joab, as a flatterer would have done, and therefore blesses the Lord
for that happy success, and when he was asked by David how the young man
Absalom was, he warily and wisely (remembering the cause why Joab would not had
him the first reporter) dissembleth his knowledge thereof, till Cushi who came
after him, answered, Wishing that all the Kings Enemies were as that young man
is. Whereupon the King justly apprehending that he was killed was much moved,
and having retired himself to his Chamber, made a grievous lamentation for him.
For these three causes for which (as we have formerly said) he had given
direction to deal gen^ty with him, and not to touch him.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 19. IN Ahimaaz his rejoicing at the Victory, and desire to carry the
new^s thereof to David, that he might also rejoice. We see the sympathy that
ought to be amongst the Godly, that as they are willed to weep with them, that
weep, like fellowfeeling members of one body, and as they are willed so to do,
1 Pet. 3. 8. So ought they to rejoice with them who re- and especially at the
prosperity of Gods Church, and people, and their deliverance, from their
Enemies, and that the Lord has manifested his justice on them, as his mercy
toward his own.

2. In Ahimaaz desiring from Ioab leave to go, and a warrant from him, who was
chief in power to give him a call, and runs not unsent, to tell these glad
tidings. We see it is the duty of inferiors to submit to the direction of
their superiors, and especially that the bearers of the glad tidings of
salvation should not run before they be sent, and have a call from those, who
have power to give it them in the Church of Christ. Though like Ahimaaz they be
never so willing, or forward, or able also to discharge that function.

3. Verse. 27. When David is in greatest fear, and solicitude concerning the
event of the battle, he gets good news of a happy success and victory: even
so when the Godly are in greatest fears dangers and difficulties, the Lord in
their extremity shows his own gracious deliverance, and opportunity, witness
Jacobs deliverance from Esau, Isreal's at the red Sea, David's from Saul's
oruelty, his peoples from Hamans bloody plot, Eliahs from Achab, Peter's from
Herod, Act. 12. And many more others, therefore let none despare of the Lords
care of them, as he had of Daniel, and the three Children, though they seem to
be like the Lamb in the Lions paw, but in a holy confidence let them constantly
rely on him.

4. David speaking of Ahimaaz, Zadok the Priests Son, says, He is a good man
and brings good tidings, joining well these two together, as indeed they ought
to be in all the messengers, and Ministers of the Gospel, in whose mouth the
good and glad tidings of the Gospel is put to declare to Gods people, of the
Sum of David's victory over all our spiritual Enemies, and of our deliverance
from them, and their overthrow, that as the news is good, so they should be
good men that carry them, their carriage being suitable to their calling and
message, both holy, that their life belies not their tongue, nor that it be not
said of them, as of he Pharisees, they say, but do not, or as Psalm. 50. 16.
What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or to take my covenant into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed?

5. How welcome was Ahimaaz to David, when he brought these news of his Armies
safety, and that all was well, and how much more welcome should they be, And
their feet counted beautiful on the mountains who (like the Angels at Christ's
birth) bring the glad tidings of salvation to the Lords people, and as the
Galatians welcomed Paul, Gol. 4. 14. As an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.

6. Verse. 28. Ahimaaz blesses the Lord for the Victory, and ascribes the same
only to him, who is the Lord of hosts* and neither to David's wisdom in
directing, nor Joabs, and the Armies valor in executing, but only to the
Lords power and Almighty Arm, who had given the same. Thereby teaching all men
in all conditions, or success of affairs to look higher then to instruments,
and to acknowledge him to be supreme governor to whom the glory of all the
good we have belongs, that we may say; Not unto us, but to thy name be the
glory and praise for ever.

7. V. 32. As David hears the joyful news of the Victory: so he hears by
Cushi the sorrowful tidings of his Son Absoloms death, which he so laments.
Whereby we see how the Lord tempers the cup, which he gives, mixing to his own,
some sowrenesse with their sweetness, so that their joy here is neither full,
as it shall be hereafter, Psalm. 16. 11. Nor unmixed lest we should be too much
inamored with this life, and cloyed with Worldly delights and contentments,
therefore our sweetest roses have their prickles, Et nil omni ex part beatum.

8. Here likewise, we see the miserable condition of civil and intestine war
and troubles, that in these, even such Victories that are obtained by the party
prevailing are not without sad losss of some, who were dear, or near unto them,
as is said of the wars between Caesar and Pompey, Bella gerit, placuit nullos
habitura triumphos, as our proverb says, Wherein we lose a friend with a foe,
which should dissuade from civil, or intestine division, and dissent, and
persuade to peace, and unity both in Church and Commonwalth.

9. As has been said, on the 5. Verse, and explication of the charge given to
Joab, and the others concerning Absoloms preservation, and the causes thereof:
so here the cause of David's lamenting for his death, was especially with
intuition, first of his own sins of adultery, and the murder of Vriah, as the
cause why he was so sharply corrected in him, who was his Son and a part of
himself, and which all of us ought to look unto, when we are corrected in the
persons of our Children, or any that are near, and dear unto us, and as David
looked unto, when he mourned and fasted, for the sickness of the first Child,
that was borne unto him by Bathsheba.

10. Next, his mourning and lamentation was with intuition of his spiritual,
and now eternal estate, dying so without repentance in his sins, of
bloodshed, incest, and rebellion, which should be in like manner the chief
cause of mourning to all, who fear God when they their friends, or any other of
nearer relation to be wicked and incorrigible, and running headlong to their
own damnation, and which was the cause of Samuels going to Ramah and mourning
for Saul all the days of his life.

11. Out of his two tender and fatherly affection he cries out with
ingemination, My Son, my Son Absalom would God I had dyed for thee. Where we
see, that the best men have not wont to be least passionate: but what shall we
say of our Saviors love to us, and fervency thereof, who has said of us
wretched rebels, Not, would God I had dyed for you, but, I have dyed for you,
a bloody, a painful, a shameful and a cursed death. Behold then how he loved
us, with a love matchless, and mavelous, in fruit like himself and
incomprehensible, whereat Angels stand amazed, and wherewith Saints are
ravished, would God that we had hearts, as we should, to love* him again.

II. SAM. Chap. 19. from the 1. verse. to the 16.
AFter the History of the former battle, are in this Chapter set down the
consequences that followed thereon, which may be called the general argument
thereof, and may be divided in seven particulars. The first whereof is the
universal deploring of Absoloms death by the people following the Kings
example, to the 5. Verse. 2. Is set down Joabs sharp and minatory reprehension
of David for lamenting so for Absalom, and his exhortation to show himself
cheerful, and to speak comfortably to the people, to the 8. Verse. Wherein
also is set down David's obedience to the Counsel of Joab. 3. From the 8. Verse
to the 16. Are set down the deliberations, and resolutions of the tribes of
Israel for the reduction, and restitution of the King, with the reasons
thereof, and David his sending of Zadok, and Abiathar the Priests to the elders
of Judah, and to Amasa, for their concurrance herein, and the motives thereof,
with the success that ensued. 4. From the 16. verse to the 24. Is set down
Shimei his meeting the King with a thousand men to conduct him. His confession
of his fault, and begging pardon, Abishais opposition thereto, but David's
gracious granting the same, and confirming it with an oath. 5. From the 24.
verse to the 31. Is contained David's accusation of Mephibosheth, that he went
not with him. Mephibosheths excuse thereof, and laying the blame on Ziba his
servant, who unjustly had calumniated him, then David's decision of parting the
Lands between them: and Mephibosheths modest acquiscing thereto. 6. From the
31. verse to the 40. Is set down Barzillai his meeting with David to conduct
him. David's liberal offer to Barzillai for his former, and this his recent
favor. His modest refusal thereof with the reason of same, and in his place
the offer of his Son Chimham to go with David, and to accept any favor, that
it pleased the King to bestow upon him, whereupon David accepts the offer,
kisses and blesses old Barzillai, who returns to his place. 7. From the 40.
verse to the end. We have a sharp contest between the men of Israel, and the
men of Judah concerning their being first in the Kings reduction, and that they
despised the men of Israel being ten tribes, or major part, and had not first
advised with them in bringing back the King.

As for the first consequence, or action mentioned, which is David's mourning
for the death of Absalom, we have spoken before, and here we see by his
example, and sympathy with him, the Victory, that day is likewise turned to
mourning unto all the people, and in place of their showing themselves joyful
in a public triumphing way, they privately steal into the City, like them,
who are ashamed, and steal away when they fly in battle. And as for the King
himself, he covers his face, as the manner of mourners was, and cries out
bitterly, O my son Absalom, my son, my son. Whereof Joab being
advertised, he comes to the King, and boldly 1. Reprehends him for mourning so
for Absalom, and giving such a bad example to the people. 2. Exhorts and
counsels him to arise, and go forth, and to speak comfortably to the people.
And 3. Threatens him, if he did not so, that he should be deserted by all the
people speedily, and that should be a worse evil to him, then all the evil
that had befallen him from his youth, till then. In his reprehension of David
he upbraids him. 1. With ingratitude, that in place of honoring, or rewarding
his servants, who had saved his life: and the lives of his sons, his
daughters, his wives, and concubines, he had shamed them, by mourning for a
traitor, who sought his life, and the lives of his servants, and therefore had
justly suffered, and for which fact they needed not to be ashamed, as it seems
he would have them. 2. He upbraids him with the greatest iniquity that can be,
that he hated his friends, and loved his enemies, which might be a sufficient
ground hereafter to any, not to prove his friends, as they had formerly done,
hazarding their lives and fortunes for him, but to prove his enemies. 3. He
labors to prove the truth thereof, by David's so bitter mourning for Absalom,
whereby he declared that he regarded not his Princes, or servants, whom rather
he should have cheerfully welcomed from the battle, thanked or rewarded, than
withdrawn himself from them, and mourned for a traitor. 4. He upbraids him
with a preposterous, and wrong choice, or election, rather of Absoloms life,
though they all had died: the last whereof had pleased him better, then the
death of Absalom. 5. Unto this he therefore subjoynes his advice, and
exhortation that David go forth, show himself cheerful for the victory, and
speak comfortably to his servants, which if he obeyed not by an argument ab
incommodo, he threatens him with a speedy, and total desertion of all the
people and Army, which he had under his charge, and had hazarded so for him,
which would prove the greatest evil that ever as yet had befallen him.

Whereupon David is moved to do as Joab had advised, he comes forth to public
view, in the most public place of the City, the gate thereof, which when the
people hear, the^ they flock, and resort unto him.

Follows next, the strife that was throughout all the tribes of Israel, that
had adheared to Absalom before, and being now defeated, were ^led every man to
his tent, concerning the reduction and restitution of David, to which they who
were for him, labor to persuade the rest. 1. From the benefits which they had
formerly received from him, and whereof without the blot of odious ingratitude,
they could not be forgetful or ungrate. Which was the deliverance of them, out
of the hands of their enemies, and especi^lly the Philistims. 2. From the death
of Absalom, whom they anointed as their King, and from whom David had fled, he
being now dead in battle, therefore why should there not a course be taken, for
bringing back of David again, and restoring him to his kingdom?

Which dealing with the tribes of Israel, coming to David's ears concerning his
reduction, least Judah should be deficient herein, or last in the performance
of this duty, he sends unto them Zadok* and Abiathar priests to persuade them
thereunto, by two main arguments. The first whereof is, 1. Seeing the speech of
all the tribes of Israel, resolving to bring back David is come to the Kings
ears, and therefore why should they be last herein? 2. From the near relation
and consanguinity of that tribe with David, whereof he is come, being his
brethren, that is, his kinsfolks: yea, his bones and his flesh, and therefore
natural affection, beside other reasons should incite them thereto.

The other part of David's message, sent by those priests as peac^makers, is to
Amasa whom Absalom had made General of his Army, for his reduction to David's
obedience, as having great power, and Authority with them, that had been under
his charge, and yet affected him. And to this they labor to persuade him in
David's name by two arguments. 1. From the natural bond of consanguinity, being
David's sisters son, and therefore bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.
2. From the benefit and advancement which David by an oath, promises to bestow
upon him, which was to make him General of his Army, in the room of Joab. The
success of which message to Amasa is set down, verse. 14. That he bowed the
hearts of all the men of Judah, as the heart (...), and made them unanimous for
his recalling, and (...). Whereupon ensued the Kings return, and Judahs
mee^^^^ (...) at Gilgal to conduct him over Jordan.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 2. WHere it is (...), that the victory which David obtained was turned
^o mourning. We see, (as we touched before) the tragical evils of civil and
intestine wars, as we see in that of the ten tribes, against the tribe of
Benjamin, of Saul between him and David, also thereafter between David and
Ishboseth, and here between him, and his own son Absalom, and after Solomon's
reign between Judah and Israel, which ended in the leading away captive the
ten tribes by Salmanasar, and thereafter of Judah also to Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar, the like intestine wars was within Jerusalem, when it was
besieged by Titus, which was the maine cause of its overthrow, and where ever
intestine division and distraction is either in Church or Commonwealth, it
produces sad consequences, and is the presage o^ f^ture destruction: for as our
Savior says, a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, which should
be a powerful motive to unity, and to eschew dissension.

2. As David mourns so does all the people. Whereby we observe how powerful
the examples of superiors is toward their inferiors: as it is said, Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur orbis, and in our Scottish proverb, such Master* such
man, O happy then are all those who have any place or promotion in Church or
Commonwealth, and who give good example to others, that they may say with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 1. Follow me as I follow Christ, as on the contrary, woe be
to them, who give evil and scandalous example, and make others stumble being
to them a rock of offense, For it were better for the^, that a millstone had
been tied about their neck, and they had been cast in the midst of the sea, and
dreadful will be their account at the last day.

3. Verse. 5. Joab in his speech to the King, deals too boldly and
presumptuously, which did irritate David so against him, that verse. 13. He
promises to Amasa and swears that he should be his Captain over the host, in
the room of Joab. Prince^ therefore being called gods, though they dye like
men, seeing they are his vicegerents, to whom all honor, and reverence is due*
ought to be honored by their subjects, and tenderly and prudently dealt with,
even when they deserve rebuke and admonition, therefore Nathan having warrant
from God, for what he spoke to David in the matter of Vriah, uses prudently a
parable, whereby he makes his own mouth to convince him of his sin, otherwise
as is said He who presumes to shave the Lions skin, Full little knows what
danger lies therein.

4. Without making mention of the Lords preservation, or giving the victory,
Joab ascribes only to himself and his Army, the saving of David's life, and the
lives of his sons, and daughters, and wives. Where we see the nature of
ambitious and worldly spirits, as is said, Job. 31. They kiss their own hand,
and sacrifice to their own net, speaking as Nebuchadnezzan, Is not this great
Babylon which I have built, whereas the Apostle words are after rehearsal of
all, what he had done for Christ and the Gospel, yet not I, but the grace of
God which is in me. The like we may see Genesis 33. 9. In Esau, who says only I
have enough, whereas Jacob speaks thus, verse. 11. The Lord has dealt
gra^iously with me, and I have enough. As also in David, chap. 22. 2. 40. and
48. When he says, The Lord is my rock and my fortress, and my deliverer, from
them that rose up against me, thou have subdued under me, and it is God that
avengeth me, and brings down the people under me.

5. Joab also imputes it as a fault in David, verse. 6. That he loved his
enemies, as well as that he hated his friends. Whereas we see that our Savior
commands to love our enemies, and to pray for them who persecute us, and
whereby we see again the carnal, and unregenerate disposition of this man,
which is indeed natural to all, till grace make a change, and turn Lions into
Lambs, and haters to be lovers of our enemies, even as Christ loved us being
his enemies, and gave himself to the death for us.

6. He imputes also to David most unjustly and presumptuously, that he regarded
not his Princes nor servants, and if Absalom had lived, and all they had died,
it had pleased him well. Which with his sub^equent threatening, as it shows the
audaciousness of Joab, having power and charge of the Army, and therefore
taking liberty to himself to speak as he pleased, and as his passion misled
him to his King and Sovereign: so it shows the great patience of David, in
hearing without opposing or reply. Prudence and patience being two notable
virtues in a Prince and adorning him no less then his crown or diadem.

7. Verse. 7. In his threatening of David, That if he went not forth, and showed
himself cheerful to the people, they would not one tarry with him that night,
which would be the worst evil of any that ever yet befell him. We see that the
greatest good and strength of a Prince, is the love of his people, and their
cleaving to him. Whereas on the contrary, the greatest evil that can come to a
Prince, and which is his greatest weakening, is their justly procured hatred and
deserting of him, as we see in Rehoboam, and which therefore should make all
Princes and Kings, strive to keep the love of their people, and cherish the
same.

8. Whereas Joab threatens David, and confirms the same by a solemn and
great oath, taking Gods name in vain against the commandment. We see both his
impiety and imprudency, for threatening of a Prince (except by warrant from God,
as Nathans was, or from his Word by faithful pastors, and in a modest,
prudent and reverend way,) they are unfit to be used by subjects, and do rather
provoke to wrath, than produce any good effect.

9. Verse. 8. Notwithstanding of Joabs rash boldness, presumptuous upbraiding,
and sharp threatening, yet passing by all, and possessing his soul in patience;
he yields to Joabs admonition, and what Joab gives with the left hand, he takes
with the right, and makes good use thereof. Wherein we have a good example for
imitation, in obeying wholesome Counsel, suffering rebuke and admonition from
pastors or others, although in the manner of delivery of the same, some
tartness, or passion, or any other personal infirmity appear, yet we should
strive to pass by the same, and consider what is spoken, and to make our best
use thereof.

10. Verse. 9. In Israells contest, and striving who should be first in bringing
back King David. We see the inconstancy of the multitude, which like Ruben is
unstable, and light like water, before for David, thereafter for Absalom: and
when he is dead, again for David: and shortly after that, following a
rebellious Sheba, no trust then to be had in them, as we see in their crying
Hosanna one day to our Savior, and crucify another day: but a watchful eye
is to be had over them, and a right hand of a prudent and wise government.

11. The argument that is used for bringing back David, is the benefits which
Israel received by him, to wit, deliverance from their enemies, especially the
Philistimes, who were the most noisome and cruel. Whereby we observe, that it
is a good part, and policy in a Prince, to oblige his subjects by benefits, for
which cause our Savior tells us, that they are called benefactours. So
likewise it is the duty of subjects seasonably to remember, and thankfully to
requite the same, as fit time and opportunity requires. But O what greater
cause have we to be dutyfull subjects to Christ our King, who has delivered us
from all our spiritual enemies, and is our most liberal benefactour, Psalm.
103. 2.

12. The ten tribes of Israel, who before in Absoloms rebellion were David's
greatest enemies, they prove now most earnest for his reduction, and his first
and fastest friends. Whereby we observe that where God is a friend to any, he
will not let them want friends: yea, will make their most cruel enemies to be
their friends, as he made Esau to be to Jacob, Genesis 33. Abasuerus to Gods
people, Esth. 8. And Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel, and the three Children, Dan. 3.
Which should teach every one by all means, to seek after the friendship of
God, and to be at peace with him, and then they shall have the Angels, and all
the creatures to be their friends, and be at peace with them.

13. Verse. 11. Though Judah unnaturally, and rebelliously had followed Absalom,
and revolted. And albeit now victorious David might by force reclaim them to
his obedience, yet prudently, and piously he uses, all fair means for their
reclaiming, and coming back to him again: and therefore for this end, he sends
Zadok and Abiathar priests to persuade them. An example worthy to be imitated
by all Princes, by all fair means rather then rigor and severity, both to
procure, and retain their people in obedience: the threatening of the people
wherewith, of twelve tribes lost ten to Rehoboam is an example. But what a
gracious King have we, who is the son of David, who being now victorious over
all his enemies, and might by his Almighty power soon subdue his proudest
rebels, yet uses all fair means for our reclaiming by the promises of the
Gospel to pardon, and accept us: and for that end that we may be persuaded to
his obedience, and to come to him* he sends the ministers of his Word, as the
ambassadors of peace and reconciliation.

14. For persuading Judah to peace, and coming to David, to bring him back in
peace, he sends to their elders, Zadok and Abiathar, as fit instruments for
that purpose. Where we observe that those who are in that holy function of the
Ministry, who have succeeded to the Legal, and Mosaicall priesthood, as they
are the preachers of the Gospel of peace, and minister to him, who is the
Prince of peace: so they should be special peacemakers, and perswaders of men
to peace and unity, both in the Politic, E^clesiastick, and Economicall
estate, and should not (like Sheb^) blow the trumpe^ of sedition or rebellion,
or be like those of whom Luther complained in his time, who stirred up the
boors of Germany against their own Princes, under pretext of zeal for
religion: and whom he calls the blooddy trumpets of rebellion. As also, as they
persuade Judah to do their duty to their superior: so is this the office of
all Ministers, to teach people to do their duty to all ranks of persons, and
especially to their superiors.

15. Zadok and Abiathar make this, as one of the motives to Judah to bring back
their King: That the speech of all Israel, their forward^ess to reduce him, was
already come to his ears. Which shows what a powerful* motive, and prevalent
argument, the good example of others is in a good cause, as our Savior shows,
Matthew. 5. 16. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 21. and Phil. 3. 17.
and 2 These. 3. 9.

16. Verse. 12. They make likewise Judahs consanguinity with David, to be
another motive for their bringing him back. Which shows that natural
relations are not to be contemned, but should be engagements to duties and
kindness, which such relations call for, least otherwisemen be counted (...),
or unnatural, such as those who are prophesied off, to be in the last days,
and are ranked with other gross transgressors. Grace then and nature may well
consist; the one being only the rectifier and sanctifier of the other, but not
the abolisher.

17. Verse. 13. By the same argument, these priests are willed to deal with
Amasa, who was* General of Absoloms host, and had much power and influence on
the people of Judah, as we see in the next verse. Wherein we see David's prudence
in making choice of a fit instrument, for effecting of a good purpose: which
contributes greatly for obtaining of a wished success, as experience herein did
prove, and therefore should be followed by others, and as we see is the Lords
own practice, when he has any great work to do.

18. Likewise they promise to Amasa in David's name. That he would make him
Captain over his host, in the room of Joab. Which shows not only the
disgust that David had taken against Joab for his bold, unreverend, and
peremptory dealing unto him, but also that hope of reward and promotion, is a
great and powerful motive, to covetous, and ambitious, worldly minded persons,
to do that whereunto they would have them persuaded.

II SAM: Chap: 19. from the 16. verse to the 31.
FRom the 16. verse. of this Chapter to the 31. Are contained two Actions, the
first of grace and pardon, which David gives to Shimej, to the 24. verse. The
second is the Action between David and Mephibosheth, and his decree of the
division of the land between Mephibosheth, and his servant Ziba. In the first
Action* between David and Shimej. We have 1. His hastening to come down with the
men of Judah to meet the King, and who were his convoy and attenders. 2. His
humiliation before David, and his dissimulate oration, which he has to the
King, the nature whereof is deprecatory, wherein 1. He confesses his sin of
cursing David, and casting stones at him, in his going to Bahurim. 2. He beggs
pardon for the same, which he expresses in these terms. 1. That he would not
impute that iniquity to him. 2. That he would not remember that which he had
done perversely. And 3. that he would not take the same to heart. 3. He
subjoynes the reasons, why David may be moved to grant him pardon. 1. Because
he knows, and is sensible of his fault. 2. He has labored to make amends for
the same, by being first of all the house of Joseph, to have come down to meet
his Lord the King. Naming the house of Joseph, and by it all Israel, over
which Ephraim (who was descended of Joseph) had the pre-eminence. And therefore
oftimes in Scripture is named, in place of the ten tribes of Israel, as Hosea
12. and 13. etc. Unto which deprecatory speech of Shimei's, is subjoyned
Abishai's opposition of granting pardon, but rather that David should inflict
death upon him, because he had cursed the Lords anointed. To whom David answers
sharply. 1. By reprehending Abishai. And 2. granting the desire of Shimei, his
reprehension of Abishai is. 1. By disclaiming his Counsel, or advice which he
gives unasked, and before David himself (whom it most concerned) is heard to
speak. By saying in the plural, and thereby including Joab, (What have I to do
with you ye Sons of Zerviah? 3. By counting them adversaries to him, though
they seem friends, because of giving such Counsel, as might renew trouble,
when matters were not yet settled; therefore also our Savior said to Peter,
when he as a friend would advise Christ to pity himself, Go behind me Satan,
etc. As counting him herein his Enemy. 3. From the unfitness of the time, and
custom after Victories, which is rather consecrated to Triumphs and rejoycings
then to funerals and Tragical executions. And 4. from his present condition,
that he was but newly restored to his Kingdom over all Israel, and therefore
the beginnings of a Kingdom should be in mercy, and not in cruelty. Whereupon
ensues David's pardon, of Shimei that he should not dye, sealed and confirmed
by an oath. Where upon this doubt only arises, how then gives David direction
to his Son Solomon. 1 Kings ^. 9. That he suffer not his hoary head to go
down to the grave without blood? Where unto it is answered. That the promise
that David made to him, that he should not dye was only temporal, towit,
during David's lifetime; but not absolute, and so rather a suspen^ion of the
punishment, due by the Law, then a total absolution of him therefore,
according to the proverbiall speech, Quod defertur, non aufertur, or that which
is deferred, is not forgiven: which delay, or suspension was granted upon the
grounds of prudence and policy, the present time and necessary occasions, and
reasons of state, tending to the good of the public, and eschewing of evil*
causing the same.

Follows, Verse. 24. to 31. The action between David and Mephibosheth, whose
meeting of David is described. 1. From the place where, towit, when he was come
to Jerusalem. And 2. the manner how, towit, That he had neither dressed his
feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washing his clothes, (all which were signs
of sympathy, and sorrow for David's affliction) since the time that David had
departed for Jerusalem to his return: whom when the King sees, he presently
accuses him, why he went not with him, when he departed from Jerusalem: unto
whom Mephibosheth answers, laying the blame on his servant Ziba, who. 1. had
deceived him in not sadling his Ass to ride on, being lame, and being
otherwise unable to tra^ell, albeit he had commanded him. 2. In slandering him
to the King. As we see, Chap. 16. 3. But he reposes his confidence in David's
equity, and not rash beleiving; in being as an Angel of God, who could discern
between truth and falsehood; and therefore submits himself to David's
determination to do therein, as he thought good, especially seeing he had
already before this time gotten such proof of the Kings gracious, and free
favor: that all his Fathers house being but dead men in the vulgar, and their
own account, yet he had set him at his own table to eat, and therefore since
his life, and all what he had was his gift, he could not gain say his will in
any thing, nor complain of wrong. To whom David answer's, that he needed not to
speak any more of these matters, and therefore decernes, that he and Ziba
should divide the Land between them, to whose sentence Mephibosheth
acquiesceth, consenting that Ziba take all, considering his joy and
contentment, which he had of the Kings returning to his own house, which to him
was in place of all.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 17. IN Shimei's hasting to meet King David with such a train of
Benjamites after the Victory, and in Ziba's joining with him with his Sons
and servants; not from any sincere affection that either of them had to David,
but for their own ends. We see the nature and disposition of dissembling and
temporizing hypocrites, whose actions for their own self end are far
different from their affections, and that where they hate most, yet they can in
some outward pretend, and make show of greatest love and respect.

2. Shimei curses David, and casts stones at him in his adversity, whom now in
his prosperity he flatter's and follows. Which shows unto us, not only the
various condition of the Godly, now in adversity and after in prosperity, but
likewise the various disposition of time servers, who with the Jews can cry
Hosanna to day, but on the morrow, Crucify, and can in adversity fly from
them, whom in prosperity they will faune upon and follow.

3. Verse. 18. etc. In Shimei sueing for pardon. We see. 1. Humiliation. 2.
Acknowledgement and confession of his sin. 3. Seeking of remission. And 4.
making amends by a contrary course of being the first of the house of Joseph,
to meet the King David, and conduct him to Jerusalem, all which ought to be in
penitent sinners, sueing for pardon from Christ the Son of David, towit. 1.
Sincere humiliation. 2. A serious sense and acknowledgment of our ^innes by
confession. 3. An earnest begging with the Prodigal and Publican, of pardon
and remission, wherein man's felicity consists, Psalm. 32. The last in amendment
of our lives, and walking hereafter in a contrary course to our former walking
in wickedness.

4. Verse. 21. In Abishai, we see an example of private and cruel vindict, such
as was in Simeon and Levi, in David's servants, who would have slain Saul, and
in Christ's own Disciples, who would had fire come down from Heaven upon
Samaria, and Peter in smiting off Malchus ear: whereas good Jacob, Godly
David, and our savior Christ were far from this carnal, and cruel
disposition, and therefore to be therein followed, as the former is to be fled:
For learn of me (says he) for I am humble and meek.

5. Verse. 22. David says, What had he to do with the Sons of Zerviah, that
they should be adversaries to him: the word in the original being, Satan,
because of their instigation to ill Counsel for which cause also Peter was
called so by our Savior, and bidden Go behind him. Whereby we see what they
are who give evil Counsel, and how such are to be esteemed, towit, even as so
many Satan's, who was the first that gave evil Counsel to our first parents,
which brought death on them, and all their posterity.

6. David gives this as a reason of his clemency toward Shimei, Do not I know
this day (says he) that I am King over Israel. Which shows unto us the good
use that Princes and great men should make of their power and authority; not to
be the more cruel, or for oppression of their inferiors, but rather to show
their elemency even to offenders. Herein imitating him with whose name they
participate, and to use their power to the good and comfort of Gods Church, and
people.

7. Verse. 23. David promises to penitent seeming Shimei; that he should not
dye, and swears unto him: but far more merciful is our Savior the Son of
David to all true penitent sinners, who has promised pardon to all such, and
sealed the remission of sins by his Sacraments, and sworn also by himself,
That as be lives, he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
convert and live.

8. Verse. 27. Mephibosheth a true and loyal friend, and subject to David, who
had shown such sympathy with David in his affliction, as he had neither dressed
his feet, trimmed his beard, nor washen his clothes, till David should return
in peace; yet is falsely slandered in the contrary, as an affecter of the
Kingdom himself. Whereby we observe, that the most Godly and innocent persons
whosoever cannot escape the scourge of the tongue, and injust calumnies: as we
see in Shimei's upbraiding David, Chap. 16. 8. With the blood of Saul and his
house, and usurping his Kingdom, and as we see, in the calumniating of Eliah,
as a troubler of Israel, and our blessed savior, as a Wine bibber, and an
Enemy to Caesar.

9. Verse. 28. Mephibosheth to procure David's favor undervalues, and dejects
himself, and all his fathers house, as dead men, and extoll's David's gracious
benefits and bounty bestowed upon him, which indeed is the best way that we can
take to obtain the favor of God, who is King of Kings, and to ingratiate
ourselves in his sight, towit, by casting down ourselves at his feet,
professing our vile, and wretched condition, with the poor Publican: and
acknowledging the Lords bounty, and merciful dealing with us, and with
Mephibosheth humbly submitting our selves in all things, to his good will and
pleasure.

10 Verse. 29. In David's perseverance of giving any part of Mephibosheths Land
to a deceitful Ziba, now after right information, to which Ziba being present
could not reply. We see infirmity in the best of men, and that judges, or
Magistrates upon better trial and information should reform their judgments,
and as equity requires recall their unjust decrees, and rectify the same: as we
see Ahasuerus did, Esther 8. And not to do as Herod did in the matter of the
Baptist, or as Pilate said concerning Christ. What I have written, I have
written, and would not alter the same. Nor yet to do as David herein did.

11. We see also, that Mephibosheth acquiesceth in David's decree, and grudgeth
not as he had done him wrong, because he had taken nothing from him, but that
which formerly he had freely given him; even so should we acquiesce in Gods
dealing with us, and submit to his wise dispensation, when he takes from us any
temporal benefit, as health, wealth, or Children, and the like, which of his
free favor he has formerly given unto us, which was Jobs practice, when he
said: The Lord has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the
Lord. For as the Apostle speaks; What have we which we have not received.

II. SAM. Chap. 16. from the 31. verse. to the end.
Follows now. 1. The action between David and Barzillai. And 2. the dissension
between the ten tribes of Israel, and the tribe of Judah. In the action between
David and Barzillai, We have 1. how he is described. 1. From his country that
he was a Gileadite. 2. From his age, that he was 80. years old. 3. From his
estate, or condition, that he was a very great man. 4. From his actions
testifying his great love to David. 1. Coming from Rogelim to conduct David
over Jordan. 2. From his former bounty and liberality to David, who had
provided him sustenance, when he lay at Mahanaim. For which kindness, shown to
David, like a thankful Prince he invites Barzillai to go with him to
Jerusalem, where he would retain and entertain him nobly in his court, which
courteous and kind offer Barzillai, notwithstanding modestly refuses. Upon
these reasons. 1. From the brevity of his life in the enjoying such a benefit.
2. From his great age being. 80. years old, and so more fit for a private and
retired condition, which that age requires, then a Kings court. 3. From the
decay of his senses, and their faculty, whereby he could not be capable of
court delights, as of delicate meats, or drink, or of pleasant Music. And 4.
that as the court could be no benefit to him, so he should be but a burden to
the King, therefore he offers to go a little way over Jordan with David,
counting himself unworthy of such a reward as was offered, and desires that
with David's good leave and favor he might return to his own City, and be
buried in the grave of his parents, and seeing himself might not go with the
King, for the forenamed reasons, he makes offer of his Son Chimham to go,
with him, and he to do to him what he thought good. Which offer David does
kindly accept, and promises that whatsoever he would ask of him, he would do
for him. And so having blessed Barzillai, he dismisses him home again, and so
goes on in his journey to Gilgall, a famous place in the territory of Benjamin
near to Jericho, accompained with Chimham, the tribe of Judah, and the half of
the people of Israel.

The second action is between the ten tribes of Israel and the tribe of Judah,
the men of Israel complaining to David of the men of Judah; That they had
stolen him away and brought him and his household, and men over Jordan, and so
despised them, whose advice should been first had, in bringing back their King.
To whom the men of Judah answer, that they were first in that action. 1.
Because the King was near of kin unto him, being of that tribe, and therefore
collecting that they where causesly angry at them for that cause. 2. They show
that it was not for any benefit, or reward that they expected, or had, for this
their being first in his conduct. To whom these of Israel reply, especially
concerning that right by kindred to David, which the men of Judah pretended,
affirming that their right to him was greater, as having ten parts in him,
because they were ten tribes, whereas they were but one, whereby arises such a
contention between them in bitter speeches, that it occasioned the rebellion of
Sheba in the next Chapter, and in which contention, it is said; That the words
of the men of Judah, were fiercer then the men of Israel.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 33. IN David's kind remembrance of Barzillais favor, and bounty to him,
when he was in distress, and in the gracious offer that he now makes unto him
for the same. We see the praise worthy virtue of gratitude, commendable in all
persons as the contrary vice is odious, and especially in Princes, for which we
see the thenth leper, who was healed by Christ, and came back to give him
thanks so commended, as likewise Pharaoh his gratitude to Joseph, in giving
Goshen to his Father and friends, to whom his successor proved so ungrateful
thereafter, and was plagued, in like manner David's gratitude to the King of
Ammon ungrately requited, which was the cause of the Ammonites utter ruin,
likewise Eliahs gratitude to the Widow of Sareptah, Elisha's, to the Woman of
Shunem, David's, also to the posterity of Jonathan, and our Saviors promise;
That a cup of cold water shall not be given to one of his, which shall want its
reward, as he also shows at the last day how it shall be said; When I was
hungry, ye fed me not, etc. Inherit therefore the Kingdom prepared for you
before the beginning of the World. Which should teach us to be thankful both
to God, as we see, Psalm. 103. 2. And to men, who have deserved well of us.

2. Barzillai is said, to have been a very rich and great man, and in David's
distress both helps, and hazards with him. Whereby we observe the right use of
riches and a great estate, towit, when occasion calls for it, both to help and
hazard in a good cause, wherein either Church, or Commonwealth, or both have
their interest, and not to mispend upon pride, riot, or superfluities, far
less to use their greatness, or bestow their goods for persecuting Gods
Church, and opposing his cause. As we see that Roman Antichrist, and his
followers (which are the horns of the beast) do, Revel. 17, 12, 13.

3. Verse. 34. Barzillai speaks of the shortness of his life, and Verse. 37. Of
his death and burial, teaching all thereby, especially the aged, in the midst
of their greatness and prosperity to be mindful ever of these things: which
made Joseph of Arimathea, to have his tomb into his garden, which made Moses
also to teach Gods people, Psalm. 90. 12. to pray, Teach us Lord to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom. This was Jobs waiting, Job.
14. 14. All the days of his appointed time till his change should come, and
which like practice, counting every day the day of our death, account, and
entering into eternity, if it were ours daily, it would further our
mortification of sin, and prevent falling therein: where as, while men with
the rich fool (being in health and strength) promised to themselves long life,
they lull their souls in security, put off repentance, and amendment of life,
and are snatched away by death unawares and presented to judgment.

4. This remembrance of the shortness of his life, of death and burial,
weanes Barzillai from regarding worldly, or court delights, and from high
offered promotion, so that he becomes dead to the World in affection, before he
be dead in the World in condition. Which in like manner should teach us how to
wean our hearts from regarding any worldly pleasures, or profit, honor, or
advancement, (and specially not to hunt after the same by unlawful means, as
many do) by seriously considering how short momentary an a time, we have to
enjoy the same, how uncertain also the honor of death is, and that we must
leave all, when we go to the grave, and are presented to judgment.

5. V. 41. When David had made an end of the troubles raised by Absoloms
rebellion by the victory which he had obtained over him, now follows a new
trouble by the division and dissension that fell out between the tribe of
Judah, and the other ten tribes of Israel, So that we see, as is said of old
age, Eccl. 12. 3. That the cloud return after rain: so in this life the Godly
may expect trouble after trouble, as one wave follows in the neck of another,
or as Jobs messengers of evil news came one after another.

6. We see here also Satan's policy to hinder a good work, which was an
unanimous, and peaceable reduction of David, by raising a dissension between
the tribes of Judah and Israel, who were of one stock, of one religion, under
one King, and fellow members of one Commonwealth. And which has ever been
Satan's practice, since he made the first division between God, and our first
parents: as we see, in that attempt of dissension between Abraham and Lot, Cain
and Abell, Saul and David, Korah and Moses, Israel and the Ephramites, Judge.
12. Israel and the Benjamites, Judge. 21. Israel and Judah here, and Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 15. ^9. And in the Schisms that he has ever stirred up in the
Christian Church, and still does, to hinder the Gospel: and make the greater
way to the propagating of his damnable errors.

7. We see here likewise in this dissension from whence it, and all other, the
like proceeds, to wit, from envy: jealousy, and pride, for precedence and
pre-eminence, as Solomon speaks: saying, by pride comes contention, which
was the cause of of Joabs killing of Abner, and thereafter of Amasa, of the
wars between Cae^ar and Pompey, of the contention also amongst Christ's
disciples, who should be greatest, of the Bishop of Rome, and between other
Bishops of Patriarchall seats: and amongst others also both in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical estate even unto this day, forgetting that speech of our
Savior, Learn of me for I am humble and meek, which is the true and sure way
to peace and unity.

8. Verse. 43. This dissension is increased, and fomented by the feirceness of
words on both sides, but the words of Judah are said to have been the feircest.
Where we see the truth of that which the Apostle James sets down, concerning an
evil bridled tongue, that though it be a small member (as he calls it, Jam. 3.
5.) yet what a great fire it kindles, and is a world of iniquity, which
sets on fire the course of nature, and is it self set on fire of hell.
Whereas a soft answer pacifieth wrath, and prevents discord.

9. In all this, though the complaint was made to David by the ten tribes, yet
for the natural affection, that he carried to Judah, whom he was loath to
offend. And which therefore made their words to be feircer, he forbeareth to
decerne, and decide the matter; whereupon a new rebellion did ensue, as we see
in the next Chapter. Which may learn Magistrates, and Judges to eschew
partiality, upon carnal or natural respects: and not to suffer affection to
bear sway, either to obstruct, or corrupt justice: but looking to the equity
of the cause, to do that which is agreeable thereto, and so to prevent dangers,
that otherwise might ensue.

II. SAM. Chap. 20. from the 1. Verse to the end.
IN this Chapter, we have these four things. 1. The rebellion of Sheba, and
defection of Israel of a new. 2. The Action of David, after his return to his
house, and shutting up his concubines, that had been defiled by Absalom, till
the day of their death, verse. 3. 3. David's employment of Amasa, to assemble all
Judah together, for the pursuit of Sheba, and his followers: and Joabs
treacherous killing of him, from the third verse. to the 14. 4. Joabs pursuit of
Sheba, and his besieging of the City Abell, where he had fortified himself,
and by persuasion of a wise woman therein, is Sheba's tragical end, and Joab's
removal from the City in peace. Whereunto is subjoyned, a rehearsal of David's
chief officers, and prime men, both in Church and Commonwealth.

First then, in the rebellion of Sheba, we have his description. 1. From his
name. 2. From his nature, a man of Belial, or a wicked man. 3. From his
progeny, the son of Bichrj a Benjamite. 4. From his Action, he blew a
trumpet, for assembling the men of Israel unto him. 5. From his seditious
speech unto them, the like whereof was that of Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. 16.
Disclaiming now that they had any part in David, who before were claiming ten
parts in him. And 2. Proclaiming liberty to them from royal government, by
bidding them go to their tents, and houses; that leaving David, whom
contemptuously he calls the son of Jess, they might think of another sort of
government. The event of which speech is set down, verse. 2. To wit, the
defection of the men of Israel, from David, and their following of Sheba, but
that all Judah constantly did cleave to their King.

The second Action is David's sequestration, and shutting up his concubines whom
Absalom had defiled, immediately after his return to Jerusalem.

The third Action is David's employment of Amasa, (whom he had newly placed in
Joabs room) within three days to assemble to him the men of Judah, who
tarrying longer then the time appointed, and David thinking delay in such
purposes to be dangerous: so that Sheba if he were not speedily pursued, might
do more evil then Absalom lately had done, therefore he imployes Abishaj to
take his servants, and pursue after him, who when they were at the great stone
in G^beon, Amasa meets them, and goes before them, whom when Joab (who was with
Abishaj in company) sees, he kindly first salutes him calling him Brother, and
asks of his welfare, but taking him by the beard with his right hand to kiss
him: as the manner of the Jews was agreeable to our joining of hands, with his
left hand, he treacherously kills him, with his sword, which he had so
cunningly girded unto him, that it might easily fall out of the scabbard, when
he did stoop to embrace Amasa, and so he might have occasion to hold it in his
left hand, after he had taken it up, without any occasion of susspition to
Amasa: who being dead, then Joab and Abishaj his brother pursue after Sheba,
which pursuit being retarded by the peoples standing still, as they came by
gazing on Amasa, who was lying wallowing in his blood, in the midst of the high
way, one of Joabs men who stood by him. 1. Proclaimed that all who favored
Joab, and were for David, should follow after Joab. And 2. That the sight of
Amasa, should no more impeade them, he removed Amasa out of the high way into
the field, and cast a cloth upon him, so that thereafter all the people
followed Ioab: who also went through all the tribes of Israel, and gathered the
people, till they came to Abel of Bethmacaachah, whither Sheba had gone, as
David had suspected he would, verse. 6. To fortify himself or escape, which
City therefore Ioab did besiege, and as the custom was for battering the same,
he did cast up a bank against the same, to throw it down. Whereupon a wise
woman of the City, calls unto Ioab, and disswades him from destroying of the
City by four arguments. The first whereof is taken from military discipline,
according to the law of Moses: whereby it was appointed, that first conditions
of peace, should be offered to any City, which if the same were accepted, the
matter was so ended, and no invasion used. 2. She argues from the disposition
of the inhabitants of the City, who were peaceably disposed as her self was,
and not rebellious. 3. She reasons from the dignity of the City, that it was a
mother in Israel, that had bred and brought forth many inhabitants and
Children. And 4. From the duty of Ioab, as a Godly Commander, and Lieutenant to
a Godly King which was, not to swallow up the inheritance of the Lord, but
rather by the right use of the sword committed to him, to defend and maintain
the same. By which arguments, Ioab disclaiming any such cruelty or wickedness,
shows unto her, that he was come only against a rebel Sheba, whom if the
City would deliver to him, he would spare the same. Whereupon she capitulates
with him, in name of the City, that Sheba's head should be thrown over the
wall unto him. Which being done by the people of the City, through the wise
persuasion of this woman, Ioab sounds a retreat from the City, every man to his
tent, and Ioab returned to Jerusalem to the King, who having all things now
settled in a peaceable condition, appoints under officers, and rulers in his
Court and Kingdom for the better government of all matters, both in Church and
Commonwealth.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. David's still finds new troubles to arise, after a rebellious son, now a
rebellious subject, a verifying of the truth of that enmity, which shall ever
be between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, David also being
herein a type of Christ, the son of David, who never did, nor will want
enemies to him, even of such as are professed sons and subjects, and whereby
also is seen the verity of that, Many are the troubles of the righteous but the
Lord delivers them out of them all.

2. Sheba is described to have been a Benjamite of Saul's kindred, as Shimej
likewise was, and therefore carrying a lurking hatred against David, so that to
seditious, and carnal minded malicious persons, there wants nothing but a fit
occasion, and opportunity, to vent and make their malice manifest.

3. Another cause of Sheba's rebellion was his pride, to be the head of a
faction, but which in the end, drew him on to his own destruction, before which
pride ever goes, as before honor goes humility, which satanicall vide
therefore every one should eschew, as the mother of much mischief, and the
causer of great ruin in the end.

4. Sheba a man of Belial, blows a trumpet of rebellion, no marvel being such
a one, and as all seditious rebels ought to be accounted, men of Belial. But
it is a sad matter, when those who should be preachers of peace, are trumpets
of rebellion, and who should lift up their voices only as a trumpet to show
Gods people their transgressions, as he speaks by his Prophet Isaj. 58. 1.
That such should lift up their voices, as a trumpet, to persuade to
transgression.

5. He who lately (with the rest of Israel) claimed ten parts in David as King,
disclaimes and disownes him now, as having no part in him at all. Thus will
hypocrisy detect it self at last; and what lay before under ashes in Sheba's
heart, bursts forth now in flames in his words and actions. And so do many
hypocrites now disclaim Christ by their deeds: and show, that they have no
part in him, who profess him in their words, and in their tide of Christians:
to have the chief part in him, and in salvation.

6. David before had raised his hand against a faithful subject Vriah, and
therefore now a faithless subject raises his hand against him, as a man sins
so oftimes he is punished, and in this also as a part is that doom denounced
against David, for the blood of Vriah fulfilled, that the sword should never
depart from his house, so that one ^ot of Gods Word shall not fall to the
ground, unbeing performed.

7. By way of contempt he calls David the son of Jess, as our Savior was
called a carpenters son. Let not therefore these of lower degree, grudge that
they sometimes undergo the lash of contemptible words, or think it strange
that they suffer the scourge of the tongue. This being likewise to be adverted
by those in authority, that disdainful and mutinous speeches, savouring of
miscontent, are the smoke, that goes before the flame of bursting forth in
rebellion, and therefore to be heeded.

8. Sheba after disowning of David's government over them, bids Israel go to
their tents to live as it were at liberty, as it is said in the book of the
Judges, that there was no King in Israel in those days, and therefore every
one did as he thought good. Where we see the ordinary practice of the Authors
of sedition^ is, to proclaim, and pretend the liberty of a people, from a just
and loyal subjection, while as they intend to bring them under the yoke of
unjust usurpation.

9. Verse. 2. All Israel revolts from David, and follows Sheba, as nothing
then is more unstable then a multitude, who upon every light occasion, or
irritation, are ready to affect a change: and withdraw their necks from under
the yoke of present authority: so there is no levity, nor love, that can be
security enough for Princes; (such as David show lately to this people after
his victory) without the awfulness of power, and the fear of justice.

10. As Bees when they are once up in a swarm, are ready to light upon every
bough: so the Israelites being stirred up by the late rebellion of Absalom, are
apt here also to follow a Sheba, especially (as is said) finding nothing but
clemency, and David's passing by their former revolt. It is dangerous therefore
for any state, that the multitude should once know the way to insurrection, the
least tract whereof in this kind, being easily made a beaten path, without
timely curbing, and resisting beginnings.

11. Though Israel rebel, yet Judah continues loyal. The Godly then in their
greatest distresses or desertions, shall never want some friends, as were
Obadiah and Ebedmelech, neither shall the son of David ever be left
destitute, of some true subjects, in the time of greatest Apostasies, like
7000. in Israel, that had not bowed to Baal, and the two witnesses in the
Revelation, with the few that followed the lamb, such also as was Athanasius,
and a few lurking persecuted Orthodox Christians, in the time of prevailing
Arrianisme: and those in the time of prevailing Popery, who were to be found in
the midst of My^ticall Babylon in self, before the time of their evocation,
and coming out of the same, and wishing for the truth.

12. Verse. 3. David before he took course for suppressing Sheba, begins a
reformation in his own house by shutting up, and sequestrating from his company
thereafter, those his concubines, whom Absalom had de^iled. The like of this
did Jacob, Genesis 35. when he was commanded by God to arise and go to Bethel, in
causing his household to out away the strange gods, that were amongst them:
leaving hereby a Godly and good example to all men, Princes and pastors who
would reform others, to begin the reformation of abuses, at their own
persons and families.

13. Verse. 4. Amasa being reconciled to David, is employed by him to assemble
all Judah for the pursuit of Sheba. It is no small wisdom then to make a
friend of a foe, and to engage such a one, who is newly reconciled, wherein he
may be confirmed, by his own act.

14. Joab having now Amasa, employed by David, and set in his room: he smarts
for a loyal disobedience in killing of Absalom, and for his too peremptory and
bold speech thereafter, which he had to the King, although had been a man of
great meriting before, and many atcheivments. Whereby we see how slipry are
Princes Courts, how changeable is their favor, and how unstable are places of
preferment, as we see in Phara^h, who knew not Joseph, in Ahasuerus favor
toward Haman, and David's here toward his cousing Joab. O happy then are they
who are in favor with God, whose love is Immutable and constant, Joh. 15. 1.
And in whom there is no shadow of change.

15. Amasa is directed to assemble all Judah to David in three days. Which
shows that in suppressing of sudden insurrections there is need of speed, and
the least delay in rebellion is dangerous, and may prove irrecoverable.

16. Verse. 9. How friendly does Joab salute Amasa with his tongue* how kindly
kisses he him with his lips, but how cruelly killes he him with his hand, as
he had done to Abner before. Whereby we see, that there is no enmity so
dangerous, as that which comes like Jails to Sicera, Jud^s to Christ, and Joabs
here to Amasa, masked with love, for open hostility calls us to our guard, but
there is no fence against a trusted treachery. Thus soiritually deals the
world with our souls, it kisses us, and stabbs us at once, if it did not
embrace us with one hand, it could not murder us with the other, the evil of
whose temptation, like Joab his sword we advert not, more then Amasa took heed
to Joabs sword, God deliver us therefore from our trust therein, and we shall
be the safer from the danger thereof.

17. The cause of this treacherous murder in Joab, was his pride, not enduring
that any should be put in his room, and his envy at Amasa's preferment (though
so near in kin unto him.) Which shows unto us, what dangerous, and damnable
vices pride and envy are: and what bad fruits the same does produce, as we see
they did before, in the murder of Abner. And as pride does here in bursting
all bands to God, King, Country, and kindred.

18. Amasa likewise now being in peace and preserment, and expecting no harm,
receives that reward which he should have received in war, when he was
following Absalom and leader of his Army. God then the righteous judge of the
world, we see, has his own times of punishing, though magistrates forbear. And
God is just in all his ways, though man be unjust. Neither let any who sin,
and are on evil courses, dream of impunity, but that at one time or other,
they shall smart for their guiltiness: and oftimes when they least suspect
danger.

19. Amasa is innocent of the crime, of seeking Joabs place, for which he is
murdered by him, yet he is guilty before God, for his siding with Absalom.
Whereupon we collect, that oftimes men suffer innocently for some crimes that
are laid to their charge: and in respect of the persons who are their pursuers,
yet in Gods judgment they are justly punished for other sins, wherein either
they have been spared, or else has not been noted to the world; and as many at
the hour of their death, and execution, publickely have acknowledged. With
should teach all men to fly sin, though never so secretly committed, or by
men past by, and where impiety is, not to expect impunity at one time, or other.

20. Verse. 10. It is said; That Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in
Joabs hand, wherewith he killed him, and so foresaw not his danger, which
shows, that God blinds the eyes of the wisest, and benum's their judgments,
when he is to cut the pillars of their standing, and the thread of their lives,
according to the proverb, hos dementat quos Jupiter vult perdere.

21. Joab was not punished by David, for the like muthering of Abner, as he did
now of Amasa, therefore he commits this new offense, and pollutes the Land
with blood again, the guiltiness whereof for this toleration did lie upon the
royal throne, which should teach all Magistrates, to use the sword aright
which God has put in their hands impartially, and without respect of persons,
otherwise what further sin is committed by their impunity of the former, they
become guilty thereof, and may expect divine punishment for the same.

22. After the death of Amasa, Joab with Abishai pursue after Sheba a traitor
to his King, while as himself is a traitor to his friend, a public person,
employed by his King in a public service, in the very execution thereof, and
who was both innocent, expecting no such thing, and cosen german with Joab,
whereby we see how ready some are to censure, condemn, and punish that in
another, whereof themselves are guilty, as we see Genesis 38. In Judah, and that
no bands of nature can ty to duties where grace is wanting.

23. Verse. 12. The people passing by when they saw Amasa lying in the high way
killed, they stood still. Which shows us that the death of great men draw many
eyes upon it, and many censures of it, whether they be in Church, or
Commonwealth, therefore their life should be so ordered, as their death may
justly be bemoaned, as Samuel was, 1 Samuel 25. 1.

24. Joabs man seeing this, removes Amasa out of the high way and covers him,
not regarding so much the loss as the eyesore of Israel. Thus wicked
politicians care not so much for the committing of wickedness, as the notice
thereof, therefore if murders, oppressions, thefts whoredoms be smothered,
and hid from the knowledge of men, their Atheist, blind and obdured hearts care
not for the omniscient knowledge of the Almighty, who has power both of soul
and body to cast into Hell fire, whence it is said by the Psalmist, The fool
has said in his heart, that there is no God.

25. Amasa being thus removed out of the way, the people follow bloody Joab in
persuit of rebellious Sheba, Verse. 13. Their leader being wicked and evil, but
the cause which they chiefly followed being good. It is to the cause then,
which we ought to look, and not censure the cause, or judge thereof by persons,
or their personal faults, who maintain the same, but separating the precious
from the vile, and distinguishing between the one and the other. Let us adhear
to the cause, or to that which is good, whether Doctrine, form of government,
or other, and leave the persons for their faults to God, and them who has power
to punish them.

26. Verse. 15. Sheba being persued betakes himself, to Abell a fenced City as
David had said, Verse. 6. To escape taking, which notwithstanding of intended
safety did prove his ruin, God so disappointing the projects and practices of
wicked men, that he makes their glory to turn to their shame, and turns their
wisdom like Achitophells into folly, and that wherein they place their
confidence and safety, to tend to their destruction. O happy then is he who is
directed by God, who puts his whole confidence only in him, and makes him to
be only his sun and his shield, Psalm. 84. 11.

27. Verse. 16. For preservation of the City, only a wise Woman appears and
parlies with Joab. Whereby we observe that God uses weak instruments oftimes
to effectuate great purposes, that the glory may be his own, and the good
redound to others, as we see in Deborah, Jaill, Judith, this wise Woman here
and many others: and that Gods graces, as wisdom and the like, are not tied to
any one sex, but are free to all on whom it pleases the Lord to bestow the same.

28. Verse. 18. She convinces Joab, first by authority of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 20.
10. That peace should be offered to any City first, before the invasion
thereof. Whereby we see, that even then Gods people were accustomed with
Scripture, and the knowledge thereof, against the Popish prohibition of Laiks,
to read the same, and which 2 Timothy 3. 15. Shows to be injurious, as also that
Scripture should be the warrant and rule of all our actions, from which
whatsoever disagreeth should be eschewed, and whatsoever agrees with the same
in matters intellectual, or in matters moral and practical, should be
followed, and obeyed. And as this was the Law of God, and his rule prescribed
to others; so is it his own gracious practice toward all rebellious sinners:
he first offers peace and reconciliation to them by the Ministry of his
Gospel, in treating and beseeching them to be reconciled to him, before ever
he take any other course of punishing, or chastiseing them. Where also we see
what should be the scope and end of war, towit, peace, and procurement
thereof, which if it have any other end, it turn's to public murder.

29. Verse. 19. She shows in her own person to Ioab, what was the disposition
of all her fellow Citizens, towit, that they were peaceable, and faithful, or
loyal, two good properties, and virtues in Citizens, and in all other
subjects, and contrary to the disposition of seditions, unquiet and fiery
spirited persons, who like Salamanders delight in the fire, and flame of
contention, and love ever (as we say, to fish in drumly, or muddy waters.

30. She also calls the City of Abell a mother in Israel, because of the
birth and breeding of the inhabitants therein, by analogy whereof all Citizens,
and others are taught what duty they owe to their native Cities, and country
and compatriots: for the which Moses and Paul were so zealous, and for the good
whereof the very heathen feared not to yield up their lives.

31. She desires also, Ioab not to devour, or swallow up by the sword the
Lords inheritance, it being a City of that holy Land, which the Lord so owned.
Whereupon we note in general the right use of the sword to be as Paul
describes it, Romans 13. To defend the innocent, and to punish only the nocent;
and not to do the contrary, which should be an admonition to all Magistrates,
and those who have power of the sword.

32. Verse. 20. Ioab in great vehemence he deprecates that imputation of any
intention he had to destroy, or waste that City, though having harbored a
traitor, providing he only were delivered, a worthy and imitable example of a
wise and valorous general, as Abraham said, Genesis 18. 23. Concerning the Lord;
That he would not destroy the righteous with the wicked. How fearful then is
their condition, and what shall be their answer in the day of their account.
Who upon the quarrel only of their own ambition, have not spared to waste
whole tribes of the Israel of God, and as may be seen in the bloody wars of
Nation against Nation at this very day.

33. Verse. 22. According to this wise Woman's capitulation, and conclusion with
Ioab, Sheba's head is cut off, and cast over the wall unto him, and that most
justly loses he his head and life, who had conspired against the head of his
people, and to take his life from him, and no less wisely by the persuasion of
this wise Woman, does the inhabitants of this City save their own heads by
delivering of his head to Ioab. Thus does Sheba's pride and rebellion bring him
in the end, and in the very place where he placed his security, to a violent
and a shameful end, the same or the like whereof may all such Sheba's expect,
who rise up and rebel against lawful and established authority. Spiritually
also the case is ours, every man's breast is a City enclosed, every sin is a
traitor that lurks within these walls, God calls to us for Sheba's head, to
cast it out (as Jon^s was in the Sea) and to kill the rebel by mortification,
he having no quarrel to our person, but for our sin, if we be wise then, we
will hearken to this his desires, if we love the life of our own souls, and
then, we cannot be more willing to part with our sin, then our merciful God
is to withdraw his judgments, else if we love the head of his traitor better
nor the life of our own soul, we shall justly perish for ever.

34. Then Joab returns with Victory, and hopes by Sheba's head to pay the
price of Amasa's blood, David hates the murder, entertaines the man, delays
the revenge, Ioab was so great and popular, that it was no marvel that David
says; The Sons of Zerviah are to hard for me, and that it was not so easy,
or safe to punish him. Greatest powers then we see have not all contentments,
but at sometimes and in some things, (as we say) must have patience perforce,
and must connive at that which otherwise they a^horre.

35. Verse. 23. David now being settled in peace, takes care of the right
administration, of all the affairs of his Kingdom, and therefore appoints
several persons both in Church, and state, military and civil, for their
several offices. A worthy and commendable example to all Kings, and supreme
Magistrates, in time of peace not to give themselves only to their pleasures,
carnal delight, or case, but to appoint fit and worthy men to govern under
them, and themselves to have the supreme, and special care of right
administration.

II. SAM. Chap. 21.
THis Chapter is branched forth in two parts, the first is the History of the
three years famine, that was upon the Land, to the 15. verse. And the second is
the four Victories which David and his servants purchased against the
Philistims, again, the History of the famine is reduced to these three
particulars. 1. The famine it self, and deprehension of the cause thereof, From
the 1. verse to the third. 2. The remedy that is sought, and adhibited. 3. The
ceasing of the plague there upon, and the burial of Saul and Jonathans bones,
and the seven Sons of Saul, whom the Gibeonites hanged.

1. As for the famine it self, it is one of the three sore plagues with which
the Lord usually threatened his people for their sins, the famine, the sword,
and the Pestilence, Lev. 26. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 23. and 2 Samuel 24. 13. And it is
twofold, towit, a famine of the staff of bread, wherewith our bodies are fed,
and this natural life; which is here meant, and a famine of the word of God,
which is the spiritual bread wherewith our souls are fed, and the spiritual
life thereof, Amos 8. 11. And which is the greatest plague of any. With all
these three fornamed plagues David, and his Land was corrected. 1. By the sword
of rebellion lately. 2. Now by three years famine, and 3. chap. 24. By the
plague of Pestilence for his numbering the people.

The time then when this famine was, is in the days of David, near the end of
his reign, and after all his intestine troubles from the hand of man are
settled; then the Lords own hand exercises David, and his people with a new
correction. Whose course for deprehension of the cause of which famine he takes
is, like a wise Physician, that seeks out the cause of the sickness first, and
so does David, and the person at whom he inquires, is said to be the Lord, who
is an omniscient God, and who laid on the rod, and therefore could best tell,
for what cause he did it: which inquiry was not immediately by David himself;
but by the ordinary mean that was used, towit, by the mediation of the high
priest, before the Ark by Vrim and Thumim, as was prescribed, Numb. 21. And
unto which the Lord readily and clearly answered, and showed that it was for
Saul and his bloody house in general, and more particularly, because he slew
the Gibeonites against oath and covenant, and so joined to cruelty the fearful
sin of perjury. Thus David having found out the cause, comes next to inquire
at the Gibeonites who were the party offended, what should be the remedy, to
whom the Gibeonites answer. 1. Negatively, that they would not have either Gold
or Silver of Saul's, or of his house. 2. Neither that David should for them kill
any man in Israel, whereby they show that they had no quarrel against the
Nation in general, for that cruelty which Saul had used against them,
distinguishing so between a national and a personal quarrel, and between
innocents and guilty. 3. They answer positively, Verse. 5. That they would
demand by way of retaliation, seven of Saul's Sons, who had consummed them,
and devised to destroy them throughout all the coasts of Israel, to be
delivered to them, and that they might hang them up unto the Lord, as an
atonement of his wrath against Israel, for their King Saul his cruelty and
perjury, and in that very place which was called from his name, Gibeah of Saul,
and where he was borne and bred, 1 Samuel 10. 26. To which demand of their's
David answered by granting the same, only he spared Mephibosheth the Son of
Jonathan, because of the Lords oath that was between David and him, and
delivered to them the two Sons of Rizpah Saul's Concubine, and five others*
who are called the Sons of Michal Saul's. Daughter, not that she did ^ear them
to Adriell who was their Father, seeing she was childlesse to the day of her
death, but that she adopted them, as Pharaohs Daughter did Moses, and because
of her education of them as if they had been her Sons, and therefore it is
said in the text, Whom she brought up for Adriell, who had to his Wife, Merab
Saul's eldest Daughter, as we see, 1 Samuel 18. 19. Who was natural mother to
these five Sons, and probably was dead, and therefore her Sister Michall had
taken them to bring up. These seven then being delivered, the Gibeonites
accordingly did hang them up on the hill before the Lord, in the beginning of
the barley Harvest, which was in month which we call March. Whom Rizpah (out of
natural affection to her own two Sons, and kindness to the rest) did watch
night and day, that neither the birds should rest on them by day, nor the
beasts of the field by night should tear them, and this she did from the
beginning of the barley Harvest, till rain dropped from Heaven upon them, or
that rainy wether began, after the great drouth which had been before and
caused the famine, having spread sackcloth for her upon the rock, in witnessing
of her mourning for them, where we have this doubt to be solved, how are these
suffered to hang so long, seeing it expressly against the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 21.
23. Which commands that the bodies of such shall not remain all night upon
the tree? To which it is answered, that the Law of God is made for man and not
to control the Author, whose power is absolute, and this fact (like robbing of
the Egyptians by the Israelites) being extraordinare, having a special warrant
from the Oracle which was consulted, no doubt their avent.

This fact of Rizpah being told to David, he is so moved by her kindness to
the dead, as he follows her example herein, by bringing the bones of Saul and
Jonathan from Jabesh Gilead and honorable burying them in the sepulcher of
Kish Saul's Father, in Zelah of Benjamin, as also in burying of the bones of
these seven Sons of Saul that were hanged. Whereupon the Lord was entreated
for the Land, and the famine removed.

Thereafter from the 15. verse, to the end, is set down the four successive,
and several Victories which David and his servants obtained over the
Philistines, and in special over the Sons of a great giant Rapha, the first
whereof was, David being present and in great danger by one of the Sons of
the giant, from which Abishai delivered him being faint, by killing the Son
of that giant who pursued him. Whereupon David's men resolve by an oath, that he
no more should go out with them to battle, and hazard his person, lest he
thereby should quench the light of Israel. The second and third battle was at
Gob, where the other two of the Sons of the giant were slain, and the fourth
and last battle was at Gath, where the fourth Son of the giant was slain, and
so all his Sons, who were borne unto him there perished.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. BY this famine for the space of three years together, after the sword. We
see that it is the lot of the Godly to be exercised with diverse crosses in
this life, as it is said, many are the troubles of the righteous, that so their
hearts my be weaned, from the love thereof, and set upon the desire of a better
life, and on the right way to attain thereto, were there is fullness of joy,
and pleasures for evermore, holiness being the way to this happiness.

2. Verse. 1. The continuance of this famine three years together makes David at
last to inquire for the cause thereof. Where we see, that when any cross, or
affliction continues unremoved, it should drive us to the inquisition, and
self trial of the cause, which while that be found out (as Achans guiltiness)
the rod will not be removed, nor the plague cease.

3. This famine is said to have continued three years. Which shows unto us,
that as the Lord is he who lays on the rod, so likewise he limits the time of
the laying on of the same, as he did as long the people of Israel should be in
Egypt, and thereafter in Babylon. Which should be an argument of patience under
any cross, and of hope for a gracious deliverance in the Lords good time.

4. David all these three years till at last, inquires not of the Lord of the
cause, partly expecting the yearly removing thereof, and partly because himself
was not pinched therewith. Which shows not only; Quod non tangit, non angit,
but likewise that the best hearts may be sometimes overtaken, with dullness in
holy duties.

5. David when he sees the plague, he inquires of the sin, considering that
never man smarted causlesly from the hand of God, and that sin ever calls for
punishment, O then when we suffer, that we would inquire, what have I done? and
that our crosses were a pedagogie, to lead us to repentance, as we see in the
example of Joseph's brethren, Genesis 42. 21. Hosea. 6. 1.

6. David is a Prophet, and yet the cause of this famine is not revealed to
him, but he must inquire thereof in the ordinary way. If God then will have
Prophets, to have recourse to Priests, as the ordinary way, how to know his
will: how much more should people, now use the ordinary means, and not neglect
the same, to inquire of Gods Word, and the ministry thereof, of Gods will: as
they are commanded, Mal. 2. 7.

7. David no sooner inquires of the cause, than the Lord by his oracle readily
answers. Whereby we see a ground of great comfort to such, as in sincerity draw
near to God: as we see in his ready answer to the thief on the cross, and
others. Yea he has been found of them, that sought him not: as we see in Paul's
conversion, and much more will be found of them, who seek him in sincerity.

8. The Lord shows that this plague on the Land, was for Saul and his bloody
house, because he slew the Gibeonites. Where we see how happy is a land, that
has a good King: and how miserable a land is, who have an ill King: whose sin
is oftimes punished in the person, not only of the people while he is alive, as
David's numbering of the people was by pestilence: but also when they are dead
(yet their sin not dying) as we see in the person of Saul, and in the famine
on the land, which his sin procured.

9. Between Saul's slaying of the Gibeonites, and the time of this famine on the
land, for the same there had intervened near fifty years. Wherein it was
forgot by many, that were alive, but was not forgot by God, who keeps our
sins unrepented of, in a fresh register, till the day of our account and
remuneration. It is therefore a vain hope of impunity, which arises from the
delay of judgments. Which oftimes is for this cause, that the cup of sinners
(as was of the Amorites) is not yet full.

10. This sin was not the sin of the present age, but of the former
generation, and yet those of the present age are punished: so that sin never
goes unpunished (as we say) either in the stock or brock, as many houses of our
land can verify, and according as it is said, that the Lord will visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children, to the third and fourth generation: to
wit, with temporal judgments as here, but not with eternal, which is only
personal, and not successive: except they tred the steps of their sinful,
and impenitent predecessors.

11. Amongst all Saul's sins, which were many and great: the Lord pitches only
on blood guiltiness, and perjury. All sins having a loud cry in the Lords
ears for vengeance, but none having a louder cry then blood guiltiness. As we
see in that of Abells, and of Christ whom he typified. whereof the Jews said,
His blood be on us and on our Children, so also of his Martyrs, Revel. 6. 10.
And of all other innocent persons whosoever.

12. Likewise as he calls Saul's house a bloody house, so the Lord lays to his
charge, the guiltiness of perjury by slaying of the Gibeonites, contrary to the
oath of the Lord made unto them, by Joshua and the Princes of Israel, Josh. 9.
3. So that perjury is a grievous, and damnable sin, violating that which is
most sacred the oath of God: and which kindles Gods wrath here, that without
repentance shall burn against the guilty unto all eternity hereafter, except
they repent.

13. Verse. 2. It is said that Saul sought to ^tay them in his zeal to the
Children of Israel, and Judah. Whereby we may observe, that men's good
intention, is not a sufficient warrant for their Actions, except the same ^e
warranted by the Word of God. As we see in Nadab and Abihu, and Saul's sparing
Agag, and in all will worship, Collos. 2. 23. Neither is it enough to have
zeal (which even the crucifiers of Christ had, and Paul when he was a
persecuter) except it be guided by right knowledge and direction from Gods
Word, else it will prove but fury, and like wild fire, and will tend not to
edification, but unto destruction.

14. Verse. 3. David asks the Gibeonites what he should do to them? and
wherewith should he make atonement. Whereby we see that he looked not on the
secundary causes of the famine, as drouth and unseasonable seasons or the like,
but he looks higher to a provoked God by sin, who be^o^ed to be appeased, and
to vindictive justice against blood and perjury. As all men ought to do, when
either any general plague, or punishment is on the land, or any particular
chastisement is upon themselves, or their ne^r relations.

15. In David's asking the Gibeonites what he should do for them? We see
likewise that David, as being acquainted with Gods proceedings, knew well that
the removal of the judgment, behoved to begin at the satisfaction of the
party wronged. For we say, non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum,
and that by so doing, the sin which cried for a curse, being removed with the
judgment, a blessing may come in place thereof.

16. Verse. 4. The Gibeonites in their answer to David. 1. Refuses any
satisfaction for the blood and lives of their predecessors by silver or gold
of Saul or his house. To show that they were free of covetousness in that
matter, and would not make merchandise of that, which was so precious to them,
who had suffered by Saul which thing may condemn many Christians now a days,
and make them ashamed: who for money and price, will sell the blood and lives of
their dearest, and nearest relations, and not prosecute the law against such,
who have polluted the land by blood guiltiness, if their greed be once
satisfied.

17. Verse. 5. In their demand also of seven of Saul's sons to be delivered to
them, to be hanged by them in Gibeah of Saul, for his consuming and destroying
of them. We see not only that the Lord oftimes, retaliates sin with the like
punishment, and destruction: but also that it is lawful for persons wronged,
to have their recourse for remedy, and satisfaction to the civil Magistrate,
howsoever private revenge be always forbidden.

18. The Lord smites the land with famine, for this wrong whereof they
complain, and they know it not, till David reveals it to them, and the Lord
to him. Which shows, that the righteous judge, oftimes avengeth the vexations
and wrongs that are done to men, when they are not a ware, nor think thereof:
our hard measures then, are not hid from him, though his returns are oftimes
hid from us, it is sufficient that God can be no more neglective, then ignorant
of our wrongs.

19. Verse. 6. For Saul's offense and sin, seven of his sons are delivered
to be hanged up. It is then an ill inheritance, that wicked parents leave to
their Children, to wit, to be punished for their offenses: as is said, That the
Lord will visit the sins of the Fathers on the Children, to the third and
fourth generation. Neither is a numerous offspring of Children ever a blessing,
or to be gloried in, seeing as Jerubaall's 69 sons were all slain, by their
own brother Abimelech upon one stone: and Saul's seven sons here, were hanged
on a gallows, so to the great grief of their Parents, if they be alive, or to
their friends if they be dead, they may come to woeful, and violent ends,
though never so numerous.

20. Verse. 7. Always David spared Mephibosheth, Jonathans son, because of
the Lords oath, that was between them. Which shows that the Godly make
conscience, of all their words and Actions, and of their fidelity and promises
even to the dead. If David's love also to Jonathan preserves Mephibosheth, how
much more, then shall the Father of mercies, preserve and do good to the
Children of the Faithful, for the covenant made with their Parents in Christ,
in whom he is well pleased.

21. Verse. 9. Saul's seven sons are hanged on a hill before the Lord. The
acts of justice then as they are intended, for example and restraint; so they
should be done in that eminency of place, that may make others to be both
instructed, or forewarned, and terrified, then unwarrantable courses of private
revenge, will seek to hide their heads in secrecy, but the beautiful face of
justice, both affects the light, and becomes it.

22. Verse. 14. After all this it is said, that God was entreated for the land.
Which shows unto us that for the removing of this plague, not only
satisfaction was given to the Gibeonites, but likewise earnest prayer, and
entreaty was used toward God. As we see the like, Chap. 24. 17. And which
should be the practice of all people, that are under any correction general or
particular.

23, This shows in like manner, that happy is that land, where sin is
sharply punished, and justice impartially executed, this being a way both to
hold off judgments off of a land, if imminent, as also to remove them if they
be incumbent.

24. Likewise we see that plagues or punishments, as they come from God in
justice, so upon repentance and humble entreaty, and supplication they are
taken off by God in mercy* as is said, Hosea. 6. 1. He has torn, and he will
heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up, being like the centurions
servants, to whom if he said come they come, and if he said go they went.

25. Verse. 10. In Rizpah's kindness and care, not only to her own sons, but
to all the rest of Saul's sons, that were hanged up, by preserving them from
being destroyed by birds or beast. We see a good example of natural affection
to her own sons, and of pity, and piety also toward the rest, though dead,
and ignominiously hanged, from whom she could expect no thanks nor reward.

26. Verse. 12. In David likewise his following of her example toward the dead
(though his enemies) by bringing the bones of Saul and Jonathan from Jabesh
Gilead, and burying them in Saul's City of Benjamin, and in the burial place of
his Father Kish, as also in burying Saul's seven sons, that were hanged. We
see a worthy part in David, who hearing what Rizpah had done, disdaines not to
follow her example, though a woman, in that which was good and commendable. As
it should be the like duty in all, to imitate virtue and piety, in any person
whatsoever.

27. Verse. 15. It is said that the Philistims had yet war again with
Israel* Which shows unto us, the restless and indefatigable malice, and
enmity of the wicked against the Godly: and what shall be the condition, of
Christ's Church, to the end of the world, under the reign of the son of
David: which may be confirmed by many examples, of all ages. In the houses of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in Egypt between Pharaoh and Gods people, in the
desert between Israel, and Amalek, etc. In the days of the Judges, between
Israel, and their many enemies, between David, here and the Philistims,
between the Christian Church, and the heathen Emperors, the Orthodox and the
Arrians, and now between Christians and Mahomet, and true professors and
Romanists. Whereupon let us learn two things. 1. To prepare for the battle.
And 2. not to love the worse the truth, and professors thereof, because it is
opposed by many enemies.

28. It is said That in the first battle with the Philistims David waxed faint,
and was in great danger of his life by a giant, till he was delivered by his
Captain Abishai who slew him. Which shows unto us the infirmity of old age,
as we see Eccl. 12. wherein David was now, his natural strength being decayed,
and which every aged person should beseech God, to recompense with the
spiritual strength of grace. In our spiritual battle likewise with our
spiritual enemies, oftimes we faint, and are in great danger, being invaded by
the great giant Satan: but he shall not prevail, because, that he who is the
Captain of the host of the Lord, ( Josh. 5. 14.) is near, and ready to deliver
us, who has overcome Satan, and freed us from his danger, as David did the
lamb out of the Lions mouth.

29. Verse. 17. In the peoples swearing that David should no more go out in
battle with them. We see the loyal and loving care, that they have of the
preservation of his life, with the hazard of their own notwithstanding. Which
is and should be to all loving subjects, an example of worthy imitation, seeing
God has made such to be our heads: therefore we should be so far from
conspiring with Absoloms, or Sheba's against their lives, that on the contrary
as in the natural body* the arms and hands will ward any blow intended against
the head: so should we any hurt, that is intended against them, whom God has
placed in supreme Authority over us.

30. The men of David decree, and swear this, least he should by endangering
himself, quench the light of Israel. Which David was, both for wisdom and
policy, as also for religion and piety: as Godly pastors are likewise called
the light of the world, Matthew. 5. Both in respect of sound doctrine, as also of
a holy conversation. Where we observe what reverend, and good estimation people
should have, both of good Princes, and Godly Pastors. As we see here of David's
men in the one, and the Galatians in the other, Gal. 4. 14. And that both
Princes and Pastors, should strive to be lights before their people, that as
light is comfortable, so they may be comfortable instruments, for the good of
their people. And as lights and lanternes go before, and lead, as the fiery
pillar did Israel in the wilderness, and the star the wise men: so they may
go before in a Godly, and good example, and not be as darkness by the contrary.

31. In David, and his servants victory at last over all those giants that
invaded them. We see that bodily abilities, are not to be trusted or gloried
in: and that there is no wisdom also, nor strength against the Lord, nor them
for whom he stands. As we see Romans 8. 38. As likewise we see what the Godly,
and they who trust in him, may expect against all their most mighty or
malicious enemies, to wit, deliverance and victory in the end. So that they may
say with the Apostle, Romans 8. 31. and 37. If God be for us, who can be against
us? Nay in all these things we are more then Conquerours, through him that has
loved us.

II. SAM. Chap. 22. from the 1. Verse to the 21.
IN the former Chapters, we have set down David's many victories, against his
diverse, and potent enemies both foreign, and domestic. After which when he
enoyes peace in the end of his reign, he praises and extolles the goodness of
God toward him. So that as he began his kingdom with prayer, as his son
Solomon also did: so he closes and concludes the same with praise, these two
religious exercises being the Lords prerogative, Psalm. 50. 15. Which song of
praise in this Chapter is coincident, both for matter and words, with the 18.
Psalm, in the exposition whereof, we mind not therefore copiously, and
accurately to insist, and which we remit to the many worthy Divines, who have
written upon the book of the Psalms, but generally to illustrate the matter
proponed in this Chapter, so far as is requisite for the continuation, and
more clearing of the history.

The purpose then of David in this Psalm, is to praise God for his many
deliverances, and victories over his Enemies: bearing the type of the trophe's,
that Christ and his Church, shall in like manner obtain over all his, and
their Enemies.

And because the matter proponed here is high, mixed and of great variety, and
therefore hardly can be reduced to an uniforme method: yet for facility and
instruction, we divide the sam: into a Preface, a proposition, a confirmation,
and a conclusion.

The preface is the inscription of the Psalm, verse. 1. The proposition, is the
commendation of the omnipotent power, and gracious favor of God toward him,
to the 5. verse. The confirmation, and probation thereof, is taken from two
arguments, the one is from the commemoration of the power, and mercy of God,
delivering him from his Enemies, amplified from the 5. verse. to the 29. the
second is from the narration of the victories given to him over them, from the
29. to the 47. verse. Whereupon he inferres the conclusion, that therefore he
will praise God, serve him, and call upon his name, for all his benefits: past,
present, and promised to his seed forever: and will make a perpetual
profession thereof, and leave the example of the same, to his posterity for
their imitation.

Concerning the Preface which we supply, from the inscription of the 18. Psalm,
it contains five things. 1. The Author. 2. To whom it is directed. 3. The
nature thereof. 4. The time when it was composed. And 5. Upon what occasion.

First then, the Author is David, who albeit he had other glorious styles, yet
he chooses this, as the most honorable: to be the Lords servant, professing in
humility and truth his subjection to God, whose Vicegerent he was over others.
He is called therefore the servant of the Lord, in respect both of his public
estate, as all Kings are called, Romans 13. 4. And by whom they reign, as also
in his private estate, common with all others that are Godly, and serve him.

2. He to whom this Psalm is directed, is, to the chief musician, who was over
the others who were appointed both by voice, and instruments, to praise God
melodiously in the Temple of Solomon, and thereby implying the dignity of this
excellent Psalm.

3. The nature of this Psalm is Eucharisticall, or a song of thanksgiving,
used to be sung after victories, or benefits received: such as were the song of
Moses and Miriam, of Deborah and Barak, the women of Israel, after the killing
of Goliath, the song of Simeon.

4. The time was when David had peace, within and without his Kingdom, which
the ungodly abuse to insolency, lust, ease, excess and the like.

5. The occasion is, his deliverance from all his Enemies, and especially his
most mighty, and capital Enemy Saul, which occasion wicked men would abuse to
their own glory, and ostentation, and not to Gods only, as here does David.

Next in the proposition we have. 1. David's profession of the Lords goodness
toward him in preserving him from all his Enemies, exalted and amplified by
eight several Epethits, whereunto he compares God, as not being able
sufficiently by one, or a few to express his thankfulness, and the Lords
goodness. 2. We have the means whereby he procured the Lord to be so
gracious, which is prayer and therefore David's resolution to continue in that
holy exercise from two arguments. 1. Taken from Gods dignity as worthy to be
praised, and therefore also to be prayed unto. 2. From the utility that should
redound to himself thereby, towit* that thereby he shall be saved from all his
Enemies.

The exalting and amplifying of the Lords goodness by the Epethits, which he
ascribes unto him are Metaphorical. And 1. He calls him, his Rock. 2. His
Fortress. 3. His Deliverer. 4. His Shield. 5. The Horn of his salvation. 6.
His Tower. 7. His Refuge. And 8. His Savior, whence he gathers. 1. That
therefore in him he will trust, Verse. 3. and 2. That he will call upon him,
Verse. 4.

First then God is called a Rock, and by application of faith, his Rock. 1.
Because men take refuge when they are persued to Rocks, as we see Judge. 20. 47.
The Benjamites did to the Rock Rimmon, and so, Cant. 2. 14. The Spouse is said,
to be in the clifts of the Rock. 2. Because wise men who would build upon a
sure foundation, which can neither be undermined, nor overthrown by storm, they
build upon a Rock, which indeed is Christ Jesus against which the gates of Hell
shall never prevail, and he is also that Rock, spoken of, 1 Cor. 10. 4. Which
affords to us in the Wilderness of this World, spiritual drink, and
refreshment, whereof he spoke to the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 14.

2. He calls God his Fortress, from a Metaphor of strong holds, whereunto
men have their recourse in time of war, placeing therein their safety, from
their persuing, or assaulting Enemy, and which the Lord proves to be to all
such, who put their trust in him.

3. David calls God his Deliverer, from Shepherds who watch over their
flocks, and when they are persued by wild beasts, protect them, and deliver
them from them, as David did the the sheep of his Father, from the Paw of the
Lion and Bear, the great and good Shepherd of our souls, being so to all the
sheep of his flock, as we see, Psalm. 23. 4. And of which number never a one
shall perish.

4. He calls God his Shield, as he is so called, Psalm. 84. 11. And as he said
to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. Under whose shelter he was safe, and under the
coverture whereof likewise laying hold by faith thereon, We are safe from all
the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 16.

5. David calls God, The Horn of his salvation, a Metaphor from horned
beasts, whose horns are their ornaments, and whereby they both defend
themselves, as also pusheth their Enemies: even so the Lord is the ornament of
the soul, and who not only is our defense, but also the pusher, and destroyer
of all our Enemies, especially which are spiritual.

6. He calls him his Tower, by which he understands that it is he, who is his
eminent refuge, and who exalted him to be King, and from a low degree raised
him to an eminent place (such as Towers are,) as also by his many Victories had
exalted him, (as one in a Tower) above all his Enemies, who he had laid low and
subdued to him.

7. David calls God his Refuge, a Metaphor from the City, of refuge in the
Jewish Nation, to which the offender had his recourse for safety from his
persuer, and avenger of blood; and to whom likewise when we have offended, must
have our recourse for salvation, from the persuit of justice, and the wrath of
the Father, and righteous Judge of the whole World.

8. He calls God, his Savior, as he is properly and indeed, not only from
bodily Enemies, and all outward evils, or dangers but he saves his people from
their sins, as the Angel said, Matthew. 1. 21. And consequently from all the
evils, that sin has brought on mankind, especially death everlasting, and
changing the nature of all other things that are evils of their own nature,
and making them work together for their good, as Romans 1. 28. shows, and to
turn to their best, as the hatred, and selling of Joseph's Brethren did unto
him.

From which acknowledgment of Gods goodness to him, and deliverance of him, he
gathers two conclusions. 1. That therefore he will trust in him, and so make
use of his by gone experience for the time to come, as he did when he
encountered with Goliath. And 2. that as by prayer and calling upon God, he had
formerly found favor, and deliverance from his Enemies, so he would therefore
continue, upon these two grounds. 1. Because the Lord is worthy to be praised
for his deliverances, which he gives; and therefore worthy to be prayed unto,
and that deliverance be still sought from him, as we are taught to do, Psalm.,
50. 15. 2. Because of the good that he should reap thereby which is, safety
from all his Enemies.

Thirdly, The confirmation of the proposition is taken from four arguments. 1.
From his extreme, and desperatelike miseries, from the 5. verse to the 7. 2.
From three degrees of Gods benefits to him, the one, the hearing of his prayers
in his adversity, the other in the wonderful testification of his presence to
his comfort, and destruction of his Enemies, from the 7. verse to the 17. And
the third is from the work of his deliverance, from the 17. verse to the 21.

First then he sets forth his miseries ranking them in four sorts, or
expressions. 1. The waves of death compassed me. 2. The floods of ungodly men
made me afraid. 3. The sorrows of Hell, (or as some translate the grave)
compassed me about. And 4. The snares of death prevented me. By the waves of
death, meaning his frequent, and deadly like dangers, wherein he was, and which
as one wave follows on the back of another did in like manner follow one after
another and assault him; so that one danger of death was no sooner past,
especially in Saul's time, but another followed in the place thereof.

Next, by the floods of ungodly men is understood the multitude of his wicked
Enemies, and their furious rage, which like spouts of waters did terrify him.
3. By the sorrows of Hell, is meant such as might bring one to despair, and
pit of destruction. And 4. by the snares of death is understood, such snares as
craftily were laid for his life, and did threaten assuredly death unto him.
Whereof the giving unto him Michal Saul's Daughter was one, 1 Samuel 18. 21. And
his employment of David for a dowry to get him a hundred foreskins of the
Phili^tims, that he might fall by their hands, and having thus described his
miseries, and several dangers wherein he was, he amplifies the same in most
pithy, and patheticke words, they compast me, they terrified me, they enclosed
me about, and they prevented me, and so, as he used an aggravating of words to
set forth Gods goodness toward him, so in the same manner does he amplify his
own dangers and misery.

Hereafter he recounts again the Lords mercies and benefits toward him by
their degrees, the first whereof he makes to be the Lords hearing of his
prayer, which by the word crying he shows was earnest, and by saying, He
called on the Lord in his distress and cried, he shows that the same was
frequent.

The second degree is taken from the arguments of Gods presence, whereby he
declares the same to the comfort of David, and the Godly, and to the terror,
and confusion of his, and their Enemies, and this he does in a Poeticke and
Patheticke manner, the force whereof is, that as God by the sudden impressions
in the Elements declares his power and presence; so by many evidences he
likewise declares the same in delivering his own from dangers, and bringing on
their Enemies dreadful destruction: so that when we see, or hear these
meteors, they may serve as books of instruction, to teach us the mighty
Majesty, and power of God, for the protection of his own, and overthrow of
their Enemies, and the manifestation of his love to the one, and of his wrath
against the other, expressed by an Allegorical manner of speech, and as by a
fearful tempest and storm raised against them.

The third degree of his confirmation of the proposition is from the work of
the Lords deliverance of him, as is said of the Godly, many are the troubles of
the righteous, but the Lord deliver's them out of them all. And this he
propones under the similitude. 1. Of one that was ready to drown, and perish in
a River of waters, whereby troubles are meant, according to the Phrase, that is
usual in Scripture, out of which he acknowledges his deliverance was from
above, that is, from Heaven when all earthly hope, or help failed, and
therefore that as Pharaoh Daughter preserved Moses by drawing him out of the
waters, even so did the Lord preserve him by delivering him from all these
troubles. 2. He amplifies this deliverance from the persons, and their quality,
from whom he was delivered, towit. 1. Positively, that they were strong
Enemies, that hated him (this being the ground of their Enmity.) 2.
Comparatively, that they were much stronger than he, and therefore by his own
strength could not be delivered from them, but by his, who is omnipotent, and
is stronger, than they. Next, he amplifies his deliverance from the vigilance,
and craftiness of his Enemies, whereby they prevented him in the day of his
calamity, and sought to surprise him before he was awar, or could provide
sufficiently for his own defense: as we see in his own Son Absoloms
insurrection, but the Lord was his stay, whereupon he did rely, and trust. And
lastly, when he was redacted to great straits, and knew no outget, nor what to
do, except that (with good Hezekias) his eyes were toward the Lord, and as he
said to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 3. When there was but a step between him, and
death. Then the Lord brought him forth as out of a prison, and delivered him,
for no merit of his, as the impulsive cause, although he was a man according
to Gods own heart, but because of the Lords free love, and that he delighted in
him.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. DAvid calls himself a Servant to the Lord, being a great King over men.
Which should be an example to teach all men, and especially those who are in
great places the virtue of humility, and that the chief point of their office
is to serve God, and to use their power for him, as the same is from him, which
while any neglect, as glorious and proud Tyrants do, they become base slaves to
Satan, and their own beastly appetites.

2. From the nature of this song of praise, we learn out of the same
inscription, Psalm. 18. And first verse of this Chapter. Where beside the
general deliverance from all his Enemies he particularizes, Saul. That as it
is the duty of all men to be thankful to God for all his benefits, in
general, as we see, Psalm. 103. 2. So likewise in the same Psalm, and
elsewhere, to recount, and be thankful for some of the chiefest, which we have
received in particular.

3. From the time of peace, and tranquillity wherein David does this; when the
Lord had delivered him from the hand of all his Enemies; We observe what should
be the right use of peace and prosperity, towit, to express our thankfulness
to God for the same both by word, and deed in the course of a Godly
conversation, and neither to be lulled asleep thereby, like Laish in a carnal
security, nor to pamper our bodies, like the rich glutton, nor to glory
thereof, and confide therein, with the rich fool in the Gospel.

4. We see here likewise, that albeit David used the secondary, and ordinary
means of his deliverance from his Enemies, yet he attributes the same only to
God, and his blessing of the means, without which all had been in vain, which
he could have used, as we see, Psalm. 127. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 6. And elsewhere, and
therefore in all our enterprises, this should be sought, and in all our
successes this should be acknowledged.

5. Verse. 2. From David's amplifying of the Lords goodness to him, by so many,
and diverse Epethites, which afford comfort and instruction. We see that a
Godly and sensible soul of the Lords mercies, can never sufficiently enlarge it
self in the expression of, and acknowledgment of the same, and when it has
expatiated it self, and done all it can, it thinks that it is deficient in
duty, and can never enough magnify the riches of the Lords mercy, and glory of
his grace and goodness.

6. From his comparing him to a Rock, a Fortress, a Horn, and a Tower, etc.
We see that from every thing a Godly man can gather a lesson of comfort, or
duty, as the Be can gather Honey from every flower, therefore ungrate Israel,
Isai. 1. Is sent to the Ox, and Ass to learn, and the sluggard to the Be and
Ant, and such as are only Verbal Professors, to the fruitless Figtree that
was cursed, and the unprofitable servant, and hider of the Talent, as also
wicked livers to the Vineyard spoken of, Isa. 5.

7. Verse. 3. From the conclusion which he makes upon all the former Epethites,
that therefore in God he will trust. We see the use, that the Godly make of the
Lords by past goodness, or mercies toward them, towit, from their bygone
experience they resolve still to trust, and put their confidence in God for
future favors, and manifestation of his care, and kindness toward them, as
we see in David's reasoning from the Lion, and Bears overthrow, to the like of
Goliath.

8. Verse. 4. David's next resolution after trusting in God, is, That he will
call upon him still as he had done formerly. Which shows unto us not only
that as we trust in God, for his mercy, and goodness, so we must seek the same
by prayer, but also that we must be constant in the exercise of this holy duty,
praying always (as the Apostle exhorts us) and upon all occasions, amongst all
the benefits of God, there being none greater then this, the moving of our
heart, to call upon God, and pouring upon us the Spirit of grace and
supplication, and then (which we can have no greater assurance of obtaining our
requests, then when we get a heart to seek the same earnestly at the Lords
hands,) wherefore he subjoynes, so shall I be saved from my Enemies.

9. In like manner where David says, he will call upon the Lord, who is worthy
to be praised. We see that prayer is only to be made to God, and neither to
Saint nor Angel, for as the Apostle says, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call
upon him, in whom they have not believed? That seeing we must only believe in
God, therefore says our Savior (proving thereby himself to be God) Joh. 14.
1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me, therefore it will follow that we must
only call upon God, these two being the Lords prerogatives royal (as it were)
religious prayer, and praise, as we are taught here, as also, Psalm. 50. 15.

10. Verse. 5. By the waves of death that compassed David, and the floods of
wicked men, that made him afraid. We see that the Godly are not only vexed
with outward Enemies, but also exercised sometimes with inward troubles, and
disquietings, as we see Job was, Job 16. 12. and 18. 10, 11. And David, Psalm.
22. 1, 14, 15. And therefore none, who are so exercised with such inward
wrestlings should think the same uncouth, or unusual.

11. Where in like manner we see that David says, That the floods, or
multitude of wicked men made him afraid. We observe that the best of men have
their infirmities, and their best graces a mixture there with. So that although
David trusted in the Lord, to be saved from all his Enemies, as he professes,
Verse. 3. and 4. Yet this his confidence we see is not without fear, the Spirit
bidding him trust in God; but the flesh causing him to fear man, such is the
battle in the Godliest between the flesh, and the Spirit, and there being no
perfection in this life, that so, we may watch, pray, and be humble, working
out our salvation in fear and trembling.

12. By the rehearsal which David makes of his miseries, calamities, and
dangers wherein he was, and out of which the Lord to the glory of his grace
delivered him. We learn that the chief way to glorify God, and be pertaker of
his mercy, is, to be sensible, and understand our own misery, and seriously,
and truly to acknowledge the same, as we see, Revel. 3. 17, 18.

13. Verse. 7. David says; That in his distress he called upon the Lord.
Whereby we learn, that sanctified troubles drive us to God, as the hardship
which the prodigal endured drove him home to his Father, and as we may see in
the book of the Judges at large, Judge. 3. 9. And elsewhere, as the bodily
diseases also which Christ cured brought the sick unto him, and as the storm,
Matthew. 8. 24. drove Peter to come to Christ, and pray to him for safety.

14. David also says; That he called upon the Lord, and he cried, which shows
unto us two things, towit, the frequency of his prayer, as also by crying, the
fervency of his prayer, which like a loud cry sounds in Gods ears, whereby we
are taught in like manner to be frequent in prayer, asking, seeking, and
knocking, and as our Savior prayed in the Garden, and we are exhorted, Luk 21.
36. Romans 12. 11. Ephesians. 6. 18. and Col. 4. 2. As also to be fervent in prayer,
and not tepid, or luke warm, but as the importunate Widow, and friend, and as
the Cananitish Woman for her Daughter to be carnest, wrestling with Jacob. t^ll
we get the blessing, for as the Apostle says; The prayers of the Godly avail
much if they be fervent, and therefore it is said, Act. 12. 5. That the Church
made earnest prayer to the Lord for Peter.

15. David in like manner says, not only that he called upon the Lord, but
also I cried (says he) to my God. Whereby we see the application, which faith
makes, as David made in his greatest distress, Psalm. 22. 1. And as Thomas said,
my God, and my Lord. Which application and appropriation, (as it were) excites
the Godly to prayer, emboldens them in prayer, and gives them a holy assurance
after prayer of obtaining their requests.

16. He also says, that the Lord did hear him, and his cry entered into his
ears, thereby signifying what a comfortable return, the Lord made of his
prayer. Whereby we are taught not only that we should pray, but also that we
should try, what return is made of our prayers: as when we pray for grace,
mortification, and other spiritual gifts, that are necessary to salvation, the
defect of which trial, makes our prayers to be more out of formality then
fruitful. As likewise this is an argument that prayer should be made only to
God, and to no other: because this is his property, that he hears the prayers
of the Godly, wheresoever they are: which no creature can do, who is not
omnipresent, and omniscient as the Lord is, and who hears not only vocal, but
mental prayers: as we see, Exodus 14. 15. and 1 Samuel 1. 13. Therefore says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear prayer, unto^ thee shall all flesh
come, and consequently to no other.

17. Verse. 8. This allegorical expression of the manifestation of the Lords
presence for the terror of his foes, verse. 15. And comfort of his own, verse.
17. Shows how many ways the Lord has, for the confusion of the Enemies of
his Church, and the deliverance of his own from their rage, and all other
danger. When we behold then these meteors, and mutations in the elements,
albeit there be natural causes thereof, yet we should ascend higher than
nature, to supernatural considerations, and deeply contemplate in them, the
might and Majesty, the power, and presence in them of the creator, for the ends
forenamed.

18. If the manifestation of the Lords presence be so terrible to his foes, as
by such ^empests, that are temporary, and but transient, here as is expressed,
and as we see was at the giving of the law in Sinaj. How much more unspeakably
terrible, shall the Lords presence be as a dreadful judge to malefactors,
when he shall come at the last day, to exact a strict account of the breach of
his law, and when the tempest of his dreadful wrath, and dint thereof shall
rest upon them, unto all eternity.

19. Where it is said, that the earth shook, (being without sense and so great
a body) when the Lord was wroth, and that it trembled, and that the very
foundations of the heaven also moved and shook, which is a far greater, and
glorious fabric then the earth. O then, when the Lord is angry for sin, how
should the greatest, and most high, and glorious Kings, and others on the
earth, who are but the dust thereof, and ashes, tremble and shake, and fear to
offend so dreadful a Majesty, and so almighty a God, and if his wrath be
kindled but a little, (as is said Psalm. 2. 12. How restless should they be,
till by humble submission, they pacify his anger.

20. Verse. 11. It is said, That the Lord rode upon a Cherub and did fly, and
was seen upon the wings of the wind. All which Allegorical speeches are used,
to express the Lords celerity which he uses for deliverance of his own people,
when they are in straits or in danger. As we see when his people were pursued,
by Pharaoh at the red sea: were also in danger of an universal massacre, by
the procurement of Haman. How many ways, and from how many dangers David was
delivered, Daniel from the Lions den, the three Children from the fiery
furnace, Peter from the prison, and imminent death, Act. 12. The Lords people
in this Island, from the Spanish Armado in 88. And the Powder treason 1605.
Which should make us in dangers, or distress, not only to go to God, (as David
speaks) who is our present help and our shield; but also to wait upon him, and
have our eyes toward him, who assuredly will come, and not tarry, and make our
extremity to be his opportunity.

21. Verse. 12. By darkness which he made his pavilion, dark waters, and thick
clouds, (though he dwells in unaccessible light) is purtrayed out unto us, as
he comes with speed for the comfort, and deliverance of his own, in the former
verse^ so here how he comes to execute his judgments upon the wicked, to wit,
as it were in darkness, unseen or perceived by them, till they light upon them
unawarres, as we see in the destruction of Pharaoh, and his Army in the red
sea, and of Herod, Act. 12. Haman, Achab, Jesabell, Eglon, the Sodomites,
Midianites, Judge. 7. and others. And as is threatened against that Mystical
whore of Babylon, Revel. 18. 8. Therefore dream of impunity as they please,
and let them put the day of evil, as far from them as they list, (Gods
judgments being far above their heads, and therefore unseen by their blinded
minds) yet assuredly the Lord in justice shall surprise them with his
punishments, while they are like the people of Laish, lying in deepest
security, or as Zebul said to Gaal, Judge. 9. 38. While they think that Gods
threatenings are but shadows or scarecrowes.

22. Verse. 17. Where it is said, That he sent from above, and drew him out of
many waters, (whereby troubles are usually understood) David hereby shows,
that (as has been said) Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers them out of them all: and therefore as their deliverance is from
above, so their eyes are to him, who is above, and seeing their troubles are
not few, but many, which they have in this life, therefore they loath this
(...) and long for a better, wherein are no troubles at all, but rest forever,
Rev. 14. 13. With fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

23. Verse. 18. He shows that as his Enemies are many, so they are strong, and
too strong for him. Whereby we observe, that worldly power, or strength is not
on the Godlies, or Church of Gods side, but rather on their enemies, wherein
therefore they glory, as in multitude, riches, power, and worldly grandeur, as
we see Rev. 17. But therein is the comfort of the Godly, that as Elisha said to
Gehezj concerning the host of Angels, there are more for them, than against
them, and he who is for them is stronger, than they who are against them, they
being but as the pot in the hands of the potter. As we see in the example of
David and Goliath, Gideon, and the Midianites, Israel, and Pharaohs Army, and
others. Therefore though we be but like simple and weak sheep, and our enemies
be as strong Lions and Bears, yet let us not faint, diffide, or despair,
seeing our security* and safety stands not in our own strength, but in his
watchful care, and strength who is our shepherd, and who as David overcame
the Lion and Bear, and delivered his Fathers sheep from being their prey: so
will he who is the son of David subdue, and has subdued all our Enemies, and
has delivered us from being their prey, and so will, even to the end.

24. David also sets down the ground of their enmity against him* to be their
hatred of him: not that he had done any wrong to them, to procure their enmity,
but rather he had done good offices to them, as he did to Saul, and loved them
though they hated him, as he did Absalom: but their hatred of him without a
cause, was only from that root, of that proclaimed enmity in paradise, that the
seed of the serpent, should hate the seed of the woman, the wicked, and the
world ever hating the Godly for Godliness sake, as they hated our Savior, and
as he foretells, that the world would also hate his disciples. Therefore let
none now adays think it uncouth, that they are either hated for piety, for
which they are beloved of God, and the Godly, or as Micholl derided David, and
despised him, that they are likewise mocked and contemned.

25. Verse. 19. As his Enemies were many, and strong, so David in like manner
shows that they were subtle, and sedulous, crafty, and vigilant, preventing
him in the day of his ^^^mity, that so they might surprise him before he was
aware, (...) could sufficiently provide for his own safety. As we see in the
Counsel of Achitophell, Chap. 17. 1, 2. Such are the enemies of Christ Church
many for multitude, strong for power, and crafty for Counsel, as Pharaoh said,
Let us work wisely, and such are the spiritual enemies, with whom every
Christian has to encounter with; but this is our comfort, in place of many
enemies, we have one (as the people said of David) more worth than ten thousand
of them, and for strength is the almighty God, and Creator, by whose word he
made all things, and upholds them by his power; and in place of their
craftiness, he who is wisdom it self, derides them from heaven, and as he did
Achitophells, can turn their wisdom to folly: therefore most justly as David
professes here, does the Godly make him their stay.

26. Verse. 20. David ascribes here his liberty or enlargement, his life and
preservation thereof, and all other his benefits, which he had received from
God, only to his free love and favor: as the Prophet speaks, Hos. 14. 4. And
not to any merit of his, though he was a man according to Gods heart. Which
should teach all men the like humble acknowledgment, for what have we (as the
Apostle tells us) but what we have received, and therefore why should we glory,
as if we had not received the same? and when we have done all that we should
do, (if it were possible) our Savior has taught us, no less truly then
humbly, to acknowledge our selves to be but unprofitable servants, as we see
also David acknowledges, Psalm. 16. 2. And Eliphaz declares, Job. 22. 2. And
Elihu, Job. 35. 7.

27. We may see here in like manner matter both of admiration, and instruction.
Admiration of the Lords free love, that he should pass by the fallen Angels,
who were created glorious spirits, and that he should delight in the sons of
men, sinful dust and ashes, so that we may justly cry out with David, what is
man that thou should so regard him, or the son of man, that thou should be
mindful of him? no cause of any such delight being on man's part, but the
contrary, as we see at large Ezekiel. 16. Next we may see matter of instruction,
that if God delight in man, therefore man should in like manner delight in God,
his service, and ordinances, and not (as many do) in the service, or rather
slavery of sin, Satan, and (like the prodigal that fed swine,) in their own
beastly lusts and fulfilling thereof.

II SAM. Chap. 22. from the 20. Verse to the end.
DAvid having spoken before of his deliverances, and liberation, he continues
in the confirmation of the proposition of Gods goodness, and benefits bestowed
on him, and from the 21. to the 26. He declares the Lords goodness toward him
in a merciful remuneration. 1. According to his righteousness. 2. According to
the cleanness of his hands, both which he repeates, verse. 25. By which
righteousness, is understood either the righteousness of his cause against his
enemies, whose cause on the contrary was unrighteous, or if personal, and not
only causall, the righteousness of integrity or sincerity is to be understood,
as he says verse. 24. I was also upright before him. And by the cleanness of
his hands is meant, the innocence of his Actions, and that as he had a just and
righteous cause on his side, so he prosecuted not the same by unlawful means,
as his enemies did. Likewise it is to be remarked, that he says not, that the
Lord rewarded him for his righteousness, as meriting any ways thereby, but
according to his righteousness, according to that excellent distinction of Pope
Gregory, on the seventh penitential Psalm, and words ( fac auditam.) who
says thus. If the felicity of the saints be mercy, and not acquired by merits.
Where is that which is written, who shall render to every one according to his
works? If it be rendered then according to works, how shall it be esteemed
mercy? but it is one thing (says he) according to their works, and another
thing for the works themselves, for in that it is said, according to his
works, the quality of the work is understood, that whose works are seen to be
good, his reward shall be also glorious, as whose works are evil his reward
shall be contrary. But as for eternal life which we have from God, and with
God, no labor can be equalled, (says he) no work can be compared. They are
therefore (as Bernard says via regni, non causa regnandi) not the causes of
Gods favor or delight in us, but the effects, not proceeding but succeeding
the same, and not the provocations, but the declarations thereof. Therefore he
subjoynes ( for I have keept the ways of the Lord) declaring, 1. Positively
what he did. And 2. Negatively, what he did not, in these words (and have not
wickedly departed from my God.) By the ways of the Lord, understanding his
word and precepts, which are called his ways, as Psalm. 119. 3. Because he is
the Author thereof, by the inspiration of his spirit, as also because there is
nothing commanded therein but holiness, which is the Lords way, he being holy
in all his ways, and last, because the same leads to him, as the star did
the wise men to Christ. Next his keeping thereof is 1. In mind and meditation,
as Ps. 1. 2. and 119. 11. And 2. In practice, meditation, and conversation:
again, his not departing from God, is not in relation to place, which none can
do, in respect that God is omnipresent. But in relation to his commandments, as
he expones himself, in the next verse, and this he did not wickedly: that is,
through presumption, and in a constant course of sinning, though through
frailty, and force of temptation one may fall, as David did indeed, and Peter
likewise: but on the contrary, he sets Gods Word or precepts always before him
to be the directory of this life, which he calls his judgments, as Ps. 119.
30. 1. Because they serve to discern good from evil. And 2. because Gods Word
is not a naked sentence, but as it points out evil, so it pronounces plagues
against it, which shall be executed according to the sentence thereof. Likewise
the same is called here Gods statutes, as Ps. 119. 8. Because of the obligatory
power thereof to the Lords obedience; as subjects are bound to obey the laws
and statutes of their King. And this David professes he did in sincerity, and
uprightness, which the Lord requires, Ps. 5. 6. And without any hypocrisy
which the Lord hates. Whereby he by the grace of God, did keep himself from
sinning against God, as Ps. 119. 11. Which he calls his iniquity, because
what grace we have is Gods, but what iniquity we commit is our own, and from
corrupt nature.

Next, Verse. 26. He subjoynes an Apostrophe converting his speech to God. And
1. extolling his goodness, and equity toward the Godly, as also his equity and
suitable dealing with the wicked, and as for the Godly, he gives them three
Epithets, whereby he describes them. 1. Merciful. 2. Upright. And 3. Pure. The
first being relative to offenders and the poor, and contrary to cruelty and
uncharitableness. The second, being contrary to hypocrisy toward God, and
dissimulation toward man, whereby a Godly man is like a Nathaniell. And the
third being contrary to uncleanness either of heart, as Matthew. 5. 8. Or life
and conversation. As for the wicked the Epithet which he gives them. Is 1.
Froward, (as Naball was said to be, 1 Samuel 25. 17.) who is, (as he would say)
of an obstinate, rebellious and perverse disposition, who neither will hear,
nor obey good Counsel: and with such (he says) the Lord will show himself
unsavory, and unpleasant to them, because of his sharp judgments, which he will
inflict upon them. 2. The other Epithet that he gives to them, is pride, or
haughtiness, both against God, in refusing to obey Gods commandments, or taking
his yoke upon them, as we see Ps. 2. 3. And in Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2. As also
against man, and in special the Godly, whom they afflict usually. Whom
notwithstanding the Lord will save: but as for those wicked proud ones, the
eyes of the Lord is upon them in wrath (as his eyes are on the Godly in mercy)
that so he may bring them down.

After which from the 29. verse to the 50. he continues the extolling of the
Lords favor particularly to himself, taken especially from the victories
granted by God to David over all his enemies, foreign, and domestic: in the
first whereof he lays down a general, that God is his lamp who will lighten
his darkness; by a Metaphor, darkness being taken for men's miseries, and
calamities, and light for men's felicity and prosperity, so that hereby he
declares how the Lord turned his calamity to comfort, and his adversity into
prosperity.

In the next three verses he has an Epiphonema from the works of God, from his
essence or nature, from his word, and his preservation of all them who trust in
him. 1. From his works, in making him run through the thickest troops of his
enemies, while they are in the field, and when they have their recourse to
their strong Cities, in making him scale them nimbly, and take them in
victoriously. 2. From his essence, that he is perfect in his way. 3. From his
Word, that it is pure, like gold tried in the fire, and without mixture of any
error therein, but true and infallible. 4. From his preservation of all them,
who trust in him. Which Epiphonema David closes with a comparison of others
that are called Gods, by way of interrogation or challenge, saying, who is God
but the Lord, and who is a rock, save our God? as if he would say, none are
such, the like interrogation having ever the force of a negation. Thereafter
from the 33. verse. to the 50. He applies the general to himself in
particular, by many arguments by way of gradation. Whereby he proves that God
had bestowed upon him, all those things that are necessary or requisite, for
obtaining deliverance from his enemies, and victory in battle. Which are 1.
That the Lord is his strength, and power, whereby he understands that he gave
him courage of heart, as we see in his going against Goliath, and which is the
first virtue of a commander in wars. 2. That he makes his way perfect or
plain, which signifies the removing of all impediments, and facilitating his
enterprises. In making his feet swift to pursue, and fall upon his enemies, and
having over taken them, to get the victory over them, and to be set above them.
4. That he he taught his hands to fight, which signifies his skill in military
affairs, and how to use his weapon. 5. That with skill he had also given him
strength of body requisite for war, So that a bow of steel was broken by his
Arms. 6. That he had given him the shield of his salvation, whereby he
signifies his surety from the weapons, or darts of his Enemies, and subjoynes
that the Lords greatness of power was the cause of his greatness by
Victories. 7. That he enlarged his steps under him, so that his feet did not
slip, whereby he signifies his prosperous success in all his marchings. 8. He
sets down the consequences of all the former in the execution, and practice
thereof, in persuing his Enemies; destroying them, consuming them, and deadly
wounding them, that they could not rise, but were fallen under his feet, so
that the Lord had given the necks of his Enemies, who would not lie under the
yoke of his obedience unto him, for that end, that he might destroy them, and
when they were in this extremity, when they looked for help from man, they were
disappointed, for there was none to save then, and when they sought help from
God, he did not answer them, and thus being helpless, he compares them to most
vile things, and shows that he did beat them as small as dust, and did stamp
them, as mire the in street, and disperse them, as they spread dung on the
ground. And thereafter he amplifies yet more the Lords goodness to him. From
the 44. verse to the 50. In that this Lord had not only delivered him from the
strivings of the people, who were his own subjects; but also that he had
subdued under him the Nations, that were round about him, as the Syrians,
Ammonites, and Philistims, etc. Wherefore Verse. 47. he bursts forth in a
Patheticke doxologie, for the Lords deliverance of him from all his Enemies,
and his advancement over them, and last by way of conclusion, From the 50.
verse. to the end. He resolves to be thankful to the Lord, while he lives,
which he does upon two reasons, the one is, ab antecedentibus, implied in the
particle, therefore, that is for all the before rehearsed benefits: the other
is a consequentibus, because he will show mercy to his anointed, and to his
seed for ever. Wherein David is a clear type of Jesus Christ, who is called the
Son of David, whom the Lord anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, (as his name Christ imports) and who has subdued all his, and our
Enemies, sin, Satan, Hell, Death, and the Grave, and Triumphed over them on
the Tree of the Cross, and led captivite captive, to whom also the Lord has
given the Nations, and the heathen for an inheritance, as Psalm. 2. 8. And the
uttermost parts of the Earth for a possession, by the conversion of the
gentiles to the profession of Christianity, and embracing of the Gospel.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 21. IN true piety, or sanctification we see that integrity, or
uprightness of heart, and outward practice thereof in our lives, which is
cleanness of hands should ever go together, and not the voice of Jacob, and
the hands of Esau, or an hypocritical, and simulate show of Godliness,
denying the power thereof, and not joining the practice, which is to have
leaves like the Figtree, which Christ cursed, or a name that they live but are
dead, like the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. 2.

2. David had said before, Verse. that the Lord favored, and had delight in
him, wherefore he subjoynes as an evidence thereof, the grace of
sanctification. Thereby showing, that this is the only true evidence of the
Lords love, towit, grace and sanctification, and by no other thing can it be
known, seeing worldly prosperity is rather the portion of the wicked in this
life, as we see, Psalm. 73. And in the examples of the rich fool and glutton,
than the lot of the Godly, to whom God gives the gifts of his right hand, and
for whom he has appointed the inheritance, as Abraham did for Isaac, and the
birthright with the blessing, which Isaac gave to Jacob.

3. We see that although the Godly merit not by any condignity of their works,
or Persons, yet that piety and Godliness wants not its own reward, ratione
pacti, because God has promised the same thereunto, and therefore it is just
with him to perform, and only of mere mercy, as we see Psalm. 62. 12. and Hose
10. 12. Where we are willed to sow in righteousness, and reap in mercy.
Therefore says Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17. concerning Onesiphorus, who had
refreshed him oftimes in his bonds. The Lord grant that he may find mercy of
the Lord in that day, towit, of death, and his account, the wages of sin
being death, but life everlasting being the free gift of God, Romans 6. 23. And
therefore called an inheritance, Jam. 2. 5. Which comes to Children not by
their own purchase, but which is given them by their Father. Which recompensing
therefore of sinceer holiness, and practical piety should be a great
encouragement, to the Godly to persevere therein, and abound in good works, in
which as the way which leads to that heavenly Kingdom, we are exhorted to
walk, Ephesians. 2. 10. And to abound therein, and bring forth much fruit, Joh. 15. 2.

4. Verse. 22. David's keeping the ways of God, and not departing wickedly from
him, or his statutes. We see, not only the Godlies care of ordering their
conversation aright; but likewise wherein true Godliness consists, which is,
as Isa. 1. 16. To cease to do evil, or not to depart from Gods commandments,
and to learn to do well, or to keep his ways, as we see also, Psalm. 34. 14.
and Amos 5. 15. Where we are commanded to hate evil, and love good, that is,
to eschew sin, not only in action, and to do good, but also to hate the one,
and love the other in our affection.

5. We see here likewise the difference between the sinning of the Godly, and
of the wicked, the Godly sin daily, and therefore are taught to crave daily
forgiveness: but this their sinning is, but through frailty, and by sins which
we call Quotidianae incursionis, but they are not, as the sins of the wicked
are, of presumption, by departing wickedly from God with delight, making a
trade of sin, and sinning against both knowledge, and conscience.

6. Verse. 23. David says, That the Lords judgments were always before him.
Whereby we observe that the right way how to eschew sin, is, to hold Gods
Word, or his statutes, called here his judgments ever before our eyes, a the
directory of our life, and conversation, as David did here, and which he hid
also in his heart, that he might not sin against God, as he shows, Psalm.
119. 11. As also if by Gods judgments, his punishments of sin were meant, the
same likewise serves as a powerful preservative from sin to the Godly, as we
see, Psalm. 119. 120.

7. Whereas he says, That all his judgments were before him, which is all one
with that, which he says, Psalm. 119. 6. That he had a respect to all Gods
commandments, we observe that it is not the practice of the Godly to nourish
any one bosom sin, as Herod did, in harkening to the Baptist in many things,
except in the matter of Herodias, but as it is the commendation of Zachary, and
Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. That they walked in all the commandments of God
blameless, so to abandon and mortify all sins whatsoever, and to observe all
Gods ordinances, and so to strive to be perfect by that perfection which we
call of parts, though we cannot in this life attain to that perfection, which
we call of degrees.

8. Verse. 24. Where David says, That he was upright before God. We see not
only wherein the Lord delights, towit, sincerity in his service, and worship,
which Psalm. 51. 6. He calls truth in the inward parts. But likewise that it
is the care of the Godly to be sinceer without hypocrisy, and to approve
themselves to God, as doing all before him, and in his sight, whom they know to
be omniscient, and the searcher of the heart, and reins.

9. Likewise where he says, And have keept my self from mine iniquity He
shows the difference between grace, and sin in the Godly, the one is from
God only, for what have we which we have not received? And therefore says the
Apostle, Yet not I, but the grace of God, which was in me: but the other which
is sin, is only from ourselves, and our corrupt nature, and therefore justly
should we own it as ours, and be humbled therefore.

10. Verse. 26. 27. From the properties whereby he describes the Godly, that
they are merciful, and not cruel, or uncharitable: as also upright, and not
hypocritical, nor dissemblers, and that they are pure both in heart and life,
and not unclean like Dogs and Swine. Let us learn to be like them, as herein
they are like to God, and do as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 1. Follow me as I
follow Christ.

11. Where he says, With the forward, God will show himself unto them
unsavory, or displeasant. We see not only the natural disposition of the
unregenerate, that they are froward, rebellious and perverse; but also that
themselves are the cause why the Lord delights not in them, as he does in the
Godly, and that the Lord is as an unsavory thing, and unpleasant to them,
especially when he punishes them justly for their sins, who otherwise to the
Godly is so sweet and desirable, that they exhort others to taste how sweet he
is, and excellent, and to seek after him, Cant. 5. 9. So that he is like that
cloud, Exodus 14. 10. That was darkness to the Egyptions, but gave light to
Israel.

12. Verse. 28. Gods people is called an afflicted people, where we observe what
their condition is, and ever has been in this World, as our Savior foretold
his Disciples, and therefore are compared to a Lilly amongst Thorns, Cant. 2.
2. Sheep amongst Wolves, and to Noah's Ark tossed upon the Waters, with which
condition they should rest content, seeing the same was of their head and
Savior, and that the Lord does this for their good, as David professes, Psalm.
119. 71. And as the Apostle many ways shows, Heb. 12.

13. As for the comfort of his afflicted people it is said, That God will save
them, so to the terror of the proud and ungodly who afflicts them it is said,
that the Lords eyes in wrath is upon them, that he may bring them down: whereby
we see that as the Godly should refer their cause, and wrongs to the Lord, so
that assuredly he sees there injuries, and hears their cries, as he did
Israells in Egypt, And his peoples in the book of the Judges, and will
certainly revenge their cause, ( for vengance is his and he will repay*) and he
will bring down the haughtiest of them all, who oppress them, as he did
Pharaoh, Sisera, Synacherib, Haman, Herod, and others, and has brought down
since mighty Princes, noble houses, and the flourishing estates of many for
their pride and oppression.

14. Verse. 29. As the Lord was David's Lamp, and enlightened his darnesse; so is
he the author of our prosperity, to whom therefore with a thankful
acknowledgment, we should refer the same, and it is he also who lightneth the
darkness of our minds, by his Word and eye salve of his Spirit whereof he
speaks, Revel. 3. 18. And makes his Church also like Goshen wherein was
light only, when all others are like the Egyptian who were plagued with
darkness, or like the Sodomites who were stricken with blindness before their
destruction. Whereupon we collect what a great blessing to any Nation, or
people the light of Gods Word is, and a faithful Ministry.

15. Verse. 30, 34. and 35. etc. We see by the many endowments, which David
rehearses for fitting him for war and for Victory, that the Lord when he
calls any man for any work in his Church, or Commonwealth he furnishes him
with abilities fit for the work, as he did Bezaleel and Aholiab, for the work
of the Tabernacle, Sampson for delivering his people from the Philistims, the
artificers for building the Temple, and as our Savior furnished and fitted his
Apostles with the gift of tongues and miracles; so that they who want this
furniture and fitnes, with suitable gifts, cannot pretend to a calling from God
for the work.

16. Hence also we see the Lawfullnesse of some wars, whereof we have spoken
before, and of the art military; which serves to confute the error of the
Anabaptists. And in the example of David, that it is Lawful for the civil
Magistrate to punish rebellious and seditious offenders, this being the Lawful
use of the sword given by God to such, for correction of them who do evil, and
to whom they should be a terror, as the Apostle shows, Romans 13. 3, 4.

17. Verse. 36. David thankfully acknowledges that the Lords gentleness, or
kindness to him had made him great, as Job also professed, That God had given
him all that he had, whose example O that these who are great in honor, or
wealth, in promotion and advancement would follow, and that they would honor
God, and be comfortable instruments to his Church and people, as Joseph was,
and David here, and as his Son Solomon, Josiah, Hezekiah, Esther, Nehemiah
and Daniel, with others were, and not Enemies to Gods Church, to their own
destruction, as Pharaoh, and the wicked Kings of Israel were, especially Ahab
and Jesabell, and as Haman, Herod, and others.

18. V. 42. David tells us, That his Enemies in their straight, they cried to
the Lord for help, but he answered them not. Which shows that in their
distress the wicked can call upon God, but it is like the howling only of a
Dog, like Pharaohs desiring of Moses, to pray for him to be free from the
plague, but not from repentance for the cause, which is sin to be freed from;
nor yet from faith* which grace they have not, therefore their prayers being
only from self love, and Worldly fear, and being the prayer of unregenerate
persons habituated in sin, the Lord did not hear nor answer them, as it is
said Of such; that God hears not sinners.

19. Verse. 43. The wicked are by David, here compared to vile things, as dust,
mire and dung, whereas the Godly on the contrary, are compared to most precious
things, as the Lords treasure, his inheritance, and his jewell's, Mal. 3. 17.
Fruitful Vines, Kings and Priests, (Revel. 1. 6.) Sons to God, coheirs with
Christ, and the most excellent on the earth; (Psalm. 16. 2.) Whereby we see,
what ever be their earthly prerogatives, how vile the wicked are in Gods sight,
and in the Godlies, as Psalm. 15. 4. And that the Godly are only in high
esteem with God, and truly honorable, and therefore let them correspond to
these titles where with they are styled.

20. Verse. 44. By the Lords subduing of the Nations to him, and by making David
to be head over them; we may see here Christ's Kingdom clearly prefigured, to
whom the Lord has not only subdued all his Enemies, and given him Victory
over them, triumphing on the Cross, and leading captivity captive, but also by
the conversion of the Gentiles, he has made him head and Lord over all,
according to that promise, Psalm. 2. 8. I will give thee the heathen for an
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for a possession.

21. Verse. 51. After David's resolution of a constant thankfulness to God for
all his benefits, in the preceding verses; he calls himself here his King,
acknowledging the Lord hereby to be the Author of his promotion, ( for by him
Kings reign) and he calls all the benefits that that he had received from
God, his mercy which he had shown to him, excluding thereby merit; which two
things would God that Kings, and all other men in place, or power would
seriously acknowledge, and then as they have their power, and places from God,
they would employ the same for God, and walk humbly before him.

II. SAM. Chap. 23. from the 1. verse. to the end.
THe parts of his Chapter are two, the first is Prophetical from the 1. verse.
to the 8. The second is Historical. From the 8. verse. to the end. The subject
of the Prophetical part, is. 1. The prosperity of David's Kingdom, but
especially of the Kingdom of the true Mess^ah whereof his Kingdom was a type
and figure. 2. The adversity and punishment of the Enemies of his Kingdom, and
of the Kingdom of Christ, or his Church. Next, the subject of the Historical
part is a catalogue of 37. of David's most valiant men, who had assisted him in
fighting the Lords battles, and the valiant acts that some of them had
performed.

In the Prophetical part, we have. 1. The exordium, or inscription. 2. The
Prophecy it self, or narration. In the exordium, or inscription, we have. 1.
The nature of the Prophecy, towit, Testamentary, or the last Words of David,
and therefore full of dignity, weightinesse and Majesty, seeing it is proponed
in the last time of David's life and reign, in form of a Testament, at which
time Godly men laying aside Worldly affairs, or earthly thoughts, are
exercised in contemplation of Heavenly things, and their words are esteemed to
be of weight, and therefore attentively heard and hearkened unto, and which like
attention and reverence ought to be given to the words of this exord. for four
reasons. 1. In regard of the authority of the speaker, of them, King David. 2.
Of their dignity, being his last and Testamentary word. 3. In respect of the
worthiness of the subject, towit, the Prophecy of the temporal Kingdom of
Judah, and eternal of the Messiahs. And 4. from the imitation of the ancient
Patriarchs especially Jocob, Genes. 49. And Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. This for the
Exord. and nature of his Prophecy.

Next, for the Author of these words, the same is either Isntrumental, and
this is David, or Principal, and this is the Spirit of God, Verse. 2. And the
God of Israel, Verse. 3. As for David who is the isntrumental, or secundary
Author, he is described by four tittles. 1. He calls himself the son of
Jess, (which Sheba used in disdain) acknowledging thereby the mean condition
he was in at first, before the Lord raised him to a higher, and this title he
assumes for three reasons. 1. Thereby to testify his humility and to give an
example to others. 2. For verification of the prophesies made of the geneologie
of the Messiah, who was to come of that root and stock. And 3. that it might be
certain what Prophet was the Author of this prophecy. The second style which
he assumes, is from his dignity whereunto he was exalted from so low a degree,
to amplify the Lords goodness thereby, and his free love. The third title which
he assumes, is, the anointed of the God of Jacob, hereby signifying his
inauguration. 1. By Samuel. 2. By the tribe of Judah in Hebron, and last by
common consent of all Israel in Jerusalem. The last title which he assumes, Is
the sweet Psalmist or singer of Israel, in respect of the divine Psalms,
which he not only composed and wrote, as the penman of Gods spirit, but also
which he sung himself, and directed to be publicly sung by the musicians, who
were appointed for that use, in the tabernacle, and in the future Temple, which
songs are called sweet, not only in respect of the melodious and sweet harmony
of musical instruments and voices, which were used in the singing of them, but
also and specially in respect of the sweet and comfortable heavenly matter that
is contained in them, as also he calls himself the sweet singer of Isaell, to
show that all these Psalms and spiritual songs, as all other parts of
Scripture, or of man's ministry, ought to be directed and be subservient to the
good of Gods Church, which is his true Israel. All which Epithites of David
here, we see then may be reduced to these two, a King and a Prophet.

Thirdly, the principal Author by whom David is moved, to utter these words of
this prophecy, he says Is the spirit of God, the God of Israel, and the rock
of Israel, from which the ancient Fathers gathered against the Heretics of
their times, the Orthodox doctrine of the holy Trinity, one in substance, and
three distinct persons, the Father, noted by the name Elohim and God of
Israel. The son, by the rock of Israel, as Paull calls Christ, 1 Cor. 10.
4. And the Holy Ghost by the spirit of God. David therefore hereby declares,
that he has in this Action for his warrant, the motion and inspiration of the
blessed and Holy Trinity, God the Father, by his son, and the inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, speaking unto him himself, and speaking by him to others.

Fourthly, follows what he is moved to speak, which is to declare the
properties of a good King, and how prosperous his Kingdom shall be under him.
But especially not meaning his own temporal kingdom and continuance thereof,
as was promised to him; but the perpetuity of the kingdom of the Messiah to
come, which though his kingdom should decay, and his house come to an end, as
all temporal things have their own period, through the unworthiness and
provocation of his posterity, yet the kingdom of Christ, who was to come of
him, and is called his son, should never decay, but be permanent and
perpetual, because of that everlasting covenant made with him, ordered in all
things and sure, concerning his everlasting salvation, which is all his desire.

Now this everlasting kingdom of the Messiah, who is the supreme ruler over
all men, and who is not only just himself, being without spot of sin, but
also who justifies others, and who rules not only justly, like one that
fears God, but also who makes others to fear him. This everlasting kingdom
of his (I say) is compared here to two things. 1. To the light of the morning,
that succeeds after the darkness of the night, and drives it away, when the
Sun rises, and is without clouds, to obscure, and hinder the bright rays
and shining thereof. 2. To the tender grass springing out of the earth, after
the sharp and frosty winter; and which shines pleasantly after the sweet and
warm summers rain.

But as for the enemies of Christ, and his Church. He 1. compares them to
thorns thrust away, by the decree of rejection. After he has called them the
sons of Beliall, who would not endure to be under the yoke, as we see Psalm.
2. 4. And 2. he shows what shall be their finiall end, verse. 7. to wit,
burning by fire; first then they are called the sons of Beliall, which is as
much as the sons of the Devil, as our Savior called the incredulous and
obstinate Jews, who gloried that they had Abraham for their Father, and who
cannot suffer to be under the yoke of Gods obedience and Christ's, though the
same be easy and light, Matthew. 11. 29. but refuse not Satan's yoke of sin,
and to be slaves to him and to their own lusts, though he can give them no
better reward in the end, but hell fire here spoken of. Next, he compares them
to thorns, as they are also compared so, Cant. 2. 2. Not growing which may be
for some use as hedges, or the like, but plucked up, and thrust away, being not
only unprofitable but hurtful, so that they cannot be handled, or touched with
a hand, that is not sufficiently armed, against their hurtful disposition, and
therefore being both unprofitable, and noisome, they are fit only to be fuel
to the fire, and to burn therein.

As for the second part of this Chapter which is Historical, containing a
Catalogue only of the names, and some valiant Actions of David's chief
officers, and Captains in his Army, the same not needing a copious
explanation, therefore we remit the same to the reader. Only this is to be
marked, that Joab his name is here omitted, though he had done many valiant
deeds for David, and this is for his many vices, and treacherous murders of
Abner and Amasa, for which David gave charge to his son* Solomon, 1 King. 2.
6. That he should not let his hoary head go to the grave in peace. And as for
others their valor, and virtues are here recorded, not only for commemoration,
and remembrance, But likewise for example and imitation of their virtues, and
to show how great works, the Lord wrought by weak means. Only the temerity
of the three, is not to be commended altogether, nor followed, that hazarded
themselves so, for bringing to David, water out of the well of Bethlehem, which
was commendably therefore poured by David upon the ground, unto the Lord, as a
testimony of his thankfulness for their preservation, and that he should not
seem so much to be given to the satisfying of his carnal desire and longing,
as to drink that, for which these three had hazarded their blood and lives.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. DAvid now being nearest to death, like the swanne sings sweetest,
comforting himself with heavenly meditations, and expressions of his faith in
the Messiah, and obtaining salvation by him: and not grudging that he is to
leave an earthly Crown, and kingdom, being sure of a heavenly. The like
example we have of old Simeon, when he got the babe Christ Jesus in his arms:
and of Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. And which should be the practice of all
Christians, who draw near to death, to exercise themselves with holy and
heavenly meditations, having laid aside the world, and the thoughts thereof.

2. Verse. 1. David's first style which he assumes is, ( the son of Jess) to
testify his humility, and to acknowledge from how low a condition, the Lord had
raised him up, as he called Abraham out of Vr, to be the Father of the
Faithful, and of many Nations, Moses from keeping Jethro's sheep, to be a
Prince over his people Israel. The Judges from a low pedigree, to be
deliverers of his people from their oppressors. And David here who was but the
son of Jess, a private and obscure man, to be King of Israel. From whence
then let all men learn a lesson of like humility, seeing the same in so great
a King, and especially in him who is King of Kings Christ Jesus, who says,
learn of me for I am humble and meek.

3. He calls himself next, The anointed of the God of Jacob, acknowledging
thereby, that all his promotion, and advancement to be King, was from God, whom
he calls the God of Jacob, and from whence our Savior reasons for the
resurrection, showing thereby That God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living, who as they were living in their souls after death, so should they
live in their bodies at the resurrection. And therefore he is called the God,
not of the soul of Jacob, but of Jacob in the complex, as he does consist,
both of soul and body.

4. Also from the title of the sweet Psalmist of Israel. We observe, that our
skill in arts or sciences, and all the gifts, and endowments, that we have from
God, as the Talent concredited to us, should be employed for the good of the
Israel of God, which is his Church, unto the edification thereof.

5. Verse. 2. Where David says, that the spirit of the Lord spoke by him. We
see, as the Apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1. 21. That the Scripture, and
prophecy in old time, came not by the will of man, but the holy men of God,
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and therefore ought so to be
reverenced and obeyed, being not of humane, but divine authority.

6. Here also we see that what David spoke, he did not the same without a
warrant from God, who spoke by him, and (as verse. 3.) who spoke to him.
Teaching us thereby in like manner, that we should have a warrant from the Word
of God, now comprehended in Scripture both for doctrine, or what we should
believe, as also as a rule of our actions and conversation, how we should live,
and order the same a right.

7. David likewise as a Prophet says, that Gods Word was in his tongue, and so
should the same only be in the tongue, of all faithful and true preachers, and
not men's fancies, or the traditions of men.

8. Verse. 3. David who was a ruler over men himself; shows what are the two
parts of such a one, to wit, the execution of justice impartially, and to rule
in the fear of the Lord: having that rooted in their heart, and having the
same also ever before their eyes, in all their Actions, or decrees in judgment.
But how far many Magistrates, and Judges vary from this rule, is but too
common and to be deplored.

9. Verse. 4. By earthly things for our capacity. He teaches how comfortable,
and profitable, the government of such a one, is to Gods people, and especially
the government of Christ Jesus the true Messiah, is to his Church, who is that
sun of righteousness, who disperseth the darkness of sin, and ignorance,
and as a bright morning without obscuring clouds, sends forth his beams, and
rays of saving knowledge in the minds of his elect, and is also as the
pleasant, and tender grass, that springs out of the earth, by clear shining
after, rain to be green pasture (as David speaks, Ps. 23. 2.) to his own sheep.

10. Also as none can hinder the rising of the sun, or the brightness of a
clear morning, nor the springing of the grass out of the earth, in the due
season thereof: so none shall be able to hinder the kingdom of Christ, and
progress of the Gospel, but shall find that as is said, Psalm. 2. 4. That he
who sits in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and as our Savior said to Paul,
That it is hard for them to kick against the pricks.

11. Verse. 5. Where David says, after the setting down the prosperity of
Christ's kingdom, and continuance thereof for ever, (although my house be not
so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, of salvation,
which is all my desire.) This teaches us to be content, with whatsoever
dispensation it pleases the Lord, to make to be our lot in temporal things;
though we should be as poor as La^arus, so be that we be made pertakers of
that salvation wrought by Christ, and be within the Covenant of grace. Which
also with David should be all our desire, as he decleres likewise, Psalm. 4. 6.

12. Verse. 6. The wicked are compared to thorns, in respect of their present
disposition, and of their future estate, and condition, prickly and hurtful in
the one, and sad and dreadful in the other, as being appointed to be burnt for
ever. Which as it should be a terror to the greatest, to be of a wicked
disposition, and chiefly to be prosecuters of Christ's Church, which is compared
therefore to a Lilly amongst thorns, Cant. 2. 2. So it should be a comfort to
the Godly, who are prosecuted by them, that though their wrongs be not
redressed here on earth, yet they shall be hereafter, when these (who like
Cananites were thorns in their sides) shall be burnt in hell fire forever.

13. The wicked also are called thorns thrust away, that is, rejected. Whereby
we observe, that wickedness continued in without repentance, is an evident
token of reprobation: as on the contrary, piety, and true Godliness, is a sure
sign of election, and predestination, unto life eternal, and therefore we are
exhorted, (in relation to our selves) to make sure our election by well-doing,
and Ephesians. 2. 10. Are called Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has preordained, that we should walk in them, elected
to them, but not elected for them, and they being, via regni, but not causa
regnandi.

14. Verse. 8. And thereafter in this Catalogue of so many valiant men under
David. We see that it is a happy kingdom, wherein there is a good King as
David was, wise Counselors, and valiant soldiers. As also how by the
contrary (as in Rehoboam) a Nation or Kingdom becomes rent, and miserable.

15. We see likewise, how the Lord works great and admirable works, sometimes
by very weak and unlikely means. As we see chiefly in the book of the Judges,
and by a few fisher men, the conversion of the Nations, that all the glory may
be given to God, and his own finger may be seen in the work, as also by this
register of their names in holy Scripture, That the memory or remembrance of
the Godly shall be blessed, but the memory of the wicked shall rot.

16. Verse. 17. We see how tender David's conscience was, who would not drink of
the water of the well of Bethlehem, which his three valiant men brought unto
him, because he counted it their blood, in respect they had hazarded their
lives for the same. O then how far contrary is the consciences of those men,
seared with a hot iron, and past feeling, whose daily meat, and drink, is the
blood of men, especially the poor, whom they oppress, and whose faces they
grind, and chop their flesh as meat for the pot, as the Prophet speaks, and
what dreadful an account have those Canniball's, to make at the last day. And
especially how dreadful shall be their doom, and damnation, who live by
sacrilege, or such idol shepherds, who live on the blood of souls, as are
described, Isai. 56. and Ezekiel. 34.

II. SAM. Chap. 24. from the 1. Verse to the 10.
THe general argument of this Chapter, is the history of the three days
pestilence, wherewith God in his justice punished his people, for their own
sins, but specially for David's their King, in numbering the people, which may
be divided in these four particulars. 1. David's causing the numbering of the
people, to the 10. verse. 2. David's repentance for the same, in the 11. verse. 3.
The punishment thereof by pestilence, to the 16. verse. And 4. The removing of
the plague, from the 16. verse. to the end.

As for the first, we shall consider. 1. By whom David was moved to number the
people. 2. What he did being moved. 3. Joabs disswasion to David. And 4. Joabs
obedience at last to David's command which prevailed.

First then, Verse. 1. It is said, That the Lord moved David, being angry
against Israel for their sins, which doubtless had been great, although not
nominated, and for which he is said to be angry, per Anthropopatheiam, whereby
humane passions are attributed to God, which truly, and properly fall not in
his divine offense, but for our capacity, the Scripture speaks to us, in our
own language, and attributes to God man's affections. And because anger is the
motion of revenge, therefore by comparison, when God revenges, and executes
justice, and does those things, which men use to do in anger, he is said in
Scripture to be angry, and in wrath.

Next, it is said that the Lord moved David, and 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. It is said
that Satan moved David, and we shall also find that there were inward movers in
David himself, that moved him. First then, we see that both God, and Satan,
had a hand in the work: God by permission, and in a wise ordination of it to
good, and Satan by suggestion, and in a malicious intention for evil; God as a
judge, in a just punishment for sin, and Satan as an enemy, and an acto^r of
sin. God then neither works evil, nor by an evil way, but he works in
evil, derelinquendo and dirigendo, withdrawing his grace, and directing the
evil to his glory in the end. As we have shown before in the Lords commanding
of Shimei to curse David. Neither is it any excuse therefore to Satan, or
David, that God moved, nor is any blot in God that Satan moved, acting from
diverse principles, and for diverse ends. That also which inwardly moved David,
was. 1. Ambition, and pride to know thereby his grandeur, in the numerosity of
his subjects. 2. Confidence in the arm of flesh, and multitude of his people.
3. Curiosity, seeking to know that which at that time was unnecessary, as Joab
did show him.

Secondly, the thing that David did, being thus moved, is, the numbering of the
people, which for a Prince to do, or command to be done, in it self, or for a
good end, and upon an necessary occasion, is not unlawful: the act then
offends not, (as we see that Israel went oftimes under numbering, as Numb. 1.
17. By Moses himself) but it is the mis-action, and the doing thereof not out
of a Princely providence, but curiosity, vain confidence and pride, which makes
the action vicious and sinful.

The third thing is Joabs disswasion, seeing the King curious, and the fact
dangerous, and this he does, 1. By a plausible Exordium praying to God to
augment the number of his people a hundred fold, and that David may live to see
it. 2. He interrogates the cause wherein he obscurely, reprehends the Kings
oftentation and curiosity. 3. 1 Chronicles. 21. 3. He obviates the Kings instance,
if he should say, that it were to try the peoples universal, and general
subjection thereby. To which Joab answers, saying, are they not all my Lords
servants. And 4. he shows the danger of doing this in the same place of the
Chronicles, saying; Why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel?

The fourth thing is Joabs obedience at last, the Kings word prevailing, the
reasons whereof are these. 1. Joab was a wicked man, and though he had declared
that it would be a cause of trespass to Israel, and therefore unlawful, yet
he dispenses with sin, and chooses rather to obey man than God, as he had
done before in the matter of Vriah. 2. He was an ambition man, and a crafty
cortior, who feared to loose his place, and that if he did it not, another
would be employed to do it. Therefore he takes his journey. 1. Toward the
East, and passing Jordan, enters into the City of Aroer, situated on the River
Arnon, which enters in the mouth of Jordan, marching the Kingdom of Sihon,
sometime a part of the Land of the Amorreans, at the springs of which River
Arnon, stands this City Jasir, their he past Northward, and entered in Galaad,
at a place called Tachtim Hodshi, which is by interpretation a new Land,
whereof no mention is in Josua. But was after conquered by Saul, 1 Chronicles. 10.
From that he came to the City Dan, which is the Northmarch of Palestina,
situated upon Jordan, and from the North he entered in the Westmarches, toward
the Mediterranean, and came to Tire and Sidon, for albeit the ancient
inhabitants possessed the Cities, yet they were in the partage of Asher and
Nepthalim: and from the Westmarch, he entered into the South of Judah even to
Beersheba, which divided Judea, from Idumea in Arabia, and so compassed all the
marches of the holy Land, beginning at the East, toward the North, and from
thence to the West, and from thence to the South, and so after nine months,
and twenty days came back to Jerusalem, and gave up the whole number of the
people to David, extending to thirteen hundred thousand men. Which number
disagrees with that which is et down, 1 Chronicles. 21. 5. Where the number of the
men of Israel, extends to eleven hundred thousand, and of Judah only four
hundred threescore and ten thousand, so there is addition to the one, and
diminution of the other. But this seeming contradiction, or disgreement is thus
reconciled, that these 300000. which are omitted in Samuel, and added in the
Chronicles, are the twelve classes of David's guard that were appointed in their
several vices to attend him monthly, 24000. monthly, as we see, 1 Chronicles. 27.
Which joined together for the twelve months, makes, 288000. to which if 12000.
of the Princes and Captains of hundreds and thousands be added, whereof is
mention, Verse. 16. They make up the complete number of 1100000. of the men of
Israel, which are not set down in Samuel, because they were well enough known
to the King, and as for the number of them, of Judah being 30000. less in the
Chronicles. then in Samuel it is answered by Interpreters, that in the
Chronicles their number is set down, as they were after the plague of
Pestilence, and whereof 30000. by that plague were destroyed.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 1. BEcause after many Victories, and abundance after famine, Israel
waxed in solent, and luxuriously wanton, therefore as God had pulled down their
pride before by the sword, and famine, so now does he by the Pestilence.
Whereby we see, not only what varity of rods, God has to chastise with: but
also that renewing of sinning procures the renewing of punishment and
correction, as we see especially here, and in the book of Judges.

2. Israel sinned, and because Israel has done so, therefore David shall
sin, that Israel may be punished. The rulers sin then is a punishment to a
wicked people; and if God were not angry with a people, he would not give up
their rulers to such sins as whereby he is provoked to vengance, as people
therefore should beware to provoke God to anger by their sins, and abuse of
Gods benefits, so it is not without cause that they are charged to pray, and
make supplications for all, but especially for those, who are their rulers, and
in eminent authority over them, the private well being ever comprised in the
public.

3. As is shown to us, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Satan moved David to this sin of
numbering the people. Which so offended God and brought a plague upon them,
whereby we observe who is the chief tempter to all sin, and has been so in
all ages from the beginning, and therefore is called the tempter: as also to
what end, he tempts to sin, which is to kindle Gods wrath against man, and to
bring Gods plagues upon man here, and eternal destruction upon him hereafter,
and therefore he is called a murderer also from the beginning, and is an Enemy
both to God and man; fie then on foolish sinners, that are slaves to such a one.

4. He moves David to sin, an eminent person, yea, a man according to Gods
own heart. Which shows, that Satan dare adventure on the best and strongest,
as he did on our first parents in their estate of Innocence, and on Christ
himself, and therefore the best of men ought to watch, and pray that they be
not led by him into temptation, remembering the examples of David here and in
the matter of Vriah, and of Peter, notwithstanding of his forewarning by our
Savior. As also, that the higher any are in place in Church, or Commonwealth
they are in greatest danger to be tempted, because their fall is most
scandalous, and the occasion by their example of the fall of many, Majorum ergo
ruina, sit minorum cautela.

5. In David's sin of numbering the people through pride, curiosity, and
confidence in the arm of flesh. We see that the Godliest whosoever have their
own infirmities, which should keep them watchful and humble, and that there is
no perfection during this life, the fairest face having its own blemish, the
cleerest day its own clouds, and the Godliest on Earth, being like Jacobs
spotted sheep, and with the Apostle, Romans 7. 24. Having occasion to cry out, O
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death?

6. Verse. 3. David a Godly man, yet sins, Joab a wicked man, yet disswades
from sinning. Where we observe that no man is so lewd, or wicked, but that
sometimes he will dislike some evil, and it will be abominable to him, as the
Kings word was to Joab, 1 Chronicles. 21. 6. As on the contrary their is no man on
Earth so holy, but that sometimes he may sin grossly, but as we say, one
swallow makes not the spring, so by one only act, men are not to be Judged,
holy or wicked.

7. Joab gives good counsel to David, though he was a wicked man. Where may
observe, that there are many who can give good counsel to others, for the
avoiding of some sins, who in grosser trespasses have not grace to take good
counsel themselves, like the Pharisees who could espy the moat in their
neighbors eye, and offer to take it out, who would not spy, nor let the beam
be taken out of their own eye. Such was Joab who counted David's command to
number the people abominable, (though having no great show of evil) and
therefore dissuaded him therefore: who in the matter of Vriah, Abner and Amasa,
could not take good counsel to himself from his own heart. Neither let any
look, who gives the counsel, but what it is; and if good, not to reject it for
him, who gives the same, as our Savior taught the people concerning the
Pharisees.

8. Verse. 4. Notwithstanding of Joabs good counsel, we see that David persists
obstinately in his resolution, and will have the people numbered, that he might
know their number, a fault too ordinary in Princes, who would use arbitrary
government, and to have their will a Law, as the proverb is; Sic volo, sic
jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. Whereas their will should be submitted to
Gods, and their actions ruled by Law, by which they would have the actions of
their subjects, and inferiors to be ruled.

9. David not only sins in commanding the people to be numbered, but also in
an obstinate resolution notwithstanding of good counsel in the contrary, which
therefore brought a plague upon his people. Which shows not only how far,
and foulely the best sometimes may fall and fail: but likewise that for the
sins of a people, oftimes either the Lord takes away a good Magistrate from
them, or else withdrawes his grace from such, and leaves them to themselves to
commit such sins, as in the Justice of God, and for their offenses punishment
is inflicted upon them, as the three years samine was for Saul's trespass
against the Gibeonites, and David's here in numbering the people.

10. Notwithstanding Joabs resistance, unto David's command at first, yet for
worldly respects, and corrupt ends, against knowledge, and conscience he obeys
David's command at last, and prefers obedience to man to the obedience of God,
contrary to that worthy speech of Peter, Act. 5. 29. And which teaches us in
like manner, that we should in all things obey God rather than man, whereof our
Savior gives the reason, because he has power, both of soul and body, to cast
both into Hell fire, which no man has.

II. SAM. Chap. 24. from the 10. verse. to the end.
Follows now after David's sin. 1. David's repentance, wherein are three
things. 1. David's contrition. 2. His confession. And 3. his deprecation. In the
first it is said; That after he had numbered the people, which was after nine
months, and twenty days, David's heart smote him. Which is the same phrase
that is used, 1 Samuel 24. 5. Whereby is signified the awaking, and accusation of
his guilty conscience, and sense of his sin now, wherein he had laid so long
in a deep, and dead security without either sight, or sense of his own
guiltynesse before. Which smiteing is called, Psalm. 51. 17. The breaking and
contrition of the heart. Whereupon ensues the second part of his repentance,
which is a confession to God of his sin, expressed by two phrases. 1. That he had
sinned greatly. And 2. that he had done very foolishly, and last, is his
deprecation, That the Lord would take away the iniquity of his servant.

The second thing which we have in the text is, the message from God to David,
which ensued upon his repentance. From the 10. verse. to the 15. Wherein we
have. 1. The time. 2. The messenger that is sent to David. 3. The message it
self, or Option given to David. And 4. David's answer and election. First then
the time was, when David was up in the morning, the smiting of his conscience
raising him from his bed, which as he says, Psalm. 6. 6. He had been watering
with his tears in the night time before. 2. The messenger whom the Lord sends
to him is described from his name, Gad. 2. From his office, a Seer, and more
particularly from his relation to David, that he was his Seer, or one whom
familiarly David used to consult with in his doubts, or difficulties. The word
( Seer) being an ordinary style given to the Prophets of God, because of the
Lords revealing by visions, words, or dreams, of his will to them, and by them
to others. As we see, 1 Samuel 9. 9. 3. The message it self is an Option of any
of three plagues, whereby the Lord was to punish David's people for their own
sins, that had angered him against them: and for David's, in numbering of the
people. 4. David's answer and election, contains. 1. His perplexity, and strait
whereinto he was put. 2. His choice of the Pestilence. And 3. the reason of his
choice, from the greatness of Gods mercy.

Thirdly, follows from the 15. verse. to the 18. The execution of the plague,
and staying thereof, wherein we have. 1. From whom it is sent, towit, the Lord.
2. How long it continued. 3. How many dyed thereof, towit, 70000. men. 4. By
whom the execution was made, towit, by an Angel. 5. The Lords staying of the
destroying Angel. 1. When and where, towit, when he was stretching his hand
upon Jerusale^^ to destroy it. 2. How, by the direction of the Lord, saying. It
is enough, stay thine hand. 3. Upon what ground, towit, the Lords compassion,
and repenting him of the evil. And 4. Where this Angel was, towit, By the
threshing floor of Araunah. Now the Lord is said to repent of the evil,
(towit, of punishment, as is said, There is no evil in the City which the Lord
does not,) not properly, but per anthropopatheiam, when he does that in mercy
what men use to do, when they repent of any evil, that they have done, and
forbear the same.

Fourthly, follows for the ceasing of the plague, and after the former
direction of the staying thereof. David's prayer and humble supplication,
wherein we have. 1. The occasion thereof, towit, his seeing of the destroying
Angel, who being an invisible spirit, yet appeared in a visible shape at this
time to David, as the Angels did to Abraham, Lot, and others. 2. David's humble
confession of his sin, and that he had done wickedly. 3. His clearing of the
people of any guiltiness, towit, in this his fact and sinning, whom he calls
sheep for innocence, and relating to himself, who was as their shepherd and
ruler. And 4. his preferring their safety to his own, and his Fathers house,
and desiring that the Lord would transfer the plague, and punishment rather
on him, and it, than any ways to let it lie on them.

Whereupon the Lord who sent first a sad message to David, by the same
messenger Gad, gives him now a comfortable assurance of mercy, and deliverance
of his people from the plague of Pestilence, and in testimony of David's
thankfulness for the same, Gad by a warrant from God directs him to erect an
altar to the Lord, in that very place, where he saw the destroying Angel,
towit, In the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite. Which thing David
readily went about to perform, as the Lord had comm^nded (says the text)
although it was Gad, as the messenger who spoke unto him, and for this end went
up to the floor of Araunah, conferres with him, byes the floor of him, erects
the Altar, offers thereon burnt, and peace offerings, and so the plague was
stayed from Israel. Wherein we have to consider. 1. Who this Araunah was. 2.
Where was this place. 3. Why this Altar was erected. 4. Araunahs liberal
offer, and his pious prayer. 5. David's modest refuseall, and the cause thereof,
with his buying of the floor, and Oxen, and the price thereof. 6. David's
building of an Altar, and offering thereon. And 7. the happy success that
followed hereupon, towit, the staying of the plague of Pestilence.

1. As for Araunah he is called by Nation, and pedigree a Iebusite, or
Cananite, but now a Proselite, and of the Jewish religion, as may be seen by
his offer and prayer. 2. This floor was on mount Moriah, and therefore it is
said, that David went up to it. 3. This Altar was to be erected, that the
plague might stay from the people. 4. Araunah therefore for the service of God,
and good of his people, and love to the King, and especially, as a presage of
the vocation of the Gentiles, liberally offers not only his threshing floor
freely, but also his Oxen, and threshing instruments, and instruments of the
Oxen, as their yokes, and such like for wood, which liberality of his is
extolled highly, that he did this as a King to the King. Who notwithstanding
modestly refuses it upon this reason, that according to the Law a man must
offer to God of that which is his own, and therefore. 5. Buys it, and the Oxen
for 50. shekells of silver, whereupon. 6. David offers (having built the Altar)
burnt offerings, and peace offerings for expiation of Gods wrath, and
propitiation. And so 7. this was the success, The Lord was entreated for the
Land, and the plague ceased. Not that this is to be referred to these
sacrifices, as the cause, but by way of Metonymie; When the name of the cause
is transferred to the effect.

OBSERVATIONS.
1. V. 10. IT is said; That David's heart smote him after he had numbered the
people. Whereby we observe, the difference between the wicked and the Godly,
that albeit the Godly sin yet they lie not still impenitently in sin, and
security, as the other do, but by grace, and repentance, they rise again: and
their hearts smites them for the sin, which they have committed, as we may
see here in David, in Hezekiah, Peter, and others.

2. We see here likewise, that the committing of sin, is like John's eating
of that little book, Revel. 10. 10. Which was sweet in his mouth, but
thereafter bitter in his belly: or like those locusts, Revel. 9. 8. Who had
alluring hair as women, but had Lions teeth that bite, and Scorpions tails
which stinge: even so sin in the committing thereof is pleasant, but in the
end when the conscience is awaked, is painful, as Manassah, Mary Magdalen, and
David found both in the matter of Vriah, and this. Who therefore would eschew,
the sower of sin, both here and hereafter, let them eschew the poysonable
sweet thereof.

3. David's heart smites him, after the numbering of the people, which was after
nine months and more. Where we see, as it is Satan's policy, when he has moved
men to commit sin, so thereafter to lull them a sleep in security, even so
that the Godly when they have sinned, may lie a long time in this sinful
sleep, before they awake: as David did in the matter of Vriah, till the Lord by
Nathan awaked him, and as here he did in the numbering of the people, therefore
as our first care should be not to sin, so our next care and prayer to God,
should be that if we sin, he us suffer not to lie still in security, with
impiety joining impenitency.

4. In David's confession, saying he had sinned greatly, and done very
foolishly. We see that he neither excuses his sin, as our first parents did,
nor extenuates his sin, as Saul did in sparing Agag, and the cattle: nor
defends his sin, as Simeon and Levi did, but rather aggravates his sin,
that he had sinned greatly. This being the practice ever of them, who are truly
humbled, and this being the best, ^and only way to obtain pardon, as we see in
the example of the Publican, and parable of the returning Prodigal, and of
David in this place.

5. Whereas David says, that in sinning he had done very foolishly. We see
that it is not without cause, that sinners are called fools in Scripture,
though never so worldly wise, as the nich fool in the Gospel: and where it is
said, the fool has said in his heart there is no God, and that sin is
folly, as Tamar said to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 12. Whereas they only are truly wise,
who are Godly, the fear of God being the beginning of wisdom, and they only
make a wise choice of things, preferring pleasures for ever more, to sinful
perishing pleasures, and a heavenly kingdom to earthly profit* they also like
the wise steward, provide for time to come, as also foresee and prevent
dangers, like wise Abigall, takes also with warnings, as David did with
Jonathans. And as our Savior advises, agree with their adversary, while they
are on the way. Whereas the foolish sinner does none of these fortnamed.

6. In David's prayer for remission of his sin, he calls himself Gods
servant. Whereby we see, that although at some time, through frailty, or force
of temptation, a Godly man may fall into some provoking sin, beside those of
daily incursion, yet their desire, and ordinary c^^^se of life, is to serve
God, from which therefore, as from the greater part they are so denominated: as
the wicked are called sinners, though sometimes they have done some act, that
seems good and pious, as Joab here in his dissuading of David to number the
people.

7. Verse. 11. The Prophet Gad is called David's Seer. Where we observe not only
the necessity, and utility, of faithful pastors, who should be Seers, or
watchmen, as they are called, Ezekiel 33. 2. And give warning to Gods people, of
their danger and duty. But likewise whereas Gad in a particular manner, is
called David's Seer. We have in David a good, and Godly, example of imitation
for Magistrates and great men, to adjoyne to themselves, some worthy, and able
servant of God, and have them in their company, with whom they may communicate
their spiritual condition, and consult with them in the matters of God, and of
their salvation, which is that one thing most necessary, as our Savior spoke
unto Martha.

8. Verse. 12. Albeit David repented in manner aforesaid for his sin, yet he
must be corrected, not that we establish hereby, that doctrine of remission of
the fault, but not of the punishment, which Romanists use for their
satisfactions, and purgatory, but to show, that when God has pardoned the
sin, yet he inflicts the temporal correction, not as an evil of punishment,
but as a medicinal good, and preservative from sin in time coming, and not
as a judge punishing a malef^ctour, but as a wise and loving Father correcting
his Child, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 12. Or like a wise, and skillfull
Physician, giving a purge to his patient, and applying a corrasive to the
corruption. So that the Lords dealing herein, is not Penal but Paternall and
Medicinal.

9. Verse. 13. David's sin must be punished, with one of three ^ore plagues,
the Sword, the Famine, or the Pestilence. Whence we collect, that if for such a
fact, which in it self, was not sinful, (a Prince to cause to number his
people) so good a man as David was, so severely punished, being one according
to Gods own heart. What may wicked flagitious sinners, for manifest, and
scandalous sins expect? and if this was done to the green tree, what may
withered branches look for?

10. Verse. 14. David chooses rather to fall in the hand of God, by the
Pestilence, then fall into the hand of man, by the Sword, for with the Lord is
mercy, whereas with man is cruelty. And this is the reason which David gives of
his choice, ( for his mercies are great) says he, so that the Godly in the
midst of their sharpest corrections, they ever by faith apprehend mercy, and
that the Lord tempers their most bitter cup, with the sweetness of fatherly
love. Whereas the wicked drink of the wine, of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, as is said, Revel.
14. 10.

11. Verse. 5. It is said ( so the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel.) Where
we observe that the Pestilence, and such other plagues, or punishments, that
come on man for sin, are sent from God: and come not by chance or fortune (as
men speak) nor are to be attributed, only to the distemper, or corruption of
the air, or the like secundary causes, but are to be acknowledged, to come
from the sinne-chastising hand of God, and therefore that for the removing of
them, we should by true repentance, and humiliation, with David here, have our
recourse to him.

12. Of this plague, it is recorded that there died, 70000. men. Where we may
see, that wherein men offend, commonly they smart, David was proud of the
number of his subjects, and now they are greatly diminished, that he may see
cause of humiliation, in the matter of his glory. The like we may see in the
strength of Sampson, and the beautiful hair of Absalom.

13. Verse. 16. When the Angel stretched forth his hand upon Jerusalem to
destroy in, the Lord repented him of the evil, and commanded the Angel to
stay his hand, saying, It is enough. Where we may observe the Lords bowels, of
compassion toward his people, even when he is most sharply smiting, and his
preventing mercy, before that David make his subsequent supplication, for
staying of this plague.

14. Here likewise we see, that the Lord has his Angels ready to execute his
will, as his ministering spirits, either in justice or mercy, whose example of
promptitude, or obedience, we are taught by our Savior, in the Lords prayer to
follow, and to do his will on earth, as it is in heaven. Whose great power also
we may see, in so short a time, destroying so many thousands: being but one
Angel. As we see likewise in the destruction of the first borne, in one night
through all Egypt, and of one hundred, fourscore, and five thousand of
Assyrians, by one Angel also, in one night of Sinacheribs Army, 2 King. 19.
35. Whence we may collect, how mighty a guard the Godly have, as we see, Genesis
32. 2. and 2 King. 6. 7. And how much more mighty is the Almighty God, whose
ministering spirits they are, and do attend his will.

15. Where the Lord says to the Angel ( it is enough,) We see that as the
Lord mixes the cup, of his sharpest, and most bitter chastisements with mercy
and love: so likewise the Lord, like a wise and skillful Physician measures his
cup, and will not lay upon any, more then they can bear, but with the
correction in his own good time, he will give the issue and delivery: thus he
who sets Limits to the raging sea, did Limit the time how long, his people
should remain, in the bondage of Egypt, and thereafter in the captivity of
Babylon. As he did here, how long this destroying Angel should smite with his
sword of Pestilence. And O how little pleasure, does the Lord take in the death
of sinners, ere David could see the destroyer, the Lord had restrained him,
whose compassions, if they did not both withhold, and abridge his judgments,
what could we look for, but hell and destruction.

16. Verse. 17. In David's supplication to God, we see his admirable Love, to his
poor subjects, who would ingrosse the plague to himself, and his house, from
this people of Israel, and sues to interpose himself between them, and the
destroyer. Thus did our Savior Christ, and son of David, (who is that good,
and great shepherd of his sheep,) offer himself to death, which they had
deserved, yea more, did dye for them, and interposed himself between the
Fathers wrath and them, to deliver them there from, and from everlasting
destruction, and as David did for his people, still interced's for his Church
to the worlds end.

17. We see likewise though David saw the Angel, with the destroying sword
above Jerusalem, yet he supplicates not the Angel, but him who is the God of
Angels, and of heaven and ear^h, which shows us, how far the practice of
this holy King, and Prophet, does disagree from the practice, and doctrine of
Romanists, who pray to Saints and Angels, and so gives that religious worship
to the creature, which is only due to the Creator, as we have shown before:
and is so far from ahe example, which we have in the Word of God, Revel. 22.
9. and that Apostolical precept, Coll. 2. 18.

18. Verse. 18. It is said that Gad came to David, and said, Go rear an Altar
to the Lord. And verse. 19. It is said, that David went up to do so, as the Lord
had commanded, So that David reverenced, and obeyed the Word of the Prophet, as
the Word of God, which should serve as a good, and imitable example, to all
people of high, and low degree, to hear, reverence and obey that, which is
taught out of the Word of God, and warranted therefrom by his faithful
Ministers, not as the word of man, but as the Word of the Lord, this being the
cause of so small resort, to the hearing thereof, so little attention thereto,
or reverence and obedience to the same, and consequently of so great looseness
of life, and abounding in sin, that Gods Word which is preached, is not
accounted to be Gods Word, and that they that hear not the sam^ (as our
Sav^our speaks) hear not him.

19. This Alter must be reared up, in the threshing floor of Arannah the
Jebusite, which was (as we have shown) upon Mount Moriah, so that on that very
hill, where the Angel held the sword of Abraham, from killing his son Isaac,
who was a tipe of Christ: does God now with hold the sword of the Angel, from
killing his people, and upon this very ground after, did the temple also stand,
where the holy Altar should be, whereon the expiatory, and propitiatory,
sacrifices for Gods people, should be offered up in succeeding generations, not
without a mystery of that oblation of Christ Jesus (as is said) prefigured by
Isaac, and whose blessed body, was the true Temple, tiped by that of Solomon,
as Christ himself shows, Joh. 2. 19. And his oblation of himself, is that
expiatory, and propitiatory sacrifice, by which Gods wrath is appeased, and we
reconciled unto God his Father, neither was that also without a mystery, that
it was on the floor of a Jebusite, prefiguring thereby the calling of the
Gentiles.

20. Verse. 22. David having declared to Arannah, the cause of his coming up
unto him, for buying his threshing floor, to rear an Altar to the Lord, that
the plague might be stayed from the people, he meets David in so holy a motion,
and liberally offers the same freely in gift unto him, with his oxen, and
wooden uteusills for a fire, to the b^rnt offering. Where we see that a Godly
heart, will part with any thing that is needful, and may serve for the worship
of God, who is the giver of all good things, which we have here: and of all
good things which we hope, or look and long for hereafter. Which serves to
rebuke and condemn, the tenacious, and base avaricious disposition, of many in
this age, who can part with nothing, for the maintenance of Gods worship, or
promoting of religion, or any good work.

21. Verse. 23. Arannah's liberality, and princely munificence, is therefore
highly praised by the spirit of God, and registrate to all after ages, in the
holy Scripture, that all these things did Arannah, as a King gives to a King,
and that he said to David the Lord God accept thee. Whereupon we observe, that
what is done by a pious heart, to the honor and worship of God, shall never
want its own reward, and blessed remembrance, as was the breaking of that box
of precious ointment, by Mary Magdalen upon Christ's head, and as here is the
remembrance, and registrating both of Arannahs liberality, and power: whereas
on the contrary, the remembrance and name of the wicked shall rot, and either
be buried in oblivion, or else like the parcells of traitors, and malefactors
bodies that are executed, and fixed up in public places, remain to posterity,
as a badge of eternal infamy.

22. Verse. 24. Since it was for God, and to David, Arannah would give, but
seeing it was for God, and offering sacrifice, (which should be of his own
substance) David will not take. O laudable and pious contention, into which,
would God or in like, all contentions amongst Christians were resolved. David
therefore, who knew that it was, more blessed to give, than receive, therefore
would not receive from Arannah, what he offered in gift, but as Abraham dealt in
like manner, with the sons of Heth, (Genesis 23.) He would buy it of him, as he
did for 50. shekells of silver, and built there an Altar unto the Lord, and
offered thereon burnt offerings, and peace offerings, and so the Lord was
entreated for the Land, and the plague ceased. To which God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, invisible and indivisible, be all honor, praise and glory, for
ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

