Mr. Grimstone, HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT: On Wednesday the 19th of January,
Upon the Preferring of the Essex Petition, Anno Domino, 1642.

With a desire to set the Country in readiness of Arms for defense against
foreign enemies.

Wherein is set forth the miserable decay of Trading in Cloth.

For the removing of Popish Lords from Parliament; with the searching out of
Priests and Jesuits. Also for the speedy bringing the Bishops to a Trial.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.

Mr. Grimstone His Speech in Parliament on Wednesday the 19. of January, upon
the preferring of the Essex Petition, Anno 1642.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I Have received a Petition from the Knights and Gentry of his Majesty's County
of Essex, and a Petition from the whole Borough of Colchester in the same
County, tending both to one effect, the scope and subject thereof consists of
these heads:

I. First, the exceeding great decay of their Trade of Clothing especially,
and also the trading of manifacture in that County, occasioned by the present
distractions and distempers in the State.

II. Secondly, the putting of that County and the whole Kingdom in a fitting
posture of war for the desence of the same, for prevention of any plot or
practice in agitation either of foreign force, or domesticke stratagem by the
pub^icke and private enemies thereof.

III. The removing of Popish Lords and Bishops from the House of Peers.

IV. The searching out and apprehension of Priests and Jesuits, which lie
secretly lurking and practicing mischief in diverse places of this Kingdom.

V. Lastly, the bringing to trial of those Bishops, and others of their
adherents, delinquents in this Sat, and to their deserved punishment.

Mr. Speaker, under favor of this honorable House, I desire to speak a word
or two of these Petitions, the presenting whereof to this House is committed to
my trust and care, and of these particulars of the same, which I have now
recited.

I. First, concerning the decay of Trade in that County, of Clothing: It is
too manifest, that by the same, many households and families are brought to
poverty and utter decay. The greatest part of that County toward Colchester,
and the part thereof adjacent to the Sea, having formerly had the chiefest
means of their livelihood by that Trade, many Websters which have in times
past (before the many taxations and oppressions laid upon that Commodity of
Cloth, Says and Bays, by diverse ill instruments of State, prying into the
Art, and benefit that came thereby to this Kingdom, raising the Customs
thereof, to that excess and height, that nothing could be gained by the same)
employed many poor people, whereby their charges and families were maintained,
now deal little or nothing in the same, but betake themselves to other ways of
livelihood, some turning In-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, some Farmers, Grasiers,
and the like, whereby rents of Farms are increased by the multitude of
Tenants, that has almost beggered the most part of that County. And rhose
poor men, Artificers, as Wea^ers, Combers, and the like, appertaining to the
Trade of Cloathworking, are brought (many of them) to beg their bread, and the
rest live upon the Parishes charge, wherein they have had their habitations.

II. Secondly, concerning the removing of Bishops and Popish Lords from the
House of Peers, we have found it by woeful experience more then necessary,
they having been, both publicly and privately, the only opposers and
hinderers of our proceedings in the great affairs we had in hand, concerning
nearly the peace and welfare both of Church and State, I need not mention their
practices to effect their endeavors, they are too too manifest and apparent to
all men.

III. Thirdly, for searching and apprehending or Priests and Jesuits, which
have been the chief disturbers of our peace, this Honorable House has
already taken order for the same, to which I can say no more.

IV. Fourthly, the bringing to trial of those Bishops accused, and all other
delinquents, are the chiefest endeavors of this House, as far as other the
great affairs of State will give leave.

V. Fifthly and lastly, the setting of this Kingdom into a good posture of
War, is of absolute necessity for the defense and security thereof,
especially that County of Essex, and other Maritane Counties of ths Kingdom
perceiving the malignities of Foreign States, are always watching an
opportunity to iniure, and to work mischief, if it were possible, to the
utter confusion, not only of this, but the other his Majesty's Kingdoms; To
which purpose we have daily intelligence of their practices and plots with
disaffected persons, and members of this state, favoring, and taking part with
any whatsoeever, either Foreigne or domestique, to bring their own intentions
and malicious endeavors to perfection, although it be to the ruin of their
King and Country.

And thus Sir, of that which I had to say concerning these Petitions, which I
humbly leave to the consideration of this House, and to give such answer
thereunto, as to the wisdom of the same shall seem requisite.

FINIS.

