THE GROUNDS OF MILITARY DISCIPLINE*
Or, Certain brief Rules for the Exercising of a Company or Squadron.
Observed by all.
IN March, in Motion, troop or stand,
Observe both Leader and right hand,
With silence note in what degree
You in the Body, placed be:
That so you may without more trouble
Know where to stand, and when to double.
Distance.
True distance keep in files, in ranks
Open close to the front, rear, flanks,
Backward, forward, to the right, left, or either,
Backward and forward both together.
To the right, left, outward or in,
According to directions given.
To order, close, open, double,
Distance, distance, double, double:
For this alone prevents distraction*
And gives luster to the action.
Facings.
Face to the right, or to the left, both ways to the rear,
Inward, outward, and as you were:
To the front, rear, flanks, and peradventure
To every Angle, and to the Center.
Doublings
To bring more hands in the front to fight,
Double Ranks unto the right,
Or left, or both, if need require,
Direct divisionall or Entire:
By doubling files accordingly,
Your flanks will strengthened be thereby.
Half files and bringers up likewise
To the front may double, none denies*
Nor would it very strange appear
For th'front half files or double the rear:
The one half Ranks to double the other,
Thereby to strengthen one the other.
Countermarches.
But lest I should seem troublesome
To Countermarch, next I come.
Which though they many seem to be,
Are all included in these three:
Maintaining, gaining, loosing ground,
And several ways to each is found;
By which their proper motions guided,
In files, in ranks, in both divided.
Wheeling.
Wheel your battle e're you fight,
For better advantage to the right,
Or left, or round about
To either Angle, or where you doubt,
Your Enemy will first oppose you,
And therefore unto their Foot close you.
Divisionall wheeling I have seen
In sundry places practiced been,
To alter either form or figure,
By wheeling several ways together.
And had I time to stand upon it,
I Would wheel my wings into the front.
By wheeling flanks into the rear,
They Will soon reduce them as they were.
Besides it seems a pretty thing
To wheel, front, and rear to either wing:
Wheel both wings to thereare and front;
Face to the rear, and having don't,
Close your Devisions; even your Ranks,
Wheel* front and rear into both flanks:
And thus much know, cause, note I Will smother,
The one wheeling does reduce the other.
Conversion and Inversion.
One thing more and I have done,
Let files rank by Conversion:
To th'Right, to th'Left, to both, and then
Ranks by Conversion fill again:
Troop for the Colors, march, prepare for fight,
Behave your selves like men, and so goodnight.
The sum of all that has been spoken may be comprised thus.

Open, close, face, double, countermarch, wheel, charge, retire: Invert,
Convert, Reduce, Trope, March, Make ready, Fire.

FINIS.

