CHRIST TEMPTED: THE DEVIL CONQUERED. OR, A short and plain EXPOSITION on a
part of the fourth Chapter St. MATTHEW'S Gospel. TOGETHER With two Sermons
Preached before the University at Oxford, some years since.

By JOHN GUMBLEDEN, B. D. and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the EARL of
Leicester.

Jam. 5.7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you.

1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith.

Ideo tentatur Christus, ne vincatur a Tentatore Christianus. August. enarratio
in Psalm. 90. Concio Secunda. C.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE his singular good LORD and PATRON ROBERT EARL of
Leicester, VISCOUNT LISLE, LORD SIDNEY of Pensehurst, etc. Grace and Peace from
the God of Peace.
My Noble LORD,
THat which Solomon says, Eccles. 12.12. Of making many books there is no end;
I suppose does nothing at all concern me; for I have not made many books; and
he that begins late, may soon end; especially being too too far remote from
those useful helps of voluminous Writers, many books; yet this have I made, and
humbly present unto your Lordship, is a Testimonial of my thankfulness, for
your Lordship's manifold and Noble favors exhibited unto me. Now such as my
sacred Profession is, such also is the Matter and Subject of this I present,
Theological. An Exposition it is (such as it is) of what happened in the
Wilderness, and other Places, between our Savior and Satan; Preached at first
for the instruction of my Parochial Cure; but since, as touching the more
difficult points, somewhat enlarged for public view. Many will see it; but my
most humble suit is, that none may own it but your Lordship. The Author
acknowledges, that, under God, be lives by your Lordship's Patronage; may
this Book also, in another sense, live so too. I am,

My Noble LORD, Your Honors most obliged Servant and Chaplain, JOHN GUMBLEDEN.


Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed and sold by Simon Miller,
at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Large Folio.

LUther 's Colloquium Mensal.

Small Folio.

THe Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany,
and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy differences are paralleled in
many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions and transactions of Church and State, with
Political observations and reflections upon the same: By David Hume of
Godscroft.

The History of this Iron Age.

Doctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament.

In Quarto large.

BArklay his Argenis Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight.

Quarto small.

THe Harmonious Confessions of Faith of all the Christian Reformed Churches,
which truly profess the doctrine of the Gospel, practiced in all the chief
Kingdoms and Provinces of Europe; wherein all that seemingly contradict are
plainly reconciled: Now published by Authority. Intended chiefly to confirm the
strong, and instruct the weak, in whatever is necessary to Salvation, in 4.

Abraham's faith; or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true faith of God's Elect: By J. Nicolson Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Strode.

Aynsworth on the Canticles. Paul Bayne, his Diocesans Trial.

The supreme power of Christian States and Magistracy, vindicated from the
insolent pretenses of Guilielmus Apollonius: By E. Grall.

A Treatise of Civil Policy; being a clear decision of 43. Queries, concerning
prerogative right and priveledge in reference to the supreme Prince and the
people: By Samuel Rutherford, professor of Divinity of S. Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the birth, increase, decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr. Pinchin his meritorious price of man's redemption cleared.

Astrology, Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Octavo.

THe Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000. seeming contradictions are
fully and plainly reconciled.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs, and Ceremonies.

Ed. Waterhouse Esquire his discourse of piety and charity.

A view and defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful in
these times.

Mr. Peter du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the delusions of the Priests and Jesuits, who are now very busy
amongst us.

Herbet's Devotions; or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
Prayers, useful upon all occasions.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiments of the Hebrew Tongce.

A Book of scheams, or figures of Heaven, ready set for every four minutes of
time, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the reign of William the
Conqueror, to the death of the late King.

Lingua; or the combat of the Tongue and the five Senses for superiority: A
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God or not.

The Poor Man's Physician and Chyrurgeon.

Duodecimo.

Doctor Smith's practice of Physic.

The Grammar War.

Posselius Apothegms.

Fasciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The Christian Soldier, his combat with the three arch enemies of mankind, the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

Drexelius School of patience.

In 24.

THe New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

Plays.

THe Ball.

Chawbut.

Martyred Soldier.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe Subject of this following Exposition (as you see) is the Devils tempting,
and our Saviors conquering. Now, in this (...), or, single conflict, neither
the one, nor the other, had each his second: no, not while the Combat
continued: but, our Savior had the Angels Mar. 1.13.
to minister unto him, when the duel was ended.

Again, when the Devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a
season; Luke 4.13.
And but for a season; for though at this time he were sent away with no better
farewell then this, Get thee hence Satan Mat. 4.10.
; yet, he soon returned, and afterward by his wicked Instruments, as subtly
as before by himself openly, he sets on him again; began another battle
against him another way; especially some few days before his death; mustring
up from time to time, such volunteers, Omne peccatum est voluntarium.
such as he found most inclinable amongst the malicious and incredulous Jews,
to engage with him in this quarrel against our Savior: to the end, that by
his united forces, he might (if possible) at last prevail, who at first was
too weak to do it single and by himself. And not strong enough neither to do
it to purpose jointly by them; not any ways able to conquer our Savior; not,
though for a time, to kill Mat. 26.4.
him, the chief Priests, the Scribes, the Elders of the people, with Caiaphas,
prevailed. Judas betraying him, false witness accusing him; Pontius Pilate
condemning him, the soldiers crucifying him; yet, all together too weak, to
subdue, and conquer him, who rose again the third day from the dead; and the
Devil afterward, never in his own person assaulted him any more; who, at
first, after he had tempted him, departed from him, for a season; but, our
Savior will never depart from his Church, and Chosen; not, while they are
Militant here on earth: Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the Mat.
28.20.
world; and, there is no cause to fear his departing from us, when we are
triumphant in Heaven: where neither rust, nor moth does corrupt, Mat. 6.20.
and where thieves do not break through, and steal: nor, Satan break through,
to tempt, and destroy. But, I will not say too much by way of Preface, least
the Gate become wider then the City: the Introduction, larger then the
Exposition. In brief here, I say but this: or, rather the Apostle says it, 2 Timothy 2.3. Be thou careful, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, to fight the
good fight of 1 Timothy 6.12.
faith, against Satan; and then, in, and, by the power of thy victorious
Savior, thou shall obtain the victory over Satan; which is the daily prayer of
him, for thee, who faithfully believes, by the same power, to be made partaker
with thee, of the same victory. Amen.

Thine, to accompany thee in the Way to Heaven. JOHN GUMBLEDEN.

CHRIST TEMPTED; the Devil conquered. OR, A Short and plain Exposition on a
part of the fourth Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel.
In the first Chapter of this Gospel, the Evangelist speaks chiefly of the
Genealogy, and Birth of Christ. In the second, of the swise men that came from
the East to Jerusalem, to worship him; and of his speedy flight by night into
Egypt, for fear of Herod, after they had worshipped him. In the third, of the
preaching and Office of John the Baptist the forerunner of Christ, who baptized
him in Jordan, being then about the age of thirty years, Luke 3.21, 23.

But, in this fourth Chapter (a part whereof we have now before us) the
Evangelist from the first to the twelfth verse begins to treat of that which
immediately followed afterward; after our Savior was but then newly baptized
of John: this.

Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the
devil, v. 1. and when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered, v. 2. and this we may properly call the preparation or
introduction to the whole following narration, both touching the single combat
between Satan tempting, and our Savior conquering. The whole then being thus
divided in general, into an Introduction, v. 1, 2. and a narration, in the
nine following verses, comprehending therein the happy issue of all on our
Saviors part, in respect of his conquest; and the Angels ministering unto him,
to congratulate his victory; we will examine the words in order, beginning verse
1. where there is mention both of the Spirit's work, who led up Jesus into the
wilderness: and also of the Devils work, who afterward tempted Jesus in the
wilderness. See! different Agents, and as different Actions: yet, all relating
to one and the same Subject; even to Jesus led up of the good Spirit into the
wilderness; and to the same Jesus, to be tempted of the evil spirit, in the
wilderness.

But perhaps, at the first hearing, this may seem strange unto you, that the
Savior of the world should be tempted by the destroyer of the world; yet, if
we rightly consider the first promise made by God, to man, of a Redeemer, to
save man, strange it is not; and, the promise in sense, is this: The Seed of
the woman shall bruise the Serpents a head; giving power, notwithstanding, even
by the samo promise, to the same serpent, to bruise the heel of the woman's
seed; But, who properly was the woman's seed? Surely, the Son of God, that
promised seed; who, in the fullness of time, was made man, of Genesis 3.15.
Gal. 4.4.
woman, by the powerful overshadowing of the holy Luke 1.35.
ghost, according to his Fathers purpose and intention when he first promised
him, under the name of the seed of the woman: and, by the Serpent, who doubts
but that the Devil is meant? who at that time, used the serpent, both as his
Active, and Passive Instrument, to beguile the woman, there being none of the
beasts of the field found so fit, as the serpent was, to express to the life,
the crafty subtilties of Genesis 3.1.
Satan; that old Reu. 12.9.
serpent, who is still suffered to Tempt, but not suffered to overcome.
Suffered, by many, both outward, and inward Trials, and Temptations, to bruise
the heel of the woman's seed, of Christ, in his members; which is still
acknowledged to be a real tempting of Christ, even by Christ himself. Saul,
Saul why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. Satan, Satan why temptest thou me? but,
denied it is, to be any Conquering, on Satan's part, either of Christ, or his
members (the faithful) the woman's seed also, by any of those temptations: God
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted, above that you are 1 Cor.
10.13
able; that is, not so far to be tempted by Satan, as to be overcome by Satan.
So that it is no new thing, to hear of the Devils malice, either against
Christ, or, against Christians: or, of the 1 Pet. 5.8.
lion; and that Lion of the tribe of Juda. Revel. 5.5. of the battle between
Michael, and the Rev. 12.7.
Dragon: Or, of the wily, and subtle practices of the Devil, that Rev 9.11.
Apollyon, that destroyer of the world, against the Son of God, made man, that
Savior, and Redeemer of the world: no new thing at all; only, to be
malicious, proper it is to Satan: but, to be victorius, both for himself, and
us, most proper it is to our Savior; for God, who said to the serpent, I will
put enmity between thee, and the woman, and between thy seed, and her Genesis 3.15.
seed, never said, that the serpent, the Devil, should bruise the head, and,
finally prevail against the woman's seed: never said it; will never suffer it;
and, if we had no other proof from the holy Text, to confirm us in the full
assurance thereof; yet this Combat here between Christ, and the Devil, partly,
in the wilderness, v. 4. partly, in the holy City, on the pinnacle of the
Temple, v. 7. and partly, on an exceeding high mountain, v. 10. (our Savior in
each place prevailing against Satan) is abundantly sufficient, to strengthen
our says, and confidence in this sacred truth; but, as yet, we are no farther
then the Introduction, the Gate, and entrance into both; both, to the Combat,
and the Victory. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil v. 1. In which words, the Circumstances considerable are
four; and that, either concerning

The Person, that was Tempted: 'twas Jesus; or,

The Person, of whom he was tempted: 'twas the Devil; or,

The place, where he was tempted: 'twas in the wilderness.

Led up thither, to that end, of the Spirit. Or,

The time, when he was tempted: Then, these are the circumstances, in words,
not much; but, in matter, much. We go on in order: And

First, The Person, that was tempted, was Jesus; by Interpretation, a Matthew.
1.21.
Savior; not, a typical, but a real: not a Joshua, the son of Nun, to lead the
people into the land of Canaan, and there, by lot, divide their earthly
possessions among them; but, a Jesus, the son of God, able to conduct his
people, his Flock, his Church (whom he saves from their sins) safely, through
all the boisterous storms, and tempests, and temptations, raised against them,
by those three grand Enemies of mankind, the World, the Flesh, the Devil on
earth, to that heavenly Canaan, to the haven of eternal rest, to the full
possession of everlasting glory, in the Kingdom of Heaven; this is the work of
Jesus; this, at all times, to save his John 10.27, 28.
people: yet, at this time, such was the condition of Jesus, that was tempted.
Who is Immanuel, God with Esaias 7.14. Matthew. 1.2, 3.
us. God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. in whom the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily. Col. 2.9.
He, that but a little before was baptized by John in Jordan, Matthew. 3.16. who
knowing the Worthiness and Dignity of the Person, judged himself altogether
unworthy to do it, until, by his Masters command, suffer it to be so now, v.
15. the servant condescended, and immediately became obedient to that command.
He, to whom the Heavens were opened; He, on whom the Spirit of God, the Holy
Ghost, descended like a Dove, after he was baptized, to Initiate and Consecrate
him for the effectual execution of his Prophetical office: He, who by his
Fathers voice from Heaven, was publicly declared at Jordan to be his beloved
Son in whom he was well pleased, v. 17. which the Devil afterward so much
excepted against, v. 3, 6. Lo! it was this Jesus that was tempted. Who, though he
were a Savior, the Son of God, the son of man, (...), God and man, and
that in one person; though at the time of his Baptism, and afterward, so
highly honored, that even the Heavens were opened unto him, Mat. 3.16. then a
present figure of his future glorious Ascension into Heaven, foretold by Psalm:
24.7, 9. Augustine. and Titleman. in locum.
David, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors,
and the King of glory shall come in. Though the Spirit of God descended and
remained on him, to the end that by that Sign John might know him, and teach
others also to know him, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the World; John 1.29, 32, 34, 36.
Nay, though the Father had acknowledged him for his own only natural Son,
God of God: yet none of all these high and incomparable Prerogatives could any
ways exempt him at this time from being tempted; and that, for us tempted. Now
the reason why for us at any time he suffered himself to be tempted, the
Apostle renders, Heb. 2.18. this, even to show, that having suffered being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are Hand ignara mali, miseris
succurrere disco.
tempted. And again, We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet
without sin: knowing that we, who are frail and sinful men, want his succor
in every temptation; not able of our selves without his strength to stand, even
against the least blast of any temptation. But our comfort is, that we have
such an High Priest, who touched with the feeling of our infirmities, was
tempted, that we tempted, might not be overcome.

2. This Jesus was tempted of the Devil. And now chiefly as touching our
Savior, who at this time, clothed with humane flesh, became a public
Person, did that enmity which God threatened to put between the serpent and the
woman's seed, Genesis 3.15.
begins to break forth, and operate effectually. Too too much familiarity had
there been before, while man stood in a slippery place, between the woman and
the serpent: the one (as it were by way of Dialogue) mutually entertaining
conference with the other. The serpent said unto the woman; lo! he begins the
Discourse, Genesis 3.1, 4. and the woman said unto the serpent, v. 2. she
continues it. Not wise enough either to understand the subtilty of Satan, or to
prevent the sequel of his temptation: which proved ominous to the woman's seed;
for, after the woman (by the serpents, by the Devils motion) had tasted the
forbidden fruit; and the man obeyed the voice of his wife, Genesis 3.6.
immediately (as a punishment of that sin) was this familiarity turned into
enmity; and from thenceforth was the sharpest and keenest edge of this
irreconcilable enmity, turned (on the Devils part) with all violence, against
Christ and his Church; against his Church even from the fall of man, by a long,
long series of temptations, to the worlds end. Against Christ himself (his
Church in the mean time being never freed from the sting of that enmity) turned
it was from the time of his Birth (that manifest proof of his Incarnation) to
the very hour of his death. For the Devil (from whom our Saviors miraculous
conception by the Holy Ghost, in that his mother, the Virgin Mary was espoused
unto Matthew. 1.18.
Joseph, was purposely concealed, Ignat. citant. Haymo. Homil. in vigilia
Nativit. Domint.
lest he should attempt to destroy the blessed Infant in the womb) knowing,
that he was born at Bethleem of Judea, and called by the name of the King of
the Jews, (which no doubt he understood well enough by the Discourse that
passed between the chief Priests, the Scribes of the people, the wise men that
came from the East to Jerusalem, on the one part. and Herod the King, on the
other part, touching this matter Math. 2 1, 2 4, 5, 7.
.) Soon after his Birth, mindful of that enmity that was between them,
covertly sought the young child's life, under the persecution and bloody
massacre of Herod: Matthew. 2.13.
appearing at first in form of a serpent, Genesis 3.1. but then in the form of a
Tyrant, whose cruelty Joseph wisely declined by flying into Egypt with the
young child, Matthew. 2.14.22.
until the death of Herod. And by his turning aside into the parts of Galilee,
after his return thence, when Archelaus, not much inferior to his Father in
cruelty, Joseph. Antiquit. Judaic. lib. 17. c. 11, 15.
reigned in Judaea, in the room of Herod; and for this cause also, not in vain
neither, was Mary espoused to Joseph, in that, by virtue of this espousal, he
(and none but he) was appointed of God, Mat. 2.13.
by his Angel, to be an Assistant, together with Mary, to preserve (during his
minority) the life of her Son, her firstborn Son, that being yet but young and
tender, he might not fall into the merciless hands either of the Devil or
Herod: And hitherto our Savior (a Minor yet) more capable of being killed then
of being tempted, escaping the on^; was not as yet assaulted with the other;
all things being calm and quiet, for the space of twenty three years at the
least, Bellarm. Chronolog. pars prior, p. 35.
even from the time of his return out of Egypt, until he was thirty years of
age, Luke 3.23. Baptized of John, and set apart for the Office of that only
Mediator between God and 1 Timothy 2.5.
Man: But then the Scene was changed, and that old enmity (for a time as it
were buried in silence) breaking forth again, he was tempted of the Devil, That
Calumniator, as his name imports; Graeci (...) appellant, nos criminatorem
vocamus: quod crimina, in quae ipse illicit, ad Deum deferat, Lact. Institu.
divin. lib. 2. cap. 9.
that Accuser of men to God, even of those sins which he himself first by his
temptations has allured man to commit against God; that (if possible) he might
always keep that enmity on foot, both in Earth and Heaven: But we are speaking
of this Accuser's tempting our Savior; whom notwithstanding he could not
justly accuse, no not of the least evil.

And here by the way (that we may leave nothing material unexamined) we may
fitly distinguish of this word (to tempt) which in holy Scripture is capable of
a double sense; and that either good, which belongs to God; or bad which
belongs to Satan Alia est tentatio deceptionis, alia probationis. Secundum
illam tentat diabolus, secundum hanc tentat Deus. August, Epistol. 146. A. 23.
; as it belongs to God, it signifies by some high and great experiment, to try
and prove us; to examine our faith, and love, and filial obedience toward him;
as plain it is in the case of Abraham, when God tempted, Genesis 22.1. that is,
proved and examined his faith, and obedience; whether at his command (though
unpleasing to flesh and blood) he would offer up his son Isaac, his only son,
for a burnt-offering, or not; thus God tempted (proved) Abraham; and there was
no evil in it: but when (to tempt) becomes the Devils work, as now here it
was, in respect of our Savior, and oftentimes is in respect of us, then it
signifies craftily to allure unto sin, with a purpose to deceive, and devour
the Party tempted, and enticed unto sin; and in this sense, was our Savior
tempted of the Devil: tempted, enticed he was to sin against his father;
although (as the event of the three distinct following temptations will
manifest) in vain tempted he was ( who knew no 1 Pet. 2.22.
sin,) to sin against his Father; in the mean time, hear what St. James Jam.
1.13.14.15.16.
says, in vindication of God, in this case, but, in no wise acquitting Satan,
who by tempting, and enticing, always cooperates with man in the sin of man.
Thus, let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for, God cannot
be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man: not unto sin; No, but every
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and is enticed; then,
when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin, when it is finished,
brings forth death. Do not err, my beloved brethren; do not err in charging
God with your sin, which is wholly, chargeable on your selves, on your own
lusts; and on the Cherisher and Fomenter of those lusts, Satan.

3. The Place, where our Savior was Tempted of the Devil, was the Wilderness
See! John the Baptist, who was sent before, to prepare the way of the Mat. 3.13.
Lord, came Preaching in the wilderness; but, the Devil came tempting in the
wilderness. Different Persons, different Actions. Idem, qua idem, semper facit
idem: it being as natural to the Devil to curse and tempt; as to the Baptist to
bless and preach. Lo! here is bitter water, and sweet: but not out of one and
the same fountain; though (probably) both in one and the same place; both, in
one and the same wilderness; there sweetness flows from John while he preached;
there bitterness flows from Satan while he tempted; John (that they might be
saved) earnestly required faith and Mat. 3.8.
repentance, of the Jews; but, the Devil, to satisfy his own curiosity,
saucily required micracles of Jesus; and that, in the wilderness, v. 3. a
solitary place and desolate; where he was with the wild beasts, Mark 1.13.
where none were present at that time, but, our Savior himself, single, and the
Devil: as, in another case, none were present in the field, Genesis 4.8. when Abel
was slain, but he himself and Cain, who was of that wicked Joh. 3.12.
one Abel, and Cain, alnoe in the field: our Savior, and the Devil, alone in
the wilderness: in the wilderness of Mat. 3.1.
Judea; there, John began to preach; there, the Devil began to tempt. God
appointing one, and the same place for both; both, for the scean of his Son's
Triumph, and also for the ciruit of his forerunners Ministry; although, some
doubt, whether it were the same wilderness, or not.

But, though some doubt there may be of that, yet, of this (that our Saviors
tempting in the wilderness, was not a matter casual, or accidental, guided by
the hand of chance, or fortune^; but fore-ordeined, and appointed by the
un-erring Providence of God, both touching the Person tempted, and the place,
where he was tempted) there can be no doubt at all; for it is plain in the
Text, that Jesus was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, v. 1. up, from
Jordan, where he was baptized, led he was to some higher place; and that, by
the Spirit (as the impulsive cause;) by his own Spirit, by the Holy Ghost, led
he was to that place: that it might appear, that this whole business (of our
Saviors being tempted of the Devil in the wilderness) was wisely guided only
of God, and not at all left carelessly, either to the Jesus ductus est in
desertum a Spiritu, non a Diabolo, ut esset potestas dei, non esset potestas
inimici, Chrysolog. de jejun. and tentat. Christi, Sermon. 11.
power, or to the preposterous disposing of Satan. No: but, as it is Luke 4.1.
Jesus, being full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was led by the
Spirit, even by that Spirit, by the Holy Ghost, wherewith he was filled, led he
was into the wilderness: and, thither he was led up of the Spirit (the good
Spirit) to be tempted of the Devil; and, as willing he was now, to be tempted
there (no ways seeking to decline the furious strokes, of the Devils enmity
against him) as afterward he was to be crucified at Golgotha; Led, then, as a
Lamb to the Isa. 53.7.
slaughter; as a Lamb; without resistance, without reluctance: and, led now of
the Spirit, into the wilderness, as one of himself, not at all unwilling to
liasten to the appointed place for his so much desired Ducitur, non invitus,
aut captus, sed voluntate pugnandi, Hieronym in locum.
Combat with Satan. St. Mark cap. 1. v. 12, expresses it by another word,
saying, the Spirit drives him into the wilderness. See! led up he was of the
Spirit, in one (...).
place; who drives (...).
him, in another; and both, very significant; Lod, as one very willing of
himself; driven, as one made more willing by the Spirit, to make more then
ordinary speed into the wilderness, there to be tempted of the Devil: or, if
you will, the whole, in short, may be represented unto you, thus; Our Savior,
but then Baptized, and (in respect of his manhood) filled with the Holy Ghost;
filled then, and, from thence forth, after a more extraordinary manner, then
before, presently (at that time, neither regarding Bethleem, where he was born,
Mat. 2.1. nor Nazareth, where he was brought up, v 23.) without any delay at
all, prepared himself by the vehement, by the driving motion of the Spirit
within him, to encounter with the Devil in the wilderness. A dark resemblance
of whose most ready, and prompt forwardness in this, we have in that undaunted
resolution of Paul, in another, case, Acts 21.11, 13. who by no means would be
dissuaded from going to Jerusalem, although he were foretold by Agabus, that he
should there undergo many trials, and temptations, as it came to pass. Such is
the powerful, and efficacious working of God's holy Spirit, that he leads
nay, he drives those whom he has in a proportionable measure filled to
undertake, without fear, without fainting, hard things and difficult. To
instance in some few cases. Steven, full of the holy Ghost, sharply rebuked his
false Accusers, though many in number, not fearing either their face, or fury,
Acts 7. So Eliah full of the same spirit, was not afraid, boldly to rebuke
Ahab the King, for his Idolatry, and 1 Kings 18.
profaneness,; and, who has not heard how boldly John the Baptist, a mon sent
of God, John 1.6. preached against the Mark 6.18.
incest of Herod? or, if there were any touch of fear in these, who were mere
men; yet, in this case, there could be none at all in our Savior; who ( full
of the holy Ghost, and fuller then they) set his face, his heart toward the
wilderness: thirsting ( as the Heart does aftar the water brooks, Psalm 42.1.)
with a longing desire, to enter the lists, to grapple (as it were) hand to
hand, and, -- pes pede vincius, to gain, but not give any ground to Satan. A
lively Type whereof we have in that confident boldness of David against Goliath,
1 Samuel 17.45.
Thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield; but I
come to thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts: in whose Name, and Spirit, our
Savior now prepared himself with much alacrity to expose himself to the utmost
malice of the Devil, who was then ready to tempt him in the wilderness; a
solitary, and desert place, and there (even in the wilderness, and in no other
place) would our Savior be tempted: and that, for many reasons.

First, That the Devil (even by the permission of our Savior) having the
advantage of place, for the then intended Combat between them, his overthrow
at the last might be the greater; and, that he deemeth a wilderness, a desert
place, more advantageous for his purpose, then any other; appears, in that he
more delights in such places then in any other; as, in dry places, such as
deserts are, Mat. 12.43. in Mountains, and Tombs; the one, not much inhabited,
the other, not much frequented, Mark 5.5. And, what he most delights in, may
easily be granted to be (even in his own judgment, whose property it is,
subtly and secretly to tempt) most advantageous for him; in such a place he
took his first advantage against Eve, Genesis 3. and, ever after (hoping for the
like success) he most delighted in such places, where there is no outward help,
no succor, no comfort near at hand (as there is in Societies) either for a
time to hinder, or, wholly to frustrate his malicious designs; and
machinations. Wherefore, what he most delighted in, as making most for his own
advantage, is here of purpose granted him; even the wilderness, a desert place,
to tempt our Savior in; that, the greater his advantage was, in respect of the
place, the greater his disadvantage, and disgrace might be, in respect of the
event; And therefore that it might appear, that the Devil, to his own shame,
was a great looser, even when confident he was, by reason of the advantage
granted, that he should become a Gainer, our Savior would be tempted in the
wilderness.

Secondly, That being for a time thus wholly secluded, and separated from the
light and society of men, not known yet but to few, nor, what was done and
heard at Jordan concerning him, not yet divulged to many, he might afterward,
with the greater Solemnity, enter on his Ministry, as one immediately sent from
God, and not chosen out of the Vulgar, or sent from men. Rarum praeclarum, the
more rare any thing is, the more precious. The more rare an eminent Person is,
and the less frequent with the Multitude, the more he will be reverenced and
esteemed.

Thirdly, That, in the time of this his retirement, having no abode at all in
any City, full of people, and fuller of sin: but, being far remote from all
company of men, and from the noise, and tumults and troubles of the unquiet
world, he might, by prayer, and fasting, and other pious Acts of devotion, the
better prepare himself for the work of God, his heavenly Father's business;
and, for his own, so much desired, victory. Sometimes, to be alone, is a most
excellent help not to be alone; Nunquam minus solus quam cum solus, I am never
less then when I am most alone.

Fourthly, That the whole honor of his victory over Satan, might redound to
himself alone, without any relation at all to any of the creatures. As
afterward, a little before his death, All his Disciples forsook him, and Mat.
26.56.
fled; and, in God's intention, for that end, they all forsook him and fled,
that none might imagine that man had any share with his Son, in the Redemption
of man; he trod the wine press of his Father's wrath alone, and of all the
people there was none with Isa. 63.3.
him; And therefore; all the glory and honor due to the Redeemer, was, in
respect of any creature, wholly to be ascribed to himself alone. So it is here:
none assisted our Savior in conquering Satan; and therefore none ought to
partake with him in the honor of that Conquest, his alone the victory was;
and, that the honor thereof might be wholly his also, he would be tempted in
the wilderness. And,

5ly, There also tempted he would be, rather then in any other place, even to
manifest thereby, that there was no place fitter then that to Conquer the Devil
Aquin. tert. pars Sermon. q. 41. Artic. 2.
in, who before had conquered man in the Garden, in Paradise; both were desert
and solitary places: both Paradise, and the Wilderness. Paradise, where the
first Adam was alone, when the serpent, the Devil, by the woman, tempted and
conquered him. The Wilderness, where the second Adam was alone, when he
conquered Satan. Solitary places both: and, the one was rightly chosen to
Conquer the Devil in, who in the other had been a Conqueror.

Nullus ubique potest faelici ludere dextra.

No man's game,
Is still the same.
Thus hitherto. I. Jesus was led up of the Spirit; of the Holy Ghost.

2. Led up he was by him into the wilderness.

3. Into the wilderness there to be tempted of the Devil. And, there to be
tempted the rather, that the Devil, where he had the most advantage, might, to
his own greater shame, have the least success, having now to deal with one, who
would be tempted in the wilderness; that having secluded himself from the
society of men, and, alone, prepared himself by prayer and fasting for the work
of God, he might have the whole honor of his own victory over the Devil: whom
he left not unrequited neither, but conquered him in the wilderness, who before
had conquered man in Paradise; As I have done, so God has rewarded me, Judge.
1.7.

4. The Time, when our Savior was tempted in the wilderness, is pointed at in
the first word of the Text. (Then) that word relating to those immediately
before, cap. 3. v. 16, 17. Then; Even so soon as he was Baptized of John in
Jordan; and (as man) enrolled into the Family of God. Then; So soon as the holy
Ghost had descended on him, like a Dove, in testimony of his innocence. Then;
So soon as he was publicly declared from Heaven, to be that Son of God; and
therefore, that second Person of the most glorious Trinity (under the veil of
humane flesh) never so clearly revealed before to the sonns of men; even Then,
the Devil (fuller of wrath, fearing he should lose his Kingdom, then Herod
was, after he heard of his Mar. 2.3.
Birth, for fear he should presently loose his) sets upon our Savior, with a
resolute purpose to deceive him by Temptations; before he was baptized, we read
not at all that he was at any time tempted: no; for, while with Joseph, and
Mary his Mother, he led a private life at Nazareth in Mat. 2.23.
Galilee, where he fixed for many years, after his safe return out of Egypt,
the Devil (as knowing as he is) could not distinguish him at all from another,
from an ordinary Person: no; but (Then) immediately, after the public
solemnity of his Inauguration to his Prophetical Office was fully ended at
Jordan, then was there special notice taken of him, by that evil spirit, by
that diligent Observer both of Persons, Words, and Actions; and, that he might
not lose so fit an opportunity to bring forth what he then began to conceive,
even a burden of Temptations, he the more narrowly watched which way his
motion tended, and (if I may so speak) diligently waited on him (though in a
bad sense, and to a bad end) till he found him in a fit capacity (all things as
yet being but in preparation) to be Tempted in the Wilderness. Then; even after
the Heavens had been opened unto him, v. 16. in testimony that he came down
from Heaven, as afterward he testified of himself, John 3.13. though for a
time, most willing he was now to become the Object of the Devils temptations,
on earth.

Lo! thus it was with our Savior Christ: and, thus also it is with Christians;
the one was Tempted of the Devil, the other is not exempted from the like
condition. Wherefore, that of our Savior to his Apostles, is, by way of
allusion, fitly appliable here; the Disciple is not above his Master, nor, the
servant above his Mat. 10.24.
Lord. And, If they (meaning the stiff-necked, and malicious Jews) if they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute John 15.20.
you; It Is an Argument from the greater to the less; and, the Apostles
afterward were sensible of the strength and weight of it, by more then
ordinary experience, in themselves. So if the Devil durst so early (even almost
when he was but then come out of the water) tempt our Savior; surely he will
make no scruple at all, at any time, to tempt those who faithfully believe in
that Savior: it being as an uncontrouled Maxim^ in his school, that none at
any time displease him, until they first begin to serve and please God. But
then, even so soon as we have given up our names to Christ, so soon as we begin
to have any opening of the Heavens unto us, any heavenly grace, any measure of
faith, any degree of repentance in us, any descending of God's holy Spirit upon
us, to enlighten the darkness of our hearts, the dimness of our understandings,
to reform the crooked perverseness of our wills, even then, presently, we daily
more and more become the Butt, at which all the fiery darts of Satan are
furiously Diabolus semper primordia boni pulsat; saencta in ipso ortu festinat
extinguere, Chryoslog. de jejeun. and tent. Christi Sermon. 11.
shot; as Saul in his furious mood cast his javelin at David, 1 Samuel 18.11.
and, They that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 1 Timothy 3.12. shall be subject to Temptation; Neither is this done without the
Providence of a good God, who would have it to be so; And that 1. To try us,
whether we will be patient and faithful unto him, or not, even when we are
under the pressures, and (by his permission, for our good) trodden down for a
time, in the Wine press of Satan, as Job was. 2. That, knowing our own weak and
frail condition, we might the sooner be moved to flee unto him for help, and
succor, in the time of our fiery trial, in the day of our calamity. 3. That we
might learn, with thankful hearts, to give him the whole glory, who, from time
to time, out of his great love and mercy unto us, has sent us such or such a
mighty Deliverance. Who, 4. In suffering us for a time to be tempted, does
thereby intend, for the promotion of our Spiritual state, to conform us daily
more and more to the Image of his Son; and, to the example of his sufferings,
who was tempted of the Devil; and, his members cannot expect any better usage.
It Is not then (as to that point in particular) it is not Apocryphal, which is
written by the wise man, Eccles. 2.1. My son, if thou come to serve the Lord,
prepare thy beart for temptation: because the one is always in separably
accompanied with the other; the true service and worship of God, always
attended on in the Faithful and penitent Person with the temptation of Satan.
So we find it here in the Original; and, in the Copy, truly transcribed, we
cannot find it otherwise. The Original is, that then as soon as Jesus was
baptized and declared to be the Son of God, pres;ently, in a manner, he was
tempted of the Devil. The Copy is, that then also he tempts us, even so soon
as we begin to fight under the banner of Jesus, as the Sons of God. So soon as
we begin to depart out of Egypt from the bondage and slavery of sin, toward
the land of Canaan, to the end that we might serve the Lord, then he follows
after us as furiously as Pharaoh did after the Israelites, Exodus 14.9. with
Horses and Chariots, an Army of Temptations. But blessed be our God, who has
taught us a way, if not wholly to be freed from, while we live in this
Tabernacle of flesh, yet, wholly to resist, and break the violent force of all
his Temptations; and, that way is by 1 Pet. 5.9. 1 John 5.4.
faith; by true faith in Christ crucified, who for our sakes was tempted of the
Devil; that we (not left destitute, and alone, without heavenly grace, and
assistance to strengthen us in our several Trials, for the is with us) might by
him be delivered from the power, from the poison, of all his Temptations; and,
thanks be unto God, who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus 1 Cor.
15.57.
Christ. And, thus far for the first part of the Preparation or Introduction to
the following combat; with the particular circumstances, of Persons, Place,
and Time, belonging thereunto, ver. 1.

The Second follows. And, when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights,
he was afterward an hungered, v. 2. We heard before in the first part, of
Jesus, of the Spirit, of the Devil, the matter then spoken of belonging
properly unto them. But now, in this Second part of the preparation to advance
against Satan, the whole matter concerns Jesus himself alone: relating either
to his fasting or to his hunger: and both in the wilderness; thither he was led
by the Spirit to be tempted; and, being there, he now thus prepares himself to
be tempted, and afterward to become a conqueror judgeing it the best way for
himself, who came into the world to satisfy God's wrath for man's sin of
disobedience, committed by eating, Genesis 3.6. to pull down the Devils pride,
even by humility, by abstinence, by fasting, and hunger; if we should look back
again to Jordan, there we should hear of better tidings; but, as there is a
time to Eccles. 3.4.
laugh, so also there is a time to weep; can the children of the bride-chamber
mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them? but, The days will come when
the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they Mat. 5.15.
fast; and, such a time was our Savior now fallen on; the bridegroom was taken
from him: or, at least for a time, was turned aside; no opening of the heavens
to him, now; no visible de scending of the Spirit of God upon him, now; no
vioce heard from Heaven, now; rather nothing but desolatenss in respect of the
place; nothing but long fasting in respect of the Person, solitary and alone;
and though it were not so hard with him at this time, as it was upon the Cross
when (the Godhead with drawing all heavenly comfort for a time from the
manhood) he cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken Mat. 27.45.
me? yet hard enough it was with him at this time; notwithstanding though his
condirion were now much changed from what it was not long since at Jordan; yet
most willing he was to drink of this Cup; and the Apostle with relation to all
his sufferings, gives the reason why he was so willing to drink of it: this;
Jesus, for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of Heb. 12.2.
God.. But it was not come to that yet; not to sitting, not to resting from all
his labors, from all his sufferings; nor to that, John 17.1. Father, the hour
is come glorify thy Son; or, 2.4.5. I have finished the work which thou gave
me to do. And now O Father glorify me with thine own self no finishing yet ino
glorifying yet but suffering rather: and though the time of his death was not
then at hand; yet the time of his Tempting was; and necessary it was (in this
his preparation both for his tempting and conquering) that his fasting and his
hunger should immediately go before it as a bait to catch Satan: who then
presumes most to prevail in Tempting, when he sees us in the lowest and
weakest condition of resisting his Temptations. And when he had fasted forty
days, and forty nights he was afterward an hungered, verse 2. In which words
we will note two things.

1. The Continuance of our Savior's fasting.

2. The effect or Consequence of his fasting; and both, before he was Tempted.

First, The Continuance of his fasting was for the whole space of forty days,
and forty nights; not current, but complete. The Text is plain, and needs no
other Key to open it but it self.

Obj. 2. Two Evangelists, Mark 1.13. and Luke 4.2. mention not the nights at
all of our Savior's fasting, but only the forty days; may we not then affirm
that he was comfoted with some relief and sustenance all those nights?

Answ. No; because, by a Synecdoche membri, a part being put for the whole,
they comprehend within that Account, even the nights also: our Savior (no
doubt) spending all that time of his fasting (knowing that the Devil was as
busy in the night as in the day) in beavenly meditations, in devout prayers
and supplications to his Father, to strengthen him when the time of his Trial
should come, when the Tempter should come; who (he well knew) was already in
the Wilderness watching and observing both his works and ways, as the Serpent
was in Paradise before he tempted the woman observing first her gesture and
behavior, and which was the best way to assault her before he asked his
Tempting Question, Yea, has God said? Genesis 3.1.

Obj. 2. It appears by St. Luke's words, ck. 4.2. that our Savior was tempted
of the Devil all those forty days which St. Matthew speaks of; or at least
that he was tempted long before the time of his fasting ended.

Answ. It is but an appearance; and there is light enough even in the Text, and
Mark 1.13. (rightly read) to dispel the mists, or the mistakes rather of any
that shall but imagine it; for, the Text, v. 2.3. sets down plainly and in
order. 1. Our Saviors fasting forty days, and forty nights. 2. His hunger,
after his so long fasting.3. His Tempting, after both; the one immediately
following the other, and in the same order as they are there mentioned; as it
is also Luke 4.2, 3. In those forty days he did eat nothing: and when they
were ended, he aftewards hungered: and the Devil said unto him; an Argument
undeniable (because the Texts positively affirm it) that our Savior's Tempting
followed both his fasting and his hunger, and was not any ways a Concomitant
or coaetaneous with the one, nor an Antecedent of the other; not a Concomitant
with his fasting; for, the forty days and forty nights were fully ended before
he was an hungered; nor an Antecedent of his hunger; for, thereupon the Devil
took the first occasion of his Tempting: as after he had fasted so long a time,
he was an hungered, v. 2. and after he was an hungered, then the Tempter came
unto him, and said, v. 3. then, and not before. So that when St. Mark says,
1.13. that he was there (in the wilderness) forty days tempted of the Devil:
and St. Luke 4.2. being forty days tempted of the Devil: they do not mean that
our Savior was tempted either all or any of those days wherein he fasted: no;
and that the Comma in the Original, (...).
Mark 1.13. between the time of his fasting, and the time of his tempting makes
plain and manifest; and so should our Translation be pointed with the Comma,
after forty days: thus he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of
Satan. Thus also is that of St. Luke to be understood, as Interpreters rightly
observe upon the Ari. Montan. Piscat. Schol.
place, chapter 4.2. reconciling the seeming d^fference of one, by the plain words
of another Evangelist. And because this of St. Matthew is the plainest, it is
also for that reason the fittest to interpret the Two others meaning, as it
fully does; And the true meaning is, that our Savior was not tempted of the
Devil until he had fasted full forty days, and forty nights.

Lo! a Fast it was, supernatural and miraculous; yet mere men I confess, have
done the like, as Exodus 34.28.
Moses, and 1 King. 19.8.
Elias; though not by the strength of mere men: no; neither did our Savior;
who after his long fasting was not at all changed in his natural constitution
all that time, but was stilas strong and vigorous as he was forty days before,
when he departed so speedily from Jordan into the wilderness; so was Moses, and
Elias by the power of God: but our Savior by his Father's, and by his own
power; all fasted so long; Moses Exo. 34.28
when he was sent of God from the Mount to deliver the renewed Tables of the
Law unto the people; Elias 1 King. 19.8.
when he was appointed of God to restore again true Religion, very much
corrupted, and in a manner decayed in his days; and our Savior immediately
before he was to enter publicly on his Ministry. So that we may easily
conjecture, that for one and the same reason they all fasted so long; and the
reason was, that each of them, in their several times and ages of the world (as
Moses under the Law, Elias in the time of the Prophets, and our Savior under
the Gospel) bringing their Message immediately from Heaven, confirmed by their
extraordinary fasting, might (as some extraordinary Persons) be the more
honored among the people, and their Message the more willingly received and
obeyed; when they should plainly perceive, that the God of Nature (as a means
to procure more awful and reverent Authority, both unto themselves and
doctrine) had given them power so far to exceed the ordinary bounds of nature,
as to fast forty days, and forty nights, without any intermission; which was
the full continuance of our Savior's fasting.

Secondly, The Effect or Consequence of his fasting was, that after he had
abstained from all manner of food so long a time, he was afterward an hungered,
v. 2. which we do not read at all either of Moses or Elias after their long
fasting; we do not read it, because no Penman of the holy Ghost has recorded
it; neither was there the same reason to mention their hunger (mere men) after
their fasting, as there was particularly, our Saviors (God and Man) after his
fasting; and the reasons why our Saviors hunger, in particular, is here
mentioned may be two. 1. To manifest to all succeeding Ages, that he that was
very God (the Person here to be tempted) was very man also: it being incident
unto Man also, and not unto God to be hungry. 2. To note, that though the
Devil, even then, were prepared to Tempt, yet the occasion thereof (to a good
end) was first offered unto him by our Savior; and offered unto him by his
Permittitur esurive corpus, ut Diabolo tentandi tribuatur occasio, Hieron. in
locum. Chrysolog. de jejun. and tent. Christi, Sermon. 11.
hunger, after he bad fasted forty days and forty nights; neither does this
derogate from the wisdom of our Savior to give the first occasion, and (as it
were) provoke Satan to empty out the fowlest dregs of all his malicious envity
against him; but rather it does magnify it to all that shall rightly consider,
that when in seeming he was weakest, and at the lowest ebb, yet even then, he
was able to Conquer Satan: to whom he therefore gave the occasion of Tempting
him by his hunger, that (knowing he would soon swallow the bait, and greedily
accept the occasion offered) he might the more victoriously Triumph over him,
who thought himself secure enough, after he had gained so fit an opportunity to
Tempt him, when he was an hungered.

We have now done with the Preparation to this combat on our Saviors part;
who was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil;
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered, v. 1.2. In the Narration which comes next, and sets before us the
whole matter, we will consider, 1. The several Conflicts between the Devil, and
our Savior. 2. The happy issue of all, on our Saviors part. The particular
Conflicts with the particular repulses given to Satan, are distinctly, and in
Order, Three; and in three distinct places. The first, in the wilderness, v. 3,
4. The second, on a pinnacle of the Temple, v. 5, 6, 7. The third, on an
exceeding high mountain, v. 8, 9, 10. and the blessed success of all, on our
Saviors part, v. 11. We begin with the first Conflict, thus.

And when the Tempter came unto him; he said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread, v. 3.

But he answered, and said, It is written, man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, v. 4.

Let us well weigh the words: and happily, from each, we may enlarge our short
Meditations.

And when the Tempter came unto him, he said, v. 3. Lo! now the first Battle
begins; and that on the Devils part: though the occasion (for a further end
then the Devil then took notice of) was first offered on our Saviors part: to
whom the Tempter then confidently came, when he observed that he was an hungered.

The Tempter called the Devil, v. 1. that Accuser of the Revel. 12.10.
Brethren; and Satan, v. 10. that Adversary of mankind. The (...)
Tempter; by a kind of supereminency, as being that Fountain, that Original of
all motions to evil, of all Temptations to sin. The Tempter, one that
engrosseth (as it were) into his own hands the Monopoly of all Temptations,
forged first in the Shop of Hell, and oftentimes so subtly presented unto
men, as if they were the good motions of an Angel of light; The consideration
whereof moved Paul, careful of their Spiritual state, to write unto the
Thessalonians after this 1 These. 3.2.5.
manner, I sent Timotheus our Brother, and Minister of God, and fellow laborer
in the Gospel of Christ, to know your faith, lest by some means the Tempter
has tempted you. Who, he well knew, would not be backward to tempt them, that
was so forward here to tempt our Savior.

The Tempter came unto him. Came; a motion which as it outwardly manifested no
speedy pace, so also in appearance, no hellish purpose. He came, as if no evil
had been intended, even when nothing else but evil was intended; as Accessit
tentantis dolo, non obsequentis affectu. Chrysol. ubi supra.
Joab with a treacherous intention came to Amasa, 2 Samuel 30, 9, 10, or rather
as the Serpent with a fraudulent intention came to Eve, Genesis 3.

The Tempter came unto him; We may imagine as not without subtlety, so not
without impudency and boldness enough; as, When the sons of God came to present
themselves before the Lord, Satan came also amonst Job 1.6.
them; came boldly, came impudently. And surely, he had not yet learnt any
better manners when he came so subtly to assault, and so maliciously to
disgorge the worst of all his venom against our Savior; who easily foresaw
all his malicious practices; and therefore strongly armed himself, both against
him and them.

The Tempter came unto him; but whence he came, before he thus subtly and (if
you will) impudently came unto our Savior in the wilderness, whether from
Jordan, covertly following him from place to place, or from compassing the
earth, as in Job's Job 1.7.2.2.
case; or from the bottomless pit, released for a time, that ere long he might
return thither again with the greater horror; or from either of the Regions of
the air, that to his own advantage who is the Prince of the power of the
Ephesians. 2. 2.
air, the Battle might be fought within the Confines, at least, of his own
Kingdom; we will not curiously enquire, we cannot positively determine: though
(probably) having been present at Jordan (for in what place is he not?) and
observed all the Solemnity performed there; and knowing that our Savior
immediately after his Baptism, was led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to
be tempted; (a work peculiarly belonging unto him) he thence (if not in our
Saviors company, yet not far behind him) sets forward for the wilderness also;
and not willing to neglect so fair an occasion offered him, as now there was by
our Saviors hunger, he approaches nearer and nearer unto Jesus, and begins
his first Temptation in the wilderness.

The Tempter came unto him; but in what form, whether of man or beast, is not
here expressed: though probably, in the form of man he came unto Piscat. Schol.
in locum.
him; yet not altogether too wise in that, since he had better success (then
now he was likely to have) when at first he appeared in the form of a serpent,
Genesis 3. but perhaps he would not appear twice in one, and the same form, lest
his double dealing should the sooner be discovered: which notwithstanding in
what form soever he appears was now discovered, and prevented by our Savior.

And when the Tempter came unto him, he said; What? can Devils (bad Angels)
speak? it seems they can. And thus it is; they, who (compared with man) have
no bodies at all of their Zanc. de simplicitat. Angelorum, cap. 4.
own, though (compared with God) the Case, perhaps, may be otherwise have
notwithstanding a Tongue, when (as now this Devil did) they assume the body of
another; whether of man or beast: as here the Tempter, the Devil said; 'twas he
that spoke to the woman, by the mouth of the Genesis 3.1.
Serpent, as the good Angel did afterward to Balaam, by the mouth of his Number.
22.22.28.
Ass; 'Twas he that entered into the Oracle at Delphos, and other places; and
thence gave vocal and articulate, though uncertain Answers, to particular
persons and their Delrio. dis. quisit. Magiclib. 4. ca. 2. q. 2.
demands; as to Philip, the Father of Alexander the great, concerning his next
and immediate Qu. Curtius. lib. 1. p. 8.
Successor; to Phyrrus King of Epirus, touching his so much desired victory
over the Romans; to Augustus Caesar, demanding what the state of his Empire
should be, when he was dead; though at that time, his deceitful practices that
way, began to vanish and have an end. I might enlarge this in sundry other
particulars; but when I have spent all my store, all is to prove no more but
this; that the Devil, who has no body of his own, has at least a borrowed
tongue to speak, when for a time, he assumeth the body of another: as it is
demonstrated here. The Tempter came unto our Savior, and said. Where he makes
use both of his feet and tongue, the integral parts of some other Creature. He
came: he said: then beginning first to make use of his Tongue, when he first
began at this time to make use of his Tempting; that was his own work; but the
Tongue wherewith he spoke, was that Creatures, whose body he had then assumed:
fitly framing the Organs of speech in another to express the meaning of his own
purpose.

And when the Tempter came unto him, he said: If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread; As if he had said; thou wast not long
since declared at Jordan to be the Son of God, which I make a doubt of; but if
it be so, make it appear unto me by some miracle; and the miracle I require for
the confirmation of it, is this: Command that these stones be made bread. See!
both diffidently spoken, and impudently spoken; diffidently, If thou be the Son
of God; impudently, Command that these stones be made bread. Lo! this was the
Devils suit; nay, this was the Devils sauciness: and therein, his subtle
policy, resolving thereby to remove and withdraw our Savior (when he saw him
hungry) from his Filial confidence in the All-sufficient providence of his
Father; The Sum the first Temptation.
and to persuade him to doubt, both of his Care, and also of his power to
relieve him: and thereupon to make use of unlawful means to relieve himself; He
said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.
(...), say but the word only, and it shall be done; such a persuasion (it
seems) the Devil had of the great power of the Son of God, although he doubted
(if thou be) whether he whom he then tempted were that Person or not; he
doubted; yet surely, more out of malice then out of ignorance; for, he could
not but know, that even that very Person whom he then tempted to a
distrustfulness in his Father's Providence, was that very Son of God; And this
he could not but know; and that 1. By what was written of him in the Prophets;
as, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name
Isa. 7.14.
Emanuel. Wonderful enough it was, that a Virgin should bear a son: more
wonderful, that this Son should be Emanuel, God with Mat. 1.23.
us; which being revealed in the Prophets, could not be concealed, from Satan;
nor the place of his Birth; and thou Mich. 5.2.
Bethleem Ephratah, etc. both being fulfilled some thirty years before this
Tempter came unto him, and said; for a Virgin did bear a Son, even Emanuel, God
with us from the very day of his Birth; and at Bethleem she did bear that Luke
2.4, 5, 7.
Son; which the Devil knew, when his instrument Herod slew all the young
children Mar. 2.16.
there for this one young Child's sake: who had he been first destroyed, the
rest had not been destroyed. Herod sent forth others about this business; the
Devil sent forth Herod; knowing that the Son of God was even then Incarnate;
although he knew not well where to find him, being but then an Infant, nor of
what Virgin he was born; that being concealed from him, even by the Espousals
of Joseph and Mary. But now 2. finding him in the Wilderness, grown up both to
the full Age and stature of man, he could not but know, that this was he, of
whom the Father some forty days before, testified from Heaven, that this was
his beloved m Son; Mar. 3.17.
a true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, though it were of no credit at
all with Satan, who here subtly pretends ignorance, rather pravae
dispositionis, then purae negationis (If thou be the Son of God) and nothing
will satisfy him in this matter, but a miracle wrought by our Savior (and
that upon this motion too) as a more manifest demonstration of his Deity.
Impudent Satan! why requirest thou a Miracle? know thou not that miracles
are extraordinarily wrought rather to Fidei sunt praestanda signa, non dolis;
Credentidanda sunt, non Tentant. Chrysolog de jejun. and tentat. Christi Sermon.
11.
confirm the faith of those that believe in Jesus, then to gratify such as
defy and abhor the saving Name of Jesus? and yet requirest thou a Miracle, who
have no faith at all to believe in him who is the Author of it, and of whom
thou requirest it? Impudent Satan! or, think thou that the Son of God will
become obedient unto thee, and turn stones into bread to gratify thee, whereas
(in respect of any want in himself) there was no need at all of such a Miracle?
no need at all; for, he that is the bread of life, as he witnesses of himselt,
Joh. 6.48, could not want Vere panis, non indiget pane, Chrysol. ubi supra,
Sermon. 11.
bread, though he were hungry; he that had a Provident Father to provide for
him, could not want sufficient sustenance; no, not in the Wilderness; nay, he
that could turn stones into bread (as thou thy self rightly supposest, or else,
why requiredst thou such a Miracle of him? unless thou did it by way of
Ironie, of Taunt, and Scoff, If thou be --) even he was able also to turn want
into plenty, emptiness into fullness; as able to do this then as afterward, to
turn water into Joh. 2.9.
wine; nay, as able as of stones to raise up children unto Math. 3.9.
Abraham; able to do that, able to do this if there had been cause; but in
this particular case, plain it is, that there was no cause at all; and to do
it, when there was no cause to do it, had been ( doubting of his watchful care
and providence over him) to offend his Father (which he would not do) by using
unlawful means and unwarantable, so long as there was any other way to relieve
himself; and therefore, Satan, thy so much desired provision to be procured for
him by a Miracle in testimony of his Deity, (which at this time wanted no such
testimony) was not at all necessary, since there was every way enough provided
for him by his Father without it; and thou temptest him in vain to grant that
which there was no cause to grant; notwithstanding, he were every way most
powerful to do what thou requiredst.

But what will thou infer thence? will thou Conclude (as thine own words, If
thou be -- seem to imply) that the Person whom thou temptest is not the Son of
God, because at thy command, he will not distrust in God, and turn stones into
bread? shall not the Lord Jehovah be God, unless Baal subscribe unto it? must,
If thou be the Son of God, be resolved preposterously into, thou art not the
Son of God, if Satan's demand be not granted, and his curiosity satisfied?
Monstrous! whereas, to have done what the Devil demanded, had been altogether
to derogate from the glory of the Son of God; for whom it was as improper in
any thing to become obedient unto Satan (such was the Case here) as most proper
it was for him in every thing to continue constant in his Filial obedience unto
his Father, as he did; for, not at all regarding what Satan should judge of
him, for not complying with him, he utterly refused to obey his voice: and none
of his Charms, none of his Temptations, none of his Baits, none of his fair
words (in his sense, capable of a fowl Construction) could any ways prevail
with him; or remove and unrivet him (which was so much desired by the Devil)
from his unshaken Confidence and assurance in his Father's providence: who (he
was persuaded) was able to provide for his Son in this his hunger, even without
his own particular assistance (which had been to doubt of his Father's
providence) by turning stones into bread. Lo! this was the Devils motion, If
thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. Command; the
work to be done was left wholly unto our Savior; yet upon pain if he did it
not, to be declared, not to be the Son of God by Satan; a strong, a violent
Temptation; yet, easily repelled by our Saviors reply to Satan and his
insolency* He answered, and said, it is written, Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, v. 4.

It is written; the Devil begins subtly, with (If) a doubtful speech, as he
delivers it; but surely, not doubtful as he understood it; but our Savior
Answers plainly and positively: It is written; and that Deuteronomy. 8.3. where Moses
(as an Argument to persuade them to be daily more and more obedient) puts the
Israelites in mind of God's great goodness and favor unto them, who fed them
extraordinarily forty years in the Wilderness; and that with bread, with Manna
from Heaven, even in the time of their extremest want, and when they were
wholly distitute of ordinary food and sustenance: such was God's care of them;
which our Savior here in his greatest hunger (knowing that the hand of his
Father's providence was not yet shortened) appropriates, and applies to his own
Case, in particular. He was now in the wilderness; though it be not expressed
here, whether in the same wilderness or not; there he was hungry, and no
ordinary means then near at hand to relieve him; yet though he expected not
Manna, he well knew that his Father was able to satiate his hunger, either with
or without means; and this was his Solace, his Contentation, this, Deus
providebit, my God will provide for me one way or other, even in the
wilderness; wherefore, confident and constant in this persuasion, he would not
by any means be enticed by the Tempting Devil (even though he was an hungered)
to use any unlawful ways to provide food for himself; which in Satan's
judgment he wanted, but not in his own; who was not ignorant that there were
other ways, either to satisfy or sustain his hunger without turning stones
into bread; and of these means he speaks here, when (as a reproach to Satan)
he says, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

It is written; Lo! this, even the Word of God, that Ephesians. 6.17.
Sword of the Spirit, this was the weapon wherewith our Savior once now, v. 4.
and twice afterward, v, 7, 10. foiled and conquered Satan; It is written; and
this Action of our Savior in thus repelling the Devil by his Father's word,
must always be our imitation; for, surely the same Sword, the same Word has
the same power still against the same Adversary, though it be now weilded by
us, far weaker Combatants; who though we are weak in faith, yet by his power,
that is the stronger man, we shall be enabled to resist the strong man Mat.
12.29.
and all his Temptations; for, as it is our Comfort, so also it is our Conquest
too, that our Savior has gotten the victory over Satan; because (to use the
words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.14, 15, etc.) we being girt about with truth,
with the testimony of a good conscience; having on the breast plate of
righteousness, manifested by an holy and a sanctified life, holiness to the
Exodus 29.36.
Lord; shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, which brings glad
tidings of peace to us in Christ, who is our Ephesians 2.14.
peace, the power whereof, being the power of God unto Salvation to every one
that Romans 1.16.
believes, treads Satan under foot; and having faith for our shield against
all the fiery darts of that evil one; Salvation, the assured hope of Salvation
by Jesus Christ, for our helmet; the Word of God, the promises of God, made to
all penitent sinners in his holy Word, faithfully believed and feelingly
applied, for our Sword; we also in him shall get and keep the victory.

It is written; and written, that man shall not live by bread alone; shall not
live; Now there is a Threefold life. 1. Of Nature. 2. Of Grace 3. Of Glory. The
first only is here meant; the life of Nature; and the meaning is, that Man
shall not live, shall not preserve his natural life by bread alone, by ordinary
food, alone, whereof bread is the principal; no, but there is another way to
preserve it, even by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Lo!
this is our Saviors Text, and for that reason, with all diligence to be
hearkened to; that his Father's promise included therein, of providing
sustenance for us (as it was in the Case of 1 Kin. 19.5, 6.
Eliah) even when we see no visible way to provide, it may be a solace and
comfort unto us, in the time of our greatest streights and scarcity; I say,
this is our Saviors Text: and the powerful, and life-preserving Word mentioned
therein, which proceeds out of the mouth of God, whereby Man shall live, even
when he wants the common and ordinary means to preserve his life, is his
Will, his Decree, his purpose, his secret appointment to preserve man's life by
some extraordinary way, thus or thus; besides that of his ordinary word and
providence. See it illustrated in several particulars thus; Sometimes God's
Will and Decree is, that Man shall live, and yet, not by ordinary means. So the
Israelites in the desert were preserved forty years together with Deuteronomy. 8.3.
Manna; and therewith they fared so well, even by the immediate providence of
God, without any ordinary food, that the consideration thereof caused the
citing of this Text by our Savior, against Satan. Sometimes God's word and
purpose is, that men shall live against means, and contrary to the ordinary
course of nature; as Daniel in the Lions Den, chap. 6 and the three Children in
the fiery Furnace, chap. 3. Sometimes his Will and appointment is, that men
shall live for a time without any means at all; as Moses in Mount Exo. 34.28.
Sinai; Elias in Mount 1 King. 19.8
Horeb; and our Savior at this time, forty days and forty nights in the
Wilderness; of which extraordinary and miraculous Word proceeding out of the
mouth of God, for the preservation of man's life, the Devil here (it seems when
maliciously he tempted our Savior hungry, to turn stones into bread) pretended
himself altogether ignorant, or at least, subtily concealed his knowledge of it.

But whether he were wholly ignorant of that, or not, let it be left (if you
will) as a thing doubtful and uncertain; yet of this, ignorant he could not be;
of this that our Saviors repulsive Answer here was every way directly Opposite
to his Temptation; and such as the Answer was, such also the Person was; every
way Opposite to Satan; there is no fellowship between light and darkness; no
Communion between God and 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
Belial; and as touching our Saviors Answer to the Devil, herein stands the
Opposition; Command (said the Devil) that these stones be made bread; Why? to
refresh thy self in this time of hunger; I need no refreshing by such means;
Not? how then will thou live? It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone;
not by ordinary means alone; how then shall he live? by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God; as by his Will, by his Decree, by his
secret appointment, and oftentimes to man unknown; but is there any such word
that proceeds out of his mouth, that proceeds out of his heart, as if it
were spoken with his mouth, for the preservation of man's life, besides his
ordinary word? there is; and by that word shall I Vere vivit in verbo Dei,
verbum Dei, Chyrsolog, ubi supra, Sermon. 13.
live: by some extraordinary way or other shall my life be preserved, though
without bread; and I may not, I will not submit to thy subtle persuasion
Command that these stones be made bread; which includes much danger in it. 1. A
Compliance with thee. 2. A Distrustful diffidence (which subtly thou temptest
me unto) of my Father's Care and providence over me. 3. A Diminution both of
his, and mine own glory: as if I were not the Son of God, unless I produced
more then needful testimonies thereof before Satan; wherefore away with thy, If
thou be -- command -- the nature of stones (though I can) I will not alter; I
want not bread, not ordinary food, though I am hungry; or if I do, I know
where to have it, and not be beholding at all to thee, for thy seeming
double-diligent care of me; but there is another that takes care of me indeed,
and him will I trust; even my God, my Father; It is written, Man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God,
shall man live.

Which, when the Devil heard, highly enraged no doubt presently (whether out of
discontent, that at first he had thus lost the field; or out of an implacable
desire of revenge for that loss, or both; not convinced, even when he was
convinced, not satisfied, as he pretended, that, that Person whom he Tempted
was the Son of God, even when there was no just cause to be dissatisfied,
having evidence enough from what was written of him in the Prophets, and from
what he had heard at Jordan) he cunningly (not altogether unlike the twisting
of the Foxes tayls together by Judge. 15.4.
Sampson) links and joins a Second to his First Temptation: making (as it were)
the end of the one, the un-interrupted beginning of the other; so swift he was
in his motion, in his Temptation; but by their fruits ye shall know Mar. 7.16.
them; Men do not gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles; nay we cannot
gather here either grapes, or figs, but fruit of a more sour taste; and whether
it were an Apple or a Pear, or some other kind of fruit the first woman tasted,
Genesis 3. surely it had a far better relish as to the mouth of the eater, though
not to the soul, then this second Temptation; wherein the Devil (who had
required a Miracle before somewhat answerable to the hardness of his own heart,
by turning stones into bread) peaeposterously proceeds now from a pretended
ignorance of the Deity of the Son of God, even to an injurious dealing with the
Person of the Son of God, not yet openly acknowledging him to be so; nor
judgeing him worthy to keep his station in the wilderness, whither he was led
up of the Spirit (though he kept his ground still, maugre all his hellish
machinations) but transporting him thence, he exalted him (probably, as an
Object of public scorn) to the pinnacle of the Temple; there to be solicited
to a rash confidence in his Father's Protection, whom hither to he could by no
means remove from his Filial Confidence in his Providence; and though St. Luke
chap. 4.9, etc. name this temptation in the third and last place, not so much
observing the order of August. de co^^ens. Evangelist. lib. 2. ca. 16.
Time, when it was done, as the certainty of Fact, that it was done; yet
manifest it is, that St. Matthew here names it in the right place, when he
makes it the Second and not the Third, not the last Temptation; for, when the
Devil was finally conquered, he departed from our Savior, v. 11. but as yet he
departed not: an Argument, that as yet he was not finally Conquered; and that
an Argument that this was not the Third (there being but Three in all) but the
Second Temptation: mentioned, v. 5, 6, 7, wherein is plainly declared how our
Savior was assaulted again, and how the Devil also was repulsed again; Thus;

Then the Devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a pinnacle
of the Temple, v. 5. And says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy
self down: for it is written, he shall give his Angels charge concerning thee,
and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone, v. 6. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God, v. 7. Which words, with each Circumstance therein,
easily admit of a particular Examination; As, Then the Devil takes him up, v.
5.

Then; surely the Devil is a good observer of time; or rather of opportunity:
not willing to neglect any occasion that makes for his own Advantage and our
ruin; he knew which was the fittest time to tempt the woman, Genesis 3. and the
fittest opportunity to stir up Herod to seek our Saviors life, Mat. 2. even
when he was but then in swaddling clothes: when the Sons of God came to present
themselves before the Lord, then Satan also (though uninvited) will come
amongst Job 1.6.
them no place will he unfrequent no company will he avoid, as to mean too
intrude himself into their counsels, no not though the Lord command Joshua the
high Priest to stand before his Zechar. 3.1.
Angel; and no time neither will he omit to effect his wicked purposes.

Then; even so soon as he was overcome in one, presently he begins another
Battle; yet not (Roman like) giving warning of the day thereof, before the day;
nor giving notice of the very Instant of his Assault, either by sound of Drum
or Trumpet, or other vocal Instrument; No; he that in all Ages has taught
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, to sound a Trumpet before Mat. 6.2, 6, 16.
them, either when they give Alms or Fast, or Pray, that they may be seen of
men, that they may receive glory of men and lose their reward with God left
that way of managing, and employing the stock of their own Hypocrisy to
themselves still, knowing how to play the Hypocrite and manage his own work
another way; even sleighly, subtly, craftily, without any noise or stir at
all; playing the part of the Serpent still, whose pace and motion was hardly
descernable in the Garden: and that when our Savior was but newly become a
Conqueror; supposing perhaps, that though he knew at that time how to Conquer,
yet he knew not how to use the victory.

Then; which further notes the insatiable and implacable malice of Satan
against Christ, and his members; having great wrath against them, because he
knows that he has but a short Rev. 12.12.
time: adding to the measure of the one, what he perceives is wanting in the
Continuance of the other; always walking about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may i Pet. 5.8.
devour; that is his end (such is his enmity against us) even by a continned
series of Temptations to devour us; whose wrath and malice against us, is
without end; from whose soul-destroying darts good Lord deliver us.

Thus the Time (you see) when this second Assault began, was immediately after
the first was ended. Then; Consider next both the Place where, and also the
manner how this happened; for the Place where 'twas in the holy City, and there
on a pinnacle of the Temple; but the manner how the Tempter dealt with our
Savior before he brought him thither, was this; he takes him up; Lo! he that
before was led up of he Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted, was now
conveyed thence to an higher place by the Devil to the same end; the place of
our Savior's Trial was changed, but the Tempter was still the same. Coelum,
non animum -- a change there was in the height, but no change at all in the
depth, in the deep policy of Satan, who takes him up: conveyeth our Savior at
his pleasure through the air from one place to another.

But surely he did not, he could not do this, without power first obtained of
God to do it; No: for though his power be very great, as the Sacred Texts
intimates, when it calls him a Isa. 27.1.
Dragon; a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. a strong man Mat. 12.29.
armed; a Ruler of the darkness of this Ephesians. 6.12.
world: yet that power (how great soever it be) is first derived from God, from
his power, from his Grant and permission; or else, why did he ask leave of God
at one time to tempt Job 1.11, 12.
Job? or, why did he not at another time enter into the Herd of swine without
our Savior's Mat. 8.31.32.
leave? an Argument that he is always at God's beck; and that he can do no
more then he permits and suffers Daemonum officium est nutibus Dei servire, nec
quicquam nisi jussum facere. Lactant. divin. Instit. l. 2. c. 17.
him; 'twas I confess in another Case (and as touching Criminal matters) that
our Savior said to Pilate (boasting of his power either to Crucify or release
him) thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee
from above, John 19.10, 11. yet it is most true also, even in this: Satan could
have had no power to move and remove our Savior's Sacred body from place to
place, from the Wilderness to the holy City; from the holy City, a lower, to
the pinnacle of the Temple, an higher place; no such power could he have had,
but from above, by Divine permission and concession; and by virtue of that
permission (the Father wisely ordering it to be so, for the glory of his Son
when he should return a Conqueror) the Devil takes him up; our Savior in the
mean time, being of himself most willing to be tempted of the Devil anywhere,
that the Devil by him for us might be Conquered everywhere; it was for his own
glory and our good that this was done, suffered to be done, though done by the
Devil, who takes him up.

Yet surely not after an usual and ordinary way; nor transported he him
leasurely and by degrees, step by step: no; for that was not at all agreeable
to the Devils hungry and hasty pursuit of his prey, nor any ways answerable at
this time to his eager desire (having been but lately Conquered) of obtaining a
Triumphant victory.

Omnis long a mora est nobis quae gaudia differt; neither was it, or could this
be done in a vision; for, then the Devils persuasion to our Savior afterward,
v. 6. cast thy self down, could have been no Temptation at all; but he takes
him up: that is, in my judgment (though I leave it to a more skilful Oedipus
to resolve shall I say, or rather dissolve this aenigma) our Savior being thus
taken up into the air, the proper Seat of Satan's principality, Ephesians. 2, 2.
(uncertain whether by the locks of his head as Ezekiel Ezekiel. 8.3.
was, or otherwise) the Devil carried him speedily to the place appointed for
his fresh and renewed Onset; which he might do, even by the power already
granted and received from above; a power to move and remove the bodies of men
Zanch. de vi and potent. Daemonum. lib. 4. cap. 10.
upwards and downwards, or otherwise as he pleases from one place to another;
and that with more speed then ordinary; this (no doubt) the Devil has power to
do; and that by virtue of God's Commission; nay, of God's Calvin. Institut.
lib. 1. cap. 17. Sect. 11.
Command, on whom his derivative power properly depends; and having such a
power once granted him, he soon made use of it, and takes him up.

And into the holy City he takes him up; even into Jerusalem, Luke 4.9 called
the Daughter of Mat. 21.9.
Zion; Tell ye the Daughter of Zion, behold, thy King comes unto thee meck; so
tell ye the daughter of Zion, tell ye Jerusalem, behold, thy King comes unto
thee meek still; and so meek, that for the finishing of his glorious Conquest,
he was content patiently to be carried, even by an unholy hand into the holy
City; Called Mat. 27.53.
holy, even for distinctions sake, to put a difference between this and the
unholy Cities of the Gentiles, wherein nothing but Idols were worshipped and
adored; as Molech among the 1 Kings 11.7, 33.
Ammonites; Chemosh among the Moabites; Ashtaroth among the Sidonians; Diana
among the Act. 19.17, 18.
Ephesians; and other in other places. Whereas here at Jerusalem from time to
time, the holy and true God was only worshipped, though not truly; who had
appointed that his Name, his honor should there peculiarly King. 11.36.
dwell; there was the Temple, the place of his Solemn and holy Worship; there
was Moses Chair; the Law and the Prophets were by the Scribes and Pharisees
solemnly read and expounded Mat. 23.2.
there; and there also God ordained that his first Christian Church should be
planted; and that from thence in following Ages, his holy Gospel, his holy
Religion should be propagated as it was to other Nations: as the Prophet Isiah
foretold should come to pass; Saying, out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and
the Word of the Lord from Isa. 2.3.
Jerusalem; and for this reason called it was now the holy City: because even
at that time (though much corrupted both in life and doctrine) it was still the
place of the public worship of the holy God; retaining even then the Adjunct
of (holy) because God was not altogether destitute, even at that time, of an
holy Church there; the place keeping its denomination from the better (though
the lesser) part.

Now after the Devil had thus conveyed our Savior from the Wilderness to
Jerusalem the holy City, he there sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple, v. 5.
on a Pinnacle without, not in any place within the Timple; no; it is the outside
and show of Religion and Devotion only that he is most taken with. Holy
places, properly so called from their relation to the holy service of God
therein, he likes not; though holy Water, holy Relics, holy Cross, etc.
names of his own invention, he most esteems and approves of; well enough
content that Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, should have only an outward
show and form of godliness; but if they will please him, they must deny the
power and inward effect of it; who not willing to stay long in the holy City
(even for the very Name it had of holy) but only in Transitu, passing through
it speedily, as a Post passes by; nor bringing our Savior within the Temple,
much less within the holy of holies, sets him without on a pinnacle of the
Temple, the place of his Second Trial; on a pinnacle; on one of the Battlements
of that part of the Temple, made at first to keep such from danger of falling,
as afterward should at any time occasionally be employed there;
notwithstanding though those pinacles, those Battlements were made for such a
use, yet the Devil purposely places our Savior not at the bottom to preserve
himself, but at the top of one of these, that being in such a posture, he might
be in the greater danger of falling: or at least, that he might be the fitter
subject for his Temptation to work upon; whose desire it was that he might
fall, if not to endanger himself, yet to obey him, which was also to endanger
himself; and both no doubt, the Devil sought, even obedience to himself, danger
to our Savior, when (placing him on the pinnacle of the Temple) he said unto
him, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, v. 6.

Lo! thus the Devil began his First, v. 3. and thus also he begins his Second
Temptation, even with the very same words; nothing at all changed in respect of
the syllables; nor no more altered in respect of the sense: If thou be the Son
of God; What shall I say? surely Satan is no good Grammarian, that knows not
how to vary his phrase: nor no good Rhetorician neither, that cannot tell how to
change his Proeme; but a great Favourer he always was, and still is, of
Tautologie; of vain and empty repetitions; If thou be the Son of God; (If) see!
he dares not positively deny it; neither will he absolutely confess it; Anceps
sermo est, says In locum, Canon. 3.
St. Hillary, it is a doubtful speech, and full of much fallacy: and indeed
proper for none but for an Arrian, or an Ebionite, or an Eunomian, or a Turk,
or a Devil; whereas none can truly, none should wilfully doubt of, or any ways
impugn the Deity of our Savior: it being no better then a fragment of the
Devils doctrine: and that no better then an Atheistical derision of him, who (
God and man in one Person, as the sacred Oracle Mat. 16.16. Acts 20.28. Romans
9.5. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 5.20.
testifies) laughs his scorners to scorn, even though they jointly band
themselves together against him, with the Devil, who in all Ages has taught
others to deny, what he himself here seemingly did but doubt of. Such were
those Antichrists of whom St. John 1. Joh. 2.22.3.2.
spoke; there being many, even in his days (so soon had the envious man sown
his tares) who would not confess that Jesus was the Son of God; against whom
the Apostle opposes this truth of truths to confute them, and to instruct us:
We have seer, and do testify that the Father sent the Son, to be the Savior
of the 1 John 4.14.
World; we have seen it: we do testify it; which the Devils Disciples would
not believe then, will not believe now; nor did he himself openly acknowledge
it, saying, If thou be the Son of God; If thou be, let me (at least now) who
have failed hitherto, let me see some manifest testimony, some evident sign
thereof; and there can be no harm; no danger in this, to prove thy self to be
(If thou be) the Son of God. Thus and thus did the Devil insinuate himself into
our Savior, then on the pinnacle of the Temple; thither by his power he brought
him: and there (expecting to see some notable proof of his Deity) he tempted
him, saying, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down from this pinnacle:
cast thy self Diabolus cecidit, and stanti invidet. Augu. in prim. Epist.
Joan.ca. 3. vox Diaboli quae semper omnes cadere deorsum desiderat. Hieronym.
in Text.
down. Lo! such as he himself is, such is the motion: it being most agreeable
to his nature, who cannot stand himself, to tempt others to fall: cast thy self
down from this pinnacle; this was the Devils Counsel to our Savior: Evil
counsel being always the worst to the evil (...).
Counselor, as this was to Satan: whose purpose was thereby to kindle in our
Savior both an ambitious desire of vain glory, and also a rash, vain, and
supine neglect of his Father's protection over him; whereas both were
altogether inconsistent with the most pure and spotless nature of the Son of
God; either to be touched with an Affection or Affectation of vain glory, The
Sum of the second Temptation.
by casting himself headlong down from so steep a place; that if he remained
unbruised and unmangled after such a fall as that, all the beholders might
crown him with a Plaudite, and admiring, adore him as some Person
extraordinary; Or, to be carried about (as many are with every wind of Ephesians.
4.14.
doctrine) with an inconsiderate and supine carelessness of the Protection of
his Father; upon which ground, though the Devil tempted him to both (even to be
careless of his Father's Protection, and also to be ambitious of the empty
applause of men) yet would our Savior become guilty of neither; knowing that
if he would have any benefit by the protection of his Father, he ought not to
attempt any thing by such means as were not lawful nor subordinate thereunto;
But this ( rashly to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, and that
at Satan's suit) this was not lawful, nor any ways agreeable to his Father's
Will; though most agreeable it was to Satan's: whose voice was, Cast thy self
down, and make no scruple at all of offending thy Father. So he tempted our
Savior; so he tempts us; persuading us to lay aside all fear of God, and
obey him: and oft-times he prevails with us, who could not at all prevail
with our Savior, but his cast thy self down, vanished into nothing.

But why did not the Devil himself (our Savior being then in his power,
though, not at his command) why did he not take the whole managing of this
matter into his own hands? surely, because his malice as wrathful as it is, and
his power as great as it is, is a limited and a restrained power and malice, as
to Christ and his members; thus far shall thou go and no farther. God confining
him within such and such bounds, which he may not, which he cannot pass: as
Solomon did, railing and cursing 1 King. 2.37.
Shimei; So that he is not able to do more then God permits him to do; and
God permits him only to Tempt (as far as he sees it convenient for the good
and Salvation of his Church and Chosen) but not to cast Persuadere potest,
praecipitate non potest, Hieronym. ubi supra.
down: not to destroy; 'twas so in Job's Case; The Lord said unto Satan,
behold, he is thine hand, but save his life; 'twas so here; the Tempter had
power granted him from above, only to say unto our Savior, by way of
persuasion and solicitation, Cast thy self down; but by way of any Coactive
violence, or praecipitation, actually to cast him down from the pinnacle of the
Temple, no power, no permission, no command had he obtained; no, none at all;
notwithstanding the limited and bounded power which he had received, he makes
use of, even to the uttermost; and though he were not able to constrain our
Savior by way of compulsion, yet he cease not importunately to solicit him
by way of a persuasive insinuation, Cast thy self down from this pinnacle; nay
in imitation of our Savior, v. 4. he farther backs his fruitless suit, with a
reason, and that out of Scripture too, though untruly alleged; and therefore
not at all prevalent with our Savior; saying, For it is written, He shall give
his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands shall they bear thee up,
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone, v. 6.

It is written; namely, Psalm, 91.11, 12. but more is there written then is here
alleged by Satan; and to far better purpose, if we compare both Texts
together: both what is written by the Psalmist there; and what is out of him
alleged by Satan here; That of the Psalmist is whole and entire: thus; For he
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: they
shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone;
The sense; so tender and careful shall the Angels of God be over thee (even as
a tender Mother is over a Child whom she leads in her hand, or bears in
her arms) that no hurtful danger shall befall thee; no stone, no overweighty
Temptation, but such as thou art able to bear, shall overwhelme thee; which is
a promise of God's peculiar watchfulness and protection by his Angels both over
the Head and his Members: both over Christ while he was on Earth; and also over
the whole body of the Faithful, so long as they are on Earth. But this of the
Devil here, is maimed and wants one of its integral limbs and parts: thus; For
it is written, says Satan, He shall give his Angels charge over thee; and so
far (to give the Devil his due) is the Text rightly Cited; But then with a
purpose to deceive, he wholly leaves out the following words, these (to keep
thee in all thy ways) which are (as it were) the Pole on which the whole sense
of this Scirpture turns; and on which the promise of God's Fatherly
protection over us (whether in lesser or in greater dangers) is wholly grounded;
who has promised indeed, to keep us safe under his wings, and to hide us from
danger under his feathers, Psalm 91. v. 4. from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome pestilence, v. 3. from the terror by night, and from the
arrow that flies by day, v. 5. But all is Conditionally, and no farther then
we are always careful to regulate all our Actions, acording to the rule of his
promise; which is (in all our ways) in all the good and honest ways of our
lawful Callings, to the glory of God, and the good one of another, as
fellow members of one and the same mystical body of Christ, to use all such
lawful means to protect and defend our selves, as God has appointed; who
permits us not at all to tempt him, by flying to extraordinary, when ordinary
means are near at hand; and may not, must not (if we will be safe) be neglected
and contemned; so far has God promised to give his Angels charge over us, but
no farther: no otherwise; But if men will rashly and wilfully go out of their
ways, which God has appointed them to walkin; and once out, continue
obstinately to use unlawful means, for the accomplishing of this or that;
surely such men tempt God (which our Savior would not do) and are out of the
pale of his protection; which our Savior well knew, and therefore would not be
moved (even though he were moved) to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the
Temple; because he knew that was none of his ways; not to fall down thence by
a violent, no, but rather to descend down thence by a Natural motion: and that
leasurely by steps and by degrees; that was his right way as the Case now
stood, though that crooked Isa. 27.1.
serpent the Devil, by concealing the substance of his alleged Text, attempted
to lead him out of that, into his own way; but his fraud was espied, his Text
was examined, and his Temptation as powerfully repelled in this, as in his
first Assault; Nay, we may truly say, that his fraud also was here farther
detected, not only in concealing part of this Text, which made wholly for our
Savior, who would not be tempted to go out of his ways; but also in his not
alleging the whole following Text, v. 13. which made so directly against
himself, on the behalf of our Savior; a Person ordained to subdue him, as the
concealed Text (the sense whereof was well known to Satan) imports; and the
concealed Text which made so plainly against himself was this; Thou shall go
upon the Lion, and the Adder, the young Lion, and the Dragon, shall thou tread
under thy feet. Where there is no promise made to the Pope to trample upon the
Emperor (as Alexander the third, abusing this Text, did upon the neck of
Frederick the first, surnamed Baleus de Act. Roman. Pontificum, lib. 5. in vita
Alexandri tertii.
Barbarossa) No; but for our Savior Christ to trample upon Satan, with whom he
had to do; This Lion, this Adder, this Dragon, being none other mystically but
the Devil Tittleman in locum, Hilar. Canon. 3. Hieronym. in Matt. 4.
himself, full of wrath, full of venom, full of poison, to be Conquered by our
Savior; who will tread him shortly under his feet, Romans 16.20 and did now
sufficiently trample on him, when he answered him, It is written again, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God, v. 7.

It is written again; once had our Savior beat off the Devil before, v. 4.
with It is written; namely, Deuteronomy. 8.3. and once also in imitation of our
Savior, had the Devil alleged, or rather misalledged Scripture, v. 6.
mangling and perverting the true and genuine sense thereof, by concealing what
therein was most Material and Considerable: this, to keep thee in all thy
ways; which was written also, Psalm. 91. v. 11. but not alleged by Satan; but
our Savior in his reply here (It is written again) points at both; both at
his own true alleging of Scripture in his first, and also at the Devils false
dealing in not truly alleging it in this his second Conflict; and because he
would deal with him now again as he had done before; that is, Conquer him with
his Father's word, He says, (putting him in mind to how little purpose it was
to contest with him any more, who had the strongest weapon, though the Devil
pretended Scripture too) It is written again: and by thy false dealing, thou
can not, thou shall not prevail against me; Our Savior in this his reply
here not opposing Scripture to Scripture, as if the one only (that alleged by
himself) had been true, and the other (that alleged by Satan, as much as
remained of it) had been false: no; but following that rule which afterward he
taught St. John, believe not every 1 John 4.1.
spirit (not the doctrine of every one that entitleth it to the spirit) but try
the Spirits, try their doctrines whether they be of God, he only Confuted the
abuse of Scripture by Falsas de Scripturis Diaboli sagittas, veris Scripturarum
frangit clypeis. Hieronym. in locum.
Scripture; For the Devil as it is plain, to his own advantage, had most
impudently abused it, by misalledging it (as Heretics, his disciples often
do) but our Savior confuted that abuse, and rectified that error, by righthly
interpreting it; and he rightly interpreted that Scripture, when (rightly
concluding, that to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, which was
none of his ways, was to tempt God, who had promised to keep him only in all
his ways, which the Devil left out) He answered, It is written again, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God: and in vain thou temptest me to tempt him; in
sense thus much; Thou that Tempest me (no good Textuary) though thou judge
thy thy self strong enough to Oppose me, and finally prevail against me with
thy too too short weapon, with a piece of a Text, yet I am stronger then thou,
and as able now as before, v. 4* by Citing a whole Text, according to its true
sense and meaning, which thou have not done, to foyl and repel thee; and thus I
do it; It is written again; thou might have been satisfied at first, but
since thou will not, my Father's Word shall again defend me, and again offend
thee: It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

It is written, Deuteronomy. 6.16. where Moses exhorting the Israelites to obey their
God, begins his Exhortation with, Hear O Israel, v. 3.4. and (not to speak of
other particulars) in this also, he commands them to hear him even in this, Ye
shall not tempt the Lord your God. Which our Savior here (the number only
changed) aptly alleges against the Devil persuading him (by casting himself
down from the pinnacle of the Temple) to tempt God; which Moses forbade the
Israelites; and our Savior took it for granted, that it was also forbidden
him. But the better to understand the Text, let us enquire a little into the
meaning of these words (to Tempt God) Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God;
thus; a Negative precept you see it is; and such Precepts are always Praecepta
negativa obligant semper, and ad semper.
Obligatory, always binding, and to all times, unless God himself command the
contrary; As, Thou shall not kill, Exodus 20.13. and no man but by divine
dispensation (as in the case of Abrabam, whom God commanded to sacrifice his
Genesis 22.2.
son) can at any time be released from the exact keeping of that Negative
Commandment. But our Savior here had received no such dispensation, as might
any ways absolve him from his Obedience to his Father; and therefore he would
not, by any persuasion of Satan, suffer himself to be drawn away from his
Filial obedience to his Father; knowing that the same law that did bind the
Israelites, though they often transgressed it, did also oblige him, and he
would at no time transgress it; but resolutely answered Satan, with relation to
himself, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Now (to come to the point we
treat of) to tempt God, is, out of rashness or unbelief, and the like, to make
Trial and Tentare est periculum facere, experimenta quaerere, etc. Pet. Mart.
loc. com. class 1. c. 8. Sect. 17. and class 3. ca. 4. Sect. 54.
experiment, by such means as we ought not, either of his power, or his
justice, or his wisdom, or his Fatherly protection over us. The latter whereof
is properly the Tempting here meant in the Text; Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God; that is (as in this particular Case) thou shall not rashly and out of
unbelief, question his power, thou shall not make trial by any unlawful means,
whether he be able to protect thee, or not, even when thou have wilfully
exceeded the bounds, within which he has promised to protect thee; or, if thou
do, thou temptest him, thou sinnest against him; which I may not do, says
our Savior; But because we are now speaking of Tempting God, who by man is
tempted several ways, let us a little expatiate in this matter, and then again
descend in order to this particular tempting here mentioned in the Text. We say
then, that God, by sinful man, naturally exorbitant, and of himself not to be
kept within the bounds of modesty and moderation, is Tempted diverse ways. As,

First, In respect of his Power. And so he is tempted, when inconsiderate men
(impatient to wait Gods leisure) do, out of diffidence and unbelief, appoint
either the Time, when he shall help them; or the Place, where he shall help
them; or the manner, how he shall help them: leaving in the mean time (as it
were) nothing to his immediate power; (who is a present help in trouble) but
what best suits with their own folly. So the Israelites tempted God in the
wilderness, when in the time of their greatest thirst, they made trial of his
power, whether he were able to give them Water, or not: chiding with Moses,
saying, Give us Water that we may drink, Exodus 17.2. To whom Moses replied, Why
chide you with me? wherefore do you tempt the Lord? In memory of whose chiding
with God, and Moses, after the Lord had manifested his powerful presence among
them, by giving them water out of the Rock, he called the name of that place,
Massah, v. 7. and Numb. 20.2, 3, 4, 13.
Meribah, that is, Chiding or Contention, because of the chiding of the
Children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord
among us, or not? To which manner of tempting the Lord our God, this in the
Text cited by our Savior, out of Deuteronomy. 6.16. has relation: Ye shall not tempt
the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah; And with such a kind of
tempting God also in respect of his power, the Governors of the Inhabitants of
Bethulia were upbraided by Judith, for making an Oath between God and them,
that they would deliver up the City to the Assyrians, unless God within five
days did give them Water; a Judith. 8.9, 10, 11, 12.
to whom she said, Who are you that have tempted God this day?

Secondly, In respect of his Justice. And so he is tempted, when wicked men,
who run on securely in the un-interrupted course of their sins, do by their
obstinacy and impenitency, make a needless trial to their own woe, whether God
be a just God, and whether in his justice he will punish them, or not. Whereas
it is known, that in the hand of the Lord there is a Psalm 75.9, 10.
Cup, and the Wine is red: it is full mixed, and he pours out of the same: as
for the dregs thereof, all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them, and suck
them out; and in this sense, the Lord himself complains against the
Israelites, Numb. 14.22. saying, They have tempted me these ten times; and by
their re-iterated sins have they so often tempted me; Wherefore I cannot but in
justice punish them; at least, with a privation of the promised land; as
afterward they found true by experience. Surely, they shall not see the land,
which I swear unto their Fathers, says the Lord; Neither shall any of them
that provoked (tempted) me, see it, v. 23. So that plain it is, that God is
even then also tempted, when the Execution of his severe justice, which will
inevitably follow incorrigible sinners, is not at all feared or regarded.

Thirdly, In respect of his Wisdom. And so he is tempted, when vainglorious
men (as if they were wiser then the All-wise God) strive to have that in point
of Ceremonious and outward shadows continued, which he (who ties not himself at
all times, to the same Rites and Ceremonies) has appointed (at least, by
degrees) at such or such a time, to be discontinued and abolished. A clear
Example whereof, we have in that sharp Contention which arose between the
Pharisees and Peter, with others, touching Circumcision and other rites of the
Ceremonial law of Moses, which in the judgment of Peter and the rest of the
Apostles (whose judgment in that Case, was the judgment even of God himself)
were at that time fit to be made Null and Cancelled, Act. 15. thus; Certain
men, which came down from Judea, taught the Brethren, and said, Except ye be
Circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, v. 1. which Paul and
Barnabas in Opinion dissenting from them, and vehemently disputing against
them, oppose and deny, v. 2. willing to have that Question determined; but not
willing to meddle therein of themselves, without the unanimous consent of the
Apostles and Elders, v. 2. who being rightly informed by them, of the true
state of the Controversy in Question; as, that Circumcision was urged by
certain of Judea, as a Ceremony most necessary to Salvation, v. 1. and that the
keeping of the whole law of Moses, not only the Moral, but also the Ceremonial
law was urged by certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed, v. 5. as
necessary also for the attaining of the same end, they came together to
consider of this matter, v. 6. and thus assembled together in Council, to
consider of this matter; Peter by whose mouth it was appointed of God that the
Gentiles should hear the Word of God and believe, v. 7. after much disputing,
said unto them, Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the necks of the
Disciples, which neither our Fathers, nor we were able to bear? v. 10. In
sense; Why thus tempt ye God, by urging Circumcision now and other Ceremonies
(once indeed commanded by the law of Moses, but now abolished) why urge ye this
as a thing absolutely necessary for the attaining of eternal life? which in its
own nature, was never so necessary; for, v. 11. our Fathers, and we are saved
no other way, but by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; more clearly revealed
now to us in the Gospel, then in former Ages, to our Fathers under the Law:
see! that yoke, those Ceremonies in Question, were then (under the law)
enjoined even to believers; But now under the Gospel, 'twas thought fit by the
Apostles themselves, as most agreeable to the wisdom of God, to take that yoke
from off the Disciples necks; wherefore at such a time as that, when the
substance, when Christ was exhibited, I say at such a time as that, to quarrel
about shadows, as those that came down from Judea did, Act. 15.1. imposing
circumcision, as necessary to salvation; whereas Paul says, If ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you Gal. 5.2.
nothing: and not yielding to take off that yoke now, newly Antiquated; and
therefore now useless Ceremonies of the Law, which before his coming in the
flesh, was only our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Gal. 3.24.
Christ, what was this? but slightly to undervalue and presumtuously to call
in question the manifold wisdom of Ephesians. 3.10.
God, preferring their own, before his; which (by reason of distinct times,
requiring a distinct dispensation) was to be manifested one way to the Jews,
another way to the Gentiles; the Jews before the coming of Christ, must,
according to the wisdom of God, be subject to many rites and Ceremonies (that
yoke whereof St. Peter speaks) but the converted Gentiles, after his coming,
must not: must not be any longer under the Paedagogie and Ritual discipline of
the ceremonial Law; wherefore Peter here, in the name, and with the consent of
the whole College of the Apostles and Elders, rightly charged those with the
sin of tempting God, who in this case (highly extolling their own judgment)
would not admit of any abolition of those old Ceremonies, though abolished,
they were according to the manifold wisdom of God.

Fourthly, In respect of his Fatherly protection over us. And so he is
oftentimes tempted, when careless men, altogether negligent of the ordinary and
appointed means, do, when there is no cause at all, presumptuously try,
whether God will protect and preserve them, or not, without such or such
ordinary means some other extraordinary way: nothing at all regarding the
undeniable truth of that approved Qui destinat ad finem, destinat ad media.
Maxim, that God who ordains to the end, ordains to the means also, which
lead to that end. For instance; when Hezekiah was sick unto death, the Lord
sent his Prophet Isaiah unto him, and his Message was to tell him, that he
should recover of that 2 King. 20.1, 5, 7.
sickness; True; but not unless he used the means appointed of God for his
recovery; which was, to lay a bunch of figs upon his boil: which done as was
appointed, he soon recovered as was promised; but had the means of his recovery
been carelessly neglected, his boil had not been healed; nor he himself restored
to his former strength. Again, Paul being in great danger of Shipwreck, in his
voyage to Rome, was comforted by an Angel, appearing to him by night, saying,
Paul, God has given thee all them that sail with thee in the Ship; has given
them (their lives) unto thee; and for thy sake, not one of them shall be
drowned; not if they use the means appointed to save their lives: and that
means was, to abide in the Act. 27.22, 23, 31.
Ship; as Paul himself (after he had conferred with the Angel) said to the
Centurion, and to the Soldiers, Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be
saved; which being punctually observed, not one of them perished in the waters;
But had they not abode in the Ship (the means of their safety) they could not
have promised unto themselves, any the least hope of safety; because, when the
means and second causes are rashly neglected, the end, ordinarily, can never be
attained; Witness that peevish Jew, who fallen into an unclean place, and
refusing to be taken out thence on the Sabbath day (whereas it was lawful to
pull an Ox, or an Ass out of a pit on that Luke 14.5. Periculum animae pellit
Sabbatum.
day) by that his wilful tempting God, in neglecting the ordinary means to
preserve his life, he lost it before the next day. As many others also do,
even by their own presumptuousness and careless neglect of all good means
ordained to save their lives. And such are they who either obstinately refuse
the present and proper help of the Physician, in time of sickness; or, that
will not (when they are to take a journey) be any ways persuaded, prudently to
decline, and avoid this or that imminent and present danger, likely to fall
upon them by the way; knowing that Thieves are there, and as dangerous
Companions there, etc. foolishly disputing against themselves thus and thus; If
God has ordained that I shall recover of this sickness, there is no need of
Physic; if not, all that the Physician can do, is in vain; therefore I will
not at all meddle with any of his Diets, with any of his Potions. And again. If
it be the good pleasure of God to preserve my life any longer, I shall be safe,
even among Thieves; if not, all my providence, all my industry will avail me
nothing; therefore I will adventure to pass, even through the midst of them;
thou will; more forward then wise; thou will; but know, that in thus peevishly
following thine own will, thou thereby temptest God, and do not at all obey
his will, who has given thee an understanding to discern between good and
evil; and a will to choose the good, and refuse the evil: Now it is good and
acceptable unto God, to make use of the Physician as a means under God to
prolong thy life; and that of our Savior, which is meant spiritually, may be
applied corporally also; this, Matthew. 9.12.
they that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick; where our
Savior grants that they that need a Physician, may lawfully use him; but they
that are sick need him: Neither was Asa blamed because he sought to the
Physicians, but because he sought not to the Lord, but only to the Physicians;
putting his whole trust in the one (in man) for his recovery, and none at all
in the other (in God) therefore was he 2 Chro. 16.12.
blamed. Wherefore that counsel of the wise man is not wilfully to be despised;
Honor a Physician with the honor due unto him, for the uses which you may
have of Ecclus 38.1.
him: An argument that in time of sickness, it is a lawful means, even
appointed of God himself, for our recovery to use the Physician; and none but
such as tempt God, will obstinately refuse his medicines when there is present
need of them, and when they may be had; yet still with this care, with this
caveat, that we seek chiefly unto God (who gives the blessing) both before and
also when we seek unto the Physician; it is good also in times of danger, to use
all lawful means under and subordinate to the providence of our good God, to
escape that danger; or else why did David wisely decline the fury of 1 Samuel
18.11.
Saul? or why did our Savior himself, until his hour was come, decline the
layings in wait of the Scribes and John 5.13.
Pharisees? or why was Paul, to the end that he might escape his hands, let
down by the wall in a basket, when the Governor under Aretas the King sought
to apprehend 2 Cor. 11.32.33.
him? or when the Jews at an other time took counsel to kill Acts 9.24, 25.
him? was it not to prove even by example, that whosoever will attain the end,
must not carelessly neglect the means; must not despise the middle, or second
causes, subordinate to that end? or if they do, the effect thereof will be
dishonor to God, and danger unavoydable to themselves. Behold, so it is in
temporal things; God is tempted, and the end is not attained, when the means
leading to that end are wilfully neglected. Surely it is so also in spiritual
things: Now faith, repentance, and the preaching of the holy Gospel, are
spiritual and heavenly means ordained of God, to bring us to the end, even to
eternal life; and therefore it is a blasphemous speech of some, who say, If it
be the good pleasure of God to save me, to bring me to Heaven, I shall be
saved, though in the mean time I be altogether careless of the means whereby
he will do it: Not so, O man, whosoever thou art, not so; for if thou will be
saved, that which John the Baptist so earnestly required of the unbelieving
Jews, is also required of thee; to repent and believe the Mark 1.14.
Gospel; because most true it is, that God who created thee without thee, will
never save thee without Qui creavit te sine te, non salvabit te sine te. August.
thee; without thine own faith, without thine own repentance, when thou art
come to years, and in a capacity of both; Believe and thou shall be saved;
eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23.
True, but that life shall be given to none but to those only that run, and
wrestle, and strive and fight to obtain that eternal prize; these being the
means appointed of God to obtain it; so run that ye may 1 Cor. 9.24.
obtain; we have not digressed in all this; no; yet it is time to look back
again to the rock from whence all this is hewn; it is this, God is tempted
several ways; as when a needless, nay a sinful experiment is made, 1. Of his
power. 2. Of his Justice. 3. Of his Wisdom. 4. Of his Fatherly protection over
us; and in this latter sense, is our Savior's answer here to be understood;
for to the Devil persuading him to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the
Temple, v. 5. No, says he in sense, that lawfully I cannot do: Why? Because
there is another ordinary way to go down, and not ( rashly neglecting my
Father's provident care over me) to cast my self down, and that ordinary way,
those ordinary means must I use, which he has appointed to preserve me;
otherwise I shall be guilty of tempting him, by trying whether he will so
preserve me or not, when I am wilfully gone out of my ways; but that I may not
do neither; for it is written: and his word shall be my guide in all my ways;
and his word is, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, v. 7. Thus our Savior
answered, and thus also was the Devil, even in this his second assault, most
shamefully repulsed.

Notwithstanding, he soon begins a Qui audit dominum deum tuum, tamen adhuc
tentare non desinit. Chrysolog. de tentati. and jejunio Christi, Sermon. 13.
third.

Again the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows him
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, v. 8.

And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me, v. 9.

Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan: for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, verse 10.

Lo! Here is much more of impudency in this, then in the two other temptations;
and that by the same Tempter, against the same Savior: For before v. 3, 6. it
was but, if thou be the Son of God; but now it is v. 9. If thou will fall down
and worship me: Satan rather increases then decreaseth in his malice; The sum
of the third and last Temptation.
whose attempts were now high and lofty; and his aim in this third and last
temptation, was to fill our Savior's heart with a covetous desire of worldly
glory, and vast possessions; to the end that thereby he might draw him away
from the true worship of the true God; knowing well enough that covetuousness
is Col. 3.5.
Idolatry; and if he could but once persuade him to covet all the Kingdoms of
the world; the way he saw was then fairly opened to persuade him also to fall
down and worship him, which was the chief end of his temptation; for the
archieving whereof, his limited power was now stretched even to the highest
Tota potestatis commovetur ambitio. Hilar, in Locum. Can. 3.
pitch, far higher then the pinnacle of the Temple; though with no better
success then when he was on the pinnacle, not so high as this exceeding high
mountain; or when he was in the wilderness, a lower place; the attempts of a
Devil, can no where thrive against a Savior; for though a threefold cord, as
Solomon speaks, be not quickly Eccles. 4.12.
broken; not commonly, and by a weak arm; yet if it be of the Devils hoisting,
left to our Savior's unhoisting, it is quickly broken: As Sampson Judge. 16.9,
12.
quickly brake the withes, and new ropes of the Philistines; being in that a
type of our Savior in his; whose two-edged Heb. 4.12.
sword, (it is written) was far sharper, effectually to cut asunder this
subtilly-wreathed temptation of Satan (the product of his two first) then the
sword of Alexander the great was to cleave asunder the Gordian Quint. Curti.
lib. 3. p. 25, 26.
knot; refusing now, not only the Kingdom of Asia, which that Alexander then
coveted, and was now boldly offered unto him by the Devil, inclusively in the
bundle of the whole, but also, all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them: He refuses them all, and will not agree to fall away from his God, by
falling down to Satan; and this is the sum both of the Devils proposal, and our
Savior's refusal.

Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.

And though he were now in the top of an exceeding high mountain (probably in
the highest region of his own dominion) yet there was he once more overtopped,
overmatched, and his lofty attempts confounded by our Savior. But we will
search more narrowly into the Text, and thence give you several observations:
Thus,

Again the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, v. 8. Again;
which notes that this bad angel, who had been too too busy in tempting
before, was as busy still; Finis alterius mali, gradus est futuri; proceeding
from one evil to another: Again; in continual motion he was, imitating therein
the good Angels, though to a bad end: Again; from the Wilderness to the holy
City; from the holy City, to the Pinnacle of the Temple; from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, to an exceeding high mountain: And all this ado, all this stir, all
this moving from place to place, was again to tempt our Savior: But we will
not believe that he thus moved up and down all this time in any other then an
oblique motion; it is his nature always to be excentrick and irregular, being
the cause of all irregularity amongst us; yet we find him in 1 Pet. 5.8.
Peter, going, walking about; and in Job 2.2.
Job, compassing the earth; that is, compassing men in everywhere, on every
side, that he might catch them in his net: compassing, not leaving any corner
of the Earth unsearcht for his prey, the cause of his going about, of his going
to and fro, and walking up and down in the Earth, rather then by any circular
motion, to attempt any thing, which had so much not only of impudency, but also
of obliquitie and irregularitie in it.

Again the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain. Takes him up;
and brought him thither through the air, as once he had brought him before
from the wilderness to the pinnacle of the Temple; And though our Savior did
never follow him whithersoever he went; yet at this time, he yielded his body
to be carried by him whithersoever he would: not refusing to be taken up into
an exceeding high mountain. Now Goegraphers make mention of many such, as Vbi
in excelsissimam exurgit sublimitatem Caucasus. Solin. polyhist. ca. 41.
Taurus, which arising from the Indian Sea, and running along in a continued
ridge of hills through many Countries, has several names, as Imaus,
Paraepamisus, etc. and where it ascends to its greatest height, Caucasus; the
Pyrenaean hills, betwixt Spain and France; The Alps; the hill Atlas, the top
whereof cannot be seen; Olympus, whose head reaches above the clouds; -- nubes
excedit Olympus; And Tenerif, in the Canaries, which is famous for the highest
mountain in the known world. But whether our Savior were taken up into any one
of these, is not here written; and therefore because the particular mountain is
not at all specified, sufficient it shall be for us to know only that it was a
Mountain, an exceeding high mountain, into which the Devil now takes him up;
And thither he takes our Savior up (probably) for three reasons.

First, To publish and manifest unto men his own natural pride and ambition,
being as willing to be known to be a Devil, as that he was one; who ever since
his irrecoverable fall (his pride at first causing it) always desires to be
high still, exceeding high, though it be to his own disadvantage as now it was;
and as it was before to our first Parents, who out of that pride which he had
infused into their hearts, affected an equality, as he himself had done, even
with God himself, Genesis 3. So that what is spoken properly of the King of
Babylon, may by way of allusion fitly be applied here; This, How art thou
fallen from Heaven O Lucifer, son of the morning? Thou have said in thy heart,
I will ascend into Heaven, I will be like the most Isa. 14.12, 13.
High. Lo! 'twas the ambitious haughtiness of a man, there, to Ascend; But it is
the exceeding high haughtiness of a Devil, here: even of that Lucifer, that
counterfeit Angel of light, who (by his pride, being fallen himself) tempts men
to become proud and ambitious, lofty and high-minded, that when they are at the
highest pitch of their ambition, the like may befall them, as was once
threatened to Mat. 11.23.
Capernaum; thou that art exalted to Heaven; exalted, by pride: Shall be cast
down to Hell; cast down, by punishment; As it fared with the Devil himself, who
not keeping his first estate, but leaving his own habitation, Jude v. 6. though
he were cast even as low as Hell, yet (as a manifest testimony of his own
natural pride) he aspired still to be on high; and this may be one reason, why
he now takes up our Savior into an exceeding high mountain.

Secondly, That wicked men once knowing him to be the God of this 2 Cor. 4.4.
world (as he is to them, ruling in the hearts of the children of disobedience)
and perceiving that he could imitate even the true God himself, in many of his
works and ways, might the sooner be deceived by him. Thus, God himself long
before, and sent up Moses into Mount Deuteronomy. 32.49.
Nebo, that thence he might show him at once all the promised land of Canaan;
and the Devil now (not ignorant thereof) in imitation of that Act of God, takes
up our Savior into an exceeding high mountain, that thence he also (as a God)
might show him at once all the Kingdoms of the world; but after what manner, we
will enquire afterward; only it is this we are yet speaking of: this, that the
end why the Devil oftentimes imitateth the works of the true God, either by
himself, as here he did, or by his instruments, is to deceive men, and persuade
them the more to obey him and imitate his works of darkness, to their own
ruin. For instance: the Magicians of Pharaoh, the Devils instruments, turned
rods into Serpents, and water into Exo. 7.11, 22.
blood; in imitation of Moses and Aaron, God's instruments, who had done the
like to convince Pharaoh, if it had been possible, and make him understand
himself: But the Devils end, by the work of these Magicians (imitating good
men, though a bad way) was more and more to deceive and harden Pharaoh (too too
much confiding in his Sorcerers, because they had done such miracles) and he
attained his end there. He does the like still; and desires still to attain
the same end, even (by imitating the works of God, to the dishonor of God) to
harden the hearts of men and deceive them. And thus surely he dealt here; his
work was wonderful, but his intention was deceitful: nothing at all for the
honor of God, but rather to persuade men, to admire and adore him for their
God, who in this Case had power to do as much to Jesus, as God himself had
done once to Moses; God sent up the one into Mount Nebo to view all the land of
Canaan; the Devil in imitation thereof (to magnify his power amongst the sons
of men, too too much inclinable by his allurements, to magnify him, and
thereby destroy themselves) takes up the other into an exceeding high
mountain, to show him all the Kingdoms of the world.

Thirdly, That by his presence there, he might not only defile that place, but
also as much as in him was, discountenance and disgrace all those memorable
works, which oftentimes, even by the appointment of God himself, without his
assistance, have been done since and before, on several other high mountains,
though perhaps none of them on that mountain. As the Arc of Noah rested on
Mount Genesis 8.2.
Ararat; and it was at first resolved, and afterward proposed by the Angel to
righteous Lot, that when Sodom was to be destroyed, it was most safe and
secure for him to fly into the Genesis 19.17, 18.
mountains. Abraham in faith sacrificed his son Isaac on Mount Genesis 22.2.
Moriah: a Type that the Son of God (whom the Devil now Tempted) should
afterward be sacrificed on Mount Calvary, the same mountain as he Luke. 23.33.
was. Solomon's Temple was built also on Mouns Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. even on
the same Mount where Isaac should have been sacrificed, and where our Savior
Christ was actually Crucified, or very near unto it; called long before, the
threshing floor of 2 Samuel 24.18, 25. 1 Chro. 21.18, 19. 2 Chro 3.1.
Ornan, or Araunah the Jebusite, where David built an Altar to the Lord. The
Law was given in Mount Exodus 19.20.
Sinai; and the sound of the Gospel went out from Mount Zion, Act. 2. as was
foretold by the Isa. 2.3. Mich. 4.2.
Prophets. Nay, our Savior Christ himself, not long after his tempting
preached on a Mat. 5.1.
Mount; and after that, was transfigured on a Mat. 17.12.
Mount; and last of all, Ascended into Heaven from a Mount, even from the Mount
of Olives, near Bethany, and not far from Act. 1.12.
Jerusalem. Lo! many remarkable things and mystical, have been done from time
to time on several mountains; and of that the Devil was not ignorant; who
(doubtless) was the more willing now to tempt our Savior on a mountain, that
both by his presence there, he might then defile that place, and also that by
his practice there, he might disgrace the works of God, that at any time had
been done before, or should be done afterward in such or such places: But
howsoever it was, whether 1. For the manifestation of his own natural pride and
loftiness: Or 2. From his emulation, to imitate the works of God, that thereby
he might the better deceive men: Or 3. From the envy and spite he had within
him, prompting him to discountenance and reproach the works of God done at any
time in such and such places; howsoever it was, and what other end soever he
had in so doing, manifest enough it is from the Text, that the Devil in this
his third assault, took up our Savior into an exceeding high mountain.

And when he had taken him up thither, he shows him all the Kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them, v. 8. And that, as S. Luke says, in a moment of
Luke 4.5.
time; in the least point of time; which Paul, in another case, calls the
twinkling of an 1 Cor. 15.52.
eye; which circumstance rightly weighed, makes it appear more then probable,
that all this here, as touching this latter temptation, was done in a Marlor.
in Locum.
a Vision; the Devil, in a moment of time, presenting, or rather representing
all those glorious objects, not to the eyes outwardly, but inwardly to the mind
and understanding of our Savior: for otherwise, and after any other manner
then in a vision, it was not possible for our Savior, as man, in uno nunc, in
an instant, in a moment of time, and uno intuitu, at one view, actually to
behold all the Kingdoms of the world; not possible to do it in so short a
time, with the eyes of his body; but in a vision, with the eyes of his
imagination possible it was; as Peter in a vision saw at once all manner of
four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and
fowls of the air, in a vessel descending from Heaven, as it had been a great
sheet, knit at the four Acts 10.11* 10.
corners: And possible it was also for Satan thus to represent the forms and
portraiture of all those Kingdoms, to the imagination of our Savior, as man,
in a vision; but as he was God, the Devil had nothing at all to do with him;
which is supposed to be the true reason, why S. John, who in his Gospel
speaks principally of our Savior as Haymo. homil. Domin. prim. Quadrages.
God, makes no mention at all of any of his temptations, which were incident
unto him only as man: Besides, all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, are comprehended within the circumference of two Hemispheres; the one
whereof is always above, the other always beneath us; insomuch that if a man
were placed in the body of the Sun, and could thence, having strong and
un-impedited Optics, behold the Earth, yet could he not at once see above half
thereof; much less could he see so much from any mountain, though it were
exceeding high. Wherefore when the Texts say, That the Devil showed our Savior
all the Kingdoms of the world, in a moment of time, this seems to me to be
meant after no other manner, then only in a vision; wherein at once (as in an
exact Map of the whole universe) all these things were by the Devil set before
the imagination and understanding of our Savior, to contemplate on; giving him
sufficient time afterward (no doubt) more leisurely to take a further view of
them all, and of the glory of them, which at first, in a moment of time, were
showed unto him in a vision; and that after he had been actually and locally
transported by the Devil from the Pinnacle of the Temple, to an exceeding high
mountain: Or (if you will) let it be otherwise, if any sufficient reason can be
yielded by any, how it could be otherwise then only in a vision; though whether
it were so or so, is not at all positively determinable from the Text; yet this
is thence positively determinable, this, that the Devils temptation, persuading
him to covetousness and ambition, took not at all in any wise with our Savior,
As the Serpents did with the woman, Genesis 3. or as the woman's did again with
the man, too too credulous and uxorious, who had grace enough given him in his
Creation (if he would) to resist it; although it was both his and our
unhappiness, that willingly he yielded to the voice of his wife, to his wifes
temptation: But no such yielding, no such compliance was there here: no; for
whether this representation of the worlds beauty were made either to our
Savior's eye, that was not at all delighted with; or to his heart, neither was
that any ways affected with all the Kingdoms of the world; notwithstanding all
these seemed so glorious to Satan, although there were no reason for it; for
all are but things merely transitory; and in respect of that which is divine
and heavenly, fit to have no other inscription engraven upon them, then that
indelible character of Eccles. 1.1, 2.
Solomon written (if I may so speak) on both sides (like the Tragedy of
Scriptus and in tergo, nec dum finitus Orestes.
Orestes) vanity of vanities, on one side; and vanity of vanities, on the other
side; and round about again, all is vanity: All; whether it be the Kingdoms of
the world, or the clory of them. But the Devil here was of another judgment,
altogether dissenting from that of Solomon; probably because he knew that
Solomon himself had much gold brought him from 1 Kings 9.28.10.14.
Ophir, hoording it up and delighting in it; the Devil, I say, was of another
judgment; and therefore sets a far higher price upon his usurped possessions,
then the price of vanity; not willing at all to part either with glory or
Kingdoms, without far more then a sufficient recompense; He says unto him;
and what he required by way of recompense for his liberal gift, now to be
tendered unto him, the Text tells us thus, All these things will I give thee;
by way of compact will I give thee, If thou will fall down and worship me, v.
9. if thou will; by way of compensation. Surely too too great a retribution for
a gift, though in appearance great. But,

He says unto him. Lo! our Savior once suffered not the devils to speaks,
because they knew Mark 1.34.
him; but here he suffered this Devil to speak thrice, because he tempted him;
it being necessary that words should now mutually pass between them as
interpreters of the mind, of the meaning of each; there is a time to keep
Eccles. 3.7.
silence, and a time to speak: And this was now the Divel's time; who after his
two former repulses, having liberty again to speak, changes his words indeed
in speaking, but not at all his malice in tempting; and because he changes his
usual words, let it be granted that he had now forgotten to say unto our
Savior any more, If thou be the Son of God; being sufficiently convinced (no
doubt) that he was so, by his own answer unto him, v. 7. It is written, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God: Meaning that as he himself might not tempt
his Father, so neither might the Devil tempt him, who was the Lord his Hilar.
in locum. Chrysolog. Sermon. 13.
God; not as he was a Devil, no, but as he was a creature; and therefore the
Son of God, which that other unclean spirit acknowledged expressly, Mark 1.24.
and surely was not now doubted of by this unclean spirit here, although in
words he would not acknowledge it; and because not doubted of, it was not urged
any more; notwithstanding, though this Temptation (perhaps, for that reason,
because the Devil in that point was already fully satisfied) begins not as the
other Two, with If thou be the Son of God: yet still with mischief enough it
begins, intended against the Son of God; He says unto him, all these things
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

O Munificent Malefactor! behold! the Church of Rome has works of
Supererogation, works not commanded, but only counseled: works of more
perfection then God's Commandments; So they Pilkint. parallel. Controvers. 34.
speak; a treasury; surely, of rich, of righteous merits, heaped up and pressed
together, for the benefit both of quick and Hyper. Metho. Theolog. lib. 2.
dead: yet willing they are not, to empty that treasury all at once; or in one
Age: being more thristy in disposing of those meritorious works, then so;
Meritorious, both for the doers of them themselves (if there be any such) and
also for others, who want of their own. But lo! the Devil here on a sudden is
become a profuse Prodigal; willingly content to part with all, even at once,
provided he may find one that will too too dearly purchase all at once. Yet
somewhat wiser he was, in this offered, then Judas was in that his contracted
bargain, who sold his Master for thirty pieces of Mat. 26.15.
silver; whereas the Condition proposed here, required a far higher rate: if
not in paying down ready money, yet in falling down, which to Satan was far
more acceptable; All these things, all the Kingdoms of the World, all the pomp
and glory of them, will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. O
Munificent Malefactor! But Satan, who shall Capitulate and Treat with thee in
this business? our Savior Jesus Christ would not, v. 10. neither will any that
are Christ's; wherefore let some Idolatrous Alexander, who thirsted after the
Conquest of the whole World; or some covetous Extortioners and biting Usurers,
culld out of the corruptest mass of mankind, making a Wedge of Gold their god,
let such or such propose one Question to thee, and let them receive thy
positive Answer thereunto, before too too inconsiderately they Seal to thy hard
Condition; and the Question is, Satan, can thou warrant this thy bountiful
and beyond all measure, most liberal gift: if any will agree to accept it on
thy Condition, can thou warrant it? Yes, I can; For, All the power, and the
glory of all the Kingdoms of the World, is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever
I will, I give Luke 4.5.6.
it. Note; All delivered unto me; that is well; and that is warrant enough
indeed, to dispose of thy Kingdoms at thy pleasure, if what thou say be
true; But it is not true Satan, what thou say it is not; for God himself has
the peculiar claim, and right in that Donation, and in the disposal of all
those Dan. 2.21.4.17.
Kingdoms, which thou so proudly boasts of; and he has never given it unto
thee: no more then Constantine the great did give those large Territories to
the Sea of Rome, commonly called Peter's Patrimony; But what means this that
follows in thy pretended Warrant? To whomsoever I will, I give it, Luke 4.6.
What means this, I give it? whereas properly that can be no free gift at all,
which is bought; and bought at so dear a price too, as this must be; If thou will fall down and worship me; for that was thy Condition, proposed to our Luke
4.7.
Savior; All shall be thine, If thou will worship me: or, as it is in the
Text, all these things will I give thee, on that Condition; that is, If thou will become an Idolater and Adore me, as some excellent Creature, All shall be
thine, and not otherwise. So that even mere worldlings, who could be well
content with such a purchase, as thou in seeming offerest (all the Kingdoms of
the world) even such may easily see, that thy warrant becomes no warrant at
all: because what is not thine own, thou have no power at all to dispose of to
another; and thy gift becomes as no gift, if it must be bought at so dear a
rate; The result is this: thou can promise fairly indeed, with a purpose to
deceive, witness thy first promise to our then Innocent Parents; Ye shall be as
Genesis 3.5.
Gods; but thou can not perform what thou promisest; So that all these things
given and warranted, become void and as nothing, because nothing can be
performed; and therefore it is easy to foresee and foretell, that thou shall
hardly find a Chapman; and if not with men, think not with such huge promises
to deceive the Son of God; neither boast thou, that thy Condition proposed, was
a Condition accepted of; No, no; for that Condition (though proposed) is void
and null, where on both sides there is not a mutual consent of Parties to agree
and subscribe unto it; But here was no such consent on our Saviors part; no,
none at all; and most impudent thou went to offer unto him all the Kingdoms of
the world, whose Kingdom is not of this Joh. 18.35.
world; to offer unto God, boldly, and as in thine own right, the things that
were God's by a most peculiar right; and to condition with the Son of God, to
fall down and worship thee, who on any condition cannot fall; most impudent
thou were; though in all humility he descended, and came down from Heaven to
save the world, and all that believe in him; far more prizing the conversion of
one lost sheep, of one sinner that has gone astray, and the salvation of one
of his elect, that shall never perish, then all the Kingdoms of the world, and
the glory of them. Wherefore in vain have thou tendered thy transitory and
mutable Kingdoms to him that is the immortal and eternal 1 Timothy 1.17.
King. In vain have thou offered thy condition, too too much savouring of
destruction, to him that is a Savior (though not thine) and the Author of
salvation to all true believers. Well, but did not thy conscience accuse thee,
when thou thus temptedst our Savior to commit Idolatry? fall down and worship
me; who has taught us here below, that Idolaters shall not inherit the
Kingdom of 1 Gor. 6. 9.
God; as if thou had had a purpose (had it been in thy power) to exclude him
thence; surely, if it did not, yet his answer could not but smite and terrify
thee, when he sent thee away from his presence with a most wrathful word; and
as dreadful as that shall be to all goats, to all reprobates at the last day,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Mat. 25.41.
angels: and his answer a witness with how much disdain and indignation he
rejected both thee, and thy condition, is recorded here, v. 10. Then says
Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan; for it is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Then says Jesus unto him: Then; See! no sooner was our Savior tempted, even
this third time, If thou will fall down and worship me; but as soon also was
both the Tempter and his temptation rejected, even this third time; our Savior
not willing to entertain any long discourse with him, in any of his
temptations. Then 'twas not for the advantage of the woman, to be too too
familiar with the Serpent, Genesis 3. It Is dangerous for any to be too too
familiar with Satan; or to have any long conference and communication with him;
only when he tempts us, we may speak unto him as our Savior here did, by way
of repulse with indignation, yet not by way of any the least friendly
compliance, with delight and contentation.

Then says Jesus unto him; and this he says, Get thee hence Satan. Lo! thrice
did our Savior here vouchsafe an answer to the Devil; yet no signs of wrath
were there in the other two, but only in this last answer to the Devil; and
necessary it was that he should be sent away in fury now, who hitherto would
not be answered with mildness; when Lenitives cannot prevail, Corrosives must
be applied. It is written, v. 4. and again, It is written, v. 7. words of
mildeness both, without any the least mixture of any bitter reprehension: But
here v. 10. before it comes so far as this, It is written, these words (of
fury) are interposed; these, Get thee hence Satan: Or as it is Luke 4.8. Get
thee behind me Satan: This our Savior said unto the Tempter; who also upon
another occasion, said once the like to Mat. 16.21, 22, 23.
Peter, when out of his preposterous zeal, he dissuaded him from suffering many
things at Jerusalem, tending to the glory of God, and man's salvation: He
turned and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto
me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men:
It Is thy will that I should be possessed of an earthly Kingdom; but my will is
by my suffering death (from which thou disswadest me) to procure for all that
shall believe in me an heavenly; and therefore in that thou art of another
judgment, counselling me, be it far from thee Mat. 16.22.
Lord; this shall not be unto thee; therein thou art like unto Satan; that
adversary of mandkind, always envying their happiness in a Crucified Redeemer;
Get thee behind me Satan; and know that with much detestation I abhor thy
humane counsel; Thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be
of men. See! so willing was our Savior to suffer for man's redemption, that he
was highly offended with any that should any ways attempt to hinder him from
suffering for man's redemption; and therefore Peter, guilty of that heinous
crime, as our Savior understood it, was more sharply reprehended for but
counselling him not to suffer, then he was for denying him with cursing and
swearing, after he was betrayed by Judas, the first degree of his suffering,
Matthew. 26. then only the crowing of the Cock put him in mind of his denial and
Tergiversation, v. 74, 75. but now it is our Savior himself that sharply checks
him for his most unwelcome counsel and presumption: He said unto Peter, Get
thee behind me Satan; In sense thus much, do not thou presume to go before and
direct me what I shall do; nay, that I shall not suffer; but get thee behind
me; be wiser in time to come, and follow thou me willingly in all things,
obeying my will, as I do my Hieronym. and Erasmus in locum.
Father's; Get thee behind me Satan. His offense (it seems) was very heinous
and superlative, that deserved so tart and so severe a reprehension; but Peter
was reestablished and reconciled again unto his Savior: Whereas Satan here was
sent away with so much fury, and with such a word of dismission, that he could
never be capable of any favorable readmission: Jesus says unto him, not only
Get thee behind me, but also Get thee hence Satan: Whereas Peter still remained
with his Savior, although at that time (out of weakness, not rightly
understanding that it behoved him thus and thus to suffer; which the Devil
knew, and maliciously sought to hinder) he had highly provoked and offended his
Savior.

But it is the Devil we are now speaking of, and our Savior's wrathful
indignation against him, Get thee hence Satan. The rebuke of Peter was very
sharp against the hypocrisy and covetousness of Simon Magus; Thy heart is not
right in the sight of God; thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond
of Acts 8.20, 21, 22, 23.
iniquity. Paul's rebuke was sharper against Elimas the Sorcerer; O full of all
subtilty and all mischief; thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all Acts
13.10.
righteousness. But this rebuke of our Savior here against Satan was far
sharper, and more piercing then all: Not so mild as that of God himself, at
another time, and in another case, who said unto him, The Lord rebuke thee, O
Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke Zechar. 3.2.
thee. But full of the highest indignation he said unto him, Get thee hence,
get thee behind me Satan. Behind me; Not suffering him to obtain so much favor
as to be set at his left hand; which for a short time shall be granted even to
all reprobates, at the day of Mat 25.33.
judgment; but Satan here obtains not so much as that; no, because his torment
one day shall be far greater then the torment of all reprobates; and the reason
is, because the Seducer is far more Culpable then the Seduced; and the
punishment shall then be proportioned to the quality both of the sin and
sinners; all are prejudged to an eternal punishment; because if they had lived
on earth for ever, they would all have sinned against the eternal God for ever;
yet not all prejudged to the same degree of eternal punishment, intensively;
not; for easier it shall be in the day of judgment for impenitent men, then
for monstrously maliticious Devils; though no ease at all can there be for
unbelieving, and therefore unpardoned men, continually tormented with Devils.

Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence Satan. And then began our Savior to
be thus wrathfully incensed, when his Father's glory began first to be
questioned; for 'twas not so when the Devil tempted him after his long fasting,
to distrust and diffidence in his Father's Providence, v. 3, 4. nor was it so
when he tempted him to vainglory, by casting himself down from the pinnacle of
the Temple, v. 5, 6, 7. Satan received then, no rebuke at all from our Savior;
No; and the reason was, because in those Two Temptations, the injury was more
properly, and more immediately done unto himself; and therefore he could
without any indignation at all, patiently bear, and slight that; But when he
saw that the Devil had appropriated unto himself, the honor that was
peculiarly due unto God; All these things will I give thee: tempting him to
become an Idolater, and so fall away from his God, from his Father; If thou will fall down and worship me, v. 9. then his patient meekness was much moved,
his wrath was very much kindled, and his fury exasperated to the highest; to
teach us, to bear with all patience and long suffering, our own wrongs and
injuries; But to be more zealous always in God's cause, then our own; as our
Savior here Aquin. 3. pars Sum. q. 41. Concl. 4.
was: who justly provoked by the wrong done unto his Father, most sharply
reproved the Devil that had done that wrong unto his Father; saying, Get thee
hence Satan, bold, impudent, malicious, exceeding sinful Satan, Get thee hence;
I detest thy self, I abhor thy gift; neither am I at all in the least beholding
unto thee, in that thou made the first offer thereof unto me; who will none
of thy promises, none of thy Kingdoms, none of thy glory, none of thy power:
as Abram said to the King of Gen 14.22, 23.
Sodom, I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, the most high God, the
possessour of Heaven and Earth, That I will not take from a thread, even to a
shoo-latchet; and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou
should say, I have made Abram rich. So our Savior, to his and his Father's
malicious Adversary, Satan here. I will not accept of any thing thou offerest
me; of any thing thou falsely call thine, or, if it were properly thine own,
I abhor and detest both it and thee; Therefore away with thy Kingdoms, away
with thy promises, away with thy gift, away with thy condition, away with thy
self: Get thee hence, get thee behind me Satan.

Yet (though wrathfully and justly moved thereunto) our Savior did not thus
with indignation dismiss and send away Satan without a special Warrant from his
Father's word to do it; he did not; but as twice before, v. 4. 7. So now
again, v. 10. he strongly opposes his false suggestions, with full power and
authority from the Word of truth; and his authority is, It is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Note; ( him
only) which positively concludes, that the Devils motion was but in vain, If
thou will fall down; and wholly excluded him from what he so much desired, even
from all manner of religious Worship and Adoration, as not at all due unto him;
his proposal conditionally, If thou will fall down, being answered here in
sense, with our Savior's flat denial, positively; I will not fall down and
worship thee; thou will not; Why? for it is written; and one word of my
Father's writing is more available to keep me in his fear, then all that thou
can either say or do, to remove me from it. Thy Ifs and thy Conditions,
which are nothing else but the forerunners of thy Temptations, shall never take
at all with me; and though thou will not allege a Text rightly, when it makes
for me, against thy self, witness thy false dealing with me on the pinnacle of
the Temple; yet I do rightly allege here what makes for my self, and wholly
against thee: It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve; Him only; and I may not fall down before thee; this is my
Father's Word, this is my Father's will, to keep his own Worship entire unto
himself; and so will I keep it, and Worship him only. Thus and thus did our
Savior Answer Satan; partly rebuking his bold impudency, with Get thee hence:
and partly denying his suit, with It is written; and this his denial (from
which we may, we will, open our way to a further discourse) briefly includes in
it Two things. 1. A most just claiming of all Religious worship, as peculiarly
due unto God only. And 2. as just a disclaiming from, and a disavowing of any
such worship, as due to any creature on any specious pretenses whatsoever,
according to the Rule of Affirmative Precepts, which always include in them
their Negatives; as on the contrary, the Negatives always include their
Affirmatives; Now the Precept here is Affirmative; Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve; therefore the Negative thereof must
needs be, thou shall not religiously worship any of the Creatures; no, not the
Devil. Let us then weigh the words impartially; knowing that we can have no
better Argument to defend the Cause of God, then that which is immediately
drawn, as this is, from the written Word of God; which is that touchstone to
distinguish between counterfeit Gold and true; that Rule, to discern between
straight and crooked; that Balance, wherein falsehood is overpoysed by truth;
and such a Balance, such a Rule, such a Touchstone, is this Word here of our
Savior; It is written.

But, Where is it written? Answ. Deuteronomy. 6.13.10.20. where God's command to the
people by the mouth of Moses, is, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve
him; words aequipollent in sense, though (I confess) somewhat fuller in the
Sentence, as it is here in the Text, cited by our Savior; and if aequivalent
they be, and aequipollent in sense, that is sufficient; Now that the sense is
one and the same, in both, will evidently appear, by comparing both Texts
together. Thus,

Moses says, Thou shall fear Timebis.
the Lord thy God. Our Savior says, Thou shall worship (...).
the Lord thy God. Where worship, is put in stead of fear.

Again, Moses says, And him shall thou Ipsi servies.
serve. But our Savior says, And him only (...), Illi soli servies.
shall thou serve; Where this word ( only) is more according to the letters,
then is in Moses; Yet in sense, not more then is in Moses; the sound, indeed,
varieth somewhat, but not the substance, not the meaning; for our Savior, who
is the best Expositor of his own law, having an occasion here to urge this Text
against the Devil, who tempted him unto Idolatry, concludes thence two things;
and prepares his way to the following Conclusions, either by exchanging one
word for another (for properly, an absolute changing it is not) or, by
supplying the seeming want of one word with another; and then whether we read
it as Moses does, Thou shall fear; or as our Savior does, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God; the sense is still full, and to fear God is not forbidden;
when in one place we are commanded to worship him; nor to worship him, when in
another place we are commanded to fear him: No; because when the one is but
mentioned, the other also presently is included; like Relatives and
Correlatives; posito uno, ponitur and alterum; as name but a Father, and you
have said enough to include the name of a Son also; and (to go on in order)
upon this ground it is, that our Savior here purposely exchanging one word for
another, as Timebis, thou shall fear, for Adorabis, thou shall worship;
positively concludes according to the true meaning of each Text.

First, That whenever we come to serve the Lord our God (as we ought)
religiously, piously, devoutly, we must bring both with us; both fear and
worship; both the inward fear and awe of our heart, and also an humble, lowly,
and reverent gesture of our body, as an outward testimony of that inward fear;
it being most plain from the compared Texts, that in God's service, worship and
fear must always go together, the outward with the inward; the humiliation of
the body, with the humility of the soul; the bowing, prostrating and humbling
of the body, when we present our selves before our God, by prayer,
supplication, thanksgiving, etc. with the filial fear of the heart; which
though sometimes it includes the whole service of Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8.
God, to be performed by the inner man; yet does it not at any time exclude the
inseparable concomitant thereof, even that outward adoration and religious
worship to be performed separately by the body, in that service which is due
unto God only; it does not, and there can be no stronger argument to confirm
the truth of this position, then this of our Savior here, saying, Thou shall
worship, (which belongs to the body) instead of Thou shall fear, which belongs
to the soul: meaning, that God requires both at once; utterly denying unto the
Devil all adoration, and prostration of his body, which he required, because
even that also (as well as the fear of the heart) was due unto his Father only;
which even the Devil himself seemed to acknowledge, when he so much desired to
obtain it of his Son. Wherefore in this case of fearing and serving, and
worshipping the Lord our God: the body cannot say to the soul, I have no need
of thee; neither can the soul say unto the body, I have no need of thee; no
more then the eye can say to the hand, or the head to the foot, I have no need
of 1 Cor. 12.21.
thee: Because our Savior here says clear enough to each, that God to
complete his whole service, has need of each, has need of both. I have need
of thee, and I have need of thee, for the manifestation of the obedience of the
whole man toward me; when he invocates, and calls upon me; when he offers the
sacrifice of praise, prayer, and thanksgiving unto me, that his obedience and
prayers, and praises, and thanksgivings may be true and real, and acceptable
before me; I have need of thee, the inward fear of the heart; and I have need
also of thee, the outward humble posture and reverent gesture of the body: The
body in this case, being to the soul as the tongue is to the mind, each the
true Interpreter unto others of one another meaning; for we cannot judge
rightly of the inward, but only by the outward man; whose gesture if it be not
humble and reverent when he comes to serve the Lord, the eye of him that sees
in secret (besides what men see) discovers thereby (if he did not know it
otherwise) that his heart is not rightly prepared for his service; who requires
the (...), the outward worship, veneration and adoration, performed by the
body, as the Introduction to, and expression of the inward fear and acceptable
sacrifice of the heart: O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before
the Lord our Maker, is the pious expression of those who out of a religious
fear came to serve the Psalm. 95.6.
Lord; where the latter explains the former words; as, will you know what it is
to worship? it is to bow or fall down, and kneel; that outward posture of the
body, being the Index of the souls inward bowing and kneeling, and humbling it
self in God's sight; but if he be wilfully and obstinately denied the one, he
nothing at all regards the other; who will be glorified jointly, both with
our body and our spirit, or else he esteem himself not at all glorified with
either; which (though many men will not) the Devil himself, who here tempted
our Savior only to fall down and worship him, as some excellent creature, well
knew and understood; and therefore he made it his whole work here to deprive
God of it, and gain unto himself first the adoration of the body; and he did it
the rather because knowing that God little or nothing at all valueth the one,
if he be denied the other, he doubted not but by degrees he should gain unto
himself the fear of the heart also; attempting to do it by taking away from God
that which is peculiarly due unto him in his own service, outward adoration.
And surely this, and only this was the direct way to do it; for take away one
from God, and you take away both; take away outward worship, and you are in the
next way to take away inward fear too; because such is the heart of man,
deceitful above all things, that surely it is not, neither indeed can it be
rightly intent to the service and fear of God inwardly, when there is no care
at all taken outwardly to express it, but only by a posture slovenly and
irreverent; which though it be not directly a falling down to Satan, which is
here forbidden; yet is it a direct denying of that which is properly due unto
God, and here commanded; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God: Religious worship
always presupposing inward fear; and that in the service of God, always
requiring outward and reverent adoration. So we preach, and so we rightly
conclude even from the Text; because our Savior therein rightly interptreteth,
thou shall fear, by thou shall worship the Lord thy God: And I cannot apprehend
what other meaning or purpose he should have by thus exchanging one word for
another, but only to let all men know that the inward fear which is due to the
Lord our God, ought not by any to be separated and disjoynted from his outward
worship, from bowing, falling down, and kneeling, when we offer the sacrifice
of our hearts to the Lord our God.

Secondly, Our Savior here, by supplying the seeming want of one word with
another; as him shall thou serve, with him (only) shall thou serve; rightly
concludes farther that that (and none but that) was the true meaning of Moses;
although in that place, Deuteronomy. 6.13. it was not expressly written by the pen of
Moses; neither is this supplementary word of our Savior (if I may so call it)
any real addition at all to the Text of Moses; no, but rather a true
Exposition it is of that Text, which the (...).
Greek version (or if you will Animadversion) afterward took special notice
of; whence our Savior himself cites this, and approves of it as the genuine
sense of Moses; as indeed it was: For he that commands, v. 13. Thou shall serve
the Lord thy God; and immediately v. 14. forbids, Ye shall not go after other
gods, of the gods of the people round about you: What does he but command in
sense (and that is Scripture, which is the true sense of the Scripture) Thou
shall serve the Lord thy God only: which is fully expressed in the like case, 1 Samuel 7.3. If you do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away
the strange gods, and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto
the Lord, and serve him only. You cannot, you may not serve God and Idols; God
and Mammon; but God only must you serve, and not Mammon, not Idols; nothing in
Competition, nothing in Opposition with God, must so far withdraw us from our
duty, as to rob him of his peculiar honor, who is a jealous God, and will not
that what is properly his own, should be given to any other; Impatiens
consortis erit; but all the fear, piety, and devotion of our hearts; and all
the Religious worship, and reverence of our bodies; all our service, whether in
outward expression or inward affection; all is due to the Lord our God only;
and surely there is good reason for it, because all that we have, either for
the preservation of our bodies, or for the salvation of our souls, all is
originally from him only; for what have thou that thou have not 1 Cor. 4.7.
received? and if received, as we have all things corporal, all things
spiritual, all things temporal, all things eternal from the Lord our God, it is
but just that with the whole man we should fear, and religiously worship the
Lord our God, and serve him only; it is but just.

Thus hitherto the meaning of this Text here cited by our Savior, against
Satan, is plainly opened, even to the Conviction of Satan; and we see that thou
shall worship, is not without good cause written in the place of thou shall
fear; neither is this word ( only) a superfluous word, but such as neither Text
can stand without it; the one wanting the word, but not the sense; the other
rightly retaining both word and sense: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve: which is our Savior's final answer to Satan,
directly opposite to his Condition, If thou will fall down and worship me; and
such an answer it is, that it justly claims all religious worship, as properly
and peculiarly due unto his Father only; and he might not presume by any means,
to give any part thereof to Satan; the claiming of it as properly due to God,
being a disavowing of it as any ways due to any creature; which when the Devil
heard, he replied no more: This Get thee hence Satan, was enough to confound
him: but this It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord; thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, was enough to conquer him and as before v. 4, 7. fully
convinced, he had nothing more to say against the Deity of the Son of God; so
now fully satisfied (no doubt) by this answer of our Savior, that all
religious worship was due to God only, and none at all to creatures (and
therefore none at all to him) he dares say no more for any further promoting of
Idolatry between himself and the Son of God; and that he was fully satisfied in
this point, acknowledging that what our Savior said was true, we conclude from
his own deep silence here, from his own not replying any more.

Yet this is more then the Church of Rome will acknowledge, and willingly
subscribe unto; though they cannot but know, that our Savior in the Text
determines the Question positively against them; for he who to vindicate his
Father's honor, said to the Devil, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve: surely never meant that any creature, how excellent
soever, whether Angels or men; whether Martyrs or Saints departed, etc. should
any ways be sharers with him in his own peculiar right of religious worship and
adoration; never meant it, but the clean contrary; and so the Angel rightly
understood it, though they will not; for when he saw John fall at his feet to
worship him, he forbad him, saying, See thou do it not; I am thy
fellow servants, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus; worship
Rev. 19.10.22.9.
God: Thereby both correcting the error of John, who offered that worship unto
him which was not his due; and also directing him to offer it to him only to
whom it was peculiarly due; worship (...).
God: not me, not an Angel. And Paul erred not, when he justly condemned the
worshipping of Col. 2.18.
Angels; and if Angels may not be worshipped with religious adoration, much
less may men, whether living or dead. Not living men, no; for when Cornelius
met Peter, and fell down at his feet and worshipped him, he took him up,
saying, Stand up, I my self also am a Act. 10.25, 26.
man. A strong Argument that no man living is worthy of any religious
adoration. The like we may conclude also in this case, from that discreet and
modest carriage of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14. thus after Paul had wrought a
Miracle at Lystra, on a man that was a creeple from his mothers womb, v. 8, 9,
10. the superstitious people of that place would haxe sacrificed unto them, v.
13. which when the Apostles, Barnabas, and Paul heard of, v. 14, 15. They rent
their clothes, and ran in amongst the people, crying out, and said, Sirs, Why
do you these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach
unto you, that you should turn from these vanities, unto the living God; From
these vanities; utterly refusing from them any Religious adoration; knowing
that the Master's due was not to be ascribed unto the Servant; nor the peculiar
right of the Creator unto the Creature; And if living men, and such as are
present with us (though of never so great Eminency, though Apostles, and
Apostolical men, such as Peter, and Barnabas were) if such are not capable of
Religious worship, much less are dead men and Saints departed, who are absent
from us, and cannot help us; whom we then sufficiently honor, and as much as
God himself requires of us, 1. When we remember them with all Christian
reverence, as the Instruments while they lived of his August. de Civ. Dei lib.
8. cap. 27.
glory. 2. When we thankfully bless God for them, and for the benefits he
vouchsafed by them unto his Church. 3. When we imitate their virtues, their
repentance, their faith, their love, their humility, their meekness, their
patience, etc. wherein they excelled; But Christian Religion, says De vera
relig. cap. 55.
Austin rightly, teaches us not, in any wise, to worship dead men.

Notwithstanding, though we have express Deuteronomy. 10.20. Matthew. 4.10.
Scripture (as this we now speak of) and therein also several Examples against
them, in this Case; yet the Romish Church (refusing to be guided by either)
regards not at all, either what the Angel said to John, or Peter to Cornelius,
or Paul and Barnabas, to those Idolatrous people at Lystra or God himself to
the people, by the mouth of Moses, or what our Savior here said to the Devil;
It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. A Text strong enough (were not men wilfully obstinate) to overthrow all
Popish Idolatry in this Case, upheld and underpropped only with certain weak
and unwarrantable distinctions, repugnant to the Word of God, and forged in
their own brains for the promoting of their own Cause; And if I should tell
them plainly, that in this, they are more malapert then Satan was, I need not
go far for evidence clear enough to prove it; for after the Devil had once
heard what our Savior said as touching this matter, in point of Religious
worship, wholly denied unto Creatures, he (though insolent enough before)
immediately ceased to reply any more; but these, though they daily hear it, yet
they still reply; and (too too much relying on their own Inventions) affirm
still, that some kind of Worship and Adoration is properly due to Saints and
Martyrs departed: nay, even to their very Relics, etc. which (say what they
can) will be found to be Religious worship, proper unto God Quem sanctis cultum
deferunt Papistae, nihil reipsa differ a Dei cultupalam est. Calvin. Institu.
lib. 1. c. 12. S. 2.
only, and altogether disavowed in the Text, as any ways due to any Creature.
Lo! this is their doctrine; this is one point of their Religion; and upon this
ground, they Invocate and call upon dead Saints, who cannot hear them; and
expect help and succor from such who in time of need cannot relieve them; Or,
if they could, are not at all to be adored by them; And did but those glorious
Spirits now know what were done on Earth, they would still refuse such
Adoration, as Peter, and Paul, and Barnabas did, while they were on Earth.

Now that the Papists maintain such forbidden Religious worship and adoration,
as due to Creatures, thereby to uphold their Invocation of Saints, is more then
manifest even from their own writings, and by their own practice answerable
thereunto; for it is the positive conclusion of Controvers. lib. 1. ca. 13. de
sanctor. beatit.
Bellarmine, that to the holy Angels and Saints in Heaven is due (though less
then divine, yet) more then Civil, or humane honor and worship; And if the
Jesuit had not otherwhere fully explained Idem, ibid. ca. 12.
himself, yet plain it is by this, that (to make his own assertion the more
plausible) he distinguishes of three sorts or kinds of Worship. 1. Divine. 2.
Less then Divine yet more then Civil. 3. Civil or Humane. The first in show,
he reserves for God. The second, for Angels and Saints in Heaven. The third
(the Civil or Humane) he makes use of, as an Argument to uphold the second,
which he calls more then Civil; Thus; men civilly honor one another while
they live Idem, ibid. cap. 12.
on Earth: therefore Saints in Heaven must be honored with more then that; No,
nor with so much as that, as it any ways relates to religious worship;
Although we deny not, but that with a pious and precious commemoration of them
and their virtues, they ought always to be honored of us, even now they are in
Heaven; This we grant and allow, a pious commemoration of them, but no
adoration at all of the Saints in Heaven, do we allow; neither may we, under
what name soever it be subtly couched, to ensnare and entice men unto
Idolatry; besides, an Argument thus drawn from Civil worship, which is merely
humane, to establish that which is merely divine (as all Religious worship is,
not admitting of magis and minus, more and less, though the Jesuit without any
warrant from the Word of truth, mince and part it into minorem divino, less
then Vbi supra.
Divine; and majorem civili, more then Civil) will not hold at all in Christ's
School.

But let us hear the Jesuits distinction, together with what the Fautors
thereof say first, in their own Terms: and then see whether it has any weight
at all in it, or not, to grant that worship to any Creature, which our Savior
here, disputing against Satan, absolutely denies to all. Now their Terms are
these; Latria, Doulia, and Bell. ubi supra. Joan. de Combis, Compend. Theol. lib
1. c. 58. Boskhi. Ara Coeli Conci. 22. Lodovic. Vives in August. lib. 10. de
Civit. Dei, c. 1.
Hyperdoulia. The first, the Latria, or Divine worship, they pretend, they
reserve unto God only; but in that they give any Religious worship at all to
Creatures (as by their distinction it appears they do) it is neither against
sound reason, nor sacred Religion, to say (how fair soever their pretenses be)
that they reserve none at all to God: who must have all, or else he accepts of
none; All, whole and entire unto himself, or else he has none at all unto
himself.

The second, the Doulia or Saint-worship, they reserve only for Creatures:
granting that to Saints which by our Savior was here denied to Satan; whereas
in the word of God, there is no difference at all between the one and the
other, between the Latria and the Differentia Latriae and Douliae and nulla
est. Par. in cap. 1. ad Roma. v. 9. Fest. Hom. disput. 35. adver. sus
Pontifici. These. 1.
Doulia; as will appear afterward; And because among holy Creatures, the
humanity of our Savior does singularly excel, for that it is inseparably
united to the Person of the Word; and further, because the Mother of God
((...)) the blessed Virgin far exceeds other Saints; this Doulia or
Saint-worship, they subdivide again into Doulia, properly so called, as common
to all Saints; and Hyperdoulia, more then Creature or Saint-worship, peculiar
only to the blessed Virgin, and the humane Nature of Christ. Lo! these are the
rotten branches of their own distinction, as touching Religious worship; and to
whom in their judgment it belongs; The Latria being seemingly given to God;
the Doulia evidently given to Saints; and the Hyperdoulia really given to the
blessed Virgin, and the humane Nature of our Savior.

The Third is Civil and humane worship, proper only unto men alive; as to
Parents, to Magistrates, to Wise men, to Learned men, etc. whom we ought
civilly to honor, either for their relation excellent gifts and virtues
imitable by us; or for their bounty and goodness unto us: Such was the honor
and reverence that Abraham gave the the Sons of Heth, in testimony of his
thankfulness for their kindness toward him, in granting him a parcel of
ground to bury his dead in; He stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the
Genesis 23.7, 12.
Land: incurvavit se. Such meeting, after they had been deprived for the space
of twenty years at the least, of each others company, Genesis 3 i. 38. He bowed
himself unto the ground seven times, until he came near unto his Genesis 33.3.
brother. And such also was the honor Joseph's brethren gave unto him, when
they fell down before his face, and said, Behold, we are thy Genesis 50.18.
servants: All civil worship, warrantable and approvable, all; provided that it
be not any way sowred with the Jesuits Bellar. ubi supra. ca. 11.
leaven; who thence falslly concludes, that even creatures (the point in
controversy) are capable of religious worship (for such it is they give them
under the name of Doulia) because Abraham bowed to the people of the Land where
he then was; Jacob to Esau; and his brethren to Joseph: Unjustly therein
condemning Calvin, whose Orthodox judgment was, that the actions of all these
were but testimonies of Civil honor, reverence, and deportment, far from the
guilt of any religious Institut. lib. 1. cap. 12. Sect. 3.
adoration; civil worship, then in testimony of such honor, reverence, and
thankefulness as is due to such or such rightly managed, this is every way
justly allowable, and not at all condemned in the Text; wherefore laying aside
that (as not altogether pertinent to our present purpose) let us reassume and
view again the other part of the Jesuits distinction, fairly set forth under
the name of Latria, Doulia, and Hyperdoulia; and consider what color or show
of truth it carries with it: Surely none at all, it being invented and
maintained merely to give the Angels and Saints in Heaven, more then their due,
as you have heard; and in the mean time to rob the God of Heaven of his whole
due, in point of religious worship and adoration; for if we give part of this
honor to Saints, and part unto himself, as the Church of Rome does, he esteems
it as if we gave him none at all: My son, give me thy Prove. 23.29.
heart; thy whole heart: So my son, worship the Lord thy God, and worship him
only: but if thou worship Saints with the Doulia, which (though the Jesuit
would have it so) is no ways proper unto them; thou can not at all rightly
worship God with the Latria; thou can not, because both are his due (though
the Jesuit will not grant it) both the Doulia and the Latria: and hence it is
that this distinction of the Roman party (though in favor as they pretend of
Saints and Angels) is not without just cause by many of our modern and
judicious Divines, quite exploded, and rightly branded with the name of a Juell
against Harding of adoration of Images, Artic. 14. p. 381.
simple, a counterfeit and Fulke in his defense of the English Translations of
the Bible, ca. 19. p. 185.
bold, a vain, Par. in cap. 12. ad Roman. dub. tert. p. 1230.
an idle, and an halting Boys on the Gospel, for the first Sunday in Lent.
Calvin. institut. lib. 1. ca. 12. Sect. 2.
distinction; and that justly too, chiefly for two reasons.

First, Because it has not, no not the least foundation at all (as it is made
a distinction) in the holy word of Pet. Martyr. loc. com. class. 2. ca. 5.
Sect. 13.
God; neither was it ever heard of, either in the Apostles time, or among the
Greek and Latin Fathers in the Primitive Church, until almost four hundred
years after Christ; for (before the Roman faction was hatched) invented it was
first by St. Augustine, who flourished in the fourth Century; a man better
ver'st in the Latin then in the Greek Idem ibid. Sect. 12. Perk. problem.
against worshipping of Saints. Fulke on the Rhemish Testament, Mat. 4.10.
Tongue; yet indeed by him it was not, in that sense as now it is made use of
in the Church of Rome, to give the Doulia unto Saints: no; for that Father gave
both unto God; to the Lord God; which they do not: the Latria he gave unto him
as God; the Doulia, as Qu. 94 super Exodus
Lord; to one and the same God both; and according to, his distinction, to
Saints nothing: using it only to distinguish between religious worship, proper
only unto the Lord our De Civitat. dei lib. 10. ca. 1.
God; and between civil worship, proper only unto men, not so much as dreaming
then that any could suppose that religious worship was communicable unto
creatures: No, the Christian world was not so soon infected with that Idolatry;
neither was this word ( Doulia) abused then (as now it is) to Patronize it.

Secondly, That this distinction is but an halting one, appears also for
another reason, and that is, because these two words, (...), and (...) (about
which the whole controversy arises) are words used oftentimes promiscuously,
not only in Profane writers; but also in the holy Scripture, to signify one
and the same, and not different things; there being only a verbal, not any
real, not any substantial difference at all between them, no more then there
is between two Synonymas, as gladius and ensis; both signifying a Fest Homm.
disput. 35. These. 1. Par. in cap. 1. ad Romans v. 9. and in cap. 12. dub. 3.
sword; and if there be none other then a verbal difference between them, only
in pronuntiation, not in signification, each or both expressing but one and the
same thing, but one and the same religious worship, which is due unto the Lord
our God only; then surely it cannot be, that any real distinction should be
raised from them; no not though the Church (as the Jesuit Bellarm. ubi supra.
ca. 14.
grants, meaning the Romish Church) divide and distinguish them; for no power
has man to put that asunder, which God inseparably has joined together.

Now that these two words do promiscuously, and interchangeably signify one
and the same thing; and that 1. In profane writers, the Jesuit himself Vbi
supra.
confesses, with others out of Suidas, Xenophon, Valla, Lodovic. Vives in
August. lib. 10 ca. 1. de Civitate Dei Pet. Martyr. ubi supra. Sect. 13.
Muscul. loc. com. de cultu Dei. Sect. 1. Pare. in cap. 12. ad Roman. Dub. 3. p.
1232. Perk. problem. p. 530. of worshipping of Saints.
Phavorinus. Nay 2. That even in the holy Scriptures also they are so used,
sometimes the one, sometimes the other, and each mutually for one and the same
religious worship, due unto God only, is most plain and manifest in both
Testaments.

First, In the Old: and that in many places; we will name but few; Thus; Ye
shall serve the Lord your God, says Moses; Ye shall Exodus 23.25.
serve: which the Greek Interpreters, from the Hebrew word ( Abad or Avad,
which signifies to Par. ubi supra. p. 1231.
serve) render, (...) Again, Thou shall serve the Lord thy Deuteronomy. 6.13.
God: (...), and They put away the strange Gods from among them, and served the
Lord; Judge. 10.16.
(...). Again, the other word ((...)) is also used in the same sense,
notwithstanding the same word ( Abad) be the Original as before; as, You shall
serve the Deuteronomy. 13.4.
Lord; (...), Serve the Lord with all your heart, 1 Samuel 12.20. (...) and serve
the Lord with Psalm. 2.11.
fear; rendered also by the same word, (...): Now if one and the same Hebrew
word ( Abad) be rightly rendered by the Greek Translators, sometimes by (...),
and sometimes by (...); Nay, by the latter oftener then by the former, as
touching that Service and Worship which is proper only unto God, an Argument
undeniable certainly it is, that as these words, whether it be the Latria, or
the Doulia, signify both but one and the same thing; so also, that one and the
same Worship meant thereby, is to be given to none other but to God only, and
cannot by any means be communicable unto Creatures; Nay, even in the Books
Apochryphal, which the Papists so much magnify, the same word (their Doulia)
whereby they express their Saint, or creature-worship, is appropriated unto
none but only unto God; as, O Lord, Let every Creature serve Judith. 16.17.
thee; (...); And my Son, If thou coms to serve the Ecclus 2.1.
Lord (...).

Secondly, The same is confirmed also in the New Testament; as Luke 2.36, 37.
Anna the Prophetess served God; (...). And says Paul, After the way which they
call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Acts 24.4.
Fathers; (...). So to the Israelites belongs the service of Romans 9.4.
God, (...); turn but the leaf, and presently you shall find another word of
the same sense, expressing the same thing; as Act. 20.18, 19. I have been with
you at all seasons, serving the Lord; (...). And he that in these things
serves Romans 14.18.
Christ; (...). And again, ye serve the Lord Col. 3.24.
Christ; (...). Besides Paul oftentimes calling himself the servant of Jesus
Romans 1.1. Phil. 1.1.
Christ, expresses it by (...). It Is enough, the words though two in sound,
are but one in sense; and therefore by this frivolous and unwarrantable
distinction, there can be no sure ground to entitle the Angels and Saints in
Heaven to religious worship and adoration, God's peculiar due, to whom (as you
have heard) both the Latria and the Doulia properly belongs; and if that
which is meant by both (both signifying but one and the same thing) be due unto
God only, just cause there is that this distinction (that being thereby
distinguished, which in God's word is not distinguishable) should be utterly
rejected and exploded, as it is.

Neither is that other term of theirs (namely the Hyperdoulia, or more then
Saint-worship) worthy of any better acceptance; for though under a plausible
pretense, invented it was at first, even to honor the humanity of our Savior,
and the person of his Mother, the blessed Virgin Mary, with religious
adoration; yet in vain invented it was under that pretense, and to that end: In
vain, because the humane nature of Christ, simply considered in it self, and
without any relation at all to his Deity, is not God, but a mere Aquin. sum.
3. pars. q. 25. Conclu. 1.
creature; and therefore not to be worshipped, not with the Latria, or
God-worship, as the Jesuit and his party themselves confess out of Pet.
Lumbard. 8. Intent. lib. 3. Distinct. 9. A.B. Alfons. ^ Castro lib. 2. advers.
hares. in verbo, Adoratio. Aquin. ubi supra. conclus. 2.
Damascene: No, nor with the Hyperdoulia neither; for the rule is, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God: but the humane nature of Christ is not God; yet
considered as it is united by an Hypostatical and personal union to his Deity,
then with relation to whole Christ, God and man, God manifested in the flesh;
then as it so subsisteth indivisibly in one and the same person (without whom
it never subsisted) it is (we confess) to be worshipped with one and the same
divine adoration, that is properly due unto the same divine person: So (as God
and man in one person) his Disciples worshipped him, after his (...) Mat. 28.17.
resurrection: So the wise men also that came from the East worshipped him,
Mat. 2.2, 11. Guided they were to Jerusalem by a star, in respect of their
journey; but surely guided they were by the holy Spirit of God, in respect of
their judgment: apprehending (no doubt) somewhat divine in him, which is the
object of religious worship, due to God only; as preheminency is of civil
worship, due unto man: (...); they fell down and worshipped him; him, whole
Christ; but his manhood, single and apart, surely neither worshipped; neither
his Disciples, nor the Wise men: And as for his blessed Mother, that pure
Virgin, the last mention we hear of her in holy Scripture, was that of her Son
unto her concerning John, Woman, behold thy John 19.26.
Son; woman, blessed she was among women, even by the Angel's Luke 1.28.
testimony, while she was on Earth; and no doubt is most blessed among Saints
now she is in Heaven: Yet because she is a creature, she is not to be honored
with divine adoration: she is not; So Epiphanius fully concerning this Lib. 3.
Haeres cap. 79. cited by Perkins in his Reformed Catholic, and by De
Pilkington in his Parallela. Contr. 7.
matter; Let none (says he) adore Mary, who is holy and honored, yet not to
adoration: And God would not have the Angels to be adored, much less the
blessed Virgin; whom her Son a little before his death, called woman, that none
too too much admiring her holiness, might fall into Heresy and Idolatry.
Whereof that the Church of Rome is wilfully guilty, both their vain distinction
of Doulia, Saint-worship; and Hyperdoulia, more then Saint-worship: and their
practical doctrine thereupon makes clear and evident. But let us return again
to our Savior's answer here to the Devil tempting him, to fall down and
worship him; No, says our Savior, for, It is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, v. 9.10. Which (let the Devil, or
any whom he has deluded say what they will) positively excludes all creatures,
how eminent soever, from any, even the least claim to religious worship and
adoration; and (as a learned writer De Fulke on the Rhemish Testament. Luke 4.8.
says) may as rightly be alleged against the Church of Antichrist, for
adoring creatures; as it was by our Savior, against the Devil himself; who
required nothing of him, but only the (...) a falling down unto him, and that
not as unto God, but as to some excellent Calvin, Institut. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Sect. 3.
creature; and consequently nothing else required he of him, but that doulia (a
term then not invented) which the Papists now so boldly give unto Saints and
Angels; yet even that was utterly denied unto him by our Savior: Neither was
any more offered to the Angel by John; or to Peter by Idem ibid.
Cornelius; or to Paul and Barnabas, by the superstitious multitude at Lystra;
yet neither the one nor the other would any ways accept of what was offered,
because they well understood that God's due only; a falling down, and
worshipping, was not at all, under any pretense whatsoever, due unto them, who
were but creatures; and because not due, though offered it was unto them, yet
was it not accepted by them; though Satan (not ignorant that it was not due
unto him, even for that reason, because he was a creature) impudently required
it, and would as willingly have accepted it, had not our Savior with
indignation rejected him, and made him understand, that it was not due unto
him; saying, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Lo! thus was Satan again repulsed by our Savior, with It is written; and thus
repulsed again, then he leaves him, v. 10. And 'twas high time to leave him
then, when he found it not safe for himself to tempt any more; either to turn
stones into bread; or to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple; or
to fall down and worship him: which as it was of all the last, so was it of all
the most impudentest temptation: Like the Natural motion, which is the most
vehement in the end. Then the Devil leaves him: That is, then he ceased to
tempt any longer, because he clearly perceived that it was but in vain to tempt
him any longer; pugnat non August in 1 Epist. Johan. cap. 2.
expugnat; knowing that his labor was but lost to strive with him, who in
every Temptation was too mighty for him. Then he leaves him; or as it is Luke
4.13. When the Devil had ended all the Temptation, he departed from our Savior
for a season. Lo! He leaves him; he departed from him: Words they are (we
confess) noting a Cessation on the Devils part, in respect of his tempting;
but no way does it note any slow pace in respect of his departing, after he had
ended the Temptation: No; for if his motion be fitly compared unto flying, when
he is resisted by a Saint, as St. James says, Resist the Devil, and he will
flee from you, 4.7. He will flee; much more (no doubt) did he now flee, when he
was resisted by a Savior; as 'twas time for Cataline to flee, when he was
rebuked by the Senate; abiit, excessit, erupit, evasit. Solinus relates
strange things of the swiftness of one Philippides, and Philonides, two in
favor with Alexander the great, for their hasty speed in Polyhist. cap. 6. p.
53.
running: But it is no strange thing to hear that Satan is swifter then all. I
beheld Satan, says our Savior, after his Gospel began to be preached, I
beheld him as lightning fall from Luke 10.18.
Heaven: As lightning; now lightning, we know is as soon vanished as seen; and
as soon was Satan here vanished, as sharply reprehended; Get thee hence Satan.
Yet probably in this his great haste, after he had left our Savior, he stayed
in this place, and that place, to salute some by the way, that acquainting them
with his ill success, in the forementioned Temptations, and with his desire
of revenge for that ill success, he might subtly infuse his poison into
their hearts, as he did, and make them fit instruments to assist him another
way, and at another time, who then left our Savior, and departed from him but
for a season. And such as he then saluted by the way, notwithstanding his great
speed (we will suppose) were besides many other, the malicious Jews, the proud
Scribes and Pharisees, the chief Priest, and Elders of the people, Judas, the
false witnesses, Herod, Caiphas, Pontius Pilate, with the scoffing and bloody
Soldiers; who (within three years afterward) instigated thereunto (as his
Seconds) by the malice of the now raging Devil, so furiously assaulted our
Savior (not by tempting, but by conspiring against him, by betraying him, by
reviling him, by s^itting on him, by buffeting him, by scourging him, by
condemning him) that at last they brought him to his death; which in their
purpose was wholly to cut him out of the Land of the living, and utterly
destroy him; but in God's purpose it was far otherwise, even to raise him from
death again, and highly exalt him, as he did by his glorious resurrection:
whereby he was declared to be the Son of Rom 1.4.
God; and the conqueror of Satan: and farther Gods purpose also herein was
(though neither the Devil, nor the obstinate Jews, who had no share nor part
therein, would acknowledge it) even that his Son's grief and sorrows should
procure our joy; that his wounds and bruises, and stripes, should procure our
healing; that his sufferings, should promote his Churches salvation; and that
his death should become their life; as it Moritur Christus, non ut perdat
brevem vitam, sed ut conferat sempiternam, etc. Fulgent. Sermon. de Epiphan. p.
656. and ca. 8. de Incarnat. and gratia Chrifti, p. 715.
did. So that even in this also, Satan and all his Hell-infected Instruments,
had the total overthrow, and were wholly frustrated of their wicked designs and
purposes, when our Savior, both for himself and chosen, obtained a Triumphant
victory over Hell and them. But we are speaking now of the Devils behavior,
after he had been thrice conquered by our Savior (before he entered on his
Ministry) both in the Wilderness, on the Pinnacle of the Temple, and on an
exceeding high Mountain; thus when he found himself too too weak to prevail
against him (not willing to desist, until he was out of all hope of victory)
then he leaves him.

Then; And (had we no other proof for it, yet) this leaving, and departing
then, in respect of Satan, was a manifest sign that our Savior then had
obtained a signal victory over Precedit Tentatio, ut sequatur victoria Hieron.
in Mat. 4. v. 11.
Satan; besides what he gained afterward by his death and resurrection. When
that bloody Battle was fought between Caesar and Pompey, in the Thessalian
(Pharsalian fields) one Cornelius (a man skilful in Heathenish Divination)
though at that time far remote from either Army, said, even on that very day
that the Battle was fought between them, that he saw the miserable state of the
whole Camp on both sides; and that (after sundry hot, violent, and bloudly
assaults on each side) some yielded, some fled, some were wounded, and many
slain; suddenly crying out at last (as it came to pass) that Caesar was the
Subito exclamavit, Caesarem vicisse. Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. 15. cap. 18.
Conqueror. But there was no need of any such divination here, to foretell who
should get the victory: No; for even the departing of Satan from our Savior,
and his leaving him, was a sufficient argument that he was then triumphantly
conquered by him: And this happy victory of our Savior over Satan, was the
blessed event and issue of his threefold Conflict and continued Combat with
Satan, which then had an end; when Conquered by him, he departed from him; that
being then fulfilled which our Savior said of himself afterward, The prince
of this world comes, and has nothing in John 14.30.
me: no power over me. And what Caesar once said of his own speedy victories,
veni, vidi, vici; I came, I saw, I Sueton. in vita C.J. Caesaris. cap. 18.
overcame; may far more truly be said here of our Savior's against Satan; for
it is plain, that by the powerful motion of the holy Spirit, he came into the
Wilderness, and to other places, there he saw his, and our Adversary, Satan,
and there (in every place) he soon conquered him whom he saw; and being most
victoriously conquered, then he leaves him. God grant that he may also always
leave us, who care no more for his company, then our Savior here did, when he
said unto him, Get thee hence Satan; Get thee hence; dictum, factum; and he
leaves him; Exit. And at this time, in respect of his Tempting, we will speak
no more of Satan; who so soon as he was departed from our Savior, Behold,
Angels came and ministered unto him, v. 11.

Angels minister to our Savior.
Behold! And indeed wonderful strange it is, to consider what a change here is
wrought on a sudden; but even now, though not under the power, yet under the
temptation he was of Satan; but lo! presently exempted and delivered he was
from all the malice and Temptation of Satan; and delivered, Behold, Angels came
and ministered unto him.

Behold! Surely it is worth a noting, that though heaviness may endure for a
night, yet joy comes in the Psalm. 30.5.
morning: Though the rain descend, the floods come, the winds blow, yet er'e
long a calm will come; though Satan for a time be let loose, and suffered to
tempt us, yet the time will come when the violence of his Temptations shall be
abated, and have an end. -- Deus dabit his quoque finem: As here it besel our
Savior; whose case is the case of his whole Church; the Devil roareth and
rages against both, but he shall prevail against neither; The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against Matthew. 16.18.
them: but in our greatest extremities, in our greatest agonies, in our
greatest Temptations, heavenly assistance, heavenly help and comfort shall
come, when there is most need, most want of it, as here; the Devil having left
our Savior, Behold, Angels came and ministered unto him. Behold! to him they
ministered, who before had fasted forty days and forty nights in the Wilderness,
and afterward was an hungered. To him that was there with the wild Mark 1.13.
beasts, solitary and alone, destitute for a time of all humane help and
company. To him that was there tempted of the Devil: To him that was carried
from the Wilderness to the Pinnacle of the Temple at Jerusalem; and from thence
to an exceeding high Mountain: carried from one place to another, and that by
Satan; who tempted him 1. To doubt of his Father's all-sufficient providence
over him. 2. Rashly to neglect the ordinary means, subordinate to his promised
protection. 3. Flatly to deny his Father, and Idolize him; fall down and
worship me. Behold! at last, Angels came and ministered unto him; who for a time
was then, and would be wholly deprived of their wonted Ministry.

Angels came: Not earthly, but heavenly creatures: Spirits immaterial and Hook.
Eccl. polit. lib. 1. Sect. 4. p. 9. Skeib. ler. Metaphys. de Angelis. lib. 2.
cap. 4. titul. 2. ex Damasceno.
intellectual; the glorious Inhabitants of those sacred Palaces, where nothing
but light and immortality; no shadow of matter for tears, discontentments,
griefs and uncomfortable passions to work upon; but all joy, tranquillity and
peace, even for ever and ever do dwell.

Angels came: The good Angels; here, as without number, so without name; who
came not to minister to our Savior, till the bad Angel, that Rev. 9.11.
Abadon was gone; more detesting at that time to be there where the Devil was,
then John the Evangelist did to be in the same Bath wherein the Heretic Iren.
advers. haeres. lib. 3. cap. 3. C.
Cerinthus was.

Angels came: Angels, in the plural number. Lo! One bad Angel was suffered to
tempt our Savior; but many good Angels were sent to minister unto him. Whence
our comfort is, that they be more that are with us, then they that be against
us; as Elisha sometimes said to his trembling servant, in another 2 Kings 6.15,
16.
Case.

Angels came: And probably they were the very same, who not long before pitched
their Tents round about him, when he was solemnly baptized of John in Jordan;
that was their office then, to minister unto him when he was baptized; but no
ministering unto him, by them would God now suffer, while he was tempted; and in
each Temptation became victorious. And the reason might be, least that glorious
victory obtained over the Devil (which was wholly his own) might by men, be in
part ascribed unto them; had they at that time, while the Duel continued,
ministered unto him. As Moses, when he wrote what God created in the beginning,
Genesis 1. would not so much as mention the creation of Angels, least men should
conceive that he had used their ministry in the production of his omnipotent
works in the beginning: for that cause the creation of Angels is concealed
there, and the ministry of Angels for a time suspended here. For that cause;
that our Creator might not be robbed of his glory by a misconstruction of the
one; nor our Redeemer robbed of his, by a misinterpretation of the other. But
now when the Temptation was fully ended, and the Conquest on our Savior's part
fully obtained (there being not the least ground at all left, why any creature
should presume to engross any part of the honor of that victory, as due unto
themselves) now those glorious Spirits were commanded to do him service again,
as they had done before; and commanded they obey. Behold, Angels came and
ministered unto him.

Angels ministered unto him: Ministered not only food and sustenance unto him
(if they did that) after his long-fasting, as was done by the hand of an Angel
to 1 Kings 19.5, 6.
Elias, in the like case; but (no doubt) they also ministered comfort unto him;
and there was cause for it, because ( as man) he was then in most need of
comfort, even when he was but newly escaped from the snares and temptations of
Satan; and cause there was for Angels then (men were not fit to do it) to
minister comfort unto him; as at another time one of that heavenly host did;
when being in a great agony; an Angel most opportunely appeared unto him from
Luke 22.43.
Heaven, strengthening him: Nay, I see no cause why I may not also safely
affirm, that part of this Angelical service and ministry was spent at that time
in congratulating his late and happy victory; and in singing an Eucharistical
(...) a song of praise and thanksgiving to his Father, for delivering his Son
from the Temptations of Satan. When the Israelites had escaped out of the hands
of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, there was joy and thanksgiving for that; Then
sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and Exodus 15.1.
said, etc. At another time, when they were delivered from the Tyranny of Ja^in
King of Canaan, and Sisera, the Captain of his Host, Judge. 4. there was joy and
thanksgiving for that; Then sang Deborah, and Barak the son of Ali^^am, on that
day, saying, Praise ye the Lord, for the avenging of Judge. 5.1, 2, etc.
Israel. When David (after the death of his son Absalon) was delivered from the
hands of all his enemies round about him, there was also joy and thanksgiving
for that; And David spoke unto the Lord the words of this song, in the day that
the Lord had delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies, and cut of the
hands of 2 Samuel 22.1, etc.
Saul. And can we think that our Savior was delivered out of the hands of
Satan, a far more potent Adversary, then either Saul or Sisera, or Jabin, or
Pharaoh, or all? can we conceive (I say) that this was done without an
Eucharistical song of praise and thanksgiving unto God? Surely no, it was not;
and who were so fit to do it as Angels, that holy and heavenly Quire? who in
multitudes together, magnified the Father for the birth of his Son; saying,
Glory be to God on Luke 2.13.
high: All heavenly Hallelu-jah's being most properly set to their melodious
voice; which is, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is
full of his Isa. 6.3.
glory: And John in his vision, heard the Angels about the Throne, cry out with
a loud voice, saying, Worthy is the Lamb to receive honor and glory, and Rev.
5.11, 12.
praise Lo! the work of praise and thanksgiving all; and all at other times
performed by the holy Angels. Therefore David putting them in mind, not of
their duty, which they always remember, but of the constant and continual
delight they have in praising God, which they never forget, says, O praise the
Lord, ye Angels of Psalm. 103.10.
his; which they continually do; and then in particular did, when h^re
(praising God for Satan's overthrow, and our Savior's victory) they came and
ministered unto him.

They ministered unto him; And therein they did but that for which they were
Created; even to be ministering Spirits: to be God's messengers from Heaven to
Faith; and again from Earth to Heaven, between him and his Church, before his
Son's Incarnation; afterward between him and his Son (the head presupposes
the body also) whole he was here on Earth; and now (our Savior being bodily
absent, and the Angels having no more to do for him on Earth in this matter, as
touching his own Person) Ministering Spirits, they still are, and shall be
between God and his Angels minister unto Saints.
Saints, so long as they shall remain here, even to the worlds end, as it has
been ever, even from the beginning; surely so it is; and that it is so the
Apostle plainly proves, saying, They are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of Heb. 1.14.
salvation. Lo! the Angels work is to minister, as here they did to our
Savior, and still do to us: Lo! they themselves are the Sons of God by Job
38.7.
creation: and it is most proper for such to take care of, and diligently watch
over those that are his sons by grace and adoption; which (that their ministry
may never cease) they carefully do, and will do; and that both while they live;
when they die; and also after they are dead: While we live, the holy Angels are
appointed to protect and defend us, both from corporal and spiritual dangers;
The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, and delivers
Psalm. 34.7.
them. When we die, they shall carry our souls, as they did the soul of Lazarus
into Abraham's bosom, into Luke 16.22.
heavens; and at the last day, when the general resurrection shall come (though
our bodies have long before been resolved into their first principles) the son
of man shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven, to
Matthew. 24.31.
another: So sacred are even their very ashes unto him; and the dead in Christ
(in the faith of Christ) shall rise These. 4.16.
first, that they first may be glorified both in soul and body, before the
reprobates be in both eternally punished. Lo! God never forgets his Church,
those that shall be heirs of salvation; God never forgets them; not in their
life; not in their death; no, nor after death neither; and therefore the holy
Angels shall never forget their office; which is to minister for the spiritual
and eternal good of all those that shall be saved; and that they shall never
cease to minister unto us, an argument it is, in that they here came, and
ministered unto our Savior; their diligent attendance on the head, while he was
on earth, is our full assurance, that they will never fail to take care of the
body while it is on earth: Mystically the body is the Church; the whole company
of all true believers through the whole world; Christ alone is their head; the
Angels really came and ministered unto him; and assuredly they will come, and
upon all occasions (as God shall see it best for us and our salvation) as
really minister unto us, till we shall all be like them in heaven.

But'tis now time to make an end; and well may the lamp fail, when the oil is
spent; the Temptation is ended; and the Exposition is ended; the sum whereof is
briefly this; our Savior ( led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness) was
thrice tempted of the Devil, after he had fasted forty days and forty nights;
and the Devil likewise was as often conquered by our Savior, with the sword of
the Spirit, It is written; and thus conquered, he leaves him; but not until
our Savior with indignation sent him away; Get thee hence Satan: And thus in
fury dismissed and speedily gone, the good Angels (not willing at all to defile
themselves with the Devils company) came and ministered unto him: Ministered
comfort unto our Savior, who so lately had so many conflicts with Satan; and
their ministering unto him, concludes by an argument drawn from the greater to
the less, that they are also appointed of God, to minister unto us; and that
they are appointed of God to minister unto us, unto those that shall be heirs
of salvation, is most true, and comfortable.

First, Most true it is, or else the Book of truth has failed me, for do but
ask the Question, whether this doctrine be true or not, and presently God's
word will resolve us to the full, in the Affirmative: As, who delivered
righteous Lot from the rage and fury of the vicious Sodomites? Genesis 19.15, 16.
Angels. Who brought the welcome message to Abraham, that Sarah his Wife should
bear a son; that message including a promise of a Savior; and that promise
manifesting God's favor to Abraham? Genesis 18.10.
Angels. Who comforted Jacob when he fled from the face of his brother Esau?
Genesis 32.1, 2, etc.
Angels. Who restrained the natural heat of the fire, when Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego were in the furnace, seven times more hot then it was wont to Dan.
3.19, 28.
be? Who shut the hungry Lions mouths when Daniel was in the Den? God by his
Dan. 6.22.
Angel. Who warned Joseph in a dream to take the young child ( Jesus) and his
mother, and flee into Egypt from the cruelty of Herod? An Matthew. 2.13.
Angel: who at that time, even in that also, ministered unto our Savior; as
many Angels now did, when he was newly released from Satan. Who opened the
prison doors, and brought forth all the Apostles at one time, persecuted for
preaching in the name of Acts 5.19.
Jesus? Who delivered Peter out of the hands of Acts 12.7.
Herod? Who comforted Paul with a promise of secure safety in his dangerous
voyage to Rome, at another time? An Angel: The Lord by an Acts 27.23.
Angel. Now as there is the same God still, so (no doubt) when there is cause,
there is the same ministry of Angels still, commanded by the same God to guard
and protect us; a truth which none but a Devil will impugn, can deny.

Secondly, Most comfortable it is; and to those only that shall be heirs of
salvation, most comfortable it is; 'twas so to Abraham, who had the happiness
to receive Angels into his Genesis 18.5, etc.
house; 'twas so to Lot, who also had the same happiness, Genesis 193. 'twas so
to Manoah the Father of Judge. 13.15.
Sampson; 'twas a comfort unto them that they received Angel into their houses,
knowing they were such as bare good will unto them; and that they were (God
appointing it to be so) and would be their Guardians to protect them, in any
time of trouble; the consideration whereof should also be a comfort unto us;
who (though we now receive them not into our houses visibly, as they did) yet
if we truly serve the Lord our God, we have a promise that we shall never be
left destitute of their help and protection, as they never were; He shall give
his Angels charge over Psalm. 91.11.
thee; and they who by God's appointment have a particular charge over us, will
never fail (when God sends them forth) to be watchfully present with us,
though to the outward eye not discernable. Some put their trust in Chariots,
and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our Psalm. 20.7.
God. We will remember him with joy and thankfulness, with all comfort and
cheerfulness; because he never forgets us; but as he instructs us by his
word, sanctifies us by his spirit, saves us by his Son; so also in the way to
that end, he most powerfully defends us, and most graciously ministers unto us,
by his holy Angels; whereof we rejoice. Jacob in his dream saw them ascending
and Genesis 28.12.
descending; that right motion noting what their daily office is, even always
to come down from God to man; and (when their work is done on earth) to return
from man again to God in Heaven; and all for the good of man; and who hears of
this, and is not comforted with this? When the wise men that came from the
East, saw the Star Stand^ver the house where the young Child was, they rejoiced
with exceeding great Matthew. 2.10.
joy. And surely if we rightly consider that the Angels of God, commanded to
watch over us, all our life long, and keep us in all our ways, stand oftentimes
(though now invisible) over our house, nay, in our house, if we belong unto
him, we also have just cause to rejoice with exceeding great joy; all is but
this; God has several ways to bring us unto himself; one whereof is, by the
ministry of Angels; who as their duty was came and ministered unto our Savior;
and as their office is, will in all times of need minister unto us; and because
all is for our good, all should also be for our comfort: But above all, let all
be for the glory of God, the Creator of Angels; to whom let us always give
praise, both with heart and tongue, even in the Angels own words of
thanksgiving, Glory be to God in the Luke 2.14.
highest; who though he has made us lower then the Angels, yet (when we want
it, and he sees it most expedient for us) has vouchsafed us for our comfort
the never failing service of Angels. But more of this in the Sermon following.

A Prayer.
O My blessed Savior, who sufferedst thy self to be tempted of the Devil, but
not to be conquered; suffer not me, poor sinner, to be conquered, when I am
tempted. I do not (because I may not, neither is it thy will I should) pray
wholly to be exempted from all manner of temptations, but that I may not be led
into temptation, not be left destitute of thy divine help in it, and that I may
not be tempted above what I am able to bear, but that where mine own strength
fails me, (as it does, O Lord, I confess, in every temptation) thy assisting,
thy sanctifying grace may always support me and my sinful weakness; for this I
pray, Lord, hear my voice; thou, O Jesus, conqueredst Satan for me, that I
might have the benefit of thy victory: wherefore grant I beseech thee, that
what thou have gained for me, I may keep, and be ever truly thankeful unto
thee, for what of thine own infinite love unto me, thou have gained for me; who
in my self, am too weak to contest with Satan, unless thou be present with me
by thy grace, by thy Spirit, by thy power to rebuke and overcome sin. O let not
my Lord be angry, and I will speak but this once; And, O most merciful Savior,
my humble Petition is, that thine holy Angels may be commanded to guard me, to
protect me, to minister unto me while I live, and while I am within the danger
of Satan; and when I die. to carry my soul into those eternal joys, which thou
have prepared for all that love thee. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

