



Royalty Per me Reges regnant

Quam bonum est conuenire

Regem and Populum conuenire

Loyalty Subdite estate Potestati Superem(...)



ROYALTY AND LOYALTY or A short Survey of the Power of Kings over their
Subjects: and the Duty of Subjects to their Kings.

Abstracted out of Ancient and later Writers, for the better Composeing of
these present Distempers: And humbly presented to ye Consideration of his
^Ma.tie and both Howses of Parliament, for the more speedy effecting of a
Pacification.

by To Gross(...)

By Gods Command We rule this Land.

We are all Yours And what is Ours.

CHAP. 1. THE KINGS ROYALTY: OR The Power of KINGS over their SVBIECTS.
AT the first, there was no distinction, or difference of men; one man was as
good as another: But afterward, some excelling others in desert, were
preferred before others in place. Greg. lib. 21. Moral. c. 11.
Nature, says Gregory, did produce all men alike: but the order of their
ments varying, occult dispensation did prefer some before others. But this
distinction, which happened from Sin, is rightly ordered by the just judgment
of God, that, because all men do not go the same course of Life, one man
should be governed by another. Aug. l. 19. de Civ. Dei c. 15.
St. Augustine says, that God would not that man, a rational creature, made
after his own Image, should domineere over any but Irrational Creatures; not
man over man, but man over beasts. Hence it was that those first just men, were
constituted rather Pastors of Sheep, than governors of men: that even so, God
might insinuate both what the order of the Creatures did require, and what the
merit of Sin had deserved. If men had continued in their first integrity and
state of innocence, there had been no use of Emperors, or Commanders: every
man would have seemed a King unto himself; nor would he have had any other
Lawgiver, than God and Nature. But when this could not be obtained, and the
perverseness of degenerous mankind grew such, as that breaking the bonds of
all Laws, they left nothing unattempted, which did not tend to the height of
impiety, there was a great necessity of Magistrates; without whose prudence,
Cic. de leg. 3.
and diligence, a City could not then consist; and by whose description and
putting men into order, the government of each Commonwealth is still
continued, and preserved. Hence came the command of man over men: Cic. ibid.
without which, as Cicero says, neither House, nor City, nor Nation, nor
Mankind, nor the nature of things, nor the World it self can subsist. For to
govern, and be governed, Arist. l. 1. Pol. c. 3.
is not only (according to Aristotle) amongst those things that are necessary,
but those things that are profitable. Chrysostom. ad. Pop. Antioch. hom.^.
And to use St. Chrysostoms words, in our dialect: If you take away judicial
Tribunals, you take away all order of Life: For, as a Ship cannot but miscarry
without a Pilot; and an Army cannot march in due number, or decent order,
without a Captain: So, without a Governor, a City cannot be well ordered; and
without a King, a Kingdom must needs come to ruin. If you take a King from
his Command, or Authority from a King, we shall live a more beastly life, than
irrational creatures: some biting and devouring others; he that is Rich, him
that is Poor; he that is strong, him that is weaker; he that is fierce, him
that is milder; so far, and to this purpose, the golden-mouthed Chrysostom.
With whom, is agreeable that of the Scriptures, In those days there was no
King in Jsraell: and what follows? every one did that which was right in his
own eyes, Tacit. l. 1. hut.
Iud. 17.6. So that, as Tacitus has it, it is better to be under an evil
Prince, than under none. Soph.
The Tragoedian tells us, that there is no greater evil than Anarchie: it
brings all things to confusion; it ruins Cities; lays waste Houses;
overthrows Armies: but the submissive and due obedience of true Subjects, does
preserve both life and fortunes. An Empire now being constituted amongst men,
it must needs be that one, or more, must have the pre-eminence: The former is
called a Monarchy, or a Kingdom; the latter an Optimacie, Arist 3. Pol. c. 5.
or State of the People. A Kingdom then, which is most proper to us, is the
Command, or Soverainty of one man, for the good of all. I will not dwell long
in describing the causes of it: I would they were as well observed, as they are
known; or better known, that they might be the better observed. All power
over the Creature, is originally in God the Creator: but out of his goodness
to Mankind, communicated to Man above all others. So that God is the only
Author, and efficient Cause, as of Things, so of Kings: For however there are
diverse ways to attain to the Princely Scepter; as some have mounted the
Imperial Throne by force and arms; others by the command of God, have been
designed Kings, as David, Hazael, Jehu, and others, of which you may read in
the holy Scriptures; others have been elected Princes by the Suffrages of the
people; and others borne in purple, by hereditary right, to a Kingdom: Yet it
is most certain, that whether by these, or any other ways, men do ascend the
Chair of State, they have their power, whatsoever it is, solely from God; and
ought to use it to the glory of God, and the good of their Subjects. Sen. lib.
1. de clem. c. 19.
Seneca tells us, that Nature at first did invent a King: which is to be seen
both in Animals, and in Inanimates: For the Bees, Cranes, and other living
creatures, have their Kings or Commanders: So among foure-footed beasts, the
Lion; and amongst Birds, the Eagles do excel. In Inanimates likewise the same
is evident; Casus Sph. Civi. p. 1 81.
the Sun amongst the Stars, the fire amongst the elements, sight amongst the
senses, gold amongst metals, wine amongst liquids have the precedencie. And to
speak truth, under God, the Law of Nature is a special cause for to effect
Plat. dial. 3. Arist. 3. Pol. 1.
and perfect Monarchy. It is certain, faith that great Statesman amongst the
Romans, Cic. 1. de leg 3.
that all ancient Nations did at first subject themselves to Kings: and that
was the first name of Government upon earth. Salust. de conjur. Caral.
The Jews had a Monarchy from Saul to Zedekiah, as may be seen in sacred
Histories. The Assyrians from Nimrod to Sardanapalus. The Medes from Arbaces to
Astyages. The Persians from Cyrus to Darius the son of Arsamus. The Macedonians
from Caranus to Perseus. Herod. l. 2.
Herodotus testifyeth of the Egyptians, that they could be at no time without a
King, Zech. l. 1. Pol. c. 1.
and therefore they did voluntarily carry the rods before them, and submit
themselves to be ruled by them. Diodor. l. 1.
The first King, so far as may be gathered from Antiquity, Polyd. Virg. 2. de
invent. rer. M. Arrian. in Hist. Alex. Messal. Corvin. in lib. ad Aug.
was called Menes. The same custom was also prevalent among other Nations: The
first King of the Indians was Alexander; of the Trojans, Trojus; of the Danes,
the first that was King, was Graemus; Brito of the Britains; Fergusius of the
Scots; Craco of the Polonians; Attilas of Hungary; Zechus of Bohemia;
Pharamundus of France; and Pelagius of Spain. The first Kings that are
celebrated of the Grecians, were Saturn, Herodot. 1.3.
Jupiter, and Cecrops; of the Garamantes, a people of the middle of Lybia,
Cambyses; of the Romans, Romulus, from whom at first to L. Tarquinius
Superbus, and afterward from C. Julius Caesar to this day, they have retained
a Monarchy. Bellar. de laic.
Bellarmine would divine, that the Civil power ought to be immediately, if not
by the Law of God, yet by the Law of Nature, in the whole multitude as in its
subject; and from it to be transferred by the same law of Nature to one or
more: But he much deceives himself, and others also, with such his
hallucination. For this power of Life and Death is given by Nature unto none.
L. Liber homo. D^ad Leg. Aquil.
None seems to be Lord of his own Members; much less of another. Only God,
who gives Life to Men, has the power of taking it away from them; or those, to
whom, by a special favor, he has communicated that power. And surely your
blood of your lives will I require Gen 9 5.6.
(says God) at the hands of every Beast will I require it, and at the hand of
Man, at the hand of every Man's Brother will I require the Life of Man.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image
of God made he man. Hence is that precept both of God and Nature: Thou shall
not kill. Exodus 20.13.
But, if this power were given by Nature unto men, it should surely have been
given to one man, rather than to all: for the command of one man (even
Bellarmine himself being the Judge) is the best, Bellar. de To. Pont. l. 1. c.
2.
and most agreeable unto nature; but the command of a multitude, the worst. Now
Nature in every thing (as the Philosophers will have it) does intend that which
is best: So that, out of the politic society, and a certain form of Civil
Government, there is not any Politic or Civil Power given unto men. Cic. l.
3. leg.
But all consent, that all ancient Nations (as formerly was spoken) did at
first obey Kings: and, Salust.
that it was the first name of command upon earth. Bellar. de To. Pont. l. 1.
c. 2.
Yea, as Bellarmine himself confesses, Kingdoms are of greater antiquity
than Commonwealths. In the beginning of States, (says Justine) the command of
People and Nations Just. l. 1.
was in the Kings. It must needs be then, that Kings not receive their power
and authority from the multitude, or men, but from God only the King of Kings.
L Ne^o 54. D. de Regul. jur.
For it is a Maxim and Principle among the Lawyers, that no man can transfer
more power upon another than he has himself. Nor is this assertion
contradicted, though you should allege, that Princes, as I said before, are
sometimes chosen by men; more often, if not always, inaugurated by them. For
hence it is that S. Peter calls a King, (...), the ordinance of man: which is
not so to be understood, Causally, as if it were excogitated or invented by
men; but Subjectively, because it is exercised by men; and Objectively, because
it is versed about the government of humane society; and then Finally, because
it is constituted by God for the good of men, and the conservation of humane
policy. For the word (...) does recall us to God, as to the first Author of
authority: and although Kings are created by men, that is, erected, anointed,
and inaugurated by them; yet the first Creator of Kings is God, to whom all
creation does appertain, and from whom all power does come. Romans 13.1.
For there is no power but of God, if we will believe S. Paul, who from his
Master tells us, ver. 2.
that the powers that be (...) ordained of God. The Final cause of sover
aignty is the glory of God, and the happiness of the subject: that a King, as
the Keeper of the two Tables in the Decalogue, with one eye looks up unto God,
whose Vicegerent he is, in advancing and defending Religion and piety; and with
the other upon his Subjects, that they may live in peace and prosperity. Epiph.
cont. Archon Haer. 40.
For this cause, says Epiphanius, are powers ordained, that all things from
God may be well disposed and administered to the good order of government of the
whole world. This is that goal to which the Princely Champion runs; Lip. 2. l.
Pol. c. 6.
which is no other, as Lipsius speaks, than the commodity, security, and
prosperity of Subjects. And this is the end which S. Paul expresses, Romans 13.
when as he says, that the Magistrate is the Minister of God to them for good:
Where, by [ good] we may understand, good Natural, good Moral, good Civil,
and good Spiritual. First, the King is the minister of God to his Subjects for
their good natural, whenas he makes provision of corn and victuals, whereby
they may live. Secondly, he is a minister of God for their good moral, when as
he does prescribe such Laws to his Subjects, as that they conforming their
lives to them may live honestly. Thirdly, he is the Minister of God to them for
good Civil, when as by his sword he does preserve their persons and estates
from injury, and maintain the public peace. And lastly, he is the Minister
of God for good unto them, good spiritual, when as he does advance and
maintain Religion and piety, and suppress profaneness and superstition. The
material cause of Soverainty, is the King and people; with which, as with its
integrall parts, it is complete and absolute; and without which, it cannot at
all subsist. The formal cause of it, consists in that order which is between
the King and his Subjects: by which, he is above them, and they under him; he
commands, and they obey; he rules, and they submit: Lip. Pol. 2. c. 1.
of which, as Lipsius says, there is so great a force, or necessity rather,
that this alone is the stay or prop of all humane things. This is that same
Bond, Sen. de Clem. 1.
says Seneca, by which the Commonwealth coheres; that vital spirit, which so
many thousands of men do draw: who, otherwise of themselves, would be nothing
but a burden and a prey, if this soul of command were withdrawn from them.
This is that same Circaean rod, with the touch of which both beasts and men
become tame and ruley; Live. li. 6. spud Lips.
and which of all, otherwise headstrong and untractable, makes every one
obedient and pliable: each man with the fear of it. A Commonwealth, Arist. l.
3. Pol. c. 1.
says Aristotle, is a certain description, or order of those men which do
inhabit it. The King, he is above all others, according to that power which God
Almighty has communicated unto him; and the Subjects, they are under him, by
the same authority.

And therefore Princes are called (...), that is, supereminent, seated in a
more sublime estate: And Subjects, they are called (...), subordinate, reduced
into order. The metaphor is taken from military discipline, in which the
Commander placed above all others, over-looks the whole body, whiles every one,
besides him standing in their ranks, keep their stations. Whereupon, as
soldiers in an Army placed in order, are subordinate to their Captain, and
perform obedience to him, as their supreme head: In the same manner, Subjects
are subordinate to their Prince, and bound to perform obedience to him. Now
what this power of a King is, is not of all sides agreed upon. If we look into
the sacred records, we may see the manner of the Israelites King to be
described. 1 Samuel 8.10. and se^.
And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people, that asked of him a
King. And he said, This will be the manner of the King that shall reign over
you: he will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots;
and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his chariots. And he will
appoint them Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and will set
them to care his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments
of war, and instruments of his chariots, And he will take your daughters to be
confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers. And he will take your
fields, and your vine-yards, and your olive yards, even the best of them, and
give them to his servants. And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of
your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants. And he will take
your men servants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and
your asses, and put them to his work. He will take the tenth of your sheep, and
ye shall be his servants. Some, from this description of Samuel, do think,
that the rights of Majesty are set forth: Luther in Post. super Eu^ng. Dom.
23. post Trin. Cor. c. 1.
So Luthen (in Postil. super Evang Dom. 23. post Trinit. Conc. 1. Those things
(says he) which are said to be Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. are those rights of Kings
which are described, 1 Samuel 8. Now those things which Christ affirms to be
Caesar's, Strigel, in 1. Sam. 8. p 27.
ought of right to be given unto him. So Strigelius in 1 Samuel 8. p. 27. Hic
dicunt aliqui describi tyrannum, non regem, etc. Sed textus nominal jus regis,
and loquitur de oneribus stipendiorum causa mpositis. Some say, that here a
tyrant is described, not a King; and that these things are not so spoken, as if
the Lord did approve of servitude: but the Text (says he) does name the rights
of Kings, and speaks of burdens imposed by way of Stipend. But these, with
others of the same opinion, are much mistaken and deceived. For God
constituting Judges under him, was himself in a peculiar manner (which never
happened unto any other Nation) a King to the Israelites, who now did ask a King
of him, as the other Nations had. 1 Samuel 8.7.
Hearken (says God to Samuel) unto the voice of the people; in all that they
say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that
I should not reign over them. Samuel therefore, as the Lord commanded him,
that he might reprehend the rashness of this people, describes unto them the
impune license, the rage and violence of this man, (whom, in stead of God, they
did desire to be set over them) and so, in his person, of all kings. As if the
Prophet had said; the lust of this Kings license shall break forth so far, that
it shall not be in your power to restrain it: who yet shall have this one
thing betide you, to receive his commands, and to be obedient to him. Insomuch
(says he) that ye shall cry out in that day, because of your King which ye
shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear you. For Kings are exempted
from the punishments of humane Laws, and have God only to be their Judge and
their avenger. L. Legis Virtus D. de legibus. Ille a quo. Tempestivum. D. ad
Sc. Trebel.
The virtue of the Law (as Modestinus has it) is this, to command, forbid,
permit, and punish: But no man can command himself; or be compelled by
himself; or so make a Law that he may not recede from it. Laws are given by
Superiors to inferiors: but no man is superior, or inferior, to himself. It
is impossible therefore for Kings to be bound by their own Laws: much less,
by the Laws of their predecessors, L. 4. D. de. recept. qui arbit.
or the people. For an equal has not power over an equal: much less, an
inferior over a superior. There are three sorts of Civil government,
according to Aristotle: Monarchy, Aristocracie, and Democracie. (...). Arist.
Pol. 3. c. 5
It is necessary, says he, that the chief be one, or a few, or many: For all
Nations and Cities (as that great Secretary of State to many Emperors has it)
are governed either by the People, Tacit. 1.3. hist.
or by the Peers, or by the Prince. As then, in Aristocracie and Democracie,
it must needs be that the Government be in the hands of some few, or many: so
in Monarchy, it is in one man's hands only; whose laws all men are bound to
obey, but himself none, save the Law of God. For otherwise, it is not a
Monarchy, but a Polyarchie, that is, the state of the Peers, or People. A King
subject to Laws, Arist. l. 3. Pol. c. 12.
(says the Philosopher) (...), is not a species of a Republike. Cicero being
to defend King Deiotarus, before Caesar, begins his oration from the insolency
and novelty of the thing; telling him that it was so unusual a thing for a
King to be accused, Cic. Orat. 4. Deiot.
as that, before that time, it was never heard of. C. Memmius a popular man,
and of great power, although he were a most deadly enemy to Nobility, Salust.
de bell. Jugurth.
yet he subscribes to the same opinion. For, to do any thing without being
questioned, L. Prince p^ D. de legibus.
is to be a King, says he. A Prince, says Ulpian, is free from all Laws.
Dio, his Coaetanie, speaks to the same purpose: They are free from Laws (says
he) as the Latin words do sound: that is, Dio 1.53.
from all necessity of the Laws, or the necessary observation of the Laws: nor
are they tied to any written Laws. Constantinus Harmenapolus, a Greek
Interpreter, to the same sense thus delivers himself. Constable. Harm. 1.1. Epit.
tit. 1.
A King is not subjected to Laws; that is, he is not punished, if he offends.
To which, I might add the common consent of the Interpreters of both Laws,
unanimously affirming and concluding, that a King is to give an account for his
offenses to God only, and only before him to justify his innocence.
Excellently Solomon: Where the word of a King is, Eccles. 8.4.
there is power; and who may say unto him, What do thou? And therefore the
Wise man, in the Wisdom of Solomon, thus addresseth his speech unto them:
Hear therefore O ye Kings, Wisdom. 6.1.2.
learn ye that be Judges of the ends of the earth: Give care you that rule the
people, and glory in the multitude of Nations: for power is given you of the
Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search
out your counsels. Let us hear some of the Fathers about this matter: Irenaeus
tells us, Irenaeus 1.5. advers Haeres.
that the Princes of the world having the Laws as the garment of Justice, shall
not be questioned for those things they shall do according to Law and Justice,
nor yet suffer punishment: but if they shall practice any thing contrary to
Law, in a tyrannical manner, to the subversion of Justice, in this case they
are reserved to the judgment of God, sinning against him only. Of those
things which are committed to Kings by God, they are only to give an account
unto God. So far he. Tettul. in Apol.
Tertullian in his Apology Rhetorizes it thus: We, says he, do invoke the
eternal God, the true God, the living God, for the safety of Emperors, whom
even the Emperors desire above all others to be propitious unto them. They
know who has given power unto them, who men under them, who their own souls:
They acknowledge it is God only, in whose power alone they are; from whom they
are second; next him the first, before all Gods, and above all men. Hieron. ep.
46. ad Rustic.
Saint Jerome says of David, that he repenting, after he had accumulated
murder upon his adultery, Psalm. 51.
did say to God, Against thee only have I sinned, because he was a King, and
feared not man. Before S. Jerome, S. Ambrose thus descants on him: Ambros.
Apol. prim. David. c. 4.
David sinned, as most Kings do; but David repented, wept, and mourned, which
most Kings do not. That which private men are ashamed to do, the King was not
ashamed to confess: they that are bound by Laws, dare deny their sin, and
disdain to ask pardon; which he implored, who was not bound by humane Laws.
He was a King, he was tied by no Laws: because Kings are free from the (...) of
transgressions, for they are not called to punisment by the Laws, being free by
the power of their command. He did not therefore sin against man, because he
was not subject to man. Aug. Ep. 48.
After him let us confort (...) lar: How far better then is the Emperor, (...)
not tied to the same Laws, and has power to make other Laws: and in another
^ce, there is a command upon Judges, that they (...) revoke sentence that is
once passed upon an offender, and shall the Emperor be under the same Law?
Aug. de fa^.
for he alone may revoke the sentence, absolve him that is condemned, and give
him his life. Gregory Arch Bishop of Tours, thus speaks to Chelperick King of
France. If any of us, O King, shall transgress the limits of Justice, Greg. L.
5. Hist. c. 17. and Aimoin. 1.3. c. 20.
he may be corrected by you: but if you shall exceed the same limits, who shall
question (...) for we indeed do speak unto you; and if you will, you hear
us: if you will not, who shall condemn you, but only he who has pronounced
him self to be Justice it self? Otto Frisingensis writes to Frederick
O^n^barius in these words: Furthermore, whereas there is no person in the
world, which is not subject to the Laws of the world, by being subject may not
be enforced; only Kings, as being constituted above Laws, and reserved to the
Judgment of God; Otto F^sing in. ep. ad Ercd. Oenob. praef. 1. Chron. 6.
are not (...) by the Laws of men. Hence is that testimony of that King and
Prophet, Against thee only have I sinned it (...) then a King, not only
nobilitated with magnanimity of spirit, but illuminated (...) divine grace, to
acknowledge his Creator, to have always in his mind the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, and, as much as in him lies, to take heed by all means not to
fall into his hands. For, when as, according to that of the Apostle to every
man, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: It will
be so much the more fearful for Kings, who besides him, have none above them,
whom they may fear, by how much above others they may sin more freely. Which
sayings of the Fathers and other Writers, Divine and profane, thus premised, I
cannot but wonder at the stupid ignorance, and ignorant wilfulness, of such
men, who would make the world believe, that it is in the power of the Pope, or
of the People, or of the Peers, to call Kings in question, and reduce them to
order, if they be extravagant. And if there be a lawful cause, (says
Bellarmine) the Multitude may change the Kingdom into an Aristocracie Bellar.
d^. laic. c. 6.
or Democracie; and on the contrary, as we read has been done at Rome. But
to speak truly, there can be no cause, without the express command of God,
either expressed or excogitated, for which it may be lawful for Subjects,
either to depose, or put to death, or any other way restrain their King, be he
never so wicked, never so flagitious. We do not deny but this thing has been
done at Rome, L. sed licet D. de offic. praef.
(as Bellarmine confesses) but by what right, let him look to it. We must not
look so much what has been done at Rome, (as the Roman Laws advise us) as
what ought to be done. But Bellarmine does affirm that the King is above the
people and that, he acknowledges no other, beside (...) his (...) temporal
things.

But to return when (...). Bellar. de Romans Pon. 1.2. c. 17. and 1. (...) 3.
(...) de Regim. civ. number. 4. Bodin de. Rep. 1.1.13.
The power of a King over his people is expressed by Samuel, to which they must
of necessity (...) without resistances. Not that the King was to (...) so by
right, as Samuel had told the Israelites (...) would, (for the Law of God did
prescribe (...) a far more differing form of Government, Philip. in Epit.
Phil. moral. p. 197. Brent. Hom. 27. in 1. l. Sam. Osiander in notis d. h. l.
Deuteronomy. 17.15, 16, 17.
Then sh^ls in any wise set him (...) whom the Lord thy God shall choose (says
Moses.) But he shall not (...) to himself, nor cause the people to return
into Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the Lord
has said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way. Neither shall
he multiply (...) himself that his heart turn (...) neither shall he greatly
multiply to himself silver and gold) But because it was the common custom of
the Kings of the Nations (whose example they desired to imitate, in asking of a
King, as other Nations had) so to do. For Samuel does not speak to him that
should be their King, but to the people that desired a King: Yea, and he wrote
this Law of a Kingdom, which he there describes, in a (...) and put it before
the Lord, that is, into (...) of the Covenant, that it might be for (...) all
for ever, and a testimony to their posterity, of those things which he had
foretold. Joseph. 1.6. Antiq. Jud. c. 5.
Joseph. l. 6. Antiq. Judaic. c. 5. Where yet we must distinguish, between the
rash and gready desire of Kings, and the utility and necessity of
Commonwealths. If a King, spurred on by a private desire, and ravenous lust of
having, does claim such things as are there described, he deals unjustly and
tyrannically: but if, the safety and necessity of the Commonwealth so
requiring, he demands those things; then, he does not unjustly, if he does use
his Kingly power. Again, we must distinguish also between the thing, and the
manner of the thing. If a King in exacting these things does observe a just and
lawful manner, and without compulsion and violence does require the help of
his subjects, as their labors, tenths, and tributes, for the supporting of the
State, and necessity of his Kingdom; he cannot be said (...) be a tyrant, or
deal injuriously: But if he shall go beyond the bounds of Necessity and
^egality; and only shall aim at his own private ends, to the inconvenience
and detriment of the public good of his Kingdom, he does abuse his Kingly
power, and degenerates into tyranny. Excellently and satisfactorily to this
purpose is that of Lyra (in Comment. 1 Samuel 8.) Lyra in Com. 1 Samuel 8.
Sciend^ quod aliqua sunt de jure regis in necessitate positi, etc. We must
(says he) know, that there are some things, which by right are the Kings,
being placed in necessity for the common good of the Kingdom, and so all those
things which are here expressed, are by right the Kings; because that, in such
a case, all things that are the Kings or Princes, are to be exposed and
expended for the common good: Even as we see in the natural body, that the
hand, or any other part of the body, even by instinct of nature, is exposed for
the preservation of the life of the who (...) But if the ^ight of a King be
taken otherwise, out of necessity, then there are more things expressed there,
than do appertain to the right of a King: as all those things which do make a
people to be (...) subject, and those which do not respect the common good,
but rather the will of that man that is set above others in (...) some. And
such things (...) the Prophet Samuel foretell them, to with d^ their minds
from asking after a King, because it was not so expedient for them, and because
the power of a King, by reason of its greatness does easily degenerate into
tyranny. Gregorio calls the power given unto Kings, Greg. l. 4. in 1. Reg. c.
2.
Jus Regium turannerum, the Kingly right of tyrants. He calls it ^gly, says
Arnisaeus, Arnisaeus l. 2. de jur. majest. c. 1. n. 4.
because it is common to all Kings: and he calls it the right, or power of
tyrants, because it does easily degenerate into tyranne, i^ Kings do not use
it in opportune and convenient time and place, with due moderation.

The elect King David, Greg. l. 4. in 1 Reg. c. 2.
(as (...) the forenamed place when he was (...) unto the Lord, he would not
(...) at (...) power and right of tyrants; but he did (...) the threshing
floor of Araunah the (...) for his money Yea, and Ahab, even (...) King, did
usurpno such power unto himself, when as he sought to acquire the Vineyard of
(...) for the worth of it in money, 1 King: 21.2.
or in exchange for a better Vineyard: But whiles he did, upon a pretended
crime, take both life and Vineyard away from Na^th, because he refusing the
conditions he had propounded to him, he did fulfill the Prophecy of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.10.
and justly suffered the reward of his impiety. So that, though Kings be
constituted only by God, and are to give an account of their actions only to
God; though they be above the people, and for no crime soever may be deposed or
coerced by the people; yet they must not deal with their Subjects as they
list: they must neither make slaves of their persons, unjustly oppressing them
with their power; nor yet make havoc of their estates, tyrannically usurping
them at their pleasure. They must know, that as God has set them over men; so
it is for the good of those men. They are not only Lords and Arbiters, Lips.
Pol. in Praef.
says Lipsius, but they are Tutors and Administers of States. They are lewd
and wicked Princes, as he speaks, who being constituted in an Empire, do think
of nothing but to be imperious: And they are proud and careless, (says he)
who do think that they are not given for the good of their people, but their
people only for them. For, as in the superior world, the stars have their
splendor; yet so, as they may be useful for men: So, in this inferior would,
Princes likewise have their dignity; yet so, as with it they have their duty.
The Commonweal^ is by God conferred upon them: Lips. ibid.
but it is committed, as it were, into their bosom; that it may be fostered
and preserved, not ruined and devoured by them. Happy is that Prince, who in
the highest pitch of fortune, desires not so much to be held great, as good, in
the esteem of his people; and he is no less fortunate, that can so temper
Power and Modesty, the two most differing things, in his behavior and
carriage, as that his people cannot tell whether they shall salute him as a
Lord, or as a Father. There are Prerogatives and Royalties, which must by no
means be denied to the Prince: and there are Immunities and Privileges, which
must not be kept back from the Subject. The Prince must so use his Royal
Prerogative, as that he does not infringe the Subjects rights; and the Subjects
must so lay claim to their rights, as that they do not derogate from the
Regality of the Prince: That so, he ruling as a Royal Prince, and they
obeying, as Loyal Subj^, may be both happy in the enjoyment of each other. Now
the Prerogatives which by right belong unto the Prince, are Ripaticks, or
watertoles, which are commonly called Customs, for the importing and
transporting of commodities, by Sea, Ship Money, the profit of sines and
amercements, Feud. l. 4. Tit. 56.
vacant goods, the goods of condemned and proscribed persons, and other
emoluments, which the Lawyers do term Royaltyes, Regalia.
which are due unto the Prince, not only for the splendour and glory of his
Court, but for the better maintaining of the public affairs. Princes may al^
be use of the propes goods and labors of their Subjects, for the (...) of the
common, good (...) may exact tributes, and taxes of the (...) they may impose
Laws to them, when (...) will or no, and they may command (...) which do not
repugne the Law of God (...) of Nature, and the Law of the Land, O^ (...)
Christ to the Pharisees asking him whether it were lawful to pay tribute to
Caesar or no, looking upon the money which had the impression, and inscription
of Caesar's image, gave this answer, Render therefore unto Caesar, the things
that are Caesar's; and unto God, Mar. 12.21.
the things that are Gods. And Saint Paul to the Romans, Render therefore to
all their dues: Tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear
to whom fear, honor to whom (...): and the same Apostle to Titus, Put them in
mind, to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, Sen.
1.7. de be nes. c. 4, 5.
to be ready to every good work. For as Seneca has it, the power of all
things pertain unto the King, the propriety unto the Subject. The King has
all things in his command, every man in their possession. The King has all
things within his dominions, his exchequer only, those things which properly
belong unto him: and all things are within his power, his own things only in
his patrimony. Cit. off. 1, 2.
Rightly Cicero: we must endeavor that we do not (which often times happened
amongst our Ancestors) give tribute by reason of the renuitie of the treasury,
and assiduity of wars: which that it may not come to pass, we must make
provision long aforehand; but if any necessity of this duty shall happen unto a
Common wealth (for I had rather Prophecy of another then our own, nor do I
speak so much of our (...) as of every Commonwealth) diligence (...) that all
may come to know and understand if they will be safe) that they must obey
necessity. Tacit. 1.4. hist.
For as Tacitus has it, neither the quiet of Nations can be had without Arms;
nor Arms be had without Stipends; Tacit. 1.4. hist.
nor can Stipends be had without Tributes. Cic. pro leg. Man.
These, these, (says Cicero) are the ornaments of Peace, and the muniments of
War. In the beginning of things (says Justine) the government of Countries
and Nations was in the power of Kings: whom, no popular ambition, Just. l. 1.
hist.
but approved moderation, amongst good men, did advance to this height of
honor. The people was not tied by any Laws: but the Arbitrament, and pleasure
of their Princes, was instead of Laws unto them. Pomponius speaks to the same
purpose, Pompon. l. 2. D. de orig. Jur.
Whenas he says: And to speak truth in the beginning of our City, all things
were governed by the Kings disposal. Ulpian l. 1. D. de Constit. Princip.
And Ulpian seconds him: That which pleases the King (says he) had the force
of a Law: As when by the Royal Law, which is given concerning his Empire, the
people does confer all their power and authority to him, and on him. Whatsoever
therefore the Emperor has ordained and subscribed by writing, or by any edict
commanded, it is a Law without contradiction: these are those which we commonly
call Constitutions. Justinian the Emperor to Demostenes thus writes. L. Si
imperialis 12. C. de legib. and constit. Princip.
If the Imperial Majesty shall have thoroughly examined the cause, and given
sentence to the parties present, let the Judges know, who are within our
Empire, that this shall be a Law, not only for that cause for which it was
given, but for all causes of the like nature. For what is greater, what more
inviolable than the Imperial Majesty? or who is So puffed up with the conceit of
pride, as that he dare contemn the understanding of the King? Whenas the
founders of the old law do plainly and clearly define, that those
Constitutions which did proceed from Imperial determination, do obtain the
force and vigor of a Law. And a little after he adds these words: For, if,
for the present, it be granted to the Emperor only to make Laws, it is only
worthy an Emperor to interpret Laws. Whereupon he thus concludes; Therefore,
these ridiculous ambiguities exploded, the Emperor alone shall be most justly
reputed to be both the maker and interpreter of Laws: This Law nothing
derogating from the makers of the old Laws: because Imperial Majesty gave the
same privilege even unto them. By me (says the eternal Wisdom of God) do
Kings reign, Pro. 8.15.
and Princes decree Justice. From whence Saint Augustine (whose sentence is
reckoned amongst the Canons) does thus argue: By what right do you defend the
Church? Aug. Tract. 6. in Euang. Johan. and habetur did. 8. Can. Quo Jure.
by Gods Law, or by man's? we have the Law of God in the Scriptures; and we have
the law of man in the Constitutions of Kings. And not far after: Therefore by
the law of man, by the Law of Kings. Why so? Because God has distributed the
Laws of men to mankind by Kings and Princes. So in another place be thus
reasons: For, if it be lawful for a King in a City, where he has dominion, to
command anything, which neither ever any before him, nor yet he himself
commanded, and not contrary to the society of that City, Aug. l. 3. conf^s^e
8. and refertur Did. 8. Can. Quae Contra.
he is obeyed; yea, contrary to the society he is not obeyed (for it is a
general pact and covenant amongst humane society to obey their Kings) how much
more then ought we to obey God the governor of every creature, and serve him,
without any doubt, in those things which he has commanded? Aristotle teaches
that there are three parts of every Commonwealth: Arist. l. 4. Polit. c. 14.
(...). One which consults for the good of the Republique: (...) another which
is versed in government: (...), a third which does exercise it self in
judicature. But that is the chiefest which consults of War and Peace, of
society and leagues; of Laws and death; of banishment and publicating of goods;
of making and receiving accounts. Yet, in another place he seems to recall
these three into two parts, in these words: (...). Arist. l. 7. Pol. c. 4.
For there are actions of a City: both of those who do command, and of those
who do obey: but the scope and office of him that governes, consists in
commanding and in judgeing. Joan. Bodin. l. 1. de Rep. c. 8.
Of later wrjters Bodinus (whose sentence yet is approved with the common
consent of the learned) defines this power of the supreme Magistrate (which he
calls by the name of Majesty) to be an absolute and perpetual authority over
Citizens and Subjects, and not tied to any Laws. It is manifest therefore, that
all other heads of Majesty are included in this absolute power of making and
taking away of Laws: Insomuch, that we may rightly call it, the chiefest power
of a Commonweal, comprehended in this one thing, which is, to give Laws to
all and every Subject, never to receive any from them, For, by his own right,
to make war with adversaries, and at pleasure to contract peace with them,
although they may seem to be somewhat discrepant from the appellation of Law;
yet they are done by law, that is, the command of Imperial authority: So
likewise, it is a Prerogative of Majesty to take notice of Appeals fro higher
powers, to give and abrogate Commands to supreme Officers; Joan. Bo (...). l.
1. deRep. (...)
to dispose of Offices when they are vacant; to give Immunities, and free
Citizens fro, Laws; to have the Power of life and death; to set a price, name
and figure upon moneys; and to impose an Oath upon Subjects: All which things
both of commanding and forbidding, come within the supreme power; that is, to
give Laws to all and every Subject, and to receive from none but the immortal
God.

These are some of the Royal Prerogatives, which have been premised in
general and promiscuously: but the Politicians are more exact in describing
these rights of Majesty and Royalty, and they make them of two sorts: Greater
and Lesser. The Greater prerogatives belonging unto Majesty are those which do
primarily and more principally appertain to the chief authority of the King
of Emperor. And they are, First, The power of making and abrogating Laws at
pleasure, as the necessity of the Common wealth shall require. Bodin. l. 1. c.
10.
For this is, as Bodinus has it, the prime and principal head of Majesty, and
without this the Folitique Power cannot long stand. L. 7. F. de legib.
For it is, as the Juris-consults have determined, the propriety of Law to
command. But an Emperor, or King without a command, what other thing is he,
than as a dream without sleep? But this must be understood of the
Nomothetique or Legislative power, which does institute Laws by its own
authority, and not by the command of another. And therefore, it is more than
manifest that the Decemuiri amongst the Romans, who were enforced to seek to
the people for the confirmation of those Laws which they had made, as Livie
relates, could not be said to make them by the right of Majesty.

Secondly, a second Right of Majesty is extreme provocation; that is, that
Subjects cannot appeal from the Laws that are made by Imperial Majesty.
Bodin. l. 1. de Rep. c. 8.
For it is a most certain sign of a limited power, if an appeal may be made
from the Law giver to a Superior. And hereupon Bodinus infers, that the
Dictators did not shine with Royal Majesty, and that they were not the chief
Magistrates, but Curatours only, or Commisaries, as we call them. For the
Father of Fabius did appeal from Papirius then Dictatour unto the people. Ad
Tribunos appello (so Livie repeates his words) and ad populum provoco, qui plus
quam Dictatura potest, Bodin l. 1. c. 10. and Arnisae. Pol. c. 11.
I appeal, says he, to the Tribunes, I protest to the people, who have more
power than the Dictatorship. Now an Appeal (as Bedinus has it) is a
Suspension of the jurisdiction of an inferior Judge, by a lawful invocation
of a superior; made in the same judicial place, and always ascends with the
order of Magistrates, until it comes to the highest power, in which it must
necessarily acquiesce and rest. As for example: In the Roman Empire the chief
tribunal is the Imperial Chamber: Keck. in Syst. Polit. l. 1. c. 17. p. 303.
In France and with us in England, the High Court of Parliament: and in other
inferior Principalities, the Princes chief Court.

A third right of Majesty, is the Creation of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Barrons, and other Noble men. L. 3. F. de not. resti.
For it is without doubt, that the King or Emperor is the Fountain of all
Nobility and Dignity.

Fourthly, another Prerogative of Majesty is the founding of Academies. Vult.
de feud. l. 1. c. 5. n. 7.
For this is referred to the eminence and pre-eminence of Kings and Emperors,
and which, Baldus c. 1. Quae Sit. Reg. n. 3. and 16.
the Pope cannot (as Baldus does insinuate) without unjust usurpation ascribe
to himself. And this, not to speak of our own two famous Universities, the
most ancient Academies, do evidence unto us: of which the University of
Bononia, the mother of Students, which was first erected by Theodosius,
afterward repaired by Carolus Magnus, and endued by them with many immunities
and privileges, Mut. in Vit. Car. M. and Car. 4.
is a sufficient witness. What shall I say of the Universities of Prague,
Paris and Padua, who acknowledge, not without respective gratitude, the
Emperors of the same name to be their Founders and Benefactors? And therefore
the approbation of the Pope is not requisite for the founding of an Academy:
because the Civilians tell us, that the jurisdiction, which is exercised beyond
the territory of him that commands, is most worthily to be rejected.

Lastly, other Politicians are wont to refer to the Regalities of Majesty,
the Calling of Councills and Synods, Legitimation, Restitution of fame, the
ordering of all judicialls, the indicting of war, and conclusion of Peace,
Althus. in Pol. C. 7. and Tho. Mich.de. jurisdict. Con. 11.32. and 47.
and the like, of which you may read in Althus: in Pol. C. 7. and Thom. Mich:
de jurisdict: Council. 11.32. and 47.

The lesser Rights belonging to Majesty, Vult. de. feud. 1.1. C. 5. n. 7.
which the King, or Emperor may more easily dispense with then the Greater,
are the Remitting or lessening of penalties and mulcts, customs, tributes, the
rights of faires or publiplique Mercats, L un. c. de nund. Jus Saxon. l. 3.
art. 66. and 1.2. art. 26.
of which you may likewise read L. un. C. de nund. Jus Saxon. l. 3. art. 66.
and l. 2. art. 26. Mysing. 5. obser. 29. n. 1.2. Nou. 89. C. 9. Vult. l. 1.
Iurisp. c. 23. n. 13. But to return, where we did digress, the King, (who
has the chief and absolute command in Monarchy) the parent, yea the author of
the law, and (...), a living law, is far greater then the law: as one, who by
authority given him from God, can, when he sees it fitting, whether his
Subjects will or no, yea without their consent, either make or abrogate the
law. Nor hinders it that he makes use of Counselors and Ministers, for so he
does lessen his care and solicitude, which in the government of a Kingdom
aright is the greatest; but not diminish the power of his Command, or Eclipse
his Majesty. The Emperors were wont to say, that we account it of our Princely
clemency (Worthy Senators) if when hereafter any emergent necessity shall
happen, L. Humanum. C. de legib. and Constit. Princip.
either in the private or public cause, which does require a general form
and not inserted in the ancient laws, that it be treated of by all; as well the
Peers of our Court aforehand, as by your most Honorable assembly: and that,
if it shall seem good to all the Judges, as well as your selves, it be then
dictated as a law; and so, when you be all met together, that it be read again:
and when all shall have consented unto it, then at length that it be repeated
in the sacred Consistory of our Majesty: that so the common consent of all may
be confirmed with the authority of our Highness, etc. Hence is that, of the
Iurisconsults, that a Prince alone can make statutes, although it be his
courtesy that he does admit the Counsel of his Peers. The Communication of
Counsels does not introduce a Consortship of the Kingdom. Bodin. l. 1. de. Rep.
c. 10.
For the rights of Majesty (as Bodinus has it) may be attributed to the chief
Prince; but not to Magistrates, or private men: but if they be ascribed to
either, then they cease to be the prerogatives of Majesty. And, as a crown, if
it be distracted into parts, or communicated, loses the name of a Crown; so
the rights of Majesty vanish if they be communicated with the subject. That
which is more evident, by the common decrees of the Lawyers: Those rights can
neither be passed away, nor divided, nor any ways abalienated from the chief
Prince, nor can they be prescribed by any diuturnity of time. For which cause
Baldus does call them Sacra Sacrorum; and Cynus the Individualls of Majesty:
But if the chief Prince shall once Communicate these unto the subject, instead
of a Servant, he is like to have a consort of his Empire: and in the mean
while, he loses the Regality of Majesty, in that he cannot be said to be the
chief Prince: because he is chief who neither has a Superior nor yet
Co-partner of his Empire.

But because Princes when they are publicly inaugurated, Ob.
do religiously promise that they will maintain the rights of their Ancestors,
and the former Constitutions of the Empire, and other things of that nature;
therefore may some think they are tied by their oath to observe them, nor can
they with a safe conscience any way relinquish them.

To this it is answered, Resol.
that Princes do no ways prejudice themselves by swearing, but that they may
as freely administer to the good of the Commonwealth, as if they had not sworn
at al: for they swear nothing, but that, to which if they had not sworn they
are obliged. For, that which is just and equal, that by their office they are
bound to observe and do; but, to do that which is evil and unjust, they cannot
be bound by any Covenant or promise whatsoever, though they have confirmed it
with an oath. Now what is more unjust, than that a Prince should be bound to
maintain and keep those Laws, which it is necessary that they must be either
Antiquated, or the Commonwealth come to ruin? Although all change whatsoever
(as it is in the Proverb) is very dangerous, yer that of Laws, is most
pernicious: And yet it is as certain on the other side, that the change of
manners does efflagitate a change of Laws, and that there is no Law so honest
and inviolable, or so dear, even by the show of antiquity it self, but that,
necessity so requiring, it may and ought to receive a change. Salus Populi,
suprema lex esto: The peoples safety is the chiefest Law. To conclude, If that
Kings and Princes, breaking all bonds of Laws (which yet God forbid they
should) do falsify their promises, and disrespect their vows, making no
account of what they have engaged themselves to by their Protestations; yet the
people must not rise up in rebellion against them, or shake off the yoke of
obedience from them, seeing they are to have no other than God himself to be
their Judge and their avenger.

CHAP. II. THE SVBJECTS LOYALTY, OR, The duty of Subjects to their Kings.
HAving in the former Chapter set forth unto you the Royalty of Kings over
their Subjects: where I have declared their Original from God, and their end,
next to God, their Subjects good; and that though they should come short of
that end for which they were constituted and ordained, yet they ought not to be
cut short by the people under them, but are to be reserved to the judgment of
God, next to whom they are second here upon earth, and under whom they have no
Superior, being above all Laws of men, and themselves a Law unto their
Subjects: I now come to describe unto you the Loyalty of Subjects toward
their Kings, and the peoples duty. For, a King and Subjects being relatives;
and the formal cause of a Kingdom consisting in that order which is between
the King and his Subjects; by which he rules, and they submit; he govern, and
they be governed; he commands; and they obey; It is very requisite in these
miserably distracted times, where most men would shake off the yoke of
obedience from their shoulders, and live as they list without all order: That,
having spoken of Kings and their power over their Subjects, I should now say
somewhat of Subjects, and their duty to their Kings.

And here, that we may the better setforth their duty, it will not be amiss to
express their nature: for, so knowing what they be, we shall the sooner come
to know what they must do. Now if we consult Bodinus about them, Bodin de
repub. page 170.
he will tell us, that Subjects are those, who are bound to maintain, and fight
for the dignity and safety of their Prince as for themselves: and to have the
same friends and enemies with their Prince. Colleg. Polit. Dithmar. disp. 8.
These. 2.
Or, as others do describe them: Subjects are a part of the Commonwealth,
which are obliged to the supreme power, even to all that they have: and for
this cause it is, that they do enjoy all the privileges of the Weal public.
This is the nature of a Subject. But then, if any should ask me who are
Subjects as well as what are Subjects; I must again have recourse to the
Politicians; who do give us to understand, that by the name of Subjects, we are
to take notice of the multitude of men, which are governed; or rather, who
submit themselves to be governed. And in this name, we must comprehend all, and
every one, of what state and condition soever they be, that are in that City,
Provance, and Country, where a Magistrate is the head: For, so many as do
belong to a Commonwealth, do appertain to the one part of it: viz. They are
referred to be either Magistrates, or Subjects: whence it follows, that the
name of Subject is more general than that of Citizen, specifically and properly
so called; although in writers we find them to be promiscuously used. For, he
that is a partaker with others of public honor and dignity is properly a
Citizen: but he that partakes only of burdens and taxes, and not as well of
honors and dignity in the Commonwealth, where he resides and lives, is not a
Citizen, but a Subject. They are terms contrariant, not reciprocal. Every
Citizen, is a Subject: but every Subject, is not a Citizen. There is also
another disagreeing respect, for a Citizen is so called, in respect of his
native Country or Commonwealth, where he is borne, or to which he is
ascribed: But he is a Subject in respect of that Magistrate which he obeyes,
wheresoever he is.

Now men are said to be Subjects two manner of ways; either by their nativity
and birth; or by their dwelling and habitation. That a man's nativity and birth
do make him to be a Subject, L. Assumptio. 6.. 1. ad Muncip.
is plainly evidenced ex L. assumptio 6. 1. ad Municip. Filius Civitatem, ex
qua pater ejus originem duxit, non domicilium sequitur. A son follows the
City from which his Father does derive his original, not his house. And if a
man be born of parents of diverse Cities, he follows the condition of his
father, not of his mother. L. Municip. 1 Sect. 2. F.eod.
L. Municip. 1. 2. F.eod. The house, or dwelling, in which any does fix and
settle the seat of his fortunes, does make him a Subject. But what space of
time is required to contract a house or dwelling, the Interpreters of Law do
vary: Because, in this thing the Laws and manners of every particular
Commonwealth is to be respected. Agreeable to this, is that distinction of the
Jurisperites, who discriminate Subjects by a natural, and a voluntary
obligation. He is a Subject, say they, by a natural obligation, who is borne
under the jurisdiction, and in the Dominions of that Magistrate, to whom he is
subject: And he is a Subject by a voluntary obligation, who willingly and
spontaneously offers himself to any Magistrate, and acknowledges him for his
supreme head, although he be not born within his territories and dominions. To
which two sorts of subjects, we may, not without good reason, add another
species, viz. such a one, as being vanquished in war, is made subject to him
that did subdue him. For, when a Prince or Magistrate overcomes any in a
lawful War, they are then made subject to his jurisdiction and power. But be
they subjects these, or any other ways, they are bound, whosoever they be that
are subjects, to yield obedience to him who is their Prince and Governor. If
any should doubt of the truth of this assertion, (because the contrary doctrine
is now broached and published by our Novel Divines) let him but consult the
Apostle to the Romans, (unless perchance for the same tenet he be held a
Malignant) and he will satisfy him: Let every soul (says he) submit himself
unto the higher powers. They are his express words, (...). In which universal
precept he includes all, of all orders, and states, all sexes and conditions.
As if he should have said: All, whatsoever they be, that do live in a
Commonwealth, must submit themselves to the supreme Magistrate, that is the
head of that Commonwealth. So that, in the Apostles precept, we have not only
employed the qualities of their persons that are subjects; but we have also
expressed the nature of their duties: viz. Subjection and obedience. We shall
not need to go far then to search after the duty of Subjects to their
Prince: the Apostle he has done it to our hands: Augustan: confess. art. 16.
it is Obedience. And so the Augustane Confession in the 16. Article does
acknowledge it. The first Commandment of the second Table, which (as the
Apostle speaks) is the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.2.
does set forth this duty by the name of Honor. For So we read it in the
Decalogue, Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee. Exodus 20.12. Where, by father, according to the
unanimous consent of all Divines, we are to understand, not only our natural
father, that did beget us; but our spiritual Father also, that does teach us;
and our Civil father likewise, the King, who is Pater patriae, the Father of
our Country, that does protect us. And then, by honor which we are commanded
to yield to this Father, we are to conceive all those duties which are
comprehended in it. Now the Politicians do tell us, that this name of Honor,
does consist of six several members, which do imply as many several duties,
which every Subject is bound to perform to the Prince his head, viz. Agnition,
Reverence, Love, Obedience, Gratitude, and Equity.

The first member, wherein this honor does consist, and the first duty, which
every Subject is to perform unto his Prince, is Agnition: that is, an
acknowledgement of Gods Ordinance in the office of the Prince. For God will
have his own Ordinance to be acknowledged in the Civil Magistrate; and that
we do conceive of him, as constituted by God: seeing that as the Apostle
speaks, there is no power but of God; To. 13.1.
and the powers that be, are ordained of God. After which manner, did the woman
of Tekoah conceive of King David, when as she being sent by Joab to intercede
for Absalom, that he might return from his banishment into the Kings favor: 2 Samuel 14.17.
For as an Angel of God, (says she) so is my Lord the King, to discern good
and bad. And a little after, ver. 20.
My Lord is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of God. And so did
Mephibosbeth esteem of him, when as he did compellate him with the same title:
2 Samuel 19.27.
But my Lord the King, is as an Angel of God. Which agnition and
acknowledgement of Gods ordinance in him, is a notable means to stir up our
obedience to him.

The second member wherein this honor does consist, is Reverence: when as,
Subjects look upon their Prince not only as a man, but as a man of God; and
reverence, not so much his person, as his office. 1 Pet. 2.17.
For the King is Gods legate, and his Vicar, presenting his person. And
therefore Saint Peter, when he exhorts to the fear of God, he does annex the
honor of the King: as if there can be no true fear of God, without due
reverence to the King, who presents Gods person. For which cause, Solomon the
wisest of men, Pro. 24.22.
and richest of Kings, does join the fear of God and the King together: the
King, for presenting Gods perion is called God, not (...), Plato in Point.
as Plato styles him, as a God amongst men; but (...), an earthly God, being
Gods Minister. To. 3.4.
Yea, as the Prophet David, and before him Moses, God himself. Yea, to go
farther, God himself does so call him, Ego dixi, I have said it, (...) 82.1.
Exodus 22.28.
Ye are Gods. Which yet we must not understand, as if they were so (...),
indeed; but (...) in name: not (...), by nature; but (...), by office. And so
much the very heathen did acknowledge. Philip Maced. in Plin. Paneg.
For it is reported of Philip of Macedonia, that he was wont to say, that a
King ought to remember, that he being a man, does discharge the office of God:
and the office which he does execute, is from thence named (...), a power like
unto Gods. Aug. in Lib. Quest. V. and N. Test. Q^est. 35.
Whence it is, that S. Augustine says, the King bearing the image of God,
ought therefore to be reverenced, if not for himself, at least, yet for his
office sake.

The third member; wherein this honor does consist, is Love. And it is another
duty of Subjects to love their Princes: Not only for their office, which they,
in the name and place of God, do undergo; but for the manifold benefits and
commodities which they receive from them, by their happy government: 1 Samuel
18.5.
Thus was King David accepted in the eyes of all the people, whither soever he
was sent. Kings, as you heard, are Patres patriae, Fathers of their Country;
and therefore Subjects ought to respect them with a filial love, even as
children do love their fathers.

A fourth member, wherein this honor does consist, is Obedience: Subjects must
willingly, and readily yield obedience, to all the just and honest commandes of
their Princes, which do no ways repugne the laws of God. They must not only
acknowledge, Reverentiam Subjectionis, a reverence of Subjection; but they must
also give them obedientians jussionis, an obedience to their just commands.
Chrysostom.
For, as Saint Chrysostom (...) observes: a people that obeys not their
Prince; is like to them that have no Prince at all: yea, and in a worse estate:
for you cannot call that a Kingdom, where the King is neglected, and his Laws
not observed. He seems to me to have lost his Kingdom, Arist. Polit.
says the Philosopher, who has lost his due obedience from his Subjects. And
therefore Subjects must obey their Prince, not only for fear of wrath, that
is, to escape punishment, if they neglect their duty; Romans 13.5.
but also for conscience sake, as the Apostle teaches, because God commands
them.

The fifth member, wherein this Honor does consist, is Gratitude. Subjects are
bound, by way of thankfulness, to honor their Princes, if it were for no
other reason, but because they do daily enjoy the benefits of peace,
prosperity, and protection by them. Which gratitude must express it self by
two other virtues, as necessary as it self; and without which, it cannot
subsist: and they are these: Colleg. Polit. Dithmar. disp.
Verity and Justice: Verity, in acknowledging what great blessings, favors,
and emoluments they receive by them; and Justice, in endeavoring to make
satisfaction, and compensation for them. And for this cause it is, that they
pay them Tenths, Subsidies, Customs, and Tributes: without which, not the King
only, but the Kingdom also, would be debilitated and go to ruin. In these
Tributes and Contributions, Ulpian. in^ 1. in criminibus. 20. f. de quaest.
(says Ulpian) there is none but may know that the strength of a Kingdom does
consist. They are the very nerves of a Commonwealth. Cic. pro Manl
They are, says Cicero, the ornaments of peace, and the supporters of war. It
is impossible, Nov. 149. C.
said the Emperor, that otherwise a Republique could be conserved, if it were
not for the religious observation, and due collation of tributes. The necessity
of which, Menenius Agrippa, in Livie, would teach the Romans, with this not
more witty than apposite Apology: Liv^. 2. p. 78.
For, as if food and nourishment be denied to the belly, the whole body must of
necessity languish and waste away by a Consumption: So, if you withold
Subsidies and Tributes from the chief Magistrate, the Commonwealth must of
necessity come to ruin. And therefore well said Tacitus, you soon teach the
dissolution of an Empire, Tacit. 14. Annal.
if you diminish the revenue, by which it should be sustained: Lip. Pol. 4. c.
11
nay, if, as Lipsius has it, you do not sometimes augment them.

Lastly, the sixth member wherein the honor of Subjects toward their Prince
consists, is Equity. Which is a virtue, whereby every Subject is bound with
candor, either to cover the imperfections and errors of his Prince, and to
interpret them in the best sense; or, by a prudent dissimulation to pass them
by, and take no notice of them: or, if the reason of his place does so require
it, by moderate counsels and admonitions to endeavor to reform them. For,
that which is spoken unto children by the son of Sirach, Ecclus. 3.10, 11
every true subject ought to apply it to himself: Glory not in the dishonor
of thy father: for thy fathers dishonor is no glory unto thee: for the glory
of a man is from the honor of his father. And we cannot but be knowing of
Chams curse, Genesis 9.25.
for laying open, or not covering his fathers nakedness. It is the office and
duty therefore of every Subject, according to their respective places, not to
discover, but rather to cover and conceal the naeves, infirmities, and
imperfections of their Princes; and, as opportunity shall serve, in an humble
way, seek by wholesome admonitions, and moderate counsels, to reclaim them.
This was Luthers doctrine, that great instrument of Reformation, which at this
day is so much pretended. The office of Subjects, says he, does require, that
they do declare unto Princes what they know not. For, as Princes may sin by
not knowing those things which they do to, Luth. Com. in Genesis c. 23. p. 270.
be sins; so, Subjects may sin more in not showing to Princes those things
which they do to be sins. The one sins by ignorance, the other by
negligence. And to this end he alleges that passage of Abimelock King of
Gerar: Genesis 20.
who having taken to himself Abraham's wife, because Abraham had told him she
was his sister; and being warned by God in a dream to restore her to him; did
lay all the fault upon Abraham, because he had no sooner imparted the villainy
and wickedness of his Courtiers unto him. And thus you see wherein the duty of
Subjects consists: either in one word of Obedience, as Saint Paul expresses
it: or in one word of Honor, which comprehends Acknowledgment, Reverence,
Love, Obedience, Gratitude and Equity, as the fifth Commandment does desire it.
So then, to bring all to a head: All, and every Subject, are bound to submit
themselves unto their Princes, in those things which they command, not being
contrary to the laws of God, and the laws of nature.

It is true, that in the Apostles times, there were some, who absurdly
interpreting the Holy Scriptures, as too many now, fanatically given, by an
unknown spirit; and extending their Christian liberty further then the
simplicity of the Gospel would permit them, did maintain, that it was a most
unworthy thing, that they, who were freed by the Son of God, and governed by
the Spirit of God, should be under the power of man. Of this leaven, was Judas
of Galile, of whom we (...) in the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 5.
He, as Joseph (...)lates, taught, that by the Law of God, none ought fit to be
called Lord, but God himself; and that there was no obedience due to the
Politic Magistrate, no tribute to Caesar.

After them, sprung up the Donatists, Anabaptists, and their Disciples, (...),
all birds of an ill brood, who did likewise reject the command of the Civil
Magistrate.

Lastly, the Pontisicians, though not in the same manner, did oppose the power
of Princes, cavilling with the Civil Authority, and maintaining that their
Clergy can by no means be punished by a Civil Judge: or compelled to appear
before the Tribunal of a Secular Magistrate; but that all their goods, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, (...) free, and so ought to be from the tributes and
taxes of secular Princes.

All whose erroneous tenants, and opinions, the Spirit of God having confuted
in his holy Word, does exactly and precisely determine the contrary; expressly
setting forth, and commanding the office of subjects to their Princes. S. Paul,
as you heard, Romans 13.1.
gives this exhortation: Let every souls submit himself unto the higher
powers: Romans 13.1. He excepts no order, nor sex, nor condition, nor any thing
that has the nature of man. And a little after, Render wherefore unto all
their dues: tribute, to whom tribute is do; custom, to whom custom; fear, to
whom fear; honor to whom honor. And, in his Epistle to Titus, he lays a
charge upon him, then Bishop of (...), that he should give it in charge to the
Cretians, to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey Magistrates,
Titus 3.1.
and to be ready to every good work. Tit. 3.1. So in his first Epistle to
Timothy: I exhort, says he, 1 Timothy 2, 1, 2.
that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men: for Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may
live a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty:

The same thing, before Saint Paul, yea, before our Savior himself, as he was
in the flesh, did the Prophet Jeremiah exhort the Jews unto, that were exiles
from their own Country in Assyria: and that not without especial command from
God, that they should pray to God for the safety of the King, and the Kingdom
of Babylon, where they were Captives; and withal, he does sharply reprove the
rashness of those false prophets, who by vain promises, and hopes of immature
liberty did incite them to rebellion. Jer. 29.4.7.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel unto all that are carried away
Captives, whom I have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon:
Seek the peace of the City, where I have caused you to be carried away
Captives; and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof ye shall
have peace. Nor, is Saint Peter backward to inform the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Cappadocia, and Bithynia, with the same doctrine. Submit your selves, says
he, to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King,
as supreme; or unto Governors, that are sent by him: ver. 17.
And presently after, Fear God: Honor the King. From which wholesome doctrine
of Saint Paul, the Prophet Jeremiah, and Saint Peter, you may see, not only
the pernicious tenets and positions of those, and all other Schismatically
affected Reformadoes, alias Renegadoes, confuted; but the truth of obedience,
due to the Civil Magistrate confirmed: and, that in obedience, honor,
reverence, tributes, and other duties, formerly mentioned, to be by Subjects
performed to their Princes, comprehended and enjoined.

But, to what kind of Princes do the Apostles etc Prophets in Scriptures
enjoyne these duties to be performed? That will be a question well worth the time
to be resolved, especially at this time, when every one almost does take the
liberty to himself; peremptorily to affirm that Subjects ought not to give
obedience to their King, if he does not, as they they would have him, and will
not be persuaded and ruled by them. For say they, it would not be grievous or
irksom to us to yield obedience and that respective observance, w^ you have
alleged fro the Holy Scriptures, unto good and gracious Princes; but it goes
against our consciences to perform these duties to one King, seeing he
swerves from the Holy Scriptures, which are the word of God; and will not be
ruled by his great Counsel, but is seduced by Malignant Counselors, to wicked
and ungodly acts of tyranny.

To this, I answer; That if our Gracious King (which God forbid) should
degenerate so far from himself, as to commit such outrages as they would suggest
(which blessed be God as hitherto he has not, nor is there likelihood that he
ever will, although, if he were not so good and so gracious as he is, he might
soon by their rebellious carriage be invited to it) yet they are bound in duty
to perform obedience to him; and not of as too many abuse (...), etc misled,
do, hand over headrise up in rebellion against him. For, if we consult the same
Apostle, and other places of the holy Scriptures, we shall find, that the
forementioned duties, are not only to be performed to good and gracious
Princes; but even to wicked and Tyranicall, even, to those that are most cruel;
as were Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero: For under all these the Apostles
lived, and their Epistles coetanie to them, directed for obedience to them. Nor
is it without good reason, that such obedience should be given to them: for,
they are of God, as well as good Kings: Romans 13.
there is no power (says the Apostle) but of God: that is, all power is from
God only. For that negative Apostolical Axiom is equipollent on all sides to
an universal affirmative. So Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzer, Dan. 4.17.25:
that the most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever
he will, and sets up over at the basest of men. So Christ himself
pronounces of Pilate, that wicked president of the Jews, John 19.11.
that he had no power over him, were it not given him from above. And
therefore, seeing their power is alike from God, we must give the like
obedience to them, as to God. It was the saying of him, who sometimes was
Nazianzens Worthy, Greg. Nazian.
(...) Subjects must submit themselves to good and gracious Princes, as to God:
and they must submit to evil and ungodly Princes, for God: that is, because God
has so commanded it. Let us hear the Fathers a little farther in this point,
and we shall find that they do all unanimously give their votes unto it.
Tertullian, if we address our selves to him, resolves us in these words: For
as much therefore as concerns the honor of Kings and Emperors, we have a
sufficient prescript that we should be subject, according to the Apostles
precept, Tertul. de Idololat.
in all obsequiousness to Magistrates, Princes, and higher powers. But yet
within the bounds and limits of Religion, so far, as we are separated from
Idolatry. For therefore is that example of the three brethren excelling, who
otherwise obsequious to King Nabuchodonosor, did most constantly refuse to give
honor to his Image; proving that it was Idolatry, whatsoever was exalted above
the measure of humane honor, after the manner of Divine Majesty. And so Daniel
relying upon Darius forother things, so long continued in his office, as he was
free from the danger of his Religion: But rather then he would run that hazard,
he did no more fear the Kings Lions, then the others were afraid of the Kings
Furnace.

Optatus Milevitanus, speaking of David's observance to King Saul, Optat. Milev.
1.2. cont. Parmen
has these words: David had the opportunity of victory in his hands: he might
have killed his adversaries, unwitting of him and secure, without much ado,
and he might have changed, without much bloodshed, or the conflict of many,
his tedious warfare into a sudden slaughter: both his servants and opportunity
did invite him to it. Opportunity did spur him on to Victory. Now he began to
draw his sword: and now his armed hand was ready to seize upon his adversaries
throat: But the remembrance of divine institutions did altogether withstand
these intentions: He contradicts not only his servants, but opportunity,
egging him on to victory. As if he should have said thus unto them: O victory,
causelessly do thou provoke me on: O victory, thou do in vain invite me to
triumph: I would willingly overcome mine enemy, but I must first observe the
commands of God. I will not (says he) lay my hands on the Lords Anointed. He
did repress both his hand and his sword; and whiles he did revere the oil, he
saved his adversary; and performing observance to him, though his adversary, he
did vindicate him from slaughter.

Saint Augustine speaking of the same person, Aug: in quaest. ex vet. Test.
quaest. 35.
speaks in this manner: David well knowing that there was a Divine constitution
in the office of Kings, does therefore still honor King Saul, being in the
same condition, lest he should seem to injure God, who decreed honor to this
Order. For a King has the image of God, even as a Bishop the image of Christ.
So long therefore as he is in that condition, he is to be honored; if not for
himself, yet for his order. Whereupon the Apostle says, Be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are
ordained of God. Hence it is that we do honor an Infidel in authority,
although he be unworthy of it; who performing Gods office in that order, does
gratify the Devil: yet the power he has, does require that we give honor to
him, etc. And in another place: but in that the Apostle says, Let every soul
submit himself to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God: he does
rightly admonish, that no man be puffed up with pride, for that he is called by
the Lord into liberty, and made a Christian; and that he does not think there
is no order to be kept in the course of this life; and that he is not to be
subject to the higher powers, to whom for a time the government of temporal
things is concredited. Aug. exposit. quar. propos. Ep. ad R^m. propos. 78.
And a little farther, If any man therefore think, that because he is a
Christian, he is not to pay custom, tribute, or due honor to those higher
powers, to whom those things of right do appertain, he is in a great error:
But this rule is to be observed which the Lord himself prescribed, that we give
unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are
Gods.

S. Jerome, Hier. in Ep. ad Tit. and habetur 11. quaest. 3. Can. Si Dominus.
whose sentence is inscribed among the Canons, says thus: If it be good, which
the Emperor, or Magistrate, commands, obey the will of him that commands: but
if it be evil, answer him out of the Acts of the Apostles, It is better to
obey God then men.

S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Romans 13. hom
upon the words of the Apostle, Let every soul submit himself to the higher
powers, thus descants: (...), (...). Although thou be an Apostle, although
an Evangelist, although a Prophet, or whatsoever else thou be, thou must
submit.

S. Ambrose thus expresses himself: Amb. 1.5. orat. in Auxent.
I could grieve, I could weep, I could mourn: my tears are weapons against
the armies and soldiers of the Goths, for such are the weapons of a Priest.
Otherwise, I neither ought, nor will resist.

Bernard to Lodowick King of France, Bern. ep. 22 1.
writes in this manner: But whatsoever it shall please your Majesty's mind to
do, we that are the sons of the Church, cannot, in the least, dissemble the
injuries, contempts and scorn even to the trampling under foot of our mother,
etc. And a little after, But we will stand out, and fight even to the death, if
necessity shall require, for our mother: but with such weapons as are lawful
for us to use: Not with swords, but with words; not with shields, but with
prayers and tears to God. And in another place, If the whole world should
conspire against me, to make me attempt any thing against Royal Authority, yet
I would fear God, and would not dare to do any thing rashly against the King,
that is ordained by him. For I well know where I have read, Whosoever resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God, etc.

Amongst later Writers, Cajet. in ep. ad Romans 13.
Cardinal Cajetan thus Comments upon Saint Paul: After that the Apostle had
instructed the Romans about the use of the body, affairs of the world, and the
gifts of God; he does now prosecute his instruction about the use of liberty in
respect of Princes. For he gives them a caution, lest by reason of the liberty
which they had obtained by Christ, they should think themselves to be exempted
from the power of Secular Princes. And to this end he does instruct them, that
they should be subject to Secular Powers. And whereas he ought to have said,
Every man, he does more significantly say, every soul; that so we might
understand, not only our estates, not only our bodies, but even our souls
ought to be subject to temporal Kings, in those things which they may lawfully
command. And in saying All, or every, he excepteth none.

See, how the Fathers do, with one consent Vote that we must give obedience to
Kings, although they be wicked, in all things that are not unlawful; That
honor, tribute, obedience, and the like, must be given to lawful Princes; and
that there is no other remedy against their violence and injustice, but prayers
and tears to Almighty God. What, do we think that they were destitute of
strength, that they could not oppose one power with another, or repel one
injury with another? Were they so stupid and ignorant that they did not
understand what power was in the Pope or People, to reduce their Kings into
good government? They wanted neither power to resist, nor forces to rebel,
Tert. in Apologet advers. gent. c. 37.
if we dare give credit to Tertullian, (who yet is of sufficient authority and
antiquity to be believed, even without our assent) thus writing in his Apology
against the Gentiles. But far be it that either the children of God should be
exempted from the fury of man; or that they should grieve to suffer in that
thing wherein they are tried. For if we would take upon us to be open and
professed enemies, do you think that we could want money or men? Are we not
more in in number then the Moors, and Marcomanns, and the Parthians
themselves, or the Gentiles, how great soever they be, let them be but of one
place, and of their neighbors adjoining unto them, yea, then of the whole
world besides. We are but of yesterday, and yet we have filled all places among
you: your Cities, Islands, Cittadels, Buroughs, Assemblies; your very Camps,
your Tribes of the common people, Decuries of the Judges, Palaces, Senats,
Judicatories; only we leave your Temples to your selves: for what war have we
not been fit, and ready to manage, even with fewer forces, who thus willingly
suffer our selves to be put to death; if that we were not disciplined by our
Religion, that it is more lawful for us to be killed then to kill? Thus far
Tertullian, with whom S. Augustine is not discrepant: you may find his sentence
to be registered among the Canons in these words: Julian was an Infidel and
unbeleeving Emperor; was he not likewise an Apostate, an enemy, Aug. in Psalm.
1 2 4. and habetur 11. quaest. Can. Imperatores.
an Idolater? yet the Christian soldiers served under this unbeleeving
Emperor. When they came to the cause of Christ, they did acknowledge none but
him that is in heaven; when he would have them to worship Idols, and to
sacrifice, then they did prefer God before him: but when he said unto them,
Lead forth the Army, and go against such a Nation, they did presently obey
him. They did distinguish the Lord eternal from a Temporal Lord; and yet they
were subject unto their Temporal Lord, for their eternal Lords sake.

When Jovianus after the death of the forenamed Julian was elected by his
army to be their Emperor, and he refusing, began to speak in these words
unto them: Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. 2. l. 1. and Theodor. l. 4. hist. c. 1.
I cannot, seeing I am a Christian, command such men, nor take the Government
upon me, of Julians Army, which he has imbued with such venomous precepts,
and pernicious discipline. Which, and words of the like nature, when the
Soldiers had heard, they began to shout with one acclamation, and say: O
Emperor, let not your mind be troubled with such doubtings, nor yet wave the
command of us, as if we were profane and wicked, for you shall find both
Christians of us, and men disciplined in piety to do you service. From which
recited places, it may appear that it was no such difficult matter for the
Christians in the Primitve times to have coerced their Emperors, by whom they
were miserably afflicted, and most cruelly used, if it had been lawful for
Subjects to rise up against their Princes. But if those forementioned fathers,
endued with no less science then conscience, and furnished with as much
knowledge as zeal, had thought it lawful, either for the Pope, or the People,
or any other men to regulate their Princes, as they thought fit; without all
question, they would never have suffered themselves and the whole Church of
God, to be so cruelly oppressed by those wicked Emperors. But as they did
most freely reprehend their vices, so they would at least have admonished them
of their office, if they had been wanting to it. But when they knew that Kings
(as have been formerly, not only touched, but oftentimes urged) have only
God to be their judge and their avenger; hence it is, that they did only flee
to him, and piously and happily implore his aid.

These things (says Nazianzen) did Julian meditate and deliberate, Nazian. in
orat. in Julian.
(as those that were witnesses and copartners of his secrets have imparted and
divulged to the world) yet he was restrained by the Ordinance of God, and the
tears of Christians, which were then many, and shed by many, seeing they had
no other remedy against their persecutors. The like may be said of diverse
other wicked Princes, who have either been taken away by the singular
providence of God, or at length reduced to a better mind: for God who is the
Father and Judge of all alike, does oftentimes most justly send ungodly Princes
unto a people for the punishment of their sins: although, they minding nothing
less, than the justice or purpose of Gods will do most unjustly. Shall there
be any evil in the City (says God by the Prophet Amos) Amos 3.6.
which the Lord has not done? But no sooner do Subjects repent them of their
sins, and depart from their evil courses, Prove. 21.1.
but God (In whose hands the heart of Kings is, and which way soever it
pleases him, as the rivers of waters, he does incline it) according to his
great goodness and singular mercy, wherewith he is affected toward afflicted
Penitents, makes those wicked princes either cease to be, or to be tyrants.

Vengeance is mine (says the Lord) I will repay it. This is the only fort and
sure defense against all injuries of wicked Kings: they are the weapons that
are to be taken up against ungodly Princes: and, this, lastly is the most
expedite way to pessundate all Tyranny.

But then you will say, Object.
If the King should make aprey of his Subjects, and impose greater taxes on
them, and exact more grievous Tributes and Customs on them, oppressing all and
every one of them with his Tyrannical power, shall we not in this Case resist
and oppose him?

For answer of this, Resol.
I must tell you, if we will be as we profess our selves to be, Christ's
Disciples and obey his word, which we desire, at least pretend, above all
things to be sincerely preached unto us, we must not resist him. Now what
says Christ. But I say unto you that ye resist not evil, etc. Mar. 5.39.
Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, being King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as
he is styled in holy Scripture, yea and the son of Kings according to the
flesh, being of the seed of David, yet lest he should give offense, though he
were free, paid Tribute to Caesar; For so we find him discoursing with
Peter: The Kings of the Earth, of whom do they take Custom or Tribute, of
their own Children or of Strangers? Peter says unto him of Strangers. Mar.
17.25.26.27.
Jesus says unto him, then are the Children free; Notwithstanding lest we
should offend them, go thou to the Sea and cast an book and take up the fish
that first comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth thou shall find a
piece of money, that take, and give for thee and me. Hereupon Bernard to Henry
then Archbishop of the Senones thus elegantly writes: Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers: Bernard ad Hen. Archiep. Senon. Ep. 42.
If every Soul, then yours; who does except you from the universality? If any
endeavor to deceive you, hearken not to their Councols, who seeming to be
Christians, hold it yet a disparagement to them to follow the Deeds or observe
the Words of Christ their Master. And a little after: These things, says he,
do they; but Christ he did both bid otherwise, and did otherwise: Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. What
he spoke with his tongue, he performed with his hand; as he taught so he
wrought: The maker of Caesar did not deny to pay tribute to Caesar, for he gave
an example to you, that you should also do the like. And a little farther he
says to this purpose. Do you contemn the saecular power? None was more
saecular then Pilat before whom our Lord stood to be adjudged. Thou could
have no power (says he) over me, if it were not g^ven thee from above; even
then did he speak by himself, and in himself show, what afterward he did by
his Apostles in his Church. That there is no power but of God, and that he
that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God.

Before Bernard St. Ambrose wrote to the same purpose. If the Emperor demands
tribute, we do not deny it: the lands of our Church do pay him tribute: If he
requires our fields, Amb. 10.5. Conc. de Basilicis non tradend. haer^t. p. 104.
he has power to lay claim unto them; none of us do interpose or withstand
him. The Collation of the people may redound to the poor; let them not
conceive displeasure about our fields, let them have them if they like them; I
do neither give them the Emperor nor deny them. And again, Ambros. l. 2. Ep.
13. ad Marcel
I was commanded by the Court officers and tribunes, to make a speedy surrender
of the Church, they alleging that the Emperor does but use his right in
demanding it, for as much as all things are in his power. I made this answer,
that if he did require of me what was mine own to give, viz. my ground, or my
goods, or any thing of the like nature, this my right I would not deny him;
although even those things of mine are the poores also. Very excellently St.
Ang. But whereas the Apostle says, Wherefore ye must needs be subject; it
is as much as if he should have said, there is a necessity for this life that
we be subject, not resisting; August. Exposit. Quar. propos. Ex Epist. ad Rom
Proposit. 74.
if they will take any thing away from us, in that they have power given them
over our temporal things. Now then, if it were not lawful for subjects,
without sin, to resist their kings when they did exact unjust tributes of them,
and by violence take away their estates from them; much less may we deny to
Princes just tributes, and other things of the like nature, which are requisite
and necessary for the safety of the Commonwealth, and cannot be denied
without its certain ruin, and the great hazard of the whole Christian Policy.

In the law of Moses we read, that the Man that would do presumptuously, and
would not hearken to the Priest (that stood to Minister before the Lord, or
unto the Judge, even that man was to be put to death. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
And since by the Laws of men they have proceeded no less severely against
Rebels. But most strict is that Law of God promulged by the mouth of the
Apostle: Therefore whosoever resists the Power, etc. resists the Ordinance
of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation: that is, as
all Divines expound it, temporal here; and, without repentance eternal
hereafter.

And as for those that do calumniate and derogate from the Power, etc. of
Princes here, by their seditious words, and scandalous writings, although
perhaps they may escape the hands of men; yet they shall never avoid the
judgments of God, from whose all-seeing eye of Providence nothing can be hid,
against whose omnipotent Power nothing can resist, and by whose most just
judgments no wickedness can go unpunished. No less wittily then pithily St.
Ang. For whereas the doctrine of the Apostle does make mention of these earthly
powers, August. de Jmper. see.
he does insinuate into our apprehensions even the parts of the heavenly
judgment. For whenas he does enjoyne us to obey the Laws of the world, he
does necessarily admonish us to take heed of the world to come. If thou will
not, says he, fear the Powers, do that which is good, To. 13.3.
which is as much to say. If thou will not fear the judgment to come, then
eschew evil and do good whilst thou art here. Therefore we ought to take
heed, and perform the first form of this Constitution, which wants the laws
of this life, that we may exclude and keep from us that fore-judgement of
eternal death in the other life; because those whom this temporal punishment
does not take hold of here; there that eternal punishment will follow with
insufferable torment hereafter.

Amongst other examples of the judgments of God upon rebellious, gainsaying
and disobedient Persons, we have that dreadful and horrible example of Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, in the holy Scriptures, which the Spirit of God sets down
as a warning to us, that we fall not into the like contradiction, ^ ptat. Mi
levit. cont. Parmen.
lest we fall into the like condemnation. Of whom Optatus Milevitanus writing
against the Donatists, who did refuse to obey their Magistrates (as too many of
the Smectymnuan rout, and Antipodian state do now amongst us) thus delivers
himself. Schisma summum, etc. That Schism is a great evil, you your selves
cannot deny; and yet without the least fear you do imitate your most
desperate Ringleaders, Corah, Dathan and Abiram, nor will you set before your
eyes, or once take it into your hearts that this evil is both prohibited by
the word of God, and revenged with a most grievous judgment. And a little
after: The Congregation of Ministers, and the Sacrilegious multitude that was
soon to be confounded did stand with their inter dicted and forbidden
Sacrifices; time for repentance was denied and withheld from them, because
their fault was such, as it deserved no pardon. A command of hunger was laid
upon the earth, which presently opened her greedy jaws upon them that caused
division amongst the people, and with an insatiable mouth did swallow up the
contemners of Gods word. In a moments space the earth clave asunder to devour
those forenamed separatists; it did swallow them up, and then was closed
again upon them. And lest they should seem to receive a courtesy by their
soddain death; as they were not worthy to live, so they were not vouchsafed to
die. Upon a sudden they were cast into the prison of Hell, and so buried
before they were dead.

St. Aug. having occasion to speak of the same Separates, August. de mirac.
sact Script. c. 29. and 30.
cap. 29. of the wonders of the holy Scripture speaks to the same purpose, and
cap. 30. of the same book, he does thus enlarge his Meditations: Again the next
day the whole multitude gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron as
guilty of blood and would have slain them, in revenge of those that were
killed; But here both Moses and Aaron come before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and again the wrath of the Lord went forth and raged amongst the
rebellious people: And again Aaron at the command of Moses, filling his Censer
with fire from off the Altar, ran into the midst of the Congregation, and
standing between the living and the dead, the plague was stayed. A just
judgment inflicted on both, that they who did inwardly burn with the fire of
Anger against their lawful Princes, should now outwardly perish with the
burning flame of most deserved vengeance; Number. 16.50.
and he that in his heart had forgiven the offense of his brethren, by his
footsteps others being defended, the fire from Heaven durst not consume; But
they that died of the plague that day were 1400. whom the wrath of the Lord
consumed.

Wherefore to draw to a conclusion, as the Apostle admonishes and comandeth,
^0. 13.5.
We must needs be subject not only for wrath but also for Conscience; Because
as S. Peter says, this is the will of God that with well doing we may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, Pet. 2.^5.16.
as free and not using our Liberty for a cloak of maliciousness but as the
servants of God. For although, as S. Aug. has it, we are called to that
kingdom where there shall be no such powers, yet while we live here in our
journey thither, until such time as we shall come to that Age, August.
Exposi^. Q^ar Pro ^of. Epist. ^d Romans Proposit. ^2.
where there shall be an annihilation and ceasing of all Principality and
Power, let us cheerfully and willingly undergo our condition, according to
the order of humane things, not dealing feignedly and hypocritically: and so
doing, we shall not so much obey man, under whose command we are, as God, who
does command us to be obedient to them. Pet. 3.10
Therefore to use S. Peter's words, He that will love life, and see good days,
let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:
let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek Peace and ensue it; Let him
bear in mind that commandment of God, Exodus 22.^8.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people. And not
forget the council of the Preacher, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought,
for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, ^ccles. 10.^0.
and that which has wings shall tell the matter. But let him embrace the
council of king Solomon, not only the wisest of Kings, but of all other men.
My son (says he) fear thou the Lord and the King, Pro. 24.21.
and meddle not with them that are given to change; for it is our Saviors
saying, who is truth it self and ought to be believed before all our pretended
Reformadoes, Mat. 26.^2.
whosoever shall take up the Sword, especially against Gods anointed, contrary
to the word of God, shall perish with the Sword.

And thus having gathered certain flowers out of the garden of Divinity,
Philosophy, History and Policy, to make a Crown for Royalty, Conclusion.
and a nosegay for Loyalty, there wants nothing now but that same thread of
Charity (which the Apostle casseth (...) the bond of perfection) to constringe
and bind them together; Colos. 3.14.
and indeed to use S. Chrysostom. similitude, Chrysostom. hom. in Coloss. 3.
as flowers be they never so choice and rare, yea the prime darlings in natures
Garden, and be they never so exactly composed and set in order, yet if they be
not as perfectly combined and tied together, hey fall away from one another and
come to nothing. In lik^ manner although a man should compose an Anthologie of
never so excellent precepts, sentences and examples out of the garden of divine
and humane writings, and propound them as so many sweet flowers to the use and
benefit of the common good, yet if there be not the hand of Charity to receive
them, and the eye of Candor for to read them, and the heart of Sincerity to
apprehend them, and tie them together with the constriction, or rather the
construction of Love; like flowers that are not tied together, they fall to the
ground and become useless. Chrysostom. ut supra.
And S. Chrysostom. reason that he gives there will hold here likewise, (...).
for without love they will soon dissolve, (...). It is love alone that knits
them fast, and keeps them together, making them useful for the Church of God,
which otherwise would do no good. And therefore having selected and culled out
variety of choice Sentences, precepts and sayings, both out of ancient and
modern writers as well humane as divine, and they as well Protestants as
Romanists, and such as have been approved and honored by the judgment of the
learned even of the adversaries, to set forth to the world the royalty of Kings
and the loyalty of subjects; I humbly tender them to the consideration of both,
his Majesty our royal King and the Parliament his loyal subjects; that so if
there be any thing in them, which showing the Power of the one, and the Duty of
the other, may tend to the repayring of that great breach, by a happy
pacification, between the King and his people, which being at first begun with
faction, fomented with fears and jealousies, and continued thus long with
malignancy of affection, is likely to bring both King and Parliament (without
the especial providence of God preventing) to utter ruin; I shall attain the
happy end that I first did aim at: and for that which remains in me to effect
it, I shall turn my pen into a Petition, and these occasioned collections,
into religious ejaculations; that God would be pleased to vouchsafe such a
happy concurrence of opinions, and unanimity of affections between the King and
his Parliament; that (all fears and jealousies being laid aside on both sides)
the King would be graciously pleased to condescend, as far as with his honor he
may, unto his Parliament; and the Parliament would humbly address themselves
to comply, as far as it may stand with the good of the commonwealth, with the
King; that so Royalty and Loyalty, like Mercy and Truth meeting together, and
the King and his Parliament, like Righteousness and peace, embracing each other,
the King may still enjoy his Regalities and Prerogatives without farther
alteration, and the Parliament may still retain their ancient privileges and
immunities without any more interruption: that so the King, the Head, may be
happy in the Parliament, his Members, and the Parliament, the Members,
reciprocally happy in the King their Head; and the whole kingdom, by this
c^ment of Charity, happy in both. Which that it may speedily come to pass, is
the hearty wish and darling desire, of him who for the accomplishment of it is,
(...).

His Gods most humble Orator, His Kings most Loyal Subject, His Countries most
affectionate Patriot, TO. GROSSK.

