HUGO GROTIUS

OF THE AUTHORITY OF THE HIGHEST POWERS About Sacred things. OR, The Right of
the State in the Church. Wherein are contained many judicious Discourses,
pertinent to our Times, and of special Use for the Order and Peace of all
Christian Churches.

Put into English by C.B.M.A.

The Method of every Chapter is added in the margent and collected at the end.

LONDON, Printed by T.W. for Joshua Kirton, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Kings-Armes, 1651.

Upon the Author, and his principal Works.
He, who the Greek wise Sayings did translate,
With equal Pen, to Latium: Vindicate
From Jew, Turk, Pagan, our Religion's Truth;
As learned as the Aged, in his Youth:
He, who the Hollandian States Piety
Presented unto every impartial eye:
Who, in the Laws of Peace and War, all Nations
Has well instructed: And, in's Annotations
On the whole Book of God, has made that light
Shine to unprejudiced minds more bright:
He, that was studious, how to reconcile
This and that Church, in mild Cassanders slile:
Has shown, what doctrine was Pelagius;
Who Is older, Calvin or Arminius;
Is ever like himself. Here (which is much.)
He Is Moderator' twixt the State and Church;
And clearly shows you, when you may prefer
To the Ancient Bishop, the young Presbyter;
And when that new Invention may please,
By Elders Lay, to give the Pastor ease.
We'ave set it out with just Care; lest we might
Wrong the Author, who has done the State such Right.
C. B.
THE CHAPTERS.
I. THat Authority about Sacred Things belongs to the Highest Powers. II. That
this Authority and the Sacred Function are distinct. III. Of the Agreement of
things Sacred and Secular, as to the power over them. IV. Objections against
the Powers Answered. V. Of the Judgment of the Higher Powers in Sacred things.
VI. The manner of using this Authority rightly. VII. Concerning Synods, or
Councils. VIII. Of Legislation about Sacred things. IX. Of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical. X. Of the Election of Pastors. XI. Concerning Offices not
always necessary. XII. Of Substitution and Delegation.
To the Illustrious Pair, my Lord, and my Lady CHANDOS.
Right Honorable,
IT is the Great Name of the Author, not any worthiness of the Translator, that
gives this Book a capacity of so high a Dedication. The Author, born in a low
Country, has, by his excellent works, both Divine and Humane, raised himself
to the just Repute of the most General, and the wisest Scholar of his time; So
that, it is become a character of an Ingenuous Student (as it was said, in the
last Age, of his Countryman, the Great Erasmus) to be well versed in the Books
of Grotius. Out of whose Magazine, our best English Writers, to their praise,
have borrowed some of their best furniture. The Argument of this Work is worthy
the study of Princes, and Great Persons; From whom, certainly, God expects a
greater care of his Churches Peace and Order. To which purpose, the Grave
Author has here said, some things first of all; some, with a better Grace than
any other; and some, that although they have been said very well by our own
Men, yet perhaps will be better taken (as the English humor is) from the Pen
of a stranger. The Translator's Design is, partly public, in this scribbling
Age (wherein yet, we have need of more good Rooks, to Out the many bad ones) to
cast in his Mite into the Treasury of the Church of England: (whom, as the
Moderate Author much honored, so He professes himself to be one of her poor
Children:) partly private, by this Dedication of it with Himself to your
Honors, to leave a Grateful Monument (and a lasting Monument, he hopes) in
those Gracious Hands, that have supported him, in his worst and weakest Times.
May Your Honors Both live to see the Public Breaches, both of Church and
State, fairly made up; and particularly, the Ruins of your Sudely: And, may
Your illustrious Names and Virtues live after you, and be increased in your
Children, So prays,

Right Honorable, Of all your Servants the most obliged, the most humble,
BARKSDALE.
Sudeley, Jan. 6. 1651.
HUGO GROTIUS, Of the Empire, or Authority of the Highest Powers about Sacred
things, or, in matters of Religion.
CHAP. I.
That Authority about Sacred things belongs to the Highest Powers.

1. The state of the question.
BY the Highest Power, I understand a Person, or a Company, that has Empire,
or Authority, over the People, subject to the Empire of God alone: taking the
word Highest Power, not, as it is sometimes taken, for the Right it self, but
for Him that has the Right, as it is frequently used both in Greek and Latin.
To call such a person, the chief Magistrate, is improper: for Magistrate is a
name the Romans give only to inferior Powers. I said a Person, or Company; to
express, that not only Kings properly so called, which most Writers call
Absolute Kings, are to be understood in that name, but also in an Aristocracy
the Senate or States, or the Best, by whatsoever other name. For although there
must be Unity in the Highest Power, it is not necessary the Person be but One.
By Empire or Authority, we mean the Right to Command, to permit, to forbid. We
say, this is subject only to God; for therefore it is called the Highest Power,
because among men it has none above it.

2. An Argument, from the Unity of the matter, proved by Scripture, Romans 13 4.
That Authority about Sacred things belongs to the Highest Power thus defined,
we prove, First from the Unity of the matter about which it is conversant, Paul
says, He is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that
does evil. Under the name of Evil, is comprehended also all that which is
committed in Holy things; for the Indefinite speech signifies as much as the
Universal, which Solomon has expressed: Pro. 20.8.
A King that sits in the throne of Judgment scatters away ALL evil with
his eyes. This is confirmed by a Similie; for the Authority of a Father is
less than of the Highest Power, yet are Children commanded to obey their
Parents in all things. Col. 3.20.
Thus do the ancient Fathers also reason, when from that of Paul, Let every
soul be subject to the Higher Powers, they infer, that the Ministers of Holy
things must as well be subject to them, as other men: although he be an
Apostle, although an Evangelist, although a Prophet, says Chrysostom. Whose
footsteps Bernard following, speaks in these words to an Archbishop: If every
Soul, yours also: who has excepted you from the Universal?

3. And by natural reason.
And truly there can be no reason given why any thing should be excepted; For,
if that which is excepted be subject to no Authority at all which who can
prove?) there will follow confusion among the things exempted, whereof God is
not the Author: or, if it be subject to some other Authority, not under the
Highest Power, there must then be two Highest Powers distinct: which is a
Contradiction; for the Highest has no equal. By this same Argument the
Fathers disprove the multitude of Gods, because that which is Highest is above
all, and can be but One.

This is further proved by the Effects of Empire or Authority; these are
Obligation and Coaction; now if there were more Commanders in Chief than one,
their Commands might be contrary about the same matter, and so impose upon the
Subject a contrary obligation or coaction; which is against nature; And
therefore as often as it happens that two Laws oppose each other by reason of
some circumstance, the obligation of the one cease. This is the reason why
the Paternall Empire, which is natural and most ancient, has given place to
the Civil, and is subject to it, because that which should be Highest could be
but One.

No man can can serve two Masters; and, A kingdom divided cannot stand; and
that common saying, All Power is impatient of a Partner.

It Is otherwise in Authorities which are under the Highest: for these may
belong to Many, because they are exercised about diverse persons; or, if about
the same persons, they are so ordered by the Supreme, that they may not clash.
Which ordination cannot be when many are, every one, supreme; for the ordaining
must be Superior to the ordained.

Kings, but either in the States, or in that Body, which the King and States
compose. Certainly, to have the whole Supreme Authority, and not be able to
command any thing, because another may forbid or intercede, are altogether
inconsistent.

From this Universality of the matter about which the Highest Power is
employed, the Art of governing is justly called the Art of arts, and Science of
sciences: because there is no Art, no Science, which it does not command, and
whereof it does not teach the Use.

4. An argument from the Universality of the end, proved by Scripture.
The Universality of the end is correspondent to the Universality of the
matter, The Apostle Paul says, the Highest Power is Gods Minister for good; of
every sort: For explaning himself elsewhere more distinctly, he shows, the
Powers are ordained, 1 Timothy 2.2
that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, not only in all honesty, but in
all godliness also. This indeed is the true Happiness of a Commonwealth, to
love God, and be beloved of God; to acknowledge Him their King, and themselves
his people, as Augustine says well: who also says, The King and Rulers are
happy, if they make their Power serviceable to the divine Majesty, for the
propagation of his Kingdom, and increase of his Honor. Emperors themselves,
Theodosius and Honorius, have professed thus, Our Labors of War, and Counsels
of Peace, are all directed to this only end, that our people may serve God with
true Devotion

5. And by Philosophy.
And this that is so clearly demonstrated in holy Writ, was not altogether
unseen by those that had only the light of Nature, for in Aristotle's judgment
that is the best Commonwealth, which shows the way to a most virtuous and
happy life; and, as the same Philosopher affirms, that is the most happy way
of life, In fine Eudem
, which leads most directly to the knowledge and service of God, the contrary
whereof is most unhappy.

Now, if this be true, that the end proposed to the Highest Powers, is not only
external Peace, but that their People may be most Religious; and the things
conducing to that end are called Sacred; it follows, that these things are all
included within the Command and Authority of the same Power; for the End being
granted, a Right is granted to all that, without which the End cannot be
obtained.

6. The right vindicated by direct authority of Scripture. Deuteronomy. 17.19. Jos.
1.8. Ps. 2.12.
To these Arguments drawn from the very nature of the thing, shall be added the
most sacred and certain Authority of the Law divine. Kings are commanded to
Keep all the law of God, to serve the Lord, to kiss the Son. This being spoken
to Kings, not as Men (for so it would not concern them more than other men) but
as Kings, it follows, some royal act is required of them, that is, the use of
their Authority in matters of Religion. I had rather explane this in S.
Augustin's words, than my own: Herein do Kings (as they are commanded by Him)
serve God as Kings, if in their Dominions they command things good, forbid
evil; not only in respect of humane society, but the worship of God also. And
in another place; The King serves God, as a man, as a King; as a man, by a
godly life; as a King, by godly Laws. As Ezechias, by destroying the Groves,
and Temples of the Idols; and as Josias served God, in the like manner: doing
those things for the honor of God, which only Kings can do. And this is that
royal noursing of the Church, Es. 49.23.60.13.16.
which by the Prophet God has promised.

7. By the consent of the ancient Christians;
After the Divine Law, follows in its order the Custom of the Church, and the
Examples of Emperors; whose Piety is out of question. That all They used their
Authority in sacred things, will appear in all the particulars that shall be
handled. In short, Socrates the Historian has told us, Ever since the
Emperors became Christian, the affairs of the Church depended upon them. For
the Church, says Optatus, is in the Commonwealth, i.e. in the Roman Empire:
not the Empire in the Church. Constantine in an old Inscription is called the
Author of faith and religion. Basil the Emperor, stiling the Church an
Universal Ship, says, God had placed him at the Stern to govern it. In that
ancient Epistle of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, speaking of Religion, He
entitleth the King of Britain, God's Vicar, in his own Dominion. And Charles
the Great, is named, The Rector of true Religion, by the Council of Ments.

8. And of the Reformed.
That the Churches reformed, in our Fathers time, after the ancient pattern,
are of the same judgment, their Confessions witness. It belongs to
Magistrates not only to be careful of Civil Polity, but to endeavor that the
Sacred Ministry be preserved, and the kingdom of Christ propagated: that the
Gospel be purely preached, and God served according to his holy Word. So the
Belgic, Let the Magistrate hold fast the word of God, and see that nothing be
taught contrary to it. So the Helvetian. This office was enjoined the Heathen
Magistrate: to take care that the name of God be duly honored, how much more
belongs it to the Christian Magistrate as the true Deputy of God in his
Dominion. So the Basil Confess. Yea, the English Church denounces
Excommunication against them that deny the King of England that Authority in
Ecclesiastical affairs, which was used by the Hebrew Kings. 'Twould be
tedious to transcribe what has been written in defense hereof. Besides the
Divines, all the writers of Polity, that are worth the reading, have given
account of this, not only as a part, but as the principal and best part of the
Imperial Right.

9. And of the Heathens.
Neither have only the ancient Christians and late reformed, but other Nations
also, delivered this with so great consent, that it is most manifestly the very
voice of right reason, common to all mankind; and being derived from the most
ancient, before the depravation of Religion, by a long Succession has been
deliverd to their Posterity. The first care in a Commonwealth is about things
Divine, thus Aristotle; and Plutarch, This is the first thing in making Laws:
It is fit, says he, the Best should be honored by the best: and He that
rules all, by him that rules. The most ancient Lawgivers Charondas and
Zaleucus approved the same by their own example: and the twelve Tables, the
Fountain of the Roman Law, derived from the Greeks, contained sundry Precepts
about Sacred things. Justinian and Theodosius have Laws concerning Religion,
in their Codes: and Ulpian defines the wisdom of the Law, to be the knowledge
of things Divine, as well as Humane. Suarez himself confesses, It has been
always observed among men, though particular offices, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, were given to several persons, because the variety of actions
required that distinction, yet the Supreme Power of both, especially as to
making Laws, was seated in the Prince; and so it appears by Histories, that
unto Kings and Emperors, in the City of Rome, and the Empire, this Power was
ever given The same is also probable of other Commonwealths. General Custom,
says the same Schoole-man, declares the institution of Nature.

10. With respect unto crernall happiness;
Indeed Thomas and Cajetan seem to have thought, all the care of Lawgivers in
those Nations to have regarded only the public Peace. But this, thus precisely
taken, is very hard to be proved, and scarce credible. For the Christian
Fathers do prove most evidently, that the Greeks of old believed, Rewards and
Punishments after death to be reserved for men, by divine Judgment. That they
thus believed, and other Heathens too, there are very many Testimonies of most
faithful Authors. Why then may we not believe this end was looked upon by some
of their Lawgivers? especially, when Austin says, It Is not to be doubted,
very many beside Abraham's Family, although the holy Scripture mention only Job,
and a few more, did believe and hope in Christ to come.

11. And unto temporal prosperity.
But besides that end (eternal happiness) the prime and principal, this also
is a just cause for the Highest Powers to take Religion into their charge, the
great Consequence it has to outward felicity and concord: and that for two
reasons; the first in respect of Gods providence; for piety has the promises,
not only of the future, but of the present life. Mat. 6.33.
Seek first the kingdom of God, and all other things shall be added unto you.
And in the old Law of the Hebrews, 12. Which follows true Religion by virtue
of divine Providence.
a prosperous Reign, fruitfulness of the earth, victory over enemies, are
proposed to the godly; to the ungodly are threatened most grievous curses. Nor
were the Gentiles ignorant of this, no not after they had departed from the one
true God unto their Idols. Livy says, All things fall out luckily to those
that worship the Gods, unprosperously to the despisers of them. In Plato there
is much to this purpose. For Christian writers, take only that of Leo to
Martian, I rejoice that you are studious of the Churches peace: Ep.^st. 42.
and this shall be your reward; the peace you give to the Church, your Empire
shall partake of.

13. And by its own nature; in respect of Moral Precepts, and doctrines, and
rites.
The other reason is, from the nature and proper efficacy of Religion, which is
of force to make men quiet, obedient, lovers of their Country, keepers of
Justice and Equity; and where the people are so well disposed, the
Commonwealth must needs be happy. Hence Plato calls Religion the fortress of
Power, the bond of Laws and good Discipline; Cicero, The foundation of humane
Society; and Plutarch says, the City may more easily be built without ground,
than the Citizens preserved without a persuasion of the deity. Cyrus in
Xenophon thought his household would be the further from any evil enterprise
against him or one another, the more they feared God: and Aristotle notes, that
Subjects do most esteem and trust the King, whom they believe to stand in awe
of the divine power. Even false Religion conduces somewhat to outward peace;
and the nearer it comes to truth, the more it prevails to that end; but for
Christian Religion (to let pass the testimonies of her friends) the
adversaries have given it this praise, That it binds men with a holy tie, not
to commit stealth or robbery, not to break their word, or fail in their trust,
as Pliny speaks; That it teaches nothing but what is just and gentle, as
Ammianus Marcellinus; that it is a persuasion which destroys all wickedness,
as it is in Zosimus.

Nor is this the effect of Religion, in that part only, where it prescribes a
rule for manners, and strengthens it with threats and promises: the Doctrines
and Rites also have no small moment to the furthering of good life, and
advancing the public happiness. Xenophon perhaps thought it was a witty
conceit when he said, It Was all one, as to manners, whether we believe God
corporeal or incorporeall: but Truth it self has taught us otherwise, when
from this, that God is a Spirit, is inferred, therefore He must be worshipped
in spirit. The most virtuous mind (as Seneca also acknowledges) is the best
worship and most acceptable to God. So do even the Philosophers teach, that no
foul deed is to be committed, because God is every where present: and because
God knows all that shall come to pass, they show that nothing shall befall
good men, but what shall turn to their benefit. Tiberius was the more
negligent of religious duties (as Suetonius has it) being persuaded, all
things were carried by Fate; and it was not in vain that Plato said, If you
would have the State go well, you must not suffer any one to teach, that God
is the cause of Evil deeds; which to say is impious, and therefore to the
Commonwealth most pernicious. The same Plato shows at large, that it is of
much concernment, what rites are used, and with what mind, in the second Book
of his Republic; where he sets down the harm those Ceremonious expiations
do, by the use whereof without amendment of life, men hoped for pardon of
their wickedness.

14. More reasons added.
Other causes, but less principal, might be added; for which the highest
power cannot relinquish the command over sacred things, without the very great
hazard of the Commonwealth; for some Priests are of such a nature, that
unless they be kept under, they will be above you: and the superstitious
multitude do more hearken to their Preachers, than their Governors. Kings and
Emperors have learned this at their cost, and the Annals are full of examples.
One thing more for conclusion; the experience of all ages tells us, that change
in Religion, even in Rites and Ceremonies, if it be not with consent, or
manifestly for the better, often shakes the Commonwealth, and brings it into
danger. Wherefore unless that curiosity be restrained by Laws, the State will
often totter. For these last reasons, there are some even in the Roman Church,
that submit the Priest (though by them otherwise exempted) to the Power of the
Prince.

CHAP. II.
That the Authority or Rule over Sacred things, and the Sacred Function, are
distinct.

ARistotle teaches very well, that it is not the part of an Architect, as an
Architect, to set his hand to the work, but to prescribe, what every one shall
do, as right reason shall direct him; and what he shall rightly appoint, the
workmen must rightly execute: So it is the Rulers office, not to do the things
commanded, but to command them to be done. But the Functions under command are
of two sorts: 1. All Functions are under Command.
some are subject both by nature and order, as effects proceeding from their
cause; some only by order. In the former way under the Architect are the
Overseers of the work; 2. Some by Emanation.
in the latter the Carpenter, the Smith, and other Laborers. So also, to the
Authority of the Highest Power are subject in the former way the offices that
have in them Authority and Jurisdiction, as the office of Major, Governor of a
town, and the like: In the latter way the Function of a Physician, Philosopher,
Husbandman and Merchant. Wherefore they fight with their own shadow, who take
great pains to prove that the Pastors of Churches, as suen, are not the Vicars
or Deputies of the Highest Powers; for who knows not that, when Physicians
neither can without mistake be styled so. But that the same Pastors, as they
receive some Authority or Jurisdiction, beside their Pastoral office, in
respect of that accession, may be called Deputies or Delegates of the Supreme
Powers, shall be showed hereafter. Wherefore when the Learned Deane of
Lichfield proving that Priests are not therefore Superior to Kings, because
Kings are commanded to ask Counsel of them, uses this example, that Kings
advise with their Counselors of State, who yet are not their Superiors: They
misunderstand him, who take his meaning to be, that these do agree in all
respects, when it is sufficient for a similitude, that there be a correspondence
in the drift of the speech: otherwise even the Parables in the Gospel will be
exposed to censure. Pastors are rightly compared to the Civil Officers, in
respect of the subordination not the emanation of their Office. The Civil
Officers are both Subjects to the Highest, and Deputies; the Pastors, as such,
are only Subjects, not Deputies.

3. The Supreme Authority, and the Sacred Function, united in the same Person,
by the Law of Nature.
The Authority over the Function, and the Function it self being distinguished,
we must enquire, Whether that Authority, and the holy Function may be united in
the same person, Whereunto that we apply a fit answer, a difference must be
made between the Law of Nature, and Positive divine Law. By the natural Law,
the same person may have the highest Authority and the Priesthood too: because
these have no such opposition, but they may meet in one man. Nay more, set
aside the Positive Law, and some external impediments, it is in some sort,
natural, that the same Person be both King and Priest; not so natural, as
that it cannot be otherwise, but as those things are termed natural, which
are well agreeing unto nature and right reason. For seeing Kings, whose
Dominions are not of the largest, may easily join some peculiar Function to
the care of their Kingdom, as we have known Kings to have been Physicians,
Philosophers, Astrologers, Poets, and very many Commanders in War; and seeing,
no Function is more excellent, and whence do flow down upon the people so many
benefits, as the Priestly Office; it appears, that this, above all other, is
most convenient and worthy of a King. 4. It was so before Moses, and after,
among the Nations.
The consent of Nations does evince it: for in the first times, when men were
governed more by Domestical than Civil Power, the Fathers of families, as all
confess, did both represent some Image of Kings, and perform the Priesthood
also. Thus Noah after the Flood was past, offers sacrifice to God. Of Abraham
God himself says, He would instruct his Children and Family in the course of a
Godly life. Genesis 18.16.
We read also of the Sacrifices of Job, and other Patriarchs. After the Fathers
decease, as the Principality of the Family, so the Priesthood too was devolved
to the first borne, and that custom continued in the posterity of Jacob for as
yet they had no Commonwealth constituted) until the Levits (that is, the
Priests, and Ministers unto the Priests,) were surrogated and put in place of
the first borne: as the divine Law does expressly tell us. But in the mean
time, in the Country of Canaan, there being a kind of Commonwealth, we read of
Melchisedec King and Priest. The like was Moses before the Consecration of
Aaron. Other Nations of old had the same custom, whether by the instinct of
nature or the example of their Ancestors. In Homer the Hero's, that is, the
Princes, Sacrifice; and, to omit other Nations, the first Kings of Rome did so
too; and after the Kingdom was out, there remained yet A King of the Sacred
Rites.

It may be enquired, whether those Fathers and Kings, while the true worship of
God lasted (as it is credible it lasted among many of the Fathers for some Ages
after the flood) received the Priesthood by some special Title, or challenged
it to themselves by their Paternall and Regal Right?

Very learned men are of opinion, that, as some probably had the authority of
the divine Oracle, so others had it not: nor is any such thing, the Law
positive being set aside, required to the constitution of a Priest. Yea, when
the men of those times, all the world over, were bound, as far as they knew
him, to honor God, and to give him thanks, as the Apostle convinces, Rom 1.
they were either bound every one to be Priests, or to commend the Priesthood to
some chosen men. But it is the Fathers part to assign all, in the family,
their several offices; and among the rest the Priesthood, as being, by the Law
of Nature, not excepted: and the function, which he may assign unto another,
the same, if he be fit for it, nature forbids him not to assign unto himself.
What is faid of the Father, let it be understood of the King; and the rather
because all confess, the free multitude, in that first state, had a right to
choose themselves a Priest. Which right of the Multitude, is transferred upon
the Highest Power. For such Election consists of bidding and forbidding;
because one is licenced to perform Priestly actions, others interdicted the
same. But to bid and forbid are acts of Authority, which he that has not
wholly, has not truly the name of the Highest Power. That which is spoken to
the Hebrews is not opposite hereto; No man takes this honor to himself, but
he that is called by God, as Aaron. For the divine writer in that place
treats of the legal Priest, not of him that was, or might have been before,
or out of the Law of Moses: and he shows, whatsoever was excellent in the
legal Priest, was much more eminently in Christ, in whom also there were many
things illustrious, which in the legal Priest were wanting. But the Custom of
joining the Empire with the Priesthood used through all the world about two
thousand five hundred years, in many places longer, the Luxury of Kings, their
sloth, or business of war, in other Nations; and among the people of God, the
Positive divine Law did at last abrogate: that Law I mean, which gave the
Priesthood not to any of the people, but only to the house of Aaron. After
this, what was before a praise, became a trespass.

5. The Supreme Authority, and Sacred Function, separated by the Law of Moses.
Why God separated the kingdom of Israel from the Priesthood, 'twere hard to
find out, unless the divine writer to the Hebrews had opened us the way. It Is
apparent the Hebrew Nation was very prone to superstition, and often fell away
to Idols; To restrain them from this, when God had imposed on them a great
burden of laborious Ceremonies, they began to place all their hope in them;
from which most unreasonable persuasion, the holy men very often call them off;
and show, that Mercy and integrity of heart is far more acceptable in the sight
of God, than all their Sacrifices. Had the King himself offered their chief
Sacrifices, as of old the custom was, how much more would their minds have
been taken up with so great a Majesty? But now, when the Priesthood was, though
still with Pomp enough, yet disrobed, as they saw, of the Royal Splendour, and
brought down below the King; hereby, they were put in mind, to hope for some
great Priest, who should also be a King as Melchizedec was, and to put their
trust in him. What admirers the Jews were of their Priests, even in this
appears, that after their return from the Captivity, they forthwith added to
the Priesthood the Principality, which quickly advanced to a Kingdom, and so
to a Tyranny.

Moreover, it is worth our observation, that, after the Institution of the
Priesthood, some relics of the ancient Custom still remained. For, to the
Fathers of families was left, the killing of the Passover; wherein, as the
Jews rightly note, they performed somewhat of the Priests office. Circumcision
also was administered without a Priest, as all the Hebrews consent by any one
that had skill to do it. And this is not to be omitted, that Prophecy, which
seems to have a natural coherence with the Priesthood, was as well given to
Kings as Priests; Yea, to private men, more often than to the Priests. Thus did
God, many ways, bring the people to an acknowledgement of the weakness of the
Leviticall order. Thus did the Law, as it were, by the hand lead them unto
Christ; who was to be the highest Prophet, the highest Priest, and the highest
King; who also should make all believers in him partakers of that threefold
honor. Concerning the Prophecy, Est 54.13. Jo. 6.45.
we have that of Esaias, cited by St. John, They shall be all taught of God: and
another notable place of Jeremy, cited in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 8.10.
Concerning the Kingdom and Priesthood, 1 Pet. 11.9.
Peter speaks of both at once, where he calls the faithful, a royal
Priesthood. And John in the Revelation, Apoc. 1.6.5.10.
He has made us Kings and Priests unto God. Yet, neither the excellency of
Christ himself in his prophetical office, nor the general Communication of
the gift of prophecy to the faithful, hinder, but that some in the New
Testament may be called Prophets, by a singular right. So also, the Kingdom of
Christ, which partly consists in his divine care of his Church against her
enemies, partly in a spiritual government of the hearts of men, has not taken
away either the right, or the name of Kings, whose Empire is external, and
subject both to the divine providence, and the spiritual actions of Christ:
according to that of Sedulius: He does not earthly Kings dethrone,
Who gives to His an heavenly Crown.
The name of Priests is also given to the preachers of the New Testament in a
special manner: but, there was some reason, why Christ and his Apostles did
always abstain from that kind of speech; which ought to admonish us, that we
do not commonly and promiscuously argue, from the Leviticall order, to the
Evangelicall; feeing, there is a wide difference, both in the office, and the
designing of the persons to it.

6. And by the Christian Law.
It is enquired therefore, under the Christian Law, whether the Highest
Authority, and the Pastoral office (which may be also called the Priesthood, as
was noted before) can rightly be united in the same person. Many arguments are
brought to prove they cannot, but all are not of the same strength; for some
do more rightly prove the offices to be diverse, as they always have been;
and, that Pastors, as Pastors, have no Empire; rather than the conjunction of
the offices to be interdicted. That is of more efficacy, that the Apostle for
bids the soldier of Christ (he seems to speak of the Pastoral warfare) to be
entangled with worldly business; Tim. 11. A.
which the most ancient Canors, entitled Apostolical, Can. 6.81.83.
extend even to inferior civil offices. And lest any think this only
constituted for the times, they lived under heathen Emperors; the same is
repeated, in the Synod of Carthage, Can. 16.
under Hono^i^s and Theodosius, Christian Emperors, and in that of Chalcedon
too. The reason was, Can. 3.7.
because the Pastoral office is of such weight and difficulty, that it
requires the whole man. Although this must not be taken so rigidly, as always
to exclude Pastors from undertaking any secular charge (the Laws, for example,
Novel. 123 Cap. 5.
except Tuitions) yet in suffices to remove from the Pastor my charge, that is
difficult and perpetual; as we see the Apostles exempted themselves, for the
same reason, from the care of the Widows maintenance; an office otherwise not
improper for them. But the charge of a Kingdom, is both perpetual, and more
weighty, than any other. The strongest argument is, That the royal office
requires far other manners and behavior, than the Pastoral, as it is
described in the Gospel, So that, even thence it sufficiently appears, both
cannot with any convenience and comeliness be sustained by one nor without
inconstant levity in passing from the exercise of one to the other.

We have showed that the Empire is distinct from the sacred Function; and, that
there are causes, why Both together ought not to be undertaken by the same
person. Nevertheless, because both the Empire, and the Pastoral office (by
Pastors I understand the Ministers of the Gospel; for Kings are Pastors too,
and that of the Lords flock; yea, Pastors of the Pastors, as a Bishop once
called King Edgar) though distinct, yet agree in this, that the same, which is
the Pastors only care, is the principal care of the Highest Powers; namely,
that Divine things may be rightly ordered, and the Salvation of men procured;
we need not wonder, if the Highest Powers, 7. Sacred names and Priv^leges given
to the H^ghest Powers.
for the community of the matter, and the end, receive sometimes the title of
the other Function. Hence it was, that Constantine called himself a Bishop,
and other Emperors had the title of Renowned Pontifs or Priests. In the
Emperor Martianus the Roman Bishop extolls his Priestly mind, and Apostolical
affection: and Theodoret mentions the Apostolical cares of Theodosius. As the
names, so the privilege of the Function, has been given to Emperors. The sixth
general Synod forbids Laics to approach the Altar, i.e. the Table of the
Lord; but the Emperor is excepted. Upon which place, Balsamo Bishop of Antioch
observes, how the Emperors were wont to Seal with Wax, as the Bishops of that
time did, and to instruct the people in Religion.

Now if the Emperors were called, as we have showed they were, Bishops and
Pontifs and Priests, there was then no cause of upbraiding some English writers
for attributing to their King a certain spiritual power, seeing the name is
often imposed not from the manner of working, but from the matter, as we call
the Laws military, nauticall, rural. Wherefore the Kings power is also
spiritual, as it is conversant about Religion, which is a spiritual thing.

CHAP. III.
How far sacred and profane actions agree, as to the right of having Command
over them.

FIrst let us see what kind of actions (for about them Authority is properly
conversant) may be the matter of command, and then, what effect the command may
have, in the several kinds.

1. Internal actions not subject to the Higher Power, but in relation to
external.
Actions are first divided into external, and internal. The external are the
primary matter under humane power, the internal are the secondary; nor for
themselves, but by reason of the external: and therefore, about the internal,
which are wholly separated from the external, and respect them not, humane
commands are not given. Hence is that of Seneca He erres, who thinks, the whole
man can be subdued, for the better part is excepted: and that common saying,
Thought is free. The reason is, because Government re-requires some matter,
which may fall under the Governors knowledge; but God alone is the searcher of
hearts, and has the sole Empire of them. Unto men, the internal acts of
others are uknown, by their own nature: by their own nature, I therefore add,
because the external, that are done in secret, are under Government: for by
their nature, they may be known. I said, internal acts are subject to command,
secondarily: that comes to pass two ways; either by the intention of the
Ruler, or by a kind of repercussion: in the first manner, where the inward act
is joined with the outward, and has influence upon it, (for the mind is
esteemed in offenses, either perfected, or begun;) in the latter, when, because
any act is made unlawful by the interdiction of the Ruler, ( for we must be
subject not only for wrath, Romans 13.5.
but for conscience sake;) by thought to intend that action, is unlawful: not,
as if humane Law were properly made for the thought; but because no man can
honestly will that, which is dishonest to be done.

Another partition of Actions is this, that, 2. Actions either determined or
not determined, before any humane Command.
before any thing is by men ordained concerning them, they are either morally
defined, or indefinite. Morally defined, I call those, which are either due, or
unlawful; those may be said to be morally necssary, those morally impossible;
as, in the Law, dishonest things are all expressed by that word. 3. Actions
determined by Law Divine either natural, or positive.
This determining of Actions, before any Act of humane Authority, arises,
either from their own nature; as, to worship God, is due; to lie, unlawful of
it self; or from the Positive divine Law; Those of the former sort are referred
to the Law natural; but, lest any be deceived, by the ambiguity of the word
natural, not only those Action are called natural, which flow from principles
known by nature; but those also, which come from natural principles,
certainly, and determinatly. For, natural, in this argument, is opposed, not
to Supernatural, but to Arbitrary. So, when as it is certain, God the Father,
Son and Holy Spirit, are one true God; that the same God be worshipped, is a
point of natural Law. Actions of the latter sort, that is, determined or
defined by divine Positive Law, are such as were prescribed by God, some to all
men, some to one people, some to single persons, namely, Deuteronomy. 4.8.
to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and other servants of God. Among all people,
to Israel alone, God prescribed many Positive Laws, pertaining to Religion,
and other things. To all mankind, some things were commanded for a time, as,
the Law of the Sabbath, presently upon the Creation, as some think; the Law of
not eating blood, or the strangled, after the flood: Other things to last for
ever, as the Institutions of Christ, concerning Excommunication, Baptism, the
Supper, and if there be any more of that kind.

4. Actions undetermined are the matter of humane Law, and also determined,
both because of their adjuncts and of a new Obligation. Eth. 5.10.
These things being understood, it may seem, that such. Actions only are the
just matter about which Humane Authority is exercised, which by Divine are left
indefinite, and free either way. For Aristotle describes that which is legally
just to be that which from the beginning was indifferent, thus or thus; but,
after the Law made, cease to be so. And this is true, if we only look upon
such an act of Authority, which intrinsecally changes the action; for, when as
the things that ought to be done, and the things unlawful, are determined, and
therefore immutable as to moral good or evil, it follows, that indefinite
actions are left, as the only matter of such a change. Nevertheless when the
things that ought to be done and those that ought not, are capable of a change
extrinsecall, and may receive it from humane Authority, it is manifest, they
are Subject to the same Authority, unless they be actions mecrely internal.
Hither it pert^ins, to assign the time, place, manner, and per^^ns, for
performing of due actions, so f^r as the circumstances are undefin'd by the
nature of the thing, and the Law of God; also, to take away impediments, and
sometimes to add rewards; and, to restrain unlawful actions, by such
punishments as are in the Rulers power, or else, to inflict no punishments,
which is called permission of the fact, and is sometimes no fault. To him that
looks more narrowly into these things it will appear, that by humane command,
there arises a new Obligation, even in Conscience, though of less degree, in
the things which men were before bound to do, or leave undone. For the divine
Law of the Decalogue, saying to the Jew, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, and the rest, not only declared, what was of the Law natural; but, by
the precept, added a new Obligation to the former; so that the Jew, doing the
contrary, not only offended, in doing a vicious act, but an act forbidden:
because, Romans 11.23.
by the transgression of the Law he dishonour^th God, as Paul speaks. As it is
in the Divine Law of the Decalogue; so also it is in Man's Law, a proportion
being observed. For they that resist, resist the Ordinance of God: and
therefore, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.
as the Apostle testifies.

We have considered, how largely the matter under Humane Power is extended, and
what acts belong unto it, in every kind: now, let us see what acts are not, by
right, within the Command thereof. 5. Acts not under Humane Command, are only
those that are repugnant to Divine Law.
It is certain, those only are without the limits of the Supreme Power, which
are repugnant either to the Natural, or to any other Divine Law; no other way,
of confining the right of the Highest Power, can possibly be invented. The
things defined in the Law Divine (wherein I comprehend the Natural) are of two
sorts; some commanded, some forbidden. Therefore there are two acts of Empire,
which belong not to the Right of him that Rules; To command what God forbids:
To forbid what God commands. The reason is, because, as in natural causes, the
Inferior have no force to work, against the Efficacy of the Superior; so it
is in Moral. Wherefore such Commands, so far as they do contradict the
Divine, cannot have the proper effect of Commands; they cannot Impose an
Obligation. Excellently says Austin: If the Curator Commands somewhat, is it
not to be done? no; If the Proconsul forbids. Herein you contemn not the Power,
but choose to obey the Higher. Again, if the Proconsul bid one thing, the
Emperor appoint the contrary, without doubt you must hearken to the Emperor.
Therefore, if the Emperor do require one thing, and God another, what is to
be done? God is the greater Power; Give us leave, O Emperor, to obey Him.

Yet, we must carefully distinguish, between the Act of Authority, 6. Commands
repugnant to Divine Law bind to a nonresistance, and wherefore.
which moves the Subject to work; and the Force offered, which imposes, on the
Subject, a necessity of suffering. For, when the Act of Authority is without
effect, and lays no obligation; yet the Force has an effect, not only
Physical, but Moral; not on the agents part, but the patients; namely, that
it is not lawful, to repel that force, by force: for violent defense, being
lawful against an Equal, against a Superior is unlawful. 1. Miht. Sect. 4.
D. de^ve Miht.
^A Soldier, says the Lawyer, who resisted his Captain going about to
chastise him, was punished by the Ancients. If he laid hold on his Cane, he was
casshier'd: if on purpose he brake it, or laid hand on the Captain, he was put
to death. This though probably it might have proceeded from Humane Law (for
humane Authority binds to all things which are not unjust, and it is not unjust
to forbear resistance) or also from the Law of Nature, which suffers not a part
to oppose the whole, no not for self-preservation: yet is it more clearly
demonstrated out of the written law of God. For Christ, when he said, He that
takes the Sword, shall perish by the sword, plainly disallows a forcible
defense against the most unjust force offered by Authority. And hither is to be
referred that of Paul He that resists, resists the ordinance of God. There
are two ways of resisting, either by doing against the command, or by
repelling force with force, as Austin interprets: Whether the Power, Romans 13.2.
favoring the truth, corrects a man, he has praise by it, who is amended: or,
disfavouring the truth, rages against a man, he has also praise by it, who
is Crowned. So Peter will have Servants subject to their Masters, not only to
the good and gentle, but to the froward; which the same Austin, extending also
unto Subjects, Princes must be so endured by the common people, says he, and
Masters by their servants; that they may exercise their patience in bearing
temporal things, and their hope, in waiting for things eternal. So it was
also in the old Law, where to use Subjects for servants, to give away their
goods to others, is called the Kings Right; 1 Samuel 8.
not, as if the King doing so, did justly (the Law divine had taught him
another lesson, yea, had forbidden him to be puffed up, Dent. 17.17, 20.
to gather abundance of gold and silver, and a multitude of horses) but
because, doing so, no man might lawfully oppose force against Him as the Romans
say, L.^enult. D. de Just. and jure.
The Praetor gives Judgment, even when he decrees that which is unjust. Hence
was that twice spoken of a King, though most unjust, yet set up by God, 1 Samuel
24.7.26.9.
Who can lay his hand upon the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Neither are
they by any means to be heard, who against the holy Scriptures, 7. Subordinate
Powers not exempted from that Obligation.
against right reason, against the judgment of pious Antiquity do arm
certain Inferior Powers against the Highest. For, Peter teaching obedience to
the King (that is, to the Highest Power) as Supreme, to Governors (that is, to
Inferior Powers) as sent, and ordained by Him, manifestly shows, all the
right of Inferior Powers to depend upon the Commission they receive from the
Highest. Hence Austin concerning Pontius Pilat: Such power God had given him,
that was contained under Caesar's Power. And, was not David a Prince, and a
Leader among the people of God, who was so far from touching that Tyrants
person, 1 Samuel 24, 7.
that his heart smote him, for cutting off the lap of his garment? Reason
confirms what we have said. For, those Magistrates, in respect of their
Inferiors, are Magistrates, as long as it pleases the Supreme Power; but, in
respect of the Supreme Power, they are but private men; because all Power, and
all Jurisdiction flows from the Supreme, and still depends upon it. Hence
Marcus Aurelius, that most wife Emperor, said, The Magistrates judge Private
men, Princes the Magistrates, and God the Princes. By the name of Princes
understanding the Emperors, who were now become absolute. The ancient
Christendom was of the same judgment; for no Governors, no Leaders of
legions, ever attempted any thing with Arms, against the most impious, cruel,
and bloody Emperors: So that, it is a very sad thing, that our Age has
brought forth men of learning, who by a new-coyned doctrine, have opened a
broad way for Seditions, 8. Examples all ged to the contrary answered.
and Wars to enter in. Neither ought we to be moved by any late examples of
Arms taken up against Kings. For if they were taken up against Kings, upon whom
the whole Right of the people was translated; and, who therefore reigned, not
by a precarious, but proper Right; whatsoever pretext or success they had,
they cannot be praised without impiety. But, if any where Kings were bound by
Contracts, on Positive Laws, and Decrees of some Senate or States; against
these, having not the highest Authority, upon just causes, by the judgment of
the same Senate or States, Arms might be taken up. For many Kings, even such as
succeed by inheritance, are Kings by name, rather than by Power; as Aemilius
Probus has written of the Laconians. But, this deceives the unskilful, that
they do not enough discern the daily administration of affairs obvious to
their eyes, which in an Optimacy is often committed unto one; from the interior
Constitution of the Commonwealth. What I have said of Kings, I would have to be
understood much more of them, who both really, and in title, were not Kings,
but Princes; that is, not chiefest, but first. Whose Principality much differs
from Supremacy. And again, this is to be noted, that some Lords and Cities have
Supreme Authority, though they seem not to have it, being under the Trust and
protection of another. But, seeing to be under protection, is not to be in
subjection; and, as the Roman Lawyers note, The people cease not to be free,
that are fairly observant to another Majesty; these also may be endowed with
Supreme Authority, who are obliged to another by unequal League, or tie of
Homage. All this I set down to that end, lest any one hereafter (as I see has
been often done) defame good causes, by an ill Defense. I would more enlarge in
this Argument (for it is of great consequence, and here to err is dangerous)
but that it is done already with great care by many others, and of late by the
learned Arnisaeus.

Upon these premises, let us come to demonstrate the parity of Empire over
Sacred and other matters. 9. The difference 'twixt internal actions and
external.
As in all things, the thoughts are not so eafily ruled, as the words: so
particularly, in Religion, Lactantius has truly said; Who shall enforce me,
either to believe, what I will not; or, not to believe, what I will? And in
this sense that of Casiodor is true, Religion cannot be Commanded; and of
Bernard, Faith is to be planted by persuasion, not obtruded by violence.
Wherefore also the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, said
concerning an Heretic, Let him think, if he will, what is hurtful for
himself; let him not utter it, to the hurt of others. And, I suppose,
Constantine had respect hereunto, when he called himself a Bishop or Overseer
of things without: because, the inward acts, taken by themselves, are not the
matter of Humane power; but are Subject to the power of God; who, by Bishops,
not Commanding but Ministering, moves the minds of men with voices and signs;
yet so, that the still reserves the maine Efficacy to himself alone.
Notwithstanding, inward acts of all sorts, taken jointly with the outward, fall
under Humane Authority. The Cornelian Law lays hold on him, who carrys a
weapon, with purpose to kill a man: and Adrian the Emperor says, not only the
event in evil deeds, but the will is to be considered. So in Justinians Code,
concerning the Catholic Faith, a Title is extant, to wit, for the Profession
of Faith, which the first Law explains, All people under our Empire we require
to be of such Religion, etc. Hence came those names of Kings, Rectors, Authors,
Defenders of the Faith. So also of old, the King of Ninive commanded
repentance, with fasting. 10. What God commands, cannot be forbidden by by man
with validity.
That things forbidden by God cannot with validity be commanded; nor things by
him commanded, be forbidden by Humane power, is no less true in other actions,
than in Sacred; in both, that of the Apostle has place, We must obey God
rather than men: which a Disciple of the Apostles, Polycarpus, has expressed
thus; We have learned to render to the Powers ordained by God, all the honor
we can, without hurting our own souls. The King of Egypt Commands the Mid-wives
to kill the Male-children of the Hebrews: They do not obey. The cause is
expressed. For they feared God: who by the dictate of Nature forbids to slay the
innocent. King Ahab would have Naboth sell him his Vineyard; Naboth denies;
for, the Divine Law, given to the Hebrews, forbad inheritances to be alienated
from the same family. Antoninus Caracalla commands Papinian the Lawyer, to
defend the paricide committed by him: Papinian refuses, and had rather dye;
because he knew, it was against the Law of Nature and Nations, to speak false
and Patronize so great a crime. By the same right, but with more holy
affection, the Apostles, when the Council charged them, not to speak or teach
in the name of Jesus, Acts 4.19.
, ask, whether they must not obey God rather than men? and justly: for they
had received a charge from God himself, by the mouth of the Lord Jesus, in his
name to Preach repentance and remission of sin, Luke 24.
and that beginning at Jerusalem; for this also was specified in their
Commission. What therefore the Divine Command had made necessary for them to be
done, Humane command could not render unlawful. And in this sense the Authors
are to be explained, who say, the Gospel, the Ministry, the Sacraments, are not
subject to Humane Power; that is, to change that, 11. How Religion is not
subject to Humane Power.
which Divine Law has introduced.

For first, the Preaching of the word of salvation, and the exhibition of the
Sacraments, being commanded by God, cannot effectually be forbidden by men.
Likewise, the Noursing of Parents or Children, the relieving of the innocent,
and many other duties, are so far exempt from Humane Law, that the prohibition
of them is of no force or virtue. Secondly, the form by God prescribed, for
the Ministry of his word and Sacrament, cannot be altered by men; nor is this
proper to things Sacred. For also, the Form of Matrimony, as it consists in
the unity and individual knot of two persons, is by Humane Law immutable.
Thirdly, it belongs not unto Humane Power, to make new Articles of Faith, or,
as Justinian speaks, to innovate the Faith; L. cum salut. L. de sum. Trin.
nor to institute a new worship of God, or new Sacraments; because, the nature
of such things will not admit thereof: for nothing can be believed or done, in
order to salvation, but what God has declared such; neither can any thing be
fit to apply unto us the Divine grace, unless God has assigned it to that
use. Yet, to speak accurately, these things which we have rehearsed, Sacred and
others, may be rather said to have something in them of immutable right, than
simply and altogether exempted from the Rule of the Highest Powers; seeing
there be very many and very great acts of Authority concerning them; 2 Chronicles.
29.15.30.12.
which acts are called in Scripture the Commandments of the King in the
business of the Lord.

12. And how it is Subject.
For first, it is the proper effect of the Highest Powers, that we have liberty
and convenience to do the things which God commands, being freed from
impediments, and supplied with helps. So Cyrus and Darius gave leave to the
Jews to restaur the Temple, and to sacrifice there; and gave them moneys too,
to bear their charges. So, by the edict of Constantine and Licinius, the
Christians had open exercise of their Religion. Secondly, not only by
permitting, but (as before was touched) Humane Law, by Commanding, what Divine
Law does Command, superaddes another Obligation. Thirdly, to the actions
Commanded by God, the Highest Power prescribes certain circumstances of place,
time and manner, that they may be done decently and in order. Fourthly from
actions forbidden by God, the matter and oceasions are by Humane Power
withdrawn. So Ezechias brake the brazen Serpent; so the Emperors shut up the
Heathen Temples. Fifthly, it is the part of the Highest Power, by proposing
punishments, to draw men to the doing of that, which God Commands, and deter
them from the contrary. as Nebuchadnezar made it death to speak evil of the
Hebrews God; and the Emperors, to offer sacrifice to the God of the Gentiles.
And in these particulars consists, as I take it, that Office of the Highest
Powers which is called by Justinian, Nov. 138.
the preservative of the Divine Laws, meaning such a custody, which is also
Legislative, as Austin speaks, Ep. 48.
Let the Kings of the earth serve Christ, by making Laws also on behalf of
Christ. And the same particulars have place in things not Sacred, which are
likewise defined one way, by that Divine Law, Romans 1.32.
which the Apostle calls the righteousness of God. For therefore the Civil Law
is said to consist, partly of Civil institutions, partly of Natural precepts.
Concerning which Natural precepts, the Civil Law gives right and liberty to
do them, hindrances being removed; yea commands the same things to be done;
determines circumstances; takes away, or streightens the occasions of often
transgression, Lastly, adds a sanction, to them, by the constitution of
punishments; which is so manifest, that we need spend no more time in this.

13. The Highest Power may determine any Actions not a^ore determined by God.
Let us come to those things, which by the Divine Law, whether written in the
hearts of men, or in the Holy Bible, are not at all determined. To determine
them either way, whether they be Sacred or Profane, is the right of the Highest
Power. Of profane, it is most known; so David, of dividing the spoil; the
Roman Emperouis, made constitutions, 15 am. 10.15.
of the solemnities and effects of Contracts and Testaments, and innumerable
other matters. Of Sacred things, it is no less clear, if one (I say not,
diligently read) but only look into the Sacred History, the Codes of Theodosins
and Justinian, the Novels, the Capitular of Charles the Great. Every where
examples are so obvious. It pertaines hither, to institute Offices, more for
convenience and ornament, than for necessity, as David did; to build or
beautify temples, as Solomon and Joas, or to appoint a Law and manner of
building them, as Justinian; to prescribe the manner of Electing Pastors,
holding Synods, keeping order among Pastors, alienation of things dedicate to
holy uses; all which very many Christian Emperors have done.

14. Resistance under color of Religion, unlawful, preved by Scripture and
examples, and Objections answered.
Now, if the Highest Power shall exceed the due limits, by decreeing and
ordeining any thing, either in Ecclesiastical things, against the Rules of
Faith and Religion prescribed by God; or, in other matters, against the
perpetual rule of equity (as in both kinds it sometime happons)
Ecclesiastical and Civil things do again agree in this, that, as a man
cannot be obliged to obey men rather than God; so if upon refusal force be
offered, there remains the glory of patience, no right to oppose force to
force. Mat. 26.52.
So Christ has caught Peter, 1 Pet. 2.16.
and Peter us. So says Ambrose, Grieve I can, weep I can, mourn I can, any
other way to make resistance, I cannot, I ought not. A most holy example of
that patience prescribed unto us by God, is left us by those ancient
Christians, that lived under the heavy yoke of the unbelieving Emperors. They
were men to be feared for their number, had they chosen rather to shed others
blood, than their own: for, Tertullian shows how they had filled both the Camp
and City. That victorious Thebane Legion, for Religion sake, was contented to
lose every tenth man, at the Emperors Command; and, it is memorable, that when
there was one Christian put to death for tearing the Imperial edict,
Commanding Bibles to be burnt, Churches to be demolisht, and the Christians
Crucified; the rest of the Christians declared, He had justly deserved that
punishment. So deeply had the voice of Christ sunk into their minds, that
forbids to take the sword. Every one takes the sword, who has not received it
from God. God has given it to none, but the Supreme Powers and to such as they
appoint. No examples of the old Testament evince the contrary; for when we read
of the defections of people or Cities from some Kings, and the impiety of the
Kings set down for the cause, therein the divine judgment is described, not
the deeds of men commended. But if the Highest Power, that has undertaken the
protection of true Religion, be it self therefore opposed by the arms either
of foreign or domestic enemies, it has all the right and reason in the
world, by Arms to defend its own Authority, and the lives and fortunes of the
Subjects. For it is all one upon the matter, whether the opposition be for
Religion, or any other pretense; nor is the Power being Independent, more bound
to let go the use of Religion, than the possession of land, at the pleasure of
any other whatsoever: For He bears not the Sword in vain.

15. Not so many porticula^s in Sacred things, as in Secular, under Humane
Power: with the reason of it.
It has been showed, I think sufficiently, how the Highest Power has equal
Authority over actions Sacred and Profane, over the external primarily, and
in regard of them, over the internal also in the second place: I say,
Authority to command and forbid, what is commanded already, and forbidden by
God; to determine things left in the midst, and permitted to man's liberty; and
when force is offered under pretense of right, to defend it self. I say, equal
Authority over Sacred and Secular actions: which Binius also a man of the Roman
religion acknowledges. In general there is no difference; but if we come to
particulars, it is confessed, Authority extends not to so many Sacred things,
because the divine Law has determined more of them, than of the Secular, for,
the secular affairs (the Institutes of the Hebrew Commonwealth, it is plain,
oblige not us) are almost all circumscribed by rules of Nature, saving that it
may be doubted of some connubiall Laws, whether they be Natural, or out of
the Divine pleasure. But, concerning Sacred matters, much is prescribed us in
the Gospel, and proceeds immediately from the will of God. This being noted, I
see not any thing more, remaining in this question; for, that a more diligent
enquiry, and greater care is need-full in things Sacred, both because the Law
of Nature is more known than the Positive, and because error in Religion is
more dangerous; this pertains to the question of the Manner to use the Power
rightly, and changed nothing in the Power it self.

CHAP. IV.
The Objections against the Authority of the Highest Fowers, about Sacred
things, are answered

THE right under standing of what is al, ready spoken, will help any one to
answer all that is said against the Authority of the Highest Powers, in things
Sacted or Ecolef^asticall. 1. That Christ Instituted the Pastoral offi^e,
answered.
For first, that Christ himself, not the Highest Powers, ordained the Pastoral
office; that, as to the substance of the office, Christ also has set down the
rules; and that, so far (as we have before acknowledged) Pastors are not the
Vicars, or Deputies of the Highest Powers, all this diminishes nothing of the
right of Government, as will appear by the examples of other things. The power
of Parems over Children, of Husbands over their Wives, has its o^iginall, not
from any Humane Institution, but from God himself: yet who will deny these
Powers, though more ancient, to be subject to the Highest. The Physicians
function is from God, the author of Nature, (as the Pastor's from God the
author of Grace,) and from Nature and Experience he receives rules to execute
his office, not from the Highest Powers; nor is he in their stead, when he
pract^seth: and yet for all this, the Physician's function is subject to the
Supreme Authority. There is the same reason in other arts and professions.

And, that Pastors are not bound to obey the Highest Powers, when their
Commands or Prohibitions are contrary to Gods; herein is nothing singular. For
every private man has so much right, and that in other things, as well as
Sacred. Yea, the Judge, that receives his Commission from the Highest Power,
being commanded by the same to judge against right and reason, is not bound to
obey, or rather, is bound not to obey; which comes to pass, not because the
private man, or the Judge is not subject to the Highest Power; (none will
imagine that:) but because both the Power and they are all subject unto God:
and when Commands are contrary, the Superior is to be preferred.

2. That the Magistrate is not of the essence of the Church, answered.
That which some allege, that the Magistrate (as they love to speak) is not of
the essence of the Church. 1. That the Church can subsist, although there were
no Supreme Power, or that Power not a friend to the Church, is very
impertinent; for, that we may speak in their phrase, the Magistrate is not of
the essence of any single man, not of the essence of a Merchant, or
Husbandman, or Physician, yet are all these under the Higher Powers, as reason
teaches, and the Apostles authority.

3. An objection out of Esaias answered. Esaias 49.23. Whether Kings are under the
believing people, or Church. Nebem. 8.8
This objection has a better appearance, The promise made to the Church in the
Prophet, Kings shall bow down to her with their face toward the Earth, and lick
up the dust of her feet: which words rather seem to subject Kings to the
visible Church, than the Church to Kings. This Argument the Papists often use.
But truly, if as Esdras and his Companions once, so we interpret the Scripture
by the Scripture, comparing together what was dictated by the same Spirit, we
shall easily find, the honor, of which the Prophet speaks, is proper and
peculiar unto Christ, which the Psalmist expresses almost in the same words:
Psa. 72.9.
and it is given to the Church, for Christ spiritually reigning in it; as under
the old Testament, we read the Arc to have been adored. There is therefore a
Trope in that prophecy, neither can the words be rigidly pressed, without
transferring that Majesty to the Church, which agrees to Christ alone, Apos.
1.5.
the Prince of the Kings of the earth.

That saying, which is so much cried up by the Papists, that the Emperor is
within the Church, not above the Church, is most true of the Church Catholic,
that never was, never will be under one King; but it must be taken warily of
the visible Church of one kingdom, so as not to deny the Superiority of the
Empire; for a King, that properly bears the name of King, is not only Superior
to the people taken severally, but to the whole people altogether. Nor is this
understood of unbelieving people only, of whom Christ has said, L^. 22.25.
The Kings of the Gen^^les bear rule over them; but even Gods own people Israel
thus speak, A King shall be over us. 1 Samuel 8.19.
And Christian people are taught Subjection to the unbelieving Kings, Romans
13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13
by Paul and Peter. Whereupon is that of Chrysostom, If this berequired under
Pagan Kings, how much more ought it to be under Kings that are believers? Nor
is it material, that pious Authors sometimes say, Kings do service to the
Church; for they mean only, that they do consult and provide for the
commodities thereof; In which sense also the old Pagans called a Kingdom
Service. So does the Shepherd serve his flock, the Tutor his Pupil, the
General his Army: and yet the Flock is not above the Shepherd, nor the Pupil
above the Tutor, nor the Army above the General. For they that govern serve,
by the office of consulting, and graciously providing, as Austin speaks; Kings
therefore may be said to serve the Church, not to be servants of the Church, in
that sense, as service signifies subjection. For Saul is not the servant of
Israel, but Israel the Servants of Saul: 1 Samuel 17.8.22.12. 1 Reg. 1.32
and specially Abimelech amongst the Priests, as David among the Peers. So is
Sadoc the Priest the servant of David and Solomon. Wherefore also the greatest
Synods, being as it were a Compendium of the whole Church, living under the
Roman Empire, salute the Emperors by the name of their Lords. Certainly, as a
Father has equally the Rule over his family, whether believing or not: so the
peoples right Religion diminishes nothing of the Right of the Highest Power.

4. That Kings are under the Pastors function, answered.
Some think this a very strong argument against the Authority asserted to the
Highest Powers, that the Sacred Function of Pastors is conversant about Kings
also, not only as the Gospel is in general preached unto them among the rest,
but as by the Ministry of the Keys, it is applied to them in particular. But
the weakness of this Argument is convinced by like examples; for what Function
is not conversant about the King? Husbandmen, Merchants and the like, the King
stands in need of, but to come nearer, the Physician cures the King as well as
his Groom, and prescribes to both what may conduce to their recovery;
moreover, the Counselor of State is employed about the King, not only as a
man, but as a King. Yet no man has been so unwise, to exempt either the
Persons or Functions of any of them from the Highest Authority, and loose them
from the bonds of Humane Laws.

5. The Objection, taken from the Kingdom of Christ, answer d. And what that
Kingdom is; and whether he has Vicars.
We must come now unto them, who think all Authority about Sacred things so to
belong unto Christ alone, that Kings cannot be partakers of it, because he is
sufficient alone for the Administration of his Kingdom, and needs not the help
of a Deputy. That we may satisfy these men, the actions of Christ must be
distinguished. His Legislation, and his final Judgment are peculiar to him.
In his Legislation is comprehended not only a more plain promulgation of the
Divine Law, misinterpretations being rejected and the difference laid open
between the things which God always approved, and those which he did wink at
or bear with for a time; but also the constitution of the Evangelicall
Ministry and Sacraments, with the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law. His final
Judgment conteins the condemnation of some, and the absolution of others with
exhibition of the reward. Which being done, Christ shall put off the
Administration of his Kingdom, and yet retein the Majesty of a King for ever.
These actions therefore being done, and to be done by Christ himself; Life and
Death Eternal, with the Promise, commination and adjudgement of the same,
being not in the power of mere men; it is certain, that in them no man is the
associate or Deputy to him. But there be other actions called intermediate: and
of these again, some are about the inward, some about the outward man. Those
about the inward man are partly in the man, partly concerning him. In the man,
Christ works when by the virtue of his Spirit he illuminats some, others by not
illuminating he blinds, he opens the heart of some, others by not opening he
hardens; sometimes he affords greater aids against temptations, sometimes
less. Concerning the man, Christ works, when he remits or reteins sin: yet for
the most part in those actions also some signs of them are inwardly Imprinted
in the man by Divine Efficacy. All those actions exceeding the Power of mere
Man, are also so peculiar to Christ, that he admits no Fellow in them not
Vicar. Ministers indeed he admits to these actions, Pastors: Private men, and
Kings too, every ohe in his way. But there is a difference between a Vicar, and
a mere Minister; because it is the part of a Vicar to produce actions of like
kind with his actions whose place he holds; though of less perfection: and to
a mere Minister it perteins not to produce actions of like kind, but such as
are serviceable to the actions of the principal cause. Whence it appears, that
the same action is properly atributed, yet proportionably, both to the
Prineipall and the Vicegerent; for the King truly Governs and gives judgment;
so does the Judge also, though not with equal Right. But, to the Principal
and the mere Minister, the same action cannot be accommodated without a Trope:
as Pastors are said to save men, to remit and retain their sins. There remain
the actions of Christ about the outward man: which especially consist in
defense and deliverance from enemies, and in the ordering and adorning of his
Church; actions rightly referred unto his providence. And as the general
providence of God which has a warchfull eye over all things although by it
self it be sufficient for the disposition and execution of them; yet, for the
demonstration of his. manifold wisdom, He makes use of the Highest Powers, as
his Deputies, to preserve the common society of men; whence also they are
styled Gods: So that special providence of Christ, watching over his Church,
assumes unto it self the same Powers to Patronise the true Faith; and to them
Christ also imparted his own name. These are they that, as Nazianzen says,
rule together with Christ, not by equal fellowship of power (far be from as
so impious a thought) but by a Vicarious and derived right, which is the
meaning of that in the Bohemian consession, Magistrates have a power common
with the Damb. Wherefore seding things subordinate do^ no fight against one
another, and seeing it does not mis become the Majesty of Christ to excout^ the
prin^ipall actions of his Kingdom by himself immediately, (...) partly by
himself, pamly by other (as ^e (...) too the Angels Ministry, out of question)
it follows, that the earthy Empire of the Highest Power, as it takes care of
Sacred things, does not at all oppose or stand against the heavenly and divine
Power of Christ.

And here we must admonish our Opponents, that in the place of Christ, 6.
Pastoral Govemment overthrows not the Authority of the H. Powers.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, they may not put upon us Presbyteries
and Synods; nor transfer what is proper to Christ alone, to rule over Kings,
unto them, whom both the necessity of order, and divine Authority has
subjected to the Imperial Power. But, because in Scripture, and the ancient
History some Government is attributed, partly to Pastors, partly to Churches,
let us see how it comes to pass, that the Government of the Highest Power is
not overthrown thereby.

Distinctions of Government: Directive. Constitutive. By consent. By Command.
Supreme, Inferior, Inferior, By emanation. By subjection only.
For the right understanding whereof, lest in the unlikenesse of things we be
deceived by the likeness of words, we must make use of some distinctions.
Government is either such as may consist with the Liberty of the Governed, or
such as ^^dy not consist, with it the former agrees to them, who govern (as
Tucitus speaka) by authority of persuasion not by pou^^^ of Command, as
Physicians Lawyers, Coun sellours in things not, altogether necessary. The
later Government, whereby the Liberty of the Governed is taken away, is either
Declarative of Law, or Constitutive: and this later, either by right of
consent, or by virtue of Authority. This distinction springs from the manner of
introducing an obligation. They that govern declaratively doc not oblige
properly, but occasionally, as they give a man notice of that which either
brings or increases an Obligation. So the Physician governs his Patient, by
showing what is hurtful, what is wholesome: which being known, the sick is
bound to use this, avoid that, not by any Right which the Physician has over
him, but by the Law of Nature, which commands every one to have a care of his
own life and safety. So Philosophers do govern the Moral and Civil life, by
showing what is honest, what the safety of the people requires. Hither are
refer^^d the Annunciations which Ambassadors or Heralds sent by the Highest
Powers make unto the Subjects, and as well the suasory, which we have
memtion'd, as the declarative, are wont to be comprehended under the one name
of Directive regiment; from which differs the Constitutive, whether it arises
out of Consent, a Command. That, out of consent, has virtue to oblige all that
have consented, by the natural law, concerning the keeping of Covenants, in
those things, which were in the right and power of the Covenanters. But they,
that have not consented, are not directly bound; indirectly they are, if three
things concur. First, that they are a part of the whole; Second, that the
major part of the whole have consented; The third, that something must be
necessarily Constituted for the conservation of the whole, or the bettering of
it. Upon these conditions, all and every one are bound, not by any Right which
the major part has over them, as Superior, but by that Law of Nature, which
requires every part, as a part, to be ordered for the good of the whole. Which
good oftentimes cannot be had without some special determination; and that
determination can be of no effect, if it be lawful for a few to undo what was
done by many. Hence it is, that the Companions of a journey, the partners of
one ship, or of the same negotiation, and all Colleagues are bound to stand to
the decree of the major part, in those things only, that need some
determination, and belong to that Community, whereof themselves are members.
But the Imperative regiment obliges by the intrinsecall force of its own
supereminence; and the regiments of this kind, as has been said, are either
Supreme, or placed under the Supreme: and these again either derived from the
Supreme, preme, or of some other original: these later, ordinary, as that
perpetual and primitive Government of the Father over his, family, whence
arises the authority of the. Pedagogue and Tutour; extraordinary, such as God
gave by special Commission to some men under the old Testament. The Powers
derived from the Supreme, either have received a right both to oblige and to
act, as the Praetorship; or to oblige only, as the Power of a Delegate. Without
a right to oblige, there is no Power, for this is as it were, the natural
effect thereof.

8. Pastors have no coactive or temporal Power: proved by Scripture and
Fathers. 1 Pet. 5.3.
Let us now apply all this unto Pastors and Churches. The Apostles are forbid
by Christ, the Presbyters or Pastors by the Apostle, to rule as Lords over Gods
heritage; the word is applied to Kings, Lu. 22.23. and that is not only forbid,
but to exercise authority, which as distinct from the other is given to Great
ones, Mat. 20.25. Mar. 1.42. By the name of Great ones are understood such
Princes as the Ethnarchs of the Jews, Antig. 13.2.
which were styled Euergetae, as we may see in Josephus, whence that of Luke
may receive some light, They that exercise Authority over them, are called
Euergetae benefactors. If therefore such right as the Highest Powers have, and
such as the Inferior Powers have, be denied Pastors; it follows, that all
Power is denied them. Christ himfelf respecting his state of a servant, Phil. 2.
denies his kingdom to be of this world; Lu. 12.14.
denies (which is lesser) that he was made a judge. And unto the same state he
called his Apostles. We have not (says Chrysostom) such power given us, that
by authority of sentence we can restrain men from offenses. And says Bernard,
I read that the Apostles stood to be judged, I find not that they sat in
judgment. Pastors are called in Scripture by the name of Ambassadors,
Messengers, Preachers; whose part it is, to declare the Authority of another,
not to oblige men by their own. Their Commission is, 1 Jo. 1.1.
to speak what they have heard, to deliver what they have received, and no
more. 1 Cor. 11.23.
The Apostle himself, concerning Virgins, 1 Cor. 7.25
because he had no commandment from the Lord, dares command nothing; only he
gives Counsel, withal declaring ^would be no sin in her that should do
otherwise; and admonishing the Corinthians to help those of Jerusalem, 2 Cor.
9.7.8.8.
by some extraordinary largess, 9. Their Government Suasory and Declarative.
Heb. 13.7.17.
he adds, not of neceSity: the reason whereof went before, I speak not by
command. The Government therefore, which is given to Pastors, when they are
said to guide, 1 Tues. 5.12.
to rule, to feed, to be set over the Church, 1 Timothy 5.17.
ought to be referred to the declarative kind, or to that which merely
consists in persuasion. Jo. 21.16. Ast. 20.28 1 Pit 3.
Where the Apostles or Pastors are read to have commanded, it is to be
interpreted by that figure by which they are said to remit and retain sins,
that is, to declare them remitted or retained. Nor is that to be taken
otherwise, when God says he set Jeremy to destroy kingdoms; that is, to
pronounce the destruction of them. Act. 15.23.
So also in those Letters of the Elders and Brethren to the Churches of Sytia
and Cilicia these words, to impose a burden, are to be expounded in like sort:
for there is no new burden imposed upon the Christians, (then it would follow,
that fornication, the avoiding whereof is a part of that burden, was lawful
before this decree) but the duty of Christians is declared out of the divine
Law; which would have free actions directed to the furtherance of other men's
salvations, and all offenses carefully avoided.

18. The Church has no Power of command by Divine right.
That the Church has no Commanding Power by Divine right appears, because the
Sword is the instrument of that power, (by the Sword is meant coercive force:)
but the arms of the Church are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4
neither has She received any Sword from God, Ephesians. 6.17.
but the spiritual, that is, Phil. 3.20.
the word of God. Besides, Her conversation is not in Farth, but in heaven; she
lives on earth as a stranger, not as free; and strangers have no right to
command. Yet, 11. The Church has a Government Constitutive, by consent: proved
by reason, and examples of Scripture. Col. 2.16.
since the Church is a company, not permitted only, but instituted by Divine
Law (I speak of the Church visible) it follows, that all those things, which do
naturally agree to lawful Companies, do agree to the Church also; so far,
as they are proved not taken away. Among those things is the Constitutive
Government, which we called by consent. We will bring two examples. The law of
the Sabbath being abrogated, 'twas at the Christians pleasure, keeping a just
proportion, to set apart what part of time they would for the worship of God.
Now, because that worship, according to the precept of Christ, required a
certain Congregation of godly men, that part of time could not be determined
but by corsent. So the Apostles leading the way, and the Church following, was
dedicated to holy Assemblies the first day of the week; Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2
Apoc. 1.20.
which also, in memory of the Resurrection, is called the Lords day. Again, the
Apostles being themselves not at leisure to oversee the poor, the Church, by
their persuasion, Instituted the office of Deacons, and made election of
persons to persons to perform it. In both places we find somewhat defined and
constituted by consent, which without great fault none could gainsay. For, it
was requisite that somewhat should be constituted; and that could not be, one
or two dissenting, unless, either the minor part should give place to the
major, or the major to the minor. This being unreasonable, that was necessary.
This right of Constitution therefore, to the Church is natural. But, the
Imperative Government, 12. The Supreme Authority compatible to the Church: the
Inferior only to Pastors.
we have showed above, not to follow from the nature of the Church: and yet
that hinders not, but that both the Highest, and the Inferior Authority may
agree unto it. The Highest, if the faithful unmixed with others, and free from
all subjection, make up a Commonwealth of themselves; This seems to have
happened to the Jews in the times of the Maccabees; 1 Mac. 4.59.
the Church had then the Highest Authority: yet, not properly as a faithful
people, but as a free people. An Inferior Authority, and liberty to use their
own Law, the same Jews, not only in their own Land, but at Alemandria and
elsewhere, have often had, with some kind of coactive Power, sometimes of
more, sometimes of less extent; as it pleased the Supreme Governors, under
whom they lived.

But, as for the Ministers of holy things, we have sufficiently showed, that no
commanding Authority agrees to them by Divine right, that is, flowing from the
Institution or nature of the Ministry it self: as also, (...) the Highest
Authority is incompatible ^ith snch a Ministry. Nevertheless, that Inferior
Authority ought always to be separated from the Pastoral office, the ancient
Church never believed.

13. The Authority of the H. Powers not overthrown, by the directive and
declarative regiment of Pastors.
Whatsoever we have given to Pastors, derogates nothing from the Authority of
the Highest Powers over Sacred things; for the Directive regiment, consisting
in the giving of counsel and declaring of the divine command, is quite of
another kind. And it is no marvel if the same person do govern, and is
governed, in a diverse kind of government; for the Counselor governs the King
by persuading; He that is skilled in Natural right, by declaring divine Law;
the Physician and Pastor both ways; yet has the King command over them all,
and that the Highest. 14. Nor by the constitutive;
The Government by consent, although Constitutive, is also subject to the
Empire of the Highest Powers; because no man, by consenting, can confer upon
another more right, than he had himself. For this Obligation, arising from the
Liberty of every one, is not larger than that liberty; but, they have not
liberty, being single, to do any thing against the Command of the Highest
Power, (except the things which God commands:) therefore they have no right to
bind themselves so far. Besides, two Constitutive Governments ^unlesse
subordinate one to the other, cannot consist, nor can any Subject be obliged to
contraries, as before is said; which is the reason why the Paternall and
Priestly government of the Old Testament (for the Aaronicall Priesthood was
never without Authority) was by God subjected to the Royal. 14. Nor by any
t^mporall power given them by Positive Law.
Lastly, that Authority, which is allowed to Pastors by the Supreme, being both
subject to it, and wholly proceeding from it, is so far from overthrowing,
that it plainly confirms the right of the Supreme; for the cause is known by
the effects, and that which gives Authority to another, has it self more
Authority.

CHAP. V.
Of the Judgment of the Highest Powers about Sacred things.

THe Authority of the Highest Powers about Sacred things being cleared we come
to that which pertains to the right use of this Authority. 1. The word,
Judgment, explained.
The Commands of Authority must proceed from Judgment. Judgment properly
denotes the act of a Superior, defining what is just between two parties; and
the Highest Judgment is that of the Highest Power; for the Laws and Decrees
thereof cannot be nulled or repealed by any Higher: although obedience to such
Laws and Decrees be not absolutely due, but so far as it may be given,
without violation of Gods command. Now, 2. It pertains to the Highest Power.
as the Authority is extended to Sacred things, as well as Secular; so is the
Judgment too, according to which the Authority is used. Indeed, some Kings and
Emperouss have seemed to reject from themselves the Judgment concerning
Religion: but, that was either because they found themselves unfit, and unable
to perform that office; or else, they meant only (as the Great King of Britan
interprets his own words, and some of the ancient Emperors) that they did not
arrogate to themselves (as the Pope of Rome does) a Judgment infallible. 3.
Notwithstanding, that they may e^^e.
The truth is, all Humane Judgment is subject unto error; and unless we will
take away all Judgment out of the world, we must acquiesce in some Highest:
whose errors are to be reserved to the Judgment of God. If you grant this
Highest Humane judgment (I speak not of Directive judgment, but Imperative)
it will not follow thence, that Pastors and other Christians may, upon the
judgment and command of the Highest Power, omit the necessary duties of piety
and charity: for (as above has been showed) the commands of the Highest,
bidding or forbidding, whether in Sacred things or Secular, bind us not, to do
or omit any thing against the Law of God, either Natural or Positive; but only
to suffer; and that, only where the pain cannot be avoided, but by contrary
force.

4. Notwithstanding, that Christ is Supreme Judge.
The Supreme Judgment of Christ does no more deny this Judgment of which we
speak, than his Authority the Authority of the Highest Powers. Legislation
carrying with it, by its own virtue, the reward and punishment eternal; and
final judgment, according to that Law, is the Prerogative of Christ alone, In
the mean time, Christ speaks by his Spirit, by Divine Judgment; yet does not
Humane action follow that Judgment, unless Humane Judgment be interposed.
Which, as it belongs to every Christian, in respect of his private actions; so,
in respect of public, and of private, that are governed by public Authority,
it belongs to the Public Powers, and to the Highest in the Highest degree.
Brentius long ago^ saw this, whose words are these: As a Private man has a
Private, so a Prince has a Public Power, to judge of the Doctrine of
Religion, and to decide it. They that make the Scripture Judge, 5. How the
Scripiture is Judge.
think rightly, but speak improperly: for if we speak exactly, the Scripture is
the Rule of judging; and the same thing cannot be, both the Rule, and the
Judge. In the same kind of speech, the Law is said to Judge no man unheard:
and, Jo. 7.51.12.48.
The word which I speak, says Christ, shall judge them at the last day.

6. How the Pastors and the Church is Judge.
To the Pastors and others that have their senses exercised in the Scripture,
and to the Churches, but especially, and in the Highest manner, to the
Catholic Church, agrees a Judgment concerning Sacred things; for every one,
as Aristotle says, rightly judges of those things which he^ under stands.
But this Judgment is of another kind; for it leads the way to their own
actions, and the actions of others, by directing, not by commanding. And, it is
not absurd to grant two Highest Judgments of several sorts, such as are the
directive Judgment of the Catholic Church, and the Imperative of the Highest
Power; for there is no Judgment among men higher in esteem than that none
higher than this in Power.

7. Understanding is required unto Judgment.
Now seeing there are two enemies unto judgment, ignorance, and
ill-affections; to the end, the Supreme Governor may rightly exercise the
Judgment that belongs unto him, he has need both of knowledge in Sacred
matters, and of a mind truly Religious: things so united one to the other, that
Religion increases knowledge, and knowledge Religion, as Lactantius has
plainly showed.

There is in Tacitus an excellent form of Prayer for the Emperor, that God
would give him an intelligent mind both in Humane and Divine Law. But as far as
Divine things excel Humane, so much more glorious, more profitable, and more
necessary, is the knowledge of Divine things, than of Humane. Therefore is the
King so strictly charged, Deuteronomy. 17.8.
to write himself a Copy of the Law, to keep it with him, and read therein all
the days of his life; and, to Joshuah says God, Jos. 1.8.
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day
and night; and in the 2 Psalm 10. verse, which evidently respects the times
of Christ. Be wise O ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth. The pious
Hebrew Kings, of old, obeyed these admonitions: and so did the Chiristian
Emperors. Theodosius and Valentinian: Among other cares, which our vigilant
Love of the Commonwealth has imposed on us, we perceive the principal care
belonging to the Imperial Majesty is the search of Religion; by the
conservation whereof, we may hope for success in all our enterprises. And
says Justinian, Our greatest sollicitade is concerning the true knowledge of
God, and the honor of his Ministers. These precepts and examples prove, that
the King ought to be skillful in Religion.

Yet, there are some that Object, and say, it cannot be that one should well
attend to any in particular, 8. The Highest Powers capable of sufficient
understanding.
who has upon him the weight of all affairs. To whom we answer: there is as it
were a natural coherence between the general knowledge of all, and the more
exact knowledge of the most noble part. So does the Metaphysiologer generally
considers all that is, and specially things incorporeall: the Physiologer, all
that moves, and Heaven above the rest. Even so, ought the Architect of a
Commonwealth to have a general view of all affairs and studies, but a nearer
and more curious insight into those of the Church.

9. Divine things, that are necessary, are easy to be known.
Neither is the knowledge of Sacred things so intricate, as some would make it.
Theology, says Nazianzen, is a thing simple and naked, without any great
Artifice, consisting of Divine Testimonies; which yet is depraved by some men,
and turned into an art of very great difficulty. I speak of those things which
are substantial points of Faith, and belong to the body of Religion; for there
be other things, partly Metaphysicall, partly Historical, and also partly
Grammatical, which by Divines are often handled, with great contention and
clamor. With these, it is not necessary, the mind of a King should be over
busied; no more than with the subtilties of the Law, whereof the prime Titles
are very needful to be known. There is a kind of intemperance in the desire of
knowledge; and the wisest man is he not that know most, but that knows
what is most useful. What the Apostle said to all, let the Highest Powers
apply unto themselves, Romans 12.3.
and be wise unto sobriety.

10. Heln from God, by Prayer.
In whatsoever is expedient and sufficient for them to know, the Divine aid
will not be wanting: which will easily supply the defect of time. One of the
Ancients said, He had learned more by praying, than by reading. God is not deaf
to these prayers of the Church: Ps. 72.1.
Give the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son.
Ps. 51.8.
Thou have made me know thy secret wisdom, says David. Solomon was very young;
he knew not how to direct his steps; the multitude of his subjects, the weight
of his affairs sat heavy on him; and who, says he, can be able to Judge this
so great people? Therefore he prays God to give him an understanding heart,
that he might judge the people, 1 Reg. 3.
and discern between good and evil. What answer does God return? Because thou
have not asked long life, nor riches, nor the life of thine enemies, but
understanding to hear judgment: behold, I have done according to thy words:
behold, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart. God and Nature, as
they say, are not wanting in necessaries. Wherefore, since Empires are ordained
by God, and that especially for the safeguard of true Religion, what can be
more agreeable to the Divine goodness, than to afford unto them that humbly
pray for it, whatsoever is necessary to their Function? Number. 11.27.25. Dent.
34.9
In the old Testament, God has often endued the powers with the gift of
Prophecy. In these last days He has spoken to us by his Son Heb. 1.
In whom, God the Father has opened all his Connsell, concerning the Salvation
of men. After him, there are not more Masters now, M^^. 13.8.
but one is our Master, Christ, of whose fullness we have all received. No new
Revelation (as of old) is now required, but only the promulgation of that which
is revealed, Nor has any man cause to complain of Obscurity or Subtility,
Romans 10.8. ^ Cor. 4.3, 4
the word is nigh unto us, in our mouth and in our heart. This Doctrine is hid
to none, whose eyes are not blinded by Satan. And therefore all are said,
taught of God, all knowing God, Christ having in some sort fulfilled that
desire of Moses, Number. 1.29
who wished than all the Lords people might be Prophets.

And if the understanding of the Gospel be so easy and at hand to all
Christians, among whom are so many rude and busied, that get their living by
perpetual labor of their hands; what is it that can exclude ^^ngs from a
benefit so general? especially when the Apostle has applied that Universal,
1 Timothy ^.4^
God would have all men to come to the knowledge of the truth, unto Kings
especially. In this confidence, the Emperor Theodosius, being in the cause of
Religion to pronounce judgment between several sects, in private implored the
Divine help, and obtein'd it. Justinian obtein'd the same, in setting forth
such a Confession of Faith, than which none of the Fathers or Bishops set forth
any more full, or more luculent. Certainly, the things which are necessary to
be believed and done, and those also, which though not necessary, are of any
great moment in the Church, are but few in number, and very obvious, shining
forth, first in the Sacred Scripture, and afterward in the perpetual consent
of more pure Antiquity. The rest can hardly put the Highest Power to any
trouble: and yet, if any sudden difficulty and unexpected shall arise (which
happens more often in Secular, than in Sacred things) time may be taken and
faithful Counsels. Thus for of knowledge.

11. Piety is also required in the Higher Powers, to enable them to judge.
Deuteronomy. 17.19. Jos. 1.7, 8.
The other part, which we require in the Highest Power, is Piety. No virtue is
more worthy of a King. Hence is it given in Precept to the King of the
Hebrews, to learn to fear God, and observe the words of his Law: to Joshua,
not to depart from that praescript, either to the right hand, or the left. The
same is often inculcated to the Kings by the Prophets. Two faults there are to
be avoided by the Highest Power: first; and above all, that greatest of
spiritual Maladies, Atheism; Superstition next, which effeminates the mind,
and overthrowes all generous Counsels. 'Twill be a very good caution against
both, to think often of that Apostolical speech: The end of the Commandment
is Charity, 1 Timothy 1.6.7.
out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; from which
some having erred, turn aside to vain jangling, willing to be teachers of the
law, when they neither understand what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

12. A distinction 'twixt the rect^tude and the validity of an action applied.
We have showed what is required in the Highest Powers, that they may rightly
exercise the Right they have: But here we must not forget to observe, the
distinction between the rightnesse of an action, and the firmness of it. For
example; a Judge unskilful of the Law, has pronounced a wrong sentence; the
Judge has: done amiss, yet is not the Sentence null, but unless an Appeal
follows, it passes into a judged Case. A privare man, that is master of his
own estate, has prodigally made away his goods, the alienation is valid,
although the act be vicious. If parents be harsher to their Children, Masters
to their Servants, than is fit; they are in fault, yet is obedience due unto
them. There be many cases of like nature. The reason is, because many things
are required to make the action right; it must proceed from an understanding
well informed, and an honest purpose of mind; it must be done in due manner,
and with fit circumstances. to make the action fume only one thing is needful,
that the Agent have a right to do it. Now an act may be out of the Agents
right, either absolutely, when the effect is unlawful, by itself, or by reason
of some Law; or relatively, when the effect is not under the Agents power and
authority. Naturally, and the law Positive secluded, no act can be frustrate,
but whose effect has either some viciousness annexed, or else is beyond the
Sphere of the Agents power. In the former respect, the command of a Father,
Master, or King, is frustrate, when it enjoynes Idolatry, or a bye: In the
l^to^, the command is fruit strace of a Master to the, Servant of ano^ there
man, of a King to one that is not his Subject, of whomsoever over) actions
^^^egly internal such as have no relation to the outward. We conclude the
refore, that the fault either in the understanding, of the ^^^^ction, makes not
void an act of Authority; (but the Commands of the Highest Powers are valid
still (being not contrary to Gods law) though they have not ^ue opinions of
things Divine of senve not God alight.

13. Insidel Princes may judge of Sacred things. Examples hereof
Examples hereof are many. Pharaoh was wicked King; yet ducst not Gods own
people go forth beyond the bounds of Egypt for to Sacrifice, without his
permission: for although Sacrifice was by Divine Command, and out of the royal
Power, ^^t the place being undefin'd by God, was not exempted from the
obedience they owed unto the King, Nebuchadnex^^, I think no man will affirm
to have been thoroughly of the true Religion. His law of ^onowing the God of
Israel was ^o^^osso^adid, than that other of worshipping the Idol vain Cyrus
and his Successors, as Histories relate, were given to the worship of false
Gods; yet, without their leave, might (not the) Hebrews rebuild the Temple,
for the service of the true. And, although the godly chose rather to compose
their controversies among themselves, yet being called before heathen Judges,
they acknowledged their Power, and by necessity of the times were often compelled
to implore it: knowing, that the right of judging might belong even to them,
that were, of themselves, unfit to give right judgment. The controversy about
the Temple of Jerusalem, and that of Garizin, was debated and determined
between the Jews and Samaritans, Ptolomy King of Egypt being judge; for
although the King did not himself adhere to the Mosaicall ordinances, yet was
he able to judge, and he did rightly judge, which Temple of the two, which
Worship and Priesthood, was agreeable to that Law, by which, it was confessed,
the judgment between the parties should be given. Act. 14.
Felix was a wicked man; but being the Vicegerent of the Roman Emperor, Paul
is accused before him by Tertullus; many crimes are objected to him, and among
the rest, that he was Prince of the Sect of the Nazarenes. He denies the rest,
this he confesses, that he worshipped God, after that way which they called a
Sect, or Heresy. The Question is, whether this be a Crime: and one of the
particulars to be enquired of, is concerning the Resurrection of the dead, a
principal point of faith. The same Controversy being after brought before
Festus, Paul acknowledged his Right to judge: Here, says he, I ought to be
judged. And, fearing the Judges partiality, He appeals to Caesar, the Highest
Judge; before whom he pleaded, not his own cause only, but the Gospels. For
the Question was, whether to preach the Gospel were a Crime Paul denies, upon
this ground, because the Gospel was a true and saving doctrine. In this cause,
the worst of Princes is acknowledged for Imperial Judge by the best Apostle.
And, if according to his duty he had acquitted Paul, (as many think he did at
the first Hearing) his Sentence had been firm, and had clearly given the
Apostle a Right against the Jews. But having condemned him, and in him the
Gospel, the Sentence was null and frustrate; that is, it could not bind Paul to
cease his Preaching; yet was it firm, so far, as to bind him from resisting the
Prince imposing penalty. Justin Mar^yr, and other most learned of the
Christians, presented their Apologies to Emperors not Christians, to the end
they might approve the verity of the Christian faith to those Judges. For,
although a man regenerated by the Spirit of God is the fittest Judge of
Spiritual things; 14. And the reason of it.
yet, that the gift of illumination, which respects the understanding (wherein
the Judgment is) is given also to many unregenerate, no man hitherto has
denied. Neither has any man here heretofore reprehended Austin for these
words, extant in that book, wherein with much pains he defends Grace: De bone
persev. cap. 14.
Certainly some men have in them naturally a divine gift of understanding,
whereby they are moved to believe, if they hear words, or see signs, that are
congruon, to their minds. And truly, how can it be said, that none but true
believers can have a true judgment concerning Sacred things, when as the Faith
if self cannot be embraced, but by judgment? Wherefore it is said to all,
Search the Scriptures: Jo. 5.30.
and they of Beraea are commended, that having heard Paul and Silas preach,
Act. 17.11
they searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so. This could not be
done without judgment; as the Syrian Interpreter has well expressed the sense,
Judging out of the Scripture. If then They, 15. Catechumens not excluded from
Judgment.
that do not yet believe, have some right to judge, private men for their
private acts, and the Powers for public; much less is it fit to exclude from
judging, such as having given assent unto the true doctrine, by some infirmity
of their mind do yet abstain from participation of the Sacraments; for
Constantine the Emperor, before he was Baptized, did with the approbation and
praise of the Bishops, make Laws concerning Religion, call Synods, give
sentence in the Synod and after, sat as Judge between the Catholics and the
party of Donatus. And Valentinian, after he had enacted many Laws about Sacred
things, departed this life without Baptism. 16. Right to judge is one thing,
Ability another. And this illustrated by Si^il^cs.
Much less yet, may the Highest Powers be deprived of this Judgment, upon
this pretense, that they have not skill in all those things which are wont to
be disputed by Divines. If this reason prevail, how many Pastors, honest and
faithful, but not of learning enough to be Doctors, must be denied to judge?
And, by that reason, Lawyers might intrude into the Seat of civil Judges,
because they are more skillful in the Law; and the Judges in City and Country,
concerning Wills, and Contracts, and such like things, are rather good men,
than good Lawyers. Add further, that in the Case of Homicide, it is his part
to judge, that has not learned Physic, what wound is mortal, what is not:
and whether a child may be born in the eleventh month, and many things of like
sort. Whence it appears, the fitness and ability of judging ought not to be
confounded with the right of judgment, which is public and Imperative. He
that is most fit has not always the right; and he that is unfit, does not
lose it. I conclude this with Plato's saying; Happy are the Commonwealths,
wherein either Philosophers are Kings, or the Kings given to Philosophy. Yet
may not the Philosopher invade the Royal throne, nor the King be thrust out of
it, that is no Philosopher.

1 Cor. 14.31.
It is objected, The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Many
of the ancients both Greek and Latin, 17. The Judgment of the Prophets not
privative of the Highest Powers.
understand St. Paul's meaning to be this; They that are inspired with Prophecy
must not all speak to the people at once, but one expect the ending of the
others speech; for they are not like the possessed, transported by the
inspiration, but so far Masters of it, that they may use the gift of God
without consusion, and in that order, wherewith God is best pleased, and his
people edified. There is no cause to reject this Interpretation, which the
series of the Apostles discourse so fairly admits. The other Interpretation,
that the Prophets ought to suffer other Prophets to judge of their Prophecies,
is not pertinent here. For first, seeing that singular gift of Prophecy, as of
healing, and tongues, was marvellously ordained by God for the beginnings of
the Church, and is long since expired, it cannot be applied by way of argument
unto our times. And, grant you may compare unto that admirable gift (manifested
also by the prediction of things to come) the Theological skill, Deuteronomy. 18.22.
what ere it be, acquired by Humane labor; yet will not they obtain their
desire, who would have all Pastors, and them alone, to be knowing in Theology;
for there are many Pastors not very expert; and some that are not Pastors are
of good skill in things Divine. Lastly, there being diverse kinds of judgment,
as has bin spoken, the establishment of one is not the destruction of the
other. The same disease or wound falls under the judgment of the Physician, and
of the Judge, if it come in question before him, and of the sick man himself.
And, when the Prophets judged in the Apostolical Church, it was said to every
Christian, 1 Jo. 4.1.
Try the spirits: yea, St. John lays down a Rule, by which every one of the
faithful might discern the Spirit of God from the Spirit of Antichrist.
Whereunto answers that of Paul to the Thessalonians: 1 These. 5.19, 20, 21.
Quench not the Spirit: Despise not prophecyings: Try all things, hold fast
that which is best. But without all question, this Trial and distinction of
things is an act of judgment. And in that place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.29.
Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; the most
ancient Fathers by the word, other, understand not the other Prophets only, but
all the people: not without great reason; when as elsewhere the discerning of
Spirits is, 1 Cor. 12.9.
by the same Apostle, distinguished from the gift of Prophecy. Whence it
appears, he meant either some gift Common unto Christians (for Faith also is
numbered among the Gifts, distinct from the gift of miracles) or a certain
excellent faculty to judge of Prophecies, where with some, that were not
Prophets, were endued. 1 Cor. 11.
The Apostle Paul himself bids the Corinthians judge what he says. And the
Holy Fathers often appele unto the judgment of all the people. Epist. 33.
So Ambroses Let the people judge, in whose heart is writ the Law Divine. All
this we have alleged, to manifest that the judgment of things Sacred, and of
the holy doctrine, did at no time belong to the Prophets only.

18. The Kings of the old Testament judged not as Prophets only, but as Kings.
Whence also it may be understood, how poor their Evasion is, who reply to the
Arguments out of the old Testament, and say, the things there done by Kings
were not done by them as Kings, but as Prophets. For, if by the name of
Prophet, they mean, some special Mandate of God was given them; this is,
where the Scripture is silent, a mere divination, so far from certain, that
it is not probable. What need any special Mandate, when the Law was extant,
unless perhaps to incite the negligent? but, if by Prophecy they mean a
clearer understanding of the Divine will, proposed but darkly in those, times;
we easily confess, they did as Prophets (since they would have us say so) know
more certainly what was to be commanded by them; but they commanded as Kings.
And for that cause, the Scripture in the narration of those affairs, not
content with the proper name, added the name of King; to signify, the Right of
doing proceeded from the Authority Royal: and therefore to be imitated by
Kings. Wherefore, letus also say, when Christian Kings give Commandments about
Sacred matters, they have the Right to do so, as they are Kings; the skill, as
Christians, as taught of God, having the Divine Law inscribed on their hearts
in a clearer Print than those ancient Kings and Prophets; For many Kings and
Prophets (says Christ to his Disciples) have desired to see the things that ye
see, Luke 10.24.
and have not seen them; and to hear the things that ye hear, but they have
not heard them.

CHAP. VI.
Of the manner of rightly exercising Authority about Sacred things.

1. The Right, and the use of it distinct.
WE distinguish the Right of the Highest Powers, and the manner of Using their
right; for it is one thing to invade that which is belonging to another, and an
other thing to use improvidently that which is ones own. So great is the
variety of things, times, places, persons, that we might here make a long
discourse, but we shall briefly collect what may suffice for our purpose.

2. Pious and learned Pastors to be consulted by the Highest Power.
First then, it behooves him that has the Supreme Authority, both in the
inquisition of that which is by Law Divine determined either to be believed or
done, and in consultation about what is profitable for the Church, to lend a
willing care to the judgment of eminent Pastors, for their piety and learning.
That this is to be done in doubtful matters, reason and common sense
demonstrates; for one man cannot see, nor hear all things; therefore said the
Persians, A King must borrow the eyes and ears of other men. By the Commerce
and Society of wise men, Princes become wise. Which sayings if they are true in
secular affairs, how much more in Sacred, where the error is most dangerous.
For the proof hereof we need not allege examples: it will be more worth our
pains, to consider how far the judgment of the Supreme Governor may and ought
to acquiesce and rest in the judgment of Pastors.

3. Principles of Faith Intrinsecall Extrinsecall, Divine Humane.
We must note therefore, that all Humane judgment is founded either upon
internal principles, or upon External; the Internal are either objected to
the sense, or to the understanding: by the former, we judge the Snow to be
white, by the later, we judge Mathematical Propositions to be true, because
they are reduced to common notions. The External principle is Authority or the
judgment of another; and that is either Divine or Humane: no man doubts but
that in all things he must acquiesce to Divine Authority; thority; so Abraham
judged it to be his duty to offer his Son; So Noah believed the Flood would
come. But, to Humane Authority no man is bound to acquiesce, unless he can
find no way to fix his judgment upon Divine Authority, or upon some Internal
principle. Yet may we acquiesce thereto in all things, the search whereof is
not commanded us. So the sick man does well, if he take a Medicine preserib'd
by a Physician of good fame; yea, being in peril of death, he is bound to
follow the Counsel of Physicians, if himself be not of that wit and skill, to
make a certain judgment upon principles of nature. 4. Of Divine Authority
proposed by men.
As to Divine Authority, God reveals some things, and proposes them himself,
other things, He reveals himself, and proposes to men by others, as by Angels,
Prophets, Apostles. Whenever the thing is proposed by others, before the mind
can fully rest, it is necessary we be assured, the Proposer can neither be
deceived, nor deceive, in the thing that is proposed. This assurance we
obtain, either by some other Divine Revelation, as Gornelius concerning Peter,
Paul concerning Ananias: or else by signs of Divine Power, yiedling undoubted
testimony to the Veracity of the Proposer. That we must acquiesce to every
Proposition thus made, no Christian doubts.

5. And the state of the question 'twixt Protestants and Papists.
But between the more subtle of the Romanists, and those of the Evangelicall
Church, this is the true state of the Question: Whether since the age of the
Apostles, there be any visible Person, or Company, all whose Propositions we
may, and ought to receive, as undoubted truths. The Evangelics deny, the
Romanists affirm. Hither is also brought this great controversy of Government
in Sacred things; for the Romanists do not deny Kings to Govern; this Heart
granted to Renolds: they do not deny all Government to proceed from the
judgment of the Governor; this Suarez plainly affirms. Neither do the
Evangelics deny the judgment of Kings; as well as of private men, to be
determined by Divine Oracle, if there be any such, if there be any Prophets
that cannot err: for all men are under God: but, whether there be any such
since the Apostles, that's the Question; and that at last is reduced only to the
Pope; for that single Pastors, Kings also, and private men, Synods Provincial,
National, Patriarchall, and even they that were gathered out of all the Roman
world, are fallible, and have been in error, no man can deny.

Wherefore, supposing that which is most true, and which some of the Romanists
do grant concerning the Pope himself, That every man in the world is subject
unto error, (for any thing that we know,) yea, every Congregation also, that
is visible: let us see how far one is bound to follow the judgment of another
that is thus fallible.

6. When it is sit to ^rest in humane Authority. 2 Cor. Hom. 13.
First we say, no man is bound to follow another Directive judgment
universally. Chrysostom of old has said the same: How absurd is it, in all
things to be swayed by the sentence of other men? For, possibly we may be
certain, either by internal Principles, or by Divine Authority, the judgment
of sentence is, false. That any private man, grounding his sentence upon the
Gospel, is to be believed before the Pope, is confessed by Panormitan and
Gerson. And the pious Bishops who had learned out of the Gospel, that the Word
is God, and God only One, did well in not giving place to the judgment of the
Synod at Ariminum. Moreover, even when the mind does not plainly witness the
contrary, yet is no man bound precisely to follow another Directive judgment:
because it is lawful for him to enquire and try, whether himself be able to
aim at the knowledge of the Truth. Then he is bound to follow, when by defect
either of wit or time, or by other business, he is diverted from that inquiry.
So the Lawyers teach, that a Judge is not tied to the judgment of a Physician
in the question of a wound; or of a Survey or in limining the bounds, or of an
Arithmetician in taking of Accounts; but that himself, upon diligent
consideration of the matter, may decree that which he conceives most agreeable
to truth and equity. But further, 7. No man may pin his faith of salvation upon
another: proved by Scripture and reason.
in the case of saving faith, no man can safely acquiesce to the judgment of
another. The reason is, not only because matters of faith are plainly and
openly proposed unto all, (so that Clemens of Alexandria calls it a vain
pretext, taken from several interpretations, for they that will, says he, may
find out the Truth:) but chiefly, because that faith is not faith, unless it
rest upon Divine Authority, as the Romanists themselves confess. Abraham
believed God, Romans 4.3.10.17.
and it was accounted unto him for righteousness: Also, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Wherefore, although men may be led
unto the faith by others, Jo. 4.28.
as the Samaritans by that woman, yet then are they only right believers, when
they believe not for the words of another, but because themselves have heard,
and do know, that Jesus is the Savior of the world. What has been spoken of
faith, is no less true of Divine worship: for, in vain, says God, Mat. 15.9.
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men. And Paul
commends the Thessalonians, 1 These 2.13.
that they received his word not as the word of man, but as indeed it was, the
word of God. We conclude then, that in the things defined by Divine Law, either
way, no man is bound by another Declarative judgment (which is one kind of the
Directive) nor can his conscience safely rest therein.

8. In matters not determined by Scripture, more may be given to Human
Judgment.
In the other kind of Directive judgment, which we here called Suasory,
because it is conversant about things not determined by Divine Law, more may be
given to the Authority of another, yet not too much. For, as we do not praise
them that are too stiff in their own opinions; so neither them, that are too
easily drawn by other men's. And herein consists the difference between
Counsel and Command, that commands, not contrary to the Law of God, lay upon
us an obligation, which Counsels do not. He that gives counsel, (says
Chrysostom) speaks his own opinion, leaving the hearer at liberty to do as it
shall please him.

9. The Prince must use his own judgment, especially where Counsel louis do
not agrec.
Now, if the opinions of Counselors (which must be weighed rather than
numbered) do not agree, there especially ought the Supreme Governor to
interpose his own Judgment. And truly, in the knowledge of private right, in
Physic, Merchandise and such like things, it is not only excusable, but
oftentimes comendable for the Highest Power to be ignorant, by reason of
greater and better cares. But, to neglect the knowledge how to rule the Church,
than which no knowledge is more excellent, none of more importance to the
Commonwealth, this at no hand is lawful. Those that have eased themselves of
this duty, and cast it upon others, we find by Histories to have been
circumvented by men, and punished by God; and either to have lost their
kingdoms, or else being deprived of the Power, to have reserved only the name
and shadow of King's.

The Objections out of the Old Testament, to prove that Kings are bound to
follow the Pastors judgment in Sacred things, 10. An objection out of Deuteronomy.
answered.
do evince nothing less. To the first place Deuteronomy. 17. where the Israclites
are commanded to do according to the sentence which the Priests shall declare
unto them: we answer, that the Judge is also mentioned there, and Sacred things
are not spoken of peculiarly, but any capital or pecuniary Controversies.
Deuteronomy. 17.8
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, etc. The Law speaks to the inferior Judges, and
in things they understood not referrs them to the Senate, wherein were Priests
and other Judges, all most knowing in the Law; nor are those lesser Judges
bound to the Authority of these, but to the Law they should explain: According
to the sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee, and according to the
judgment which they shall tell thee, shall thou do. Just as if a King should
now command the Judges, to judge nothing contrary to what the Lawyers shall
show them to be lawful: when yet Lawyers themselves declare, the Judge is not
always tied to the declaration or opinion of the Lawyers. Pertinent is that in
the Gospel: M^. 23.2.
They sit in Moses chayr, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do; which is well explained by Stella and Maldonat, though
Romanists; so far as they teach what Moses sitting in his chayr has taught,
they must be heard. Only so far; for the Teachers rashness will not excuse
the overcredulous Scholar. That which follows in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
concerning the punishment of the man, that will not hearken unto the Priest,
or unto the Judge, evidently shows, that the Priests did not only give answer
upon the Law, but enjoyed also a part of the Government, as elsewhere we have
demonstrated; wherefore this concerns the Priests of the Old Testament, as they
were Magistrates, and cannot be extended to the Ministers of the Gospel.

11. Another out of Numb. 27.
There is another place, wherein some do much glory. Number. 27.21. God speaks of
Joshua in this manner; He shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask
counsel for him, after the judgment of Urim before the Lord: at his word
shall they goc out, and at his word they shall come in, both he and all the
children of Israel with him, even all the Congregation. But this place also, if
it be rightly understood is far from the purpose. It is certain, the Urim,
(which in other places is more fully the Urim and Thummim) was in the Ephod or
pectoral of the Hebrew High Priest. The manner of answering by Urim and
Thummim, as the Jews relate, was thus; If the matter, upon which the Question
was, should succeed happily, the precious stones would sparkle with a heavenly
luster: if otherwise, they would not change their native color. And learned
men have observed out of Maimonides, that the High Priest was wont to stand
before the Prince for honor sake, but the Prince stood not before the Priest,
unless Urim were consulted; whereby it appears, the honor was done to the
Oracle, not the Priest; and according to the judgment of Urim, that is, the
judgment of God, not of the Priest, Joshua must go out and in. Compare with
this, another place very like it, 1 Samuel 30.7. If the Ministers of the Gospel
will make any use of this, then let them propose to Governors our Gospel-Urim,
that they may there behold the Divine threats and promises; and let them
require obedience not to themselves, but it; which shines by its own light, and
is placed, not in the Pastors only, but all Christian hearts, being that saving
Grace which has appeared unto all men. Tit. 2.11.
But enough of this first admonition, That the Highest Power ought, in matters
of the Church, to hear and examine the opinions of Churchmen.

12. Care must be had of the Churches Peace and Unity.
Another general admonition pertaining to the manner of exercising the Supreme
Governors Right, is this: That He must have a special care of Ecclesiastical
Peace and Concord. This is as it were the very Soul and life of the Church.
Hereby, says Christ, Jo. 13 35.
shall men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. And it was
the Divine character of the Primitive Christians, Act. 4.32.
The multitude of believers was of one heart and soul. Nor had Constantine, and
after him the other Christian Emperors any greater care, than to prevent or
heal the dissentions of the Church. Julian on the contrary, hating the
Christians with an implacable hatred, could invent no way to hurt them worse,
than by opening a wide way for Schisms and divisions. This he did, faith
Ammianus, that the discords of the people being increased by license, they
might not be any terror to him. And, says Austin, By this means he thought to
destroy the Christian name, if out of his envy to the Churches unity, whence he
had fallen, he permitted sacrilegious dissentions to be free from censure. All
pious men may pity these our Times, being as sick of the same License, as ever
was any Age. Whether it be more the Pastors, or the Princes fault, see the
Testament of the Prince Elector, worthy to be read by all the friends of the
Church; and let all Princes know, that it very much concerns them, as Austin
speaks truly, to procure, that the Church, their mother, may have peace and
quietness in their time.

13. Cautiions and R^les conducing to Unity. F^w Decisions, in points of Faith.
The Cautions, which conduce to Unity, are principally these: First, Abstain
from deciding Questions, as much as may be: that is, saving the Doctrines
necessary to Salvation, or very profitable to that end, It Is Nazianzen's
advice, Enquire not curiously into the manner of every thing; and Austin says,
In some things even the best and most learned Catholics do not agree, and yet
the body of faith is still entire. This modesty of defining, the Fathers in the
Nicene Synod, and the first of Constantinople, and the Moderators of them the
Emperors have observed; for having set down this Confession, that the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are distinction from one another, yet one God, and of the
same Essence; in explaining the manner of difference between the Essence and
Hypostasis, they were not sollicitous. The Bishops at Ephesus, and Chalcedon,
and the Emperors of those times, having defined, that the person of Christ is
one, his Natures two, thought it not fit to enquire subtly into the manner of
hypostaticall Union. In the Milevitane and other Synods, the Fathers and the
State-men present, for the vindication of Gods grace, pronounced plainly
against Pelagius and his Relics, That without the Divine grace, nothing
spiritually good, can be begun by man, or continued, or perfected: but many
things sharply disputed about the order of predestination, and about the manner
of reconciling man's free will with Gods free Grace, they passed over with a
prudent silence. All the Fathers of the ancient Church confess, that in the
most holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper are exhibited the visible signs of
Christ invisibly present: concerning the manner of his presence they differ in
their speech, and yet for this they do not break the Peace. Wherefore
Doctrines very few are to be defined, the necessary with Anathema the rest
without: as it was done in the Synod of Orange: and there are in the ancient
Counsel of Carthage these words to the same purpose; It remains that we speak
our opinion in this controversy, judging no man, nor separating him from our
Communion if he think otherwise.

14. And those in in General Councils.
But in those first ages, it was very available to the keeping of peace in the
Catholic Church, that no Dogmaticall definitions were wont to be made but in
General Councils; or if any were made in lesser Synods, they were not firm
until they were sent to other Churches and approved by common judgment. Which
custom, if the Rulers in the Christian world would now revive, they could not
do the Church a greater benefit; for in those remedies, which Physicians call
topicall, is little help, nor can the unity of the parts be hoped for, but from
the unity of the whole body. I cannot forbear to praise that excellent Canon
of England, An. 1571. Let Preachers take heed of Preaching any thing to the
people, as a necessary point of Faith, but what is agreeable to the doctrine of
the old or new Testament: and which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops
have collected thence.

What has been said of things to be believed, must be understood also of
things, by the Divine Law, appointed to be done; but of these, the
controversies are not so many. In both kinds, for the reteining of concord, it
will be needful to make the people understand, that all things enjoined are
agreeable to Gods word. That which Seneca says against preambles, Let the Law
command not dispute; 15. Ecclesiastical Laws delivered in a persuasive way.
may have place in things merely Arbitrary (yet in such Laws we see the reason
of them given at large by Justinian and others, in the Code and Novell
Constitutions) but in things that are to be performed religiously, the severity
of the Injunction is to be mollifyed by the gentleness of persuasion. So Plato
has given in precept, and Charondas and other Lawgivers have showed us by
example. And certainly as Governments are made firm by the willingness of
people in all things, so most of all in the business of Religion. For, says
Lactantius, Nothing is so voluntary as Religion; which without the wills consent
is nothing. And people that are compelled by Law to serve God, serve not God
but the Prince, Themistius. Here then is required the greatest care and pains,
that the major part of the people, being convinced by divine Testimony, may
know the things commanded, to be according to truth and piety. I say, the major
part; sor we may rather wish, than hope for an universal consent; but for the
ignorance or malice of a few the care of truth and peace is not to be deserted.
Yet here must be showed tenderness and discretion, that they who resist both
the Divine and Humane Ordinance, may be rather withheld from doing ill, than
compelled to do good: as Austin has long ago judiciously distinguished in
this matter. 16. How top eserve unity in point of ceremonies.


Now we go on to the things not determined by Divine Law, such as are many
things belonging to Church Government, to Rites and Ceremonies. Wherein, if the
matter be fresh and easy to be wrought, it were safest to restore all things to
the times next the Apostles, and to observe what was then observed, with great
consent, and no less benefit of the Church, For the most ancient Constitutions
are the best. Yet there must be a respect had to the present things, and a
respect to the places too: Wisely says Jerome: In things neither contrary to
Faith nor manners, let the customs of our Country be as Canons Apostolical.
Austin and others have words of the same sense. And variety here is of good
use, serving for a Testimony of Christian Liberty. See the History of Socrates.
1.5. c. 22. Verily, if in this nature there be any thing that may be bettered,
yet is tolerable and of long continuance, it is wisdom to let it still
continue; unless the change may be made upon a handsome occasion, and with
favorable assent. The change of a custom, says Augustine, does as much
disturb as prosit. But in these things, wherein Gods word has left a liberty,
the Highest Power shall do well to content the people. So in Secular matters
we see that Cities and Companies that have no jurisdiction, have leave to make
certain orders for themselves; which the Highest Power, after examination past
upon them, approves and ratifies.

17. Highest Powers need the Ministry of others.
One thing more we will not omit, which perteins also to the manner of using
the Right we treat of: The Highest Power ought to use not only the advice, but
service of other men: and therefore particular affairs, lest the multitude of
them oppress the mind of one, are to be put off to Courts ordained one above
another, and the last appeal to be made to the Highest Judgment. So in the
ancient Church under the Christian Emperors there were Presbyteries in Cities,
there were Synods Metropolitan, and Exarchicall, and, above all the rest,
Imperial; but of this we shall speak again hereafter.

All that we have said here, of asking Counsel, of contenting the people, of
inferior Courts, and whatsoever may be added, ought not to be esteemed
perpetual, and always profitable; for no prudentiall precepts are universal;
18. Prudentiall Rules have their exceptions: and whence.
because prudence must have regard to emergent circumstances, Times, Places,
Persons, make a great alteration here. When the matter is clear, there is no
need of Counsel: when dissentions are hot and vehement, there is little hope
of Consent; neither can the proceeding be by degrees, when either the matter
will not admit delay, or the Lower Courts are suspected of injustice, by reason
of hatred, or favor, or other impediments of upright dealing. In such cases,
when the ordinary course cannot be observed, advise must be taken of necessity.

19. The Distinction of power absolute and ordinary, erroneous
By the way we must note their error, that distinguish of power absolute and
ordinary; for they confound the power, and the manner of using it. As in God
the power is one and the same, whether he work according to the order appointed
by him, or beside that order: so the power also, or the right of the Supreme
Governor is the same, whether he observe the prescribed order, or not; but, in
common accidents, it is the part of a wise Ruler to follow the accustomed
order, and the Positive Laws. Laws are made for ordinary cases: L. 3.d. de Leg.
in cases extraordinary the Highest Power must leave the road and take some
unusual way; for cases are infinite, order and Law Positive finite, and the
finite cannot be an adequate Rule of the infinite. 20. Highest powers how far
obliged to their own Laws
But although it be the Duty of the Highest Governor in usual affairs to use
the ordinary way of Government; yet if he do otherwise, he may indeed be said
to do not rightly, but not to go beyond his Right. The right of the highest
Power is not limited by Positive Law; for the Right of any man is not limited
but by his Superior; and no man is Superior to himself. Hence also Austin
said, The Emperor is not subject to his own Laws, for it is in his power to
make new; and Justinian, Nov. 105.
In all things before spoken, the Emperor is excepted: to whom God has made
the Laws themselves to be subject. If then the Question be proposed, whether it
be lawful for the Highest Power in common accidents to exceed the bounds of
Law: the Answer may be given in the words of Paul the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.12.23.
It is lawful, but not expedient: or in the words of Paul the Lawyer, L.^non
omne. d. de reg. jur.
It is lawful, but it is not for his honor. It becomes your wisdom, says
Cicero, to consider not how much you may do, Pro Rabir.
but what you ought to do: and every where in good Authors, to that which is
lawful, is opposed that which is a duty, that which is expedient, that which
is honest, that which is best to be done. Lastly, that which is said above,
has place here also: Though the action has not full rectitude, if Right be
not wanting, the Act is firm; for suppose an unwise command, suppose a
disorderly command come from the Highest Power, it must be fulfilled, if it may
be, without sin: for the Apostles word is still of force; We must needs be
subject. To him has God allotted Supreme Authority, to us is left the glory of
Obedience.

CHAP. VII.
Of Synods.

THis place requires, 1. What we mean by Synods.
that we treat of Synods. By Synods we mean Assemblies consisting of
Church-Pastors alone, or chiefly of them, for the acting of somewhat by common
consent; for if Pastors be called together to hear commands, that Assembly I
suppose is not called a Synod. The utility of these Synods being evident, it is
enquired, what Original they have, and what necessity.

2. No Precept in Scripture for Synods.
I find no Precept in the Law Divine for having of a Synod, and they are much
deceived that make Examples of equal force with Precepts. Yet are Examples of
great use, that it may appear, what has been usual, and what in the like
cases may be prudently imitated. We have no Examples of these Synods out of the
Old Testament; for a Synedry is one thing, and a Synod another. In the New
Testament we have a Law for Believers to meet for prayer, and hearing the Word,
and breaking of bread. The offended brother is bid to tell it to the Church;
that is, to the Assembly of the faithful, and it is added, Where two or three
do join in prayer, and where two or three are met together in the name of
Christ, Christ will be present with them. And Paul says, The spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets, speaking of one Church or Congregation.
3. Their Original not from Act. 15.
Here is no Synod yet. The Original whereof is wont to be taken from that
History, Acts 15. but whether that Assembly be properly called a Synod, as we
now take the word, may be made a Question. There arose a Controversy between
Paul and Barnabas, and certain Jews at Antioch, concerning the force and
efficacy of the Mosaicall Law. Paul and Barnabas, and some of Antioch, are sent
to know the judgment of the Pastors; of all Asia? or, of Syria, Cilicia, and
Judoea, gathered into one place: no certainly: but of the Apostles and Elders
at Jerusalem. Act. 15.3.
The company of the Apostles was a College, not a Synod, and the Presbytery or
Eldership of one City was not a Synod neither. Only one Church is consulted
with, or rather the Apostles only, whose Answer is approved by the Elders and
Brethren of Jerusalem.

4. But from the Law of Nature: with a distinction of the Law of Nature,
Absolute, After a sort;
Wherefore we derive the original of Synods from the Law of Nature. Man being
a sociable creature, his nature permits association especially with them, to
whom either any contemplation, or action is common. So Merchants for Traffic,
Physicians and Lawyers to examine the controversies in their Art, hold their
meetings by the Law of Nature. But to avoid mistake, we distinguish between
that which is natural absolutely, and cannot be altered, as to worship God, to
honor our Parents, not to hurt the innocent: and natural after a sort, that
is, permitted or allowed by Nature, until some Law of man interpose; thus all
things are by Nature common, all persons free, the next of kin is heir, until
by humane Constitutions propriety, and servitude be introduced, and the
Inheritance given away by Will. 5. Synods not from the Law of Nature absolute.
In this second acception, it is natural to hold Synods; for, if it were so in
the former sense, Bishops would never have asked the Empeperours leave, before
they met; and Jerome's argument, to prove a Synod unlawful, were not good; Show
me, says he, what Emperor commanded the celebration of that Council. The
convention therefore of a Synod is in the number of those things, which being
permitted by the Law of Nature, are wont to be commanded by humane Law, or
permitted, or prohibited. So in the Council of Agatha, the Bishops summoned to
the Synod are desired to come, unless they be hindered by sickness, or the
royal Precept.

6. Synods under the Pagan Emperors, by what right.
It may be objected, that leave to gather a Synod, was never asked of the Pagan
Emperors. But we say, there was no need to ask leave, when there were no
Imperial Edicts against it. As for the ancient Decrees of Senate against
meetings, religious meetings were excepted in them, and particularly the Jews
(as Philo relates it) had leave of Augustus to assemble. In whose privileges
the Christians might justly claim a share, Act. 24.14.
believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets. And
Suetonius, under the name of Jews, designs the Christians too. Besides, in
the places where most of the Synods were held, though subject to the Roman
Empire, they had the benefit of their own Laws. Wherefore, if at any time the
Churches enjoyed Peace, which often happened under Pagan Emperors, the Bishops
had no hindrance, but they might meet in Synods. But in the heat of
Persecution, as the Christians could not intermit Church-meetings, although
forbidden by humane Laws, because they were commanded by Divine; So the
Bishops were careful, not to incur the suspicion and hatred of the Rulers by
Synodicall Assemblies, so long as the Church could subsist without them.
Cyprian shows in several places, when under persecution there arose a great
Question about receiving the lapsed into Communion, and to the deciding of it
there was need of Common-Counsell, nevertheless the Bishops deferred their
meeting till the storm was past: neither durst the Bishop of Rome, Liberius,
without the consent of Constantius call a Synod. The orthodox Bishop of Spain
assembled not into the City of Agatha, without the permission of King Alaric,
although an Arian.

6. Synods called by Christian Emperors.
What the Pagan Emperors had no regard of, that the Christian Emperors justly
assumed to their care and government, well considering, the corruption of
anything to be so much the worse, by how much better it is, in the regular use.
After that, Synods were not left in medio, but as they gave hope of good, or
fear of evil, so they were either commanded or forbidden. Therefore Socrates
the Historian says, The greatest Synods were holden according to the Emperors
pleasure. This is spoken of general Synods in the Roman Empire; But
Constantine called also Topical, whereof Eusebius speaks; Having special care
of the Church, when discords arose in sundry places, The Emperor himself,
being appointed by God, the common Bishop or Overseer, commanded the Ministers
of God to assemble in Councils. After the Acts of the Nicene Council were
confirmed by the same Constantine, the general Law of Synods to be holden
twice every year, supplied the place of special consent. In stead of half-year
Synods, in some places they had annual. Nor was the Assembly at the pleasure of
the Bishops, but the Governors of Provinces had a charge given them, to make
the Bishops, though they should decline it, to meet together in Synods: and
beside those at set times, other Synods also were holden out of order, at
command of the Highest Power.

8. Three Questions about Synods.
But there are three principal Controversies concerning the Highest Powers
right and office about Synods. First, whether it be lawful for the Highest
Power to command any thing in Sacred affairs without a Synod; Second, what is
lawful for him, and what he ought to do before the Synod, and in the Synod;
Third, what after the Synod.

For the resolution of the first Question, we must conceive, 9.1. Whether the H
Power may govern withour a Synod.
whatsoever is said very justly of the exceeding great commodities of Synods,
belongs to the manner of using the Right of Empire, not to the Right it self.
For if the Highest Power should receive from the Synod any right of Governing,
it were not then the Highest: The Highest being that which is subject unto God
alone, and under God has the fullest right of governing. Again, if the Highest
Power without a Synod could not command that, which it might command with a
Synod, then should it receive part of the right of governing from the Synod:
and then, because none can give what he has not, it would follow, that
somewhat of the Government were in the Synod; which the Synod, not having by
any Humane right, must challenge by Divine right; whereas the Divine Law denies
any such Power to have been given by God unto the Church, (as has been showed
above,) and therefore not to Synods. The Right being thus confirmed, we make no
scruple to affirm, That the Highest Power may sometimes rightly order Sacred
things without a Synod: They that universally hold it unlawful, 10. The
affirmative proved by examples.
will never prove what they say: but we shall easily. For there are extant many
examples of the Hebrew Kings, that without a Synod gave commands in Sacred
matters.

Whether the Church declare or not, even before the Churches declaration the
Kings duty is to reform what is amiss, and for neglect thereof he must give
account to God. Eminent among the Christian Emperors is the example of
Theodosius. He sat as Arbitratour between several Factions of the Bishops, he
gives every one the hearing, he reads their (confessions, and after prayers to
God for his direction, he gives his judgment, and pronounces his sentence for
the Truth. To omit other examples; The Kings and other Highest Powers, which in
the memory of our fathers have purged their Churches from inveterate errors,
have done according to the pattern of those ancient Kings and Emperors: as
elsewhere we have showed. True it is, and they are commended for their
diligence that have observed it, there were such circumstances in those
actions, by reason whereof that course was taken, and no other could serve the
turn. And we acknowledge that course to have been extraordinary, and more
seldom taken: but (as before) we say, The manner of doing being diverse with
regard to times and persons, changes not the right; but flows from it
according to the rules of prudence; Nor does any one affirm, a Synod is to be
omitted without cause, but that sometimes there may be causes for the omission
of it.

These causes may be referred to two heads; either because a Synod is not
necessary, or because it appears it will be unprofitable. That both may be the
better understood, we must note the Ends of a Synod in a public Church; for of
this we speak. We have proved already, that a Synod is not called, as if it had
any part of the Government belonging to it. 11. Three ends of Synods: yet not
necessary. Counsel. Consent. Jarisdiction.
The end therefore is, that it may give Counsel to the Prince for the
advancement of Truth and Piety, that is, go before him by a directive
Judgment. Another end is, that by the Synod the Consent of the Church may be
settled and made known. So, although the Apostles severally had both knowledge
and authority to define the controversy of Mosaicall Ceremonies, it was 01 for
the Churches good, that it should appear, they were all of one mind, and that
the pious people should be taught to understand the truth rightly, and to make
unanimous confession of it. A third end may be added to the former: as
Presbyteries in a public Church, so Synods, beside their native, have an
adventions right from Human Law: whereby they judge of Causes, as other Courts
ordained by the Highest Power; and so, that upon their sentence coaction
follows. But now, of all these ends none is necessary, nor is a Synod simply
necessary to those ends. Counsel is not necessary in things manifest to any
one by natural or supernatural Light; For as Aristotle said well, We make
use of Counselors in great matters, when we distrust our selves, as unable
without the help of others to discern the Truth. Who doubts, but the man that
denies God, or his Providence, or his Judgment after this life; the man that
makes God the proper author of all sins; the man that denies the Deity of
Christ, or the Redemption wrought by him; I say, who doubts, but a man so
profane, may be put out of office, or out of the Commonwealth, by the command
of the Highest Power, without the advice of many Counselors. Again, the
Highest Power may have such assurance out of some former Synod, that he need
not call a new one. Therefore a Synod is not necessary, to the end sufficient
Counsel may be had. And as for consent of the Church to be inquired or
constituted, it is in vain sometimes to take any pains about it, when the Church
is manifestly divided two ways, the parties and their heat being well night
equal, as in the Donatists time it happened in Africa. Sometimes also, the
consent of the Church may be known without a Synod: if there be extant the
unanimons writings of almost all the approved Doctors in their Churches. Be
sides, every one in private may either by voice or writing declare his opinion,
which Austin says was done in his time, and commends it. And he that peruseth
ancient story shall find the Churches affairs more often transacted, and
consent testified by communication of Letters, than by Synods: as is observed
by Bilson, Reynolds, and the Magdeburgenses. And lastly, it may be the Cause in
hand is so peculiar to one Church, that the consent of others is not needful.
Now for the third end of Synods, the hearing of Causes, it depends upon the
will of the Highest Power, from whose Authority it proceeds; although in the
ordinary way, inferior Courts are not past by, yet if those Courts be liable
to some suspicion, or the business will not bear delay, the Highest Power may
call it from them to himself. We conclude therefore, that which Whitaker and
others have written before, and the example of Free Cities, that without a
Synod preserve their Churches, do confirm: A Synod is not at all times
necessary, nor in every case.

12. Synods sometimes not useful.
So far from necessary sometimes, that it is not profitable; for as the parts
are, such is the whole. I will not here repeat the old complaint almost of all
ages, that the chiefest distempers of the Church have proceeded from the
Priests. Nazianzen has said enough, where he also renders the principal
causes thereof, the Ambition and Pride of Churchmen; nor does he speak of
Arian Synods only, but of all of his time, those especially wherein himself was
present: Therefore, says he, have I withdrawn my self, and sought for security
of mind in rest and solitude. This evil will happen if it appear, either that
the integrity of judgment is hindered by vehement prejudices, (which often
befalls men, not malicious:) or that factions are so prevalent, that a farther
branch may rather be expected from the Synod, than any testimony of consent. I
much wonder, what came in some men's minds, when they said, They that accuse
another of impiety, 13. Accusers may not be Judges in a Synod.
may be his Judges also in a Synod; and, that the Right of refusing, which has
place in civil affans, cannot be extended to Ecclesiastical. For certainly,
the common Rules, which arise out of natural equity, ought to be of force, no
less in Ecclesiastical than other judgments; and I remember Optatus speaking
properly of the Ecclesiastical, says, Judges must be sought, which are not of
either party, because judgment is hindered by affection. In the Council of
Chalcedon, the Judges charge the Legates of the Roman B. they should put off the
Judges person, if they would be the accusers of Dioscorus; And Athanasius would
not come unto the Synods, wherein 'twas manifest the adverse party reigned.
Such is often the face of things, 14. Synods sometimes hurtsull.
that a Synod may be hurtful at the present, which if you stay awhile, and let
the minds of men come to a calm, may be called to good purpose. 1 Cor. 3.13
Time shall declare, says the Apostle, the work, that is, Phil. 3.15.
the doctrine of every one: And, If any man be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal the truth. In both places showing, there is often need of time, that
the Truth may be found out, and a right judgment given. The contrary may also
happen, that the present evil cannot endure the delay of a Synod, and calls
for a more compendions remedy. Moreover, the same causes for which great
Assemblies are suspected by the Highest Power, may also have place in Synods;
for, as a very learned man has said, It is not less Political, to assemble
Bishops, than other Orders of men. There is the same fear, the same danger,
unless they have put off Humane passions, when they became Pastors. I might
reckon up many examples of unhappy Councils, as were under Constantine, those
of Antioch, Caesaria and Tyrus; the Bishops of which last, as the Emperor in
his Letters plainly tells them, did nothing else but sow divisions and hatred,
and disturb the Peace of the world. Yet I confess, the Church is not in the
best condition, when Synods cannot be had: and therefore all means is to be
used, that these Assemblies may be retained, or after long omission restored,
whereby the Church speaks both to her Members, and her Governors with most
convenience. 15. What may serve in their stead.
And yet, even then, when the Highest Power governs without a present Synod, it
has the judgment of the Church in former Synods; it has the perpetual
consent of the most famous Doctors, which flourished in every Age and Nation;
it has the most learned and religious Divines of the time present, both
domestic and foreign, whose opinions are worthy of an equal regard,
especially in points of Doctrine, which is the common study of them all, and in
respect whereof they have every one a share in the Universal Episcopacy. In
making Church-Laws, the King (says the Bishop of Ely) made use of men fit to
be advised with, men who in reason are esteemed most under standing, most able
and judicious to answer in such affairs: and says Burhil, He was instructed by
Ecclesiastical Councils, or in defect of these, by Authors for their Faith and
skill in these matters most approved.

16. O. her causes to deny Synods, beside the general corruption of Religion.
Upon the premises, we see there are other causes, beside the great corruption
of Religion, in contemplation whereof Synods may or ought sometimes to be
omitted: and therefore they were not so often granted by the Christian
Emperors, as they were desired. All are Petitioners to your Grace with sighs
and tears, says Leo to Theodosius, that you would please to command a Synod
in Italy. Epist. 24.
Yet he prevailed not; yea in vain did the Right of calling Synods belong unto
the Emperors, if upon just cause they could not deny to call them. It is
certain, the Churches which were sick of the Ubiquitarian error, could not be
accounted past all hope, yet the Electors and Princes, to whom the Laws of
Germany commend the care of Religion, without a Synod by the Counsel of
wisemen expelled this disease out of their Dominions; and are praised for it,
by the same persons, who will not acknowledge the Right, on which alone that
Reformation depends. The office of a Prince, In 4. prac. loc. 5.
as Zanchius and others with him note, partly consists in this, that, until a
free Council may be had, which cannot be had at all times, He command the
dissenting parties, to use, 17. What is to be done, till 2 free Council may be
called.
not their own, but the terms of Scripture, and forbear to condemn each
other in public. This also pertains to the Right of ruling before a Synod,
and therefore without a Synod.

It does not follow hence, that the liberty of judgeing, which by Divine right
is due to Divines, is taken from them; for they may, also out of Synods,
deliver their judgment, either before the Highest Powers, or if it be
needful, before others too: and they may render the reasons of their judgment
out of the word of God.

The sum is this, Synods, we confess are the most usual help of Governing
the Churches: yet we hold, such time may fall out, that Synods may not be
profitable and convenient, much less necessary. And our greatest wonder is,
the boldness of some men, that maintain, even when the Powers take on them
the protection of the Church; 18 Synods not called without the Highest Power.
whether they will or no, Synods may lawfully and rightly be assembled. Beza
was of another mind, who has said, Synods are to be called, not without the
command and favor of the King. Junius was of another mind, who said. It Is an
unjust and dangerous attempt of the Church, to hold a general Assembly,
without his knowledge and Authority, who is set to keep order amongst men.
Lastly, of another mind were All, that have hitherto defended the Protestant
cause against the Papists.

19. Whetther the Highest power may choose the Synodmen.
Next concerning the Right and Office of the Highest before and in the Synod,
it is controverted, Whether it be lawful for the power to design the persons,
that shall come unto the Synod, or no. It is lawful, we doubt not: but to
clear the matter, let us proceed in order.

20. The Right of the Primitive Church. And the Assembling of Bishops.
After that Christ instituted the Church and the Pastoral office, it has been
lawful, by the Law of Nature; not the immutable Law, but by that which has
place until some other Provision be made; for the Church, in things concerning
the Church; or, for the Pastors, in things concerning the Pastoral office, to
make choice of them that shall go to the Synod: because, no Humane Law, no
agreement interceding, to determine the persons, there is not other way. By
this right; the Brethren of Antioch send some of their number with Paul and
Barnabas to Ferusalem. Acts 15.2.12.
Likewise, the Elders, and the Church of Ferusalem together with the Apostles,
send out of their Company chosen men to Antioch. But in all the ages following,
I find no example of election made by the Church; for to the Diocesian Synodes
assembled all the Presbyters, to the Metroplitan all the Bishops, unless any
were detein'd by great necessty. Here then is no election, but that the Bishops
seem to have taken with them to the Metropolitan Synods some Presbyters and
Deacons at their own pleasure. That greater Synods might assemble, 21. The
Emperors encyclic letters to the Metropolitans.
the Encyclic Letters of the Emperors were sent to the Metropolitans, and for
the most part the election of their fellow-Bishops was imposed on them, to
complete the number which the Emperors had prescribed. This appears by the
Letters of Theodosius and Valentinian to Cyrill, the like whereof were sent to
all the Metropolitans, as the Acts do testify. Plainly, to Cyril is the
election there committed; which election the Metropolitans made sometimes
alone, sometimes with the Provincial Synod of their Bishops. Of the suffrages
of the Church or people there is no appearance. The Metropolitans, in case any
of them could not be present in Synods themselves, sent some Bishop or
Presbyter to spply in their names, and to keep their places.

22. The Highest Power may elect Pastors for the Synod. Proved by reason, and
examples.
Albeit this were the most frequent manner of election, yet by no Law was the
Highest Power forbidden to call Synods of Pastors elected by his own
discretion. This alone is enough to prove a permission; but reason does evince
the same: if we consider the ends before spoken of, for which Synods are
assembled. For first, many Synods are had only for Counsel, but naturally it
is lawful for every one to chose his Counselors; so it is in questions of
the Law, of War, of Merchandise, and all other affairs: between which and the
Ecclesiastical, as to mere consultation, there is no dissimilitude. Synods
are also holden for the exercise of External Jurisdiction, committed to them
by the Highest Power; but this is also natural for every one to choose his
Delegate. In the Synods, that are gathered for procuring of consent, the case
is somewhat different, in these it seems very expedient, that the Election be
either by the Churches or by the Pastors, to the end, the acts of the Synod may
be more passable; for men are wont to like those things best, which are done by
those persons, whose faith and diligence themselves have chosen. This therefore
belongs not to the Right, but to the prudent Use of it; and is not perpetual;
because it may sometimes happen, that the election made by Pastors may be less
available to concord, than if it be made by the Highest Powers. Again, in a
Synod held for Counsel or Jurisdiction, because the Highest powers take not
notice of all able men, it may be best sometimes to receive them upon the
commendation of the Church or Pastors. We say then, not that the Highest Power
ought always to choose the persons, but that he always may. Our leader in
this judgment is Marsilius Patavinus; for he says, It pertains to the
Authority of a Lawgiver, to call a general Council, and to determine fit
persons for it; by determining, he means not only approbation of the persons,
but election too; and herein he is followed by the Learned French Defender of
the Protestants cause against the Trent Synod. Nor are examples wanting. The
King of Israel calls unto him what Prophets he will^ and namely Michaia at the
persuasion of Fehosophat. 1 King. 22.
The Donatists request a Synod of Constantine, to judge between them and other
African Bishops, by this Petition, We beseech you, excellent Emperor, because
you are of a just and Royal extraction, whose Father was no persecutour, and
because Gallia is not infected with this iniquity, that your piety would
command Judges for us thence, to allay the contentions here. Not the Churches,
not the Synod of Gallia, but the Emperor names the Judges. To the first Synod
of C. P. Theodosius admitted also Macedonian Bishops: who were not surely
chosen by the Churches or Bishops Catholic. That other Emperors and Kings
used the same Right is very certain. And this very thing did the Protestants
desire of the Emperor Charles the Fifth; and the other Kings; that they might
have leave to choose pious and learned men, and send them to the Synod. 23.
When the election is permitted to others, the Highest Power commands ^^^veri.
But here we must observe, when the Churches or Bishops choose men for the
Synod, whether by their Native or Dative Liberty, The Supreme Governor has an
undeniable power still over that election; For all use of Liberty, as above is
said, is subject to Command; and the virtue thereof is this, that for just
causes some turbulent men, or otherwise unfit, may be excluded from public
business.

That the time and place were proscribed by the Emperors for the Council, the
things also to be done, and the manner of doing; that Synods were translated at
their pleasure, or dissolved, both others before us, and we also have made so
plain, that I think it will be denied by none. Wherefore let us now rather see,
what Judgment in the Synod is competent to the Highest Power. 24. The H. Power
may judge in Synod.
They fancy to themselves an Adversary over whom they may get an easy
victory, who take the pains to prove, that the Bishops judged; not the
Emperors alone; for who ever did so forget himself as to deny that? but this
we affirm; The Highest Power has right to Judge together with the Pastors:
the proof whereof is needless here, because above we have made good to the H.
Power an Universal right of judging, which certainly, by the Synod cannot be
taken away. But whether it be best for the Supreme Governor to express
himself, and how far, is another question.

Let us go through every end of Synods. If a Synod be had for Declarative
judgment, 25. Whetheir it be expedient or no, in person.
that is, that the Bishops may show out of the holy Scripture, what is true,
what false; what is lawful, what unlawful; here the King, being well versed
in the Bible, cannot be deprived of that which is granted to private men, to
search the Scriptures, to try the spirits. But here must be exceeding great
Caution, lest the Majesty of one, bridle the Liberty of many. 'Twas said of
old, Casar, when will you give your Vote? if first of all, I shall have one to
comply with. Yet will it be most profitable, that the Supreme Governor not
only honor the Assembly with his presence, but also order and moderate the
actions, enquire into the grounds of every sentence, and propose objections.
Which the Emperor Constantine did in the Nicene Synod, and Charles the Great,
in that of Francford. But when the Synod, in things not determined by Divine
Law, gives Counsel to the Highest Power, what is for the Churches benefit;
here also it is better to propose the incommod^es with the commodities, than to
deliver judgment openly: according to that Rule, What should be done, debate
with many; what shall be done, determine with a few. The royal presence also,
when the Synod is held chiefly to testify the Churches Consent, is of good
effect, to curb the boldness of turbulent men: but, the Supreme Governor
shall be more assured, whether the consent be true and spontaneous, if he give
no suffrage, but he content to reserve the Epicrisis, or final determination
to himself. And this has place too, in the Synod, which by concession of
Humane Law, does exercise some Jurisdiction: the Supreme Governor may be
present, and give Sentence if he please, but it is more proper for him, that he
reserve himself entire for the Epicrisis, or Judgment after.

26. The Highest Powers present in Synods by their Deputies.
We have spoken of the Highest Power, when it self is present in the Council;
but pious Emperors could not always be so, by reason of other affairs: and
then they sent others in their name, with Commission either to judge together
with the Bishops, or only to preserve good order. For in the Synod of
Chalcedon, it is clear enough that the Senators and Judges interposed often,
and gave their Sentence in defining the very Articles of faith; but in that of
Ephesus, Candidian was not allowed by Theodosius to pass his judgment. To the
Council of Tyrus, Constantine sent only Dionysius, a man of Consular degree.
to observe all that passed; but he went beyond his Power, as Ahanasius notes;
He had all the talk, and the Bishops observed him in silence.

27. III. What is the Highest Powers right after Synod.
Now we come to that Judgment, which belongs to the Highest Power after Synod;
the Greek Fathers call it Epicrisis. This is so proper to the Highest Power,
that it must not be cast off or neglected by Him. The Epicrisis: wherein is
contained right to change, to add, to take away.
For if the Synod only give Counsel in things to be done by the Highest Power,
it is certain His judgment, to whom the Counsell's given, ought to follow,
whether it be led by certain arguments (as is necessary in the matter of Faith)
or in some sort by the Authority of other men. For (as above) some Judgment of
the doer must precede every act, that it may be right; but absolutely, and in
all things, no man can square his judgment by that of another, unless it be
such a judgment as in infallible, but the Judgment of a Synod is not such. If
some Doctrine be explained, or some Law Divine, it is not only the Right, but
the Duty of the Highest Power, to see wether the Synod walked according to the
Rule of Holy Stripture: as Constantine writes of himself to those that met in
Tyrus. For it is his part to Govern. What if some Synod, (such as many have
been, and many may be,) shall either through ignorance, or by conspiracy, or
because the greater party overswayes the better, agree upon some doctrine,
manifestly repugnant to the Catholic faith derived from the Scripturs? Suppose
the Arimin, the Seleucian, (both which were greater than the Nicene) or suppose
the second Nicene Synod; Shall the H. Power now command any thing to be done,
which the Law Divine, and his conscience instructed by that Law forbid? No man
in his right mind will say so. But if somewhat be conceived by the Synod, which
by Divine Law is not determined, but partains unto Church Government, since all
Government, whether introduced by Nature, or by Positive Law, is under that
Power which among men is Highest; it is the part of this Highest to see whether
the things conceived will be useful for the Church; for to the last agent
belongs also to give the last Judgment. Therefore have Synods submitted both
their Articles and Canons to Emperors and Kings; but with different respect;
the Articles to be examined by Sacred Writ (for the true do not refuse
examination, the false, even after Synod, deserve rejection;) the Canons to be
tried according to the Rules of prudence; and if profitable, they received the
force of Laws. Concerning the Canons are those words out of the Councils of
France; if there be any defect, let it be supplied by His prudence; if any
thing amiss, let it be corrected by His judgment. Wherefore not only the right
of approving, (as some do now) but of examining, taking away, adding,
correcting, did the ancient Bishops ascribe unto the Highest Powers. Nor indeed
can any one, with reason, be said to approve any of those things, which are not
in his Power to disapprove. He is properly said to consent, who may also
dissent, according to that in Seneca; If you would know whether I am willing,
allow me Power to be unwilling: and Aristotle, Where to do is in our chayce,
there is also, not to do. This is certain, some Canons have been disallowed; a
great part of the Chapters, which in the year 856, the Bishops set forth in
Synods, was rejected by Carolus Cal^^s: as we read in his Capitular. And
Clarolus Magnus made some addition to the Decrees of the Synod holden at
Theodons. We add, says he, this of our aunt. Lastly, where a Synod has
passed judgment by a Power derived from Humane Law, here it is much less to
be doubted, but that His judgment is reserved to the Supreme Governor. For
all Jurisdiction, as it flows from him, returns to him again. Hither I refer
that Judgment of the Ephesine Synod, whereby Nestorius was cast out of his
Patriarchship. The Synod prays the Emperor, that what was done against
Nestorius might be of force.

28. An objection answered.
One may object, that where the Supreme Governor was himself present in the
Council, there at last nothing remalned, but to confirm the acts with his
Authority. But, neither can this be granted. For when the Supreme Governor
judged among others, he Judged not as Supreme; for he might be Inferior in the
Suffrages. Wherefore his final Judgment must still remain safe unto him, I
mean his Imperative judgment, and that in the freest manner. The same is true
of the Magistrates, D. quando appell.
if they be present in any Court under their Authority.

28. The manner of giving the Epicrisis, or final judgment; And of Appeal.
But we must observe, that the Supreme Governor exercises this Imperative
Judgment, sometimes wholly by himself; sometimes partly by others, partly by
himself; Which appears by instance in Civil affairs. For Kings, unto whom
supplication is made against the sentence of the Praetonian, Prefects, or of
the chief Senate, do for the most part commit the last hearing of the Cause to
men of Law; whose sentence, unless it be suspected, they confirm; sometimes,
they command the Cause to be pleaded all again before themselves. So in causes
Ecclesiastical, it was the Custom for Emperors to commit the matter to the
examination of other Bishops, for their religion and wisdom most noted; and,
taking account of them, to confirm what in their own discretion they judged
best. And this is the cause why against former Synods, other new, and these not
greater than the former, were so often called: not because this Synod by it
self was Superior unto that; but, these men had greater credit with the
Emperors, than the former. It was but seldom, that the Emperors heard all
the Cause again themselves: as Constantine, after the Church had judged twice,
himself examined the Gause of Coecilian, and gave final Judgment in it. He
also called before him the Bishops who had met at Tyrus, to render him an
account of all their doings. Wherein he is justly defended by our Men against
the Patrons of the Roman Sea.

It is true in Sacred no less than in other matters, that an Appeal strictly
taken, which inhibites the execurion of Sentence given, may by the Civil Law
be taken away: but then there is left open another way; to implore the Hearing
of the Highest Power, by Complaint or Supplication. For if this be denied, the
King could not scatter away all evil from his throne, He could not be a
terror to all evil, which is his perpetual office: so that the old woman
said well to Philip of Macedon, If he were not at leisure to be Judge, He
should Dio.
not be at leisure to be King. Maecenas saw this of old, who shows to
Augustus, that no man (under the Highest) ought to have so much Power committed
to him, as that from him there should be no appeal.

29. The Epicrisis in parts of Religion, as well as in the whole.
One thing more must be remembered here, that the right of the H. Power, after
the Synod, to determine any thing against the Synod, cannot be contracted only
unto those Controversies, wherein as it were the whole body of Religion is in
Question. For there is the same right in the parts, as in the whole: and the
reasons before alleged give unto the H. Power a free final Judgment, in
single Questions, as well as in all together. For also in single Questions,
Synolds may err, neither ought the H. Power to yield blind obedience to them,
much less by its Authority to defend a false and hurtful doctrine; or suffer
the truth to be oppressed; nor can the wisdom of the Highest Power permit
errors to increase by little and little, and as their nature is, one beget
another, till their number be so great that they cannot be rooted out without
hazard of the Commonwealth.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Legislation about Sacred things.

1. The several acts of Authority are Legislation, Jurisdiction, and another
without special name.
HItherto we have spoken generally; now let us more nearly view the several
parts of Authority. The Act of Authority either respects all, or single
persons: that is Legislation; this, if an occasion of Suit, is Jurisdiction; if
otherwise it is called by the general name, because it wants a special. Of
this last sort, the commands are such as the Centurions: I say unto this man,
Mat. 8.9.
Go, and he goes: to another, Come, and he comes: to my servant, Do this,
and he does it: but the principal act is, the Injunction of Functions
permanent. 2. Wherein is Legislation.
In what things Legislation is, may be understood by the precedent part of our
discourse; for almost all things belonging to Authority we have explained by
examples of Legislation as the more noble. Thence it appears, that a Law is
made either of the things defined by Law Divine, or of those that are left
undefined. The Laws that are made, either respect the whole body of Religion,
or the parts of it.

3. It belongs to the Highest Power, about the whole Body of Public Religion.
In nothing more shines forth the virtue of Supreme Authority, than in this,
That it is in the power and choice thereof what Religion shall be publicly
exercised. This, all that have written Politics put in the chiefest place,
among the Rights of Majesty; and experience proves the same. For if you
enquire, Why in England under Queen Mary the Roman Religion was set up, but
under Queen Elisabeth the Evangelicall; the nearest cause cannot be rendered,
but from the will and pleasure of the Queens; or (as some will have it) of the
Queens and Parliament. Enquire, why one Religion is in Spain, another in
Denmark, another Sweden; you must have recourse to the Supreme Governors will.

4. Answer to the Objection of the change of Religion.
But many do object, If that be so, the State of Religion will be very
unconstant, especially where one is Ruler over all; for upon change of the
Kings mind, Religion also will be changed. It Is true indeed, that they say: but
that danger is in all other things as well as Sacred. The work will be like the
workman; and the Law be as the King. Yet no man's right is to be denied him,
for the danger of abusing it: for then no man's right shall be safe. Besides,
although the Highest Power should transfer that right upon another (which we
have showed he may not) the same danger would still remain; for the right
would but pass from men to men: and every man may be deceived. Here then, our
only comfort lies in the Divine providence. Indeed the hearts of all men God
has in his power, but, Pro. 25.1.
The Kings heart is in the Lords hand, after an especial manner. God does his
work, both by good and evil Kings. Sometimes a calm, sometimes a storm is
for the Church more useful. If the Governor be pious, if a diligent reader of
the Scriptures, if assiduous in prayer, if Reverent to the Catholic Church, if
ready to hear wife Counsels, by him will the truth be much advanced. But if he
be of a perverse or corrupt judgment, it will be more hurtful to himself than
to the Church; for he must expect a heavy judgment from the King thereof, who
will not suffer his Church to be unrevenged. The Church in the mean while,
cease not to be the Church; yea, if the King rage against it, it will gather
strength and inciease under persecution.

5. Religion must not be brought in by the force of subjects.
Certainly, 'twas never lawful for Subjects to gain by force the public
exercise of their Religion: the ancient Christians when they were at strongest,
when they had Senators and Presidents very many of their mind, never took such
right unto themselves. It Is the Office of the Highest Power alone publicly to
authorize the true Religion, and to remove the false. To remove Idols out of
private places belongs to the Lord of the place; and upon his neglect, to the
King as the Lord general: but to remove them out of the public place is the
right of the Highest Power, and to whomsoever it shall delegate that office.
Deuteronomy. 7.5.
And thus is that Law of Deuteronomy. to be interpreted; You shall destroy their
altars, and break down their statues, and cut down their groves, and burn
their graven images with fire: The command must first be given by the Highest
Power, and then must execution be done readily by the Subjects: Do thus says
Austin upon the place, when you have received Commission for it. The Pagan
Temples in the Roman Empire were not shut up, before that Law of Constantius,
extant in both the Codes. If any one has broken Idols and there been slain,
the Elibertine Council forbids him to be received among the Martyrs, because
it is not written in the Gospel, nor is any such thing found done by the
Apostles.

6. False and Schismatic worship, by the Highest Power, sometimes prohibited
and punished.
But the Highest Power has not only forbidden Idolatrous Assemblies, but those
too, which gave themselves to any evil superstition, or error publicly
pernicious, or were obstinate breakers of the Churches peace. Christian
Emperors have excluded Heretics and Schismacks from all access to honors;
have deprived them of the right to obtain any thing by Will; have given away
their Churches to the Catholics. All which, Austin at large defends against
the Donatists. For those p^^shments of such inexcusable Delinquents in
Religion, which left them time of repentance, the ancient Church approved. But
the pain of Death was so much against the gentleness of the old Religion,
that Idacius and Ithacius were condemned by the Bishops of Gallia, for being
Authors, that certain Priscillianists should be confuted with the sword: and
in the East a whole Synod was condemned, which had consented to the burning of
Bogomilus.

7. Sometimes dissembled and regulated.
Yet sometimes also false Religions have gone unpunisht under pious Emperors.
The Jews, whilst they held from the contempt of the Christian Law, and from
drawing over Christians to their Sect, had always free use of their Religion.
Neither were the Pagan rites prohibited by Constantine at the beginning of his
conversion, but he advanced Pagans to the Consulship, as Prudentius notes to
Symathus. So Jovinian and Valentinian, Princes worthy of all praise, terrified
not them with threathing edicts, that violated the verity and unity of the
Christian Law. And which is more to be noted, the Emperors did not only permit
impunity to disagreeing sects, but often made Laws to order their Assemblies.
Constantine and following Emp^^urs grant to the chief Rulers of the Jewish
Synagogues the same Rights with Christian Bishops. So Theodosius forbids any to
be received into their Sect against the will of their Primates; and forbidding
them to be received into their Assemblies, that denied the Resurrection and
Judgment, or would not acknowledge the Angels to be Gods creature, He says he
had reformed the Jewish Nation. So the Proconsuls took away the Churches of the
Donatists from the Maximianists, because they were proved to have been
condemned in a Council of the Donatists.

8. Legislation in the parts of Religion.
Moreover, in the true Church, the Right. and Office of the Highest Powers is
not only conversant about the whole body of Religion, but the single parts, as
reason and examples do evince. Reason, because it cannot be otherwise, but He
that has right upon the whole, has right upon the parts. Examples are at
hand: Ezechias, that he might suppress the adorers superstition, took away the
Serpent set up by Moses; and by the same right, against the Decrees of the
second Nicene Synod, Charles the Great forbad the adoration of Images. Honorius
and Arcadius repressed, by their Edict, Pelagius and Calestius, the authors of
a false opinion: and so of late, some of the German Princes have purged their
Churches (otherwise well ordered) of the Ubiquitarian Error. 9. Suppeslion of
unprofitable questions, So^^m. 1.7. c. 12 (...) cleric. D. de sum. ^^init. And
of words not found in So pure, N^^^on


For prevention of Schism, Constantine cut off needless Questions: an example
worthy to be imitated by our Rulers; for it is most true which Sisinius said to
Theodosius, By Disputations about Religion, contentions only are inflamed. The
Emperor Andronicus, of excellent knowledge in Divinity, threatened the Bishops
disputing subtly upon, The Father is greater than I: that unless they would
abstain from such dangerous discourse, he would throw them into the river. Even
true words, but not extant in the Bible, were for a time forbidden to be used.
So Heraclius the Emperor prohibited both the single and the double Energy to
be ascribed to Christ; that this is not to be disliked, De side.
we have the authority of St. Basil for us, who says, Many pious men abstained
from the words Trinity, and Homousion, and that also the word Unbegotten is not
to be used of the Father, because these words are not in Scripture. And
Meletius of Antioch for a time abstained from questions about Doctrine, only
delivering what pertained to emendation of manners, esteeming this care above
the other. It is pertinent here, which Plato has in his Laws, That no man
should publish any writing, unless approved first by Judges appointed for the
purpose.

10. The Regulating of Church men's conversation.
This is also an especial work of Laws, to compose the manners of the Clergy.
The blind and the lame David excludes from the Temple: Ezechias and Josias
command the Priests to be purified. Justinian does not allow the Bishops to
wander up and down, Novel. b.c. 11.
to play at Dice, to be spectators at Plays. And Platina exclames very justly,
O King Lewis, In Greg. 4.
I would you lived in our times! Your most holy orders, your Censure is now
very necessary for the Church.

11. Laws about things undetermined by Divine Law; And that, beside the Canons.
To proceed; That the Powers also used their Authority in defining things which
the Divine Law has left undefined, is most plain. The King of Ninive proclaimed
a Fast; David commands the Ark to be transported; Solomon orders all things for
the ornament of the Temple, and after him Josias: who also takes care, that the
Treasure destined for Sacred uses be not alienated. Of this kind is the
greatest part of Constitutions which appear in Theodosius and Justinian's ^ode,
and in the Novels, and in the French Capitulars: as, of the age of Bishops,
Presbyters, Deaconesses, of the immunity and judgments of the Clergymen, and
insinite other things, which were tedious to number, That in those Laws are
Constituted many things that are not in the Canons, both the Reading shows,
and Whitaker confesses. Therefore also in the Trent Synod, the King of France
doubted not to declare by his Orators, That the most Christian Kings (so it is
in the Acts) have made many Edicts in matters of Religion, after the Example of
Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, lentinian, Justinian, and other Christian
Emperors; That they have made many Ecclesiastical Laws, and such as the
ancient Popes not only were not displeased with, but some received into their
Decrees; and esteemed the chief authors of them, Charles the Great, and Lewis
the Ninth most Christian Kings, worthy the name of Saints; That the Prelates of
France, and the whole Order Ecclesiastical, according to the Prescript of
those Laws, have piously and Christianly ruled and governed the Church of
France.

12. Yet the Canons are of use, in the making of Laws.
In the mean time it is most true, that the Emperors for the most part in
making laws had respect unto the Canons, old, or new: whence is that saying,
The Laws disdain not to imitate the Sacred Canons; For, in things not defined
by Divine Law, the Canons are useful to the Lawgiver two ways. They do both
contain the Counseis of wise men, and make the Law more gracious in the
subjects eye. This, as it is not necessary to the right making of a Law; so, if
it may be obtained, is very profitable. Justinian's Novel is Extant, wherein he
gives the force of Laws to the Ecclesiastical Canons, set forth, or confirmed
by the four Synods, the Nicene, the first of Constantinople, the first of
Ephesus, and that of Chalcedon. Where by the word Confirmed, we must understand
the Canons of the old Provincial Councils, which being generally received,
were therefore contained in the Code of the Catholic Canons.

13. No Legislative Power belongs to the Church by Divine Right.
Now to that which some Enquire, whether the Church has any Legislative Power,
the Answer may be given out of our former Treatise. By Divine Law it has none.
Before the Christian Emperors, the Decrees of Synods, for the order, or the
ornament of the Church, are not called Laws but Canons, and they have either
the force of Counsel only, as in those things that rather concern single
persons, than the whole Church; or else they bind, by way of Covenant, the
willing, and the unwilling being the fewer, by necessity of determination, and
therefore by the Law of Nature, 14. Yet it may be granted by the Law Positive;
cumulatively, n^t^rivatively; and not without subordination and dependence.
not by any humane Authority.

This notwithstanding, some Legislative Power may be granted by Humane Law, to
Churches, Pastors, Presbyters, or Synods. For if to other Companies and
Colleges, whose usefulness is not to be compared with the Church, that Power
(as we have said above) may be granted by the Supreme Governor; why not also
to the Church, especially when no Divine Law is against it. But two things must
be here observed. First, this Legislation granted, does not at all diminish the
right of the H. Power, ('it is granted Cumulatively, as the Schools speak, not
Privatively:) for the H. Power, though it may communicate to another the right
of making Laws general or special, yet can it not abdicate the same right
from it self. Next, the Laws made by any such Company, may, if there be
cause, be nulled and corrected by the H. Power. The reason is, two Lawgivers,
both highest, cannot be in one Commonwealth: and therefore the Inferior must
obey the Superior. Hence it is, that for the most part, in the constitutions
of Synods, we see the assent of the Highest Power expressed in these words:
Come. Tolet. 6. can. etc.
At the command of the King; By the Decrce of the most glorious Prince, the
Synod has Constituted or Decreed.

15. How Kings have confessed themselves bound by Canons.
It may be objected here, That Kings sometimes affirm they are bound by the
Canons, and forbid to obey their Edicts contrary thereto. But this is of the
same sense, as when they profess to live by their own Laws, and forbid their
Rescripts if they are against the Laws, to be observed. For such professions
take not away their Right, but declare their will: As a clause added in a
former Testament, derogating from the later, makes the later of no value; not
because the Testator might not make a later Testament, but because what is
written in it is supposed not approved by his free and perfect Judgment. And
hence it is, that if there be a special derogation from the derogating clause,
as the later Testament is of value; so is the later Constitution too.

16. The Canons dispensed with by Emperors. 1. Examples hereof, even in the
Apostolical.
But that Canons have been nulled and amended by Emperors and Kings, and that
Synods ascribed that Power to them was proved sufficiently, when we treated of
Synods. Yea, (which is more) even those Canons, which are found in the Apostles
writings were not perpetually observed. The reason is, because they were
supposed to contain not so much an exposition of Divine Law, as Counsel
accommodated to those times. 1 Timothy 3.6.
Such is the Canon to Timothy, That a Neophite be not made a Bishop; which was
renewed in the Synod of Laodicea. Yet in the Election of Nectarius this Canon
was laid by, by Theodosius; and by Valentinian, in the Election of Ambrose. And
such is that Canon, 1 Timothy 5.9.
That a Widow under sixty be not chosen for a Deaconesse: which Theodosius also
constituted by a Law. Yet Justinian permitted one of forty to be chosen. 17.
Divine Laws also moderat^d by equity. Let ^^.7.10 and 22.
It Is not to be forgotten here, that the Hebrew Kings excepted some actions
from the Divine Law it self. There was a Law, That no unclean person should
eat the Passover. Yet Ezechius, having poured forth his prayers to God;
granted an Indulgence to the unclean to cat thereof. Again, the Law was, that
the Beasts should be slain by the Priests: and yet twice under Ezechias the
Levites, by reason of the want of Priests, were admitted to this office. Not
that the Kings loosed any one from the bond of Divine Law (for that can no man
do) but that according to equity, the best Interpreter both of Divine and
Humane Law, they declared the Law Divine, in such a Constitution of affairs,
to lose its obligation, according to the mind of God himself: For such a
Declaration, as in private actions, and not capable of delay, it is wont to be
made by private men, (So David and his companions interpreted the Law, which
permits the Priests only to eat of the Shewbread, to have no binding force in
the case of extreme hunger) so in public actions, or in private also that may
be delayed, it is to be made by the Highest Power the Defender and Guardian of
Divine Law, according to the counsel of wise and godly men. And hither, for
conclusion, I refer, that in the time of the Macchees, it was enacted that it
should be lawful to give battle to the Enemy on the Sabbath day.

CHAP. IX.
Of Jurisdiction about Sacred things.

1. Jutisdiction about Sacred things belongs to the Highest Power.
TO Legislation, Jurisdiction is coherent, with so near a tie, that in the
highest degree one cannot be without the other. Wherefore if the Supreme
Legislation about Sacredthings, under God, agrees to the Sovereign Power; it
follows, that the Jurisdiction also agrees unto it. Jurisdiction is partly
Civil, partly Criminal. 'Twas a point of Civil Jurisdiction, that the
Episcopal Sea of Antioch was abjudged and taken away from Paulus Samosatenus.
The Criminal, from the chief part of it is called the Sword; He bears not
the Sword in vain, but is an avenger upon all that do evil: therefore upon
them too, that do evil in matters of Religlon. 2. The effects of it are
declared.
Of this sort was the command of Nebuchodonosor the King, that they should be
torn in pieces, who were contumelious against the true God; and that of Josias,
whereby Idolaters were put to Death. Relegation also belongs to Jurisdiction. So
Solomon confined Abiathar the Priest; without any Council, as the Bishop of Ely
well notes; it was indeed for treason, but he had as good Right to punish him, if
the offense had been against the Divine Laws. So the Christian Emperors
banished Arius, Nestorius, and other Heretics. Esdras and his associates
received Jurisdiction from Artaxerxes; whereby they punished the obstinate
Jews with the publication of their goods, and ejection out of the public
Society. The very same punishment in the Gospel is called Casting out of the
Synagogue. For as Esdras had all kind of Jurisdiction by the grant of the
Persian King: so by the permission of the people of Rome, and of the Emperors
afterward, the Synedry of the Jews retained this part of it, with the power of
binding and scourging. We learn out of the Hebrew masters, that there were
three degrees of casting out of the Synagogue: by the first, Nidui, the party
was commanded to stand off in the Synagogue in a meaner place: by the second,
Cherem, He was not permitted to appear in the Synagogue, nor any other suffered
to make use of him, nor allow him any thing, but to sustain his life in a most
slender manner: the third degree, in Chaldee Scammatha, was the proper
punishment of him, who by the Law of Moses had deserved death, but, the Power
of capital Judgment being taken away, could not be put to death: his touch
and commerce all men shunned. Some such thing seems that to be in John's
Epistle, casting out of the Church, which Diotrephes did, that loved
preeminence, Ep. 3. v. 10
and assumed unto himself Dominion.

It Is also a point of Jurisdiction to abdicate any one from the Priests Office,
which Josias did to the Schismatic Priests, only allowing them where with to
live. So Theodosius and other Emperors made decrees about the deposition or
restitution of Bishops. Constantine threatens the contumacious Bishops, and
tells them they should be ruled, by the virtue of Gods servant, that is, says
he, my self. For we must note, to the right of the sword it belongs, not only
to eject out of that Office, which flows from the Empire of the Highest Power,
but from all other Offices of what kind soever.

3. Jurisdiction properly so called belongs not naturally to the Pastors.
That Jurisdiction about Sacred things, being a part of Empire largely taken,
agrees to the Highest Powers, is very plain. Let us see, whether any
Jurisdiction, Humane Law being set apart, agrees to the Ministers of holy
things: and afterward, we will consider what is given to them by Humane Law.
Naturally, the Priests have no Jurisdiction, that is, no Coactive or Imperative
Judgment: because their whole Function includes no such thing, in the nature
thereof. 4. Yet by Law Positive it belongd to them in some Nations.
That Jurisdiction which the Priests had in the Primitive State of the Natural
Law, they had as Magistrates, not as Priests; for even when the Priesthood was
not joynd with the Highest Power, seldom were the Priests without some power.
Hence is Cohen a name common both to Priests and Magistrates; and among many
Nations the Custom was the same. For the Druids among the Gauls were the most
noble of that Nation; and among the Cappadocians, as Strabo, himself a
Cappadocian, tells us, the Sacerdotall dignity was next to the Regal, and Kings
and Priests were for the most part of the same family. Tacitus writes, that the
German Priests of old, had alone the Power to punish; and among the Romans,
that which Lentulus said in the Senate, Cic. l. 4. ad Attic.
The Priefts are judges of Religion, signifies not only the judgment of skill,
but of power. But the Mosaicall Law plainly to the Priests, and principally to
the High Priest, as it gave eminent dignity, so Jurisdiction too, yet under the
Highest Power, whether a King or Council. And it is manifest, where neither a
King was constituted, nor a Judge, there the High Priest was Prince, as being
the most eminent among all, whether Private men or Magistrates. Examples
whereof are Heli, and afterward the Asmoneans. That among the Jews the
Sacerdotall Nobility was of prime note, both Josephus and Philo observe. That
the Priests had Magistracy, even this alone may prove, that he is to dye who
obeyed not the command of the Priest. De^^. 17.8.
In which Law the High Priest is equalled to the Highest Judge. Nor did they
only give judgment in Sacred but in Civil affairs, being the best
interpreters of the whole Law, at that time the wisdom in Divine and Humane
Law being not divided. L. 3. devit. Mos.
Whence also, Philo, where he brings in Moses upon the Tribunal, says, 5.
Pastoral acts of Divine Right, which seem to come near to Jurisdiction, and
yet are distinct from it.
that the Priests sat with him on the Bench. But in the Evangelicall Law,
Christ having not given unto Pastors any Dominion or Command, neither has he
given them any Jurisdiction, that is, coercive Judicature. Yet let us see, what
actions there are, either of Pastors, or of the Church if self, which have any
show of Jurisdiction, and therefore for their likeness may come under that
name. Those actions we do here consider, which owe nothing to Humane Law, or
to the will of the Highest Power. 6. The Apostolical rod. 1 Cor 4.21
To Jurisdiction does seem to pertain that Rod, where with Paul threatens
the Corinthians; whereby is meant, as the Apostle explains himself, 2 Cor.
13.10.
to use sharpness, to revenge all unrighteousness, not to spare; all which
are expressions of a certain miraculous virtue of imposing punishment.
10.6.13.2.
Thus Ananias and Saphira fell down dead, Acts 4.13.
Elymas was smitten with blindness, 1 Timothy 1.20. 1 Cor. 5.
Hymeneus and Alexander, and the incestuous Corinthian were delivered to Satan.
To deliver to Satan, was plainly a point of miraculous Power, which inflicted
torment on the body, such as Saul in former time felt after his departure from
God, as Chrysostom and other Fathers interpret. This is certain, when the
earthly Powers used not the Kight of punishing, God had given them, to purge
and defend the Church; what was wanting in Humane aid, God himself supplied by
Divine assistance. But, as Manna ceased, after the people were brought into the
promised Land; so, after the Emperors took on them the Patronage of the
Church, whose Office was to punish them that troubled the Church without or
within, the forenamed Divine punishments expired. To speak to the purpose, that
Divine execution of revenge was properly the Jurisdiction of God not of men,
because the whole work was Gods, not the Apostles. God, that he might give
testimony to the truth of the Gospel Preached, as at the Apostles prayers, or
presence, and touch, he healed diseases, and cast forth Devils: so, at their
imprecation, commanded men to be vexed with diseases, or seized on by Devils.
Nor did Paul more in delivering men to Satan, than did Peter and John in curing
the lame man, who say, Acts 3.12.
they did nothing by their own Power, and transcribe the whole effect to God.
At the Churches prayers also did God often show the like signs of his
displeasure; 1 Cor. 5.2.
therefore are the Corinthians blamed, that they mourned not, to the end the
incestuous person might be taken away from among them. And to the same effect
is that wish, not command, of the Apostle, to the Gal. Gal. 5.12.
Would they were cut off, that trouble you.

7. The use of the Keys.
Now, in the perpetual Office of the Pastors, some resemblance of Jurisdiction
has the use of the Keys. So, by Christ himself is called, that application of
the Gospel-threats and promises, which is made to particular men. Whereunto
Preaching has the same proportion, as Legislation to Jurisdiction; wherefore
by the same figure is the use of the Keys called Jurisdiction, as the Preaching
of the Gospel Legislation. It has been showed before, that Christ, as alone he
gives Law to souls, so alone he passes sentence on them, not only in the end
of the world by the last judgment, but in the mean time also by retaining or
remitting sins. He alone, says Ambrose, remits durosins, who alone has dyed
for our sins. And Jerome says, As the Priest makes the leprous clean or
unclean, so the Bishop or Presbyter binds or looses. The same Father shows,
where he, that uses the Key, erres either in fact or Law, there the Key is of
none effect. It Is otherwise in Jurisdiction, for there, what the Judge erring
has pronounced, stands, by reason of his Authority that gives sentence, and
passes into a judged case. As then, the Crier does not give the sentence, that
he declares either rightly or amiss; so the Pastor, in that use of the Keys,
cannot properly be said to exercise Jurisdiction.

8. Prescription of the works of penance, by way of direction or persuasion.
To the use of the Keys coheres the prescription of works of penance; which if
it be general, as that of the Baptist to the Jews, Bring forth fruits meet for
repentance; and that of Daniel to the King, Break off thy sins by mercy: or if
special, as the enjoining restitution, and open detestation of an open
offense; it pertains to the annuntiation of the Law, not to Jurisdiction. But
if that be specally prescribed, which the Divine Law has not specially
defined, this belongs not to Jurisdiction, but ought to be referred to Counsel,
by which name it is very often called by the ancient writers. Wherefore, as
Philosophers, Physicians, Lawyers, and friends also giving Counsel, do not
properly pronounce sentence, although often times the Counsel is such as cannot,
without great fault, be rejected: so neither does the Pastor pronounce
senrence, or use Jurisdiction when he affords advice wholesome for the soul.

9. Nonexhibition of Sacraments.
Moreover, it is annexed to the use of the Keys (which also has some
appearance of Jurisdiction) not to exhibit unto certain persons the seals of
Divine grace. But, as he that Baptizeth, or gives the Eucharist (as the old
manner was) into the mouth or hand of the receiver, exercises not
Jurisdiction, but only a Ministerial act: so likewise, he that abstains from
the same actions. Nor is any difference here between visible and vocal signs.
By what right therefore a Pastor declares in words to a man openly wicked, that
he is an Alien from the grace of God; by the same right he forbears to exhibit
Bapusme to him, it being a sign of the Remission of sins; or if he be Baptized.
the Eucharist, it being a sign of Communion with Christ. For the sign is not
to be applied to him, to whom the thing signified belongs not, nor is a Pearl
to be cast to Swine, but (as in the Churches was wont to be proclaimed by the
Deacon) Holy things are for holy persons. Yea, it is not only against verity,
but against charity too, to make him partaker of the Holy Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11.29.
that discerns not the Lord, body; for he eats and drinks damnation to
himself; Here then, seeing the Pastor only suspends his own act, not exercises
any right of Domiuion over the acts of other men, it appears, these things
perteine to the use of liberty, not the exercise of Jurisdiction. The like in
some proportion we observe in a Physician, that attending his Hydropic
patient, will not give him water when he calls for it, because it is hurtful:
or, in a grave man, that will not vouchsafe a debauched man the honor of
Salutation: and in those, that avoid the company of men infected with Leprosy,
or other contagious disease.

10. The Churches acts of Divine right, which seem to come near Jurisdiction,
but yet are distinguished ^om it. Separation. Epist. 68. Jo. 10. Romans 16.17.
We have looked upon the actions proper unto Pastors; let us come to them,
which belong unto the Church, or are common to the Pastor with the Church.
First then, the people (that we may speak with Cyprian) in obedience to the
Precepts of our Lord, ought to separate themselves from a sinful Pastor. For
command is given to every one particularly, and to all in general, to take
heed of false Prophets, to sly from a strange shepherd, to avoid them that
cause divisions and offenses comrary to the doctrine. Secondly, the faith full
are commanded to decline their familiar conversation, who, being named
brethren, are Whormongers, Idolaters, Railers, Ti^. 3.2 These. 3.6.14. 2 Timothy
3.6. 1 Cor. 5.9.13 1 Timothy 6.6.12.
Drunkards Greedy, Heretics, making a gain of godliness, or otherwise
behaving themselves inordinately, against the Institution of Christ, Withdraw
your selves from such, be not mingled with them, turn away from them, eat not
with them, says the Apostle Paul in sundry places. For such men are (as the
Apostle Jude speaks) spots in the love feasts of Christians. Wherefore when the
Scripture makes use of these words, it is manifest, no act is signified greater
than a private one; for what is the Church here bid to do, but what a Disciple
does, when he deserts an evil Doctor; or honest men do, when they renounce
the friendship or society of their Companions fallen into wickedness? The
words, that afterward came into use, Deposition of the Pastor, and
Excommunication of the Brethren, seem to come nearer to the nature of Command;
but words are to be measured by the matter, not matter by the words. A Church
is said to depose the Pastor, when it cease to use his Pastorship; to
Excommunicate a brother, when it withdrawes it self from his Communion; in both
cases, it uses its own right, takes away no right from another; and although
it does not that without judgment, (whence also the faithful are said to
judge those that are within) it exercises no Jurisdiction properly so called,
1 Cor. 5.12.
for Jurisdiction is of a Superior over the Inferior, but Judgment is often
among equals; as in that place, Mat. 7.1.11. Canonical acts, superadded to the
acts of Divine right, and distinct from; them.
Judge not, that ye be not judged.

Having weighed what is of Divine right, let us now see whit has been added,
either Canonical or Legal. This was Canonical, and sprung from the Pastors
Counsel, and the Churches consent, that inquisition began to be made into
actions also not manifest; and that such as abstained not from their sin, were
not admitted to the Holy Communion, but after a certain space of time; for it
was not unlawful to do otherwise, but this way was more expedient both for
the lapsed and for others. For the lapsed, that they might the more detest
their sin; for others, that the example might deter them from the like
offense. Hence it was, that persons guilty of some grievous crime, first
bewailed their fault for a while without the Temple, and after by several
steps were admitted to the Prayers of the faithful, and last of all to the
Sacred Mysteries. With the like severity did the Essens of old chastise the
offenses of their order, as Josephus relates; and at this day the Jews, being
but merely private men, do enjoin penalties to the followers of their sect,
that are delinquents. He that has killed a man, standing out of doors
proclames himself a manslayer. To others are appointed abstinence, stripes,
and exile also; for what is wanting to the Power of the Rulers, is supplied by
the reverence of those that obey.

To return to the Christian discipline: that the Institutes thereof were never
reckoned as Laws Divine, appears by this, because it is not in the power of man
to give a Dispensation or Indulgence then; but it has been always in the
power of Bishops, Cone. An cyr. Can. 2. and 5.
with respect had to the life of the Penitents, either to prolong or shorten
the time of their penance. Yea, and generally men in danger of death were
received to Communion; Which the Nicene Synod calls an ancient and Canonical
Law: which agrees also with the custom of the Essences in Josephus. And among
those, that by Divine Law are forbidden to be partakers of holy things, to wit,
the impenitent, some are by the Canons kept only from the Communion of their
own Province; others, the Clergies Communion being interdicted them, are
admitted to the Communion of Laics; and for the same crime a Layman is
Excommunicated, a Clerk put out of office. Besides, Austin teaches that.
Excommunication must be forborne, if the contagion of sin has invaded and
o'respread the multitude. Which exception were not to be admitted, were
Excommunication grounded only on Divine Law. It appears therefore, many things
were added out of Humane consent, which, as long as they were destitute of
Imperial Authority, had not only no force of compelling, but, saving by
consent, obliged no man: unless perhaps by that Natural Law, which comman^s
offenses to be avoided. In the same manner, as the Canons themselves, did the
Judgments given according to the Canons, oblige every one; for, as to the
debate of meaner businesses, the Laics were appointed by Paul the Apostle's
counsel, for composing of differences: so, in the more weighty affairs, the
Clergy were the Judges; unto which judgments, pertains that admonition,
proceeding from natural equity: Against an Elder (that is, 1 Timothy 5.19.
a man of approved faith) an accusation is not to berecerved without two or
three witnesses.

12. Jurisdiction granted to Pastors by Positive Law.
But after the Emperors embraced Christianisme, then at length to Pastors, as
men that performed a public office, was some part of Jurisdiction given. This
was threefold, by ordinary Law, by consent of parties, by delegation. By
ordinary Law, the Bishops were allowed to judge of things pertaining to
Religion. The first that seems to have made this Constitution was Valentinian
the first, whose rescript Ambrose cites. L. 5. Ep. 32
Other Emperors did the like. Justinian by his Constitution exempts
Ecclesiastical affairs from the Cognizance of the Civil Judges, Nov. 89.
and leaves them to the Bishops. In other causes, both Clearks and Laics
pleaded not before the Bishops, but by their own consent. Which Jurisdiction by
consent, the Bishops received from Constantine, with so full a Right, that the
Cause which the Bishops had once decided, should be carried on no further; that
is, there should be no appeal from the Bishops sentence. Afterward, by the
Synod of Chalcedon, Cap. 9.
it was made unlawful for Clerks against Clerks to run forth to the Secular
Tribunal, but first the action was to be examined before him, whom by the
advice of the Bishops the parties should have chosen. And yet, if the Clerks
did otherwise, the secular Judge wanted not Jurisdiction, but the Clerks were
liable to the penalties of the Canon. First of all the Emperors, Justinian
circumscribed the rights of the Secular Judges, and commanded, that Clergymen,
whether by Lay or Clergy, in Civil Causes, should only be sued before the
Bishop; yet so, that the Bishop might remit the difficult Controversies to the
Civil Judges: and he might also appeal to the Civil Judge, that would not
rest in the judgment of the Bishop. But the punishmen of the Clergy for Crimes
not merely Ecclesiastical, at that time, and long after, remained in the hand
of the Civil Judges. That which we have said of the nonappeal from the
Sentence of the Bishop chosen Judge by consent of parties, the same, Arcadius
also, Honorius, I. 1. Cod. de sent. pr. pr. l a procon. C. Th. de appel.
and Theodosius do show in the Epistle to Theodorus Manlius Praetorian
Prefect: Let the Bishops sentence be firm for all, that have cho^en to be
heard by Priests; and we command the same reverence to be given to their
judgment, which must be given to yours, from whom it is not lawful to appeal;
For from the Pratorian Prafects was no appeal, but if any one said he was
oppressed, 'twas lawful for him to Petition the Emperor. Whence the
Praetorian Praefects are said to Judge in the Sacred place, that is, the
Imperial; which may be as rightly said of Bishops judging by consent of
Parties. The same right is attributed to the Patriarks, to whose cognizance the
causes Ecclesiastical were deferred, which with Inferior Bishops could find
no end. Against the Sentence of these Prelates (says Justinian speaking of the
Patriarks) there is no place for an Appeal, Sancimus, Cod. Epill. Cand.
by the Constitution of our Ancestors. The third kind of Jurisdiction we have
called that which arises from delegation, whether of the Highest, or the
Inferior Power; in this kind of Causes, was always granted an Appeal unto
the Emperor, if Judgment were given by the Emperors command; or to the
Judge, whosoever he was, if by the Judges Precept. In the name of Jurisdiction,
we comprehed the right of citing Witnesses, of imposing on them an Oath, and
binding the party overcome by Sentence, unless Appeal were made; upon whom
also execution was done, not truly by the hand of the Bishop (that was not
becoming) but by the hand of the Civil Judge. Hence was the Jurisdiction
properly called Audience, because the Judge himself executed not the Sentence.

13. The efficacy of his Jurisdiction.
Wherefore, above that, which the Pastors and the Church had by Divine right,
and by the mere Canons, much was added by Humane Law, and the grant of the
Highest Powers. The people now, had not only right to avoid an unfaithful
Pastor, but such a Pastor by virtue of a Sentence pronounced against him, lost
his Pastoral right, and whatsoever he ascribed to it: and, if he attempted any
thing against the Sentence, was punished with relegation. So the Pastor now, had
not only right to deny the Sacraments, and every one to deny familiarity, to
the brother of an irregular life, but it was also unlawful for him to approach
unto the Church.

14. The Jews had the like granted them.
Nor ought we to wonder, this Right, by Christian Emperors, was given to
Christian Pastors, when the same indulged thus much to the Jews, that none
should be admitted into their Sect, nor be reconciled to it, without consent of
their Primates. L. generaliter. ff. de dicurr.
And so the Pagan Emperors of old, as Ulpian says, Imposed such Commands upon
the Jews, which might not offend their Superstition; but the Christian
Emperors gave them this farther privilege, that the Masters of their
Synagogues, and other Presidents of their Law, were free from personal and
civil offices: and if two Jews, by agreement, referred their Controversies to
the Jews, the Judges should execute their Sentence. So much favor did the
Christian Emperors bestow upon the Jews, for the beginning Truth had among
them, and for hope of their future Conversion; as the ancient Fathers love to
speak.

15. The accessories of Excommunication.
This is also to be noted, Besides that relegation from the Society of the
faithful, other incommodities were annexed to Excommunication, to the end, the
offenders might be the sooner brought unto repentance. And that this was no new
thing, but of most ancient Custom, deduced even from the beginning of the
world, or the reparation of it after the Flood, the perpetual use of almost
all Nations is an argument of no small moment. Memorable is that place of
Caesar concerning the Druids among the ancient Galls; L. 6. de Bell. Gall.
If any private person, or public, stand not to their Decrees, they forbid him
their Sacrifices. This is among them the most grievous punishment. They that
are under this interdict, are accounted in the number of impious and wicked
persons: all men refuse their company, come not near them, nor discourse with
them, lest the contagion hurt them, They receive no advantage by the Laws of
the Kingdom, nor are capable of any honor in it. At this day in some places
Excommunicate persons are interdicted the use of Common Pastures; in other
places, a mulct is set upon their heads; therefore does Luther justly call the
greater Excommunication a Politic punishment. All this Jurisdiction or
Imperative Cognizance, 16. All Pastoral Junisdiction properly so called flows
from the H., Power.
Court and audience is derived from the Highest Power. This was the meaning of
the King of Britain, in that Law, All Authority of keeping Court, and all
Jurisdiction as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, flows from the Regal Power,
as from the Supreme head. And the Politia Anglicana speaks thus unto King
James; The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is plainly the Kings; a prime,
principal, and individual part of your Crown and Dignity. The Ecclesiastical
Laws are the Kings Laws, nor do they arise from any other fountain, but the
King, nor are they preserved by any other Power but his. From the Royal Power,
all Ecclesiastical. Jurisdiction streams, by the Archbishops and Bishops to
the Judges Ecclesiastical. Which is also the Bishop of Ely his meaning, when
he says, The Judgments of the Church receive external Authority from the
Emperor.

17. How far those Pastoral acts may be used upon the Supreme Governor. Of the
use of the Keys.
Having spoken of the acts, competent to the Churches and their Pastors, either
by Divine or Humane right, the Design of our Treatise carries us on to this
consideration; what acts, and how far they may be exercised about him, who is
endued with Sovereignty. The naked use of the Keys, with that which adheres
unto it by Divine right, has place, no less about the King, than about the
least of the people: yea, is so much more necessary about Him, by how more
there is in his sin, danger of contagion. Miserable is that Prince, from whom
the Truth is concealed: and well did Valentinian, to exhort Ambrose, That he
should proceed, according to the Divine Law, to cure the souls infirmities.
Nevertheless, 18. Under which pretense, cannot be excused seditious Sermons,
Which are refelled by Scripture, and the objections answered.
they are injurious to the Gospel, who under the name of the Keys, cover
their popular declamations, wherein they openly traduce the actions of the
Highest Powers, that are either of ambiguous Interpretation, or not at all
known, or not certainly; and with much acerbity inveigh against them before the
common people. This is a way to please the people, who being naturally jealous
of their betters, lend a willing care, and an easic faith to such invectives;
but it is not the way to edify them. Hence, it is necessary, that seditions
follow or, which is the next step to Seditions, the Contempt of the Sovereign;
nor without reason has that most wise writer reckoned, Deubtfull speeches of
the Prince, among the incentives of popular Tumults. A wide difference there
is, between the preaching of the Gospel, and the use of the Keys. The
preaching of the Gospel, being to all, is so to be attempered, that it may
profit all; and concealing the persons, aims only at the vices. It is an evil
custom, to turn the Pulpit into a Stage, and the sweet voice of the Gospel,
into the old reviling Comedy. The ancient Romans censured it as an unworthy
thing, to accuse any man in such a place, where he might not presently give in
his Answer: as Cicero relates. But God, by an edict of his Law, has especially
guarded, not the life only, but the fame of the Highest Powers, when He said,
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler; Where manifestly, we must understand
somewhat more to be forbidden, than what is unlawful toward private persons;
nor is the Law meant of Power abstractly, or the Ruler only, that governs well.
Paul applies that command to the High Priest Ananias, one that Judged contrary
to the Law. Saul had grievously sinned; and Samuel in the severity of a Prophet
denounces Gods wrath against him: yet being asked by Saul, to honor him
before the Elders and the People, and not to leave him, He denies not the
request. Nathan accused not David, guilty of Adultery and Murder, before the
people, but comes unto himself; as it is credible the Baptist did to Herod,
when he told him of his fault. So the ancient Bishops and whole Synods, in
public always speak with greates Reverence, even to the Pagan Emperors, and
enemies of the Church, and to Constantius the Patron of Arians. Neither did the
Invective Orations against Julian come forth in public, till after his
decease. The Prophets, I confess, being Divinely inspired, did not always
observe this Rule. And no marvel, seeing God, who by the ministry of Prophets
anointed Kings; who by Phineas, by Samuel, and by others, slew whom he pleased;
and did many other things not allowed to private men; He also by the same
Prophets set a mark of public ignominy upon irregular Princes. For what is
more true, than that nien specially inspired by God, to fulfill his Commands,
are by him released from the bonds of Law. Wherefore when Shimei openly
upbraided King David with his homicide, David to excuse him found nothing else
to say, 2. Sam. 16.11.
but, It may be the Lord has bidden him: intimating thereby, that only one way
there was, to justify evil language to the King, if God has given any one
some special Injunction for it. The Prophets themselves, when they were
accused for raising sedition, take their defense from nothing else, but a
peculiar Command they had received from God. Truly, I do not find, the Kings
were thus traduced by the Priests, whose office was ordinary; 2 Chronicles. 24.20.
as for the example of Zacharias the son of Joiada, in the Gospel, the son of
Barachias, his Speech aimed not at the King, but all the people; and in a
common fault, he exhorted all to a common repentance, moved thereunto by the
Spirit of God. This we know; Christ has granted to them, who have received
injury from the Brethren, that, after they had admonished the injurious, first
alone, and then before a few, they might in the last place bring the matter to
the knowledge of some pious Congregation; Mat. 18.17.
Where, by the name 02 of Congregation or Church, learned men, and among them
the famous Beza, not without reason, understand, not all the people, but the
Synedry; for, by the Septuagint, the word is given to every Company: and in
Moses, by, all the Congregation, the Synedry of the Seventy Elders is
signified, as Aben Ezra, and Rabbi Solomon have long since noted. This also we
know, that the Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2.6.
who had defiled himself with incest, 1 Timothy 5.20.
was censured of many. We 02 know, that Timothy is enjoined, to rebuke them
that sin, before all, that the rest may fear. Which place seems, by that which
goes before, to be understood of Presbyters that sin, who in the hearing of the
other Presbyters were rebuked by the Bishops. But although we understand it
generally, it is certain, these indefinite Rules admit their restrictions and
limitations according to the quality of the persons. An Elder, says Paul, 1 Timothy 5.1.
rebuke not, but entreat him as a Father, and the younger men as brethren. Much
more honor is due to the Sovereign Power, and to Magistracy, than to age. Add
here, which many have noted, and is congruent to the Custom of the ancient
Church, that the Prelates of the Church are not to be reproved before the
multitude; how much less the King: who is, (as Constantine said) constituted
by God as it were an universal Bishop?

19. All coaction of the Highest Powers unlawful.
Now as ignominious traduction, so all coaction too, against the Highest Power,
is unlawful; because, all right of compelling proceeds from it, there is none
against it. That which is objected concerning Uzziah, 2 Chr. 26.20.
is answered by interpreting the text according to the Original, thus: And
Azariah the chief Priest, and all the Priests looked upon him, and behold he
was leprous in his forehead, and they made him hasten thence, yea also, himself
was compelled to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. By the Divine Law,
it was not permitted for a leprous man to be in the Temple; the Priefts were
therefore earnest in hastening the King away, because he was struck with
leprosy, and the disease it self increasing upon him made him depart of his own
accord, The Priest declares, God compels.

20. Canonical acts cannot be exercised against the Highest Power, without
consent.
We have said what may be done by Authority of Divine Right; the rest, that
has been added by the Canons, either naked, or clothed with Law, as it may,
we confess, to good purpose be used upon the Emperor sometimes; so, if he
oppose it or forbid, by what right or with what prudence it may be used, we do
not see. For, that all Government, which arises from consent, is under the
Supreme Command, and that all Jurisdiction is not only under it, but also
flows from it, is demonstrated before; nor is that in question, that the
Sovereign is not bound by penal Statutes. Whence the ancient Fathers have
interpreted that of David, To thee alone have I sinned, to be spoken, Ps. 1.51.
because he was a King; whence also is that note of Balsamon, to the twelfth
Canon of the Ancyran Synod. The Imperial unction drives away penance, that is,
the necessity of public satisfaction. Mean while it is true, that Kings, to
their great honor; as in Civil affairs to their Courts and Parliaments, so in
Sacred they may submit themselves to Pastors even as to public Judges. For it
is current, l. (...)
says Ulpian, and a thing in practice, that if the greater or equal subject
himself to the Jurisdiction of the other, sentence may be given, for him, or
against him. But this subjection, because it depends upon the Kings will, and
may be revoked at pleasure, diminishes not a jot of his Supreme Command, as it
has been proved by very learned men. Whether or no it be expedient, that a
King should suffer this Jurisdiction to be exercised upon him, is wont to be
disputed. They that affirm, show how by this submission of Kings, much
strength and Authority accrueth to the Discipline of the Church. It Is true, and
spoken to the purpose, As the Princes, so will the People be, and the Rulers
example has the sweetest influence. But, for the Negative it is said, That the
Commonwealth stands by the Authority of the Governor, and (as Aristotle) the
consequence of contempt is dissolution. Certainly, if any credit may be given
to them, that have recorded the affairs of the Emperor Henry, and among them
to Cardinal Benno, the Rise of his calamity was, that publicly, with
lamentable penance, naked feet, and course apparel, in an extreme cold winter,
he was made a spectacle of men and Angels, and at Canusium, for the space of
three days, endured the scorn of Hildebrand. A difference therefore must be
made, between those things which are needful to the public profession of
repentance, and the more grievous and ignominious punishments. To the former
some of the Emperors, before Henry, rare examples of Christian meekness have
yielded willingly: but Henry was the first of all, upon whom any thing so
ignominious was imposed, or any thing at all without a voluntary submission.
And Hildebrand, or Gregory VII. was the first of all the Popes, that took upon
him so great a boldness toward the Imperial Majesty, as Onuphrius tells us;
who also says, that the Kings and Emperors, who either upon just or unjust
cause exempt themselves from these Positive censures, are to be resigned up to
the Judgment of God. And so the Kings of France, for many ages, have
challenged to themselves this right, That they cannot be excommunicated. 21.
How the Pastor may satisfy his conscience.
In what fort a Pastor, without such coaction, may satisfy his conscience in
the use of the Keys, Ivo Carnotensis has declared: Let him say to the
Emperor, I will not deceive you; I permit you at your own peril to come into
the visible Church; the Gate of Heaven, I am not able to open for you, without
a better reconciliation.

22. What is the Right of the Highest Power, about the fore said acts of
Pastors and Churches.
It remains now to show, what is the Right and Office of the Highest Power,
about those actions, which we have ascribed unto Pastors and Congregations. And
first, as to those actions, which by the only Right of Liberty, and Privilege
of Divine Law, are exercised, seeing by them also injury may be done to others,
it is certain, they are comprehended within the sphere of the Supreme
Jurisdiction. For, not only the Actions, which proceed from the Authority of
the Highest Power, but all Actions whatsoever, capable of external moral
goodness or evilnesse, are called to the judgment of the Highest Power. If
married persons perform not to each other, what the Law of Matrimony requires;
and if the Master of a Family neglect his charge; in these cases, the Courts of
Justice are of use. Of all evil, the Power is ordein'd the Avenger. One among
evils, and not the least, is the abuse of the Keys, and unjust separation, or
denegation of the Sacraments. 1 3.Cod. de ^pisc. and Cl^ic.
There is an Imperial Law, prohibiting the Bishop, that he Sequester no man
from the Holy Church, or the Communion, unless it be upon just ground. And
Justinian in his Novell, forbids all Bishops and Presbyters, Novel. 123
to segregate any one from the Holy Communion, before cause be showed
wherefore the Sacred Rules will have it to be done. Mauritius the Emperor
commands Gregory the Great, to embrace Communion with John of Constantinople.
In France, the ancient usage was by seizing on their Lands, and other ways, to
compel the Bishops to the Administration of Sacraments. And the Princes of
Holland have often laid their Commands upon the Pastors to execute Divine
service. Much more then, may the Highest Power challenge this right over such
Actions, as have their force, not by Divine, but Canon Law. For, under the
pretext of Canons, it sometimes happens, that the Canons are violated; and it is
possible, the Canons themselves may be exorbitant from the Divine
prescriptions. If either be, the Highest Power cannot deny the Plantifs, to
take knowledge of the case. Now concerning those actions, which flow from
Humane Law, and oblige men whether they will or no, and draw after them
coaction, there is much less cause of doubt. For all Jurisdiction, as it flows
from the Highest Power, reflows unto the same.

But as it is a part of Jurisdiction, no^ only to Judge, but to appoint Judges,
so belongs it to the Highest Power to do both. 2 Chronicles. 19.8. and 11.
Thus Ama^^iah, and the other 02 Priests with him are constituted Judges by
Jehoshaphat. 22. Ecclesiastical app^als depend on the Highest Power.
Neither can be showed more evidently, the Jurisdiction of the Supreme in this
kind of causes, than that all degrees of appealing depend upon his pleasure.
Otherwise, why do the Pastors of England appeal unto this or that Bishop, all
the Bishops unto the two Archbishops? And there is the same subordination of
the consistories, Classical, and the National Synods. Nor is the last term
of appealing limited by any Law Natural or Divine. Wisely said the King of
Britain, in his judgment every Christian King, Prince, and Commonwealth have
it in their Power, to prescribe unto their subjects that external form of
Government in Church affairs, which may suit best with the form of Civil
Government. And truly, of old, it was so done by the Christian Emperors.
Otherwise, whence came that so great Prerogative of the Constantinopolitan
Church? Whence had the Synod of Chalcedon power to abrogate the acts of the
second at Ephesus? Now as in Civil businesses, the judgment is permitted by
the Highest Power, 23. Exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction by himself or others.
for the most part, to the appointed Courts, and at last, upon Petition against
the greatest of them, the matter is referred to men most skillful in the Law;
or, more rarely, the Highest Power it self advising with learned Counsel gives
final judgment; but very seldom upon suspicion of some Court, calls forth the
cause unto it self: so also in these controversies about Sacred things, it has
been most usual by the ordinary Synods, and, upon appeal from their decree, by
a certain Assembly called for the purpose, to put an end unto them; it has
been less usual, yet sometimes useful, for the Emperor himself to judge of
the Religion and equity of the former Judges. Thus in the case of the
Donatists, after a double judgment of Bishops, Constantine did; who although
he approved not the appeal, yet he refused not the trial of it. But this is
somewhat more rare, and yet not without right, that, if a Synod upon probable
causes be declined, the Highest Power calls the cause before it self, and
weighing the opinions of most eminent Divines, pronounces what is most
equitable. Can. 12.
The Synod of Antioch prohibits him that complains of injury received from a
Synod, to trouble the Emperor with the hearing of his Case, so long as the
matter may be rectified by a greater Synod. Yet this takes not from the
Emperor the Power to hear the cause, if it be brought before him. Moreover,
the modesty of the ancient Bishops has attributed Power to Kings, not only to
examine the right or wrong of Excommunication, 24. The Highest Power may
dispense with Canonical and Legal penalties; And judge whether Excommunication
be just or no.
but to pardon also and abate the punishment thereof, for so much as belongs to
Positive Law. Ivo Carnotensis, a Bishop, and a stout desender of the Churches
right against Kings, was not afraid to write unto his fellow-Bishops, that he
had received a certain person into Communion, in contemplation of the Kings
favor to him, according to the Authority of a Law, that says, whosoever the
King receives into grace, and admits unto his Table, the Priests and Co
gregation must not refuse. The Kings of France, and the Vindicators of the
Regal Right, the Judges of the Supreme Courts, have often constituted and
decreed, that public Magistrates, by occasion of that Jurisdiction they
exercise, are not subject unto those Ecclesiastical penalties. So in the
Decrees of Hungary, of the year 1551. the Ecclesiastics are forbidden to send
out, without the knowledge and permission of his Majesty, any sentence of
Excommunication against the Nobles of that Kingdom. And in an ancient Law of
the English it is read, that none of the Kings Ministers be Excommunicated,
unless the King be first acquainted with it. Which I see the Princes of
Holland have thought sit to imitate; for the same was promulged by Charles the
Fifth, by his edict in the year 1540. Nevertheless, such use of the Keys as is
congruent to Divine Law, and such injunction of penance as is consentancous to
the Laws and Canons, the Highest Powers are wont to approve. And this is the
Imperial Anathema mentioned in sundry of Justinians Laws. We conclude, that
Christian Powers at this time, do not innovate, which will not, unless upon
causes approved by themselves, suffer Excommunication, being joined with
public shame, to proceed unto effect; which by their command inhibit censures
manifestly unjust; for it is their Duty, to save every one from injury, and to
keep the Church from Tyranny.

CHAP. X.
Of the Election of Pastors.

REmains that part of Empire, which, as we have said, consists in assigning
Functions. 1. Two perpetual functions, of Presbyte^s and Deacons; And their
difference.
The perpetual Functions in the Church are two, of Presbyters and Deacons.
Presbyters, with all the ancients, I call them that feed the Church, by
preaching of the Word, by Sacraments, by the Keys; which by Divine Law are
individual. Deacons, which in some sort serve the Presbyters, as the Levites
did the Priests of old. To this order are referred the Readers, who were in the
Synagogues, as the Gospel and Philo show, and were retained in the Church, as
appears by History, by the Canons, and by the writings of the Fathers. In the
Gospel, he that keeps the Book is called the Minister, which is even all one
with Deacon: and the same appellation is given by the Synod of Laodicea to the
Deacons of of Inferior degree, which were afterward called Subdeacons. But the
most laborious part of Deaconship is about the care of the poor. Presbyters,
the ancient Latin Church translated Seniors. Deacons, I think, cannot otherwise
be styled, than Ministers: although there be some, who, as their manner is in
other things, had rather carp at this, than acknowledge it to be true. I am
deceived, if Plinius Secundus did not understand both Greek and Latin; yet he,
relating the Institutes of Christians, rendering word for word, names them
Shee-Ministers, whom Paul entitles Sheedeacons, and the Church afterward
Deaconesses. Now, as the Levites could do nothing, but the Priests might do
the same; so is there nothing in the Deacons function, which is excepted from
the function of the Presbyter: because the Deacons were given to the Presbyters
as Assistants in lesser matters. Before Deacons were ordained, one of the
Apostles, Judus Iscariot was Treasurer of the Lords money; and after him, all
the Apostles for some time distributed their allowance among the poor, until
the contention risen among the Widows, and the greatness of their other
employments enforced them to use the help of others. And yet, the Institution
of Deacons did not so acquit the Presbyters, but they had still the poor under
their inspection. Hence were the Bishops chiefly trusted with the dispensation
of the Churches money, and that with so full a Power, as to be unaccountable,
but to use part of it for the necessities of themselved and other men, and to
deliver part to the Presbyters to be disposed among the poor: C. 38.40.41. C.
44.
as appears in the Canons which are entitled Apostolical, and in the Synod of
Antioch. Unless the ancient Custom had been so, in vain had the Apostle
commanded a Bishop to be hospital; in vain had the Antiochian Collections been
delivered to the Presbyters at Jerusalem.

Now concerning the Constitution of Presbyters, 2. These four distinguished,
Mandate. O dination. Election, Confirmation.
whose function is principal 01 and most necessary, we must note four things
that by many writers are not accurately enough distinguished; The first is, the
faculty it self of preaching, of administering the Sacraments, and using the
Keys, which we will call the Mandate; a second thing is, the application of
this faculty to a certain person, which by the received word we will style
Ordination; a third is, the application of this person unto a certain place or
Congregation, which is called Election; the fourth is that, whereby a certain
person in a certain place exercises his Ministry under the public
protection, and with public Authority; and let us call this, if you please,
Confirmation.

The first is to be distinguished from the second. To illustrate this with a
Simile: The Husbands power is from God; the application of that Power unto a
certain person proceeds from consent; whereby yet the right it self is not
given. For, if it were given by consent, by consent also might Matrimony be
dissolved, or agreement made that the Husband should not rule over the Wife;
which is not true. The Imperial Power is not in the Electors; therefore they
do not give it: yet they do apply it to a certain person. The Power of life
and death is not in the people, before they join together in a Commonwealth;
for a private man has no right unto the Sword: yet by them it is applied unto
a Senate, or single person. Christ, without controversy, is He from whom that
right of Preaching, of exhibiting the Sacraments, and of using the Keys, does
arise and receive its virtue. He also by his Divine providence, as he preserves
the Church, so procures, that the Church may not want Pastors.

The second differs as much from the third, as for a Physician to be Licensed
to practice Physic, and to be chosen Physician to such a City: or, for a
Lawyer to be admitted to the honor of that Profession, and to be made a Syndic
of some Corporation. These two have been ever distinct, and sometimes sepatate.
The Apostles were truly Presbyters, and so they call themselves; for the
greater Power includes the less; yet was not their Injunction appropriate to
any certain place. The Evangelists also were Presbyters, but to no place bound.
And so, long after, was Pantanus ordained by Demetrius, 3. Of Ordination
without a Title.
Bishop of Alexandria; Frumentius, by Athanasius, and were sent to preach the
Gospel through India; Which in our time has been also done; and would it were
done more carefully. Indeed the 6. Canon of the Synod at Chalcedon forbids
Ordination absolutely, or, without a title; but this is not of Divine Law or
perpetual, but positive, and such as admits exceptions. The reason of the
Cannon was, lest by too great a number of Presbyters the Church shall be
burdened; or, the Order it self grow cheap, and vile. The London Synod
excepteth fellows of Houses in both Universities, and Masters of Art living
upon their own means, and who are shortly to undertake some cure. If the Bishop
ordain any other, it is at his own peril, to keep them from want, until they
are provided for. Therefore Election, that is, assignation of a certain place,
and Ordination are not always joined together, and when they are, they are not
the same.

Which is farther proved, because they that are translated from place to place,
must be chosen again, but not again ordained, which they must be, if either
Election and Ordination were the same, or Ordination a part of Election.
Besides, it will appear that Election was made by men of sundry sorts, but
Ordination only by Pastors, 4. Ordination only by Pastors, 1 Timothy 5.22.
and anciently by Bishops only. Hence Paul writing to the first Bishop of the
Ephesians gives him Admonition, That be lay hands on no man suddenly. And the
most ancient Canons entitled Apostolical, require, that a Presbyter be
ordained by a Bishop, but a Bishop not without two or three Bishops. Which
Custom, if seems, came from the Hebrews: for the Senators of the Great Synedry
could not be ordained, but by three Priests; and that by imposition of hands,
as is noted by the Talmudists. Without question, this manner was most holy, and
for the conservation of sound Doctrine most commodious: when none was admitted
to teach the people, but he first received Allowance from the approved Doctors
of the same Faith. Pastors therefore ought to ordain Pastors; nor is this their
office, as they are Pastors of this or that Church, but as Ministers of the
Church Catholic. For, says Cyprian, There is but one entire Episcopacy,
whereof every one is a partaker. Hence it has been always held, that the
Baptism is of force, given by a Presbyter without the limits of his peculiar
Charge.

Nor is it material, whether the Election precede the Ordinarion, or be
consequent to it; for, when it precedes, it is a conditionate, not plenary
Election: which the Canons of later times have called Postulation. 5. The H.
Power has Authority over it.
Over this Ordination the Highest Power has an Imperial inspection and care.
Justinians Constitutions are extant, of the Ordination of Bishops and Clerks;
and other Laws of others, which prescribe the age and standing of men to be
ordained. Laws of good use, and fit to be revived for the prevention of the
Churches ruin, through the rawnesse and ignorance, and inexperience of her
Teachers: according to that out of the old Poet: What lost your state, founded
on so good Rules?
The public charge was given to boys and fools.


The fourth member of our distinction, Confirmation, differs as much from the
third, as the Church considered by it self, differs from the Church public.
It Is pertinent here, that Ezechiah is read to have Confirmed the Priests; 2
Chro. 29.3.
that Pastors are defended by Laws and Arms; that some Jurisdiction or
Audience is attributed to them; that Maintenance is assigned them, out of the
public, either lands or moneys; that Vacation from civil offices, and in some
causes exemption from the Court of Inferior Judges is indulged to them. All
which shows, that their public Confirmation is by the favor of the H. Power;
as the Institution of their Office is from God, their Ordination by the
Pastors. Only there remains to be disputed their Election, that is, the
Application of the Person to the Place, or of the Place to the Person.

That we may handle this question exactly, Cap. 7.
we must have recourse to that distinction set down before. 6. Right Immutable,
Mutable.
Some things are of immutable right; other things are just and right, until it
be constituted otherwise. In this later way, not in the former, the Election of
a Pastor, in any place whatsoever, belongs to the Church or Congregation of the
faithful in that place. That the Election is rightly made by the Church, is
proved by the very Law of Nature; for, naturally every Society is permitted to
procure those things, which are to their own conservation necessary; in which
number, is the Application of Functions. So have the Company in a ship, a right
to choose the Master Fellow-Travellers their Leader; a free people their King.
Whence it follows; 7. How the Election of Pastors belongs to the Church.
if the Divine Law has not prescribed a certain way of electing, and as yet no
Humane Law thereof is extant, then the Election of their Pastor pertains unto
the Church.

But he that will affirm this Right to be immutable, must evince the
immutability, either by the Law of Nature, or by the postive Law of God. By the
Law of Nature, he cannot: for no reason persuades it, and like examples show
the contrary. So, many Nations, who are under the Command of the best men, or
of hereditary Kings, may not now Elect their King, because, that which Nature
did permit, might be changed by Humane Law, and has indeed been changed. He
must then have recourse to Positive Law, which he will never be able to
produce. Examples in stead of Law, he must not allege; for many things are
rightly done, which yet are not necessary to be done. 8. Apostolical
Institutions subject to change.
Nay more, not only many things, grounded upon examples of the Apostles time,
but also some things Instituted by the Apostles, use has altered to wit, such
things, which were not strengthened by the force of a Law. The Apostles
Instituted, that the Churches should have Deaconesses: which Pliny also shows
to have been among the Christians in his age. What Church is there now, wherein
this Office is retained? And Beza says, he sees no cause why it should be
restored. The same Beza acknowledges, the Function of the Deacons to have been
perpetual, by Apostolical Institution; who nevertheless approves the
different usage of Geneva. The Apostles Instituted, that Baptism should be
celebrated by immersion, which by aspersion is now performed. Many other things
of like sort, need not be proved abrogated, seeing they are proved to have been
used, they are not proved to have been commanded. But farther, it appears not
out of the whole History of the New Testament, 9. Deacons, but not Pastors,
elected by the people.
that Pastors were Elected by the people: that the manner of Election remained
indefinite, is more easily collected thence. I speak of Pastors; for, of the
receivers of the Churches money, there is not the same reason. The Apostles were
very sollicitous, lest by taking of the public money they should incur
suspicion, or give offense. Paul might assume Luke unto himself, by his
Apostolical Power, and commit to him the custody and disposition of
Collections for the poor: but he chose rather, to permit a free election to the
Churches; for this reason, as himself speaks; that no man should blame him, 2
Cor. 8.20
in the administration of so copious munificence. For the like cause, was the
election of Deacons, remitted by the Apostles to the multitude, that no man
should complain of any partiality between the Hebrews and the Hellenists. But
this was not perpetual, the reason thereof being temporary; for in the next
times after the Apostles, the Deacons were not chosen by the people, but by the
Bishops; 10 Pastors in the Apostles time elected by the Holy Spirit, And
Mathias the Apostle. Jo. 6.70.13.18. Acts 1.2. Gal. 1.1.
the people being sometimes consulted with, and sometimes not.

To proceed with the Pastors: the Princes of them, the Apostles, were elected
by God the Father, and by Christ. I have chosen you twelve: I know, whom I have
chosen, says Christ. After that He through the Holy Ghost had given
Commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, says Luke. Paul an
Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. So,
them that were in the next degree to Apostles, the LXX. Evangelists, Christ
himself appointed. Luke 10.1.
This Divine Election to Preach the Doctrine, then first brought down from
Heaven, is signified by the word of sending; for, after the Election of those
LXX. it is said, pray the Lord, to send Laborers into his Harvest; Luke 10.2.
and that is pertinent, Romans 10.15.
How shall they Preach, unless they be sent? When Christ was ascended into
Heaven, the promised Comforter supplied his place. Therefore, both to the
ambulatory, and to the standing Offices, the fittest men were chosen, by the
judgment and testimony of the Spirit, but by the Ministry of the Apostles, or
of them whom the Apostles had made Governors of the Churches. 1 Timothy 1.18.
So Timothy was admitted to his charge according to the prophecies which went
before on him: that is, says Theodoret, by Divine revelation: not by Humane
suffrage, says Chrysostomo. And Oecumenius generally of that age, By
appointment of the Spirit were Bishops made, not in a common way. Hence Paul in
his oration to the Presbyters of Ephesus, tells them, Acts 20.
They were made Overseers over the Lords flock by the Holy Ghost. Sometimes
also, Lots were cast, that the people might, by the event, be certified of the
Divine judgment. The most ancient Author, Clemens of Alexandria, has left
this written of John the Apostle, By Lot, He chose the Clergy, of those that
were signified by the Spirit. Nor is it a new thing to use Lofs in the choice
of Priests, but used also by the Gentiles, by the ancient institution,
doubtless, of the sons of Noah. This illustrates the History of Matthias: Acts
1.23, etc.
whom, I wonder by what argument, some have persuaded themselves, to have been
elected by the people; for in Luke, there is no foot-step of such election.
What is said, They appointed two Barsabas and Matthias, ought not to be
referred unto the multitude, as Chrysostom would have it, but, as it is the
common opinion of the Fathers, to those eleven, whose names are before expressed,
and who by the mouth of Peter had spoken to the multitude. These are they, who
in the words immediately following are said to have powered out their prayers
unto God, and to have given forth their Lots, that it might appear, not, whom
the multitude, but whom God had chosen: for so themselves speak; wherefore,
that which follows, is not to be rendered, He was chosen by the suffrages of
all, (for who can believe, that the people were called to give their votes,
after the Divine election, unless Gods pleasure ought not to stand, without
their good liking;) but, He was numbered with the eleven Apostles, as the Syriac
and all the ancients have interpreted.

11. Popular elections not proved by. Acts 14.23.
So, there is another word in the Acts, wherein some are more subtle, than is
necessary. The Apostles are said to have commended the faithful Lycaonians to
God, with prayer and fasting, after they had ordained them: Presbyters in every
Church. This ordaining is expressed by a Greek word, in whose Etymology some
have found the suffrages of the people. And it is true, that both at Athens and
in the Cities of Asia there was a Custom of giving suffrages with the hand
stretched forth. And if we were delighted with that subtilty, 'twere easy to
interpret the word of the Apostolical Imposition of hands or Ordination, for
he that imposes hands must needs stretch them forth, and the next writers
after the Apostles use the word in this sense. But indeed, neither the
Evangelists, nor other Greek Authors are so curious in their words; yea there
is scarce any word which has not enlarged its signification, beyond the
original meaning. Again, if Luke in this place would have signified a popular
election, he would not have ascribed the word, ordained, to Paul and Barnabas,
as hoe does, but to the multitude. Therefore Paul and Barnabas do the same
thing here, which in another place Paul would have Titus do, Til. 1.5.
that is, or daine Presbyters in every City. That which Titus is commanded to
do, by the precept of the Apostle, the same does the Apostle here, being so
authorized by the Spirit of God, that he needed not the assistance of the
people. Lastly, the fasting and prayers did not precede the Ordination, but
intervened between it and the Valediction; that it is strange, this should be
drawn into an argument of popular election, when as, if the prayer and fasting
of the people had preceded, this were nothing to the purpose. For, the people
may also fast and pray to God, that the election of a King to be made by the
Electors, may be prosperous and happy; yet are not the people therefore the
Electors.

12. Nor by the precept of avoiding false Teachers.
I have seen them, who would assert Election to the people by Divine and
immutable right, upon this ground, that the people has from God a precept to
avoid false Pastors. But these men do not observe, that this argument, if it
have any force, proves Election to be the right not of the multitude only, but
entirely of every single person. For all, and every one, must avoid false
Pastors, with all care. And so must every sick man take heed of a rash
Physician: but no man will therefore say, that the City Physician is to be
chosen by the Plebeians. This may rightly be collected thence, 13. The old way
of trying Pastors in the Primitive Church.
before election can come unto effect, the people, and every one among the
people, must have power to allege causes, if they have any, wherefore he, that
is proposed, ought not to be elected. For Paul having spoken of Bishops, and
passing unto Deacons, says, 1 Timothy 3.10.
And let these also first be proved, where, requiring that to be observed in
Deacons, which was to be observed in Bishops, there is no doubt but he would
have Bishops to be proved, especially seeing he said before, that they must be
blameless. Among the Athenians, there was a probation of their Princes, the
form whereof was this: Pollu^. l. 8.
What Parents and Forefathers they were extracted from, of what tribe they
were, of what estate, what service they had done the Commonwealth. So, if a
Pastor were to be elected, it was justly granted every one to enquire, what his
behavior was, how married, what his children were, and the rest which Paul
would have observed in a Pastor. This is that in the Council of Chalcedon,
Can. 6.
Let the name of the ordained be published; for so Lampridius has expressed it,
in the life of Alexander Severus: When he appointed Governors of Provinces, he
published their names, exhorting the people, if they had any thing against them,
they should bring in their evidence; for he said, it was a great gravamen, not
to do that in choosing Rectors for Provinces, which the Christians and Jews
did, in publishing the names of such as are to be ordained. This is indeed a
Luculent Testimony of the old fashion of Christians, not much distant from the
Apostolical time. For between the decease of John the Apostle, and the Reign
of Severus, are about a hundred years and ten. But this place is so far from
evincing the Christian Priests to have bin chosen by the people, that hence you
may rather conclude the contrary. For it is one thing to be admitted to prove
crimes or impediments, another thing to elect. Severus did propose unto the
people the Governors names: but that they were elected by the Emperor
himself, no man, that has read History, will doubt. Yea, 'twas needless to
propose the Priests unto the people, if the people did elect them. It is most
certain, in the ancient Church, after the Apostles age, although by right the
people might choose their Pastors, that was not every where observed, but the
people abstained very often from election by reason of the incommodities of
popular Voting, retaining in the mean time the right of probation. 14 Cyprian
does not confirm, but everthrow Popular Election.
And this is the sense (if it be rightly weighed) of Cyprian's Epistle to those
of Spain; wherein some lay the chief foundation for Election by the people;
for he does not precisely say, The people have power of choosing worthy
Priests, but either of choosing worthy, or refusing the unworthy. Either is
sufficient for Cyprian's purpose, that an unworthy person may not creep into
the place of a Priest. And in the following words, he does not say, a Priest
is to be chosen by the people, but the people being present. Why so? that a fit
and worthy person may be approved by the public testimony and judgment; And a
little after, that the people being present, either the crimes of evil men may
be detected, or the merits of good men commended. How so? Because the people
most perfealy knows the life of every one, and has best experience of his
conversation. Nevertheless, the same Cyprian in the same place declares, that,
to choose a Bishop in the presence of the people was not a thing of universal
Custom. It is held, says he, among us, and in all the Provinces, almost. How
weak the arguments are, which he allegeth out of Scripture, to prove the
peoples presence necessary, has been showed by others. And the cause he brings
has hardly place, but where the Pastor of a City is to be chosen out of the
people or Clergy of the same. But, that Elections were not always made by the
people, appears even out of Cyprian himself, in another Epistle, which is
likewise thought to favor popular suffrages. In Ordinations of the Clergy,
most dear brethren, we are wont to consult with you before, and by common advise
to weigh the manners and merits of every one: but humane Counsels are not to
be waited for, when the Divine suffrages do lead the way; Aurelius our
brother, an illustrious young man, is already approved by our Lord, and called
by God, etc. And then, Know ye therefore, most beloved brethren, that He was
ordained by me, and my Colleagues that were present. He says, He was wont to
consult with the people; that they were always to be consulted with, he says
not: yea, by his example he shows the contrary; for He with his Bishops had
promoted Aurelius, the peoples advise being not required. He sets down the
cause: the people is advised with, to give testimony of life and manners: but
Aurelius had a sufficient testimonial from his twofold Confession, which
Cyprian calls a Divine suffrage. By the same right, He declares to his Clergy
and people, by epistle, that Numidicus was to be ascribed to the number of the
Carthaginian Presbyters, and that he had designed the like honor for Celerinus.

15. Pastors often chosen by the Bishops, not by the People.
That in Africa other Bishops also had right of Electing Presbyters, the saying
of Bishop Aurelius in an African Council shows; The Bishop may be one, by
whom, through the Divine grace, many Presbyters may be constituted. And, that
the testimonies of the people were not always desired, is manifest in the
third Carthaginian Council: the words of the Canon are, That none be ordained
Clerk, Can. 22.
unless he be approved, by the testimony either of the Bishops, or of the
people. Wherefore, two ways lead one to the Clergy, Popular testimony, or
Episcopal examination. Whence Jerome to Rusticus; When you are come to perfect
age, and either the people or the Prelate of the City shall elect you into the
Clergy. And in another place; Let Bishops hear this, who have power to
Constitute Presbyters through every City. Yea, the Laodicean Synod, whose
Canons were approved by a Council O^cumenicall, rejects popular Eclections:
Upon which place Balsamon notes, that the most ancient Custom of popular
Elections was abrogated by that Canon, for the incommodities thence arising: as
he also notes upon the xxvi. of the Canons Apostolical, that Presbyters were
of old chosen by suffrages, but that custom was long since expired.

16. The Election of Bishops By the Clergy; By the Comprovincial, Bishops.
Now let us proceed to the Election of Bishops, a thing of so much more moment,
than the former, by how much more care of the Church was imposed on the
Bishops, than on the mere Presbyters. No man denies them to have been chosen by
the people, that is, by the Laity and the Clergy, after the Apostles time: but,
this to have been of right immutable, no man can affirm. For, to pass by the
examples of them that have been constituted Successors by the deceasing,
Bishops; it is a thing of most easy proof, that Bishops were very often
chosen, either by the Clergy of their City alone, or by the Synod of their
Comprovinciall Bb. For the right of the Clergy, the place of St. Ferom is
remarkable: At Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelest, unto Heracles and
Dionysius the Bishops; the Presbyters always named one to be Bishop, chosen
out of themselves, and placed in a higher degree. Naxianzen speaks ambiguously;
He would Elections were permitted, either to the Clergy alone, or chiefly to
them; for so less evil would befall the Churches: yet withal he shows, this
was not observed in his time, but the suffrages of the richest and most potent
men, yea, the Votes of the people too, had the stroke in Elections. But, the
Election made by the Comprovinciall Bishops is approved by the great Nicene
Synod, Can. 4.
without any mention of the people. Whereunto agrees the Antiochian, adding
this, Can. 19.
If any contradicted such Election, the suffrages of the greater part of
Bishops should carry it. Yet I deny not, in many places, even in the time of
these Synods, the people also had their Votes: but the custom was not
universal. It was free, until the Synod of Laodicea was confirmed by an
Universal Council: the xii. Canon whereof, following the Nicene and
Antiochian, gives the right of Electing to the Comprovinciall Bishops: the
xiii. expressly takes away all Sacerdotall Elections from the multitude.
Justininian also has excluded the common people from the Election of Bishops,
and committed it namely to the Clergy, and the prime men of the City. By the
prime men he means the Magistrates and Officers. Among many named, the
designation of one he committed to the Metrapolitan: yet so, that, if there
were a scarcity of able men, the Election of one, by the Clergy and principal
men, might stand. Notwithstanding this Constitution of Justinian, (which did
not long outlive him,) soon after, there was a return to Synodicall Elections:
which Balsamon relates were usual in the East in his time also; with this
exception, that the Metrapolitans were chosen by the Patriarchs, the Patriarchs
by the Emperors.

17. Mutab^lity in the man^er of Election.
Wherefore we conclude, it is neither proved out of the Scripture, nor was it
believed by the ancient Church, that the Election either of Presbyters, or of
Bishops, did immutably belong unto the people. Of this judgementa also, they
must needs be, whosoever have transferred the Election to the Presbytery; for,
were it of Divine and immutable right that the Multitude should Elect, the
election could not be transferred to the Presbytery, more than to any others.
Neither were the Compromise of any value, which we read was often made
concerning Election, if it be determined by Divine Precept, that the common
people must choose the Pastor; for that sentence, What a man does by another,
be seems to do by himself, pertains only to those actions, whereof the next
efficlent cause is undetermined by Law. Certainly, the very same thing, that
we say, was judged against Morellius at Geneva, that is, in that City, wherein
great honor, great right belongs unto the people; which Decree, the most
learned Beza defending, That the whole multitude, says he, was called
together, and gave their Vote, was neither essential, nor perpetual. In the
same place, he thinks it sufficient, if the common people be allowed to bring
in reasons, why they are displeased at the Election, which reasons afterward
are lawfully to be examined. Beza himself commits the Election to the Pastors
and Magistrates of the City; which is congruent enough to Justinian's Law, but
is not of right Divine and immutable; for how can that be proved if Ordination
and Confirmation be rightly distinguished from Election. And the ancient Church
was of another mind, permitting to the Bishop the Election of Presbyters, and
of the Bishop to the Comprovinciall Bishops. Wherefore. the manner of Election
is of the number of those things, 18. In Elections the Highest Power has a
Legislative right.
that are not specially determined by Law Divine, but only under general
Rules, which command all things to be done in the church for edification in the
best order, and without confusion. But in all things of this nature, those
general rules remaining safe, we have demonstrated before, Legislation belongs
to the Highest Power. Bullinger, a man of a very sharp judgment, is of the
same mind, who having alleged many examples of popular Election, inferrs thus;
L. 2. de Episc. Ord. and Inflit.
Yet I will not thence conclude, that the right of electing Bishops, is to be
reduced to the promiscuous Votes of the common people; for, whether it be
better, that the Bishop be designed, at the meeting of the whole Church, or by
the suffrages of a few, no right Constitution can be prescribed to all
Churches: for several Countries have several Laws, Customs, and Institutes.
If any in whom the right is, abuse it by Tyranny, they are compelled into order
by the Holy Magistrate, or the right of designing Ministers may be transferred
from them to others: for it is sufficient, that some Elders perform that
office of Electing, upon command of the King or Magistrate, by the advice and
Counsel of men who understand what the function of a Bishop is; what is the
condition of that Church or People, over which a Pastor is to be appointed; who
also can judge of the endowments, the learning and manners of every one. By
this right, Justinian, as we have said, Constituted a manner of Electing,
somewhat receding from the former usage, and the ancient Canons; by this right,
after the Nicene Canon, were many Bishops elected by the Clergy and the People.
The Laws of Charles the Great, and other Kings, are extant, containing diverse
ways of Electing, so that Bucer said most truly, The form of Election is
prescribed by pious Princes.

19. And may it self make Election, upon just cause.
Let us now consider, whether the Highest Power it self may make Election: the
question is not, whether it ought to make it; nor, whether it be always
expedient to do so, but, whether, if it do make Election, it commit any
offense against the Law Divine. We say, with the excellent Marsilius Patavinus,
The Lawgiver or Prince is not, by any Law of God, prohibited from the
Institution, Collation, or Distribution of Ecclesiastical offices. Whosoever
affirm the contrary, do accuse of impiety, innumerable pious Princes of
ancient and of this age; which truly is a point of great temerity, when no
Divine Law can be produced to prohibit it, as has been abundantly by others,
and by us in some part demonstrated. Although this might suffice (for whatever
is not circumscribed by Divine Law, is within the sphere of the Highest Power:)
yet, for the desending of our sentence, both reasons and examples are in
readiness.

20. This proved by reason;
The first reason is taken hence, that all actions, even those that naturally
belong to others, not having causes determined by nature, we see are rightly
exercised by the H. Power. Naturally men choose teachers for their children,
and give them Guardians; sick persons make use of what Physician they please;
Merchants elect the Curators of their Company: Yet in many places, Guardianship
is appointed by Law alone, or the will of the Magistrates; Physicians are
constituted by public Order, and Informers of Youth too, with interdiction of
others from the practice of those faculties; and to the Commanies of Merchants
are fit Curators also appointed by the Highest Power, without blame of any any,
But, if this right be competent to the Highest Power, over those things, which
did belong to every one, much more over those things that belong unto the
People; because, the power of the people is devolved upon it, as all men know,
that have any knowledge of the Laws. That sometimes there may be just causes,
why the H. Power should challenge to it self the Election of Pastors, no wise
man will deny. For often errors introduced into the Church against the word of
God, cannot be rooted out by other means; often, there is no other way to avoid
Schism; often, the suffrages of the Clergy are disturbed with factions, popular
election with seditions; whereof are extant many examples, even of the purer
times. Add in the last place, that the times are now and then so boisterous,
that the King will hardly keep the Crown upon his head, except he have a care,
the Pastors may be most obedient and faithful to him. Verily, all Histories
do witness, how dearly the German Emperors paid for their abdication of this
Imperial Right.

21. And by examples, in the state of Natural Law; And under the Moisaicall.
That we may come to Examples, it has been showed before, that before the
Mosaicall Law, and afterward among the Nations without Judaea, Kings themselves
enjoyed the Priesthood, the Divine Law not then forbidding it: at which time,
there can be no doubt, the Priesthood might also have been committed by them to
others: as we read the Pontifs and Flamens were created by the Kings of Rome.
But, among the Hebrew people, after Moses Law, no man, except of Aarons family,
could be admitted to the office of a Priest; nor to the service of the Temple,
1 Reg. 13.31.
unless he were a Levit. Hence, is Jeroboam justly blamed, for choosing
Priests who were not Levits, for the Law did not allow it; nor was it in the
King, to command Sacrifices to be offered, in any place but the accustomed,
which, after David, was Jerusalem. Other Functions, or the places for them, the
King might assign to the Priests and Levits. So were some Levits appointed by
David for preaching, others for singing. And, that there should be Singers with
Harps and other Instruments, was God's precept by the Prophets: as the
application of persons to the several offices is every where attributed to
David, under the name of King; and after David, to Solomon: and Jehoshaphat,
the King, not the Prophet, by name electeth Priests and Levits, whom he might
send forth to the Cities of Juda to instruct them. The very same thing that is
here debated. Aug. in Ps. 44.
For, as some Fathers were of opinion, the right of blood in the Moisaicall
Law, is correspondent to the Imposition of hands in the Christian Law. As then,
the Hebrew King may apply certain persons; to a certain office and place, but
only such as were of Aarons family and Levits; so the Christian King rightly
makes a Presbyter or Bishop of a certain City, but of them which are ordained,
or to be ordained. And so did Nehemia's Lieutenant to the Persian King, leave
some Levits in the particular Cities, others he called forth unto Jerusalem.
Yea, the High Priest attained not that dignity by Succession, but Election of
the great Synedry, yet confined unto certain families (which Election seems
to have been the regal right, when the Kings reigned) the most learned of the
Hebrews Maimonides has observed.

22. Examples of the Roman Emperors, and of the Kings of France.
But let us proceed with the Christians. Before Constantine, no man will wonder
that no Christian Pastors were elected by the Emperors, when the Emperors
either were enemies to the Church, or had it in contempt, and accounted it not
worthy of their care. Constantine gave the force of a Law to the Nicene Canon,
of Election to be made by Bishops, other Emperors after him did the like,
either by renewing the Canon, or not abrogating of it. And, it is manifest, this
manner of Election was long in use; the Empire being of greater extent, than
that the Emperors diligence could provide for all the Churches.
Notwithstanding this, it was lawful for the Emperors, if they pleased, to
Elect by themselves. For, seeing it is from the Highest Power, that the Canon
has the force of a Law, no marvel, if the Highest Power, upon just causes,
may recede from that Law, either in the whole, or in some particular case. For
Laws are wont either to be abrogated, or tempered and limited by the
Lawgivers, as before is showed. Yea, there is no need of abrogation or solution
of the Law, when as the Lawyers agree in this, that, by the general words in
the Law set down, the right of the Highest Power is never conceived to be
excluded. It Is true, the Examples of Elections made by Bishops prove, it is not
necessary that Elections be made by the Highest Power; the Canons also show,
the same Elections are rightly made by Bishops, with consent of the Highest
Power: but neither of these is in question. The Question is, whether it be also
lawful for the Highest Power to make Election. That it is lawful, we have the
judgment of the best, both among the Emperors and the Bishops.

In the first Synod of Constantinople, Theodosius commanded the names of all
that were proposed should be given to him in papers, reserving to himself the
choice of one. What can be more clear? One among all the Bishops proposed
Nectarius: the Emperor makes choice of him, and persisteth in it, against the
will of many Bishops; who, seeing the Emperor would not be removed, give
place, and yield him that reverence, which was due unto him, in a matter not
prohibited by Law Divine. Who sees not, this was done beside the Canons? for
according to the Canons, the Emperor had no share in the Election, but here
the Emperor alone electeth, that is, designs the person. The Bishops, as also
the Clergy and people, approve of the Election. But, it is one thing to elect,
another to approve of the Election. The Bishops approve, because it was their
Office, after Baptism, to impose hands upon Neitarius, as yet a lay man and
Catechumen. And heart too, we observe, the Canon was not followed: for according
to the Canons, a Catechumen, nor Neophite, could not be elected. The Clergy
also, and the people do approve: because to them belonged the Trial, which,
how far it differs from Election is showed above.

Many examples we might allege, of Elections not Cunonicall, but Imperial.
Why the Emperors themselves elected. we deny not they had peculiar causes; but
this pertains not to the question of right, but prudence. Certainly, the
Emperors believed it to be lawful for them, before they considered whether or
no, it were expedient. For of things unlawful, there ought to be no
consultation. 23. Objections answered.
To say the cause hereof was some Divine revelation or inspiration, in such an
age of the Church, is a mere refuge of pertinacious ignorance: to say, the
Domination of the Roman Bishops, was the cause of Imperial elections, when as
yet that Episcopacy was not turned into temporal Dominion, is to be quite
mistaken in the order of times. Nor yet can we doubt, but the more Sanctimony
abated in the Clergy, and Obedience was slackned in the people, the more just
cause had the Highest Powers to vindicate Election to themselves. In the West,
that Bishops were most often, and for a long time, elected by the most
Christian Kings of France, without any suftrage of the people or Clergy, is
written in all the French Histories, as it were with Sunbeams. What was said
of the Domination of the Roman Bishops, as if he had given occasion to Kings to
draw to themselves the Elections, besides that it is before answered, cannot be
applied to the Bishops of France, and to those times, when the French Kings did
not yet possess Italy. Yea, on the contrary, because the French Kings used
this right in their own kingdom, therefore also in Italy did Charles the great
assume this to himself, that he might not with less power govern Italy, than
France and Germany. For, it is most truly observed by Godalstus and others, the
Decree made in Pope Adrians time, pertains only to the Italian Bishops, when in
other parts, the complete right of Election was in Charles before. In vain
also, a recourse is had to the wealth of Bishop-pricks, and the Temporal
Jurisdictions annexed to them; for even in the times of Charles the Great, and
much more in the ancient and purer times, Bishoprics were but poor and
slender, as is noted by that most searching Antiquary, Onuphrius. And for
Jurisdictions, the Bishops, in Charles his time, had none annexed to their
Bishoprics: but this came into use at last, after the avulsion of Germany from
France, when the Ottoes were Emperonrs in Germany. And, the Jurisdictions were
so far from being the cause of Imperial Elections, that, on the contrary,
therefore were Jurisdictions granted unto Bishops, because the Emperors were
most assured of their fidelity, being chosen by themselves, and thought the
custody of Cities might therefore most safely be committed to them: as the
same Onuphrius has observed. 24. Of Investitures, by them is meant the
Collation of Bishoprics.
Some have been deceived by the name of Investiture, Because the word is used
of Fees especially, therefore have they thought all that is said of
investitures of Bishops to belong to territories and Lands; which is a gross
^rrour; for, to vest and to invest, are old words of German Original, that
signify the collation of any right whatsoever: and are therefore found in old
Authors applied to all Offices both Civil and Ecclesiastical. It appears by a
passage in the life of Romanus Bishop of Rouen about the year 623. that
Investiture by the staff was almost 300. years before Territories were given
to Bishops; which began under Otto, the first Emperor of that name. And truly,
if Investiture had been with respect to Civil Jurisdiction, it would have been
by the Scepter, Sword or Banner, as the manner of those times was, not by a
ring and staff. Wherefore, although the most Christian Kings did not challenge
to themselves imposition of hands, which makes Presbyters; yet these two
things they esteemed as their right, to join this man unto this Church, which
is signified by the Ring; and to confer upon him Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, that is, judgment concerning Sacred affairs with a certain
public power, which is signified by the staff. For to the King himself also,
when he was first consecrated, together with the Scepter was wont to be given a
staff. L. 5. c. 30.
And by this, says Aimonius, the defense of the Churches, that is, a power to
maintain Religion, was delivered to him from God; for the Offices corresponded
to the signs: as also a Canon was vested by a Book. Many ages after, when piety
had begotten opulency, and the daughter laid a snare for the mother, the
Emperors, almost detruded from their most ancient right, began to show the
indignity of the thing, by this argument among the rest, because the Bishops by
their munificence possessed Lands and territories. But never did the Election
of them depend upon this alone, being more ancient than the same munificence.
Moreover, the accessory cannot have so much force, as to draw the principal
after it: and befides, in some places, at this time, stipends out of the
public succeed in place of Lands: and for all this the right of the Highest
Powers remains the same it was. Therefore, by the name of Investiture, in the
stories of those times, is not to be understood a naked sign; nor are Kings to
be thought so unwise, that, for a bare rite or Ceremony they would have
undertaken so many labors, and so many wars: but, with the sign, or by the
sign, the thing signified must be conceived, that is, the Collation of
Churches. Which Collation, it is certain, was made two ways: for, either the
Kings by themselves, made Election freely, and without the suffrages of any
other, or else, they granted others the right of clecting, the right of
approving, not imaginary, but with a liberty to annull the Election, being
reserved to them, selves. Both of these, Historians comprehend in the name of
Investiture. Which right remained in the Emperors until the times of
Hildebrand, who first laid violent hands upon it. Onuphrius Panuinus relating
his life; He first of all the Roman Bishops attempted to deprive the Emperor,
not only of the election of the Pope himself, which also Adrian the third had
sometimes done; but of all Authority too, whereby he Constituted the other
Prelates, to wit, the Bishops and Abbats. The Author here has rightly explan'd
Investiture by the name of Constitution.

Those two things, whereof we said Investiture consists, that is, the power
of choosing, and the Liberty of refusing, if the Bishop were chosen by any
other, all writers approved for their diligence in this kind, have very well
distinguished, and knit together in the Regal Right. Such a liberty of
refusing I mean, which is not subject to the judgment of another, And indeed
these Rights, both of election, and of rejection, are of great consequence to
maintain both Church and State: but the former, of so much the greater moment,
by how much it is more to oblige, the receiver of a benefit, than to exclude,
an enemy. Paulus Aemilius, when he had declared how that right was extorted
from the Emptrour Henry: 25. Examples of the Kings of England.
That thing says he, much weakened the Imperial Majesty's, in the minds of his
people; for he was divested of the better half of his Jurisdiction. And
Onuphrius in the same manner: Half his Power was at once taken from the
Emperor. The same Author elsewhere speaks of Henry the third This most
excellent, right (so he calls Election) (...) retained with all his might. Of
the same mind were the Kings that buil^ their power upon the ruins of the
Roman Empire. To let pass others, let us hear, if you please, the King of
England speak himself. Henry, the first of that name sina^ the Conquest,
granted the Bishopric of Winchester to William Gifford, and presently, against
the statutes of a new Council, invested him with the possesions perraining to
the Bishopric. The same Henry gave the Archbishopric of Canterbury to Ralf
Bishop of London, and invested him by the ring and staff. This is that same
Henry, who in the relation of Westminster, by William his procurator constantly
alleged, that he would not, for the I^sse of his kingdom, loose the
Investitures of Churehes; and affirmed the same in threatening words. Away with
the unlearned Interpreters of History: who does not see here that by
Investitures is meant the collution of Bishoprics? The Parliament Statute also
under Edward the third, gives plain evidence for the fame, wherein is
manifest, that the Royal Right to collate Bishoprics was in England more
ancient, then the election of the Clergy. And Historics do give their
testimony too: which declare how Bishoprics, were collated by Etheldred, and
the most ancient Kings, seven hundred years ago. Afterward, elections were
granted to the Clergy, under two conditions, which were observed likewise in
Franses, that license to elect were first obtained, and the clection made were
submi^^ed to the Kings pleasure. But in the later time the whole election was
rendered to the King. In our time, there is an image of Election in the
Chapters; the whole force of it is in the King. For, the Bishopric being void,
the King, by his Letters, containing License to elect, transmitteth also the
name of him, whom he would have elected.

Bilson Bishop of Winchester discoursing with much diligence upon this
Argument, in several places affirms that which is most true; That no
particular form of Electing is prescribed by Divine Law: and seeing Princes are
Heads of the people; and, both by Divine and Humane right, have the charge of
all external and public administration, as well in Sacred as in Civil
causes, committed to them these reasons necessarily evince, that the Elections
are also committed to their trust; at least, if they be pleased to under take
the burden. The same Author says, It is as clear as the Sun; that other
Princes, be side the Roman Emperors, since the first profession of Christian
faith, not only had the Highest Power in Electing Bishops; but by their sole
Authority Instituted whom they judged worthy of that honor, without expecting
the suffrages of the Clergy or People. I will not add more examples or
testimonies: either these are sufficient, or nothing is sufficient.

Whosoever therefore, dares to condemn of Sacrilege, so many famous Kings, some
whereof, first in their Kingdoms professed the Christian faith; some
courageously resisted the Popes ambition; some either began or promoted the
Churches reformation; and among them many renowned for their holiness and
learning: whosoever, I say, 26. Pastors as well as Bishops may be Elected by
the Highest Power.
dare account them sacrilegious, as if in electing Bishops they had violared
the Law Divine, he shall not have me for an approver of his temerarious
judgment. Now, whereas some, in this business of Election, distinguish the
other Pastors from the Bishops, because indeed themselves live where no Bishops
are, this difference comes to nothing. For such Pastors, although they have
this common with mere Presbyters, that they are not over others; yet have they
thus much of Bishops, that they are not under other Pastors; and so it is
doubtful, whether they may be rather numbered among mere Presbyters, or
Bishops. Moreover, seeing Presbytery is contained in Episcopacy, they that
bestow the Bishopric, do withal bestow the Pastoral cure of a certain place
or City, and something more: so that, the Argumentation rightly proceeds, as
from the greater to the less, or rather from the whole to the part. It Is true,
the ancient Emperors and Kings mixed themselves but little with the collation
of Pastoral offices of inferior degree; the reason was, because they thought
in reason, all that lesser care might be rightly committed to the Bishops,
chosen either by themselves, or according to their Laws. And therefore, in the
most ancient Canons, you shall hardly find anything of the Presbyters election,
because all that business was at the Bishops dispose as we have showed before.

27. Examples hereof.
Yet are not examples wanting, whereby it may appear, that Ecclesiastical
offices, of the lesser rank also, were collated by Kings. Onuphrius is
witness, for the Emperors. An Epistle of Pope Pelagius, Bishop of Rome, is
extant, which signifies, that the Sacred Letters of the most gracious Emperor
were come unto his hands, requiring certain men to be made Presbyter, Deacon,
and Subdeacon at Centumcells. The public Records of our own Country do
abundantly witness, the Princes of Holland, Zeland, and West risia, even from
the beginning of their Principality, have conferred, at their pleasure, upon
fi^men, the Pastoral Gure of every City and Village, except in what places it
could be proved, that the same right was granted away to others, and that
Gustome. was kept until the times of the last War. These examples, although
they be not ancient, are yet sufficient to refell those, who have adventured
publicly to affirm, Pastors, until the very last times of the War, were
chosen by the People. Here might be added, were it needful, very many Records
of Investitures, whereby the Princes bestow upon Noble men, their Vassals,
among other rights, also the Collation of Churches. And I, for my part, cannot
understand, how it comes to pass, that the same right does not still endure to
this day: whether it be expedient, or where, and how far it is expedient, is
another question. The States, in my opinion, by their pains taken in the
Reformation, have not deserved to be in worse condition, then before they were.
In the Palatinate, the Pastoral Cures are conferred by the Decree of a Senate,
which by the command, and in the name of the Elector, has government of the
Churches. In the Dominion of Basil, the Churches without the City have no power
at all in choosing their Pastor; whom the Magistrate of the City sends to feed
them, him they receive with reverence, although they never heard him teach. In
the beginning of the Reformation, they were content with this Call alone. It is
the Saying of Musculus: Loc. Com. de Elect.
A Christian Pastor ought not to be sollicitous about his Call, nor to doubt
that it is Christian and lawful, where he is called to preach the Gospel, by
the pious Magistrate or Prince. Wherefore the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches
does not deprive the Powers of this Divine Right. Neither have the States
themselves ever been of another judgment; for, when in the year 1586, without
the assent of the States, a Synod was held, the Earl of Lester, Governor of
these parts, to move the States to allow of the Synod, declared Nov. 16. That
such allowance should be a detriment to no man, in respect of that right he
challenged in the Institution of Pastors. And in the same year, December. 9. the
Acts of that Synod were admitted by the States, with some exceptions, whereof
this is one: That the States, Noblemen, and City Magistrates, and others should
retain the right and Custom of Instituting and destituting Pastors, and
Schoolmasters.

Let us now give answer to the rest of the Objections, used to be brought
against the Highest Powers in this regard. Some say, 28. The Objection from the
abuse of Right, answered.
that certain Kings and Princes have abused the Elections, either through a
sordid love of gain, or through too much favor. It is too true; but to the
determination of the question, it is impertinent; for, the abuse of right
depriveth no man of his right; unless perhaps a subject, by the sentence of
his Superior; much less, is a possible abuse sufficient to the loss of
right. Then, no man shall be certain of any right whatsoever. But to speak the
truth, there is a greater number of laudable Elections, which Kings have made.
And on the contrary, by popular Elections, the matter often was brought unto
Seditions and slaughters, to Sword and fire; nor is the Clergy always free
from favor and faction, no not at this day. So that, if for fear of
incommodities Elections may be overthrown, no kind thereof will be able to
subsist. When Genebrard, an enemy to the Regal right, had said, the Bishops of
Rome chosen by the Emperors were monsters of men, the contrary was showed by
our side, that they were good men, at least in some mediocrity; Rainold. 187.
but from the Election of the Clergy and People came forth Monstces in^ee^.
Moreover, the Greatness of the Highest Powers yields not to corruption so
easily, as private men, nor is so obnoxious to unjust desires and importunity
of Suitors. Lastly, Ordination, which remains with the Pastors, and the right of
contradicting, which is left unto the people, shuts up the way, if not to all,
which exceeds Humane Power, yet to the worst abuses.

29. The Canons and Fathers answered.
The Canons are objected too, and some Sayings of the Fathers. That old Canon,
which is the 30. in their number entitled Apostolical, speaks of Magistrates,
not of Emperors; and as the Canon next before is opposed to nundinations, so
this to violent intrusions. The Canon pertains to them, that being not lawfully
examined and ordained invade the Church by force, by the Magistrates help and
favor. So, the Parisian Synod disapproves not Election, but Ordination by the
King; nor all the Kings Authority, but that which is against the will of the
Metropolitan and Comprovinciall Bishops, to whom the ordination did belong. For
King Charibert himself, under whom this Synod was holden, elects Pascentius to
the Bishopric of Poitiers, whom the Comprovincials received, as rightly
chosen. And if the Canon bear another sense, yet is it nothing to the purpose.
For, if it was made by the Kings consent, it might be rescinded, erther by
himself, or by other Kings also, especially with the sentence of their Peers:
because no positive Laws are immutable; but, if without the Kings consent,
then neither had that Canon the force of a Law, nor could the Regal right be
impaired thereby. This is certain, since the Kings began to Elect Bishops, many
Synods have been held in France, and not any one of them has reprehended the
Kings in that respect, but many have admonished the King, to use that study and
care in choosing Pastors, which was meet. Whence it is evident, the Gallican
Bishops never found any thing in that Election, contrary to the Laws Divine.
It Is very improper for our men, to produce the Authority of the Nicene second
Synod, whereby the worshipping of Images was introduced. And yet, the meaning
of the Canons alleged thence, is no other, then of those we have already
answered. That sharp speech of Athanasius against Constantius is alleged also;
Who having received most grievous injuries, if he had uttered any thing, not so
generally true, as accommodated to those times, what marvel is it? seeing
other Fathers too, have let fall many words, which will not bear a rigid
Examination. Yet does not Athanasius, how hot soever in this cause, pretend any
right Divine, but enquires, Where is that Canon, that a Bishop should be sent
out of the Palace? He shows, what Constantius had done, was not Canonical: and
rightly; for another way of Electing was then in use, and that confirmed by the
Authority of the Nicene Synod, and by the Precepts of Constantine. Now,
although for just causes, it be granted unto Kings, to recede from the Canon;
yet to forsake the Canon, with intention of promoting to Episcopacy the
favorers of the Arrian party, was not the part of a pious Emperor. This way
of electing is the more justly reprehended, if Ordination also being omitted,
Bishops were obtruded upon the Churches: which is very credible to have been
done; for it was not probable, the Orthodox would ordain Arians, or such as
used Collusion with them. Verily, not any one of the Fathers has hitherto been
found, who said, there was any Divine Law to hinder the King from choosing the
Pastor. It appears, the most holy Bishops above mentioned, who condiscended to
the Election made by Theodosius were of another mind. And thus much be spoken
of the Highest Powers embracing the true Religion.

30. Touching the Right of Pagan Kings.
As to the Kings, that give no assent to the saving Faith, pious Assemblies
never made address, unto them, for election of their Pastors. For how could
they expect defense of the Church from the enemies of the Church. And, suppose
the matter should succeed most happily, yet would it be an indecorum, that the
Affairs of the Church should be judged before the unjust, 1 Cor. 6.1.
and not before the Saints. Yea, if Kings that are aliens from the Faith,
arrogate to themselves any such thing, without question they bring upon
themselves the greater Judgment. Notwithstanding, if Infidel Kings will not at
all admit any Pastor or Bishop, except Elected by themselves, and in the mean
time leave to the Church the Probation, and to other Pastors the Imposition of
hands, I cannot think it convenient for Christians, to refuse men, otherwise
fit, for this only reason, because they are commended by Infidels. For the good
God does effect his good work, even by evil men. I am not a man of that
confidence, that I dare condemn so many Christian Churches in Thrace, in Syria,
in Egypt, which do receive Patriarchs or lesser Bishops from the King of the
Turks; and that this patience of the Christians is no new thing, is showed by
Barlaamus Cyracensis. Clearly, it is better to entertain a worthy Pastor,
adorned with good report of the common People, ordained by other Pastors, from
the hand of a Prince, though an unbeliever, then to suffer the wast of
Churches. Esdras, we are sure, did not decline the office of restoring Gods
worship, imposed on him by the Pagan King Artaxerxes.

But, that we may return unto our own, that is, unto Christian Powers (for that
was aspersed on the by, to give others occasion of better thoughts upon this
business) we must advertise the Reader, that in all this Treatise, we enquire
what is lawful, not what is at every time expedient. For, whether we reflect
upon ancient or later times, we shall see great variety in the manner of
election: nor only through ages and Provinces, but through years and particular
Cities. So much uncertainty there is in that, which the Law Divine has left
uncertain. And truly, 31. The best manner of Election.
where the question is not of the right, but of the best manner of Election,
it is mavelous how many things may probably be discoursed on every part. Give
me Cyprian, and those of his time, there will be no fear of popular election.
Give me the Nicene Fathers, I would gladly ascribe the election unto Bishops.
Give me such Emperors as Theodosius, Valentinian, and Charles the Great, there
will be no danger in the election Regal or Imperial. But we are fallen into
the lees of the Church, and after we have with circumspection viewed all
things, we find nothing, but some incommodity is annexed to it. Therefore
nothing at all can be here prescribed, as perpetual; That which is indefinite,
Arist Eth. 9.14.
must have an indefinite Rule. Yet if I were in this respect to give my advise,
the manner of Justinian's times is not displeasing to me, with this caution,
that a Pastor be not obtruded upon the people against their will, and also
saving the right of the Highest Powers to rescind and make void Elections, 32.
The Right of rescinding Elections reserved still to the H. Power.
if any error be committed, pernicious to the Church or Commonwealth. Which
right, not only the French Kings, but also the ancient Roman Emperors very
frequently have used, as is most easy to be proved.

They do much err, who confound this will and pleasure of the H. Powers,
whereby the Election made is approved, or disapporv'd with that consent, where
with the Magistrate of every City, according to the Laws or Canons, concur to
the Election, in the next place to the Clergy, and sometimes with the People.
For, here is a wide difference. The pleasure of the Highest Powers is over the
Election; the Magistrates consent is a part of the election. That agrees to the
Highest Powers, as such; this to the Magistrates, by Positive Law; nor properly
as Magistrates, but as an honored part of the City. Therefore the Election by
the Magistrates stays within the bounds of their City; but Emperors and Kings
exercise their right, not only in Cities which they dwell in, and whose
Churches they frequent; but, if they see it needful, through all places of
their Dominions. Again, the Magistrates may be overcome with suffrages, the
Highest Power cannot. Certainly, although the election be permitted to others,
that right of free approbation cannot safely be abdicated by Him that rules in
Chief. Also, 33. And of exauctorating Pastors, if need be.
after Election made, the right of removing a certain person from the Ministry
of a certain place, although it may be in others too, ought always to remain
in the Highest Power. So Solomon ejected Abiath^r from being the Priest of God.
So the Bishops of Rome were more then once deposed by the Imperial Power, as
Bellarmine himself confesses. The proof whereof is easy. For if the Highest
Power has right to interdict any one the City or Province, he must needs have
a right also to interdict him, the Ministry of this City or Province. For this
is included in that: and, in whose Power the whole is, in his power the part
cannot choose but be. Nor only may the Highest Power do this by way of
punishment, but by way of caution too: to wit, if any Pastor be drawn by the
People into matter of tumult, which perhaps may come to pass without his
fault. For, unless the Highest Power could do this, the Commonwealth were
not sufficient to secure it self.

34. Although chosen by others.
The last error is of those, that think it belongs unto the same Person, to
elect and to remove. For the Highest Power may interdict, not only public
acts, but private, too, to which it electeth not the Persons; namely, in
negotiation, and conduction: as above is said, when we spoke of Jurisdiction,
and is manifested by Examples. For, eight or more Roman Bishops, it is certain,
have been deposed by Emperors, sometimes with a Synod, sometimes without,
whereof a good part were elected by the Clergy and people of Rome.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning offices to the Church, not always necessary.

1. Things necessary to be distingu^sh^ (...) ^ot necessary.
IT is of much concernment for the keeping of peace in the Churches, vt^
distinguish accurately, between the things commanded by Divine Law, and the
things not commanded. For, although the right or manner of regiment somewhat
differs, thence will follow no divulsion of the Churches, as long as neither
part ascribes to their own way, the authority of Divine precept. And this is
the prihcipall cause, why we have taken so much pains to show, That manner of
Election, which Kings and some pious Princes do at this time use, is not by
Divine Law forbidden. Not, that we propose their examples to be imitated by
others: for, other kinds of Election may be either by themselves more
profitable, of at least to the disposition of the people, and state of some
churches more fit; or else, if for no other cause, for the ancient custom
sake, to be preferred: but, that we may not, by a temerarious censure, alienate
from us the Kings, and the Churches too, by whom that manner is observed. What
we have done concerning Election, the same we must do about the offices
Ecclesiastical, which some of the late Reformed Churches use, and some use
not; That is, We must declare, nothing is either way defined concerning them,
by Precept of Divine Law; whereby, it will easily appear, The diversity of
government ought not to be any obstruction to fraternall unity. Fully to
understand the right of the Highest Powers, this Discourse is very necessary;
for, in things determined by Divine Precept, a necessity of execution lies upon
the Highest Power; in other things there is left some liberty of choice. And,
as we have said before, The Ecclesiastical Government for the most part is
conformable to the Political, which was also observed by the King of Great
Britain, a Prince of excellent wisdom.

Now, the principal Controversy amongst the Protestants, is about the
Episcopal eminence, and about their office, who being not Pastors, that is,
neither preach, nor administer the Sacraments, yet are Assessors, 3. Of Bishops
and Lay Elders.
or assistants unto Pastors, and by some are styled Presbyters, or Elders. Let
us consider of both, so far as our design permits; for, these questions are
so largely handled by others, that scarce any thing remains to be added.
Especially, the most learned Beza, having undertaken the defense of the
Gonevian Discipline, has, according to the fertilty and vigor of his wit,
copiously expressed, what might be said both for those Assessors, and against
the Bishops: And, on the other side, they that extol the Anglican Church,
Saravia and the Bishop of Winchester have disputed very smartly, as well for
the Bishops, as against those Assessors. So that, whoever would have perfect
intelligence of these matters, are to be remitted to their Books. For our
parts, Our endeavor being to lessen, not to widen, the difference, we will
contract, into a few determinations, all that is either confessed on both
sides, or may be so clearly proved that it cannot be gainesaid by any, but the
contumacious.

3 The word shop^ plain Here ^^ken so the O^^sver ^^stors.
In the first place for Bishops; we take leave to use the word in that
signification, wherein the Synods Universal and Topicall, and all the Fathers
have always used it. In the Apostolical times, it is certain, though the
Functions were distinct, the names were not. For, the Function of the Apostles
is called Presbytery, and Episcopacy, and Diaconary, nor is any thing more
usual, than for the genericall name, by some particular right, to adhere to
one of the species; as in adoption, cognation, and other words of the Law
appears. And so, the name of Bishop, when in the nature of the word it
signifies any Inspector, Overseer, and Prepositus, or (as Jerome translates it)
supra-attendent (for the Septuagint also have rendered the Hebrew word, which is
given to Magistrates, by the name of Bishop; and among the Athenians the
foreign Praetor, among the Romans the municipall Aediles were called by this
name; and Cicero says Himself was made Bishop of the Campanian coast;) this
name by the Apostles, and Apostolical men, according to the use of the
Hellenists, was given to any Pastors of the Church, Nevertheless, by a
certain proper and peculiar right, it might be assignd to them, who, as with
the rest they were Overseers of all the Flock, so above the rest were
constituted Inspectors of the Pastors also. Wherefore they abuse their own time
and other men's, who having undertaken to discuss the question, take much pains
to prove the name of Bishop common to all the Pastors: when as the word is of a
larger signification much. They also do but beat the air, who with great
endeavor prove, that unto all Pastors whatsoever certain things were common,
namely, the right to Preach, to exhibit the Sacraments, and the like. For, the
question is not of these things wherein they do agree, but of that eminence
whereby they are distinguished. And, that is yet somewhat more absurd, that
some, to prove Bishops differ nothing from mere Presbyters, bring in the
Fathers for their witnesses, That Bishops are all of equal merit: as if you
did say, That all the Roman Senators were equal to the Consuls, because the
dignity of both the Consuls was equal. But he is angry with himself, or with
his Reader, who refutes such things.

4 Bishops not against Gods word.
Concerning Episcopacy then, that is, the eminence of one Pastor among the
rest, this is our first Assertion, That it is repugnant to no Law Divine. If
any one be of a contrary opinion, that is, if any one condemn all the ancient
Church of folly, or even of impiety; without question, it lies upon him to
prove it: and for proof I see nothing alleged but this: Whosoever will be
great among you, Mat. 20.26. Mar. 10.44.
let him be your Minister: and whosoever of you will be chief, shall be the
servant of all. But certainly, all eminence or Primacy of Pastors among Pastors
is not here interdicted: but all Pastors are admonisht, that they may know,
that a Ministry is enjoined them, not an Empire given. For the precedent words
are, They that rule over the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; and their
Great ones exercise Authority upon them; But so shall it not be among you.
From this place we may much rather argue for Eminence and Primacy, than against
it. For that which is in Matthem and Mark, Whosoever will be great, and the
chief, is in Luke, He that is greatest among you: He that is the President, or
leader. Moreover, Christ exhorts them by his own example: The son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Wherefore, the precept of
Ministering does not hinder, but one may be greater than they to whom he
Ministers. Ye call me, says Christ, Lord and Master: and ye say well; Jo.
13.13, 14.
for so I am. Therefore if I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye
ought also to wash one another feet. And how could Christ disapprove the
disparitie of Ecclesiastical Offices, when himself had appointed LXX.
Evangelists, of a second order and lesser degree, Ad Fabiol.
as Jerome speaks in dignity inferior to the Apostles, as Calvin says. Much
more clearly, triumphing now in Heaven, Ephesians. 4.11.
He has given some Apostles, and some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Doctors: not only distinct in Functions, but by certain degrees also. For
God has given in the Church, first Apostles, in the second place Prophets, in
the third Do ors. The very Deaconry, by the Apostles instituted, is sufficient
to prove, that Christ had not commanded an equality of Churchmen. Therefore,
we set down this first, as a thing of undoubted verity; Wherein we have
Lanchius, Chemnitius, Hemingius, Calvin, Melanchthon, Bucer, all consenting
with us; yea, and Beza too, so far as to say, That some one chosen by the
judgment of the other Presbyters, should be and remain President of the
Presbytery, cannot, nor ought not to be reprehended.

5. Bishops always in the Catholic Church.
Secondly, we determine, That the Episcopacy we speak of, has been received by
the Universal Church. This appears out of the Universal Councils; whose
Authority, even now, among pious men is very Sacred. It appears also, by
comparing Synods either National or Provincial; whereof there is hardly one
to be found, but it carries in the forehead manifest signs of Episcopal
eminence. All the Fathers, none excepted, testify the same. Among whom, the
least friend to Episcopacy is Jerome, being himself not a Bishop, but a
Presbyter. His testimony therefore alone suffices: It was decreed all the
world over, that one chosen from among the Presbyters should be set over the
rest, to whom all the care of the Church should pertain. Yea, so universal
was this Custom, that it was observed oven among the Heretics, which went our
of the Catholic Church; All these things, says the Author of the Homilies
upon Matthew, which are proper to Christ in verity, have Heretics also in
their Schism, Churches, Scriptures, Bishops, and other orders of the Clergy,
Baptism, Eucharist, and all things else. Certainly, this error of Aerius was
condemned of all the Church, that he said, A Presbyter ought to be discerned
from a Bishop by no difference. Jerome himself, to him who had written, There is
no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, answers, It Is spoken as
ignorantly, as one would wish; you have, as the Proverb is, made shipwreck in
the Haven. Lastly, Zanchius also acknowledges the consent of the whole Church
in this point.

6. Bishops in the time of the Aposties.
Our third determination is, That Episcopacy had its beginning in the
Apostolical times. Witness the Catalogues of Bishops in Irenaeus, Eusebius,
Socrates, Theodoret, and others, all which begin from the Apostles age; now to
derogate faith, in an Historical matter, from so great Authors, and so
consenting together, it cannot but be the mark of an irreverent and
pertinacious mind. It is all one, as if you should deny the truth of that,
which all the Roman Histories deliver, That the Consulship began from the
expulsion of the Tarquins. But let us again hear Jerome: At Alexandria, says
he, from Mark the Evangelist, the Presbyters always elected one from among
themselves, placed him in a higher degree, and called him Bishop. Mark
deceased in the 8. of Nero: to whom, ( John the Apostle being yet alive,)
succeeded. Anianus, to Anianus Abilius, to Abilius Cerdo. The same Apostle
surviving after the death of James, Simcon had the Bishopric of Jerusalem;
after the death of Peter and Paul, Linus, Anacletus, Clemens Held that of Rome;
Evodius and Ignatius, that of Antioch. Surely, this Antiquity is not to be
contemned: whereunto Ignatius himself, the coetanean of the Apostles, and his
next followers Justin Martyr and Irenaeus yield most apparent testimonies,
which need not be transcribed. We will end this with Cyprian: Now, says he,
through all Provinces, and through every City are appointed Bishops.

7. Bishops allowed by the word of God.
Our fourth is this; This Episcopacy is approved by Divine Law: or, as Bucer
speaks, it seemed good unto the Holy Ghost, that One among the Presbyters
should be charged with a singular care. The Divine Apocalypse affords an
irrefragable argument to this assertion; for Christ himself commands to write
unto the seven Angels of the Asian Churches. Who by Angels Understand the
Churches themselves, they manifestly contradict the Holy Scriptures. For the
Candlesticks are the Churches, says Christ, and the stars are the Angels of
the seven Churches. It Is a wonder, how far men are transported by the spirit
of Contradiction, when they dare confound things, so openly distinguished by the
Holy Spirit. We deny not, but every Pastor, in a general signification, may be
capable of this title of Angel; but, here it is manifestly written to One in
every Church. Was there but one Pastor in every City? No sure; for even from
the time of Paul, at Ephesus, Act. 20.17, 18.
were many Presbyters ordained to feed the Church of God. Why then is the
Letter sent to One in every Church, if no One had a peculiar and eminent
Function? Under the name of Angel, says Austin, is commended the Governor of
the Church. The Angels are the Presidents of the Church, says Jerome. If any
had rather hear the modern Writers, let Bullinger speak; The heavenly Epistle
is destined to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, that is, the Pastor. Now
Histories do witness, that Angel or Pastor of the Church of Smyrna Polycarpus
was ordained Bishop of the Apostles, namely by St John, and lived in the
Ministry of this Church 86. years. What Bullinger relates of Polycarpus is
confirmed by Irenaus, Tertullian, and other Ancients, who say, We have the
Churches nourished by John: for though Marcion reject his Apocalypse, yet the
Order of Bishops recounted to its Original, will stand upon John the Author.
Let Marorat also speak; John began with the Church of Ephesus, for the
celebrity of the place; nor does he address himself unto the people, but the
Prince of the Clergy, that is, the Bishop. Happily, Beza's Authority, or Rainolds
will be more accepted; See therefore, what favor the Truth found with them.
Beza, To the Angel, that is, to the President, who was in the first place to be
admonisht of these things, and by Him his other Colleagues and all the Church.
Rainold; Colloq. cum Harto, c. 8.S.
In the Church of Ephesus, although there were many Presbyters and Pastors for
the administration thereof yet One was over those many; whom our Savior calls
the Angel of the Church, and writes the things to him, which others from him
might learn. Certainly, if it be well said by Dio Prusoeus, that Kings are the
Genii of their Kingdoms; and in Holy Scripture, Kings are styled by the name
of Angels, who sees not, that this name is also, by an excellent right,
agreeable to the Prince of Presbyters. Christ therefore, writing to those
Bishops, as men Eminent in the Cergy, without all question has approved this
eminence of Episcopacy.

To let pass the Annotations after the second Epistle to Timothy, and that to
Titus, which are found in the most ancient Greek Copies: Concerning Timothy,
hear the writer, 8.A place of Ambrose examined.
supposed Ambrose, whose words are these: Timothy created Presbyter by himself,
the Apostle called Bishop, because the prime. Presbyters were so entitled; of
whom One receding, the next succeeded; but, because the following Presbyters
began to be found unworthy to hold the Primacy, that method was altered by a
Council, providing, that merit not seniority should Create a Bishop, ordained
by the judgment of many Priests; to the end, an unworthy person might not
unadvisedly usurp the place, and so become a scandal to many. He says, the
primacy of Timothy among the Presbyters is acknowledged by the Apostle. Whereas
some learned men would hence set up a certain circular praesidency, herein they
are opposed by all the ancient Monuments, that are extant: nor do the words of
Ambrose help them; for, receding is all one with dying, or departing. And,
whereas the Courses of the Priests are brought hither to establish this
Interpretation, L^. 1.8.
any one may see with half an eye, how impertinent it is, when those Courses
make nothing toward presidency, which was always in the High Priest, and other
Chief of their Classes. But the alleged Writer his meaning is, that Seniority
in age, or rather in Function was valued in the making of Bishops. Wherein,
although none of the Ancients be on his side, yet, if we understand him of
certain Churches, what he says is not incredible. For, Justin. Nov. 123.
also the Archimandrits, or chiese of Hermitages, at the Commencement of
Monachism, were elected according to that Order. To believe him of all
Churches, Jeroms testimony of the Alexandrian Custom will not permit. The same
Writer, 9. Timothy and Titus were Bishops.
concerning Timothy; Timothy now Created Bishop, he institutes by epistle, how
he ought to govern the Church. Concerning Titus. Titus, the Apostle Consecrated
an Apostle, and so admonishes him to be sollicitous for the well ordering of
the Church. No other are the judgments concerning Titus, and Timothy, of
Epiphanius, Eusebius, Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theodoret, Theophilact,
Primasius, as by producing their words has been demonstrated by others. Yea,
the Oecumenicall Synod of Chalcedon says; After S. Timothy, Action 11
, until now, have been made xxvii. Bishops, all ordained in Ephefus. For,
Antiquity did not believe, what of late some with confidence aflirm, that they
who were Evangelists could not be created Bishops. As long as they walked about
the Provinces, they did the office of Evangelists; but when beholding in one
place a plentiful harvest, they thought fit to cherish it with their longer
Presence, doubtless, being presidents to the Presbytery, they performed all
offices Episcopal. Upon which reason, Antiquity believed, that the Apostles
also were truly Bishops of certain Cities namely, in those places where they
made longer stay, or to speak more properly, Act. 18.11.
where they sat; by which word, Luke has very emphaticully expressed, Paul's
abode with the Corinthians. Besides, Timothy and Titus, we read of others,
advanced by the Apostles, into the Episcopal throne. Concerning Evodius, thus
to the Antiochians writes Ignatius; He first, by the Apostles hands, was
promoted to our presidency. What presidency that is, is not left doubtful by
Ignatius, who every where distinguishes the Bishop from the Presbyters, and
preferrs him above them. You must do nothing without the Bishop, but be
subject to his Presbytery. And in another place; The reverend Presbytery, being
dear to God, is so fitted to the Bishop, as the strings to the Harp. And again
in another place; What is the Bishop, but the Prince; and the Presbyters, but
his Counselors? This is that Ignatius, who saw Christ in the flesh; who lived
with the Apostles; who, next after Evodius, was Bishop in the Church of Antioch.

10. Bishops styled Angels, Apostles, Presidents.
A question may be made, when as their office, who were over the Presbyters by
a certain perpetual dignity, is so ancient, and approved by Christ himself; by
what name was that Honor entitled, before the common name of Bishops began
peculiarly to be ascribed unto this Presidence which, as Jerome thinks, began
about the viii year of Nero. The ancient Fathers are of opinion, that those
Princes of the Presbyters were styled Apostles. And truly, there remain in
Cyprian and other Authors, not a few obscure prints of this locution; Yea,
Paul himself, when he says, He was nothing less than the chief of the
Apostles, seems to intimate, there were some other Apostles of lesser mark.
That the name of Angel was anciently given to him, who afterward began to be
called Bishop the Apocalypse evinceth. For, it appears the word was taken, as of
common use, because those Letters are popularly written, and the Mystery of the
Stars is explained by the appellation of Angels, as being very obvious; but,
the most simple and plain denomination, seems to have been that of President;
for, by this name, Justin Martyr calls the Bishop, in his second Apology.

11. Patterns of Bishops in the natural Law, in the Mosaical, but most probably
the Rulers of Synagogues.
Another question may be, By what example Episcopal Eminence was brought into
the Churches. It is certain, there were degrees of Priests among the Heathens;
that the Custom was not new to the Grecians, and such as sprang from Greece, we
learn by the most ancient discipline of the Druids, One, says Coesar, is
President to the Druids, who has amongst them the chief Authority. And how
ancient the Emmence of Mother Cities, in matters of Religion, is, we learn out
of Thucydides, where he speaks of the Corcyreans, a Colony of the Corinthians;
upon which passage, the old Scholiast notes, It was the Custom to receive High
Priests from the Metropolis. Strabo names one Priest of the Catti, who was, we
make no doubt, the highest; and among the Burgundians the greatest Priest is
mentioned by Marcellinus. This custom, God himself approved by the legal
Constitution of the Judaical Republic; when he set up One, with highest
Authority, over all the Priests. Who, although in some acts he was a Type of
Christ, yet the whole Institution of this Pontificate, is not to be referred to
this end alone. This eminence of one Priest, served for Order also, as well as
the Regal Power, which did also, in its way, adumbrate Christ. Although then,
this example might suffice; yet to me, the Constitution of the Christian
Church, seems not so much expressed, according to the pattern of the Temple
at Jerusalem, as of the Synagogues. For the Synagogues were, in many places,
without any Commanding Power; as neither the Church of Christ has any by it
self. Add hereunto, that wheresoever the Apostles came, they found Synagogues
well enough ordered, even from the times if the Babylonian dispersion: which,
if they would receive the Faith of Christ, (as to them the Gospel was Preached
before others) there was no cause, why they should depart from that Government,
that the experience of many ages did commend: nor was it any burden to the
Gentiles, in such a matter, to accommodate themselves to the Jewish
institutions. Now in every Synagogue, it is certain, there was one, who by the
Greekish Jews was called the Ruler of the Synagogue: which name occurs
frequently, both in the Gospel and the Acts; Lu. 8.41.
and every where the Prince of the Synagogue is designed by it. Only, one place
is excepted; Acts 13.15.
where, the word being taken in a larger sense, in one Synagogue are named more
Rulers, that is, both he, who (as the Hebrew Masters teach us) was the Prince,
who answers to our Bishop; and then the Pastors, which Office and name remains
in the Christian Church; and the Elemosynaries, which are like unto our
Deacons. Wherefore in that one place the Pastors joined to the chief of the
Synagogue are called the Rulers. So, in the new Testament often, the High
Priest, with those next unto him, are called the chief Priests, and in Jeremy,
the ancients of the Priests. Jerem. 19.1.
These Rulers of the Synagogues had others over them, which were called
Primates; L. ult. Cod. Theod. de Jud.
in either Palestine one, and others in other Provinces. And thus much be
spoken by the way, to illustrate the original of Bishops.

Our fifth Assertion is, Episcopacy has been the springhead, 12. Bishops of
great use to the Church.
whence many commodities have flowed into the Church. The History of all times
proclaims it: but I will again use him for my witness, who in all Antiquity
was the least friend of Bishops, that is, Jerome: In the whole world, says he,
it was decreed, that for the taking away of Schisms and divisions, one being
elected from among the Presbyters, should be set above the rest. In another
place. The Churches safety consists in the dignity of the chiefest Priest,
that is, the Bishop: to whom if there be not given a Superior power over all
the rest, there will be made so many Schisms in the Church, as there be
Priests. Nor is it any thing else, which Cyprian does so frequently inculcate:
Whence have Schisms and Heresies arisen, and do still arise in the Church, but
while the Bishop which is one, and the Governor of the Church, by the proud
presumption of some men is contemned. And elsewhere: Heresies have no other
Rise, and Schisms no other beginning, but hence, that obedience is not given to
Gods Priest; nor is one Priest and Judge for the time, in the steed of Christ
elected. Not only single Assemblies, by the presidence of one, were guarded
against Schisms, but as the same Cyprian says, The Universal Church was
coupled together by the chain of Priests, linked to one another and united.
For, the whole Christian world was preserved in concord, by commerce of those
Letters, which were called formate. And so much for Episcopal eminence.

13. Bishops are not by Divine command.
To proceed: On behalf of the equality of Pastors, we have these things to say,
not repugnant to those before. First, The Episcopal eminence is not of Divine
precept. This is proved enough, because the contrary is not proved. For Christ
is no where read to have commanded it. Indeed, he approved it in the Apocalypse:
but it follows not, Because he did approve it, Therefore he did command it.
Episcopacy is of Apostolical institution, because it appears, in some Churches
Bishops were ordained or approved by the Apostles: but the Apostles never
commanded, that such Bishops should be in every Church. By which distinction,
we separate Jeroms case from the case of Aerius. Jerome says, The Bishops
became greater than the Presbyters, by custom rather than by the Lords
dispose: As also Austin, Episcopacy is greater than Presbytery, according to
the titles of honor which the Church has used. When the Fathers speak of
Custom, they exclude not Apostolical institution; yea, as Austin says,
Epist. 19.
What is observed in the Universal Church, nor is instituted by Councils, but
has bin always kept, is most rightly believed, to have been delivered by no
less Authority than Apostolical. But, as we have elsewhere said, it is not
presently of Divine precept, whatsoever is instituted by the Apostles; for many
things are instituted, with reservation of a Liberty to make a change. That the
people should with a clear voice say Amen at the end of prayers. That the
Preacher should be uncovered, was a Constitution in the Apostolical Church:
Which in many places now, we see, is not observed. Moreover, the Apostles so
appointed Bishops, that they left certain Churches without Bishops: as
Epiphanius acknowledges, There was need of Presbyters and Deacons; for by these
two the Ecclesiastical Offices may be complete; but where none was found
worthy of the Episcopacy, the place remained without a Bishop; but, where was
need; and they were worthy of the Episcopacy, Bishops were ordained. Those
Churches therefore, as Jerome speaks, were governed by the common Counsel of
the Presbyters.

14. Not always one Bishop in every City.
This we shall add in the second place, It was not universally observed that
one Bishop should be over every City. Of the Apostles time, we suppose it is
already proved. And afterward, more Bishops than one were in the same City, in
imitation of the Jews, who had as many chief Rulers as they had Synagogues; but
in one City often times were many Synagogues, or (as Philo calls them)
Proseuche, places of prayer. Acts 6.9.18.8.17.
So, at Jerusalem, was one Synagogue of Libertines, another of the Cyrenians, a
third of the Alexandrians. And at Corinth, about the same time, were named two
chief Rulers of Synagogues, Crispus and Sosthenes. Epiphanius declares, it was
instituted first at Alexandria, that in the whole City should be but one
Bishop. At last in the VIII. Nicene Canon, we see it was defined, That there
should not be two Bishops in any City: yet so, that withal it appears, the
Canon was sometimes dispensed with. For, the Canon permits, that Bishops
returning from the Sect of the Cathari, to the Catholic Church, should retein
Episcopal honor, next to the Catholic Bishop. So, the Ephesin Synod, after
the Election of Theodorus, grants that honor to Eustachius, as appears by an
Epistle to the Synod of Pamphilia: and, in the conference before Marcellinus,
the Catholics offer the same unto the Donatists, if they would return unto
Communion; Every one of us, receiving an associate of his honor, may sit with
greater eminence, the peregrine Bishops sitting by as a Collenge. Valerius
also, in the Church of Hippo, assumed Austin to himself. Which, although
Austin says 'twas done through ignorance of the Canons, appears yet to have
been a thing not unheard of before, much less believed repugnant to the Law
Divine. Moreover, the Episcopal Chairs, in many Cities, were often void, not
for some months only, but many years together; all which time, The Churches,
that I may again speak with Jerome, were governed by the Common Counsel of the
Presbyters: or, as Ignatius says, Epist. ad Annoch.
The Presbyters fed the flock, until God should show them one to govern them.
To the Roman Clergy, we see, Cyprian wrote many Letters, and the Clergy
answered him, concerning all things pertaining to the State of the Church.
Furthermore, all the ancients do confess, there is no act, except Ordination
so proper to the Bishop, but it may be exercised by the Presbyter. Chrysostom
and Jerome are very clear in this point. And, 15. In whom is the right o^
Ordination.
although in the judgment of these Fathers, the right of Ordination is denied
Presbyters; which may be seen in the constitutions of many Synods partly
Universal, partly topicall: yet, why may not this be understood, that the
Presbyters could ordain none, in contempt of the Bishop. That they did in some
sort concur to Ordinations with the Bishop, seems to appear by the IV. Synod
of Carthage: When a Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop blessing him, and holding
his hand upon his head, let all the Presbyters also, that are present, hold
their hands upon his head, by the Bishops hand. For the confirmation hereof, I
dare not bring that of Paul, concerning the laying on of hands of the
Presbytery, because I perceive, Jerome, Ambrose, and other ancient, and, the
Prince of all recent writers, Calvin, interpret Presbytery in that place, not
the consistory, but the Office to which Timothy was promoted. And truly,
whosoever is versed in the Councils, and the writings of the Fathers, cannot be
ignorant, Presbytery, as Episcopacy and Diaconacy, to be names of Offices.
And, seeing it is certain, that Paul laid hands on Timothy, it seems neither
necessary nor convenient, to join fellows with him for an Apostolical act, and
Collation of miraculous gifts. In the mean time, I do not see, how this can
be refelled, (even among the Schoolmen, Antisiodorensis long since granted it:)
where Bishops are not, Ordination may be rightly made by Presbyters. For, the
things that are observed for order sake, admit exceptions. So, in the ancient
Council of Carthage, it is permitted Presbyters in case of necessity, to
reconcile penitents: and in another place, to lay hands on the Baptized.
Moreover, as we have said above, it is doubtful, whether Presbyters, that
neither have Presbyters under them, nor a Bishop over them, are nearer to
Bishops or more Presbyters. For, of Timothy also, Ambrose argues thus, He that
had not an other above him was a Bishop. And, we know, (to take an instance in
the Commonwealth) many things are lawful for a Senate having not a King, which
to a Senate under a Kings Power, are unlawful. For, a Senate without a King is
as it were a King.

16. For what reasons Bishops were laid by in some Churches.
This is our third Assertion: The causes were not light, why, in this age, in
some places, at least for some time, Episcopacy was omitted. That the causes
are temporary, Beza himself seems to acknowledge, when he says, He is not the
man, to think the old order were not be restored, if the ruins of the Church
were once repaired. Of these causes, the first might be the penury of men,
sufficient for so grave an Office; for, if that were a cause just enough, while
the Church was young, to omit, in many places, the Episcopal eminence, as we
heard Epiphanius say; why then, at the Churches Rise out of the thickest
darkness, might not the same cause take place, especially in those places,
where was found not one of the old Bishops, that would yield up himself to
truth, and open his eyes to see the light held forth. Another cause of this
omission, might be the long and inveterate depravation of the Episcopal
Office. Socrates of old complains, some Episcopacies of his time had exceeded
the bounds of Sacerdotall purity, and were corrupted into Domination. Hierax
complains in Pelusiot, the Dignity of lenity and meekness was advanced into
Tyranny. Nazianzene complains of the ambition of Bishops, and for that reason
wishes, if not Episcopacy, yet at least that perpetual right of Cities in
retaining Episcopal dignity, were changed: Would to God, there were neither
Presidency nor preeminence of place, nor tyrannical power; that we might all
receive our estimate by virtue alone. The Fathers of the Ephesin Synod long
since profess themselves afraid, lest that, under the colors of the Sacred
Function, should commence the pride of secular power. And it is easy to find
the like sayings in the African Councils. But verily, never did Ecclesiastical
ambition, from the Apostles age unto those times, advance to such a hight, as
it has done since those times, to the memory of our Fathers. So that now,
without cutting off the part wherein the cause lies, the disease seems almost
impossible to be cured. It is true, good things are not to be condemned because
some men abuse them: yet the abuse being turned into a custom, an intermission
of the things themselves is not infrequent. The Mosaicall Serpent might have
remained without Superstition, if the thing it self were considered: but
Ezechiah respecting the grown vice of the people, that he might take away the
Superstition, took away the Serpent. I am loath to say, that the name and
eminence Episcopal, by their fault, to whom it had fallen, had lost all its
reverence, and was come into the odium of the common people; to whom, even when
they are in error, somewhat sometimes is to be yielded. The Romans, being
evil entreated by the Tarquins, took an oath, they would no more endure a King
at Rome. A third cause may be added, that in those most infestious times, the
Preachers of the truth, being hated for the truths sake, were obliged to acquit
themselves, not only from the crime of ambition, but from all suspicion too;
which when by taking away the Episcopal dignity they sollicitously
endeavored, for all this, they escaped not the calumny of their adversaries.
What reproaches should they not have heard, had the change of Doctrine been
joined with the acquisition of preferment? I will add one cause more, why, in
the beginning of the Repurgation, Episcopacy was not very necessary. God had
raised up excellent men, of great wit, of great learning, of great esteem,
both among their own, and the neighboring people: few indeed in number, but
such as were able to bear the weight of many businesses: Their high reputation
amongst all, easily supplied the defect of Episcopacy. But, (if we will with
Zanchy-confesse the plain truth,) none were indeed more truly Bishops than
they, whose Authority (although this was not their design) prevailed even to
the overthrow of Bishops. Nor is that here to be omitted, which we have said
already more than once, The Ecclesiastical Government, for the most part,
receives some impression from the Civil. In the Roman Empire, the Bishops were
correspondent to the Dukes, the Metropolitans to the Presidents, the Patriarchs
or Primats to the Vicars or Deputies of the Emperor. What marvel is it then,
if people more accustomed to an Optimacy than Monarchy, would have the Church
affairs committed rather to the Clergy, than the Bishop? And these are the
causes, wherefore I think the Churches may be excused, which have no Bishops:
whilst yet they abstain from a disapprobation of the most Sacred order, and
withal retain, what Beza judged in no wise to be omitted: That was
Essential, says he, De Minister. ^vang. Grad. cap. 23.
which by the perpetual ordainance of God, has been, is, and shall be
necessary; that in the Presbytery some one, both in place and dignity the
first, oversee and govern the action, by that right which God has given him.

Let us come unto those Assessors, whom in many places we see joined to the
Pastors out of the people, by an annual or bienniall Office. They call them
Presbyters, when yet they neither Preach the Gospel to the people, nor
exhibit the Sacraments. Concerning them, this is our judgment.

17. Lay Elders, none in the Apostolical ^ime.
First we say, Those temporary Presbyters are strangers to the Apostolical and
ancient Church: nor have I seen any, that would affirm, much less could
prove, that they were known of old. Tertullian prescribing against Heretics,
among other things declares, how much their temerarious, inconstant, light
Ordinations differ from the Rule of the ancient Church: This day, says he, the
man is a Presbyter, who to morrow is a laick: Nothing could be more clearly
said, to make it appear, that temporary Presbyters were in those times unkown
to the Catholic Church. It is not, say some, material to the nature of the
Office, whether it be undertaken for a time, or for ever. If this be so, I may
wonder, that Pastors also, employed in the word and Sacraments, are not made
Annual somewhere. But if this be absurd, whence I pray, but because, as the
gifts of God are without repentance, so the Divine Offices were instituted by
him for the perpetual uses of the Church? He that has put his hand to the
Plow, and looks back, is not sit for the kingdom of God: that is, for the
ministry of the Church. Wherefore, this very change of Assessors, is no light
argument, that this is an invention of Humane prudence, no institution of Law
Divine.

18. All the ancients by Presbyters understand only Pastors. The ambigu^ty of
the word Seniors and Elders.
Secondly, All the ancient Church, by the name of Presbyters, urder stood no
other men, but Pastors employed in the word and Sacraments. I speak not of the
word old men, or Seniors and Elders: whereby, it is certain, sometimes age,
sometimes Magistracy is meant: but, of the Greek word, which in the Latin
tongue does always signify the Pastoral dignity and Office: and so it does
also in the Greek Authors, wheresoever the word Presbyter notes any thing else
but age or Magistracy. We are not yet come to that place of Paul, which belongs
rather to the question of Divine Right: and of the Elders of the old Testament,
there will be place to speak hereafter. Of so great a number of Fathers, of so
many volumes of books, after so long canvasing of this controversy, not so
much as one place has been alleged, wherein the Presbyteriall dignity is
ascribed to any other than Pastors; When yet, if there had been two sorts of
Presbyters, not often, but a hundred, yea a thousand times mention of them
ought to have been made especially in the Canons, which describe unto us the
whole Government of the Church; at least the manner of electing those
Presbyters, non-Pastors, would somewhere show it self. And although the
Defendant, or he that is on the Negative, is not to make proof; yet were it
easy to produce infinite places of the Fathers, which attribute to all
Presbyters the right of feeding the flock, of Baptising, and exhibiting the
Lords body; and, so far, equal all the Presbyters to Bishops, and call them
the Apostles Successors: which also declare, the Presbyters punishment was, to
be removed from the Presbytery, or for a time to be admitted only to the
Communion of the Laics: which farther show, that maintenance was given to
every one, and a much severer Discipline prescribed for them than others.
Moreover Laws are extant too, of the Presbyters Privileges, and immunity from
Civil Courts and burdens; and many other things there are, which will not
suffer us to acknowledge any Presbyters, but Pastors only.

19. The Penitentiary Presby^er.
Some allege a History of the penitentiary Presbyter, and sharply reprehend the
abrogation of him; which yet, at other times, they like very well, when the
Popish Confession is opposed. But who ever heard of any Penitentiary, that was
not a Pastor? or, when did the ancients ever believe, that the use of the Keys
might be separated from the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments? Certainly,
Christ gave the Keys to them to be used, to whom he gave power to Preach and to
Baptize. What God has joined, let no man put a sunder. Ambrose, De peniten^.
1.6.2.
of the right of binding and loosing, says, This right is permitted only to
the Priests; and elsewhere, Those Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, all we
Priests have received in the Blessed Apostle Peter. Jerim of these, that
succeed in the Apostolical degree, They, says he; having the Key, judge
before the day of judgment; and in the same place, It is no easy matter to
stand in the place of Paul, to keep the degree of Peter. Chrysostom, This bond
of the Priests tyeth the very soul. 20. Pastors may be called Priests.
No man is ignorant, that the Fathers by Sacerdotes, or Priests, do mean
Pastors, to whom the Word and Sacraments are entrusted: indeed, beside the use
of the new Testament, but not without Authority of Scripture; for in Esaias God
foretelling the calling of the Gentiles by the Gospel, says, Is.66.21.
And I will also take of them (the converted Gentiles) for Priests, and for
Levits. Wherefore, the exercise of the Keys, and the Right to absolve
penitents, according to the judgment of all the Fathers, agree to Priests
alone, that is, to Presbyters, the Depositaries of the Word and Sacraments.
Wherefore also, these Presbyters, who specially attended to the absolving of
Penitents, are to be thought no other than Priests, whom the new Testament
styles Pastors.

Now, as the word Presbyter, when it signifies a Function Ecclesiastical, is
never found in the Fathers applied to other than Pastors; so neither is the
Latin word Seniors. 21. Who are the Seniors in Tertullian.
Tertullian speaking of the use of the Keys, judgment is given, says he, with
great Gravity, as in the presence of God; and it is a very great prejudgement
of the future judgment, if any one has so affended, as to be excluded from
Common Prayer, and the Assembly, and all holy commerce. The most approved
Seniors are the Presidents, having obtained the honor by testimony, not by
price; for no Divine thing is set to sale. That in those times Presbyteries
consisted only of Pastors, Calvin himself confesses; wherefore, Tertullian
putting the Greek word into Latin, calls them Seniors, who had the power of the
Keys. For in Greek they are called Presbyters: which word, in its primary
signification, expressing age, was after transferred to Civil Dignities, and
last of all to Ecclesiastical. Let all the Acts of Synods, that ever were, be
read quite thorough, there will be found no Seniors, that were not Pastors.
Moreover the word major natu, or Elder, which seems proper to age, began to
be applied to Pastors, in imitation of the Greek word. Firmilian Bishop of
Cesarea: The Majors are the Presidents (in the Church) who have also the power
to Baptize, and to impose hands, and to ordain: He has given sufficient
caution, to understand no other then the Pastors. So then, the words,
Presbyter, Senior, Major, have a threefold signification, noting First age,
Secondly Magistracy, Thirdly Priesthood. Nor only was the name of Seniors
common to Magistrates and Pastors, but the Assembly of Presbyters, the
Presbytery, which Ignatius calls the Sacred System, Jerome bath translated
Senate: The Church has a Senate, the Assembly of Presbyters: that is, of those
Presbyters, who at the beginning, says he, were equal to the Bishops, and by
whose Counsel the Church was governed. Tertullian by such another Metaphor,
styles the Clergy an Ordo, or State; The Difference, says he, between the
State and people, was constituted by Authority of the Church.

Farther, we must observe, by the word Seniors, Ecclesiastical writers doc
often understand not dignity, 22. Why the ancient Bishops used to consult with
the Church.
but age. It is certain, the Bishops of old seldom disposed any affairs of
greater moment, without consulting the Church. Which course was always
profitable; in the times of persecution, or upon imminent fear of Schism,
almost necessary. For this cause, to lay the murmuring, Acts 6.2.
which arose about the daily ministration, the multitude of the Disciples were
called together. So, after Paul was come to Jerusalem, when there was a rumor
of him, that he taught the Jews to forsake Moses, although all the Elders were
present, Acts 21.22.
it is said, the multitude must needs come together. Cyprian says, I could
return you no answer alone, because ever since I was made Bishop I resolved
(this word shows it was arbitrary) to do nothing, on my own head, without your
Counsel (the Clergy) and consent of the people. It Is plain, as in the
Ordination of the Clergy, so in separating and in reconciling the lapsed, the
people were wont to be consulted with Not always all the people, among whom
were Women and the younger sort, but the Fathers of Families, and not all these
neither, but the elder, and of riper judgment, who happily are the Many, 2 Cor.
2.6.
of whom Paul speaks. These were often consulted with, in place of the
people. In the acts of purgation of Cecilian and Felix, are mentioned, the
Bishops, Presbyters Deacons, Seniors and after, Take unto you your Brethren of
the Clergy, and the Seniors of the people. Some be Seniors then, who are not
Clerks; and therefore Laiks. For these are still distinguished in the Fathers.
It Is ill favouredly done of them that take this word amiss; for it is no term
of disgrace, but is necessarily, used to distinguish the Clergy Seniours from
the rest. Neither have the Fathers only so spoken; whose Authority yet at least
ought to suffice for the retaining of certain words; but the Prophets
themserves, in whom the Priests and people are divided. Rightly then, are they
called Laiks who are not Priests, that is, dispensers of Divine mysteries.
Austin writes, To the Clergy and Seniors of the Church of Hippo, and in
Turonensis it is, Before the Bishop, Clergy and Seniors. Yet I will not
peremptorily deny, but by Seniors in those places, may be understood
Magistrates, who, as we have even now said, were styled by that name. So, Leo
inscribes an Epistle, To the Clergy, the honored, and the common people.

And, as in some places it may be doubted, whether by the word Seniors the
Magistrates or the Elder in age are meant; so in other places, question may be
made, whether by the same word the Elder in age or the Priests are signified.
As, when Gregory appoints, If any Clergy man be accused, let the truth be
inquired, the Seniors of the Church being present. And, when Austin mentions
them, Sermon. 19. de verb. Dom.
that for ebriety, thefts and other errors are rebuked by the Seniors. And,
when Optatus shows, the Ornaments of the Church were commended to faithful
Seniors. For, all this may agree both to Clergymen and Laymen. 23. Who are the
Seniors in the suppositious Ambrose. 1 Timothy 5.


But, most worthy of our consideration is that place of an uncertain Author,
commonly reputed Ambrose, out of his Commentaries on Paul's Epistles. The words
are these: Old age indeed is honorable among all Nations? Whence it is, that
both the Synagogue, and afterward the Church had Seniors, without whose advice
nothing passed in the Church. How this is grown obsolete I know not, unbesse
perhaps by the dissentions of the Doctors, or rather by their pride, whilst
they alone would seem to be somebody. That we may know the writers mind, we
must see, whom he calls Seniors in the Synagogue. Whether the Magistrates, who
were called Seniors sure enough, that the Synagogue may be a Bench of Judges,
as in Matthew, cap. 10.17.
They shall scourge you in their Synagogues? I think not although many things
(as we shall show anon) which belonged to the Jewish Magistrates, are wont by
a certain similitude, to be applied to the Christian Presbyters. Hear the
same Author elsewhere declaring: It was a Tradition of the Synagogue, that the
Seniors (in dignity) disputed sitting in their Chairs, the next on Benches, the
last in the pavement upon mats. I suspect the word (in dignity) stole out of
the margin into the text. For Philo describes the same custom thus, They that
come to be Priests take their places in order according to their age, the
younger beneath the elder. Wherefore, the Seniors in age sat first. And,
questionless, some such order of sitting was observed in the ancient Church,
which James would not have neglected, when he reprehends them, that give the
honor of the highet seats to rich men only, the poof being thrust known below,
or enforced to stand. It follows in Philo, One of the most ^^^^full, passing
over the difficult places (of the Holy Bible) makes an exposition of them. It Is
to be noted, in the Synagogues of the Jews, to every one exercised in Holy
Writ, 24. Liberty to interpret Scripture in the Synagogue.
(and all were so, except mechanics, as also among us) it was permitted to
interpret Scripture. By this common liberty, Christ taught in the Synagoues,
and after him the Apostles. Memorable are the places, Luke iv. and Acts xiii.
There the book is reached forth to Christ: here Paul and Barnabas, though
unknown, are asked to speak unto the people, If they have any word of
exhortation. If no stranger, or none of the people offered himself, then the
chosen men of the Seniors (who were named the Fathers of the Synagogues, the
Majors, and by an excellency the Seniors) interpreted the Law. And these being
not well provided, it was the Rulers Office. Some what correspondent to this,
we find in the first Christian Church. For, 25. And in the ancient Church: with
the d^fference
they that have the gift of prophecy are permitted by the Apostle to speak unto
the people at the Assembly, by two or three, and the rest to judge. That
miraculous gift ceasing, it was hardly lawful for any one, except the Pastors,
to teach among the Christians. Indeed, we read of Origin and a few more, not
Presbyters, who taught in the Church: but that was seldom, and not without
peculiar license of the Bishops. For the Bishop of Caesarea being reprehended
for permitting Origin to teach, alleged three examples of the like concession,
adding, it was credible, though not apparent, the same was done in other
places. Here now we see some difference between the Interpreters of the Law in
the Synagogue, and the Interpreters of the Gospel in the Church. In the
Synagogue, they taught, as many as had any word of exhortations: in the Church,
all what were approved and had obtained the honor of a Testimonial, as
Tertullian speaks, that is they that were ordained. The Judges of the Highest
Synedry were wont to be ordained by imposition of hands: but of the expounders
of the Law, the same does not appear. A reason of the foresaid difference is,
not only because the Preaching of the Gospel is of more moment, than the
expounding of the Law; but also, because in the Christian Church the Preachers
of the word are withal dispensers of the mysteries. Whereas, the Masters of
the Synagogue administered no Sacraments. For all the Sacrifices were offered in
the Temple only, except the Passover; which yet was not celebrated in the
Synagogues, but in every house, the Master of the Family being chief. Nor was
it any where commanded, that Circumcision should be given in the Synagogues, or
by any special Ministers. It may then be doubted, what Seniors of the Church,
Pseudambrose understands: those, that answer to the most skillful of the
Synagogue, who also are scarce any other but aged men, (in which respect the
chief of the Monks are called Seniors in Justinian:) or those, Nov. 133. Cap. 2.
that anser to the Elders in age, in Philo? If the former, then Pseudambrose
says the very same with Jerome. The one, Without the Counsel of the Seniors
nothing in the Church was done: the other, The Churches were governed by the
Common Counsel of the Presbyters: speaking of those Presbyters, which, he
says, at first were called Bishops, and out of whom afterward the Bishops were
elected. But if the later please you more, (and truly his speech mentioned his
age, not Office:) the meaning will be this, which we have expressed a little
before; That, instead of all the people, the Elder men were wont to be consulted
with, in the more weighty affairs: that is, in ordaining the Cleriks, in
absolving the lapsed, and such like. And indeed, it is more credible, this
custom was long since obsolete and disused, to consult with the people or the
chief of the people, than that the Bishops did almost all things without
consulting with the Clergy. Yet this also by little and little came to pass
and prevailed against the ancient custom. These things therefore being
understood, no man will henceforth doubt, but in all Ecclesiastical writers,
the word Presbyters or Seniors pertains either to the aged in the Church, or to
the Magistrates, who also are a part of the Church, or to the Pastors. And this
ought to prevail with us, that we take not, unadvisedly and without forcible
arguments, the places of Holy Scripture speaking of Presbyters, in any other
sense, than they have been taken by them, who being nearer to the Apostles
times had more perfect intelligence of that ancient Title.

But now let us proceed to the Ofacles of Holy Scripture and let this be our
third Assertion: Those choice Assessors of the Pastors, of whom we dispute, 26.
Lay Elders, or Assessors, not commanded by God.
are not by Divine precept. Whosoever affirms the contrary must condemn the
Church of so many ages, for contempt of Gods Law: from which temerity, we think
it becomes us to abstain. Nor indeed is there any weight in their arguments,
who affirm that which we deny, and upon whom therefore lies the necessity of
proving. Sufficient answers have been returned heretofore by very learned men:
yet lest any defect be in our Treatise, it will be worth our pains, to repeat
what has been well said, and to add somewhat that may bring light unto the
question.

27.Mat. 18.17. Explained: and the Difference 'twixt the Synedry and the
Consistoty.
In the front, we have that which Christ commands, Tell it to the Church,
etc. In which place, some are of opinion, Christ has given the Church
direction, to institute a certain Synedry to judge of things Ecclesiastical,
consisting both of Ministers and other persons; for such they will needs have
Ecclesiastical Synedrys to have been. As for the words of Christ, the ancient
and recent expositors have offered us sundry explications of them. To repeat
them all were tedious. To me, the most simple and plain Interpretation, and
which comprehends almost all the rest seems to be this: The man, that has
offended us, is not easily to be accounted for one deplored and incurable.
There are several degrees of admonition to be observed, first alone, that he
may, if it be possible, repent without a witness of his fault; if that avails
not, a friend is to be taken with you; one, a second, and a third, if perhaps
he will yield to their Authority. And hitherto Christ has said nothing, which
is not almost in the same words delivered in the writings of the Jews. For this
is extant in the book Musar. If, say they, he will neither then be
reconciled, (friends being used, two or three,) let him depart, and leave him
to himself; for such a one is implacable, and is called a sinner. But the same
book in another place adds one degree more; for thus it says, If neither by
this means he shall prevail any thing (friends being used) then he ought to
make him ashamed in the presence of many. Which Christ not disapproving,
according to his exceeding lenity, which he would have us to imitate, would
have us try all things first, before we give up the man for lost; for that is
the sense of, Let him be unto thee as a Heathen and as a Publican: that is, an
incorrigible sinner. So, Mat. 11.19. Mar. 11.15.
in the Gospel are often joined, Publicans and sinners; and the Gentiles are
called sinners, as when Christ says, he should be delivered into the hands of
sinners. Wherefore the meaning of Christ is, that before we relinquish all
hope, after a few witnesses, any company of pious men ought to be adhibited, to
the end the scandalous person may be reclaimed, by the number and consent of
grave men, by the punishment or censure of many, as Paul speaks. For in Musar
and in Paul the many, and in the words of Christ the Church, are the very same.
Certainly, that a Company not great, is comprehended in the name of Church,
both the LXX. teach us, and Paul too, who has entitled, by the name of Church,
one family of pious people. Here it suffices, that it be understood, this
place in Matthew is nothing to their purpose; for a company both of Pastors,
and of non-Pastors, may be without the Assessors, of whom now the question is.

What they add concerning the Jewish Senates, after long consideration, I
cannot grant. The Synagogues of the Jews, their Proseuche, and Phrontisteries,
as Philo calls them, were far different from their Courts of judgment. In their
Proseuchae were the Scriptures read and expounded, all were instructed (to
speak again with Philo) to the love of God, to the love of virtue, to the love
of men: whereto answer those three words of Paul, Godly, soberly, justly. Here
are no judgments exercised upon any. That was done in the Courts of judgment;
where the Judges had cognizance of Sacred matters as well as of Profane; the
same Judges, by the same Law; for in the Hebrew people these were never
disjoined. These Judges were partly in the several Cities, partly in the Head
City. Those were the lesser Synedryes, to the Hellenists; this the Great one,
and by an excellency the Synedry. Whence the Hebrews following the Hellenists
derived Sanhedrin. None of these Courts, because they had all of them coactive
power, could be retained in the Apostolical Church; because, it is certain,
neither the Apostles, nor the Church had any coactive power granted to them.

28. Lay. Elders not spoken of in, the new Testament.
I come unto the name of Presbyters, which many think, in the new Testament was
given to the Assessors of Pastors; which is not clear to me. In the Testament I
find three significations of this word ^one which pertains to age, as when the
Presbyters or Elders are opposed to the younger; 1 Timothy 5.1.
another, which belongs to Power and Empire, as when there is mention of those
that sat in the great Synedry or in the less; a third, which agrees to the
Preachers of the Gospel; a fourth I do not find. 29. Why Pastors were called
Elders by the Apostles.
A question may be made, why the Apostles called the Pastors, ordained by them,
by the name of Presbyters? Was it, because scarce any other but old men were
called to that Office? or, because in the Synagogue also the Masters, by an
excellency, had that appellation? or, (which I like as well) by a similitude
taken from the Jewish Magistrates? For, Christ himself, in the constitution of
his Church, that he might show himself a King, and withal by degrees might
abolish the hope of an earthly Kingdom, composed his Church, though destitute
of all external power, to a certain Image of the Judaicall Kingdom, and so
erected the minds of his Disciples to the hope of a Kingdom Celestial. 30.
The Church of Christ compared with the Judaicall Kingdom.
There was one King among the Hebrew people: He also acknowledges himself to
be a King. In that Kingdom were twelve Princes of their Tribes: Christ
constituted to himself so many Apostles, and, that it might not be doubted,
whether he had respect, promises to them twelve thrones, whereon they should
judge the twelve tribes of Israel. In the Kingdom, were LXX Senators of the
Great Synedry: so many Evangelists are constituted by Christ. The third dignity
in the Kingdom, was of the City Judges, called Presbyters or Elders: in the
Church also the Presbyters follow the Apostles and Evangelists in the third
place. The chief of those Judges were called Bishops or Overseers: and so in
the Church the Princes of the Presbyters are the Bishops. Lastly, They that
waited upon those Judges were Deacons or Ministers: so are, they called in the
Church, who are Ordained below the Presbyters.

31. The Office of Elders in the new Testament.
What the Office of Presbyters is in the Christian Church, the Apostles in
sundry places teach us. Paul having sent for the Presbyters of Ephesus to
Miletum, gives them to understand, that they were made Overseers over the flock
to feed the Church of God. Acts 20.28.
James bids the sick call for the Presbyters of the Church, Jac. 5.14.
to pray over them, and anoint them with Oil, in the name of the Lord. 1 Pet.
5.1.
Peter exhorts the Presbyters, being himself a Co-Presbyter, that is, a
Colleague in the Office. It appears therefore, they were Pastors. Neither were
they otherwise ordained, but by imposition of hands: as of Timothy it is
recorded. In other places, where without any character, Presbyters are barely
mentioned, to understand any other Presbyters, but those who in so many places
are most clearly described, is the part of a temerarious conjector, unless the
Context compel us to depart from the certain and received signification.

In all the new Testament, only one sentence of Paul is extant, which is
speciously brought to confirm those: Presbyters non-Pastors. 32. An answer to
the only place, 2 Timothy 5.17.
Let the Presbyters or Elders, that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and Doctrine. From this word,
especially, is inferred that there were in that time certain Presbyters, who
ruled only, and did not labor in the word and Doctrine. But first, if that
were true, at least somewhere else would appear this new kind of Presbyters
(never spoken of before) by what Author, by what occasion it began, as the
Original of Deacons is recorded: and not so on the By, and in passage, in a
single place, where the speech was not concerning Offices Ecclesiastical; this
necessary part of Ecclesiastical Government should not, I say, so slightly be
insinuated. Again, the Fathers next to the Apostles times would have told us
somewhat of it: at least the Greek Fathers, who could not be ignorant of their
own tongue, would have left us this Interpretation, which some suppose to
follow from the very series of the words. Now, when as before the last age not
one of the Interpreters has taken the words of Paul in that sense, we have
reason to see, whether they admit not another interpretation, more consonant to
other places of the Scripture. Let us then consider the scope of the Apostle.
He would have double honor given to Presbyters. What he means by honor, may
be understood by the words before, Honor Widows. Where, 1 Timothy 5.3.
to honor is nothing else but to maintain them honestly; for, his will is
that the Widows should be honored, who are Widows indeed, that is, as appears
by the opposition, such as have not believing kindred, by whose help they may
be relieved; for, if they have, such he forbids to be burdensome to the
Church. After he had finished his discourse of susteining Widows, he shows, the
Presbyters also must be supplied with honest maintenance. That this is noted by
the word honor, the reason annexed proves: For it is written, Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. This same testimony of
Scripture, he had produced elsewhere, to the same sense: who goes a warfare
any time at his own charges? 1 Cor. 9.7. etc.
who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a
flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man?
or, says not the Law the same? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. Dent. 25.4.
And afterward, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
thing if we shall reap your carnal things? Well is it noted upon the place, we
handle, by Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose, Calvin also, and Bullinger, that the
Apostle here speaks of supply of maintenance, and necessaries. That our
Assessors should be sustained by the Churches allowance, is not seen at this
time nor was ever seen. Neither is it credible, that the Apostle, who every
where spares the Churches, burdened enough with poor people, would lay an
unnecessary burden on them. Wherefore, if ever, in this place especially, those
Assessors had been unseasonably mentioned where a discourse of maintenance is
commenced. The words of Paul have been commodiously interpreted many ways by
others. The plainest Interpretation is, Maintenance is due indeed to all
Presbyters, that rule the Church, that is, feed the Lords flock; but especially
to them that wholly neglecting their private affairs, apply themselves to the
only care of propagating the Gospel, and spare no labor in it. Here then, are
not set down two sorts of Presbyters, but it is declared that the labor of all
is not equal. All acknowledge, even Beza too, that the word translated, to
labor, Ad Mat. 11.
notes not every labor, but that which is most painful. In such labors not
vulgar, 2 Cor. 6.5.
Paul says, he approved himself the Minister of God; for explication whereof
he adds, painfulnesse, hunger, thirst, watchings, 11.27.
and all kinds of incommodities, Christ in his Epistle to the Bishop of
Ephesus, having said, I know thy works, adds as somewhat greater, and thy
labor. Paul again, ofttimes attributes to himself, to labor; Apoc. 2.2.
and the same to certain holy Women, which renouncing the world went up and
down for the service of the Gospel. To these Presbyters then, who care for
nothing but the Gospel and for its sake expose themselves to all distresses,
reason it self will dictate, somewhat more to be due than to the rest. 1 These.
5.12.13.
So also Paul to the Thessal. ascribes, to rule, and, to labor, unto the same
persons: We beseech you, brethren, to know them, which labor among you, and
rule over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And to esteem them very highly in
love for their works sake. All the error of the new Interpreters arises hence,
that they think, in the word and Doctrine, is to be pronounced emphatically,
when the Emphasis is in, labor; for explication whereof is added, in the word
and Doctrine. Such another hallucination is theirs, who in the words of Paul to
the Cor. where he discourses of the Supper: Let a man examine himself: they
urge the word, himself; when the Emphasis is not there, but in the word,
examine; nor is, himself, put distinctively, but declaratively. Moreover, that
clause, in the word and Doctrine, could not so well be joined with the first
part of the sentence, as the second, because it has very fit coherence with
labor, not so with rule. I will give you like forms of speech, which no man
will charge with unaptnesse: Masters, that bring up youth, are profitable to
the Commonwealth; they especially, that attend this one thing night and day,
to make their Scholars good proficients both in virtue and learning.
Physicians, who cure the Body, are to be had in great esteem; They above
therest, who with no less affection than pains, do their utmost endeavor, to
preserve or restore our health. Compare the thread of Paul's discourse herewith,
you will see all to be even and square.

33. Other places need no answer.
Other places, that are wont to be alleged, are more frigid, and vanish of
their own accord. Romans 12. Diverse gifts, and according to the measure of gifts,
diverse actions are reckoned up, but such as do not yet make diverse Functions.
As the same may be, He that gives, and, Romans 12.8.
He that shows mercy: So nothing hinders Him that exhorts, and Him that
rules, to be the same. For, out of the two places already produced, it is
manifest, that, to rule, is attributed to Pastors, as also, to guide, Heb.
13.7. Likewise, 1 Cor. 12.28.
to the Corinth. not only diverse Functions are enumerated, but also many gifts,
which meet in the same Function. As therefore, miracles and gifts of healing
do not make diverse Functions, so neither do Helps and Governments; but all
these are aids and ornaments of the Pastoral Office.

Thus far, we have endeavored to make it appear, that the Adsession, we speak
of, is not by Divine precept. The fruit of which determination is, that we
entertain no worse opinion of the ancient Churches, than is meet, nor of the
late reformed, who make no use of those Adsessors. Now, on the other side, what
we conceive, may be said for that Office, shall fairly be produced.

34. The Highest Power, or the Church might lawfully institute lay Elders
First, That Office might, lawfully be instituted, either by the Highest Power
being Christian, only the Church, where the Highest Power either cared not for
the Church, or granted leave to do it. For, seeing it has the Highest
inspection over all the actions of Pastors, as the Custos of both Tables; nor
can it execute all things by it self; it was lawful to delegate some, who, in
its name, might be among the Presbyters, with that right, which the Highest
Power was pleased to communicate unto them. Which, by that, that shall be
handled in the next Chapter shall be made more manifest. The Church also is not
interdicted by Divine Law, to institute Offices, making for the conservation of
order, and for edification: and it has that liberty remaining, until it be
circumscribed by some Law of the Highest Power. These things need no proof; for
they shine by their own light and no Divine Law can be showed to the contrary.

35. This institution not displeasing to God proved by Scripture.
Secondly, Some passages may be found in Holy Scriptures, whereby it may
appear, this institution is not displeasing unto God. I prove it, first in
respect of the Highest Power, by the constitution of the Judaical Synedry:
wherein, with the Priests there sat men chosen out of the people, preposed
truly to Civil affairs, but to Sacred too, as has bin showed before.
Wherefo^^, when out of the new Testament, on the contrary part, nothing is
alleged, hence we do rightly collect, that Jurisdiction in Sacred things, that
is, public judgment, and joined with command, may be committed to some of the
people with the Pastors; especially if the better part be deferred to the
Pastors, as in Sacred things, 2 Chronicles. 19.11.
greater was the Authority of Amariah the Priest, then of Zebadiah the Ruler.
By the same argument, is rightly defended the Ecclesiastical Senate, which by
the Commission of the Elector Palatine rules the Church affairs with command,
and consists partly of Pastors, partly of pious Magistrates. In respect of the
Church also, the same is thus made good. It was lawful for the Corinthian
Church (even without the Apostles Authority, for the Apostle reprehends the
Corinthians for not doing that, which now he charge them to do) to
constitute in the Church, some to determine private controversies. If so much
was lawful to the Church for avoiding of contentions, why might not as much be
lawful for avoiding of the mischief of Oligarchy? Besides, it is often times
expedient, that the whole multitude of believers be consulted, in the Church
affairs, as above we have showed: why may not then the Church adjoyn some unto
the Pastors, who may consider this, at what time it is needful, that the
Church be consulted. It was also lawful for the Church, to make choice of
some, 2 Cor. 8.19 Phil. 2.22.
who might in their name carry and dispose of their money; wherefore, seeing the
Pastors have inspection over the Deacons, the Church may, for this purpose join
some associats to the Pastors, 2 Cor. 8.20.
Lest any should blame them in their Administration of the Churches
benevolence, that I may speak with the Apostle. Lastly, it was lawful for the
Antiochian Church to delegate some out of their Company, Acts 19.2.
to be present at the Debate of the Apostles and Presbytery of Jerusalem, by
whose testimony they might be assured, all was there done according to Gods
word, and without partiality.

36. Examples in the ancient Church drawing toward it.
Thirdly, Examples in pious Antiquity are not wanting, which, if not wholly
Consonant, yet come very near unto this custom. On the part of the Highest
Powers, it is most evident, the Emperors, appointed Senators and Judges, to
sit in Synods, Inspectors and moderators of their actions. Nor this only, but
to give sentence together with the Bishops, concerning the deposition of a
Bishop, and other matters, as we see it happened in the case of Photinus and
Dioscorus. And, why is not that lawful in Presbyteries, which was lawful in
Synods; especially, when as no less regard is to be had of Presbyteries in
narrower territories, than of Synods in that amplitude of the Roman Empire? But
further, by the Emperors were given unto the Churches, at their request,
Defendors, which were Laiks, whose Office was to keep off all force and tumult
from the Church and Pastors; Novel. 56. Conc. Cha^c can. 76.
and to take care, that nothing should be done in the Church, by violence or
corruption. These are they, who in the later ages begin to be called the
Churches Advocates. So, by the Metroplitans were wont to be given unto the
Churches Phrontistae, or Sollicitors, who, with the Bishop should keep accounts
of the Churches treasure. On the Churches 01 part, we must repeat, what was
said before, that the whole multitude was not always consulted, but sometimes
the Elders only. Now, if it was lawful to carry the consultation from the
multitude to the Elders, why might it not, the company of Elders being over
great, be contracted to a fewer number, especially with consent of the
multitude? Moreover in choosing Pastors, it appears, that which was belonging
to the multitude was often, by compromise, collated on a few. And, that in
Synods Laiks were present, and gave their vote, is so manifest, both by the
History of the Great Council and elsewhere, that Pope Nicolas could not deny
it. In this point, the judgments not of Melanchthon only and the later
Authors, but of Panormitan and Gerson are well known. Why, in Presbyteries may
not be allowed as much to Laiks, chosen for that purpose, no reason can be
found. But farther yet: It is apparent, in the ancient Church, there were
Matrons, to exhort the other women to an honest conversation: whom they called
Presbyters; and, because in the Churches they sat above the other women,
Presidents. The XI. Canon of the Laodicean Synod abrogated them, when they had
continued until that time, as Balsamon notes. And happily, Paul speaks of them,
Tit. 3.4.
where he requires the Presbytesses, or aged women to be holy in behavior, not
false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things: That they may
teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their
children, etc. If women therefore, partakers of no Church-Office, might
nevertheless be appointed by the Church, to be teachers of other women, why
might not others, beside the Pastors be assumed by the people, who, abstaining
from Pastoral Offices, should with greater diligence perform that, that is
not only permitted, but commanded every Christian? And, if those were entitled
Presbytesses, we may also in a more general respect, give unto these the
appellation of Presbyters. 37. The English Churchwardens not much, unlike the
Adsessors.
Moreover, not much distant from the Office of Adsessors, is the Office of
Church Wardens and Sidemen in the Church of England. Upon whom it rests, to
take care, that none disturb the Divine service; that no excommunicate person
thrust himself into the Assembly; They are also to admonish inordinate livers,
and, if they persevere, to defer their names unto the Bishop. And these are
chosen by the Church.

38. The Adsessors be of good use.
Fourthly, our last position is, that from these assessors no small benefit may
accrue unto the Church. For, if we respect the Highest Powers, it is expedient
for them to have, in the Assemblies of Pastors, their eyes and ears, by whose
Ministry they may explore, whether all things be done with fidelity and
according to rule. But, if we look upon the Churches, it is a thing of
consequence, that they also have a good opinion of the Pastors; which will then
most probably come to pass, when they have witnesses of their actions, and
some to beget and keep a right understanding between the Pastors and themselves.

Upon the premises it follows, that in the Office of Adsessors, who in some
places are in use, whom for distinction we may call temporary or
Lay-Presbyters, there is nothing to be reprehended. But, we conceive, these
cautions are to be remembered. 39. Yet with cer^ain cau^ions.
1. That the Office be not affirmed of Divine precept; which cannot be said
without contumely of the ancient Church, and divulsion of the present. 2. That
nothing be attributed to them, which pertains to the Evangelicall Keys; which
Christ having given to be exercised by Pastors only, may not be by us
transferred to any other. To excommunication therefore, as it is the Pastors
work, they can confer nothing beside their Counsel; but, as excommunication
is also the work of the people, who ought to remove from them wicked persons,
so far they may make an Act, or Decree, which may be proposed to the people for
their approbation. 3. Let none be ele^ted to this adsession, who are unable for
Church Government, and especially for judging controversies. For that is
perilous, and undecent for the Church, and the most ready way to Oligarchy. 4.
Let not those Adsessors exercise any external Jurisdiction, or Coactive Power,
beyond what the public Laws allow them. 5. Let them know their Office, not
only as the Pastors Office, which is instituted by Christ; but, as the things
that are of humane Institution, and therefore mutable, is subject to the
Authority of the Highest Powers. The two last cautions being not known, or not
well observed, great perturbations of the Commonwealth do necessarily follow,
a^wise men have heretofore admonished, and we have daily experience. For, many
men having once imbibed this opinion, that, that Government is of Right Divine,
come at last to this, to believe the Highest Powers have little or nothing to
do in the Church, as being by God abundantly provided both with Pastors and
with Rulers too. Thus is an Invention of humane prudence confronted to the
Ordinance of God, and in this two headed Empire is sown perpetual seed of
parties and factions: whereunto they cease not to turn their eyes, whosoever
either in State or Church seek after Innovations. They that remember, what has
been done, thirty years since, in this our Country, know the truth of what I
say. And this consideration principally moved me, not to leave this question
untoucht. 40. The Genevian election of Adsessors.
It Is worthy the Relation, that in Geneva (which City brought forth, if not
first this Synedry it self, at least the prime Defenders of it:) the entire
right of electing those Elders is in the City Senate, which is called the
Little, the Counsel of the Pastors being only heard. Nor are they only elected
by the Senators, but from among Senators alone, that is two out of the same
little Senate, and ten both out of the Senate of the sixty, and out of the
other Senate of two hundred. The election made after this manner, is submitted
to the examination of the two hundred: and the Elders elected, although they
have no Jurisdiction, yet they give oath to the Republic. He must needs be
very ill-sighted, who perceives not, what incommodities the Genevians feared,
when they took such a sollicitous and wary course for their elections.

CHAP. XII.
Of Substitution, and Delegation about Sacred things.

IT is not enough for the Supreme Governor to know his own Right, unless he
know also how to use it in the best way. Now, whereas the Supreme Governor
executes his Office, partly by himself, partly by others; in those things which
he dispatcheth by himself, 1. The H. power has need of Vicars in Spirituals.
how he ought to use the Counsels of wise men is said before; nor is it unworthy
to be here repeated, that the Christian Emperors and other Kings always had,
standing by their side, most Religious Pastors, by whose Counsels they did
dispose of Sacred affairs, as they did of secular by the advice of others. But,
neither by this Help is the Supreme Governor, whose influence is diffused
through so many and so great businesses, enabled to dispatch all things, but
has need to use the service of Deputies. The most weighty labors, (says a
wise Author) of him that holds the Imperial Ball, have need of Helps: And,
many businesses want many hands. The Disputation makes a great noise in the
Law-School, What parts of Authority may be committed to other by the Highest
Power? It would be tedious and impertinent to relate all that may be said upon
this queston. In short, 2. What Authority may be committed to inferiors, by
the Highest Power.
some things there are, which are not possible to be separated from the right
of the Highest Power: some things which to communicate to any other, by reason
of their greatness, is not expedient. Of the former kind, is the right of
amending Laws, though made by others; the right of cancelling unjust
judgments, if not by way of appeal, at least by way of Petition; the right to
void elections, which are against the good of the State or Church. 3. Liberty
of Religion tolerated sometimes
Of the later sort are these: the choice of Religion, and as well the Election,
as the Deposition of the chief Pastors: which the Highest Powers, for the most
part, have reserved to themselves, yet not always. For also to certain
subjects, whether Princes, or Corporations, we see the choice of Religion has
been granted, when the necessity of the times exacted it. Nor is this so new,
when the Persians also, Macedonians and Romans granted the Jews and other
Nations, under their Dominions, Liberty of Religion: Moreover, the Bishops of
Rome and Constantinople, we know, were not always elected by the Emperors.

4. Vicars are either substitutes or delegates.
The ways of committing Right to others are two, Substitution, and Delegation.
Substitution I call a mandate given by Law or Privilege: Delegation, by
special Grant. That the Highest Powers were accustomed to substitute Bishops,
we have showed above; 5. Bishops substituted, and Cleriks.
for thence arises, the right of making Canons, which have the force of Law;
the right with Power to depose a Pastor, or to exclude one of the people out of
the Congregation: which apparently have been permitted to Synods or
Presbyteries. From the same Springhead is the right of the Clergy or Chapters
to make elections: as may be proved by many Patents of Emperors and Kings.
Wherein verily, their piety is worthy of all honor. For they judged, that unto
them, who were most acquainted with Sacred affairs, and to whom the Pastoral
Regiment was by God committed, that other Regiment, which flows from the
Imperial Power, might also be committed most safely. Would the event had not
often deceived them, in their so honorable design. In the mean time, they, who
endure not Pastors to be called, in any part, Vicars of the Highest Powers, are
to advised to depose their error, moved either by reason, or the Authority of
Laws and Histories. 6. Pastors and Laymen joined.
Elsewhere we see, the care of holy things was committed to Pastors with
others, not Pastors, but pious and learned men, and that not without example of
Divine Authority. For the great Synedry of LXX. among the Hebrews, upon whom,
among other things, the care of Religion lay, consisted of Priests, Levits, and
men chosen out of the people. No doubt, in matters of Religion, (yea in all
Judgments, if I mistake not) the High Priest gave his sentence before the
rest. Yet so, that the Kings Vicegerent, who was entitled Nasi, had the first
place, and asked the Votes. After which exemplar, I observe, the
Ecclesiastical Senate is composed in the Palatinate. This Conjunction of the
lesser Powers with the Bishops I find also in Justinian. Nov. 17. c. 11.
Certain it is, in the Deposition of Bishops, the judgments of the Synod, and
of the Synators or Judges adjoined by the Emperors, met together. So, Pholinus
is deposed by the sentence of the Bishop, and the men of Senators rank, whose
names are recorded in Epiphanius. Sometimes therefore, the lesser Powers were
associated to the Pastors, only to suppress violence and tumult; sometimes, to
give sentence with them. And so, in the election of Bishops, Justinians Law
united with the Clergy, the City Magistrates. Which manner had not its first
Original then; for Theodoret tells us, After the death of Athanasius, Peter was
made Bishop by the suffrages of the Clergy, and of the men in dignity and
office. Yea, times have so fallen out, that, by reason of Schisms or the tumor
of Bishops, it was necessary, this weighty part, the care of Sacred things with
command, should be committed to the inferior Powers, 7. Sometimes Laymen alone
and that without the Bishops. For, Aelianus Constantin's Proconsul, and
Marcellinus, by Commission of Honorius, examined the Laws of the Donatists, and
gave sentence 'twixt the parties, as above is noted. And in the Court of CP.
one of the Patricians did particularly attend the Church affairs: whence his
Office had its name. So also, the Parliaments of France by appeal, the Senate
of Spain by way of opposition, the Court of Holland by penal writs, corrected
the errors of the Ecclesiastic censure.

8. The right of Lay-Patrons ancient, and derived from the Regal.
Moreover, that the right of electing or presenting Pastors (the right of
ordaining saved to the Pastors, and of probation to the people) was often times
allowed to laymen alone, is clear enough. And this is the Right of Patronage,
which, not with us only, is in force, but in England and the Palatinate, as may
be seen in the English Canons and the Palatine Constitutions. Now, as we do
not blame their piety, who are sollicitous, lest any mischief be done the
Church, under color of this right; so the truth exacteth at our hands, not to
let pass in silence the temerarious Assertion of those men, who say this right
is a new thing, and depends upon the Authority of the Pope. Surely, Justinian
is not a new Emperor, nor lived he under the Popes Domination, yet has he
established this Right by a Law. Nov. 123.c. 18.
If any devout person has built a House, and will ordain Clerks in it (here to
ordain, the Latin Interpreter translated for, to elect) either himself or his
Heirs, if they maintain the Clericks, and name such as are worthy, the named
shall be ordained: but if the presentees are, by the Holy Rules, excluded as
unworthy of Ordination, then let the most Sacred Bishop ordain such as he
shall find more worthy. This Law was published by Justinian about the year
DXLI. at what time the Roman Bishops were at the Emperors devotion and created
by them. There is also another Constitution of the same Emperor set forth as
is thought in the year DLV. Novel. 157.
and inscribed to the Bishop of C P. Which permits the Founders of Churches, or
of maintenance, to appoint Clericks, if yet they be found worthy by the Bishops
examination. And in the year DLIII. a Canon was made is the Council of Tolen,
to the same effect. About the year DCCCXXVII. were collected the Constitutions
of Charles the Great, wherein we find, If Laic (Patrons) present unto the
Bishops Cleriks approved both for their life and learning to be consecrated,
and constituted in their Churches, by no means let them be rejected. Not only
Pastors of inferior degree, but Bishops also were constituted by the Dukes of
Bavaria and Saxonia, by a Right long since derived from the German Emperors,
as has been observed by others. When as, without such Grant, the Investiture
of Bishops (as Hermoldus of old has written) is proper to the Imperial
Majesty. Wherefore this Right was extracted from the Constitution and
Concession of Emperors and Kings, and is an Offspring flowing from the Right of
the Highest Power. And it is so far from depending on the Popes Authority, that
on the contrary, the makers and Interpreters of the Papal Law, have opposed or
clipped nothing more eagerly, desiring to persuade the world, that all
benefices are the Patrimony of the Pope. 9. Benefices not the Popes Patrimony.
Panormitan is chief among them: whom I had much rather have for my adversary
in such a matter, than my Second. For I know, most of his Comments in this kind
are refuted by Covarruvia and Duarenus and other Lawyers: Covar. p. 2 Relig. c.
Poss. Sect. 10. Duar. 1. 3. de Minist. cap. 11.
and wisemen have herein always differed from the Clergy of those times, even
unto our age. See but what the the Holland Senate has noted in the Trent-acts,
as contrary to the old Law of our Nation. 10. The Custom of Holland
To the IV. Sect. c. 12. In this Chapter the Lay Patrons seem to be grieved. To
the xxv. Sect. c. 4. We must beware, lest by uniting Parish Churches and single
Benifices, prejudice be done to the Lay Patrons: and in other places more to
the like effect. This was then the judgment of the Senate, the Keeper of the
old Customs of our Country: which may more justly be defended by us, than what
our Ancestors in their unhappy time, esteemed intolerable. But what if the
Roman Bishops themselves; what if Panormitan himself durst not require of Lay
Patrons, what is now required, by virtue of their Authority? I will not dispute
about the word, whether the Collation of the Patron may be called Election Cap.
nobis de Jur. patr. Ex d. c. nob.
, and yet Clement III. called it so. These words are cited: In a Conventuall
Church, the assent of the Patron is better required, not to the election of the
Prelate to be made, but after it is made: the following words, which are very
material being omitted: unless the custom be otherwise by reason of his
Jurisdiction. For, many ages before, and in many places, the custom was
otherwise; and namely in our Holland. Witness again the Senate: Ad cap. 1.
Sess. 5. Syn. T^id.
Note, that if the first Prebend to be void, in Collegiat Churches, be assigned
to the Readers of Divinity; the King and other Lay Patrons, whose right it is
in the Collegiat Churches of Holland, in every Chapter, should be deprived of
the presentation of the Prebend first to be void. In such a Collegiat or
Conventuall Church, the Pope hardly admitted a Lay Patron; but the Emperors,
Kings, and the Princes of our Holland, as we now heard, have admitted him, even
to the memory of our Fathers; and therefore, the Pope fearing he should not be
obeyed, added to his decree the exception of Custom; which many as it now
appears, if they had a Papacy, would not add. That our States abrogated the
Right of Patronage, neither is true, nor can be said without their injury. For
they mention, among the causes of the troubles, the Acts of the Trent Synod;
and show, that nothing did more hinder the publication of them, than that the
Lay-Patrons complained, their Right was infringed by those Constitutions. What
opinion the States themselves had of the business, we have heard their own
words. This is a certain truth, that both the election made by the Patrons may,
11. All Patronages subject to the Highest Power.
upon just causes, be rescinded by the Highest Power, and all this Right, no
less than other things which are the properties of private men, is Subject to
the Commands of Law. To which restraint, if we add both the exploration of the
people, and the Pastoral Ordination, the corruption of the Church need no more
be feared, from Noble Patrons, than from Rustic Elders.

12. Inferior powers have no command by Divine Right.
Two things remain to be spoken, before I conclude this part, concerning
derived Right. The one is this, that the Inferior powers have, by Divine
Right, us Authority at all about Sacred things. What ere they have, they have
it as by the Supreme, which we have elsewhere noted. Wherefore, neither Joseph
the Decurion, nor the Proconsull Sergius, could do more in the Church, than
any private person. Because, neither the former from the great Synedry, nor the
later from the Roman Emperor, had received any Power, to dispose of
Ecclesiastical affairs. And no man ought to snatch to himself the sword, or
any part thereof. The other is this: 13. And little is to be given them by the
Highest, in Sacred things.
Being the tuition of the Church is a principal part of the Supreme Authority,
the Highest Powers will do wisely, if they grant as little as may be of it to
the Magistrates. And whatsoever they grant, let them take care at least, to
commend these most noble Offices, only to their most noble Peers. For, if the
charge of Checker money and Coin is committed not to the Municipall Judges, but
to men of higher place, how much more does it concern the public safety, and
the Churches honor, that Ecclesiastical affairs be not devolved to inferior
tribunals. So, in France, no Judges below the Parliament have cognizance of
abuses of the Ecclesiastic censure; nor with us, of old, below the Senate of
Holland. 14. None at all unless they be Orthodox.
. But, the Inspection of the Church affairs is not easily to be deferred to
them, who are not in the Churches books. For, seeing both Jews and Christians
held it irreligious, to carry their private complaints before such as were
Aliens to their Law; much more unworthy were it and dishonorable, in so great
frequency of Right believers, that the wounds of the Church should be committed
to the cure of any other persons, but only to the Sons of the Church.

THE END.
Soli Deo Gloria.
Erudito Lectori.
EX Latinis bonis, Anglica non mala me fecisse, si censueris, est quod gaudeam.
Fateor, autem, ne mibi fraudi sit, nonnulla hic omissa: ea nimirum, quae ^ut
ipsa Res, aut Lector meus facilius abesse pateretur. Nempe, istam navavi
operam, in eorum praecipue gratiam, qui Latina non attingunt. Ingens operae
pretium est, ut (...) (quorum (...) far oportet) meminerint, offic^i esse
sui, ne quid Resp. Ecclesiastica detrimenti capiat videre, Clero dignitatem
conciliare, Et populum antiqua sub Religione tueri. Da veniam, erudite Lector,
and Vale.

Scripsi December. 17. 1650.
The Method of every Chapter.
CHAPTER. I.
1. THE State of the question. 2. An argument from the Unity of the matter,
proved by Scripture. 3. And by Natural Reason. 4. An argument from the Univer
sality of the end, proved by Scripture. 5. And by Philosophy. 6. The Right
vindicated by direct Authority of Scripture. 7. By the consent of the Ancient
Christians. 8. And of the Reformed. 9. And of the Heathens. 10. With respect
unto eternal happiness. 11. And unto temporal prosperity. 12. Which follows
true Religion by ver^he of Divine providence. 13. And by its own nature. 14.
More Reasons added.
CHAP. II.
1. ALL Functions are under command. 2. Some by emanation. 3. The Supreme
Authority, and the Sacred Function united in the same person, by the Law of
nature. 4. It was so, before Moses, and after among the nations. 5. The Supreme
Authority, and Sacred Function separated by the Law of Moses. 6. And by the
Christian Law. 7. Sacred names and Privileges given to the Highest Powers.
CHAP. III.
1. Internal actions not subject to the Highest Power, but in relation to
external. 2. Actions either determined or not determined, before any H^mane
Command. 3. Actions determined by Law Divine, either natural or positive. 4.
Actions undetermined are the matter of Humane Law; and also determined, both
because of their adjuncts and of a new Obligation. 5. Actions, not under Humane
Command, are only those that are repugnant to Divine Law. 6. Commands repugnant
to Divine Law, bind to a non-residence: And wherefore. 7. Subordinate powers
not exempt from that Obligation. 8. Examples alleged to the contrary answered.
9. Difference' twixt Internal actions and External. 10. What God commands
cannot be forbidden by man, with validity. 11. How Religion is not subject to
humane power. 12. How it is subject. 13. The Highest Power may determine any
actions not before determined by God. 14. Resistance, under color of Religion,
unlawful, proved by Scripture and Examples: and Objections answered. 15. Not
so many particulars, in Sacred things as in Secular, under humane power: with
the reason of it.
CHAP. IV.
1. OBjections answered. And first, that Christ instituted the Pastoral
Office. 2. That the Magistrate is not of the essence of the Church, answered.
3. An Objection out of Esaias answered. Whether Kings are under the Believers, or
Church. 4. That Kings are under the Pastors function, answered. 5. The
Objection taken from the Kingdom of Christ, answered. What that Kingdom is,
and whether he has Vicars. 6. Pastoral Government overthrows not the
Authority of the Highest powers. 7. Distinctions of Government: Directive and
Constitutive. By Consent and by Command. Supreme and Inferior. By Emanation
and by Subjection. 8. Pastors have no Coactive or temporal power: proved by
Scriptures and Fathers. 9. Their Government suasory and Declarative. 10. The
Church has no power of Command, by Divine Right. 11. The Church has a
Government Constitutive, by consent: proved by reason, and examples of
Scripture. 12. The Supreme Authority compatible to the Church: the Inferior
only, to Pastors. 13. The Authority of the Highest powers not overthrown by the
directive and Declarative Regiment of Pastors. 14. Nor by the Constitutive. 15.
Nor by any temporal given them by positive Law.
CHAP. V.
1. THe word Judgment, explained. 2. It pertains to the Highest power. 3.
Notwithstanding that they may err. 4. And notwithstanding, that Christ is the
Supreme Judge. 5. How the Scripture is Judge. 6. How the Pastors and the Church
is Judge. 7. Understanding is required to Judge. 8. The Highest powers capable
of sufficient understanding. 9. Divine things are easy to be understood. 10.
Help from God, by prayer. 11. Piety also requisite in the Highest powers to
enable them to judge. 12. A distinction 'twixt the Rectitude and the Validity
of an action, applied. 13. Infidel Princes may judge of Sacred things. Examples
hereof. 14. And the Reason of it. 15. Catechumens not excluded from judgment.
16. Right to judge is one thing, Ability another. Illustrated by Similies. 17.
The judgment of the Pro^hets, I Cor. 14. 31. not privative of the Highest
powers. 18. The Kings of the old Testament judged not as Prophets only, but as
Kings.
CHAP. VI.
1. THe Right of command, and the Use of it distinct. 2. Pious and learned
Pastors to be consulted by the Highest Powers. 3. Principles of faith;
Intrinsecall, Extrinsecall. These Divine, and Humane. 4. Of Divine Authority
proposed by men. 5. And the state of the question 'twixt Protestants and
Papists. 6. When it is fit to rest in Humane Authority. 7. No man may pin his
faith of salvation upon another; proved by Scripture and Reason. 8. In matters
not determined in Scripture, more may be given to humane judgment. 9. The
Prince must use his own judgment; Especially where Counselors do not agree.
10. An Objection out of Deuteronomy. answered. 11. Another out of Numbers 27. 12. Care
must be had of the Churches Peace, and Unity. 13. Cautions and rules conducing
to Unity. Few divisions in points of Faith. 14. And those in General Councils.
15. Ecclesiastical Laws delivered in a persuasive way. 16. How to preserve
Unity in point of Ceremonies. 17. Highest Powers need the Ministry of others.
18. Prudentiall rules have their exceptions; and whence. 19. The distinction of
power Absolute, and Ordinary, erroneous. 20. Highest Powers how far obliged to
their own Laws.
CHAP. VII.
1. WHat we mean by Synods. 2. No precept in Scripture for them. 3. Their
Original not from Acts 15. 4. But from the Law of nature; which is distinguished
into Absolute and After a sort. 5. Synods not from the Law natural absolute.
6. Synods under the Pagan Emperors: by what right. 7. Synods called by
Christian Emperors. 8. Three questions about Synods. 9. Whether the Highest
Power may govern without a Synod. 10. The affirmative proved by examples. 11.
Three ends of Synods, yet not necessary: Counsel, Consent, Jurisdiction. 12.
Synods sometimes not useful. 13. Accusers may not be Judges in Synod. 14.
Synods sometimes hurtful. 15. What may serve in their stead. 16. Other causes
to deny Synods, beside the general corruption of Religion. 17. What is to be
done, till a free Council may be called. 18. Synods not calla without the H.
power. 19. II Whether the H. power may choose the Synod-men: and judge in
Synod. 20. The right of the Primitive Church. And, the assembling of Bishops.
21. The Emperors encyclic letters to the Metropolitan. 22. The H. power may
elect Pastors for the Synod: proved by reason and examples. 23. When the
election is permitted to others, the H. power has command over it. 24. The H.
power may judge in Synod. 25. Whether it be expedient or no, in person. 26. The
Highest powers present in Synods by their Deputies. 27. III. What is the
Highest powers right after Synod: The Epicrisis wherein is the right to change,
to add, to take away. 28. An Objection answered. 29. The manner of giving the
Epicrisis, or final judgment. Of appeal. 30. The Epicrisis in parts of
Religion as well as in the whole.
CHAP. VIII.
1. THe several Acts of Authority, are Legislation, Jurisdiction, and another
without special name. 2. Wherein is Legislation 3. It belongs to the Highest
power, about the whole Body of Religion. 4. Answer to an objection of the
change of Religion. 5. Religion not to be brought in by force of Subjects. 6.
False and Schismatic worship, by the Highest power, sometimes prohibited and
punished. 7. Sometimes dissembled and regulated. 8. Legislation in the parts of
Religion. 9. Suppression of unprofitable questions. And of words not found in
Scripture. 10. The regulating of Church-mens conversation. 11. Laws about
things undetermined by Divine Law. And that beside the Canons. 12. Yet are the
Canons of use in the making of Laws. 13. No Legislative power belongs to the
Church by Divine right. 14. Yet may it be granted the Church by Law positive:
Cumulatively, not Privatively: and not without subordination and dependence.
15. How Kings have confessed themselves bound by the Canons 16. Canons
dispensed with by them. Examples hereof, even in the Apostolical. 17. Divine
Laws also moderated by equity.
CHAP. IX.
1. Jurisdiction about sacred things belongs to the H. Power. 2. The effects if
it are declared. 3. Jurisdiction proper belongs not naturally to the Pastors.
4. Yet by Law positive it belonged to them in some nations. 5. Pastoral acts of
divine right, which seem to come near Jurisdiction, and yet are distinct from
it. 6. The Apostolical rod. 7. The use of the Keys. 8. Prescription of the
works of penance by way of direction or persuasion. 9. Non-exhibition of the
sacraments. 10. The Churches acts by Divine right, which seem near
Jurisdiction, but are distinguist. Separation from the inordinate brother or
Pastor. 11. Canonical Acts superadded to the former, and distin ^ist from them.
12. Jurisdiction granted to Pastors by positive Law 13. The efficacy of this
Jurisdiction. 14. The Jews had the like granted them. 15. The Accessories of
excommunication. 16. All Pastoral Jurisdiction properly so called flows from
the H. Power. 17. How far those Pastoral acts may be used upon the supreme
Governor. Of the use of the Keys. 18. Under which pretense, cannot be excused
seditious Sermons which are refelled by Scripture, and the Objection answered.
19. All coaction of the H. Power unlawful. 20. Canonical acts cannot be
exercised against the H. Power without Consent. 21. How the Pastor may satisfy
his Conscience. 22. What is the right of the H. Power about the foresaid acts
of Pastors and Churches. 23. Ecclesiastical Appeals depend upon the H. Power.
24. Exercise of supreme Jurisdiction by himself or by others. 25. The H. Power
may dispense with Canonical and Legal penalties. And judge whether
Excommunication be just or no.
CHAP. X
1. Two perpetual functions of presbyters and Deacons. And their defference.
2. These four distinguished: Mandate, Election, Ordination, Confirmation. 3. Of
ordinatian without a Title. 4. Ordination only by Pastors. 5. The H. Power has
authority over it. 6. Right Immutable or Mutable. 7. How the election of
Pastors belongs to the Church. 8. Apostolical Institution subject to change.
9. Deacons, but not Pastors, elected by the people. 10. Pastors in the Apostles
times elected by the H. Spirit. And Mathias the Apostle. 11. Popular Elections
not proved by Acts 14.23. 12. Nor by the precept of avoiding false Teachers.
13. The old way of trying Pastors in the primitive Church. 14. Cyprian does not
confirm, but overthrow popular Elections. 15. Pastors often chosen by the
Bishops, not by the people. 16. The Election of Bishops, by the clergy: By the
comprovincial Bishops. 17. Mutability in the manner of Election. 18. In
elections the H. Power has a Legistative right. 19. And may it self make
Election upon just cause. 20. This proved by Reason. 21. And by examples: in
the state of Natural Law: and under the Mosaical. 22. Examples of the Roman
Emperors, and of the Kings of France. 23. Objections answered. 24. Of
Investitures. By them is meant the Collation of Bishoprics. 25. Examples of
the Kings of England. 26. Pastors as well as Bishops may be elected by the
Highest Power. 27. Examples hereof. 28. The Objection from the abuse of right
answered. 29. The Canons and Fathers answered. 30. Touching the Right of pagan
Kings. 31. The best manner of Election. 32. The right of rescinding Election
reserved still to the H. Power. 33. And of Exauctorating pastors, if need be.
34. Although chosen by others.
CHAP. XI.
1. THings necessary to be distingnisht from not necessary. 2. Of Bishops, and
Lay elders. 3. The word Bishop explained. Here taken for the Overseer of
Pastors. 4. Bishops not against Gods word. 5. Bishops always in the Catholic
Church. 6. Even in the time of the Apostles. 7. Bishops allowed by the word of
God. 8. A place of Ambrose examined. 9. Timothy and Titus were Bishops. 10. Bb.
styled Angels, Apostles, Presidents. 11. Patterns of Bishops in the natural
Law, in the Mosaical: but most probably the Rulers of Synagognes. 12. Bb of
great use to the Church. 13. Yet not by divine Command. 14. Nor always one
Bishop in every City. 15. In whom is the right of Ordination. 16. For what
reasons Bishops were laid-by in some Churches. 17. Lay Elders none in the
Apostles time. 18. All the Ancients by Presbyters understand only Pastors. The
ambiguity of the word Seniors, and Elders. 19. The penitentiary Presbyter. 20.
Pastors may be called Priests. 21. Who are the Seniors in Tertullian. 22. Why
the ancient Bb. used to consult with the Church. 23. Who are the Seniors in the
suppositious Ambrose. 24. Liberty to interpret Scripture in the Synagogue. 25.
And in the ancient Church; with the Difference. 26. Lay Elders, or Assessors,
not commanded by God. 27. Mat. 18.17. Explained. And the difference 'twixt the
Syndery and Consistory. 28. Lay Elders not spoken of in the new Testament. 29.
Why Pastors were called Elders by the Apostles. 30. The Church of Christ
compared with the Judaicall Kingdom. 31. The Office of Elders in the new Test.
32. An answer to that only place for Lay Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17. 33. Other places
need no answer. 34. The Highest power, or the Church, might law fully institute
Lay Elders. 35. This institution not displeasing to God: proved by Scripture.
36. Examples in the ancient Church drawing toward it. 37. The English
Churchwardens not much unlike the Adsessors. 38. The Adsessors may be of good
use. 39. Yet with certain cautions. 40. The Genevian elections.
CHAP. XII.
1. THe Highest Power has need of Vicars in Spirituals. 2. What Authority may
be committed to Inferior Powers by the Highest. 3. Liberty of Religion
tolerated sometimes. 4. Vicars either Substitutes or Delegats. 5. Bishops
substituted and Cleriks. 6. Pastors and Laymen joined. 7. Sometimes Laymen
alone. 8. The right of Lay-Patrons, ancient, and derived from the Regal. 9.
Benefices not the Popes Patrimony. 10. The Custom of Holland. 11. All
Patronages subject to the Highest Power. 12. Inferior Powers have no command by
Divine Right. 13. And little is to be given them by the Highest, in Sacred
things. 14. None at all, unless they be Orthodox.
THE END.
An Advertisement to the Stationer.
SIR,
IF it be objected (as a friend of mine conjectured it might) that the work is
any way opposite to the present Government, speaking so much of Kings and
Emperors: The answer is, That the Judicious Author distinguishes between Kings
absolute, and such as are confind or bound up by Laws; and cannot act without
or against a Parliament. See cap. 3. Sect. 8. So that, This treatise does not
presume to dispute the States Authority ('it is ill disputing with those that
command Legions:) but presupposing that, humbly shows them, what they may and
ought to do, on behalf of the Church. And, in the very first page, you find
all the Book is written of the Highest power, whether King or Senate. And,
these are the Authors words at the end of 15. Sect. Chap. 11. A Senate without
a King, is as it were a King. This I thought sit to advertise, to prevent
jealousy. Fare you well, And remember, it is one of the best pieces of the
excellent Grotius.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are to be sold by Joshua Kirton, at
the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard.
Books of Divinity and Sermons.
1. THe Truth of Christian Religion, proved by the Principles and Rules, taught
and received in the Light of the understanding, in an exposition of the
Articles of our faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed, written by a learned
Author lately deceased, in Folio, 1651. 2. A Concordance Axiomaticall,
containing a Survey of Theological Propositions, with their Reasons and Uses
in holy Scripture, by William Knight, in fol. 3. Certain Sermons or Homilies
appointed to be read in Churches in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and now
reprinted in folio. 4. Compunction or pricking of heart, with the time, means,
nature, necessity, and order of it, and of Conversion; with motives,
directions, signs, and means, of cure of the wounded in heart, with other
consequent or concomitant duties, especially self-denial; All of them gathered
from Acts 2.37. being the sum of 80. Sermons. With a Postscript concerning
these times, and the sutiableness of this text and Argument to the same, and to
the calling of the Jews. By R. Jenison, Doctor of Divinity, in quarto. 5. A
plain Discovery of the whole Revelation of St. John, in two Treatises; 1.
Searching and proving the Interpretation. 2. Applying the same paraphrastically
and historically to the text, with a Resolution of certain doubts, and annexion
of certain Oracles of Sibylla; by John N pier, Lord of Marchiston, in quarto.
6. The Government and order of the Church of Scotland; with an Astertion of the
said Government, in the points of Ruling Elders, and of the Authority of
Presoyteries and Synods, in quarto. 7. A Treatise of Miscelany questions;
wherein many useful questions, and cases of Conscience are discusted and
resolved concerning the Controversies of these times; by George Gillespie of
Scotland, in quarto. 8. An Answer to the ten Reasons of Edmund Campian, the
Jesuit, in confidence whereof he ^ftired Disputation to the Ministers of the
Church of England, in the Controversy of Faith; by William Whitaker, Doctor of
Divinity, in quarto. 9. Jo. Hen. Alsieduis his discourse of the 1000.
Apocalypticall years, or the Saints reign on earth a thousand years; Englished
by W. Burton, in quarto. 10. Letters concerning Religion, between the late
Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Se^l, the Lord Faulkland, and Mr. ^a^^er
Montaguc, in quarto. 11. Truth Asserted, by the Doctrine and practice of the
Apostles, seconded by the ^estimony of Synods, Fathers, and Doctors, from the
Apostles to this day, viz. that Episcopacy is Jure divino; by Sir Frantis
Wortley, in quarto. 12. An Answer to the chief Arguments for Anabaptisme, by
Doctor John Bastwick, in quarto. 13. Two learned Discourses; 1. on Matthew
28.18, 19. 2. on 2 Peter 2.13. written by a learned and worthy Gentleman larely
dec^ased, in octavo 1651. 14. Popular Errors in general points, concerning the
Intelligence of Religion, having relation to their causes and reduced into
diverse Observations, by John D^spagne, Minister of the French Church, in
octavo. 15. New Observations upon the Creed, with the use of the Lords Prayer
maintained, by John Despagne, in octavo. 16. The same in French. 17. New
Observations upon the Commandments, by John Despagne, 1651. 18. The same in
French. 19. The Abridgement of a Sermon preached on the Fast day, for the good
success of the Treaty between the King and Parliament, 1648. by John Despagne.
20. The same in French. 21. Sermon Funebre de Jean Despagne sur la mort de sa
Femme, in octavo. 22. Advertissement touth out la fraction and distribution du
prin en la S. cene obmises en plusieurs Eglises Orthodoxes, par Jean Despagne,
in octavo. 23. A Monument of Mortality, containing 1. A wakening for
worldlings. 2. Meditations of Consolation. 3. Comfortable considerations
preparing the sick for an happy change. 4. A Mirror of modesty, with a reproof
of the strange attired woman, and the sacred use of Christian Funerals, by M.
Day, Doctor of Divinity, in octavo. 24. Plain truths of Divinity, collected out
of the Sacred Scriptures, particularly of the destruction of Antichrist, and
the time when, the coming of Christ to Judgment, and his reigning with his
Saints for ever upon this earth after the restitution of all things; by John
Alcock, in octavo. 25. Herberts careful Father, and pious Child, lively
represented, in teaching and learning, a Catechism made in 1200 Questions and
Answers, in which the Catholic truth is asserted, and above 600 Errors,
Heresies and points of Popery are briefly consuted, in octavo. 26. Herberts
belief and confession of faith made in 160. Articles, in octavo. 27. Herberts
quadrupartite devotion, for the day, week, month, year, made in about 700.
Meditations and Prayers, in octavo. 28. Meditations on Christ's prayer upon the
Cross, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do; by Sir John
Hayward, in octavo, 1651. 29. David's Tears, or Meditations on the 6.32. and
130. Psalms, by Sir John Hayward, in twelves. 30. The Devotions of the dying
man, that desires to dye well, Written by Samuel Gardener, Doctor of Divinity,
in twelves. 31. A Beautiful Bay-bush, to shroud us from the sharp showers of
Sin. containing many notable Prayers and Meditations, in twelves. 32. A Grain
of Incense, or Supplication for the peace of Jerusalem, the Church and State,
written by John Reading, in octavo. 33. An Evening Sacrifice or prayer for a
family necessary for these calamitous times, made by John Reading, in octavo.
34. Character of true blessedness, delivered in a Sermon at the Funeral of
Mistress Alice Per^ival, by John Reading, in twelves. 35. Six Godly Meditations
or Sermons, upon certain select texts of Scripture, by Andrew Rivet, Doctor of
Divinity, in twelves. 36. A Meditation on Math. 27.27, 28, 29. or a Pattern for
a Kings Inauguration, written by King James, in twelves. 37. Directions to know
the true Church, written by George Carleton, Doctor of Divinity, in twelves.
38. The Singing Psalms in Welsh, in twelves. 39. A Preparation to Fasting and
Repentance, by Peter du Moulin, in 24.
Sermons.
1. DOctor Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, on Galathians 6.14. before the Lords of
Parliament. 2. Ejusdem, on Job 42.12. before the Lords of Parliament. 3. Doctor
Andrews, Bishop of Winchester, on Luke 1.74, 75. November 5. 1617. before the
King. 4. Ejusdem, on 1 Cor. 11.16. on Easter day before the King. 5. Ejusdem,
on John 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. on Easter day before the King. 6. Doctor
Laud Bishop of St. David's, on Psalm. 22.3, 4, 5. at the opening of the
Parliament. 7. Doctor Robert Willon, on Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. on Nov. 5. before
the Judges, at Westminster. 8. Christopher white, on Romans 13.1. 9. Humphrey
Sydenham, on Eccles. 12.5. at the Funerals of Sir John Sydenham. 10. Doctor
Christopher Swale, on Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. before the King. 11. Isaac Singleton,
on Esaias 22.15. upon Gowries Conspiracy. 12. Peter du Moulin, on Romans 1.16.
before the King. 13. Doctor Morton, Bishop of Durham, on 1 Cor. 11.16. at St.
Paul's. 14. William Price, on Ezra 9.6, 7, 8. before the Lords of Parliament.
15. Anthony Cade, on Romans 2.15. a Visitation Sermon, with an appendix
concerning Ceremonies. 16. Doctor Henry King, on Jer. 1.10. at St. Paul's, on
March 27. 1640. 17. Doctor William Gouge, on Nehem. 5.19. before the Commous of
Parliament. 18. Ejusdem, on Ezekiel 36.11. before the Lords of Parliament. 19.
Ejusdem, on Ezra 8.21. before the Lords of Parliament on the Fast appointed for
the good success of the Theary between the King and Parliament, 1648. 20.
Ejusdem, on Exodus 13.3. on Queen Elizabeth's day, Nov. 17. at Paul's. 21.
Ejusdem, on Ezekiel 24.16. at the Funeral of Doctor Ducks wife. 22. Matthias
Milward, on 2 Cor. 2.14. before the Company of the Artillery Garden. 23.
Ejusdem, on Romans 13.4, at Guild Hall Chapel. 24. Henry Miller, on Psalm.
124.1, 2, 3, 4. on the fifth of November. 25. Alexander Rosse, on Matthew 21.13.
Two Sermons. 26. John Pigot, on Luke 19.41, 42, 43, 44. 27. Nicholas Guy, on
John 11.26. at the Funeral of Doctor Gouge's Wife. 28. Thomas Palmer, on Psalm
37.40. 29. James wilcock, on Acts 24.13, 14. 30. Ejusdem on John 20.19, 20.
Lam. 5.16. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 1 John 4.1. in 6. Sermons.
Libri Theologici Latini, etc.
1. THomae Bradwardini Archiepiscopi olim Cantuariensis de Causa Dei, contra
Pelagium, and de virtute Causarum, ad suos Mertonensos, libri tres; Opera and
Study D. Hen. Savilii editi, in fol. 2. De Republica Ecclesiastica pars
secunda, cum 2 Appendicibus, 1. de SS. Eucharistia contra Card. Perronium, 2
Responsio ad magnam partem defensionis fidei, P. Francisci Suarez, in folio. 3.
In Acta Apostolorum, and in Singula^ Apostolorum, Jacobi, Petri, Johannis, and
Judae Catholicas Epistolas Commentarii; Autore R. P. F. Nicolao Gorrano Anglo,
in fol. 4. Miscelan^orum Theologicorum, quibus S. Scripturae and aliorum
classicorum Autorum, plurima monumente explicantur atque illustrantur, libri
tres, Autore Nicolao Fullero, in quarto. 5. De Potestate Papae in Rebus
temporalibus, sive in Regi^us deponendis usurpata, adversus Bellarminum; Autore
foanne Episcopo Roffenst, in quarto. 6. Papa Anti-Christus, sive Diatriba de
Anti christo; Autore Georgio Downamo Episcopo Detensi, in quarto. 7. Causa
Regia, sive de Authoritate, and Dignitate Principum Christianorum differtatio,
adversus B^llarminum; Autore Tho. Mortono Episcopo, in quarto. 8. Antidotum,
Adversus Ecclisiae Romanae de Merito proprie dicto ex condigno venenum; Autore
Tho. Mortono Episcopo, in quarto. 9. De Suprema Petestate Regia, Exercitationes
habit in Academia Oxoniensi contra Bellarminum and Suarez. Autore Rob. Abbot
professore Regio, in quarto. 10. De Gratia and Perseverantia Sanctorum,
Exercitationes habitae in Academia Oxoniensi, and Animadversio brevis, in R.
Thomsoni Diatribam, de Amiss^ine and intercisione Justificationis and gra^^a;
Autore Roberto Abbot. 11. Georgii Abbati Archupiscopi Cantuwriensis Explicatio
6. illustrium quastionum, 1. de Mendacin, 2. de Circumcisione and Bapasmo, 3 de
Astrologia, 4. de piasentia in cultu I dololatinco, 5. de Fuga in persequutione
and peste, 6. An Deiis sit Author Peccati, in quartu. 12. Stephani Szegedim
Analysis, in Psalmos, Prophetas Majores, 4. Evangelia, Acta Apo^^o^orum, omnes
Epislulas, and Apoca^ypsin, in quarto. 13. Liturgia Inglesa, O Libro del Rezodo
Publico, de la Administracion de los Sacramentos, y otros Kitos y Ceremenias de
la yglesia de Ingal^terra, in quarto. 14. La Liturgy Angloise, oule Livre des
Pritres publiques de L'administration des Sacraments, and antres ordies, and
Ceremonies de L'Eglise d'Angleterre, in quarto. 15. Georgii Wicelin Methodus
Concordie Eccsiastic^, cum Exhortatione ad Concilium, juxta Exemplar excusum,
1523. in octave. 16. De Proesulibus Anglia Commentarius, omnium Episcoporum,
necnon and Cardinalium o^ ^sdem Gentas, nomura, tempora, Seriem, atque Actiomes
maxim ^^morabil^s, ab ultima antiquitate repetita, complexus, per Franciscum
Godwinum Episco^um Landavensem, in quarto. 17. St. Gregori Nazianzeni in
Julianum Invectiv^ dua, etc. cum Scholies Groecis and notis, R. Montague, in
quarto. 18. Gilberti Foliot Episcopi Land. Exposion in Canticum Canticorum,
unacum Compendiv Alcuini, e Bibliotheca Regia, in quarto. 19. Dela verite en
tant qu'e^^est distinct de la R^^^lation, du vray semblable, du Possible, and
du faux, pa^ Edouard Herbert, Baron de Cherbury, in quarto. 20. Loci Communes,
D. Martini Lutheri, ex Scriptis ipsius Latinis, in 5. classes distributi, A. M.
Thesdosio Fabricio, in quarto, 1651.
Books of several sorts, of Humane Learning.
1. GErhardi Mercatoris Atlas, or a Geographick Description, of the Regions,
Countries, and Kingdoms of the world, through Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, represented by new and exact Maps, in two large Volumes in folio. 2.
Britain, or a Chorographical Description of the Kingdoms, England. Scotland,
and Ireland, and the Islands adjoining, out of the depth of Antiquity:
becautified with Maps of the several Shires of England, written by William
Camden Clarenceux K. of A. in folio. 3. An History of the Civil Wars of
England, between the two Houses of Lancaster and York, beginning in the Reign
of Richard the second, and ending in the Reign of Henry the seventh, written in
Italian by Sir Fra. Biondi, Englished by Hen. Earl of Monmouth, in folio. 4.
The Roman History of Amianus Maroellinus, translated into English, by Philemon
Holland, Doctor in Physic, in fol. 5. The Annals and History of Cornelius
Tacitus, with the notes of Sir Hen^y Savile, in folio. 6. Discourses upon
cornelius Tacitus, written in Italian by Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi, translated
by Sir Richard Baker in folio. 7. The Life and Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
written by Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury, in folio. 8. The History of the
Houses of Douglas and Angus, written by Mr. David Hume, in fol. 9. The Siege of
Breda, written in Latin by Herman Hugo, translated into English by Colonel
Henry Gage, in folio. 10. The History of the Council of Trent, written in
Italian by Pietro Soave Polane, translated by Sir Nathana^l Bront. 11. The same
in Latin. 12. The Theater of Gods Judgments, collected out of Sacred,
Ecclesiastical, and Pagan Histories, by Doctor Thom. Beard, and Doctor Tho.
Tailor, in sol. 13. A French-English Dictionary, Compiled by Master Randle
cotgrave, with another in English and French, in folio. 14. Regiam Majest^^tem.
A Collection of the old Laws and Constitutions of Scotland, from King Malcome
the second, to King James the first, by Sir John Shene, in fol. 15. The same in
Latin. 16. Enquiries touching diversity of Languages and Religions, through
the chiese parts of the world, written by Edward Brerewood, in quarto. 17. The
History of the Quarrels of Pope Paul the fisth, with the State of Venice,
written in Italian by the Author of the History of the Council of Trent, and
Translated by Doctor Christopher Potter, in quarto. 18. A briet Discourse of
the New Foundland, with the Situation, temperature, and commodity thereof in
quarto. 19. Of Supremary in Affairs of Religion, by Sir John Hayward. 20.
Considerations touching a war with Spain, written by Francis Lord Vanlam,
Viscount St. Alban, in quarto. 21. The Life of Jacob Boesmen, vulgarly called
the German Prophet, in quarto. 22. Almansir, the learned and victorious King,
that conquered Spain, his Life and Death, published by Robert ashley our of
Oxford Library, in quarto. 23. The Epistle congratulatory of Lysimachus Nica^^^
of the S. of Jesus to the Covenanters in Scotland, paralleling their harmony in
Doctrine and practice, in quarto. 24. The Poor Vicars Plea, declaring that a
compe tency of means is due to them cut of the Tithes of their several
Parishes, notwithstanding the Impropriations, written by Thomas Ryves, Doctor
of Law, in quarto. 25. A Collection of some modern Epistles of Morsieur de
Balzac, carefully translated cut of French, being the fourth and last ^olume,
in octavo. 26. The History and Relation of the bloody Massacre at Paris, and in
other places in France, 1572. in Twelves, 1651. 27. The Free School of War, a
Treatise, whether it be lawful to bear Arms for the service of a Prince of a
diverse Religion, in quarto. 28. Instructions for Musters and Arms, and the use
thereof, in quarto. 29. The Key of the Mathematiques new filed, with the
Resolution of adfected Aequations, the rule of compound Usury and false
position, and the Art of Geometrical Dialling, in octavo. 30. The same in
Latin. 31. A General Treasury of Accounts, for all Countries in Christendom,
made by William colson of London. 32. Accounts of Merchandise ready computed,
also, Tables for measuring of Timber, Board, Glass, and Land, enlarged and
corrected, by John Penkethman, in twenty fours. 33. The Merchants Avizo,
necessary for their Sons and Seivants, when first sent beyond Sea, in quarto.
34. Mystagogus Poeticus, or the Muses Interpreter, explaining the historical
Mysteries, and mystical Histories, of the Ancient Greek, and Latin Poets,
written by Alexander Rosse, in octavo. 35. Observations on that (in its kind)
eminent Petition presented to the Commons in Parliament, September 11. 1648. in
quarto. 36. A Perfect plaforme of an Ho^garden, and Instructions for the making
and maintenance thereof, with Notes and Rules for reformation of all abuses
commonly practiced therein; written by Reynold Scot, in quarto. 37. The
Problems of Aristotle, with other Philosophers and Physicians, containing
question and answets, touching the estate of man's body, in octavo. 38.
Childbirth, or the happy delively of women, s^tting down the government of
women, in their breeding, travel, and lying in, in quarto. 39. The Marrow of
Physic, w^^ten by Tho, Brugis, in quarto. 40. Pharmacopoea, cu^ adjecta sunt
Paraphrasis, and miscendorum medicamentorum modus, scripta a Bricio Bauderono,
huic accedunt Jo. du Boys Pharmacopier Parisionsi^ observationes in methodum
misceindorium medicamentorum, in fol. 41. Observationes Medicoe, de assechbus
omissis, Authore Arnoldo Bootio, Med. D. in duodicimo. 42. Anglia Flagellum,
sen Tabes Anglica, Authore Theophilo de Garancieres, D. Medico, in duodecimo.
43. A Sure Guide to the French tongue, teaching to pronounce French naturally,
to read it pufectly, to wine it truly, and to speak it readily, by Paul
Cogucau, in octavo, 1651. 44. Lettres sur la mort de quelques Persons en
qualite and en Merit, tant de l'one, que de l'autre Sex, par ^harles de
Beauvais, in oct^vo. 45. Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, and
his R^view thereof, by Richard Tillesly Doctor in Divinity, in quarto.
Poetry and Plays.
1. Godsrey of Boulogne or the Recovery of Jerusa^^^, done into English
heroical verse, by Edward Fairfax, Gent, with the life of the said Godsicy, in
sol. 2. The crown of all Homers works, Batrachomyomachia, or the battle of
Frogs and Mice, h^s Hymns and Epigrams, Translated by George Chapman, in ^olio.
3. The Hierarchy of the bl^ssed Angels, their Names, Orders, and Offices, the
^all of Luciser, with his Angels, written by Tho. Heywood, in sol. 4. Orlando
Furioso, in English hetoicall Verse, by Sir John Harrington, with addition of
the Authors Epigrams, in fol. 5. Leoline and Sydanis, a Romance of the Amoreus
adventures of Princes, in quarto. 6. The young man's Looking-glass, Bacchus
Banne^ displayed, Characters, and Epigrams, written by Richard ^atts. 7. The
most pleasant History of Albino and Bellama, by N. W. in twelves. 8. Analecta
Poetica Graeca-Latina, or capping of Verses Greek and Latin, in twelves. 9.
Horatius de Art Poetica, Englished by B. Johnson. An Execration against
Vulcan. The Mask of Gypsies, and Epigrams, by the same Author, in twelves. 10.
The Constant Maid, A Comedy, written by James Shirley. 11. St. Patrick for
Ireland, the first part, written by James Shirley. 12. Landgartha, a
Trage-Comedy, written by Henry Burnel.
Books for Schools, and the University.
1. ANtonii Ruvio Commentarii in universam Aristotelis Dialecticam, in quarto.
2. Thomoe Lushingtonii Logica Analytica, de Principii^, Regulis, and usu
rationis rectae, in octavo. 3. Elementa Logicae, Autore Edovardo Brerewood, in
duodecimo. 4. Aditus ad Logicam, Autore Samuele Smith, in duodecimo. 5.
Institutionum Peripateticarum, ad mentem Summi viri Kenelmi Equitis Dygboei,
pars Theorica, Item appendix Theologica, de Origin Mundi; Authore Thoma Anglo,
in duodecimo. 6. Francisci Baconi, de Sapientia veterum Liber, in duodecimo. 7.
Aemilii Porti Dictionarium lonicum and Doricum Graeco-Latinum, in octavo. 8.
Lexicon Graeco-latinum, in N. T. Dom. nostri Jesu Christi, Autore Georgio
Pasore, in octavo. 9. Novum Testamentum Dom. nostri Jesu Christi, Graecum,
Cantabrigiae, in octavo. 10. Idem, notis Roberti Stephani, Josephi Scaligeri,
and Isaaci Casauboni, in octavo. 11. Novum Testamentum Latinum Theodoro Beza
Interpret, in duodecimo. 12. Elementaria Traditio Christianorum Fidei, aut
Catechismus, Grac. Latin. per Tuss. Berchetum, inoctavo. 13. Paraphrafis
Psalmorum Davidis Poetica, Autore Georgio Buchanano, in duodecimo. 14.
Particulae Latinae Orationis, collectae, dispositae, and consabulatiunculis
digestae, Autore J. Hawkins Med. D. in octavo. 15. A brief Introduction to
Syntax, showing the use, grounds and reason of Latin construction, collected
out of Nebrissa his Sp^nish copy, with the Concordance, supplied by John
Hawkins Med. D. in octavo. 16. Jo. casa Galateus seu demorum honestate, and
Elegantia, notis Nath. Chylnae in octavo. 17. Isocratis Orationes and
Epistolae, Grac. Lat. Interlincat. in octavo. 18. Analecta Poetica
Graeca-latina, or capping of Verses Greek and Latin. 19. Aeschims c^ntra
Ctesiphontem, and Demosthenis pro Corona Orationes a Johanne Sturmio
illustratae, Graece, in octavo. 20. Homerilliav, idest de rebus ad Troiamgestis
Graec. Lat. in octavo, Cantabrigia. 21. M. Fahn Quintihani Institutionum
Oratoriarum libri 12, ^accesserunt Quintilianorum Declamatiomes, Dan. Pareo
editi, in octavo. 22. Synonimorum Sylva olim a Simone Pelegromo collecta, nunc
H. F. emendata and Aucta, in octavo. 23. Ca^liop^i^, or a Rich Storehouse of
proper choice and elegant Latin words and phrases collected chiefly out of
Tullies Works, by Thomas Dray, in octavo. 24. Bibliotheca Scholastica
Instructissima, or a Treasury of ancient Adagies and Proverbs collected out of
the English, Greek, Latin, French, Italian and Spanish, published, by Tho.
Drax, in octavo. 25. An eas^e Entrance to the Latin tongue, containing the
Grounds of Grammar, and their Examination; 2. A vocabulary of common words,
English and Latin. 3. Examples appliable to the Rules of Concordance and
construction. 4. Collections out of the lowest School Authors. 5. More elegant
expressions for children. 6. The first principles of Christianity, by charles
Hoole Schoolmaster in London, in twelves, 1651. 26. A little Vocabulary
English and Latin, for the use of little children that begin to learn the Latin
tongue, by Charles Hoole, in twelves, 1651. 27. Alexandri Rossaei Isagoge
Grammatica, in Gratiamily lorum qui nolunt memoriam multis and longis regulis
gravari concinnata, in octavo. 28. Jodoci Stunpelii Parnassus Epithetorum,
Singula Ravisii, multag, Prosodiae Smetii, Epitheta vario metro pro Studiosis,
versus eleganter extempore sine epithetorum quantitatis errore Scripturis,
inclusa continens, in duodecimo, 1651. 29. Quirti Horatii Flacci Poemata,
Scholiis five annotationibus Joannis Bond illustrata, in octavo. 30. Publii
Ovidu Nasonis Metamorphoseon, libri 15. notis Tho. Farnabii illustrati, in
octavo. 31. Angeli Caninii Hellenisinus, copios^ssimi Graecarum latinarumque,
vocum Indicis accessione per Carolum Hanboesium locupletatus, in octavo, 1651.
31. Riders Dictionary English and Latin, and Latin and English enlarged, by
Francis Holy-Oke, in quarto.
FINIS.

