XVI SERMONS Preached in the University of OXFORD, AND AT COURT.

BY RICH. GARDENER, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to King CHARLES deceased.

Together with his SERMON Preached in Bow-Church London, on the Anniversary
Meeting of Hereford-shire Natives, June 24. 1658.

We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by the manifestation of the
truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, 2
Cor. 4.2.

Meum esse est Fore.

LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, for Joseph Barber at the Lamb, and Samuel
Speed at the Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Religious READER.
IT has pleased the Powers, under which the Doctor is permitted to breathe, to
shut up his Tongue in silence, in reference to the solemn way of interpreting
and applying sacred Writ: But he is not denied the liberty to hold forth a
Transcript of what he formerly taught and preached, as authorized and assigned
to that great work by his high Calling. If thou conceive it comes abroad
without the accustomed Verdure and Vigor, impute it to an unavoydable fatality:
He has been so worried, that it is much if any signal evidence of a strengthn'd
Understanding be left to know him by.

Yet I am secured by unbyassed knowing Judgments, thou will, in this, find
verified, Afflictio dat Intellectum, his manifold pressures have improved and
sanctified his Intellectuals, causing him to make Mary to take upon her
Martha's duty, speculative Knowledge to join hand in hand with practical and
moral, whereby in entertaining Christ, both choose the better part.

He was loath to condemn it to obscurity, or to leave it as a Posthumous Issue,
lest a Collector of Manuscripts, blundering on it, might produce it into light
with a Nickname, Nocte pluit tota.
since Bathyllus presumed to own that approved Distich, composed, not
subscribed, by Virgil, his living contemporary: Or lest a Legerdemain
Brachygrapher might alter and disguise it with a newfangled Mode, and so vend
it; as the Indigent deal with the ductile Limbs of their Younglings; first
distort and cripple them; then expose them to public view for a future
Livelihood. Another incitement for the publication, is to manifest the gross
scandal, raised by errant Preachmenters, who groan it out to their seduced
Proselytes, that Christ (alas!) was not rightly known among us, till the
Chariot and Horsemen of their Israel opened the way for his passage. And why?
because, so they feign, self-preachers sent from the Universities, not from
God, filled the ears of the Court and Country with wellsounding words, with
neat delicate streams of Wit and humane Learning, not aiming at the Souls
health.

If the thick Mists and Clouds of Faction have not quite darkened their Right
Eye, the inward of the Soul, herein, as in other of his unanimous
fellow servants Pulpit-labours, they may brightly behold the Lord of Glory
reaching out his Golden Scepter of Grace and Mercy to the poor in Spirit;
shaking his Iron Rod of Terror and Vengeance, to crush and beat down every
high Imagination exalted against Obedience to his Gospel.

Here Is no pillow sown under the Elbow of a Court-Favorite, Blastus; a
temporizing Orator, Tertullus; a popular Mechanic, Demetrius, the turbulent
Silversmith; or of any other ring-leading Artificer: But the purity of
Evangelical Verities, is carried on without connecessary quirks and quiddities,
in a clear clean perspicuity; unless they will have nothing plain, but what
rankly savours of downright rude uncouth slovenly Expressions. The chief points
of each Sermon are necessary heads of Christian Doctrine. The Nature and
Offices, the Sufferings and Death of Christ, his Precepts, Promises, and
Threats, are zealously declared and pressed home to the Conscience, convincing
the World of Sin, of Righteousness and Judgment.

Maligning Spirits may surmise the end of this Impression to be whatsoever
distempered Fancy may suggest: The true Verdict, which I am to give in, is, if
according to the Author's supplications offered at the Throne of Grace, the
Holy Ghost shall work so effectually with these his Endeavors, as to make them
subservient Instruments of reconciling any one to God in Christ; his intent or
scope is accomplished, his joy, his glory and crown achieved. He will be bold
to say he has well labored in the Word and Doctrine, as a Workman that needed
not to be ashamed; being assured, according to the gracious promise, he shall
have this inch, this minute of a toylsome time, out-weighed by the Eternity of
blissfulness.

Having opened the Purport, the Tenor and Substance of my Commission, thou
may on easy terms take the whole home, at leisure peruse it seriously, and
make thy own eyes witnesses of the Truth thus asserted by

Thine, BIBLIOPOLA.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 20. read named. p. 3. l. 3. r. out of. p. 4. l. 3. r. fired. p
89. l. 19. after wonderfully, insert, Esaias believed in the Lord; but it was
when he saw him sitting on a high throne. p. 96 l. 29. r. transcendent. l. 33,
34. r. recalcitrating, p. 118. l. 6. r. Heir. p. 131. l. 17. r. Mankind. l. 26.
r. ear. p. 132 l. 17. r. touched. p. 138. l. 13. r. passing. p. 147. l. 10. r.
dram l. 25. r. me. p. 151. l. 23. r. Maids. p. 162. l. 17. r. loca. l. 18.
insert Hall. p. 163. l. 9. r. Murena. p. 175. l. 28. insert on. p. 182. l. 19.
r. presumption. p. 209. l. 7. r. nere. p. 211. l. 31. dele first but. p. 154.
l. 24. r. filth. p. 295. l. 7. r. endure.

Luke 13.23, 24. v. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved?
And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.


IN a disputing Age, it will not be unseasonable to handle a questioning Text;
either for the reproof of Curiosity, or for satisfaction of doubt.

These words evidently branch themselves into a Question, an Answer, and a
Reason. The Question is in the beginning; Then said one unto him, Lord, are
there few that be saved? The Answer follows; And he said to them, Strive to
enter in at the strait gate. And this is the Reason; for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Of these, and their subdivided particulars, in order.

In the Question you may observe the party asking, the manner, and the matter.
The party asking is an Individuum vagum, a certain uncertain Inquisitor, one
without a name, Then said ONE unto him.

When a Question is asked of our Savior, which carries some weight, or tends
to needful Instruction, the name of the Proposer is registered together with the
proposal. Thus John is on the file for asking, Art thou He that should come?
Matthew. 11.3. Caiaphas is not forgot, for asking, Art thou the Christ? Matthew.
26.63. Pilate is recorded, for asking, Art thou the King of the Jews? Matthew.
27.11. Nicodemus is nor unmentioned, for asking, How a man could be born again?
John 3. But this Question in the Text being more curious then necessary, and
tending to I know not what purpose, is asked by I know not whom; for he is not
vouchsafed the grace of being name. No particular is specified in holy writ,
that made the Inter'gatory, or moved the Quaere. From whence I infer, that such
as pry into Gods secrets, are less in his books then they that follow the
duties commanded. For needless curiosity of the brain, robs the heart of that
intention, and devotion, which ought to be placed on matters more pertinent.
Why should thou or I be inquisitive after the number of those shall be saved?
It more concerns us to lay our hands on our own breasts, to enquire strictly
whether we find in our hearts those heavenly graces to which God has annexed
his saving promises, the more to assure our selves that we are Christ's,
translated out the power of darkness to his marvailous light. Be not then
addicted to vain prating people, who, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 6. Know
nothing, but dote about questions, and strife of words, and things which have
no pith in them, whereby ye can reap no profit, but whereof comes envying,
raylings, evil surmises, froward disputations of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth.

And so from the person asking, I proceed to the manner, which in appearance is
dutyful; it begins with Lord.

Then said one unto him, Lord.

The name of Lord is most precious, and holy; it sounds well in godly
conference: whenever it comes forth, it promises a religious, and
well-weighed speech; and therefore it ought so to be placed, and used, that the
matter may fitly become so high a Name. But yet we find that all curious
novelties, and strange reaches, howsoever devised, and broached, are wrongfully
entitled to Gods honor, that by his great Name they may get honor to
themselves. What vain fancy, or project; what heresy, or commotion, has
ever been set on foot without the pretense of Gods glory? Sometimes his Name is
quoted impertinently in senseless talk, which occasions a cold respect of his
omnipresent, though invisible Majesty. Sometimes he is lewdly called on, which
breeds offense. Sometimes he is praised for prospering downright sins, which in
time he will punish: And the griping worldling will not stick to say that God
has greatly blessed his estate. Not to run too far off, I do not think this
question in the Text of sufficient piety to follow the Name Lord; which gives
me occasion to complain of this so specious abuse. You call me Lord, or Master,
says our Savior, and so I am, John 13. if then I be your Lord, where is your
service? Not every one that says unto me, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father, which is in Heaven, Math. 7.
Let Lord, and service; more obedience, and less questioning, go together.

Whatsoever the question be, as what it is, we shall partly see anon, the
formal, outward reverence of this Inquisitor, serves well to convince some
rude, undisciplined Christians, who in most religious duties are most
negligent, undecent, and profane; who, when they speak of God, yea when they
speak unto him, show less manners, (I cannot say religion) then they would to
an honest man. First, coming into his house not reverently, as into a Kings
chamber, but heedlesly, as into an Inn; then praying, or babbling with a
vagrant eye, with one knee, and one elbow, perhaps with a long side, leaning
like a dead pourtraicture on a Tombstone. Let such learn of this Questioner to
say Lord mannerly.

Now to the question it self, Are there few that are saved? Some have thought
that after a certain revolution of date and punishment, all shall be saved.
Some think just half; coloring their opinion, I cannot say proving it, with
certain parabolical allusions, and semblances, which to them seem
demonstrations: As because Isaak had two sons, one of whom God hated, and the
other he loved: or because two women shall be grinding at a mill, one taken,
and the other left: or in regard Saint Paul has said, As in Adam many are made
sinners, so in Christ many are made righteous, Romans 5. Or in consideration that
the right and left hand (on which all at last shall be ranked) are both of a
size; and so they part stakes betwixt heaven and hell. These proofs need no
answer.

Some think a few only shall be saved, so few, that they can almost tell who
they are. These style themselves the beloved of God, his chosen, and dear
children, drawing all Gods promises only to their own behoof, reprobating all
others; and whatsoever is spoken against them, is spoken against God, These are
so self-conceited, that they confine Gods mercy to their own acquaintance. Thus
the Donatists, or they of Donatus party, so spiritually covetous, as if it
would do them little good to sit in Abraham's bosom, unless they saw many a
Dives in hell. Their arguments for their paucity are these, drawn from the
words of our Savior, first in a seeming parallel to my Text, Mat. 7.14. Narrow
is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Again, in
the 12. and 22 of St. Luke, Fear not, little flock, for it is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And Matthew. 22.14. Many are called, but few
are chosen. Now if the flock be little, and the number few, all they that
follow any kind of Sect, think themselves to be the only men. I conceive we
should like rather this opinion then any of the former, because men prove it
worst by their lives. A modern Light holds forth a Tenet, Joseph Alford Treat.
of Christ triumph.
that the number of the Elect is not inferior to the damned; urging withal,
that they who entertain such narrow conceptions of the heavenly Kingdom, as if
it were open but to few, do not advance Gods Majesty, but diminish it; not
magnify his goodness, but disparage it. For in this rather (says he) is the
mercy of God manifested, that when in justice he might have damned all, he
destinated some to punishment, but more to salvation. And so those Texts which
tell us few are saved, and few find the way to eternal life; he refers not to
the fewness of the Elect, but of believing Jews at Christ's first coming to
them; as if such speeches were directed only to the contemporary Jews, in
regard in the second verse, Luke 13. it is the reply of those Jews, We have
eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets, as if
that should advantage them. Whereupon he gives this exposition of my Text.

You demand of me (says Christ) whether few be saved, but I admonish you not
to trifle away time in such questions, but let there be a holy Contention among
you with all celerity to enter in at this door of my Gospel; for the time is
very short in which you have a capacity of faith to obtain the Kingdom of God.
Now the remissness, the laziness of these Jewish people was so great, that few
of them indeed did believe his Gospel, and thereby few at his first
manifestation in the flesh did enter by the true gate, Christ Jesus. In these
discrepant applications of Christ's answer here, I will not impose a necessity
of belief on any. And because the faithful, be they never so many, are few in
respect of our Saviors bowels, who would that all should be saved and come to
the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. or in respect a multitude of all Nations,
which no man could number, stood before the Throne with Palms in their hands,
Revel. 7. I leave it, as it is here, undecided. For what can this further my
Salvation, to know how many else shall be saved? Has our heavenly Father but
one blessing? Is not his house large enough? are there not many mansions? Such
a needless enquiry is like many other concerning Gods Counsel, as, What he did
before he created the world, Where hell shall be: How mankind should have
increased, and been disposed, if Adam had stood in his innocence: Whether Gods
decree be absolute, or conditional: When, and upon what considerations he
elected: Whether there be Scientia media, a divine foreknowledge of future
events upon such conditions as never come to pass?

There are a sort of men who make it their only Religion to enquire of what
Religion God himself is; who in stead of following their own duties, dive into
the Office of God. Such is the knowledge which puffes up, and buts against
love, which edifies. Such questions of supernatural Genealogies, or Genealogies
of questions, be superfoolish; away with them. So I hasten to the answer of our
wise and blessed Savior, He said to them, Strive to enter in at the strait
gate.

First of the manner, then of the matter.

It was but one proposed the question; Christ replies to the rest who stood by,
they being all concerned therein. Besides, the manner of his answer is not
direct to the quaere, which shows he did not much like it; but to the ground
thereof. He answers like himself, who is even the Discerner of hearts, and can
see to what conclusion the thought would bend. He that moved the question, was
happily touched with a spice of pride, rejoicing within himself that he of the
few was one, and taking delight in the exclusion of others. Otherwise, if many
should be saved, he had a mind perchance to live idle, and secure, hoping to
thrust into heaven amidst the multitude. Soft, our Savior teaches him his
duty, that so he may be one of the few; and in stead of resolving, gives him an
answer like that which he gave to Peter, being inquisitive about John, What Is
that to thee? follow thou me, John 21. Please not thy fancy, whosoever thou
art, in reckoning thy self one of the few; nor rest secure, in counting upon
many, but strive thy self, as thou art bid.

It is the holy Ghost's usual method, in answering to impertinent questions, to
begin at the end, and to render to prying speculation a precept for practice.
So when the Herodians asked Christ whether it were lawful to pay tribute to
Caesar; he refers them to the inscription of the coin, and bids them give to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Matthew. 22. So when the Disciples asked
concerning the end of the world, he answers, Let no man deceive you, Matthew. 24.
When the question arose, Who should be the greatest? He told them, The Kings of
the Gentiles exercise Lordship, but ye shall not do so, Luke 22. Still their
answer is their duty. But when duty is the question, the answer is plain, and
direct: As, when the people asked the Apostle John, What shall we do? He that
has two coats, let him impart to him that has none, Luke 3.11. When the
Publicans ask the fame, it is, Exact no more then what is appointed you, Luke 3.
When the Soldiers demand in like manner, so he answers, Do violence to no man,
accuse none falsely, be content with your wages, Luke 3. It Is clear, he prefers
doing before disputing.

No doubt but our Savior could have answered exactly to this question in the
Text, for he knows his own, all his Members are written in his book. If we by
our Anatomy can reckon up all the parts, all the bones, the veins, the sinews,
and muscles of the natural body, Matthew. 10.30.
Christ could surely tell all the Members of his mystical body; yea and all the
hairs on each of their heads. He speaks plainly in the formentioned 7 Chapter
of Matthew. that those which enter in at the narrow gate are but few: but here,
to meet with a curious brain, with a proud or sluggish heart, he conceales that
answer, and puts off the Questioner with his duty: Strive to enter in at the
narrow gate; which is the matter now to be pressed upon you.

We may not think to get a place in Heaven as we do a prize in a Lottery; first
ask whether there be many, or few chances? then put in our hands, and draw our
Fortunes. No, we must work out Salvation; it will cost us labor, and sweat,
and striving to extremity.

The word in the Original is (...), Strive till ye fall into an agony, and
sweat as well in receiving redemption, as Christ did with giving it. For it
cost our Redeemer a combat with Satan, an Agony within himself, a wrestling
with death, before he could set up the prize for us to run at. Wherefore we
cannot do less then run, and thrust hard when we come to the goal or gate. The
Kingdom of Heaven is gotten by violence; we cannot obtain a blessing, unless
with Jacob we wrestle for it. And indeed, the word here is borrowed from
Champions, or wrestlers. Before the combat, incredible was the care and
strictness of temper in those Olympian Agonists, who for certain months before,
cleansed their bodies with physic and diet, poysed the condition of weather
with helps of art, wore their apparel by rule, had their bread weighed, their
drink measured, their sleep stinted, oftentimes breathing themselves, and
trying their abilities, to prepare way for victory. Can we do less in our
spiritual course for an infinite prize, a crown immeasurable, a Kingdom
immortal? Then having physick'd your souls with the Cup of Christ, be sure ye
keep your selves clean and temperate. No beast, nor unclean thing might
approach the Holy Mount on earth where the Law was given, Exodus 34.3. How then
shall men turned to beasts by uncleanness, or worse then beasts, by stupefying
and sense-confounding excess, be admitted into the Heavenly Mount, reserved
for the Children of Grace, who practice their spiritual strength with chaste
good works, and examine their parts inwardly before the last stiff wrestling
at heavens strait gate?

But what means this Metaphor of entering at the strait gate? It shows the
difficulty of entrance; we must therefore use the same endeavor spiritually
for admittance into Heaven, as we do corporally for entrance through a narrow
passage, (i. e.) we must stoop, and lessen our selves, by abating and casting
off all those cumbrous impediments, which swell us up, and lets our
ingredience. Such are these: pride, which advances the head; covetousness,
which buncheth the back; and intemperance, which blows up the belly. The man
must be extenuated, and freed from all these encumbrances, that will get
through this gate, which is therefore called narrow, because we must narrow
our selves.

The house of God on earth may be conceived a resemblance of his heavenly
palace; for in most of our Churches the door we commonly enter in is low, and
little; this answers to humility. None should pass through with stuff, or
carriage; this answers to the banishing of vvorldliness. When we come thither,
we use commonly to come cleanly, and fasting; this answers to chaste and sober
temperance. Concerning the lessening of our selves by humility, our Savior
has given the size of a little child for our measure; except ye be converted,
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the heavenly Kingdom.
Whosever shall humble himself as this little child, shall be greatest, Matthew.
18.

Nothing hinders humility so much as pride of spirit, presumption on God, or
out selves: pride of dressing, or pride of precedence, hinder too, but not so
much. The one is a toy; the other the Apostles once had, and unlearned; Luke 22.
but pride of Spirit was proper to the Pharisee; without this, he might have
entered in; for surely that Pharisaical Sect had more then ordinary
righteousness, but they loved to show it, to boast, and stand upon it, and to
condemn all others. This is a stiff pride, and hard to be removed, because
they that have it applaud themselves, and think they do well. This is the
pride of Lucifer, vho appears as an Angel of Light; and they that have it, come
very near, yet cannot get through. Sometimes they can put in their heads by
Speculation, but their backs will not bow, that their feet may come along.
Sometimes a foot is in by practice; but while they keep their heads alost, and
gaze on the mysteries of the structure, they get a knock on the head, and fall
back to the world.

Concerning abdication, or contempt of the world, particularly of uncertain
riches, 1 Timothy 6.17.
our Savior has said, Matthew. 19. It is hard for a rich man to enter in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19. v. 23.24. and verse. 14.
it is harder for him then for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle. On the
contrary, make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16.9.
that they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles.

The poor, which are in before, will give a hand unto you. They have told
Christ of their friends on earth, and Christ takes notice of them. Wherefore
the soul must be lessened, and purged from all these gross humors, and fardels
of fleshliness, otherwise the gate of Heaven, though wide enough for thousands
to enter at once, will contract it self like a shut-purse, and be found too
narrow for one unreformed sinner; yea, though that sinner make a fair show of
Sanctity by much religious dispute, and search of heavenly things; for, as it
follows, many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Is not this our Saviors promise, Seek, and ye shall find; knock, it shall be
opened? Matthew. 7. How then can any that seek be denied entrance? Surely,
because they do not seek to the purpose, and after a right manner. They seek
inquisitively, not dutifully; rather to know the Secrets of God, then to fulfill
his Commands: or perhaps they seek faintly, with a vvandring intention, and
careless cessation; if they find not presently, they give over their search;
they may knock once, or twice on their breast, but softly, as upon felt, and so
give over before they be heard. Therefore the Apostle having said in the third
to the Colossians, and the first verse, (...), Seek earnestly to find the
things above, for that is the extent of the Greek (...), in the second verse, he
changes (...) into (...), and says, (...), mind heavenly things. Now (...) is
a general word, comprehending the operations as well of our will, as of our
understanding; yea in the Scripture it is most commonly applied to the
affections, which are peculiar motions of the will: so that our last English
translation, to show the right manner in seeking, has well rendered it, Set
your affection on the things above. For to seek with love and duty, to seek
from the heart, is only effectual. Any other search, whether by speculation,
talk, or questioning, is but formal, vain, and frivolous. For heartless
enquirers seek entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, as into a public
spectacle; thither they come, and make a profer; but seeing a thrust at the
door, away they pass. The difficulty of obtaining, rebates the edge of
endeavor.

Such a Seeker was the young man in the Gospel; he sought indeed to enter, but
how? by asking a question, What shall I do? Matt. 19.16. Do was the best
question could be asked; yet little available, because the answer was not
followed; for having great possessions, and being told, verse. 22.
Thou shall sell all, and give to the poor, he went away forrowful, and
displeased. If Heaven might be purchased at an easy rate, there would be many
more merchants then there are; wherefore our Savior puts the man to the Test,
whether he loved God best of all, by a proposal of forgoing that, which was
dearest to him; whereunto if he had willingly condescended, as Abraham did to
the sacrificing of his only son, perhaps the will had been accepted instead of
extreme performance. But howsoever, he that loves any thing more then Christ,
he that will not forsake Father or Mother, Wife or Child, Brother or Sister,
to gain him (witness Christ himself) is not worthy of him. Matthew. 10.37.
Shall I say then, He that will not forsake his dear sin, or rather, he that
prefers Heaven it self before Christ, is unworthy of him, and Heaven? You may
hear God himself complaining of these vain unserviceable seekers, Isa. 58.2.
for indeed they are but hypocritical sinners; They seek me daily, and delight
to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
Ordinance of their God; they ask of me the Ordinance of Justice: but what
follows? Still the old custom: They seek to know, not to follow: and what
availes to see, and not to walk; to stand, and not knock; to hear, and not
obey; to say, and do not? You may find by experience, that true effectual
seeking, requires the diligent employment of two parts, the eye, and foot; the
one to look out, the other to follow after: That answers to speculation, the
other to practice. He that is wholly taken up with speculation, may see Heaven
afar off, as Moses saw the Land of Canaan from Mount Nebo, Deuteronomy. 32. but
thither he cannot come without religious practice.

Be not then curious in enquiring what needs not, whether, or how many others
shall be saved: this is to be busybodies, or, as the word originally imports,
Bishops in another diocese, 1 Pet. 4. which the same Peter would not have
Christians to be; but strive earnestly, and faithfully, to do what God
requires, that your selves may obtain salvation. Be careful truly and
obediently to follow, and walk in that path, which will, though narrow, lead
you to eternal life. Endeavor to be holy, as ye affect to be happy, for then
surely you shall be both holy and happy; then shall grace end with you in
glory: and as here ye live the lives of the Saints, so hereafter ye shall
possess the joys of the Saints in the Kingdom of Heaven: which God of his
mercy grant unto us, through the merits of his Son, our Savior, Jesus Christ,
the righteous. Amen.

John 2. v. 11. This beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee; and
manifested forth his glory, and his Disciples believed on him.


THE first Chapter records the Nativity of Christ: SERMON. II.
now after his birth follows his life, the things that Jesus began both to do,
and teach; and these are no less then Miracles, or words able to work them;
but the virtue of every power is made most apparent by action, for which
respect the Evangelist in the 1 of the Acts, v. 1. has placed our Saviors
doing before his teaching: for unless his works had made way for his words, the
peoples belief had come but slowly on. Mark then how holy History has
registered his Miracles from the beginning. This BEGINNING of Miracles, etc.

From which Record you may observe the Miracle it self, it was the turning of
water into wine; then the Circumstances: 1. The Author, it was wrought by
Jesus. 2. The time, it was the first, or the BEGINNING of his Miracles. 3. The
place, it was wrought in CANA of Galilee. Then the manner, it was glorious, for
thereby he manifested forth his glory: and lastly, the effect, which was
belief; his Disciples BELIEVED on him. Of these in the order proposed.

The turning of wine into water is familiar amongst us, but the turning of
water into wine deserves the name of a Miracle. It Is easy to make worse of
better, but not to make better of worse: easy to spend, and wast, but not to
provide, and gather.

But you may say, We find it common in Nature, that water soaking into the root
of the tree, is turned into the blood of the grape, and so becomes wine; and,
which is most difficult, that God himself should convert water into wine, or
cause a vine to do the same.

Indeed every work of Nature, if duly considered, has a greater expression of
power then a Miracle: It Is more to make an eye, then to cure the blind; to
frame a joint, then to bid the lame walk; to scrue an ear, then to open the
deafs hearing; or to mould a man out of nothing, then to raise the dead.
Nevertheless, a work cut of ordinary course, though of less power, more takes
our gazing wonder, because less obvious. Ignorance mixed with some parcel of
knowledge, is the Mother of Wonder.

Howsoever, we are rightly taught hereby to magnify God in all his works,
which we daily behold; for there is more excellent art in making the poorest
bramble, or thistle, then in building the goodliest Palace of the earth; as
Solomon in all his Royalty was not apparelled like the Lily of the field,
Matthew. 6.

Next, this urges us to use Gods Creatures reverently, and temperately,
because it has sometimes cost him a Miracle to call wine out of water; yea,
and water out of the rock. All the wit of man cannot make a drop in time of
necessity, nor procure by the friendship of Abraham the moistning of his
tongue, Luke 16. Pharaohs Magicians, Exo. 7. could turn water into blood, so
can murderers, and the destroyers of mankind, they can turn whole Rivers; but
to convert water into wine, and make it fit for the use of man, this is the
work of him that turns wine Sacramentally into his own blood. God by turning
and returning of water into wine, and wine into his own blood, has double
sanctified the use thereof. Blessed be He, who has given us the same
plenteously to enjoy, and reverent be we in using it decently.

The quantity of water here changed by computation of the firkins which the 6
pots held, was near about two hogs-heads: The Miracle afforded no more at a
great meeting, at a solemn marriage, where one Guest brought 13, or 14. in his
company. For there was Jesus, and his Mother, and his Disciples. From hence we
may learn to propose a fit measure, both at the time of jollity, and ordinary
refreshing.

This for the substance of the Miracle; the circumstance next following, is the
Author Jesus.

That Is the Son of God, and Savior of Man, the Lord of Lords, and Head of all
Powers; by his word all things were made, and by his word alone he could have
soon converted, or confounded the whole world. Nevertheless such as He was,
he sought to raise faith, and vvin obedience rather by his goodness, then by
his greatness; not by his rod, but by a beneficial Miracle; that so the mighty
may be brought to descend to the weakness of their underlings by gracious
dealing. If they be heads, not to tread on their feet, but to tread with them,
to show and guide them, to move and direct them. If they be Masters, to govern
sweetly; if Fathers, to provide lovingly; if Teachers, to instruct mildly; if
Rich, to sustain charitably; to rule by example of works, as well as by rigor
of words; not so to load the back with justice, as to leave the belly empty
of mercy; but after Gods Method, to join the rod and the staff in comforting.

Our Jesus being the Son of God, showed whose son he was by his work, a work
far exceeding the skill of Carpentry, not forming the vessel, but enriching it
with liquor; his Father makes the vine, and he therefore the wine, which
issues from the vine.

If you would demonstrate your selves to be children of your heavenly Father,
imitate his works, his goodness, his beneficence and mercy. Our Jesus being
the true Vine, John 15.22. presented the fruit of the vine in this Miracle: Can
you think to be branches of the same vine, not yielding fruits answerable?
Every tree that does not bring forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire, Matthew. 7.

The next circumstance is that of time. This was the first, the beginning of
Christ's Miracles. Was it so? I thought his very Incarnation had been the
Miracle of all Miracles, the foundation of all the rest. And so it was indeed;
but this was the first outward Miracle, which he wrought Extrase, without,
upon other Creatures. That the word was made flesh, was the beginning of
humiliation; but that water was turned into wine, was the beginning of
Exaltation. That the word being made flesh was born of a Virgin, a Miracle
absolutely the first, this redounds to the honor of Virginity, which
whosoever truly keeps, works a prime miracle on himself; but that the word
turned virgin-water into wine at a Wedding, the first outward Miracle, it
redounds to the honor of Marriage, which next to virginity is the most
honorable estate.

But why was this the first outward Miracle? You may suppose these reasons.

The coming of Christ was tidings of joy, Luke 2.
of great joy, which should be to all people; therefore a Miracle of Wine,
whose property is to make glad the heart of man, was a fit entrance to begin
this time of joy. For indeed, if we dive into the mystical sense, this turning
of water into wine, is the turning of tears into joy at the marriage of Christ
and his Church.

Further, This beginning suits well with the order and progress of Christ's
Miracles: first, you see he begins with change of the Creatures made for the
use of man: then he proceeds to the change of man's body; as you have heard how
he made the dumb to speak, the blind to see, and the lame to walk; then in the
last rank of Miracles he changes the soul, both by effusion of his blood, and
infusion of his spirit.

All that I shall here apply is this: First, that the thought hereof be
entertained with joy, and thankfulness. Secondly, that we answer this beginning
of Christ's Miracles with some answerable beginning in our selves concerning the
Creatures: For the turning of water into wine, let us begin a Counter-miracle,
turn wine into water, the excess of it into tears of repentance, the abuse into
the use of sobriety; then we may find in the next turn the form of the body to
be wonderfully changed, the dumb in a spiritual sense will be enabled to
speak, the deaf to hear, the blind to see, and the lame to walk. Then at last
we may attain to the greatest change of the soul, by renewing the Image of
Christ, by proceeding from ignorance to knowledge, from unrighteousness to
righteousness, from profaness to holiness, daily growing up from grace to grace
till we end in glory. Now having measured the circumstance of time, I arrive to
the circumstance of place, which is Cana of Galilee. This beginning of Miracles
did Jesus in Cana of Galilee.

(...)signifies zeal, or emulation, and (...) revolution, or turning about to
the first point where motion began: put both names together, they signify the
zeal of a Convert; which ought to exceed in the service of that God, whom
formerly ye forsook. Thus under the name of the place, is couched the
condition, which belongs to the people of God, zeal after conversion. Hearken
to me ye that seek the Lord; look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the
hole of the pit whence ye are dug, Esaias 51.1. even to the Lord your Maker
and Redeemer; look unto him, and turn unto him with zeal of service: Yield
your selves unto him, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members
as weapons of righteousness unto God. Know you not, whose servants you are, him
ye obey? as therefore ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and
to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6. The heart of a zealous convert is a fit
seat for Christ to begin Miracles. Galilee in the 4. of St. Matthew. and
originally in the 9 of Esaias, is called Galilee of the Gentiles, because it
stood on the confines, bordering upon them; and in regard of the Babylonian
captivity, it was mixed with the Gentiles.

And surely the Gentiles may well labor in zeal, and conform themselves to the
name of Cana, it shall well become them: for God has estranged himself from
the Jews, and sent salvation upon the Gentiles to this purpose, that by them he
might provoke the Jews to jealousy, Romans 11.11. And so says God himself, I
will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke
them to anger with a foolish Nation, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Such were all the Gentiles,
not a people, but foolish Nations; (...), a confused multitude, before Christ
reduced them to order, by working Miracles. But now the prophecy of Esaias began
to take effect, I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them
that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was not
called by my name, Esaias 65. and v. 1. And why? because, as it follows, I have
spread out my hands all the day long to a rebellious people.

Wherefore it concerns us Gentiles, to whom God has revealed himself, to be
zealous, and emulous in holy duties, as well to excite the Jews, as also to
confirm our own election: If the branches were broken off, that we the wild
Olives might be grafted in the true vine; know, that because of unbelief they
were broken off, and that thou stand by faith: Be not high-minded, but fear;
for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not
thee, Romans 11.19.

We Gentiles were formerly but as dogs, unworthy to lick up the crumbs that fell
from the childrens table, Matthew. 15. and yet behold the children are discarded,
and the table is left to us. Let us not then like dogs return to our vomit,
preferring uncleanness before the mystery of holiness, and losing the relish of
heavenly food for dross and filth. Take heed, ye that condemn the Jews for
crucifying our Savior, lest ye do worse, by making his passion, and the riches
of his mercy, to be of no effect.

It is remarkable how Jesus, being the Savior of all, divided his presence,
and the means of Salvation, betwixt the Jew and Gentile. He was born at
Bethlehem in Jewry, but he lived at Nazareth, at Cana, and Capernaum of
Galilee: he suffered death at Jerusalem; but being risen again, he went into
Galilee, to declare his resurrection, Mark 16.7. The Jews had the custody of
Divine Oracles, they had Moses and the Prophets, more worthy of belief then one
sent from the dead, Luke 16. The Gentiles had only the book of Nature;
therefore at Jerusalem Christ taught in the Temple, but in Galilee he wrought
Miracles: there he bestowed his words, as to men of more understanding; and
here his works, as to men of grosser capacity; there faith was to enter by the
ear, and here a door was opened by the eye. To either place our common Savior
was not defective, but applied means of conversion most answerable to both.
Thus the Cornerstone lay in the midst betwixt both side-walls, the Jews, and
the Gentiles; the same Mediator, who joined God and Man in one Person, Heaven
and Earth in one league, sought also to join the Jew and Gentile in one Church.
Thus like the Sun he illustrates both hemispheres, and so divides his course,
that the whole world may be cherished by his beams.

Now for our parts, we have the means of conversion vouchsafed to both; we have
the words which he preached at Jerusalem, we have the works he wrought in
Galilee; and we know the truth of them as well as most of the Inhabitants of
Cana; for all were not present, the greater part were satisfied with Relation:
Then what hinders our belief? and if we believe, what hinders our duty? Let us
show our faith by our works, by obedient conformity to his precepts, and by
newness of life.

Observe further, that Galilee was contemptible in the esteem of the Jews, and
was accounted a place from whence no good could ever come. Likewise Julian the
Apostate, thought to disgrace Christians, by calling our Savior himself, and
all his believers, by the name of Galileans. Wherefore Christ, who came to
relieve the distressed, and to raise the lowly, honored this place with the
first of his Miracles. This teaches us neither to despise others, nor to
despair of our selves, be the present condition never so poor, and low. When
God seems to be farthest off, even then he is nearest at hand, as loving to
show his strength in weakness, his mercy in misery. Though Cana does likewise
signify (...) a reed shaken with wind, yet let us raise our meditations with
this, that the reed stands up, when the sturdy oak is thrown to the ground. In
such preservation, and providence, the glory of God appears most manifest. So I
proceed to the glorious manner of working this Miracle: He manifested forth his
glory.

Glory is the excellence of Majesty, the light and luster of surpassing virtue,
and therefore most proper to God, the fountain of all virtue and power. Such
brightness cannot be concealed: the cloud of humane flesh, and form of
humility, wherein the Godhead of Christ was clothed, could not long obscure his
Majesty, but upon occasions it must needs break forth. They are his own words,
No man puts a light under a bushel; Luke 11.33.
the true Light, which lightens every man into the world, begins at length to
display his beams.

And because glory is no private object, but conspicuous to public view,
therefore our Savior took this time for his Miracle, when a numerous assembly
were met together at a Marriage Feast. The Sun was not made for the eye of a
single Spectator; particular persons must not expect a Miracle for personal
reasons, or private respects, but content themselves with the general course of
providence.

Now if the manner of the Miracle be rightly considered, this work, this
beginning of Miracles, did most gloriously declare the power of his Godhead.
For by his own Command, without any borrowed power, the same word, which made
the Elements, was able to turn and change them how he list: yea, without a word
spoken, his will was sufficient; the substance created by him, felt his
influence, and obeyed. For we find nothing spoken to the water, but only this
to the servants, Fill the water-pots, and now draw forth. None could do this in
such a manner, but God himself.

Now to apply these observations; it is said, Exodus 34. That the glory which
shone on Moses, made the face of Moses to shine; the light, which is darted on
the wall, causes the wall to reflect a second light. It is then our duty,
since the glory of Christ and his Gospel is risen upon us, to manifest the same
by actions of light, according to that of the Prophet, Arise, shine; for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, Esaias 60.1. Weak as
we are, we have a way of manifesting Gods glory too, even by good works; Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5. The Image of the Original may be
conveyed hither and thither by several glasses; Christ bears the Image of his
Father, and we of Christ; a Christians good life is the reflex of Gods glory,
which we must endeavor to manifest.

Again, Christ presented his Miracle before a multitude, so must our good be
diffusive, ready to be extended to many, even as many as occasion shall
require, and ability will permit. The Sun is not exhausted by casting his beams
on every side: no more should we grow weary of diffusing righteousness on every
object, both by deed, and example. The stock of virtue is ever increased by
spending.

Lastly, since God is the sole worker of Miracles, and glory is his peculiar,
which He will not give to another, we ought nor to appropriate the least beam
thereof to our selves in any of our works, but to attribute the whole to God,
the prime Author of all. For where is the wine of the vessel without the vine,
the water of the Conduit without the Spring; or the shining of the wall without
the light of Heaven? Herod after his rich decking of raiment, and language, was
struck by a hand invisible, and eaten up with worms, because when the people
heaped upon him divine applause, he gave not the praise to God, Act. 12. Not
unto us, Act. 12.
not unto us, O Lord, but to thy Name be glory for evermore. I now come to my
last point, the effect of this miracle: His disciples believed on him.

Miracles, and belief are mutual Relatives, eying each other as the cause and
the effect: so that Miracles are for belief, as the cause for the end; and
readiness of belief invites Miracles, as the end draws on the cause: Unless you
see wonders, says our Savior, ye will not believe, Joh. 4. These are the most
effectual works of faith; and on the other side, said I not unto thee, that if
thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God? So he speaks to
Martha about the raising of Lazarus, Joh. 11.40. Necessary Miracles are never
wanting to confirm belief. Human Nature in this depraved condition, is nothing
so apprehensive of truth, as it is greedy of good, and regardful of power; from
whence it comes, that hearing of Gods word is less taking then seeing of his
works; especially with men of hard hearts, and dull capacities. A wicked and
adulterous Generation, is altogether set upon signs. What sign show thou?
v. 18.
is frequent in the mouth of the learned Jew, though best acquainted with
divine Oracles. But how came Christ's own disciples to be of this condition? you
must have them excused, because they were simple and ignorant men, newly taken
up by the Seacoast in Galilee, and had not been long with their Master.
Wherefore our Savior according to his continual goodness descends to humane
infirmity, and initiates the faith of his Church with Miracles. And I dare say
that Miracles are not yet so ceased, but even to this day, if the Gospel were
now to be planted in a place where it has not been already rejected, God would
hearken to the voice of his Agent, and confirm his words with signs from
Heaven.

Since then we know by our selves what is most prevalent in the conversion of a
sinner, or unbeliever, let us be ready to afford that to others, which our
selves have sometimes needed: Let us imitate the method of Christ; and though
we cannot turn our brethren by showing Miracles, let us come as near as we
can, and second good words with exemplary good works.

This is the way to be Sub-saviours, Petty Mediators, and Factors for Christ.
Then the Lords Minister best follows the Text, when his life comments upon his
Doctrine, and makes a visible repetition at home of what he delivered in the
Church. Likewise works are honest Laymens Sermons, they preach with their
hands, and not with their tongues,, and by the plenty of righteousness there
lies a tongue in every finger.

It was the Caveat of the blessed Mother, to the servants of this feast,
Whatsoever he says unto you, do it. And it shall be mine to you; See that ye
do what our Savior commands, that so ye may keep the perpetual feast of a
good conscience, and find the water of tears and heaviness, turned into the
wine of joy and gladness; which may never be consumed, but last like the widows
oil, till ye come to the place of joy everlasting; vvhither God of his mercy
bring us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Luke 7. part of the 47. verse. Her sins, which are many, are forgiven her; for
she loved much.


THE Text is (...), a Word of Comfort, because it treats of a welcome Subject,
our delivery from the bonds of sin. It is again a plausible Theme, in regard of
this inference, for she loved much. Of all passions, that of Love commands
attention; it is the Idol, to which the tongues and pens of most men do
sacrifice their labors. And therefore the current of my discourse is only to
draw the stream of affections into its clear and native channel; to alter their
object, and better their intent, and that by advancing this glorious example of
blessed Mary Magdalene, whose singular love to Christ, made the sweet savor of
her Name more precious then her ointment, for it endures until this day; and so
changed the hue of her blushing sins, that though they were of a crimson dye,
yet she became all over as white as snow. Her forepast crimes had now ceased to
call into her face her conscious blood as a witnessing tincture of her guilt.
The Judge himself has pronounced it, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven;
for she loved much.

In which Epiphonema, or quick-close, we may behold the unparalled love of
the one unto the other. Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; there is Christ's
love to her. For she Loved much; there was her love to Christ. Herein only was
the difference: Mary's love to Christ was (...), due debt; Christ's love to her
is (...), grace, and favor. It Is out of his free gift that her many sins are
forgiven her. He loved her first, and so in a correspendent tune she echoed
her due affection unto him. The (...), this illative For here in this Text,
shows (as anon shall be proved) that her love was the effect, not the cause of
her forgiveness. And so I divide the whole into a benefit, and a thanksgiving.
The benefit includes first the matter it self, forgiveness of sins. Secondly,
the extent of the gift; her many sins are forgiven. In the thanksgiving, you
may be pleased to observe in what the substance of her thanks did consist, it
was in Love; For she Loved: Then the degree and measure thereof: it was no
faint, no perfunctory affection; it was fervent, and exuberant, she loved much.
But in the first place, the matter of the benefit requires my narration, and
craves your patience. HER SINS are forgiven HER.

Forgiveness of sin is the greatest boon the miserable man can obtain, because
none can bestow it but he, who is the absolute Benefactor in man's Salvation. As
for us, we are all crazed and crippled in our fall in Adam; and how can one
cripple help another? We then received such a crack, that none can new-cast us,
and restore us to our primitive integrity, but he that first molded us. Our
wound admits such infinite dimensions, that it requires an infinite Redeemer to
prepare a sufficient plaster. The Almighty restrains this prerogative as
proper and peculiar to his own throne, placing it as the most eminent of all
his titles, and esteeming it the chiefest Flower of his Crown. When Moses did
supplicate that he would daign him that honor as to show him his Glory, I will
show thee my Excellency, says the Lord, Exodus 33. And what is it? even his
grace, mercy, and bounty. In the next chapter He is proclaimed JEHOVAH,
gracious, merciful, rich in kindness, forgiving INIQVITY, TRANSGRESSION, and
SIN. He insists upon it, as delighting therein; and expresses it with a treble
emphasis, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; that no obliquity,
whether in thought, word, or deed, may seem to escape the bounds of his
Royalty. Rich in kindness, as if the riches of his grace were in this one Act
above others most diffused. And indeed we find it so: for his mercy, whose
object is our iniquity, outshines all his works. His Omnipotency demonstrates
him to be an awful God, his mercy exhibits him an indulgent Father, and that
encourages us to tread within his Courts, and to approach near his presence.
Forgiveness of sins, entitles us to a higher estate then we were first born to;
for by our Creation we were but men; by our Remission we become Saints. And so
happy we, that have been once wretched; Hence is it that it is the task, the
scope, the whole business of a Christian: we cannot well live without daily
food, far less can we live without daily forgiveness. And therefore our
Savior, who in the one Petition taught us to pray, Give us this day our DAILY
BREAD; in the very next he instructs also to ask, and FORGIVE us our
trespasses. The Angels are Creatures more excellent then our selves in Nature;
and yet by this boon of forgiveness, we far surpass some of them in condition.
For they having neither Devil without, nor flesh at home to seduce them, when
they once fell, fell eternally, being not so much as vouchsafed that small
courtesy to be pitied. But man having his innocence stolen from him, and his
overthrow occasioned by another treason, the Son of God was moved in
compassion to come down into the world; and not only so, but to lay down his
own life at the stake for the life of man, which was forfeited. He was so
zealous of our remission, that when our many sins like so many talents of Lead
had sunk us deep as hell it self, he then stripped himself of his robes of
Majesty, and cast himself into the Main, to raise us up again. I have heard
it is the method of the Court to chastise the faults of Princes in their Pages,
whom they best love, that by smarting for their offenses in their other selves,
they may the more willingly amend them in their own selves. But here the Prince
himself, the only Son and Heir of the celestial Diadem, endures the discipline
of the lash, that his servants, his bondslaves, may be forgiven.

Methinks we should be no less affected herewith, then Naaman was, when Elisha
healed him of the leprous disease that clothed his body. 2 Kin. 5.
For when he felt his flesh to come again like the flesh of a child, as the
Text phraseth it, he devoutly honored the Prophet as a Father, and rejoiced at
his second nativity. Greater reason have we to feed our selves with true joy,
and to magnify the God of Israel, who cleanses our diseased souls from a
fouler leprosy, healing our old soars by forgiving our sins past: and the
better to keep us clean, the sink being thus emptied, he instills into our
hearts more sovereign Spirits, that so we may be secured not only from a
present, but a future danger. Neither does this gracious dealing derogate from
his justice; for though his Edict be out against sin, yet it does not so bind
his hands that he cannot seal a pardon. He that transgresses a Kings Law by
Felony, is to fulfill the Law in the penalty of death. And yet the King, who
ratifies the Laws validity, can soften, and take off, as he pleases, the edge
and rigor of those Laws, to which he puts the Fiat for their constitution.
Neither is punctual execution essential to the Law, but the power of execution.
If Sovereign Powers may laudably use their liberty in freeing of Delinquents;
much more may the King of Kings dispense with his own Ordinance. The
demonstration of his revenging justice springs not from the necessity of his
Nature, but from his voluntary disposition; He being Agens Liberrimum. And
though sin, as sin, has an outward dis-agreement, and be evil in it self, yet
it has no inward repugnancie, it is not absolutely evil to the Almighty, in as
much as he is not the worse for the being of it, but is able, were he pleased
to show his power, to turn it to his Glory. Be not then dismayed in regard of
the vast dimensions of thy numerous sins. Saint John in his first Epistle, and
first chapter, certifies us, that the blood of Christ does cleanse us from ALL
our sins; and so are not able to shut out a good heart from God, which can but
gasp for mercy as a dry land does where no water is. He cast out of this
convert in the Text, seven devils as easy as one, and so he cancelled with the
same facility her greatest bonds, as he did her smallest bills.

We acknowledge the Devil to be chained to everlasting torments; yet not so
much for his many sins, as for his continuance therein, for his abode and
dwelling in those tents of Kedar. If it were possible he could break off that
accursed league, his chains would be dissolved, and himself Fixed into a
Saint. It is well observed how our Savior was contented to descend according
to the flesh, as well of Rahab a Harlot, Tamar an incestuous person, as of the
holy Patriarks; that where sin did abound, grace might overflow. This one
instance, Mary Magdalene, may serve for all, whose many and manifold sins were
quite forgiven.

Touching the person of this sinner, she was indeed a Noble Woman; Magdalena,
a Magdalo Castro.
but virtue is not entailed to descent; it does not still run in a blood: hers
was corrupted, she being more noted for the eminency of vice, then of
parentage. In plain terms, she was Prostibulum, an unchaste Lady, a common
Curtesan: Consueverat Peccatrix appellari.
Her usual appellation was Peccatrix, Mary the Sinner; all her senses and
affections wholly taken up with pernicious pleasures. In vita Magdal.
Her eyes enchaunted with lascivious objects, her ears charmed with scurrilous
talk, her smell filled with artificial perfumes, her arms heated with wanton
embraces; by which means she became not beset only, but possessed with a
heptarchy of soul spirits, no less then seven being the settled inmates of her
heart. And yet behold a strange alteration! this strayed sheep is returned,
this prodigal child reclaimed; Mary Magdalene has escaped as a bird out of the
snare of the fowler, she has dislodged that unclean Legion, which so wasted
her Spirit; her body and soul no more a Dungeon, but a Palace, even a
sanctified Temple of the Holy Ghost.

Where are now those Barbarians, that will censure Saint. Paul a Murderer,
Act. 28.
if the Viper be not speedily shaken from his Hands? Where are the Pharisaical
Spirits, that will pass their judgment upon any soul but their own? a crooked
Plant is not forthwith to be broken, it may be straightned for a better use: He
runs far, that never turns. God has his own times and hours, and moments, for
the Conversion of a Sinner; and so it becomes not us altogether to condemn any
man, seeing there is hope of every ones Forgiveness, whose Repentance is not yet
cut off by Death. Tom. 5. p. 63. sup. Tu Pet.
I am sure Saint Ambrose doubts not to affirm, That Peter, by his fall, found
more grace then he lost, his Faith being stronger after, then before.

I speak not this to encourage secure Libertines, who feel no remorse for their
Sins, leaving Repentance to their Deathbed: To such as these, I must tell
another Tale. An account that is long over-past, in the end becomes difficult
to be finished: Even so it will be with him, who wilfully suffers his debt of
Sin to multiply, and the reckoning of his Transgressions to run on; in the end,
his own wickedness shall reprove him. The Lord, says Jeremiah, shall draw him
out of his lurking holes, and present him naked to Judgment: And then with
what confusion and astonishment shall he that was prodigal of the time of
Grace, Chap. 2.
come forward unto judgment? My intent, by proposing the Pattern of this
Convert, is only to strengthen the bruised Reed, whose humbl'd spirit trembles
at God's Indignation. First then, show me Mary Magdalen's Confession, her
hearty Contrition; make it appear, that thy soul is furnished with her Grace,
that thy Love to Christ is steady and unfeined; and then my soul for thy
safety, I dare secure thee of Remission. And so we are brought directly to this
Inference, For she loved much.

This Particle for, does not infer that her love to Christ was the cause of her
forgiveness; but that it was a certain proof and sign of her pardon, because,
or, in that, she loved much: the words immediately following in the Verse, make
the measure or degree of our love to Christ, to arise from the measure of his
gracious Remission toward us. To whom little is remitted, says our Savior,
he loves little; and so to whom much is forgiven, he loves much. The
forgiveness of her Sins going before her love, must needs be the cause of her
Love; and not her Love the cause of her forgiveness. The same is manifest in
the Parable or Similitude of the two Debtors, from the 40 to the 43 Verse,
where it is set down, that abundance of Love in the greatest debtor, proceeded
as an effect of the greater sum forgiven by the Creditor. The ambiguous
Inference thus explained, we may learn from this happy soul, how to place our
Love aright; not on some poor Creature, unworthy to be sought, insufficient if
obtained; but upon the greatest, wisest, best, and fairest Object, even upon
the Lord our God, whereby we enjoy all Joy for ever by mere loving.

The Nature and Property of Love, may be expressed in this Breviary: Love is
the imperious Sovereign of Affections, yea, the sum of them, they are all
reduced to it: For Love, when it longs for the thing loved, is then desire;
when it has the thing loved, it is then joy; when it flies from that it
affects not, then it is fear; and when it feels what it not desires, it is
sadness. Thus all the Affections, Desire, Joy, Fear, and Grief, are included in
Love. So then, if we love God, we will desire to enjoy him; and having enjoyed
him, we will rejoice to keep him; and feeling him to leave us, we will grieve
at his absence. Again, Love is so transcendent, that it speaks with the tongue
of every Virtue: Bounty is Love, as it is beneficial to the Indigent; Grace is
Love, as it gives good things freely. Our Savior makes Love the Cognizance of
his Disciples; the Apostle styles it The accomplishment of the Law, and bond of
perfection, which linketh us to God, and God to us: we are far from him, if we
love him not; with him, if we love him: Animus est ubi amat, non ubi animat;
the soul being more where it likes, then where it lodges; rather where it
loves, then where it lives. We find, in the History of this religious
Penitent, that Love acquitted her thanks to God, discharged her reckoning,
sanctified her actions, and covered a multitude of Faults.

But because Love generally delivered, does not illustrate how she particularly
loved, we will draw closer to the Point, and try her Deeds by the Symptoms and
Properties of true Sincerity; that so it may appear her words were not smooth
and counterfeit, but the trusty Messengers of her settled Affection to her
Savior.

The first property of Love, is a fervent and longing desire to enjoy that
which is beloved.

This first Step we may trace in her timely hasting to the Tomb, where when she
found her Lord removed, every part of her became an Eye; and every thought, a
look. Indeed, Peter, the Disciple that is said to love Christ best, and John,
the Disciple best beloved of the Lord, ran too; but their Devotion was sooner
out of breath. For when they had seen what she had said, they staid not, but
suddenly retired, and shrunk away. She stands to it; her disconsolate heart
still throbbing and panting, sighing and enquiring until she found him, whom
her zealous soul most desired. Neither was this thirst of his presence descryed
only in her early visits at his Grave where he lay, but it was discovered also
in her former intrusion into the Pharisee's house, where he sat at repast. She
would not expect his coming forth, as knowing nice Ceremonies of behavior to
savor more of the Courtier then of the Christian. These aerie and windy
Circumstances of worldly carriage, oft-times withstand the solid purchase of
the Soul, and quenches the alacrity of the Spirit. And so the importunate
Demeanor of this bold, yet religious Guest, received not a check, but a
welcome. We cannot be unseasonable in pressing our Redeemer at midnight,
before the morning-watch; he neither slumbers nor sleeps. We may approach near
him at the very Table; it is his meat, says Saint John, Joh. 4.34.
to do the will of him that sent him. And yet her approach was humble; she came
quivering behind him, who saw her well enough; Exodus 33.
accounting it with Moses, grace abundant to see the back parts of God's Glory.
She looked not so high as his hands, but in decent obeisance fell at his feet,
as resolving now to tread wholly in her Saviors steps.

Learn then out of this Property of Love, to crave no other solace of Christ,
but Christ himself, in whose presence is fullness of joy. Away with all dullness
and coldness in God's Worship; Mary's fervor is the best temper. For he that
is all Spirit, will not take pleasure in the drowzie and heavy Service of a
Sluggard. Why did he ordain the neck of the consecrated Ass to be broken,
rather then offered up in Sacrifice? Was it not to intimate, That he cannot
brook our heaviness and tardiness in serving him, of which the Ass has ever
been a Hieroglyphick?

The second Property of LOVE, is a quick obedience, and forward care to follow
Christ. Her speedy renovation was a lively expression of this sprightly
quality. A Lebete Phiala, of a Cauldron seething and boiling with lust, she
became a Crystal Vial of pure Chastity. Quot membra, tot holocausta; every
member that before served Sin, is now turned a holocaust, a sweet burnt
Sacrifice. And that her Zeal within might want no pregnant signs without, the
fire of her Devotion melts her soul into floods of water, like a flash of
lightning seconded with a storm of rain, as if she mean'd to overwhelm her
spiritual Pharaoh in her own salt Sea of Tears. Her heart, which before her
Conversion was the Fountain of mischief, returns her now a Medicine; and her
eye, which let in vanity, lets it out again, by making her Tears as it were,
a second Font, wherein she was renewed from the guilt of her Offenses. And
having prostrated her self at Christ's feet, she delights in kissing them; her
kisses being holy Interpreters of her devout acknowledgment, that it was his
feet which guided her in the way of peace. The better to declare how she held
nothing too good in the Service of so good a Master, she wipes them clean with
the principal Ornament of her head, the flaxen Towel of her hair. Those
dishevelled locks, whose curious dressings were before laid out as entising
Nets, to catch the loose Beholders, are now religiously dedicated to dry his
feet, from whose paths they had so often digressed.

Her Diligence waited on him, no less when he was interred, then when he was
alive. For though Joseph and Nicodemus had already bestowed an hundred pounds
of Myrrh and Aloes for his embalming, yet she prepared her Spices, and
provided her Ointments too. Not that she undervalued what they had done, but
because Love persuaded she was to do all her self. Upon guess that his doleful
Coarse was surprised by others, how did her resolute fervor exceed her Sex?
She wooes and strives to win the supposed Gardener, with Titles of Honor, SIR,
LORD, if you have taken him hence, tell me where he is; Ego illum tollam, I
will bear him away. Timorous Joseph of Arimathea, came secretly to Pilate for
fear of the Jews, and begged his body: But she endued with Judiths spirit,
cannot be daunted with difficulties, nor appaled with impossibilities. She
thought her Love the complearest harness, the surest shield, and therefore she
begs not help, but maugre all their Opposition, Ego tollam, I will bear him
away.

By this second Property, we may remember, that the value of Christian Love, is
to be tried by the same Touchstone as holy Mary's was, not by words, but by
obedience. Joh. 14.23.
If any love me, says Christ, he will keep my Commandments. The Jews called
him King, and bowed their knees before him; but they defiled his Face with
Spittle, and threshed his cheeks with blows. And what are they but degenerate,
not freeborn Christians, who call Christ Lord, and bow their knees before him,
yet crucify him, and trample his blood under their feet, by adhering to their
impieties? What is this, but with Judas, to kiss him, and betray him? We make
his Scepter a Reed, when we yield him no sway over our Affections, when his
just Commands are more questioned then obeyed.

The last Property of Love, Philip. 4.
is Bountifulness; Love, says the Aposte, is bountiful: This caused our
Convert not to come niggardly, and empty-handed. She would not visit her Lord
without a Present, without a Pledge of her homage and better meaning. The
largeness of her heart honored him with the best she had, and bestowed a
sumptuous Ointment on the Lords Anointed. An Ointment so precious, that Judas,
the Bearer of the Purse, repined with a quanto melius? how much better had this
bin sold for three hundred pence, and the price thereof employed to the
necessities of the poor? Yet her modesty rated it not so high, as that she
durst pour it on his sacred Head: she esteemed it but good enough to anoint his
hallowed feet. It is true, that in nothing, Job 22.
as Job says, can a man be profitable to the Almighty: and so the riches of
the Spikenard could not add any sweetness to him, who is nothing but sweetness
it self; yet he graciously accepts her little Mite, as a lively Symbol of her
greater thankfulness, and entertaines her small Box of Ointment, as a
recompense for that saving Oil, which He, the good Samaritan, infused into her
soul.

This last Property of Christian Love, discovers the Hypocrisy of those who
would be religious without Charges. They are like the Fig Tree in the Gospel,
which had fair Leaves, but not so much as one Figg to give to Christ in his
hunger; having the show of Godliness, but denying the Power; talking of a
flourishing Church, and yet endeavoring to deprive the Church of her ancient
Patrimony; devouring Tithes, because they will not have the Lords Ministers
meddle with that themselves Nickname Worldliness: A Patron scarce passing away
a thin Parsonage, without a Reservation of his own Tithes. Some of these may be
seen garnishing their private Dwellings, and yet contented that Gods House lie
naked, and more vile then some of their meanest Offices; and all for fear of
bringing in their own Chimaera of supposed Idolatry, when indeed their
Covetousness, as it is 3 Coloss. and their stubbornness, 1 Samuel 15. are the main
mischievous Idolatry. Apol. cap. 39.
But what says the ancient Father, Tertullian? Pietas est pro pietate sumptus
facere: True Christianity thinks it cannot be at too much cost with God. For he
is more delighted with Abel, sacrificing the best; then with Cain, serving him
with the worst: with Aaron, in a decent Vestment; then with a Novelist,
standing before him in a slovenly Coat. The outward respects of reverence, are
still accounted Pledges and Arguments of our Piety and inward Devotion, that
with Mary Magdalene we love him much; which is the degree of her Affection in
this Adverb much, for she loved much.

She did not love moderately or remissly, that were a plain sign of too much
undervaluing and neglect; she loved earnestly and extremely. Other Objects may,
God cannot have excess of Love. Tell me what pitch of Affection does the
Natural Man reserve for his Mammon, for his Herodias; the same, in a far
exceeding intention, did she confer upon her Savior. How could she love him
too much, who, in regard of the beams of his Grace, which he vouchsafed to cast
upon her, deserved the best, yea, all, and a Thousand times more then all? The
precept is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, with all thy strength; which Saint Austen expounds of Supereminent and
overflowing Love, that if any other thing offers it self to be loved of us, it
should be carried along, and made to run together with us, to the Love of God.
Springs and Brooks run back into the Main; and so the least Rivulet of
Affection, ought not to be drained any other way then to him, of whom, and from
whom, are all things. It Is an ungrateful ground, that like an unbottomed Gulf,
swallows and returns not; whereas a clean, and well-planted Soil, renders much
fruit for the many showrs did fall upon it. Gracious Mary had her heart
refreshed and watered plentifully, and so her thankful soul proved fruitful in
good works, and brought forth a delightful harvest, for she loved MVCH.

I need not insist upon this Point: Her several Actions before expressed, do
abundantly testify the eminent measure of her Affection. You might see it in
her Spices which she brought to Christ alive, and at his grave. Neither was the
Period there; her thankful and obedient heart followed him even beyond death.
The Legend quotes Egesippus and Josephus Testimonies, how after his Ascension
from the Mount of Olives, she sequestered her self from all the world, and led a
solitary life in the Wilderness; where, if their account be right, she sighed
away full thirty years in mourning for his absence. We read, that the Eastgate
in Ezekials Temple, was ever shut, Ezekiel. 44.2.
because God went once thorough it: so her heart was shut to all Objects
whatsoever, and left open only to retain her all-sufficient Redeemer. The
steel of the Mariners Card, when it is once touched with the LODESTONE, is
reported ever after to bend, and look toward the North. And so she, having her
soul touched with the sanctifying Spirit of God, had her Cogitations only
directed to him. For the measure of Loving God, is to Love him, says devout
Bernard, De diligen. Deo.
without measure, (i. e.) with all possible perfection that a Creature can
attain unto: Nothing can fill the print of the Wax, but the Seal that made it;
nor any thing satisfy the Soul, but he who first created it. Hence is that of
Saint Austen, Domine fecistinos ad Te; Lord, thou have made us for thy self, Et
irrequietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in Te; and our heart is unquiet,
till it rests in thy self.

Faith and Hope shall cease, and like shadows fly away; but Love mounts to
Heaven; and the greater it has been here, the higher in degree it shall be
there; the wider entrance, and happier entertainment it shall find with the
Society of the Saints and Angels, with the Beatifical Vision and Fruition of
the undivided Trinity.

Now blessed be the Lord, that leaves us not so deeply engaged, but has taught
our poverty a short and ready way how to satisfy so infinite a Creditor. It is
not rich and sumptuous Presents, nor any worldly advantage, which he considers,
that so our outward wants may not dishearten our often endeavors in the
discharge of our Duty.

He expects our tribute at home, and within us; the service of our thanks being
to be presented by no other Present then Love. So that we may as well deny our
selves, as to be wanting in the performance of our love to him, who is the God
of Love, the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost; whose Grace, Love and Communion,
be with you always. Amen.

Gal. 5. v. 24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts.


SERMON. 4.
IT ought not to seem strange, that a Preacher of the Gospel, being an Embassdor
of Peace, should come as a Herald, to denounce War: it was so from the
beginning: The very God of Peace proclaimed War betwixt the seed of the Woman,
and the seed of the Serpent; The Substantial Word of God, professed he came
into the world to make division betwixt the Father and Son, the Mother and the
Daughter. And the Apostle in the Text, sets every man at variance with himself,
to make division betwixt the Flesh and Spirit. This (...), Duel, or Conflict in
our own Breasts, is good, and Christian indeed. For when we turn the greatness
of our courage to the subduing of our inward Corruptions, we make a holy peace
with God, and bring our selves within the Line of Communication with his Saints.

They which are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the corruptions and
lusts. In which Proposition, we may consider how the persons are qualified, and
who by a more peculiar appropriation, are stamped with the Character of those
which are Christ's.

Secondly, The religious duty wherein they are exercised, shadowed in the
Metaphor of crucifying; and here is their evidence and assurance, they have
crucified.

Thirdly, The Subject, or matter of this crucifying, and that is the whole body
of sin, both in the outward and inward man. They have crucified the flesh;
there the outward man is disciplined, his sensual Delights and Pleasures being
castigated, and fastened to Christ's Cross. They have crucified the affections
and lusts; there the inward man is rectified; the rebellious stubbornness of
the will, the exorbitant thoughts of the mind, the extravagant desires and
motions of the heart, being regulated, and brought in obedience to the Law of
the Gospel.

We are to begin with the pruning of the luxuriant flesh. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh.

It Is too evident: 2 Pet. 3.6.
Saint Peter has rightly observed, That some wrested his brother Paul's
doctrine to their own damnation: for because it is said in the first verse of
this Chapter, Christ has made us FREE, and we are not under the Law, verse 18.
the Antinomians, Libertines, and others, catechize the pure Saints of their
lewd Sect, that they may break the Law without sinning; in regard being not
under the Law, they are not guilty of aberration from it, and so not of sin:
But the Apostle checks those presumptuous enemies of sound Doctrine, making it
clear, verse. 13. that the liberty he cried up, does not intend license; nor his
walking freely in the Spirit, make way to wander loosely in the flesh. The
satisfaction of Christ, frees from the tyrannical yoke and curse of the Law;
from the rigid performance of Circumcision, and other Bondages of the Law, 1
and 2 verses; but it voyds not Obligation of personal obedience to the Law, as
it is a rule of life, in the 13 and 14 verses. The end of our Redemption is not
looseness in practice, but a happy service: we gain an easier Master, no
licentious disorder; yea, rather by the Gospel of Christ, our burden is
increased, a greater task is added. For whereas the Law says, Thou shall not
commit adultery, the Gospel says, Mat. 5.28.
Thou shall not look, nor think lasciviously. And indeed, all the sacrifices,
all the sacraments, all the purgings of the Law, did but represent the new
Covenant of Christ, the crucifying of ourselves, and our cleansing through his
blood. The shell of Ceremony we have thrown away, but the kernel of Moral and
Christian Duty couched under it, we still retain. We cast off the body of sin,
which defiled the body of flesh; and instead of cutting away the foreskin of
that member which execures the act of lust, we prune the heart, See Coloss.
2.18.
where rotten desires are conceived; or, as in my Text, we crucify the flesh,
(i. e.) we mortify the fleshliness of the flesh, with the Affections and
Lusts. To this purpose, and in this sense, Gods Elect are said to derive their
Race and descent from Christ.

They which are Christ's, are the same Spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6. and so are
engaged to proceed in a professed hostility with the flesh, without Truce or
Cessation. For the Spirit is in such a direct Opposition to the Flesh, Romans
8.13.
that it is written, If ye walk after the flesh, ye shall dye: and therefore
Jude concludes, that the fleshly have not the Spirit, verse. 19.

They which are Christ's, are dead to sin; how then can such walk in the counsel
of the ungodly, or stand in the way of sinners?

Again, They which are Christ's, are adopted and regenerated, engrafted and
rooted in him. Now what a perverse Consideration were it, to imagine the end
of these improvements, and super-endowments to be, that this seed, that this
offspring of God, should spread forth, and be pampered with the Delicacies of
the flesh, since the putting on of Christ is an inhibition to make provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof? Romans 13.14. which verse is a good
comment on this my Text. It does not absolutely forbid to make provision, but
so as to fulfill its lusts. And thus the Apostle's crucifying the flesh here,
intends not the destruction of the body, but the ruin of those corruptions
which have entrenched and encompassed in the soul. For flesh is not taken in
this place for Caro carnis, for that which is the Substance of the flesh.

Indeed, there were Heretics called Patriciani, who held Man's flesh was not
made of God, but of the Devil; which caused some to dispatch themselves, to
cast off the flesh. But we know the flesh, in it self, like all the works of
God's hand, was good and perfect; Christ himself has assumed it. But by flesh,
the Apostle means Caro peccati, the body of sin, the depraved will of the
flesh, the general corruption of nature, which has so scattered its poison
through the soul, that the powers, which should command, are turned to obey
their Servants. Notwithstanding this manifest truth, there was an ancient
Heresy, which being grounded upon the literal and violent sense of our
Saviors Counsel, that if the eye or hand offend, would have, without a
Metaphysical knife, Mat. 18.9.
or mystical abstraction, the one really to be cut off, and the other pulled
out: whereas the right meaning of those words, intimates nothing but the death
of sin in those parts, without the ruin of the parts themselves.

It is the usual practice in progress of War, to destroy the pertinacious
refractory Inhabitants, but to spare the Country; as Israel must not let the
Canaanites live, yet they may live themselves in their cities. Wherefore I
cannot think any man so imperfect, whose natural Logique teaches him not to
abstract the sin from the subject, and discreetly to distinguish between the
soundness of the member, and the putrefaction. Be it our study to root out, and
utterly banish these inordinate qualities of the flesh, so that we maintain the
substance; and in purging malignant humors, do not rashly violate the life of
nature, wherein we shall show our selves like wise Householders, that pull not
out the teeth of their cursed MASTIFES, but break them; as unwilling to lose
that which is useful, where the inconvenience alone, may safely be removed. It
is a Position born with us, That no man hates his own flesh; which Religion
seeks not to take away, but to reform. It was God's own ordinance, that we
should glorify Him in our BODIES: which injunction would be impossible, if by
unnatural and too cursed usage, we should humble them to the grave. For says
David, Psalm. 6.5.
In death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the pit? Let
then the Body have its due respect, but still with relation to the soul's
health; since otherwise, excess of affection is not Love, but dotage; and the
feasting of the body, the famine of the soul. For though the Devil himself be
all spiritual wickedness, yet he has not a more officious Engine to catch our
souls, then the wantonness of the flesh. The flesh is his access, to work the
admittance of his suggestions: So that the world, and the usurping god of this
world, could do nothing, or very little, unless they plowed with our own
Heyfer, and suborned our flesh against us. The nineteenth verse of this
Chapter, begins with a large Catalogue of the works of the flesh; I cannot run
over each particular, I will touch the principal, which I conceive to be
gluttony and drunkenness. The one was the first sin which appeared before the
Flood; the other, the first after the Flood. Lot, who was newly delivered from
the flames of incestuous Sodom, through distemper of a contrary element, fell
into incest. Noah, who had lately escaped the deluge of the whole world, was
drowned in a Cup, when the Vine, which his hand planted, supplanted the
Husbandman, and exposed him to the mockage of his wicked Sons. The Assyrian
Monarch, 1 Kin. 20.16, 20.
Benhadad, who was guarded by a Troop of Kings, and thought to have taken all
his Enemies alive, was suddenly defeated, and surprised, when Wine had given
him the first overthrow. For that which is taken into the Body, enters not in
vain, but is conquered, or conquers: if it conquers, then the meat feeds on
the Eater, the drink swallows the Drinker: To him the Props of life become the
Instruments of death. And here I cannot but observe how drunkenness, of all
other Vices, most takes the Devils part; for whereas God gave this Pledge, that
the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents HEAD; this sin, as it were in a
natural revenge, strikes at the head of Man. You may see the malice of it; it
wounds the head, and trips up the heels. And now since such decays, ruins and
vengeance be the wages of fleshly excess, methinks I hear a voice from the
Spirit, cry, Crucify, crucify the flesh.

The better to understand the Congruity of the Metaphor, let us examine the
Analogy betwixt mortifying the flesh, and crucifying it.

First, the Cross is a most cruel and accurate torment. A torment, which being
seated in the hands and feet, parts most sensible of pain, by the multitude of
nerves there united, makes the anguish also more eminent. Such should be the
death of sin in us all, a death without mercy or remorse; A death as zealously
executed, as willingly deserved: For if our transgressions would plunge us in
the depth of destruction, all pity showed to them, is cruelty to our own Souls.
Save these Traitors from the Gibbet, and instead of acknowledgment, they will
be the first Enemies that wound us. Impiety knows not how to be grateful, nor
will it ever enter into a wicked heart, to repay the debt of thanks. Saul lost
both his life and honor, 1 Samuel 15.
in sparing Agag, a man appointed to dye: And can we expect a better reward
for the flattery of our sins? If they first nailed our Savior to the Cross,
themselves have taught us our duties how to entertain them; And how is that? as
Esther served Haman, by hanging them on their own Gallows. It cannot but argue
us no friends of Christ, who are in peace with his Enemies, which so often as
we fondly pamper, we endeavor to renew the bitterness of his passion, and
put him to a second shame. As there is no true friendship among the wicked; so
to live friendly with wickedness, is not love, but conspiracy. A strange
conspiracy, wherein man is lost by his own treachery; and by mis-applying his
kindness, laid open to endless injuries. To produce sin then, is dangerous; not
to murder it when it is born, is deadly. The simple Commission, may be a work
of infirmity; but not to chastise it severely, is vvilfully to maintain it.

The second Congruity between mortifying and crucifying, is this: The Cross
was a lingering punishment, which depriving the Malefactors of breath by
degrees, made them feel distinctly the decay of life, and number the express
minutes of their passions, like so many Sands stealing away from their
Hourglass. Is not this the very course, and ordinary state of mortification,
wherein sin expires not with one breath, nor is the benefit of sanctification
heaped on us all together? Sin is not so vveak an Inmate, as to be thrust out
of doors with ease; it both crept into us, and will depart with leisure. The
Moon decreaseth not all in one night, neither does the swiftest Ebb post away
in an instant. All Fruits have some days to wither in, before there can be a
season to fall. In like manner, man's limited nature is not capable of such
vast and unruly strides, as suddenly to mount from the bottom to the top, from
corruption to grace. What though God by his Omnipotency can in the strictest
point of time, as easily cast out seven Devils as one? yet it pleases him in
these actions, to descend to the vveak ability of his Instruments, and to
perform what they can, not what he is able to do. Let Us not howsoever be
discomforted with the tediousness of this fight. A slow victory, is better then
an eternal Servitude; and our liberty will appear far more grateful, by how
much it was purchased at a dearer rate.

The last Similitude betwixt our mortification and crucifying, is, That as in
crucifying no part escaped suffering, so we must suffer no sin to escape
crucifying. God, who freely remits our offenses, and without exception cancels
the general debt, will not accept a lame and imperfect repentance. That all
transgressions may be forgiven, all must be crucified. For how can we serve
God with a whole heart, when one Closet is reserved for a bosome-sin, when
God is put to part stakes with the Devil in us; one eye being cast up to
Heaven, and the other slyly glancing on a viler Object?

I have heightn'd this meditation to the utmost in the general; I shall now
apply it more particularly to those, who are Christ's appropriated FLOCK. For
the adopted Sons of God in all points, as far as they may, ought to resemble
the natural Son, and tread the same path which he has scor'd out. As Christ
therefore suffered the death of the Cross for sin, so must they crucify sin,
and dye to it.

Was the Cross a lingering, painful, and torturing death? Let it not seem
grievous to us, with striving and struggling, with Gall and Vinegar, with
pricking and piercing, and with other tortures of tedious Combat, to subdue
our Affections, and part by part to crucify the body of Sin.

Were his Temples torn with a Crown of Thorns? Let it not seem harsh to set our
selves against the thorns of the flesh, which goad our sides.

Were his hands and feet so fast nailed to the Tree, that they were stopped and
disabl'd from use and motion? It must be the care of those which are Christ's,
to restain their hands from Oppression, their feet from bloodshed, their
tongues from falsehood, their throats from excess, their eyes from adultery, and
all their members from the motions of unrighteousness. Our Savior endured the
pangs of the Cross, till the close of death; It is likewise our part, never to
cease from curbing rebellious affections, till they be quite dead, till the
Serpent has no strength to move his Tail. For they who find comfort in
Christ, rest not in a bare believing Christ was crucified for them, but do
truly feel that they are crucified with him, the motions of sin working not so
strongly in their members, to bring forth fruit unto death, Romans 7.5. Then we
are truly Christ's, most deerly allied to him, when we resemble his Virtues,
when our actions speak us to be his. He will be read as well in our manners, as
in our names; if we can gladly wear his Livery, we must not be slack to
perform his Service. True Catholic Religion, is not a Doctrine of ease; it
teaches that no corrective Discipline can be great enough to prevent the
out-breakings of Natures Corruption. Indeed, the Penance we put the body to, is
overhasty, and it lasts not long. Our Tears, if any, dry straight; our
Prayers, if many, are quickly thought tedious; our Fasts, but loosely kept; our
Chastisements, too slight to master our sturdy and obstinate Inclinations.

But there have been Worthies, who have not spared to use all the means of
humiliation, which a Creature is piously capable of. I keep under my body,
says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27. so our English renders it; but it is more
powerfully significant in the Original, (...). The Apostles word imports, I
BEAT down my body, as it were with Blows and Clubs; to note his strictness in
keeping under the obstinacy of natural Corruptions. Some have become like
Bottles in the Smoke, Psalm. 119.
watered their couch with their Tears, grown stiff in their knees, by praying
and fasting. I have read of others, who steeped their Bread in Lie, that they
might eat Ashes with the Prophet. Christian Charity believed this Vexation of
body and spirit, was used as a means to advance them in their way to God: They
thus macerated and wore out themselves with a strict austerity, that by
weakening the Body, they might strengthen the soul.

If the Romanists severity to their own flesh, assiduousness at their Orizons,
frequent inflictions of Penance, joined with a Submissive readiness to renounce
their Errors upon clearer Illumination, were true effects and Fruits of a
well-guided Zeal for displeasing their Redeemer, and not practiced in a color,
pretense, and advantage of Religion; these so qualified Castigations of
themselves, may be, for any thing I yet know to the contrary, acceptable in the
sight of God; in regard no exactness, no purity, no contending to perfection,
can be too much pursued in true Religion.

They who are singled out for Christ's pure Service, ought to be men separated
from the world, though within the world; not dwelling on the Earth, but passing
through it; so estranged from covetousness, that they scarce use necessaries;
so far from lust, that they feel no flesh; so free from contentions, that they
are not engaged by desires; so set on their journies end, that they scarce
carry the eye of passengers, or cast a glance to any delightful prospect. To
such, if any such there be, the world is crucified, and they to the world; sin
has no lively operation in them, no dominion over them.

And so I proceed from the outward to the inward man; from the crucifying of
the flesh, to the mortifying of the affections: They which are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

First then, all unbridled passions are to be subdued to the yoke of Christ:
for by their over-eager Excursions, men are so discomposed, that they discern
nothing clearly, do nothing orderly, but become utterly unfit for holy actions.
See thou a man wanton in joy? As Aesop's Crow lost his Morsel when he
endeavored to sing; so through secure jollity, he suddenly loses that, which
makes him rejoice. Is any other cast down with immoderate grief? he not only
quells the spirit, which should work a remedy, but doubles his loss, by
throwing himself after it. Some are so transported with anger, as if they took
part with their Adversary to vex themselves; so impetuous in their hatred, that
they avoid the good for the evil, by hating the person for the vice.

Again, many had never bin hurt, if they had not feared; and others had been
welcome to their desires, had not rash boldness cast them on needless dangers.

But may not the desires, intentions and thoughts be free? No: The Law of the
Gospel takes hold of them too, as well as of our deeds. These Cockatrices are
to be killed in the very egg, before they increase, either in age or danger.
The Desire, the Plot, the Thought, of any iniquity, is as odious to God, as if
it were actually done. For it is done in his eye, when it is but thought. Christ
looks not so much at the Accessory, as the Principal; to the evil action, as to
the mischievous intention. To a Sovereign, the intent of Treason is as mortal
as the Act; and so the malicious thought of a deliberate Slaughter, which is
the Mother, is to the All-Holy, murder too, as well as that act of Slaughter,
which is the Daughter. Our Savior is so taken with the inward part, the
affection of the heart, that he judges both of good and evil actions according
as that is well or ill affected. Let the outward Conversation be what it will,
yet if a man regard iniquity in his heart, he will not hear him. For gravius
est diligere peccatum quam facere; it is a worse token of an evil man, to love
sin, then to commit it; because Commission may be out of a violent temptation,
and straying infirmity; and so not so much the sin of our selves, as of those
remainders of sin, which dwell within us. But our Love is all our own; Satan
can but offer a temptation, the heart it self must love it. As then God in
mercy accounts the good will for the deed, in regard where there is a willing
mind, there will certainly be all answerable endeavors to execute that will,
and to reduce it to act: so he esteems the deed nothing without the will.
Public shows of Religion, by coming orderly to Church; outward postures and
services of the body in the Temple, are no otherwise pleasing to the Searcher
of hearts, then as they serve to express the inward Devotion and Elevation of
the soul. For men may happily come to Church, and there devise how to undermine
it; serve God, and rob him at once. And therefore the worship which stands in
the appearance of a bare outside, in stead of honoring God, does much derogate
from his honor, as giving him the eye of an Idol, unable to see; or at most
the eye of a Creature, which can reach no further then the Superficies, or Skin
of an action, without discerning the heart.

It had need then be part of our Petition as well as David's, Cleanse us, Lord,
from our secret faults, and wash, as well our hearts from carnal affections, as
our flesh from evil actions.

We confess, O God, to our own shame and confusion, that our backslidings be
many, our iniquities do testify against us; yet Thou, who art the hope of
Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble; show not thy self, we beseech
thee, a stranger in the Land where thou delightest to dwell; but do away our
transgressions for thy Names sake: and that we may not transfer this Christian
duty of mortification from our selves wholy to others, grant, that by thy
saving Grace, we may be enabled to crucify and subdue our own pride, envy,
malice, and covetousness; to endeavor in all sincerity, our own particular
Reformation; and from the ground of our hearts, utterly to abandon each beloved
sin, that so thou may own us for thine, and we may make our daily approaches
to thee, as to a gracious God, and most merciful Father, in and through Jesus
Christ, our only Advocate and Redeemer. Amen.

Coloss. 1. verse. 20. And (having made peace by the blood of his Cross) by him
to reconcile to himself, by him, I say, whether things in Heaven or Earth.


THE high Excellency of Christ, SERMON. 5.
imposes silence, and makes adoration our safest Eloquence; which caused me
in my passage on the former verse, not to dive into the depth of his fullness,
lest my weakness might seem to bring up the lighter things of the Schools, and
let the weighty sink. My walk was but near the shore, my approach did but
touch the confines. The matter was divided only into two parts; fullness of
union, and fullness of unction: yet it might justly seem a work of no mercy, no
use to us, were those prerogatives sealed only for himself; had we no share
in them, any one might say, as the Tribes to Rehoboam, What portion have we in
David? 1 Kin. 12.
we have no inheritance, no part in him. And therefore for the assurance of our
faith, the Apostle soars higher, and contemplates the riches of the Fathers
mercy in the face of the Son, as it shines and reflects upon us. To what end
has the Father given all things into the hand of Christ? Why is he thus
replenished with all Treasures? Is it that he might keep and hoord it up for
himself? No: All his goodness has relation to our profit; All power is put
into the hands of the Son of God, that he might dispense it the better for the
sons of men. It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, that
he might be able, says the Text, to reconcile us unto the Father, and all
things to himself, both things in Heaven, and things on Earth, by the blood of
his Cross.

In which words, you may observe the act, one in substance, though various in
the phrase; to set at peace, to reconcile: The Person to whom reconciliation is
made, to himself: The Object, All things in general: The distinction of their
particular places, Things in Heaven and on Earth: The material, or meritorious
cause, by him, Christ, the second Person: The Means, by blood; and therein the
difference; it is not every sprinkling, nor every effusion of blood, but by his
blood shed on the Cross.

I begin with the first part, as it lies couched in this Proposition: It
pleased the Father, by him, or by Christ his Son, to pacify, or reconcile to
himself all things.

God is so well pleased with this Act of reconciling, that though the
disobedience of our first Parents made him to come as a Judge, Genesis 2. and 3.
pronouncing condemnation, You shall dye the death; yet as a Father, willing to
reestablish them, he repeales the Sentence, and breaths again into their dead
Trunks, that breath of life, The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents
Head. So unnatural it is to him to destroy his own Workmanship, that he
prepares the plaster before we have the wound, our recovery before our fall;
the dispossessing them of the earthly Paradise, estated them in the heavenly.
The one served as a Nursery, not that they might grow there still, but that
from thence they might be transplanted to the other above, where they shall
abide for ever. And the better to secure us of our Restoration, it pleased the
Almighty to show the experiment in his own Person, by knitting and marrying in
love, two natures most unequal, the Divine and the Humane. For as in the
beginning he took clay to create us, so afterward he assumed flesh made of
clay, to reconcile us. The Wax receives not the impression before applied to
the seal, no more could the weakness of our flesh reassume the characters of
God, did not God honor and embrace this weakness of our flesh. He which
raises another fallen, must stoop himself to do the courtesy. Man was fallen,
and without recovery, had not God bowed the heavens and come down; had he not
poured out himself, that all might partake of his fullness. Neither Moses, nor
the old World, sent us relief: the Man which fell betwixt Jericho and
Jerusalem, might have bled to death, for all the Priest and the Levite: nothing
but despair, until the good Samaritan came. So was it with the World until
Christ came, all looked another way. The Prophets looked over it, the Law
through it; the eye of the Prophets was fixed on the remedy, but applied it
not. The hand of Moses was too rough for the wound; the Oil he powered in, was
but Vinegar at the best: the Law may show us the way, but lend no strength to
walk in it: He alone that is the true Light, can guide us; He who is the Way
it self, can lead us; He that is the very Door, can give us a lawful entrance
into our eternal Canaan. For though God has given power to his Ministers, by
applying the means, and by way of message, to pronounce our Salvation,
nevertheless the full and absolute authority remains in his own hands; and who
shall wrest it from him? To grant a temporal, is an inseparable Jurisdiction of
Princes; to assure us of everlasting pardon, is a privilege due to none but to
the King of kings. Their vveak remission releaseth from the guilt in this life;
but where the Lord vouchsafes to show mercy, the iniquity is quite done away,
the debt cancelled for ever. Wherefore to prevent all encroachment, (...), by
him, I say, by him to reconcile, is doubled, and repeated. For He, which is the
sole Maker of the Law, admits no Partner in freeing the Transgressor of the
Law. Neither is any Creature capable of that glorious prerogative, which so
nearly concerns the Divine Majesty. Indeed, the first Adam could take God from
us; only the second Adam can restore God to us.

The holy Man, 2 King. 4. being to perform that great task, first sent his
Servant and his Staff to work the cure; but there was not the least spark of
heat before Elisha himself came: before he stretched all parts upon the Child,
his mouth to his mouth, his eyes to his eyes, his feet to his feet; there was
neither voice nor hearing to be discerned. The sad mis-hap of this Child, is
the general fate of all us, Children of wrath, all dead and rotten in our
sins, Slaves to sin, and Enemies to God; who notwithstanding sent his
Servants, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and his own Law to school us; but we
were lost, and would not be found. The Exhortations and Precepts, though
charmed never so vvisely, were too vveak to free us from that spiritual
Bondage, and to restore us to our primitive integrity: Neither breath in our
Nostrils, nor thanksgiving in our mouths, until Christ came, who not only
applied himself to us, his arms to our arms, his body to our body, his feet to
our feet; but took on him our nature, and clothed himself with our flesh, that
so by his Incarnation, he might take from us what to offer to God for us in
his Passion. So that to pacify and reconcile, is the special work of the Son
of God. See with what compassion he speaks to Jerusalem; Luke 13.
Jerusalem, and O Jerusalem; I would gather, and how often would I gather thee;
gather thee as a Hen, and as a Hen her Chickens, her Chickens under her Wings.
The Devil disperseth, Christ gathers; Christ gathers as a Hen, Satan disperseth
as a Lion; Christ under his Wings, the Devil within his Jaws.

We are all by nature disjoined from God, with the Prodigal, wandering from our
Fathers House, and scattered like sheep in the Valleys of death. Christ calls
us, and draws us home; removes that which did separate, and abolisheth the
enmity betwixt God and us. Zacharias was stricken dumb, when our Savior was to
be born, Luke 1.
in token that the Law was to be silent when the Gospel of Reconciliation was
to be preached. As the Woman's Accusers brought her to Christ, and afterward
dropped away, leaving none but them two alone; Joh. 8.
(Remansit magna misericordia, and magna miseria) says Saint Austin, There
remained no Body but Misery and Mercy together; so when the Law had frighted us
with the Rod of Terror, it at last brings us to Christ, the Prince of Peace;
and there we find God pacified, and the Delinquents reconciled. It Is well
noted, Quod amat medium Mediator Dei and hominum: The middle Person in the
Trinity, the Mediator 'twixt God and Man, loves always the middle part, that he
may the better aid and help all parts. When he was born, he was in medio
jumentorum, in the midst of the beasts: When he was twelve years old, he was in
medio Doctorum, in the midst of the Doctors: When he taught, he stood in medio
discipulorum, in the midst of his Disciples: When he dyed, he was in medio
Latronum, in the midst of the Thieves: Now he is in Heaven, he is in medio
Angelorum, in the midst of his Angels; And yet also in medio Christianorum, in
the midst of us Christians gathered together in Unity. Mat. 18.20.
For wheresoever two or three are gathered in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them.

In the Morning of the World, he was not so familiar with his people; safety
and danger were then on equal terms; there was power to stand, but no stay to
recover the foot that was once falling. Deliverance was afar off, and the
promised Messiah either not apprehended, or at least beheld through Types and
Shadows; weak Objects to raise them to an assurance of faith, or make them hope
for redress, when the disease seemed to outvy the Remedy. But when God made
himself acquainted with our infirmities, he then showed himself the great
Physician of our souls, and by a fellow-feeling of some weaknesses, freely
delivered us from all. Happy were those that then needed a Physician; the sick
were in better case then they which were sound: For to them, even to the weak,
to them which were without, and to the lost, was he sent, to be a Reconciler.
Come then, and see how gracious the Lord is, that breaks not the crooked Plant,
but streightens it for a better use, and so frames us in a new Mould, that
whereas before we tremble at the partial examination of our own Conscience, we
may appear before his Tribunal with boldness. For by our Reconciliation, we
become Saints; whereas by our Creation, we are made Men: as if the pardon of
sin were a light matter, unless the Sinner were improved with it.

In regard this boon of Reconciliation is of such an excellent nature,
venerable Bede accounts more honor does redound to God, Restauratione Hominum,
quam creatione Angelorum, by restoring of man that fell, then by Creation of
the Angels: Yea, the Conversion of a Sinner, 12 ae q. 11. art. 9.
says the Schoolman, is a more glorious work then the Creation of the World;
because the one is transient, the other permanent.

Labor then to be in the number of true Converts; for if we come near to God,
not being by him reconciled to him, we shall come as soft Wax to the scorching
flame, and as stubble to the devouring fire. For every sin, as it is a
transgression, is against the Majesty of God himself; and so our Reconciliation
is to be made by him, I say, by him, to himself. He is the Center, to which all
hearts move: the mind is still fluctuating, unsettled; no true tranquillity, no
peace, until we be reconciled to him. As in a Circle, the more the Lines drawn
from the Circumference come near the Center, the more they unite; the further
they go from the Center, in which they are united, the more they run out one
from the other: So when we run forth from our Father, into our own
Exorbitances, then we are one disjoined from the other; but when we keep to
Christ, the nearer we come to him, the more we all unite. For it pleased the
Father, by him to reconcile all things, both of things in Heaven, and things on
earth: wherein the Object, with the particular places for our Reconcilement, is
expressly mentioned.

As God is most good, so his goodness most diffusive, whose plenteous
redemption descends like the morning-dew, not to be shut up in a narrow family,
no more then those fatning drops can be confined within a certain Region. Hence
the Evangelist, Joh. 1.9. calls Christ The Light, which enlightens not a few,
but many; nor many, but all, even every one which comes into the world. And yet
according to the various Disposition of the World, the Light does variously
enlighten the World. We see Light pass through Glass and Crystal, and yet it is
withstood by the Earth, which is less solid, less hard, because the base vile
Earth may not admit those pure beams of Light: So neither can Jesus Christ, the
Supernatural, Divine Light, enter into the soul which is not washed and cleared
by repenting Tears, and by the fire of the Spirit cleansed from the sordid
Scurf and Corruption of the flesh, which as earth adheres to the Soul. Let us
then draw near to him in grace, and so we shall draw near to him in Glory. He
will be with us in his protection on earth, and in felicity in heaven.

Who sees not how the Apostle knew not any member belonging to Christ's
Reconciliation, but either in Heaven or on Earth? For the building of the
material Temple, the stones were either hewing or polishing in the Mountain, 1
Kin. 5.
or transported and laid in the Temple. So it is with us, who are made ready
like lively stones, for the Celestial Jerusalem; either we are squaring and
fitting here, or else by glorious Conjunction, laid on Christ the Cornerstone
in the Heavenly places. Epist. ad Macar.
Saint Austin once said it, and the Church accounts it Orthodox, When the time
is fulfilled, the Combat ended, the race run, Quisque id habebit, quod in hac
conquisivit, every one shall have that which he has gained in this life. Hic
vita aut amittitur, Ad Demetriad.
aut tenetur, cries Cyprian; Here if we miss, we miss for ever. Bernard scoffs
at some mis-believers, Qui expectant salutem in medio Gehennae, In Cantic. Sermon
51.
quae facta est in medio terrae; which wait for Salvation amidst hellish
receptacles, which was wrought in the midst of this Terrestrial Globe. And
therefore 'twas a fond Charity in Origin, to imagine the wicked Angels should
at last be savingly purified. For they fell without a Tempter, and so shall not
receive the benefit of a Redeemer. Neither Devil without, nor flesh at home to
seduce them; whereas man's Innocence was stolen from him, and his overthrow
occasioned by another's treason. Yet as the reprobate Angels are in such a
misery, that they cannot be recalled; so the Holy Angels are in that perfection
of happiness, as they cannot fall: and if so, the Office of a Reconciler may
seem fruitless to both; He cannot help the one, nor better the other.

It Is true, the blessed Angels need no Reconciler in regard of Redemption from
sin; for by the power of their Nature, wherein they were created, they are able
to execute whatsoever it be, in which it shall please God to prove their
obedience. Yet their peace was not perfect, until they were made sure of
perseverance, which was only by Christ. They had not that grace by Creation:
for the fall of some of them, shows that by their own nature their will was
mutable; and therefore says St. Bernard, Qui crexit hominem lapsum, dedit
Angelo stanti^e caderet; In Cant. Sermon. 22.
the same Jesus, which raised up man, when he was fallen, confirmed the blessed
Angels that now they cannot fall. They have gained then by Christ a more
perfect adhering to God; by Him they are confirmed in goodness, and freed from
defection. The text says they are reconciled by Christ, in that they are made
friends with us on earth, with whom before they were at open enmity. For seeing
they have Idem velle and Idem nolle with the Almighty, their will always
concurring with his will, they cannot choose but love those, on whom their Lord
and Master shall cast a gracious eye. Yea their love in this kind is so
excessive, that they will refuse no Office, be it never so mean, for them who
are translated out of the power of darkness into the kingdom of light. They
will become their Nurses, and carry them in their hands, Psalm. 91. They will be
their guard, and pitch their Tents about them, Psalm. 24. So that of their
protection we be sure; but of their number, whether one, or more, it is
questioned by more than one. Jacob, Genesis 32. saw a whole Host of Angels
environing him. The like did Elisha's servant about the Prophet, 2 King. 6. Yet
in the 10 of Daniel, the whole Kingdom of Persia had but one Angel-Guardian,
Daniel 10. The ancient Fathers were of opinion, that ordinarily one Angel is
assigned to every one as his Custos, and Tutor; but in extraordinary exigents,
whole hosts of Angels are made Assistants to them, whom he has reconciled to
himself by the blood of his Sons Cross. But seeing this mystery is unreveal'd
in the Scriptures, it shall content us, that He, who makes his Angels
Ministering Spirits, has not only broke down the partition-wal betwixt heaven
and earth, but has given commission to those glorious Spirits, who are his own
near favorites, to wait on us, and to keep us in all our ways. And so I am
fallen on my last part, the Means whereby this reconciliation is wrought, the
blood of his cross.

It is in vain to dispute what God could have done; he was able by other means
to save the world, for he might out of his absolute power not have punished sin;
the demonstration of his revenging justice springing not from the necessity of
Gods Nature, but from his voluntary disposition. Yet when once he determined
that his Justice should take revenge, if by breach of Covenant it be wronged,
he could not set us free from punishment, but so as his injured justice might
be satisfied. Hence it is that the Scripture so frequently affirms, It was meet
and necessary that Christ should be consecrated through suffering; Luke 24.
Heb. 2.
that He should suffer, and so enter into his glory. All the typical sacrifices
prefigured this. The Passover must be killed, before Israel could be delivered;
so Christ ought to be slain, before we be reconciled. The blood of the
sin-offering (what beast soever it was) was to be poured out; so the blood of
Christ, the true sin-offering, was to be shed; for without shedding of blood,
no reconciliation, Heb. 9. Tract. de diligen. Deo
Well therefore might Holy Bernard say, that our renovation cost God more than
our first creation. Semel, and tantum dicendo fecit; in Reficiendo fecit multa,
and pertulit dura. In the first, He breathed life into the Face of MAN; in the
Second, he breathed out his own life, to redeem that man. The world is said,
Psalm. 83. to be made by Gods fingers; but the Redemption of man is said to be
wrought by the Arm of God, as requiring more strength. He has showed strength
with his Arm, Luke 1.
says the blessed virgin: God created the whole universe with his bare word;
He spoke the word, and they were made: But our renovation spent many a word,
many a deed, many a tear; yea, the heart-blood of his only begotten Son. For
though sin be soon acted, and with delight; yet it is long in cleansing, and
full of pain. We may confess the truth there of in our own experience; we see
it here in our blessed Savior. There were not two days, nor (as some
conceived) two hours wasted, in eating that Sugared Poison, which diffused its
rancor throughout the whole outward and inward man, and brought a most fearful
death on all our Members. Thus easily, thus speedily destroyed; but we could
not be restored to life again without unconceivable torment, without Christ's
Blood, and that gushing and streaming from every part of his Sacred Body. So
that it may be truly said, Copiosa apud Eum Redemptio, our Redemption by
Christ is plentiful, and made complete by the shedding his blood upon the cross
even to death.

Hereupon, because the cross was the Instrument of man's Redemption, the Altar
of that great Sacrifice, and the Ladder by which Christ ascended into Heaven;
the Primitive Church held it in high estimation, using the formal or transient
sign on the forehead, as a badge of their profession; thereby testifying their
faith, and manifesting to the Heathen that they were not ashamed of their
crucified God. Upon this ground was erected in their public places, the
permanent and material Cross, to serve for a Trophe and monument of the
exaltation of Him that dyed for our Salvation on the Cross.

Your very Ensigns, your flagges and Colors in the camp, what are they but
crosses wrought with Gold and Silk? we behold the sign of the Cross naturally
formed in a Ship, when she is born with swelling Sails, and rides with her
Yards outstretched: when a man, spreading his arms, adores God with pure
devotion, the sign of the cross is there also. So that on this sign natural
Reason does build, and Religion casts no neglect on it. Yet this caution is to
be observed, that we attribute no Divine worship to the Cross, nor repose any
hope of Salvation in the bare sign, but as Saint Ambrose says of Helen, We
adore the King of Heaven, and not the wooden Cross. It should be our care to
see that the cross of Christ be not made of no effect; for if he dyed thereon
to break down the Partition-wal, and to slay hatred; shall enmity and discord
live when he is dead? Shall he be Nailed, and shall not our vile affections be
Nailed down with him? If God be slow to Anger, and swift to Mercy, you ought to
be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect. We are members of one and the
same Body, whereof Christ is the Head; we must therefore be so affected each to
other, as we see the members are: They envy not one another, but communicate
each with other; they are so far from retaliating, that if one foot strike the
other, it will not strike again, but bear the infirmity with no less affection
then before. Let us remember Him, who has thus remembered us, as not to spare
his own Blood to reconcile us. And seeing He alone is the way for us to walk,
the truth to direct us, the life to refresh us; we must fly to him by Him,
building our nests in the clefts of the Rock, in the wounds of his Body, that
He may be an Antidote to us, who was wounded for us; that his Blood may not cry
for vengeance, but for remission, and for reconciliation of all things to
himself, both of things in Heaven, and things on Earth: Which God of his
infinite mercy grant, through the same Jesus Christ.

Amen.

Luke 23. verse. 42. And he said to Jesus, Lord, remember me, when thou come
into thy Kingdom.

SERMON. VI.
MY text is part of a Tragedy; the Scene, mount Calvary; the Action,
crucifying; the Words, reviling; the Applauses, Tears; the Catastrophe, or end
of all, Jesus of Nazareth hanging on the Cross between two thieves. One of them
with a tongue set on fire from hell, belcheth out his blasphemy, If thou be
Christ, the Son of God, sent from the Father to save mankind, then save thy
self, and us. The other had his tongue and his heart, his outward and inward
man, Baptized with the Holy Chost, and his own Blood; and therefore, as if he
had been ravished into Paradise, and there bare a part in that Celestial
harmony, (Thou art the King of Glory O Christ, thou art the everlasting Son of
God) with Admiration of Soul, and in the language of the Saints, thus besought
his Heavenly Majesty, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

In which Pithy and pious Ejaculation, may it please you first to take notice
of this Petitioner, and then of his Petition. The Petitioner is brought in
masked under the veil of an Indefinite Pronoune, He. The person to whom he
commenceth his suit, is directly expressed to be Jesus: [He said to Jesus.]

In the Petition, you have his confession. First, he gives witness to Christ's
Deity, in this Compellation, Lord. Secondly, He acknowledges Christ's regal
Sovereignty, in attributing to him a Kingdom: and Lastly, he believes his own
Souls glorious Immortality, in that he seeks to be remembered when Christ came
into his Kingdom. I will begin with the Petitioner; And He said.

I may not be so forgetful of your patience, and the time, as to wast any of it
in making a busy enquiry, and as it were a Hue and Cry after this person: Let
it suffice, my Evangelist tells you in general, he was (...), a Malefactor: St.
Matthew and the other, style him more particularly (...), a thief, a common
Robber, one that did often provoke heaven; and yet He said to Jesus, Lord,
remember me. He was now but returned from his many outrages by the highway,
and yet he dared to set afresh on him, who was the Highway it self. He had
scarce wiped his mouth, or washed his hands from his late impieties; and yet
here, by a new and strange kind of robbery, he is not afraid to steal
Eternity. It may well be said, that Heaven is gotten by Violence, when thieves
break through, and steal it. I am much taken up with admiration, when I reflect
upon the quality of this person: for what is more worthy of wonder and
astonishment, then that a thief should have a better knowledge of Christ upon
the Cross, than his disciple had when he sat with him at Supper? That a thief
should have a more eminent degree of faith, than the Patriarch Abraham, the
Father of the faithful, than Moses, than the Evangelical Prophet Esaias, than his
own Apostles, to whom it was given by the grace of Dispensation to know
Christ, and the Mysteries of his Kingdom?

Abraham believed in the Lord, Genesis 12.1.
but it was when he was so much honored as to have God himself to be his
own Messenger, Genesis 3.4.
and to parley with him from Heaven. Moses believed in the Lord; but it was
when he appeared to him in the midst of a fiery bush wonderfully. The
Apostles believed in the Lord; but they were eye-vvitnesses how his miracles
posed nature, and that all the Creatures did homage to him as to their Creator.
These were easy taskes of faith: But this Petitioner believed in the Lord,
when which way soever he looked about him, his eyes could not meet with any
thing but horror and misery. He does not supplicate to Jesus, sitting at the
right hand of his Father; So he is crowned with Majesty: nor unto Jesus
judging the quick and the dead; So He is attended with Angels, and Archangels:
but when he savv his side, hands and feet all bleeding, his face ghastly; his
head drooping, and his Soul heavy to the death, even then he said to Jesus,
Lord, as if he had been lifted upon the Cross to overlook Christ's debasements,
and to make a show openly that his faith should out-vy his sense.

Lorinus upon the first of the Acts, cites many who believed that this
Malefactor, hanging on the right hand of our Savior, had his body overshadow'd
with Christ's shadow, so that the virtue of this shadow procured his conversion.
As if the feeble glimmering light, and weak beams which he saw, made him guess
at the glory which is above. But this misconceit is wide, and empty of truth, a
shadow without substance. For if Christ was crucified at the sixth hour, as
Saint John relates, and from the sixth hour to the ninth there was darkness
over all the Earth, and Christ died at the ninth hour; how could this sinner
receive any shadow, when there appeared no light? It Is most true, this
extraordinary confession was principally caused by the powerful operation of
Gods Spirit. The Spirit of the Lord shall come upon him, and he shall be turned
into another man. It was spoken of Saul, who had a flash of the Spirit passing
by him. 1 Samuel 10.6.
Give me a man whom the Spirit of God thoroughly Sanctifies, he shall feel in
himself strange alterations, his spirit renewed, his will reformed, his whole
Body and Soul transformed into the Image of Christ. Look upon the Apostles;
Idiots, and become Learned; Ignorant, and speak with all tongues; Fugitives,
and turn Martyrs; deny him, and persecute him, and yet gloriously dye for him.
Wherefore it becomes not us to pronounce condemnation upon any man; for whiles
he So journes here, he is recoverable by future amendment. How know we whether
God will temper him anew, and stamp him into goodness? A wastful child may be
called home, and unlive his misspent youth; the Day Star may arise in his heart,
who now walks in darkness, the Devils mask. Cinis fit vitrum; out of the
dusky ashes may be made bright Glass; he that is a wild Olive to day, to morrow
may be grafted into a better stock: Exodus 7.
Aarons Rod, though changed into a Serpent, was turned again into a Rod bearing
blossoms and fruit. Our rash falls may prove profitable, and make us more safe
from falling. God can take occasion to magnify his glory from our sins, as
well as from our Innocence. I hope I shall not offend to say, If the putrifi'd
Sores of sin had not smelled rank in David's Nostrils, the Church had wanted
many of his Psalms. Mary Magdalen had never loved so much, if her pardoned sins
had not been so many.

I trust there is none will so lose himself, as to imagine that I propound this
Pattern to encourage vice. This were to make me a Factor for Satan, whose Chief
bait is to entangle and beguile our Souls, by the train and flourish of
example. He will suggest that Abraham was an Idolater, Paul a persecutor; Mary
Magdalen a Courtisan; and Semel insanivimus omnes; the just man falls seven
times a day, and yet he will rise again. For by this Sophism he backs the
licentious Libertine, who little suspecting in so fair a semblance a treacherous
Simon that should gull him, sings a Requiem to his Soul, the Devil bearing him
in hand he may at his pleasure give the hand of parting to all those inordinate
Superfluities of naughtiness, wherein he now embaths himself, and that at the
last. Gasp, a Lord remember me will snatch at Christ, and make him his own.
Thus being blinded with sensuality, while his soul cleaves to the midst of his
mirth, his unwelcome end steals unlooked for; he is sucked into the gulf, and
in a moment goes down into the pit. To prevent which destruction, Saint
Bernard's rule is to be applied to our hearts, Infidelis est fiducia, quando in
spe peccamus; it is not faith, but presumption, when we continue sinning with a
conceit of impunity or pardon. The truth of this Converts humble
acknowledgment, and hearty confession, must be evidenced, before we can partake
of his joys in Christ's Kingdom. And so from the porch, or entrance of the
Text, let us go in, and behold the beauty and glory therein contained. And He
said to Jesus, Lord.

Jesus is the name of his person, the name brought from Heaven, the name
wherein He was promised, and so long expected on the earth, that the Jews
might hear, and their ears might tingle: Him, whom you have slain, and
crucified, this Jesus is the Lord. Now as Jesus is the name of pity, and that
wins us to love him; so Lord is the attribute of Majesty, and that moves us to
fear him. First, Jesus, and then Lord: for if we are not confident of his
mercy, how shall we tremble to approach his glory? It Is true, what St. Austin
says, Coelum non esset coelum, nisi ibi Jesus esset; Heaven would be no heaven
to us, had we not there a Jesus: And it is as true, that Jesus could not be a
Jesus, were he not Dominus, a Lord. For without the Godhead, the Manhood of
Christ were not a sufficient foundation of faith: the Divinity does support,
enable, and deliver the humanity. So that Optimus and Maximus, Jesus and
Dominus, Mercy and Truth, has Kissed each other, and by a mighty hypostatical
union, met in one person,

The name of Lord is a name of power; and therefore when God said, Exo. 6. I
will bring you into the Land which I swore I would give you; all the assurance
which he made is, I am the Lord: Again, I will pass through Egypt the same
night; still the fiat is, I am the Lord, Exo. 12. This occasioned Abulensis to
put a kind of Divinity in the very name: non est significativum, sed
operativum; it does not barely signify, as other feeble expressions do; it
has as it were a Sovereign power engraven in it; it works, it effects:
For by the name of the Lord, the very false Prophets were able to give sight
to the blind, feet to the Lame, and to expel Devils. Peter in the depth of his
distress cries, Save Lord, or else I perish: As if the name of the Lord had
been the svveetness of his Soul, and the very health of his Bones. The general
acclamation of the people is, Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord. So that Dominus, when it is put absolutely, is of the same extent
with Deus. Upon this ground, the Septuagint does ever render the name Jehovah
by (...), Lord. And thus much some of the Heathen seemed to conceive. For as
Domitian was the first Emperor that assumed this high and avvful name Lord; so
Suetonius observes, that he no sooner styled himself Dominus, but he called
himself Deus too; Dominus Deus noster Domitianus, our Lord God Domitian.

Indeed Tertullian in his book Adversus Hermogenem, curiously distinguishes
betwixt the name of God and Lord. The name of God, says he, being Nomen
(...), an absolute, essential Name, attributed to him in regard of his being,
was alvvaies immanent in himself, before there was either time, or any
creature. But the name Lord being Nomen potestatis, Nisi ex quo esse caeperunt
in quo potestas domini agert.
a name of power with relation to his creatures, could not be applied to him
until he had actually produced those transitive and foreign works, wherein
his power was to be exercised. Which assertion has text for it; for if you
look into Genesis, you shall find that Dominus, Lord, is no where set down
before all the Works of Creation were particularly effected. Hence it is,
Dixit Deus, God said, Let there be light, and there was light. Vidit Deus, God
saw the light that it was good. Fecit Deus, God made the Great light to rule
the Day, etc. But when the Creation was perfected, then, and not before,
Dominus Deus dixit: The Lord God said: And the Lord God took the Man, whom he
had made: And the Lord God commanded. But with submission to that Learned
Father, I cannot well yield, that therefore Christ ought not to be styled Lord
from all times, because the Creatures, in respect of whom this appellation
Lord pertains to him, were made in time. For although those things whereof
he is Lord, were not from all Eternity; yet he had the Right of Authority over
them, even before the Foundation of the world was Laid; and he is Lord from
all Eternity, even of all things; from whom, and by whom, other Lords have
their being. But most pregnant it is for our purpose, that this Name Lord,
whether it were given before all times, or in time, is a Name of infinite
power, and transtendent Soveraignity; and therefore by it is decyphered Christ's
Deity. He was no temporal Lord; where was his Dominion? Now was that
Prophecy fulfilled, A worm and no man. He was trod upon by the
recacitrating, contradicting Jews; and yet retorted nothing, but Pater ignosce:
Father, forgive them. Saint Paul shall end the controversy, who 1 Cor. 2.
makes it a mark whereby all Christians are described, They are such as call on
the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. In the 42 of Esaias, the blessed Trinity seems
to be jealous of this Name; I am the Lord (so runs the Proclamation) this is my
Name, and I will not give it to any other. I confess that his Vicegerents, as
he suffers them to share with him in his highest title, so have they some
resemblance of this Chief prerogative. For they also, out of the slime of the
Earth, and from the dunghill, can raise an ignoble vapor, and place it in the
highest region of power and Authority; and if their heat be stirred up against
it, yea but a little, they can again dissolve it, and throw it down headlong,
making the end worse then the beginning. But as they cannot make the basest
thing in the world, so can they not annihilate, or null the least particle they
find Created. And howsoever they seem to have power of life and death over
their subjects; yet in as much as their hearts are in Gods hand, and He rules
them as seems best unto him, they can neither quicken whom God would have
depressed, nor depress any, whom God would have raised up. So that we may
truly say, and sing, Who is like to thee, O Lord? Glorious in thy Saints,
admirable in thy Majesty, working wonders; among them all, there is none like
to thee.

But Christ's Deity is confessed not only by this compellation Lord, but partly
by the nature of his request. And so I proceed from the circumstance of the
person, to the Matter of his Petition, Remember me.

What a sudden familiarity is here with God! Spes bont et considentia plus
valent quam medicina.
I have read ('it is Galen's observation) that a good conceit, and strong
confidence, oft-times proves more Sovereign then the physic. And therefore
they who write of that renowned Macedonian Alexander, do more wonder, quod
ausus est aggredi, quam quod vicit; at his great attempts, then at his happy
Conquests: Grant his courage, and you will yield him Victorious. So my thoughts
are more amazed at the boldness of his Petition, then at its good success.

Lord, remember me: What shall the Lord remember, if he remembers thee? shall
he remember how thy Soul is foul with rapine, yea bloody with murder? shall he
remember how thou soldst him to death by thy sins? These cry as high as heaven,
and so must press thee as low as hell. Take a view of thy whole life, and thy
guilty soul will cry out, Lord, let not the remembrance of me be revived, but
rather, let me be folded up in the darkness of oblivion. For among other
punishments of sin, this is not the least; it makes Gods presence terrible to
us. Indeed Adam in the state of Innocence had such a Paradise, that he walked
with God without fear, but being galled with sin, he runs up and down like a
Heart with an arrow in his side. So Peter, Luke 5. cries out, Depart from me
Lord, for I am a sinful man. The sight of his sins made him fear, lest if he
should be so near Christ, he should awake him to revenge. But this Petitioner
feels himself most miserable, and yet he will remit nothing of the height of
his thoughts; he trusts God as omnipotent, and most merciful, and so lets him
take the charge of the success; He holds his conclusion, in spite of all
premises; and looks into heaven through hellish pains.

Such is the nature of true Sons of Abraham, they consider not their own
unworthyness so much as Christ's boundless mercies, which assure them he never
so Shuts up his loving kindness in displeasure, but at any time they who hunger
and thirst after remission, may find ease for their Souls. For our Lord and
Savior never destroies any thing he made, without a kind of pain and
reluctance; grieving as often as he is forced to procure grief to any. How often
would he have gathered the obstinate Jews, and covered them under his Wings!
and when they would not come in, how did their disobedience compel him to
scatter them? He is slow to anger, and swift to mercy: Fingens plasmata,
antequam faciens vulnera, as Evagrius sweetly speaks; providing the remedy
before he inflicts the wound. So that the petition is the same, which the
Prophet makes, Psalm. 23. Remember thy tender mercies, O Lord, and thy loving
kindness; remember not the sins of my youth, but according to thy mercy
remember me for thy goodness sake, O Lord. Saint Austin rightly catechiseth, In
Dominum non cadit oblivie; such a slippery inconstancy as forgetfulness cannot
be ascribed to God. Aquinas puts it Inter actus Deo inconvenientes, among those
acts which are incompatible with a Deity. Yet as the just be had in his
perpetual remembrance, so God is said, Psalm. 10. to forget the wicked. But this
forgetting is effectus Irae, non defectus memoriae; a note of punishing, not of
his not remembering. The sum then is, Memento mei is all one with Ne excludas
me. Let me not be condemned, O Lord, let me not wholly be excluded from thee: I
have followed thee with thy Cross, let me follow thee with thy Palms: I have
pledged the bitter potion of thy Cup, and drank of thy Vinegar and Gall; let
thy mercy afford me some nem Wine with thee in thy Kingdom. And this is
observable out of the very words: It is not Memento actionum mearum, but
Memento Mei; he says not, Remember my works, or regard my merits; but Remember
my Person, remember Me.

There Is no condignity, or congruity of merit, answerable to that precedent
sin, which is put back by our Judge, that it go not before us to Judgment; nor
to that present grace he distills upon us, nor to any of that future glory which
God has treasured up in Christ for us: Dignatio est Christi, non dignitas
Christiani; Eternal life is only the gift of that God, whom to know to be the
only true God is eternal life. Does the wall parturire radium, bring forth the
light, which it reflects? Does the Conduitpipe create that water it conveyes?
No more can man, who is a tottering wall, an empty cloud, challenge God for
those graces, which flow from him to Mankind. Holy Bernard's saying is most
orthodox: Sufficit ad meritum, scire non sufficere meritum; Our best Knowledge
is to acknowledge our errors; and our fairest righteousness, to confess we are
altogether foul and unrighteous. For there is not any thing in our actions,
which can make us acceptable to God; it is only the acceptance of our Persons
through Jesus Christ. But where would this poor Soul be remembered? Not in this
present life; he is weary of that, his thoughts soar higher: It is Cum veneris
in regnum tuum, when thou come into thy Kingdom.

Had this faithful Confessor consulted with flesh and blood, he would have been
judged to rave, in ascribing a kingdom to one so wretchedly crucified. He saw
the skin of our Savior Pearl'd with blood, his tottered Body black and blew
with stripes and wounds: And are these Inducements to argue Christ a King? If a
King, where is his Throne? where is his Scepter? Is the Cross his Throne? are the
nails his Scepter? The brainsick Jews, led only with things visible, could
not discern how a Man of sorrow could set up a Kingdom of Glory, and therefore
impudently deny Their Prophesies of Our Christ. But the veil is taken away
from our eyes, the stumbling-blocke is removed; and it is the hight of our
Comfort, to confess it best becomes the Majesty of our Redeemer to manifest his
power rather by weakness than strength, by baseness than glory. It more adorns
his crown and dignity, to conquer his Foes by stripping himself of all worldly
means, than by investing himself with imperial force. Had he come with more
strength, the less had been his Victory; the more pomp he had exhibited, the
less he had declared his Godhead.

Yet they are not wanting, who publish abroad that the Apostles did not sin
when they thought Christ's Kingdom should be temporal; So Salmeron affirms:
Tom. 4. Tracd. 37. Lorin in 4. Act. Mendoz. in 1 K. c. 2.
Franciscus and Alphonsus Mendoza are of opinion, that Christ had Dominion, and
the prerogative of a temporal King, most truly and properly in each
circumstance. But I conceive they diminish the Lords honor, in going about
thus to increase it. For it is most certain, that the Kingdom of David and
Solomon, from whom they derive our Saviors pedigree, was utterly extinct and
demolished in Jechoniah. Jer. 22. makes this clear: There shall not be a man of
his seed, which shall sit on the Throne of David, or bear rule any more in
Judah. So that the actual exercise of this temporal Dominion, is not to be
ascribed to him by the title of Succession, much less by that of Election. For
in Ioh. 6. when they would have made him King, he withdrew himself, and fled
into the mountain: The Jews were so far from giving their Vote and Suffrage,
that they cried, We have no King but Caesar. Least of all was he to claim it
by force of Arms, or dint of Sword. His style is Princips pacis, the Prince of
peace. And it was a presage of his Birth, that they should break their Swords
into Mattocks, their Spears into Sythes; and himself denied his being king of
this World. We acknowledge, regnavit Dominus, the Lord reigns; at regnavit a
ligno, but he reigned from the tree. The Lords Anointed, Christ, the Redeemer,
is Ruler, but his Government is upon his Shoulders: His Scepter is a Scepter of
righteousness, his Throne on the Earth is in the hearts and consciences of the
faithful, who have union with him here, and by him shall have communion with
the whole Trinity in Unity hereafter in the Heavenly Kingdom.

I could live and die in contemplation of this kingdom above, wherein we shall
see that we love, and love that we see; and love the more that we see. For the
measure of the blessed shall be Full, heaped up, shaken together, and running
over. Running over in God, shaken together in man. It Is true, some Glory in
this Kingdom is given excellenter, as the School speaks, more to one then to
another; yet shall nothing be Singulariter, more in any one that it not in
another One shall so have the gift of glory lesser then another, that he shall
also have this gift, not to covet any more Glory. For what can be more, then to
have all the good that we will, and to will nothing that is not good?

Consider this, you that forget God, and remember your Redeemer: what though
all of us be in this case of the thiese on the Cross? Nos quidem just, we have
deserved death, even everlasting death; yet having Christ, we may challenge all
things, even heaven it self. For having given us his son, Romans 8.32
how can he deny us any thing? So reasons the Apostle. Now that our souls may
be saved by our Interest we have in Christ, let us continually remember his
Doctrine, which forewarns us, that it is to no purpose though we say Lord, Lord,
doubling, and trebling it too, Math. 7.21.
if we be not diligent to do him true service, Pov. 23.26
whom we style Lord. My Son, give me thy heart, cries the Spirit by the mouth
of Solomon: for in the hearts of men is the Throne of Gods Kingdom; and except
he reign in our hearts while we are in the Church Militant, we shall never
reign with him in glory in the Church triumphant. The old saying cannot be too
often repeated; The thief saved on the Cross, was one, that none should despair;
and 'twas but one, that no Licentious liver should presume.

Therefore O God, though we have robbed thee of thy glory, yet remember to make
thy self glorious in us, now thou art in thy Kingdom of Glory. The poor thief
on the Cross craving thy remembrance when thou came into thy Kingdom,
obtained thy infallible promise of taking him with thee into thy Kingdom.

Behold, now thou art in thy heavenly Kingdom, and we here on this earthly vale
of misery; we beseech thee graciously to remember thy unworthy servants, and
let our Souls in affection, and in our conversation, be now, and ever in
heaven; that so when thou shall translate us hence to thy celestial Mansions,
with Angels, and all glorified Spirits, we may break out into those Songs of
Joy, and voices of exultation: Glory, and Praise, and Honor, be to him that
sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, for evermore.

Amen.

Ephesians the 1. Beginning with the later part of the 19 verse. According to
the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, in the Heavenly Places.


SERMON. VII.
THe Act of the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, is the precedent and
exemplary cause of our reviving. An Exemplary cause, not as if we are raised to
the similitude thereof; for Christ rose, but saw no corruption in the grave:
Our Bodies, or, if you will, our Carcasses, shall rise again; but the
corruption of the flesh, the rottenness of the Bones, the dust and ashes, or
rather nothing, whereinto we must be dissolved, is incident to us all. Christ's
rising and ascending are exemplary, because ours has its inchoation or
beginning in His; nay it has its perfection and consummation in him, before it
be begun in us. For the Apostle in the second chapter of this Epistle, and
verse. 6. is confident to affirm, that God has already raised us up with him,
and set us in the highest Heavenly places. So that even now we have a sure,
though not a full possession of that glory, which hereafter shall be revealed.
Against this principal hold of our belief, the cunning malice of Satan has
raised more perverse opposites then against all the rest of the building. And
therefore lest flesh and blood meeting with so many difficulties and
contrarieties, should sink into despair, and tremble to fight under the Lords
Banner, Saint Paul fastens upon the mighty power of God; and to make sure the
point, betakes him to his Orizons, from the sixteenth verse, to this of my
Text, to induce thereby a persuasion, that the Almighty works in those which
believe, with the same force and efficacy as he did work in Christ: So that if
we be not raised from the dead, Christ is not risen; and if we shall not be
there where Christ sits at the right hand of his Father, it is not true that He
sits, as it is expressed. For he rose not for himself, but for us; He ascended
up on high, and led Captivity Captive, not for himself, but that he might be
our High Priest, and make intercession for us in the Heavenly places. This is
the sum and scope of the whole verse: but that I may speak no less fitly then
truly, I restrain my Meditations to the later part, as to the Cardo or the
Basis both of the time and Text. Wherein you have the Efficient cause, The
mighty power of God: the declaration, or operation of this Power, in that it
works: the subject, or person in whom it wrought, Christ. The manner of this
working; and that is twofold, described by a double Act, and both miraculous;
When he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand. In the
first act, consider the estate from whence he was raised; From the dead: In the
second act, his Supereminent exaltation; and set him at his own right Hand: and
lastly, the place of this exaltation, in the Heavenly places. According to the
mighty working of his power, etc.

The verity of Gods promise, and his ability in performance, are the principal
Pillars which support and sustain a Christians confidence: So that not without
just cause, after we have made confession in our Creed, that we believe in
God, we add in the next place, that he is Almighty; for if this ground be once
shaken, neither Earth, nor Heaven, nor Men, nor Angels, can yield us any hope,
or life, or consolation. Our Preaching is in vain, your faith vain, you are yet
in your sins, they which are asleep in Christ are perished. Wherefore Abraham,
to show his affiance in Gods mighty power, considered not his own body how it
was dead, he regarded not the deadness of the womb of Sara: Nay, when the heavy
mandate to sacrifice his only Son Isaac did seem to contradict the promise,
that in Isaacs life all the Nations should be blessed; yet the Patriarch, under
hope, did believe above hope, quia Fidelis est qui promisit, because Faithful
is he that promised, Heb. 10. and not only so, sed quia potens est qui
promisit, because He that promised is able to do it, Romans 4. Holy David is so
resolute, that though he walk in the midst of the shadow of death, he would
fear no evil; Psalm. 23.4.
and why? because thou, even thou, who art Omnipotent, art with me. Hence is it
that the glorious Martyrs of the Church regarded not the cruelty of Tyrants,
the launcing of the Sword, the torture of the Rack, the scorching of the Fire,
nor the loss of Life. They rest on the mighty Power of God, not fearing what
man can do. Why did not the fire consume those three thrust into the fiery
Oven? was it not hot enough, or did it not burn, when the very Flames did lick
up the Tormentors which put them in? Why did the Sea so spy the Lord? why ran
it back, as afraid, and became a wall to Israel, and yet ran together again to
drown Pharaoh, and his whole Host? Why did not the Lions in their Den rather
snatch Daniel before he came to ground, then lie still before him as Lambs, and
not Lions? But this, that water may not wet, though it be a great Sea; fire may
not burn, though it be a flamingfire; many Lions, many hungry Lions may not
touch a silly man, when the all-commanding power of God requires a strict
obedience.

In Logical and natural things, Ratio facit fidem, Reason causes us to assent
and believe: but in Divine and Supernatural, Fides facit Rationem, faith
commands our Reason. So that Credendum est, as Tertullian speaks, quia est
incredibile; we must believe, because it seems to us incredible, and not to be
believed: Ratio enim facti est Potentia Facientis; for in things of wonder, the
reason of the work is the power of the Worker. In our contemplations of the
blessed Trinity, the feeble brain of man apprehends it as an impossibility,
that there should be a Plurality of persons, and yet no distinction of Essence;
that there should be (...), but not (...). that the Father should be another
Person from the Son, and the Son another person from the Father; and yet both
so One, that they are the very Oneness and Unity of nature. But Saint Austin
makes the Identity of substance an argument against Maximinus, an Arrian
Bishop, to prove God to be Omnipotent: Otherwise, where is the Omnipotency of
the Father, if he could not beget to himself such a Son as is Coessential with
him? So that the assurance of this mighty power, is the Fortress of Gods truth.
It is strange to sense, that a Virgin chaste should bring forth a Son; but not
to be doubted, considering the working of Gods mighty power. For He, which
could make Aarons Rod to bud, and Sara's womb to conceive, is able also to make
a Virgin fruitful.

The Schooses distingnish the Power of God into his absolute, and ordinary, or
actual power. The absolute Power of God extends it self beyond his will, even
to things infinite: For by it he could have made a stone on the ground, a Star
in the Sky: a Reptil, or silly Worm of the Earth, a glorious Angel in the
highest Heaven. But here, if ever any where, a Gnat may better swim, then an
ox wade; a simple Ignorance being preferred before an indiscreet knowledge.
For it were but a presumptuous folly to search the depth of those Secrets,
which are reserved for the most High. The actual power of God is limited, being
of the Latitude and extent with his will. By it he can do nothing but that
which out of his most free purpose he determined, and did foresee He would do.

I do not love to enter into these high and secret Mysteries: only for the
comfort of our Souls, and confirmation of our faith, give me leave to observe
In transitn, in the very passage to my Text, that the goodness and power of God
is still manifested and discovered to us, as it wrought in Christ: ACCORDING to
the working of his mighty Power, which he wrought IN CHRIST.

The Name of Christ is not the Name of God: He is the Anointer, Christ the
Anointed. Yea, the Name of God were a Name full of horror and terror unto us,
were it not for the Name of Christ. Caelum non esset caelum, nisi ihi esset
Christus Jesus. Heaven were not to us a heaven, had we not there an Anointed
Savior. For the benedictions of the Gospel are first directed and made to
Christ; and then by consequent, to them who are in ingrafted into Christ. He is
the Angel of the Covenant, in whom all the promises are yea and Amen. Look
upon the external or transient works, and you shall find them openly proclaim
and pronounce Gods Glory; but so, as they were done in Christ.

The Heathen dreamed of so many Guides of Nature, as they saw there were kinds
of things natural in the world. But to us there is one only worker of All in
All, alone to be adored and honored by all for ever. The Creator made the
whole world, not with hands, but by the word: The Scripture herein is plain;
All things were made BY HIM, both visible and invisible. And that we may know
the heavenly Arch which is erected over our heads would quickly loosen and
dissolve it self into a disordered and confused Chaos, Joh. 1.3.
nay would be annihilated, and brought to nothing, did it not receive its
stability from Christ; the Apostle, in Col. 1.17. is most emphatical, (...),
All things consist in Him: Portans omnia (...), bearing up all things by his
mighty Word. Heb. 1.3. Whereby it is clear, that the conservation of the world
is for the sake of Christ. The whole Book of God puts us in mind how we had
utterly disabled our Nature to fulfill that Law, which was delivered as an
Instructor concerning the mystical way to Salvation; and therefore our
Sovereign good, which we desired naturally, must now be attained supernaturally
by Christ. When all the floodgates of Gods indignation seemed to be set open
against us, our affliction and calamity being as unsupportable as death; then
it pleased his tender mercy to be led as a Sheep to the slaughter. Nay, He was
the Paschal Lamb slain before the beginning of the World, in his Fathers Secret
decree; for his blood Prius profuit quam fuit, was effectual before it was
actual. I should want both breath and time, if I went about to describe unto
you how mightily God wrought in Christ's Doctrine. At the first it seemed
absurd, and contemptible, the Professors being reputed the Offscouring of the
Earth; but at last, it forced their violent persecutors to become their humble
Orators, and to request that of them, as an especial favor, which before
themselves scorned to grant. Run over the Circle of Christ's life, and wind up
the whole thread of it, you shall behold every where the Power of God as it
wrought in Christ; sometimes in curing diseases, and anon in casting out
whole Legions of Devils. To instance in one for all, Remember an Army of
unvictualled people sed and Satisfied in the Wilderness, with the Poor
provision of five Loaves and two Fishes, Inter secantes dexteras crevit Ceres,
as Prudentius elegantly sings. A strange, and new Creation! The bread and
fishes increase and multiply in the hands of the Eaters; the Fragments and
remainders proving greater then the Feast. All these things, which the power of
God wrought in Christ, are glorious, and full of wonder: but that the Sepulcher
should yield him up, and the clouds receive him; that his dead body should rise
out of the lowest Grave, and ascend to the highest Heaven, is a miracle of
miracles, at which the Angels stood amazed. And so I come to the two special
Acts of Gods power, as it follows in the Text, When he raised him from the
dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places.

Christ's Resurrection assures us of the fruit of his Ascension; it is the first
degree of his exaltation: and therefore fix your thoughts a while upon his
rising from the dead, it being the Praecursor, and Forerunner to his Session at
Gods right hand.

It was altogether requisite that our Savior should rise from the dead; for
though our redemption was purchased by his death; yet unless he had rose again
to apply it, no benefit had redounded to us; for all that, we might have
perished. And indeed, we could never hope that any power was able to Marry
again those Souls and Bodies, betwixt which nature had pronounced an
everlasting Divorce, were it not that the Apostle has made Christ our Head's
rising an undoubted evidence that all his dead Members shall rise too. As in
Adam all dyed, so in Christ all shall be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22. The dead in
Christ shall rise, 1 These. 4.10. To magnify the transcendent work of our
Resurrection, the Apostles, when they were confirmed in this main Article of
faith, and had seen how Christ had perfected the work of Redemption, did
constitute a new Sabbath, quia minus est creasse, quam reparasse mundum;
because it is a less work to create a World out of nothing, then to renew a
world when it is fallen into that which is worse then nothing. I confess, there
is not a leaf in the whole book of nature, wherein he that lists may not
read sufficient motives to induce his assent to this truth: Cur enim de
hominibus diffiditur, quod fieri in lignis videtur? For seeing it is yearly done
in the grass of the field, in the Corn that is sown, in the seed of the trees,
and vvood which grows; why should we distrust, or once doubt the like of
men? Of all the signs and Types of Christ's Resurrection, that of Jonas is the
most lively figure: Devoravit, possedit, ejecit; the Whale svvallovved him,
retained him, and cast him out again. So was the Son of Man in the heart of
the Earth, and the third day he arose again. To silence all cavils concerning
rising in the same Individual, numerical body, Christ's body in the Grave is
kept free from all putrefying alterations; there was no need to recollect any
dispersed matter; his body shifts not its shape into various and unsearchable
changes, but the trusty Earth returns it again in the very same shape it was
commended to her trust. And to satisfy all doubt, he is zealous to assure
their eyes and hands: Behold my Hands and my Feet, Luke 24.39
it is I my self; Handle, and See; a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see
me have. This is it, which makes Saint Paul say, Romans 14.
He was DECLARED to be the Son of God, by the resurrection from the dead; So
evidently declared, that there is not a Didymus, which knovvs it, but must cry
out, My God, and my Lord.

Neither is it any diminution of Christ's Glory, in that it is said the Power of
God raised him; For God here is not to be taken Personally, but Essentially.
Saint Austens rule of the Trinity passes for good and current; Vbi unus, ibi
Trinitas, Deus unus; where One is, All are. The Father does all things, by the
Son, in the Holy Ghost. The Son is no less Omnipotent then the Father: For
though he has both Essence and power from the Father; yet as his Essence is
natural to him, in regard he has it by generation; so is his Power natural
also: and therefore Hilary's form of speech is, The Son does all things, and is
mighty, not of himself indeed, but by himself: Whatsoever the Father does,
(...), the very same the Son does, Joh. 5. He had power to lay down his own
life, so he had power to take it up again. This made him tell the Jews, that
though they destroyed the temple of his Body, yet in three days he would build
it up again: And not long after, He raised it to such a hight, that it did not
only touch, but sit in the highest Heaven, even at the right hand of God,
which is the (...) and Supereminent degree of Gods Power, which He wrought
in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set Him at his own right hand.

To Sit, is a sign of tranquillity: the right hand, as it is a Name of
dexterity, so it is of dignity. The right hand of God is a Name of Power and
Majesty; the Heavenly Places, are the chief City of the great King of Glory. It
is then a happy Resurrection so to be raised, a blessed Session so to be
placed. Christ, while He So journed on the Earth, was still in motion; he had
not whereon to rest his head; and was it not good reason, that having ended
this troublesome Pilgrimage, he should now sit down, and have a Quietus est
in his own home? The holy Spirit it is styled the Finger of God; Christ, the
hand of God: And yet while he was conversant among Men, He disrobed himself
of all honor, being esteemed an outcast of the people. But being raised in
triumph, and having made his enemies his Footstool, he will now be
Glorified with that Glory, which he had with his Father from the beginning of
the World. He will now keep his residence in Gods Presence Chamber, in the
Heaven of blessed Angels and Spirits, to whom the Almighty reveals himself in
the abundance of his Glory. I should ill husband my time, and much trespass
upon your patience, if I went about to prove how the right or left hand being
parts, and that material, cannot properly be attributed to the pure and simple
Essence of God: Sufficient it is for our purpose, that this sitting at the
right hand of God, is construed in Heb. 1.3. by sitting at the right hand of
the Throne of Majesty. In 1 Cor. 15. instead of (...), the Apostle uses the
word (...), he must Reign. In Luke 22. it is (...), the right hand of Power. To
go no further then my Text, so soon as it is said, And set him at the righ hand
of God in Heavenly places; he presently adjoyns, by way of explication, Far
above all Principalities, and Powers, and Might. This occasioned Aquinas to
observe, that the sitting of Christ at the right of God, consists in three
things: In his Eminency of heaven, whose glory he does enjoy; in his
Pre-eminence of the Angels, whom he excels in Dignity; and with his Coemenincy
with the Father, with whom He is equal in Majesty. But whether this imperial
power over the creature, this advancement to the Throne of God, this
communication of the Divine attributes, be the right or claim of Christ as he
is God, or as he is Man, or as he is both God and Man, the fury of
controversy, wherewith the Text Labors, commands me now to enquire.

Christ, as he was the Word, had Equality of Dominion with the Father from all
eternity; but as he was the Word Incarnate, or manifested in the flesh, this
prerogative of fitting at the right hand of God was a Consequent of his
Ascension. It cannot be denied, being Hair of all things, it was meet he should
be before all, who are but parts of his Inheritance; and seeing he was invested
with the exuberance and excellency of endowments more then any other, it was
requisite he should have the first place before all other: From the Instant of
his conception, his Soul, as the School teaches, enjoyed the blessed Vision;
but while God was clothed with the veil of flesh, and compassed with the
shadow of death, quievit Deitas, says Irenaeus, the Deity lay hid, and would
not discover its whole virtue; and so by a voluntary minoration, and
exinanition of himself, he sequestered and laid aside his right of Precedence
and Sovereignty. But so soon as He ascended, the Godhead openly dispersed its
Beams, and shined clearly in the Manhood, exalting it above all things
created, and dignifying it with as much Majesty and Honor as possibly it could
contain. The Apostle goes further; for in 1 Timothy 3. he dares to tell us, that
God is received up into glory. And indeed, to speak properly, Christ, as he
was the Word, had his Omnipotent Power in himself: during the time of
mortality, as it were a Sword in a sheath, he could not draw it out at the
Commandment of the flesh, but then only when it pleased the Father. For we
read, that in some places He could not do many miracles. Joh. 11.
At the raising up of Lazarns, he was glad to pray to his Father that he might
exercise his Authority over death. Being ready to suffer, and so also to rise
again, his Prayer was, Father, glorify me with that Glory which I had with
thee from the beginning of the world. Joh. 17.5.
He prayed not this as bare Man; for he had not really that glory which he
desired, from the beginning of the world, as he was Man; but as the natural Son
of God. And he dispossessed himself of the same, not as he was Man, but as he
was the Son, being in the Form of God. We may therefore safely reassume that
saying of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 3.16
God is received up in glory. For it was at his ascension that Christ, as he
was the Son of God, had the Rule and authority over the creatures restored,
though not bestowed. And it was at his ascension that Christ, as he was Man,
had this (...) bestowed, though not restored; The Son by a voluntary
dispensation, emptyed himself, and relinquished his right in the time of his
humiliation. The Father by a voluntary dispensation, resigned to the Son the
actual execution of all power, upon this his ascension.

The Lutherans will have Christ's placing at the right hand God, to be an
elevating of his humane nature to a true and real use of the Divine attributes;
so that by virtue of this exaltation, the humanity is become Omniscient, and
Omnipresent, no less properly then the Deity. This opinion, or rather
blasphemy, makes in Christ not an Union, but a mixtion, and confusion. For the
Rule is ancient, and orthodox; Where two natures are conjoined, those things
which are proper to one, cannot really be communicated to another. Otherwise
this Session would nullify the essential properties of Christ's Body, and so it
should not be glorified, but abolished. It is true, the right hand of God is
every where; but it is a Sophism to hold that which sits at the right hand to be
every where. His Rule and Dominion is in every Place, but his presence in
respect of his Manhood is not in every Place. For a Spiritual Substance has a
larger circuit, and is extended farther then a corporal. The Beams of the Sun
are inseparably united with the Body of the Sun, and yet the Body is not
wheresoever the Beams are: The whole Divine Nature of Christ is inseparably
united to the humane, and yet it is not consequent that where the one is, the
other must needs be. For although the Total Deity be in the Humanity, yet it is
not there, as I may say Totally, because it is wholly in the humanity, and
wholly out of the humanity. So that the WORD is somewhere where the Flesh is
not, and yet the Word is everywhere God and Man.

We may see in a Circle all the lines equally drawn from the circumference to
the Center, but we know the center is not wheresoever the Lines are; and yet we
cannot conclude that the lines of the Circle are anywhere, whereas they are not
in the center. The truth is the same in the point in hand, though the manner be
different. For Christ according to his Deity is really every where; but
according to his humanity, He sits only at the right hand of God in the
Heavenly Places; and wheresoever Christ is, there is He both God and Man.

So that the ground of the Lutheran Error is their supposing a false effect of
the Session and personal Union. For the Manhood of Christ exalted into Heaven,
is not made equal with the Father, but advanced above the Creature. When King
Solomon caused his Mother to sit at his right hand, did he give her an Equality
in his Government? And yet we may religiously affirm, that the humanity of our
Savior now sitting at the right hand of God, in a sort, in some acception,
raigns with equal power and Majesty with God; that it is Omniscient,
Omnipotent, and Omnipresent, Non in Abstracto, sed in concreto; not formally,
as it is in it self; but as it is in the Word, whereunto it is personally
united; because through the hypostatical union, it can be no where severed from
that nature, which in it self is infinite. And so Christ in his two natures is
and works every where in a diserse manner, and by mixed actions: as God by
essential presence; as man, by virtual cooperation with that which is
essentially every where present. Hereupon we may in every place approach his
Throne with boldness, the pity and compassion of his Manhood still closing with
the strength and might of his Godhead. The distinction may be learned from
Christ's own mouth in Matthew. 8. All thing are given TOME; not to my humanity,
but to Me. His Body then is not otherwise omnipotent, and omnipresent, then as
it is in the WORD, which is truly omnipotent, and omnipresent really. The
words of my Text give an overthrow to any contradicting Spirit: And set Him at
his own right hand, in the Heavenly Places

Certainly, these Places signify nothing but a place limited for the extent of
it; so that it is a sufficent reason; His body is ascended, and sits at the
right hand of God in the Heavenly places, therefore he is not corporally
present here below. The Mansions of Gods House are many; and this is employed in
the plurality, Places: but what the joys of these Heavenly places are, or how
the degrees are unequal, Profecto in me totum non intrabit, Aust.
truly it will not wholly enter into us by knowledge that we may apprehend it;
Sed ego in illud totus intrabo, but we shall wholly enter into it by fruition,
that we may enjoy it.

Wherefore comfort ye, comfort ye, you which long for the coming of Christ;
Eundem habituri estis Iudicem, and Advocatum; He shall judge you, that dyed,
and rose again, and took possession of heaven for you. What if it be said, No
man ascended into heaven, Ephesians. 4.10.
but He that descended, the son of Man, which is in Heaven? shall we therefore
despair? No, but we will hope so much the more: Licet enim solus intrabit, for
though He alone shall enter into heaven, at profecto Totus intrabit, yet he
shall enter whole, and entire. Bern.
A bone of him shall not be broken; Psalm. 34.20 Joh. 19.36.
we are Bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; He is the Head, we the
Members; the one is not found in the Kingdom without the other. For the body of
Christ is not like to that hideous Image whose head was Gold, and feet Clay;
Dan. 2.32, 33.
our Glorious Head must also have glorified Members. And now me thinks I see
our Savior not riding upon the Wings of the wind, or making the clouds his
charet, but sitting on his Throne of Majesty, and advanced in the highest
Heavenly places; and Satan, and sin, and death, trod under his Feet. And now
behold how the whole Host of Heaven stoupeth, and does homage to him, and
every knee boweth before Him, Both of things in Heaven, and things in the
Earth, and things under the Earth, and every Tongue confesses that God (...),
has worthily super-exalted him.

Let every one then that has any consolation in Christ Jesus, rejoice, and
sing out thanks unto God, who has given us Victory through Christ Jesus our
Lord. For it is the Lamb that is worthy to receive Power, and Riches, and
Wisdom, and Honor, and Glory, and Praise, for ever and ever.

AMEN.

Matthew. 9.20, 21, 22. And behold, a Woman which was diseased with an issue of
Blood twelve years, came behind Him, and touched the hem of his Garment. For
she said within her self, If I may but touch his Garment, I shall be made
whole. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be
of good comfort; thy faith has made thee whole.


SERMON. VIII.
CHRIST came into the world not for himself, but us; his Errand being not his
own, but our advantage; which made the Evangelists to observe, that he kept no
long residence any where, but coasted from place to place, to seek and save
that which was lost. The chapter prefers a bill of his several Cures; this in
the Text is remembered as eminent among the rest, and that is the reason it is
ushered in with a note of attention and admiration, behold.

The better to lodge the argument in your minds, give me leave to chalk out
the whole, part by part, observing the infirmity of the Woman, and therein the
qualy, a Bloody issue; the continuance thereof, which was of no less standing
than Twelve years; the means she used as a rescue from the danger, expressed in
a double act, She came behind him, and touched the hem of his Garment: The
Motive, and that was a persuasion of Christ's Power to do her good; For she said
within her self, If I may but touch the hem of his Garment, I shall be whole.
Then follows the exceeding riches of Christ's goodness; first, in his gesture,
He turned him about to see her; then in his Words, partly cherishing her, and
said, Daughter be of good comfort; partly commending her, thy faith has made
thee whole. So that we may consider here a weak Woman, a strong faith; a
bashful means, a prosperous cure. To this end I would bring you likewise, and
therefore I will try to lead you orderly in her steps, beginning with the
notice of her person; Behold, a Woman.

A Woman, first, and so more subject to shame, and fear: a diseased Woman; what
makes she then abroad, in a throng too? Diseased with an unclean issue of
Blood, Lev. 15.
and therefore unfit by the Law of Moses to touch or be touched by any
creature, under peril of uncleanness. How if some zealous Jew should have
known, and spied her there? Besides, her disease had stayed upon her twelve
years; enough to denote to the censorious, a Divine Judgment on her, and Gods
dereliction of her. She had wearied all Physicians, She; and they were alike
weary, for she had emptyed her purse. What cure could she now hope for, Mar.
5.26.
unless her desperate case had made her malicious to infect others? An
Anchorites hole might seem fitter then a public assembly. Soft, hold! This is
every man's own case; for the Woman in Scripture usually represents the whole
Church, the Spouse of Christ, whereof we are Members. Her womanish affections
of shame, and fear, may justly be ours; for we also are diseased, and yet we
venture abroad into the Tossings of the world, and are still in a throng. The
weak flesh is pressed with the world before, with necessities behind; with the
Devil on that side, and the malice of men on the other: Diseased we are all
with shameful uncleanness; our Blood runs out, by running the ways of
perdition. If every man's disease were successively written in his Forehead, we
might all in turn seem unworthy of company; the Pharisee himself with all his
purity and holiness, not excepted. Thus we languish in Soul, not for twelve
years only, but for most part of our life. The Physicians, which are the
Divines, be they never so good, never so many, cannot cleanse us. Though we
spend all our treasures, will and working, labor and wit, sense and reason,
and whatsoever we can bring to submit to our Teachers and Reformers, for
bettering our estate, we do but linger out, and cannot by such means attain to
perfect health, no more then this weak Woman.

In that the ground of this Woman's disease was her own blood, I observe, how
sin breeds so great a disorder, that it raises a commotion in our very
Principles, turning the blessing into a curse, the nutriment into the
punishment. For what is more usual, then to see those, who give way to the fury
and frenzy of their passions, to ruin their Bodies by their very strength?
It being just with God to chain a man in his own fetters to entrap him in his
own snare. So that it behooves us not to Riot and Frolic away our natural
abilities; lest what is ordained for our safety, becomes an Instrument of our
misery.

Again, did the Prodigal flux continue venting twelve years? Learn, that it is
the Lord's method to cloud his face toward us for a while, to withdraw things
most desired, that our confidence may be approved, when we trust He can as well
help without the means, as by them. The impotent man at the Poole of Bethesda,
was departing thence eight and thirty years: It cost him many a deep sigh and
salt tear, long looking, and as much longing, and yet no prevailing, 'till the
appointed period was at hand. The Crooked Woman, Luke 13. was doubled and bowed
together by the Spirit of infirmity eighteen years (a tedious space to be
detained in the throws of fear and doubt) but after long search, and much ado,
Christ made her strait. It Is plain in John 11. ver. 33. that our Saviors
compassionate Soul was touched with remorse for the Agonies of Lazarus; yet he
estranged himself from him, and suspended his relief. He prepares not to visit
him, till Misery it self spoke, and the loss was manifest. Joh. 11.17
Lazarus must be enterr'd, before he be recovered; cast into a dead sleep,
before he goes to wake him up, that so their unexpected contentment might be
greater then their former complaint. Saint Austin will have all this to be done
in a Mystery, to no other end, but that such, who have deaded all their
faculties to spiritual Actions, should not despair, as if the Tree of Life was
not to be recovered; but when Sin is waxed to the height, expect a Conversion,
and not a Confusion. God ofttimes abides the extremity of evil; expects
Ungodliness to the utmost; and then to magnify his Mercy, he has Compassion.
Complainest thou with that devout Father, of thy imbred inveterate Vices,
against which thou have often resolved, Modo, and modo, Now I will leave them,
now I will utterly relinquish them; and yet they keep thee Prisoner still,
pleading Prescription for their hold? For all this, give not thy self over,
where thy Physician does not; but know, that Christ came to cure, not only
green Cuts, small Skars; but deep and inveterate Wounds, Diseases of eight,
twelve, of as many years old as thy life can bear date.

They mistake the good pleasure of God, who confine it to the narrow
Circumstances of Time and Persons. With him all things are not only alike
possible, but easy. He is able to refine pure Gold from base Metal, to sift
out fair Wheat from course Bran; to make the Prodigal of Nature, a Miracle of
Grace; the Child of wrath, the Son of God. He can work it out of the very
Flint; Mat. 3.9.
as well of stones raise Children to Abraham, as of Jews; and, though the Point
be difficult, at the last gasp, take the prey out of the Lions Mouth.

I speak this, that no disconsolate Soul should go dropping, and hanging down
the head with Spira the Italian, who, as it were, drew the Indentures, set the
seal to his damnation; made his own Hell, through a treacherous persuasion: He
was one among others, to whom God never intended a power to believe, nor a
Christ to believe in. Our safest course is not to stand out by multiplying
Rebellions, but upon remorse of Conscience instantly to come in.

Lastly: Is her case so near like ours? then let us consider it more tenderly.
Alas, poor woman! Who is this, whom her genuine blood, her natural infirmity,
and oginal sickness, has brought to deaths door streights of unclean
languishment? Who is this so defiled with corruption, so tainted with secret
sores, that Art could not cure her, nor the Law suffer her to pass for clean;
yea, whom the Law prohibited from the Temple, from all sacred things, esteeming
all things polluted which she touched? This is even the Church, stained with
the first Man's Transgression, originally corrupted, wounded, and weltring in
her own Blood. if we look nearly, we shall find her to be more especially the
Church of the Gentiles: For in the same Gospel, under the person of of the
Rulers Daughter, the Church of the Jews is otherwise specified: To her cure
Christ was traveling, who says, I am not sent but to the lost Sheep of the
House of Israel, Mat. 15.24. But by the diseased woman, secluded from the rites
of the Synagogue, is meaned the people of the Nations, not descended from the
Patriarchs, not sanctified by the Law, nor glorified in the Prophets. This part
of Mandkind, striving to cure the corruption of Nature by humane skill, did
more increase it: for strictness of discipline did only draw forth the blood
of the Offenders, but could not stop it. The Jews enjoyed the Savior's
corporal presence; the Nations only heard of his Fame passing by, and
therefore came behind him, (that is) they followed him in aftertimes, by the
tract of the year, being glad to touch his garment, to feel him in the
Sacrament by the touch of Faith. The Rulers Daughter, and under her the
Synagogue, is said, verse 18. to have dyed; dye she must to the Law, and perish
according to Nature, that so she may be raised to life through Faith in Christ;
though most of the Jews, even to this day, Mar. 3.35.
will not believe it, saying, Trouble not the Master, for the Damsel is dead;
they will not accept of Christ's coming, they have death in their Mouths, and
refuse the hope of the Resurrection. But the unclean woman, and under her the
Corporation of the Gentiles, creeps to receive the comfort of the Gospel, hopes
for health by touching Christ's Garment, which is the Garment of Righteousness.

Now, Men and Brethren, since you know what this woman is, or rather, what your
selves are, take it for no shame this once to follow a woman. So, for your
Example, I proceed from the weak person, to her strong Faith, evidenced in two
Acts, Accessit, Tetigit, she came behind him, and tuched the hem of his Garment.

She did well to come; for if we would have any thing with the Lord, it is all
the reason that may be, that we come unto him; we have need of him, not he of
us. But when was it that she came? that is expressed in the former verse, even
then, when he was in the way to the Rulers House. A time, one would think, not
very congruous to facilitate a suit. Had she consulted with her carnal
Counselors, those friendly enemies would have wished her (forsooth) to be more
mannerly then to press him while he was in the heat of other employments; for
such an unseemly preposterousness was not like to compass any thing. But let
them construe her meaning as they will, she will not intermit this opportunity.
She had heard how our Savior proclaimed openly, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will ease you; Mat. 11.28.
and so feeling the burden of her own grief intolerable, she thought it would
be deemed pride or neglect, not to come, being thus invited; rudeness, and not
civility, not to do as she was bid. Neither height, nor depth, nor
Principalities, nor Rulers, could separate her from the Lord of Health. She
over-looks all dissiculties, and swims out of these intangling Weeds, to lay
hold on Christ, though the Monster-headed multitude stood in the way, like so
many Bears and Lions, to intercept her passage.

This woman's forwardness in coming to Christ for her bodily health, checks our
supine negligence in flying to him for our souls health. Away then with these
nice Circumstances of worldly carriage, which abate the fervor of Zeal, and by
unnecessary delays, withstand, if not ruin our Conversion. In things which
must be done, it is good to be speedily rosolute; for having once neglected the
first motions of Grace, and suffered them to dye issueless, we may wait long
enough before the opportunity of a second call encourages us.
Over-shamefastness is an unprofitable Virtue in a Beggar, whose importunate
demeanor may well be excused by his necessity, and his earnestness deserves
rather pity then a check. All places are of alike access to God: in what place
soever we come unto him, in bed, or up; in the field, or with this woman in the
road, we shall be sure to have Audience. Yet, though she boldly entered, her
courage was quickly dashed; for when she came in presence of him, whom she was
to petition, her Conscience was touched with Modesty; and that Disease, which
brought her thither for her help, made her likewise to fear her Helper, and to
come behind him.

Timorous Woman! What could there dismay thee? Thy Savior, in shape a man, in
the lowest Ebb of fortune, in company with Sinners; and yet, with a dejected
Countenance, come thou behind him? Do thou tremble to behold God in the
back of Man? The weakest sight fears not to gaze on the Suns Glory through
another body; yet so tender was the Eye of her Faith, that she durst not
behold this Son of Righteousness to his Face, though the Luster of his Godhead
was then involved in the Cloud of our humanity.

In this her posture, we may all behold the Cowardice of guilt, and of a
stained Conscience: For sin is in the Soul, what the Disease is in the Body;
shame and fear inseparately waits upon both. Adam had no sooner experience of
evil, but became acquainted with fear: Genesis 3.10.
I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid: He runs behind. Who would
not fear to sin, which makes us thus afraid? Magnum supplicium peccare, etsi
non puniamur; sin it self is a dreadful sting. This pensive woman durst not
come into the presence of Christ, for shame of her uncleanness; and the
consideration of this her impurity, made her to shun the eyes of the people,
fearing that they also would repel her; being by sentence of Law debarred from
company. In this mournful grief, she placed her self behind him, hoping
secretly to steal her health by a touch, and so be gone.

We stand in a miserable and hard condition, I needs must say; for while
natural infirmities eggs us on to sin, inbred shame keeps us off from
Confession; what we fear not to do, we blush to speak; and yet perhaps have a
great desire to be cured. This was the vvomans case; she was troubled with a
bashful Disease, and therefore desired to be cured in secret. The first
happiness is, not to fall into the shame of sin; the next, is to find a
covered remedy, according to that, Psalm 31. Blessed is the man, whose iniquity
is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Howsoever, to fly the Physician, whose
virtue must cure us; to conceal the Malady from him, who at first sight cannot
choose but know it, is unprofitable Modesty. Though we come with shame, yet
come we must, and creep after this afflicted wretch, though it be behind him.
Which posture of hers, shows she was quickened with a good measure of the
Spirit, otherwise, how should she be persuaded Christ to be so holy and
powerful, as to heal by the lowest means, that if behind him she came, so near
as his hem, she should receive her health from him, or at least from God
working in him? No ground in Nature could cause this persuasion; the Rules of
Physic prescribe either some inward receipt, or outward application, without
which, no disease is cureable; for what Physician can cure with a touch?

No doubt though this woman could have proceeded no further then to the mere
motion of Spirit (which Christ understood as well as the touch of his
Garment) that alone without any corporal application, would have been
effectual; for so the Faith of the Centurion, prevailed for his Servant, though
absent, Mat. 8.13. As thou believe, so be it done unto thee: And the Faith of
the Syrophenician, Mat 15.28. Be it unto thee, even as thou will: And the faith
of the Noble man for his Son, John 4.50. who was cured on the self same hour.
If thus the faith of one prevailed for another, the Master for the Servant, the
Mother for the Daughter, the Father for the Son; much more might this vvomans
faith have been successful fot her self. Approximation of Spirit, is stronger
then that of the Body. Nevertheless, having gotten the opportunity (which is
never to be neglected) she would satisfy the Spirit in the behalf of the body,
with some bodily Medicine, though not powerful in it self, yet some way
sacramental, able to convay health by the Mercy of Christ, though not to give
it. For what was it she desired? merely the touch of his Garment: She said
within her self, If I may but touch his Garment, I shall be whole.

Well fare a good heart yet: though she had little blood in her body, she had
spirit in her heart still; after so much vain cost and labor, she was not so
desperately gone, but that she could yet think of a Remedy. Think she could,
but durst not speak out: Thought was loud enough in the Ears of God, from whom
she expected cure; and therefore within her self she said: but if she spoke out
one word of her infirmity in the ears of men, she feared a repulse and
punishment from Jewish Rigor, where upon she said no further then within her
self.

Poor soul! how was she distracted in Mind? how was she driven by necessity,
and divided in Thought? If the stength of Faith do best appear in opposing
difficulties, behold, an unvanquished Faith, not broken by a Conflict of
Thoughts, not crushed by a War of afflictions, though as violent as two
contrary Winds wrestling in the Air, or two headlong Rivers justling in the
Sea. Necessity of her danger drove her forward, shame of unworthiness kept her
back; health she desired, but feared the censure of the Law; she saw a way to
cleanse her self, but it lay through the pollution of others; she was confident
of the Masters gentleness, but she doubted the Rigor of the standers by: she
would receive the benefit of cure; but therewithal to cast an aspertion of
uncleanness on the Giver, would be a grief. If she spoke her case, she
proclaimed her unfitness; if she held her peace, she needs must suffer: if she
staid to deliberare, the swiftness of Christ's passion would cut off
opportunity. Thus her bad cause fought with her faith, fear with hope, shame
with desire, manners with necessity. How could she reconcile these contraries?
how find a covert, in public? secrecy, in a multitude? speak, and hold her
peace? how get health, and save her modesty? receive a benefit, and do no
injury? touch, and not defile? In all this storm of perplexity, she fainted
not, still she had somewhat to say, A woman for that; but yet, liek a wise
woman, she said it within her self. In great extremities, the force of grief
turns Counselour, necessity becomes a Doctress, and sickness finds a Remedy to
it self. This Woman, by the working of Faith, thought on a way how to salve
all; her life, her Modesty, the Masters Reverence, and the Peoples purity: and
that was by shooting with white Powder, by speaking inaudibly, by whispering
aloud unto God, both below and above the Ears of men; by saying within her
self. Where she might not approach in body, thither she stole in heart; she
came to the heavenly Physician, by a secret passage of Spirit, while with the
open appearance of flesh, she kept aloof.

Happy woman in this, who among the multitude, knew how to be alone with
Christ, and found a passage, which none could stop!

This was the woman's behavior, and this must be ours in like necessity. When
our fortunes are enclosed with calamity, when the body is beleaguered with
sickness, or the soul with torment of sin; when we can gather no help, either
from our selves or Friends, from Doctors or Pastors, when sentence is death,
and judgment is pronounced by all our miserable Comforters, and we are
banished from the Church and all Assemblies; yet still there is a Temple in the
heart, and a spark of Divinity there lodged, which finds access unto God. Say
our Misery be so tyrannous, that we may not speak and vent our grief in words,
(the common ease of those that be helpless) there is yet a tongue in the heart,
which may grow hot with Communication; there is the Dialect of Spirits; the
Language which has best audience in Heaven, is there spoken. Suppose the heart
it self be perplexed and troubled with doubt, we must yet believe against
threatening, hope against hope, cast about again and again, never leave
saying, and assaying within our selves, till a glimpse of comfort shall appear
like the breaking of daylight in fearful darkness. This weak woman's Faith was
implicated with much doubting; yet Christ entertains her trembling confidence
with such a gracious gesture, as he turned about, and seeing her, said,
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole: [hath made thee
whole] Here Is a full tide of matter ready to rush in, and overflow; and I
cannot, without much perplexity to my self and you, make my passage through: I
will therefore withdraw, and retire till a more useful season be administered.
To the immortal, eternal, invisible, only wise God, Three in Persons, One in
Essence, be all Honor and Glory, from Generation to Generation. Amen.

Matthew. 9.22. But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said,
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole.


SERMON. IX.
JEsus turning about, and seeing her, does not infer she was undiscerned of him
before; for neither distance of place, nor obscurity of the conveying Means,
nor interposition of objects, could let our Savior from looking on her. He, to
whom all things are diaphanous, saw that soonest, which was hid from him. His
eye is all penetrable, a tergo and a front, as well behind as before. He
perceived not according to the appearance of her face, but according to the
disposition of her mind; he beheld what she did in the withdrawing room of her
heart, her desire had as articulate a sound in his ear as her speech, and
thence the Holy Ghost his Language is, ver. 21. (...), She said within her
self, because he heard her heart out-speake her tongue. It is true, Christ
demanded Mar. 5.30. who it was that touched him, yet the question was not made
as if he were ignorant of her person, but that her confession might publish to
others what himself fore-knew. He demanded that her faith might be confirmed
her insidility removed which occasioned her to think she might be healed by
stealth; our Savior not knowing it. For those words in Lu. 8.47. When she saw
she was not hid, implies she thought she might be hid; a trespass against his
omniscience. Besides, the Quere was expedient, because thereby she might be
brought to an open acknowledgement of the miracle, for the strengthening of the
Ruler's faith, encouraging him to believe that Christ could cure his Daughter
as well as this Woman. And that the benefit might be more diffusive, he changed
his Posture, used an Interrogatory, cast his eye upon her, the better to
commend her to the multitude, as an example of imitation: So that Grace went
along with his look, for so soon as he beheld her he breathed consolation, and
said, Daughter.

It could not choose but be a singular comfort to this distressed woman, who, as
the other Evangelists has recorded, was now fallen down trembling at our
Saviors feet, to hear her self termed by the appellation of Daughter. For, as
we are the children of God, we have claim to the Kingdom of Heaven, Christ
himself becomes our Brother, He the child of God by nature, we by Adoption. Now
what bond of love is so strict as that betwixt the Father and the Child? Mercy,
and bounty are the Characters of a Father: And these are so transcendent in our
heavenly Father, that the Prophet Esaias, chap. 49. gives the prerogative to him.
She might therefore secure her self of his bounty; For if they that be evil can
give to their Children good gifts, How much more shall the Father, which is in
Heaven give so to her his Daughter, Matthew. 7.11? And then she needed not
mistrust his mercy; For even as a Father pities his own children, so is the
Lord merciful to his, Plas. 103. The proof whereof we may behold in this
gracious speech, Be of good comfort.

You may know the Lord by his Walk, it is in the Cool; and by his voice, it
is in a soft woing Idiome, Genesis 3.8. and subsequent verses. Those sons of
thunder may be of Moses fiery train, they are not fit Disciples for the
Messiah. The Lord stands not now on mount Sinai with burning fire, and dismal
darkness, but on mount Sion, speaking to us, not by the terrible trumpet, but
by the meek Mediator of the New Testament, alluring with mercy, and comfort,
not affrighting with terror, and Judgments: It is the peculiar dignity of
Christ's coming to Solace, and make glad the heart. If the law make the heart as
Mount Sinai covered with darkness, his Gospel calmes and lightens it presently.
He did not shake, but settle the weak, unstable Ground of this Woman's faith.
It Is not the part of a discreet Physician to administer corrasives to a feeble
Patient, whose natural temper and vigor is not able to overcome so forcible a
prescript: And he is no good Physician of Souls that comes in a whirlwinde, and
a tempest against a dejected Sinner. They likewise are too simple, who think,
because they are Christians, they must affect a grim austere carriage or
deportment, a demure composed countenance like an Image. What is a Christian
but his Mirth? his joy in the Holy Ghost, with melody in his heart to the Lord?
Wherein does the Kingdom of heaven consist but in joy? Rejoice in the Lord,
says Saint Paul, and again I say rejoice, Philip. 4.4. Let the righteous be
glad, and rejoice before God, Psalm. 68.3. For the Father of consolation may
justly withdraw his refreshing comforts from such as do not cheerfully rely on
his gracious providence. And indeed the Holy Ghost, who is the Comforter,
seldom rests on a lumpish Spirit. It seems the Prophet Elisha thus conceived
it: for in 2 King. 3.15. he called for music to cheer his Spirits before he
was fit to receive the Spirit of God. Let others then number life by the hours,
I shall measure it by cheerfulness, as I would money, not by tale, but value.
My Savior is my Pattern, who exhilarated this pensive Woman, saying unto her,
Be of good comfort, Thy faith has made thee whole.

Her faith is here evidently augmented by modesty and humility, as indeed it is
always, the distance of the Patient, and the lowliness of the desired medicine
attributes the greater power to him that should cure. You shall find great
difference betwixt the faith of the Ruler, and of this poor Woman, because the
one was led by his learning, the other by her virtue. The Ruler besought our
Savior for his Daughter openly to his Face, the Woman came secretly behind his
back, as not worthy to appear before him. One prayed him to come and visit Luke
8.41. as if God were not always, and every where present, but must change
Places, and make journies. The other thought it good manners to come her self:
the one being learned in the law, prescribed a Legal form of cure, the
Imposition of hands, Come and lay thy hands on her, verse. 18. as if man were
necessarily to be cured, as he was first made, by Gods handy Work. Nothing
would serve him but the hand: The other trembled in touching his Garment, yea
the hem of his Garment, the lowest inch, acknowledging his power to lie there
as well as in his hands.

Behind she came, not thinking to decline the eye of Christ, but the eye of
man; for man uses to abhor all sores, but God loves to cleanse them. She
could not hope to be cured in such a manner, unless she believed the Physician
could see in secret, and hear in Silence. In God there is neither behind, nor
below: the body of Manhood has parts, the Godhead is purely simple, the same
on every side, and eye all over; the power whereof is neither diminished in
Manhood, nor degraded in the Skirt of the garment. Thus, after a modester way,
she presented her self to the eye, which she seemed to decline: by the back she
came to the face, by the outward garment to the breast within, by the garments
hem to the top of the head. Chrysolo.
Manu vestimentum, fide Deum; the garment she touched with her hand, and God
with her faith. I may be bold to aver, that by a modest belief in means so
weak and remote she far out-passed not only the Ruler, but the Apostles
themselves, who too much doted on bodily evidence. Thomas the Apostle would not
believe Christ was risen, Joh. 20.25.
unless he lay his hand on his side, and thrust his finger into the wound; as
it were compelling his Savior to suffer once more after his resurrection. But
this meek Woman was satisfied with the lowest, and most outward token of cure,
not considering the garment so much as the Wearer, contenting her self with the
farthest Beam of an infinite Majesty, because it cannot faint by degrees, nor
grow weak by distance, nor be defiled by her unclean touch. For if the Sun by
fingering dung with his Beams can suffer no pollution, much less the Suns
Inlightner. And if our Physicians think it no disgrace to handle a sore, but an
honor to cure it, surely the Heavenly Physician is strong of the same mind,
because he came from Heaven not only to heal our bodily wounds, but to cure
the sin of the Soul: Sin it self when it turns to a wound, that is, when it
hangs upon us against our wills, and is not embraced, then it moves not his
anger, but his pity; the sinner shall be punished, but he that is sore and sick
of sin shall be cured. This made the Woman so confident as to draw near, and
yet in the manner of her approach she did not forget her modesty; she came
behind silently, touched his garment gently, and reverently, the hem of it
right humbly; the least sense of Grace, the lowest dram of mercy, would
suffice her. She came like a religious Theif, stealing favor, enriching her
self without her Masters detriment, not choosing, but taking that which was
next at hand, laying hold on no more then what she might carry away with the
Owners leave, and assistance.

The words in the Text afford no color, not the least touch that any part of
Christ's garment could work miracles. First, it is not thy Touch, but thy Faith
has made thee whole. Euk, 8, 46. the Sovereign Power is attributed to his
Person, not to the hem of his vestment; and therefore Christ there said, that
virtue proceeded not out of his garment, but (...), out of one. Salmerons
conceit is wide, that the God of Nature might give as well the virtue of
healing to that coat of his, as to the Loadstone a natural efficacy of
attracting Iron. For if it were as natural for Christ's Coat to heal, as for
the Loadstone to attract, then the virtue should have shined, it should have
been conspicuous no less at one time then another. It would have been inherent,
inseparable from the garment: And so the Soldiers, which parted it, the people
which trod on it, ought to receive some benefit as well as the Woman. But no
powerful influence was derived to them; the Lords own words are partly
interrogative, Who is it that touched me? Luke 8. v. 45. And partly positive,
Some one has touched me, v. 46. which made the Disciples, as if they had been
posed, to reply to him: Thou see? the whole multitude throng thee, and yet
ask thou who touched thee? Gregory the Great tells us, it is no Paradox in
Divinity to say they thronged him, and yet they did not touch him. For many
pressed him with their bodily presence, who never touched him with their
hearts, because in their devotion they were merely absent from him: The hand of
the Soul, and not of the body, apprehends and touches Christ for our good. It
was not the fingring of his garment, but her faith which went along with her
finger that touched him to make her whole.

But admit she was healed by the touch of Christ's garment, the Rule of the
School informs us, Privilegia personalia non trahuntur in exemplum, Personal
privileges, are not to be patterns of imitation. And therefore, though it
pleased our Savior to use some external signs and rites in curing the infirm,
yet we have no commission that we should do the like by touching of Relics.
What if the dead man, which touched the bones of Elisha, was restored to life,
2 King. 13. and many were healed of their diseases, at the monuments of
Martyrs, the Devil, as Saint Jerome tistifies, roaring and yelling in those
hallowed places? Yet this was not done that any should put confidence in their
relics, but it was the pleasure of the Almighty by these testimonies, which
then were needful, to commend to us the Doctrine, and faith of his Servants. It
was not because Elisha's bones had any power in them to revive the dead, but
the Lord did raise from the dead him as touched those dead bones, to declare
the Holiness of his Prophet.

Neither is it a well weighed reason, because heretofore miracles were wrought
at the Saints shrines, therefore now we should expect the same. Nascenti
Ecclesiae data sunt, non constitutae; they were not dispensed to those which
believed, but believed not. At the first planting of the Gospel; God wrought by
the hands of Holy men to establish the authority, and to gain credit to the
Gospel, then newly published, and not to accompany their Relics in these
Sunshine days, the sound of the Gospel being already gone into the uttermost
parts of the World. So that concerning miracles now much bragged of, I may say,
as Saint Austine sometimes said of the miracles of the donatists, aut sunt
figmenta mendacium hominum, aut portenta fallacium Spirituum; they are either
the bold inventions of Juggling Impostors, or the vain delusions of infernal
Spirits. For this particular of my Text we have it written, it was not the
manual touching of his garment, but the spiritual touch by faith which made her
whole; Thy faith has made thee whole.

Had our Savior said, my Power has made thee whole, he had magnified his own
virtue, but not commended to her the means to make use of it. And therefore to
show how he esteems of faith above all other graces, he empties himself to
fill it with honor, saying, Thy Faith has made thee whole. It is without all
question, that the Power of Christ wrought the cure effective, as the Prime
Agent, yet has faith concurred dispositive, the Patient was incapable of her
health without the performance of this condition by the work of the Holy Ghost
in her. For though his saving power be ineffably great, yet he has made an
order modo ordinario, ordinarily it shall extend to none but such as are
believers; the effect is known only in them; (...), is Saint Marks phrase,
Mark. 6. v. 6. He could not do any powerful work in his own Country, in respect
of their unbelief, that put the Obex, and made the damme.

My intent is not to afflict your Ears with a long winded discourse concerning
Faith: Let who will find leisure to weave a curious Spiders Web, in differing
a former and a later Love in God; I desire no more leave then to tell you in a
word, that I conceive Love in God to be one most simply, as himself is most
simply One, Entire, and Radical in Christ, accounting it with Luther, on the
Galathians, a horrible thing once to think on God, without Christ.

As for those fruitless Contentions about Faith and Works, if moderate men had
the steering of them, there would not be so much ado. This we safely say, Then
only they are themselves, when they are together: For Works without Faith,
make but a Pharisaical Hypocrite; and Faith without Works, styles thee a
Carnal Gospeller. I confess, their Functions be diverse, yet they must dwell
both in one Soul, as Mary and Martha did in one House. It is fit, that every
thing does stand in it is proper Charge and Office, yet must every thing need,
in some respect, the Society of an other. A Queen, though in her State and
Royalty she be alone, goes not without her Train, her Mayors of Honor. We may
observe it in Nature: The Root sucks of the Ground, the Body receives of the
Root, the Branch takes of the Body, and the Fruit shoots out of the Branch;
These successively accompany, and go together: So Faith grounds upon Christ's
Passion, that gives the Sap of Love, and Love blossoms forth in Works. In
Faith then, be constant; in Love, fervent; in Works, diligent. By Faith in
Christ, this feeble woman is cured in a minute, whom humane Art could not
recover in twelve long years.

This Example shows, it is likely our own fault, or our own neglect, that we
lie so long languishing under such tedious infirmities, when Faith, and
obvious, or easy endeavor, can cure so quickly; For the Virtue of Christ, may
now be touched as well in his Sacrament, as heretofore in his Garment: His
Divinity is still as near, and his Appendixes nearer. Christ is not wanting to
us, but we to him, and our selves. Do you wonder that the woman was cured by
the touch of Christ's Garment? It might be so easily, for you may read, in the
fifth of the Acts, verse. 15. that the sick were laid in the streets, to be
cured by the very shadow of his Apostle Peter. See Mat. 17.20.
To remove a Sin, or a disease by Faith, is nothing so hard, as to remove a
Mountain.

I shall not strain the Allegory, in applying it to an humble invasion of
Mercy, when we lie sick under a like Flux of sin, for it fuits naturally.

The Garment of Christ, is an Emblem of his Humanity, wherewith the Godhead is
said to be clothed, and habited, Philip. the second; He was found in Habit as
a Man: And this Habit of his Humanity, is the Conduit of his Mercy, because in
the Flesh, he reconciled the World to himself: so that to touch his Garment,
is to lay hold on his Mercy. So much God himself has signified in the
sixteenth of Ezekiel, I saw thee polluted in thine own blood: I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood, Live: and, as it follows, I spread my Skirt over
thee. Then the hem of his Garment, signifies the precious Drops of our
Redemption, which ran down like Aarous Ointment from his wounded Head, to the
Skirts of his clothing: Or, if you will, it signifies the Dew of Grace
descending from the top of Christ's Divinity, to the touch of his lowest Members
on Earth. Wherefore, from the touch of this Woman, you may gather these
Lessons.

A repayring to Christ for Mercy, though our sinful Sores, our bloody Fluxes,
and frail Diseases, run upon us never so grievously: For the Son of Man came
not to destroy, but to save sinners.

Next, Humility in our approach, esteeming our selves far unworthy to stand
before him, who are so defiled in our own corrupt sight, and in the sight of
equal sinners.

The Crumbs of his Table, the Hemme of his Garment, his Shooe-latchet, the least
of his Mercies, is too good for our Betters.

Lastly, a submissive Confidence in those Conveyances of Mercy, which lie next
before us, though they seem never so common, and despicable in humane sight;
such are the Elements of water and wine in the Sacraments, the foolishness of
preaching the Gospel. Naaman, 2 Kings 5.10. must purge his Leprosy in Jordan,
though the River of Damascus be as good: Joash, 2 Kings 13.11. must smite the
Assyrian, by smiting the Ground, though the blow touch not the Enemy. Our
Savior was pleased to cure the blind with Clay and Spittle, though both seem
hurtful to the sight.

What should we look for Extraordinary Revelations from Heaven? are not these
easy and simple Conduits of Grace, which convey so great benefit, sufficient
Miracles? We must not consider the quality of the Elements and Organs, but the
Virtue of him, whose Ordinance has given them a Supernatural use, when rightly
they are performed. Remember the Example of this woman, who desired only to
touch his Garment, saying then, I shall be whole; and as she believed, so it
came to pass; by Faith in CHRIST, she is cured in a trice.

To conclude: When we feel Christ to be touched by us to the purpose, Let Us
come forth, and appear before men, that Glory may be given to the Author. For
our Saviors intent, by enquiring after her Person, (whom he needs must know,
seeing he was not ignorant of the secret Fact) was this: To publish the
work, and to set it forth for Gods Honor, and the Spectators Instruction,
that all might partake the benefit of the recovery, which one had gained.

We therefore, who have gotten health to our souls by touching Christ with a
lively Faith in his sacred Ordinances, do pour out our Hearts, and all that is
within us, in giving thanks unto thy Name, O Thou most Highest. Thou have made
us glad through thy Works, and we will rejoice in giving Praise for the
Operations of thy Hands; We will be telling of thy loving Kindness early in
the Morning, and of thy Truth in the Night-season: We will declare thy Name
to our Brethren, and in the midst of the Congregation we will fall down and
Worship thee, crying with a loud Voice, Salvation to our God, which sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb: Blessing and Glory, and Wisdom, and
Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, be to our God for ever, and ever. Amen.

Mat. 26. Last part of the last Verse. And he went out, and wept bitterly.


SERMON. X.
PRAYERS and Tears have ever been accounted the Church-Weapons against all the
Enemies of her Peace and Prosperity. We are here met this day, to celebrate
it, as it ought to be, with Weeping, Mourning, Fasting, and Praying, that the
Cry of our Supplications and Tears, may outcry that of our Sins, and derive a
blessing to this Monthly Fast: To help so Religious a Work, I have chosen a
Text, which (without affectation to use the Apostles words, Phil. 2.10.) holds
forth a Lesson of Saint Peter's Contrition: it being my duty to tell you, how
the Lord expects, that Peter's humiliation should be a Motive of our
Reformation, which consists in being ashamed and confounded, that we should sin
against so good a God.

The case in brief, was this: The Apostle justly feared he had not only
kindled the Fire of his Masters Wrath by denying him, but fuelled it too, by
for-swearing him; and therefore, that he might not fall into that Fire, which
will hereafter prove unquenchable, he does here quench it with his Tears; and
lest the Lord should set his mis-doings in order and battle array before his
Face, he makes haste to prevent the thunder of his Anger, by punishing in
himself the Offense he had committed; that so God, who was injured by him,
might he righted on him; and this was the cause, HE WENT OVT, AND WEPT BITTERLY.

Wherein we may observe the quality of the person formerly offending, Peter, an
eminent Apostle; the manner of his Conversion, couched in these two
Circumstances, went out, and wept: The going out argued, that he loathed the
lewd Company of the sinful; his weeping, is an evidence that he abhorred his
own sin. And here we have the order and process of his Renovation; First, he
went out, and then wept. And secondly, so soon as he went out, he wept. In the
last place, is set down the great Measure, and high degree of his sorrow, he
wept bitterly.

It is remarkable, that the infirmities of Peter, are more upon the file, then
any of all the Apostles, as if his Lapses were left as Cautions, that none, in
a puff of Pride, should soar aloft above others, in regard of priority. In his
frailty, we all may behold, as in a Mirror, the plain image of our own
imbecility. For if the Lion be vanquished, what shall become of the little
Lamb? Green VVood will warp and shrink, if seasoned Timber hold not out:
slender Trestles must give way, when stronger Pillars bend. If Peter, whose
Faith was supposed to be strong as a Rock, did notwithstanding waver, and reel
to and fro like a rolling Stone, it behooves us to look to our feet, which stand
upon a more slippery ground. Indeed, it is the delusion of the seducing Spirit,
to propose the exorbitances of Gods Saints, not for our humiliation, but
imitation, as if we could hide our wickedness under the Vail of their holiness.

Hence was it, that the gods of the Gentiles were for the most part found
criminous, that men might thence think they sinned by Authority: and having
known by long experience how much he has thrived by this Project, he still
keeps it up, he is most busy in sifting Peter, in laying open to the Eye the
imperfections and blemishes of those, which are above us, that so the eminence
of their Persons, may make good their Vices, and draw their Examples into
Rules. To which purpose, the self same Text which forbids sin, shall, by his
mis-applying Sophistry, maintain us in sinning: Because Peter fell so
hainously, his Example shall make the secure Sinner to hug all superfluity of
naughtiness, and to run on in the same excess of riot, deceiving his own Soul.
But his fiery darts do sometimes more heal then hurt; the remembrance of his
former Wiles, work in the penitent, a detestation of his hellish practice; and
makes his profane delight, his godly sorrow.

Thus Hell helps to Heaven, the Devil against his will turns Physician to
Peter: for the foyl he received, resolved him into sanctified Tears, so that he
gained more by weeping, then he lost by sinning. The Church reads his Story, as
a Rule of Circumspection, and not of Presumption; as an Argument of Fear, and
not of boldness in sinning; as a Motive to his Repentance, and not to his
denial; for to this end it follows, he went out.

He did well in going out; company does hinder us to parley with our sins, and
to enlarge our Meditations. There Is no such time for a man to reconcile
himself, to make his own Atonement and peace with God, as when he is alone;
then he may fully bewail and bemoan, even beshrew and shrive himself unto the
Lord. Therefore, holy men of old, when they went about to make a fearch, and as
it were a quest of inquiry throughout the sinful corners of their Conscience,
still retired themselves, coveting to be alone, and sequestered from the Crowd.
Isaac, when the evening drew nigh, went out alone into the Fields, and poured
forth his Orizons, Genesis 24. Jonas, preparing himself to mourn, sits not still,
but went out of the City, and being alone, freely disburdened his breast into
the Bosom of God, Jonas 4. When was it that Jacob wrastled with an Angel, and
prevailed for a blessing, but being solitary, private, and left alone? Genesis 32.
when Gods will was that Abraham should have the Execution of certain
Ordinances, which himself had appointed, he caused him first to remove out of
his Country, and to separate from the Distractions and disturbance of worldly
Conversation, Genesis 12. He took Moses up to the top of Mount Sinai, and strictly
commanded that none should presume to approach the Mount, while he vouchsafed
to commune with him, Exodus 19. How often did our Savior withdraw himself from
the multitude, and went out into the Mountains, the Deserts, and such solitary
places, to pray unto his Father? Wherefore, when God stirs thy heart, and makes
it in a weeping case, (that is) apt, and inclined to shed Tears, with Peter, go
out into some convenient place, which may witness thy Tears, as well as it has
done thy Sin; and where thou may freely vent thy sorrow and Contrition,
without fear or suspicion of Vainglory, without interruption or avocation from
those sad and serious Contemplations, which make thy soul to bleed within. So
Joseph, Genesis 42.24.
when his affection was enflamed toward his Brethren, makes haste to get
himself into a private room, where this passion of love might more freely vent
it self.

It cannot be denied, but such, who can well away with a solitary kind of
life, have many opportunities to serve the Lord, which others have not; and
have not many imperfections of the World, which others have. This made diverse
voluntarily to relinquish their Crown, their Scepter, their Royal Robes, and to
dedicate themselves to a Cloisters privacy, that they might live, as they
thought, more acceptably to God. Yet I would not have you so to come out of
Company, that you make a sullen segregation from all Society, as Ermites do in
their Caves and Dens; for Temptations are, and may as well be, in the Deserts,
as in public Places. Christ being alone in the Wilderness, and fasting too,
was tempted, Mat. 4. So that it is impossible for a man to avoid Temptations,
yea, though he went out of the World, except he left his heart behind him
also. Gratian says well, Non loco, vel ordines, Creatori nostro nos proximos
faciant: Distinct. 40. c. Non Loca.
There Is no one Calling, state or condition of Life, that simply of it self,
does engratiate us with our Maker; but the answer of a good Conscience, is that
which procures his Favor: He that has a daily care to preserve this, may live
as well in a City, as in a Cell. For a lesser stick may fire a Billet, and the
poorest good Companion will do thee some good. But the place Peter quitted, was
not the Temple, but the High Priests; he brake not company with those who
professed Christ, but with such as persecuted him; it was from them he went out.

And it was high time he should so do; for himself is a sad instance, how
meetings and manners do often assimilate and sympathize. When Augustus perceived
grave Senators talking with Livia, but riotous Youths with his Daughter Julia,
he concluded, says Suetonius, the one to be light, and the other staid. Can
any one continually handle Pitch, and yet have none cleaving to his hands? It
was an extraordinary Commendation which Tully gave to Murana, that living among
the luxurious Asians, he was not infected with their effeminacy. Laus illi
tribuenda est, non quod Asiam viderat, sed quod in Asia continenter vixerat.
Ulysses is urged as a rare President of temperance, that he kept himself sober
in Circe's Celler. And it is one of the pious Elogies of the Church, that she
flourishes like a Lilie among Thorns, Cant. 2.
because they are but few that are entire and whole, able to stand upright
amidst the sharp pressures of a crooked Generation, as Lot in Sodom, or like
Fish in the salt Sea, that can retain their sweetness even there: It Is a
matter of as much difficulty to live innocently among evil doers, as to swim
against the violence of a stream. Metaphys. l. 1. c. 16.
Aristotle notes it of his Master Plato, That abiding long with the
Pythagoreans, he learned of them many erroneous Opinions. Julian, in
profession, sometimes a Christian, by conversing with Libanius and Maximus,
Sozomen. l. 5. c. 2.
became an Apostate. The Hebrews, dwelling among the Idolatrous Egyptians,
which worshipped an Ox, says Herodotus, L. 2.
did imitate them so near, that they worshipped a Calf; and pitching but a
while in the plain of Moab, they sacrificed to Baal-Peor, and ate the offerings
of the Dead. This made Saint John so cautelous, Joh. 2. Ep. 1. 1. v. 10, 11.
that in his second Epistle, he will not allow so much time as may serve to
salute, or bid a dangerous Heretic good speed, lest by using that sign of
familiarity toward him, we be partakers of his sin, and so consequently of his
punishment. As is his precept, so was his practice: for coming into a bath, and
spying Cerinthus in the same, he suddenly, says Eusebius, Elb. 3.
leapes back, crying to his Associates, Let Us go hence, lest the bath fall on
us, while the Enemy of Gods truth is with us. Lot is to hasten out of Sodom, if
he will not be burned; and Peter must come out of Caiaphas retinue, before he
can come to himself.

For though it be not shame to deplore our sins in the appearance of men, so
long as we do it not that it may appear to men; yet Saint Paul's Decorum, 1 Cor.
14.40.
Let all things be done DECENTLY and in order, will the better dispose us to
Devotion. In the great mourning of Jerusalem, Zachary tells us, Zach. 12.22.
That the Family of every Tribe was set apart, and their Wives apart. My soul,
says Jeremiah, Lamentations the eighth, shall weep for them in secret places.
I pour out my heart by my self, says the Psalmist, Psalm 42. The man truly
humbled, is described in the third of the Lamentations, to sit alone, and to
keep silence: for good Motions are restrained and quenched in the stir and
noise of much people. It is as clear as the Sun, that a solitary and private
place, is the fittest to work us to Compunction: We see the effect of it in
Peter; for so soon as Christ's gracious look called him home again, he demurred
no longer, but at once left his sinful company, and his own sin too.

True Repentance is early,, not dilatory: A green Wound is to be taken in hand
presently; for if it be suffered to fester and wrankle, the Cure will not prove
so easy. Hence is it, when a true Penitent is thoroughly awaked, as Peter here,
he is forthwith struck with a holy horror, he presently bestirs himself, never
suffers his eyes to sleep, nor his Eyelids to slumber, till he has made his
peace with God by serious humiliation. The survey and view of his sin, works in
him a reformation of his Life, which the Baptist calls (...), The worthy fruits
of Repentance; it brings him to such an Indignation and Zeal, that he is much
troubled in his deportment. We may behold it in this humble Penitent: for so
soon as he set foot in the Palace, he hastes back into the Porch; and at last,
finding no resting place there, he went out, and wept; which is the sign of
his Conversion.

There Is nothing does purchase God's favor, more then the Tears of Contrition;
for though they are not meritorious causes, yet they are pregnant signs of
Grace, and sanctified means to compass God's Mercy in on every side. The Lord
accepted the Offering of Eliah, drowned in waters, when he would not look upon
the Oblation of Baals Priests, though it was sowz'd with their own blood, 1
King. 18. And so the sacrifice of a broken and weeping heart, is more pleasing
in his sight, then the giving up our bodies to the Sword. In the Creation, the
Holy Ghost lay, and in a holy sense brooded on the waters. In the new Creation
of a Convert, the same holy Spirit moves still on the waters of Repentance. He
makes such an account of them, that he puts them up in his Bottle, writes them
in his Note-book, as it seems by the Psalmist; so many Tears, for so many
Sins, now discharged and crossed.

It is not Heresy to say, That so often as we bemoan our sins, so often we are
rebaptized; our own tears are the Element to purge the stains of pollution.
When all Flesh was corrupted, God sent the water of that great Flood upon the
earth, as a Remedy to cleanse it: and if we let the Flood of relenting Tears to
overflow our hearts, it will mortify all carnal Concupiscence, and make
fruitful the barren Field of the Soul: so that tears are as necessary to
Christians, as the Waters to the Earth. A Land that is never watered, brings
nothing forth but Weeds and Thistles; and the Soul will be unfruitful in good
works, which is not watered with these natural showers. Our Savior tells us,
Luke 18.17.
Unless we be as little Children, we shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. You know that Children have no other VVeapon to defend themselves
withal, but Tears; and with those likewise must we be armed, if we will
prevail against the Adversary. Pharaoh was drowned in the water of the Sea,
and we have no other Ocean to overwhelm our spiritual Pharaoh in, but our own
salt Sea of Tears. David was a Miracle in weeping, he mingled his Drink with
his Tears; he did so drench himself therein, that he made his Bed swim in
Tears; he was so affected with grief, that he changed even the course of
Nature, delighting in no society, but compared himself to a Pelican in the
Wilderness, Psa. 102.6.
whose nature is ever to have Tears trickling down her Bill; to an Owl of the
Desert, and to a Sparrow that sits alone upon the house top. 102.7.
A man would think Jeremiahs head was all on fire, and that nothing could
quench it but a torrent: O, says he, Jer. 9.1.
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a Fountain of tears! We shall not
find in any of the Evangelists, that Christ laughed at any time, but of his
weeping we have often mention. He bedewed the way before us, to signify that he
treads just in his steps, who carries always the sorrow of his bitter passion
before his eyes; which is my last part, he high degree of Peter's grief; in that
he twept bitterly.

Those bitter Tears, must needs flow out of the bottom of a heart thoroughly
broken; they did testify he went out, to speak in his own terms, 2 Pet. 3.9.
(...), to retire to Repentance. Gall and Vinegar was our Saviors bitter Potion
on the Cross; and the same, in a mystical sense, must be ours, if we will
crucify the old Man. Hence it is, we read in the Scripture of Lu. 18.
knocking our stony hearts, of Jer. 31.
smiting the Thigh, 2 Samuel 13.
tedring the hair, wringing the hands, Joh. 3.
putting on sackcloth, Job 42.
strewing Ashes, Dan. 16.
howling, and lying on the ground. For these significant Rites and Ceremonies,
express true Repentance; which, if they be used in sincerity and simplicity,
and not in a superstitious, dissembled, perfunctory Hypocrisy, will be
powerful with the Almighty.

A penitent sinner is to use severity against himself. Holy Bernard says
truly, In quantum non peperceris tibi, in tantum Deus tibi parcit: In how
little thou do spare thy self, by so much the more God will spare thee

The coming of the Lord into our humbled Souls, may be resembled by his
appearance to Eliah. First, there came a mighty strong Wind, 1 King. 19.15. etc.
that rent the Mountains, brake the Rocks: After the wind, came an Earthquake;
after that, a fire; and last of all, came a soft and still voice. So the Lord
appears to the mortified Christians; First, by the Wind of his Wrath, breaking
his Spirits; then by the Earthquake of his Indignation, shaking his Soul; then
by the Fire of his displeasure, smoking his Conscience: but in the end, by the
still Voice of his Mercy, he refreshes his drooping heart.

It is not erroneous Doctrine, to say, We must, after a sort, be in hell,
before we can be capable of Heaven: That is, in the hell of an ashamed,
affrighted, and confounded Conscience, before the Lord will speak unto us, that
he is our Redemption. It Is recorded of Christ, that in the days of his Flesh,
he offered prayers and supplications, with strong cries and tears, Heb. 5. He
did not only cry, but strain himself with vehemence; that we might know, it
is not the faint, but the violent bitter cry, which lays hold on Heaven.
Peter did abound in sobbing and lamentation, Lament. 2.
letting tears run down like a River: Yet, as one says of his weeping, Invenio
quod flevit, non invenio quid dixit: Though I find he wept, I do not find
what he said: his tears did supply the defect of his speech, they were more
energetical, more persuasive, then any words. These are the best Orators to
plead and intercede for Remission before the Throne of Grace, like rain, they
penetrate more profitably, by falling without noise.

If any find himself to be (...), of such a dry brawny temper, that he is unapt
to weep: if his eyes be like to the Mountains of Gilboah, on which neither Dew
nor Rain did fall; yet let him cry with his heart, and that will be
Taciturnitas Clamosissima, a silence that speaks loud in the Ears of our
Redeemer. The groans of the poor Publican, pierces Heaven more then the noise
of the talking Pharisee. When Israel, at the Red Sea, was environed with
Enemies behind, with Rocks and Hills on each side, the Text says, They made a
doleful howling to the Lord, but Moses held his peace: yet in the issue,
Populus clamabat, and non audiebatur; tacebat Moses, and audiebatur; the people
cried, and were not heard; Moses held his peace, and was heard. Why do thou
cry unto me? says God, Exodus 14. v. 15. when he uttered never a word, nor made
any noise we read of, only his heart cried, and that was it the Searcher and
Observer of hearts listened unto. So that the compunction of the fluent melting
heart, is absolutely necessary to unfeigned repentance.

To this contrition in heart, the School adds confession in word, and
satisfaction in work. Take away the Leven of Popery from those two acts (that
is) their absolute necessity, and dignity of merit, and for ought I yet see, we
go so far: confession to the Lords Minister, the Archbishop Usher admits in
some cases, as Medicinal, not as Sacramental. In answer to a Jesuit.
Such as cannot quiet their own breasts, must be pressed to unbosome, and
uncase their conscience; to open and discover their spiritual wounds to their
ghostly Physician, for their further Instruction. When the Sinner can find no
ease at home, what should he do but use the best means he can to find it
abroad? Yet a Penitent which confesses his faults daily in humble
supplications, that shows his groans, and sends up Lamentations from the depth
of the Soul to God alone, who sees the things that are in secret; If he reform
his Excesses, and cease from his former sins for the time to come, no necessity
can absolutely bind such a one to bring himself upon the stage, or to confess
each particular to a Priest for obtaining remission. His remedy is within
himself; his own internal repentance will gain him access to his Savior.

As for Canonical satisfaction, the Church in the days of Yore had power to
proportion penance according to the quality of the offense. See Caranza, c. 31.
or 37.
The primitive discipline did thus measure the delinquents humiliation during
the time of their enjoined punishment: some were called Andientes, because they
might only stay the Sermon. Council. Agath. Con. Nice. Cypri. l. 3.
Others were styled Orantes, in that they might be present at the Prayers, but
not at the Eucharist. If any in the time of persecution had denied the faith,
though it were much against their will, yet they were to undergo a bitter
penance, and that was to continue three years at least. Some had it prolonged
ad Magnum Diem, even till the hour of their death, as appears Can. 6. council.
Ancyrani: our Church of England allowed greater mitigation and relaxation from
the former severity, condescending, like an indulgent Mother, to the weakness
of her children, lest some should rather hazard the loss of heaven, then endure
such a rigor by a public acknowledgment of their transgressions. And herein
the proceeding was prudent: Gratian. 1. did. de pan.
for apud Deum non tantum valet mensura temporis, quam doloris; God regards not
the Length but the Strength of our repentance; not the Time, but the Truth of
our contrition. Yet the Ecclesiestical Story presents some to our view, who
voluntarily afflicted themselves in a great measure, and high degree, by
watching whole nights, lying on the hard earth: which being used without any
superstitious opinion of merit, or satisfaction, I cannot disallow.

Irenaeus tells us of a Woman seduced by Mark the heretic, L. 5.8.27.
which did so bewail her offense, that her life and laments did end together.
Natalis, the heretical Bishop in Eusebius, puts on Sackcloth, and ashes, and
falling down before the feet of the Bishop with uncessant tears, and sighs,
implores a pardon. L. 3. c. 11.
Ecebolius in Socrates Prostrates himself to the feet of the Passengers,
crying, Tread me, tread me under your feet; for I am the unsavory Salt. L. 1.
de panit. c. 16.
Saint Ambrose gives us a Catalogue of many, who macerated and withered their
cheeks with weeping, and by continual abstinence made their living bodies the
very image of Death. These did conform themselves to the place of their
habitation; and seeing the world was nothing else to them but the valley of
Bochim, of Weepers, like mournful Doves, they spent their lives in relenting
tears, that thereby they might discharge and blot out the bill and
handwriting, which was on record against them.

Thus I have given a rude draught of the limbs and branches of the unfallible
signs of an unfaigned humiliation. But what of all this? What is my Illation?
It is the same, which Saint Austin infers upon that to the Romans.

For where the Apostle says, Romans 8.28.
All things work together for the best to those that love God; the holy Father
is bold to conclude, Etiam peccata, Domine; yea even our sins, Lord, do that
too. For do they not make for our good, when thereby we become more humble,
more devout, more wary in our conversation? Saint Ambrose observes, that Peter's
faith was stronger after his fall, then before; as a broken bone well set, is
the faster. Hence it is that the Angels triumph with such an exceeding joy for
the conversion of a notorious sinner, because such a one effectually reclaimed,
becomes more displeased, more fallen out with himself for his sins then any
other. None more fearful of relapses, none more careful and sincere in Gods
service then he. The Soul of Jonathan was not so knit to David, as his is to
the son of David. The general drift and desire of his heart, is in nothing
willingly to sin against God, but in every thing to approve himself before him.
Upon this ground Bernard makes repentant eyes the Angel's Cellars, and penitent
tears their sweetest Wines, because they make them glad for the benefit which
thereby accrues. Therefore for the comfort of true penitents, Christ after his
resurrection appeared first to Mary Magdalen, and to Peter, who of grievous
sinners proved the soundest converts. The one never left mourning for her sins
till she left the world; and the other, as it is storyed of him, every night
about the crowing of the cock, did rise, and pray with continual tears. The
holy Apostles fluxed eyes should be Sermons unto ours; and his weeping for his
denying, must put us in mind of our denyals. For not to yield obedience to
what we know, what else is it then in effect to deny Christ? If ever you will
allot a time of tears, begin now while it is day, lest darkness overtake you,
and there be none to help you.

In these sad days of humiliation, every eye should shed forth tears, and all
faces gather blackness; that as we have spent our first days in sin, so may we
our last in sorrow. Is not wrath gone forth from the Lord, when the Dove, with
the Olive Branch, is flying from us? Who can wash his hands from those sins,
which have brought a public calamity upon himself and others? And therefore we
should be deeply affected with the smart of the Land. He that looks on sin, in
the mildest notion of it, shall find in it plentiful matter to fetch tears;
but he that weighs it more narrowly in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and takes
a view of all such passages as add to the hainousness of it, what is it that
can turn his eyes into a Fountain of tears, if this does it not? when a man
weighs with himself, that he has grieved the good Spirit of God, provoked so
merciful a Savior as Christ is, displeased so loving a Father as God has been
to him, that he has sinned against the experience and effects of Mercy,
against the reluctance and checks of his own Conscience, against his own Vows
and Resolutions to the contrary; how should this make his heart to bleed
within? Add hereunto, how at such a time when thou were in the Act of
uncleanness, of drunkenness, and the like, the just God might have sent thee to
Hell in the very Act; he might have made thy tongue to rot, the last Oath thou
did vainly swear. Many in hell have not sinned the sins we have done; and so
we might have been howling and yelling in everlasting burnings at this instant,
did not Gods pure Mercy deliver us. As then Elisha threw Salt into the waters,
Kin. 2.21.
to make them sweet, so let us season our prayers with salt tears, to make
them savory to the Lord.

Give us, we beseech thee, holy Father, the Springs above, and the Springs
beneath; the Springs of the heart, and the Springs of the eyes, to weep
bitterly and uncessantly for the sins of our Souls; that so, having our measure
of tears here, we may be freed from them without measure hereafter, and be
received into those ineffable Joys, which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has
heard, nor has entered into the heart of man to conceive. Grant this, good
God, we beseech Thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, our Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

Heb. 12. first part verse. 6. Whom the Lord Loves, he chastens.


SERMON. XI.
THe exigents of this life, were at the first only the wages of sin: but Gods
gracious mercy, which brought honey out of the Lions breast, Judge. 14.
turned also our wounds into a Plaster, and made that the remedy, which he
ordained to be the smart of our offense. Nor ought it seem strange that Gods
visitation should produce effects so mainly different, since the very same meat
in a wholesome body, turns to pure and solid nourishment, which in a
distempered stomach increases the malignant humor there predominant.
Howsoever then these benefits which redound to us by the severity of Gods
justice, may seem to be bestowed with a frowning countenance, yet the event
will show them wholesome arguments of his favor; For whom the Lord loves he
chastens. In which position are three points remarkable: First, The means,
which the divine Majesty uses to prove who be His; and these be Chastisements.
Secondly, the persons toward whom he uses these means, Whom he Loves, his
Sons: Lastly, The duty and practice how to demean our selves in this trial,
following by way of consequence; and that must be done in a patient submission
to the will of God, since his cha^^^sements are effects of his love. I begin
with the means, together with the prime Author and disposer thereof, namely the
Lord, HE chastens.

The Preacher has observed long since, That the race is not to the Swift, nor
the battle to the Strong, nor favor to men of Knowledge. Eccles. 3. And is
there no complaining in our streets, that they who are but Gregarii ordinis,
meanly gifted, to our thinking, are exalted, when others of known abilities are
kept low? In regard of this seeming confusion in the dispensing of earthly
movables, the Stoiques Dreamed all things to be governed by Fate, or Distiny;
the Epicures and Poets attributed the Sovereignty to Chance or Fortune. But
these pre-conceits were fictions and fables; the only wise God makes himself
the prime Author of all those pressures, which are incident to those that are
near and dear unto him. Hence is it that the prophetical writings seldom
mention an affliction, but the Author is annexed, I the Lord have done it. In
Amos 3. he makes it his business to persuade it. All things, says the son of
Syrach, are double, one against another, chapter 42.24, 25. and that for the good
of one another. V. 25.
Thus the dullness of cold serves to qualify and mitigate the eager activity of
the heat. If fullness has closed thy eyes aagainst the Divine light, scarcity
is at hand to open them, and to abate that tympany of pride, which prosterity
has engendered. To this end, I (...) the Almighty, form the light, and create
the darkness, Esaias 45. This was Typified in Ezechiels vision, chap. 1. For when
he saw the Majesty of God after the appearance of a Man, there were four Wheels
which moved before him, thereby signifying there is nothing done within the
compass of the round world, but the eye of Gods providence appears in it. If He
pronounce Fiat, or Corruat, help, or hurt, both Heaven and Earth obey him, As
a handmaid looks to the eye of her Mistress. Indeed we read, chap. 19. v. 1. of
Job, there came a great wind from the Wilderness, which so smote the four
corners of the house, where Job's Children were Feasting, that it fell on them
to their ruin: but the Psalmist declares it is the Lord which brings the winds
out of his treasures, Psalm. 135.7. Does David's enemies compass round about to
devour his Soul like a Lion that is greedy of his prey? Psalm. 17.5. Yet in that
very Psalm, where he prays against them, he acknowledges them to be the Sword
of the Lord, and the men of his hand, v. 13. 14.

Howsoever, that Innocence should every where be marked out to misery, at this
the Saints have often not marvail'd, but stood amazed. But marvail not at it, the
doors of the Israelites were all besprinkled with blood: affliction and sorrow
are the marks of the best, Greg.
Et licet occultum sit cum bonis male eveniat, and malis been; though it be a
secret my^^ry, that the good are distressed, and the ill prosper; yet it is a
greater secret, and God works more against course and kind, when ill men are
molested, and the good prosper. Whereas we read, Psalm. 2. Osculamini filium,
kiss the Son (i.) do honor and homage to the Son of God, some render it
apprehendite disciplinam, apprehend his discipline, obey his ordinances, submit
to his corrections: For to say truth, a man can hardly attain to a well-setl'd
peace, till he has been some way disciplined by the hand of Heaven.

It is not the method in Gods School, to bring us to Heaven by ease, and
flattery; there is no passage form interrupted joys on earth, to those
permanent felicities which are above. For the way we must tread is spread with
thorns, not roses; the gate we are to enter is narrow, and requires our earnest
endeavors to pass through it with a religious violence. For if it were
convenient that Christ should first suffer, and then enter into his Glory;
ought not we to take the like pains, and so follow him? You would think it a
strange Soloecism, that the General should lead the way with sighs and groans,
and his wanton Soldiers dance after him: that a sick and tormented head should
be furnished with a pampered body, with soft and delicate members. Mat. 16.24.
He that will be my Disciple, says Christ, must take up his cross, and follow
me. You see upon what conditions we are entertained; not as idle drones to lay
all on his neck; our own shoulders must smart also, and we take up his cross,
and follow him. Follow him, not to Jerusalem in triumph, but to the fatal
Garden, where he was arrested; and if he yet call, to mount Calvary, where he
was crucified.

God deals with us here, as we do with our own clothes, which we cut out into
several small parcels, before we make up into an entire and complete garment:
What then if our heavenly Father suffer us to be torn and rent asunder? It is
the better to fit us for that heavenly Robe, that our mortality may the easier
put on Immortality, and our Savior raise us to a second being, when he sees us
shattered into our first dust. They who in ordinary races contend for
masteries, harden their bodies by a strict diet, submit themselves to a severe
discipline, and with delight abstain from those meats which flatter their
palats. They are daily exercised, vexed, weakened; and the more oppressed with
labor, the greater hope they conceive of victory. It cannot then be, that
Christ should so much neglect his own Champions, as to leave them softened and
broken with sloth, who are to wrestle not with men or beasts, but with
Principalities, and Powers, and spiritual wickedness, and those in high Places.
Ierom is peremptory, Non potes transire a delitiis ad delitias, we must not
think to pass from the delights of this world directly and immediately to the
joys of the next. The children of Israel had many windings and turnings, much
encumbrances by deserts and Serpents, before they came to the Land of Canaan.
This typified our passage to the Canaan above. For the weakness of our nature
is such, that we grow proud, and thereby endanger the loss of our selves, if we
overmuch taste of Gods bountiful favors.

After that our Savior had commended Peter, Mat. 16.17.
saying, Blessed art thou Simon, for flesh and blood has not revealed that
unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven; Presently he became so hot and
forvvard on this favor, as quickly after he would needs seek to hinder our
Redeemer from his passion; presuming to say Master, Verse. 22.
pity thy self, this shall not be unto thee. And so when Moses savv it pleased
God to talk familiarly with him, he could not contain himself from further
presumtion, but enters into these words; I beseech thee show me thy Glory,
Exodus 33. To humble us then, and to bring us to the knowledge of our selves,
we are made vveak, our bones are often vexed, and bitter Wormvvood is mingled
with our honey; we being like a Damask-Rose, sweeter in the Still then on
the Stalk. Gods hand strikes his peculiar adherents like the Launcer of a
Surgeon, not to let out the Soul, but the imposthumed blood. His stripes carry
along a Sovereign healing Balsam: And so much is implied in the orginal word
of my Text; for (...), being derived from (...), notes such a discipline, which
a tender parent lays upon his deer child, and that is more to instruct then
correct. Man being in honor, has no understanding, says the Prophet David:
Psa. 59.20.
the same tune is sung by the Son of David, The prosperity of fools destroys
them. Prove. 1.
But a wiser then Solomon, intitles his patients heirs of eternal Blessedness.
No marvail then if the benefit be so great, that God bestows it only on whom
he loves, and admits none into the number of his Sons, but whom he chastens.
And so I proceed to the persons toward whom he uses these means of
Chastisements, Whom he loves.

Gods love is very large, and therefore the better to understand it, we must
see how it is distinguished. There is his General, and his Special love: By his
General love he loves the universality of the creature; for to love, is nothing
but to will well, and to do well to any. Now Gods goodness is over all; for
every thing has life, motion, and being from him. He preserves the very
beasts. Psalm. 36. But this manifold kindness, which he extends to all
indifferently, is so short of that special love wherewith he embraces the
elect in Christ, that when Saint Paul comes to consider it, he raises his
style, as wanting a word sufficient to express it: in Ephesians. 4.7. it is styled
great love, rich mercy, yea and more, the exceeding riches of his Grace. In
Ephesians. 3. it is described to be a Love incomprehensible; for in ver. 9. it is said
to Surpass knowledge. Hence is it that the Psalmist compares it to the love of
a Father, the Prophet Esaias prefers it before the tender bowels of a Mother, and
the Apostle in the (...) of the Text confirms this singular and superabundant
love of God. For (...), is derived from (...) vald^, and (...), acquiesco;
which instructs us, that God in the love of his Church finds a complacency, or
wellpleasingness, an oblectation, delight, or contentment. According to that in
Zephany 3.17. The Lord will quiet himself in the love of his Church, he will
rejoice over her with joy.

Nor ought it to stagger flesh and blood, that God suffers his Church to be so
tormented, if his entire love toward her be so great; for affliction is the
trial of a Christian: It is without Heresy, a true Purgatory on earth, wherein
good men are purified. For though fire consume straw, it purges Gold; and that
calamity which confounds the wicked, does but refine the godly. It strengthens
and confirms them, as blasts of wind increase the flame; and like Antaeus in
the Fable, the oftener cast down, the greater courage is regained. There Is
nothing more unhappy, then a man perpetually happy; It Is a sign such a one is
contemned of God as a coward, and unfit to war under his Banner. Alexander the
great made choice of the Stipendiarii his PENSIONERS, (...).l 1
for his prime Soldiers in his Persian expedition. And thus those who are Gods
Pensioners, enriched with his continual favors, are chosen to be his Triarii,
his courageous and constant Soldiers in the Church Militant; who when they are
bruised and crushed in the outward man, are yet so sound in the Inner man, that
like a firm Tower they stand unshaken for all the Devils battery. To these are
committed the hardest and most dangerous exploits, and so they cannot but count
themselves honored by the Lord of Hosts, who elects and esteems them worthy
for the noblest enterprises.

This is no new art: for if we run over the list of Saints from the beginning
of the World, we shall find God adopts none but such as know how to be
Wretched. In the first of days, rather then righteous Abel shall not suffer, a
Brother will be his executioner. Abraham, the friend of God, must first be
banished from his own Country, before thought fit to be a Citizen of Heaven. Is
not Jacob persecuted by Esau, as if affliction came by inheritance? Is not
Joseph also sold by his Brethren? Moses no sooner leaves the Court of Pharaoh,
but the world leaves him: what armies of mischief begirt him, when once it
appeared he made religion his profession? David a man after Gods own heart,
fought as many Battles with afflictions as with the enemies of Israel. The
pursuit of a cruel Master, the unnatural rebellion of a Son, the apostasy of
friends, and his own foul enormities, were means quick enough to keep him from
worldly content, and to rank him in the first place with those, who became
Worthies by affliction. If we proceed, we may behold that royal Prophet Esaias
divided with a Saw, Jeremy at once slain, and buried in a shower of stones;
Daniel, who fed their Souls with the word of the living God, made a prey for
Lions: and to conclude, what corner of the world is not made famous by the
several martyrdomes of the Apostles? So that I may truly call tribulation the
Physic of good men, which keeps them from the surfeit of Spiritual pride, and
vain confidence in their own ghostly strength. In their afflictions they will
seek me diligently, says God himself, Hosea 5. For when they feel the heavy
hand of God, and severely smart under his Rod, they are brought to an
acknowledgment of their sins, from which they might think themselves free, did
not some chastisement put them in mind of their desert. Besides, should the
ungodly live always in prosperity, it might be thought they loved Heaven for
their own ease, and served God more for his reward, then honor. So Satan
objected against Job, that he loved God because he gained by him, Job 1. But
affliction makes it appear, that their worship is not grounded upon temporal
respects, when they can adore him in the bed of sickness as cheerfully as in
the greatest calm of fortune; and are so far from tying their duties to his
outward respects, that in a down-cast estate they can renounce themselves for
him, who by withdrawing his hand seems quite to have forsaken them.

Again, should Christians want afflictions, their virtue would want matter to
feed upon; and like an active fire sadly decay, if the fuel be once
subtracted. Should they continually enjoy an interrupted felicity, what would
become of their fortitude, humility, patience, which had they not an Adversary
to grapple with, would be buried in sluggishness? No Rose springs without a
thorn; and moral Philosophy teaches us, there is no virtue but has a double
vice to encounter with. They say the Eagle exposes her young ones to the trial
of the Sun, the Goldsmith descries the Metal by the Touchstone, and God
approves or rejects his servants as commended by adversity. Are not the hottest
Spices brayed in a Mortar, that they may yield a more fragrant smell? And do
they not press the fairest and ripest Grapes, to bring forth their sweetest
juice? Ripe and full Ears are smitten with the Flail, to beat the corn out of
them, and the corn is grinded to make Flour. Whereupon Saint John professes,
chap. 16. In mundo pressuram habebitis: though ye be Gods chosen, ye shall have
pressures and grievances in this world, that God may be glorified amidst your
cheerful sufferings.

The Physician permits to those, whom he despairs to recover, a liberty of
their desires; but where hope of amendment may encourage his proceedings,
bitter potions are there administered, and the intemperate longings of an unruly
appetite most severely curbed: The beasts which are ordained for Slaughter, we
permit freely to range in the fruitfullest pastures, little regarding the
extraordinary thriving of those we accustom to Labor. Fruitful Vines are cut,
and Pruned, and dressed, while the luxurious branches of the barren are
reserved only for the fire. Do not then repine to see the wicked flourish;
they are men quite given over by the Physician of their Souls, and left to a
reprobate sense; they lie in Hell like sheep, Psalm. 49. and may fitly be
compared to the unhappy fig tree in the Gospel, not worth the care of manuring,
but subject to the final curse, and utmost neglect of the Husbandman. What
then if the God-forsaken-man spreads out his Plumes, and seems to check the Sun
in glory? Vice loves to seem glorious, yea more to seem then to be: And
indeed it had need to have some pleasure here, which has nothing but woe
hereafter. The world loves the vicious, and so will not punish them; God loves
them not, and therefore scorns to chasten them. He will not use the Rod where
he means to use the Sword, nor will he destroy the body where he means to
destroy the inward man. What remains then, but that we endeavor to bring forth
the fruit of tribulation, which is a patient submission under the hand of God,
since his Chastisements are effects of his love, the last part, by way of
Consequence? The Lord chastens whom he loves, therefore submit to his
Chastisements.

One would think there needs no great persuasion to patience, where
Chastisements are the effects of Love; but rather as the Species or Image which
issues from the Countenance into the Glass, is reflected into the eye of the
Beholder: so Gods love to us, should beget in us a love, which is reflected
upon him, the Author of all love; yea, Love it self. When the Heathen judged
the Christians unhappy, because they suffered poverty, spoil, exile, and the
like; Saint Austen answered, Now surely their case were miserable, if they
could be carried any whither ubi Creatorem suum non invenirent, L. 1. de Civ.
Dei.
where they might not find their Creators loving Protection. But so long as
Gods favorable Presence is with them, they cannot be unhappy: His torments are
certain benefits, and a sure way to Heaven. Hereupon Saint Paul accounts his
afflictions no less then the very dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also
of Jesus might be made manifest in his and our body, 2 Cor. 4.10. Indeed, when
I recount all his sufferings, and peruse the large Catalogue of them under his
own hand, 2 Cor. 11. In labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in
prisons more plenteously; in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness,
in perils among false Brethren; Good God! how many men, how many holy Paul's
seem there to be presented to me? is it possible one man should sustain an army
of afflictions? or, that one soul should encounter so many Crosses? Yes, what
cannot he endure as Christ's Beloved? what cannot he do in the power of him that
does all things? in the Virtue of Christ's Death, Saint Paul can tire and weary
out his Torments. He can prevent the fury of Death, by dying to himself; and by
mortifying his own flesh, like a dead Carkase, become insensible of a second
pain. Hence it is, that the Primitive Martyrs looked on Tyrants, Lions, Devils,
with undaunted Countenances, walked through Gaols, Gives and Hells, without
startling; yielded their Limbs to be mangled, their Joints to be racked, their
flesh to boiled in scalding Oils, and embraced Death with Cheerfulness: they
considered not quam poenam habuerunt in flagello, what smart they endured in
the scourge; sed quem locum in testamento, but what right and interest they had
in their heavenly Fathers Will. And therefore, if God wounded them, they
counted his VVounds the VVounds of a Friend, tending to their good. If he put
them to the Sword, they embraced that as an occasion of everlasting victory,
being fully persuaded that Death would be to them an entrance to Life, and a
passage to Immortality. They remembered to their Consolation, that when Steven
was stoned, he saw Heaven opened, and Christ at the right hand of his Father,
ready to receive him. When Elisha was beset with the Assyrians, he saw a Hill
of fiery Chariots in his Defense; and so, recording Gods unchangeable promises,
they reckon all the perplexities of this life, and the extremities of death it
self, to be but as Elisha's fiery Chariot to carry them to Heaven, or like
Lazarus soars, to send them to Abraham's Bosom. Thus did holy Chrysostom
comfort himself, when the Empress Eudoxia breathed out threatenings and
slaughters against him.

If, says the good Father, Chrysos. Epist. ad Cyriamon.
she will banish me, let her use her pleasure; the earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof. If she will throw me into the Sea, let her; I remember Jonas. If
she will cast me into the Furnace, I have the three Children encouraging my
patience. If she will expose me to wild Beasts, I remember Daniel, cast to the
Lions in the Den. If she will stone me, I have Steven the Proto-Martyr for my
Leader. If she will take off my Head, let her take it, I have the Baptist for my
pattern. If she will strip me of my Goods, let her dispose of them; Naked came I
out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return.

O, what a rare Virtue was it, thus to conquer himself, that misery might not
conquer him! How does this cheerful Resolution of that precious Saint, check
our cowarcise, who cannot endute in cold blood to lose a Limb with patience,
nor abide the short displeasure of some few odd minutes, without thinking
presently of Rebelling, or running away so soon as called to the field.

To prevent such an indiscretion, let us consider there is no greater sign of
discretion and grace, then to smart patiently and contentedly, to rest our
hearts in the Justice and VVisdome of God. For to struggle with afflictions,
does the more entangle our selves; and, as it falls out with the Bird in the
snare, it works rather our Captivity then Enlargement. Our Savior, when he
suffered that cruel shameful Death on the Cross, might have redeemed himself by
descending from the Tree; but he chused rather to exercise his patience, then
to show the greatness of his power: thereby lessoning us, that Sufferings are
greater trials then Actions.

If then the Lord shall cause the Sun to go down upon thee at Noon, as Amos
phraseth it, sending affliction in the midst of thy prosperity; if poverty come
upon thee like an armed man, startle not at it; if naked, be not dejected; thou
art then blessed, being miserable; and approved of God, though thus loathsome.
When the Angel of the Lord saw Josuah the high Priest stand before him in
filthy Garments, he caused them to be taken from him, and to be clothed with
change of raiment, Zach. 3. The more destitute you are, the more conformable
you are to the Author and Finisher of your Faith, who, at his birth, had no
better Cradle then a Cratch; in his middle age, without a house to put his head
in; and at his death, had not so much ground as would serve for the length of
his body, but Joseph of Arimathea is fain to put him in his own Sepulcher.

Is a malicious false gloss cast upon thy sincere Intentions, and public
Actions? Consider, the best cause does not always find the best patronage. Mary
Magdalenes admirable Zeal, is with Judas, loose prodigality. Good Saint Paul,
that heavenly Apostle, who, as Maximus speaks, learned among the Angels, what
he should preach among men; who brake many a quiet sleep, to break the word
aright to his people; for all his Graces and Labors, is hated, and esteemed an
enemy by his own Galatians; and yet, not long before, they were ready to pull
out their eyes to do him service.

Is thy good name blasted with the malignant gusts of detraction? Behold, says
the Prophet, Isaiah the eighth, I, and the Children whom the Lord gave me, are
as signs and wonders in Israel; yea, as Monsters, not worthy to live,
Zachariah the third. Christ before you, and for you, tasted the bitterness of
this Cup. What say the Jews of him? He is a Samaritan, and has a Devil. Is
Jobs Cross strange and extraordinary? his own Friends judge him a transgressor.
What remains then, but that in the extremity of all Outrages, which can be
committed against our upright dealings, we earnestly endeavor to obtain a firm
persuasion of Gods special Favor to our innocent persons; and then the sense
of his gracious presence, will soften and sweeten all our disquiet.

David, in Ziklag, was at a low Ebb, 1 Samuel 30. his Estate gone, his Goods
spoiled, his House burned; he was stripped of all outward Comforts, the Enemy had
got into Possession; the loss of their Children had so imbittered the People,
that they talked of stoning David, verse 6. yet, says the Text, He encouraged
himself in the Lord his God; he comforted his heart in the spring of comfort,
steeled and confirmed it with this Conclusion, That the Lord of Hosts, the God
of the Armies of Israel, was more able to help him, and fight his Battles, then
his greatest Enemies were able to dismay him. And according to his Confidence,
was his success; for there we read in the end, he recovered his Losses, and
quite subdued his Foes. And therefore, amidst all your fores, think not on your
own wounds, but your Redeemers: If Satan, by his Emissaries; should destroy
your bodies, he has done the like to your Lord and Savior; Phil. 1.29.
and to you it is given, not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer for his
sake. Tertullians advice shall close up all.

Learn to love and imitate the patience of God, who delays to revenge your
Sins; and the patience of Christ, who suffered for your Sins. Endeavor to repay
him that obedience which he has discharged for you; offer to him the patience
of Soul, and the patience of the Body, who expect from him in the general
Resurrection, a happy Reunion of Body and Soul: Which God mercifully grant us
in his due time, through the Merits of Christ, our Lord and Savior. Amen.

2 Cor. chap. 7. verse. 1. Having therefore these Promises, dearly Beloved, let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God.


SERMON. XII.
EVery Christian consists of a double person, a carnal and a spiritual; both
which are compounded of so diverse and contrary Elements, that though they are
joined in the same Breast, yet, like Jacob and Esau in the Mothers Womb, they
there struggle for the Victory: so that these Words present a Duel betwixt the
Soul and the Body; the success of which Combat determines that great
Controversy of Man's Salvation. If the Soul subdue the rebellious Flesh, then
are we redeemed from the slavery of sin, the Laws Bondage, and are made Heirs
of Gods promises in Christ. The better to prevail, the antecedent part of my
Text removes the evil; the conclusion persuades to perfection.

The manner of the Motive is by way of Compellation; dearly Beloved: the ground
of it, Evangelical Promises, having these PROMISES. And here the Apostle makes
us joint Purchasers with himself; having, or WE having, there is our interest
and just claim; let us cleanse, that is the propriety of the work; our selves,
there is the propriety of the persons; from filthyness, the matter to be wrought
upon; and that in the full latitude, from ALL filthyness, even of the flesh and
spirit, the parts and faculties which are infected. Lastly, our continual
progress therein, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. But before I enter
into this large field of matter, give me leave to salute you in this
Compellation, Dearly Beloved.

Religion does not make men rude, but civil; the Church has its Ethics, as
well as the School; good Language is not confined to the Court, we should hear
it from the Pulpit; for it is not Apostolical, if we quote a Text to usher in a
Libel. Has Saint Paul a Doctrine to be settled in the minds of a multitude? Is
he to pierce a heart that is sealed up with hardness? his Pen lies not steeped
in Wormwood, he comes not in a Tempest or Earthquake; but in a modest, quiet,
and mild temper, sweetning his words, and preparing their Ears with I BESEECH
you Brethren, by the mercies of God, Romans 12. I Paul my self BESEECH you by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. As an ambassador of God, I
BESEECH you in Christ's stead, that ye be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5. And
seeing we have these promises, DEARLY BELOVED, let us cleanse our selves.

If at any time he is compelled to let fall a few drops of severity, even that
little Gall is mingled with much Honey; that bitter water, issues out of a sweet
Fountain; every reprehension of his, proceeds from a loving affection. Well may
this form and style of preaching, be the Apostles in imitation, when it was the
Blessed Trinitie's in example. God the Father, came in a soft and still voice;
God the Son, figured himself not as a Tiger, but a Lamb; God the Holy Ghost,
appeared not in the shape of a Vulture, Ep. 84.
but a Dove. Leo the great, gives the reason, Plus agat cohortatio quam
Commotio, Plus charitas quam potestas: Violence is no good Instrument to win an
assembly; that does rather exasperate then reform. Bitter Pills are used to be
administered in sweet Sirrups, without any loss of their Virtue or Operation;
and I never heard that the influence of a gentle persuasion, was any
disparagement or prejudice to the cause. So that captare benevolentiam, to work
a man's self into the good liking of his Auditors, is a rule not only
prescribed for the Orator, but Divine too. The case is the same in both,
because if they like not the Man, they will not care for the Matter. Wherefore
Saint Paul does not mean we should speak slovingly, when in the first to the
Corinthians, he renounced the entising words of man's wisdom; for who sees not
that an uncouth and bald expression, misshapes good matter, and in stead of
edifying, deafs men's ears? The Apostle denied, That by the strength of their
own Eloquence, they had strength to win souls to Christ; but yet himself
accounted and used the beauty of speech, as a help to our Conversion. And so,
from the Porch and Entrance of my Text, let us go in and behold the Building.
From this Compellation, Dearly Beloved, we may observe who are included within
these Promises; and they, upon the first view, appear to be no other then We,
WE having, or seeing WE have.

Faith and Charity keep a different Dialect; the voice of Faith is Ego, I, with
an appropriation to our selves; the Language of Charity is Nos, We, with a
Communication to others: It seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13. Now as Charity knows
no bounds, so Nos no restriction. It is Nos in the largest Latitude, and utmost
extension, as it comprehends Jews and Gentiles. We hold not in special, but in
common; and so we are not to straighten and contract our Saviors Bowels, when
he has enlarged them; nor to make an enclosure of these Promises, which he
has laid open: to day, and yesterday, and from the beginning of the world he
has been liberal unto all. In Paradise, there was a Tree of Life, as well as
of Knowledge. Ever since, as there has been a Law to instruct, so there has
been provided a Tree of Life too, that man might eat of it, and live for ever;
even the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Our first Parents had the
Redeemer assured by the promised Seed of the Woman; Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, remembered it: those were called the Sons of God, which could not be but
by Grace; the Law made them not Sons. After the Flood, Noah, with his little
Family, offered Sacrifice; which was a Type of Christ. All our Fathers did eat
the same spiritual Meat, and they drank of the same spiritual Rock, and that
Rock was Christ. It was prophesied long before he came, that all flesh should
see the Salvation of God, Lev. 3. After he was come, the Apostles, at the day
of Pentecost, were accommodated with all Tongues, that Christ, by them, should
be conveyed to all Nations. Seeing then he has vouchsafed the ordinary Means
of Salvation to attract all, Go, and preach to ALL nations; so it runs in the
Commission; and daily invites All to embrace them: without question both Jews
and Gentiles have a Right and Title to these Promises. The King, in the
Parable, Mat. 22. bids ALL to the Marriage; his will was, none should be
debarred, but such as cared not to bring along with them their Wedding Garment:
So the great King of Heaven, invites every one to the Marriage of the Lamb; he
admits All to his heavenly Table; he rejects none but only such, who
under-value, and cast behind them, the All-healing Robe of Christ's
Righteousness. If the Redeemer of Mankind, when he saw us weltring in our own
blood, drawing in corruption faster then our breath, had cast his saving Mantle
short of the mark, as being unwilling to cover the skirts, as well as the head
of prevaricating Adam, the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, the Plaster had been
less then the wound; and the sight of such a Medicine might have made the case
more lamentable; and in stead of curing, enraged the diseased. But to prevent
all querulous murmuring, it pleased our Savior to be made a little lower then
the Angels, that he might taste death for every man, Heb. 2.9. For he would
have no man to perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. not
casting away any until there be no remedy; and that is chronicled too, 2 Chronicles.
36.13. See D. Prof. Rep. ad Object. Vincen.
So that their blood may be on their own heads, and destruction from
themselves. Indeed, Job tells us, That the Ostrich leaves her Eggs in the
earth, and forgets that the foot might scatter them, or that the wild Beasts
might break them, Job 39. She shows her self cruel to her young ones, as if
they were not hers; and is without fear, as if she traveled in vain. But our
Maker is of a melting disposition, grieving so often as he is forced to procure
grief to any; which makes him to exemplify his Compassion, by parallelling it
to a Hen, Mat. 23. a Creature most affectionate to her brood: the wings of his
Mercy being always displayed to hide every one from the day of wrath, unless it
be them, the full measure of whose iniquity makes them desperately to cry out,
1 Kin. 12.
What portion have we in David? we have no Inheritance, no part in him. Hence
it is, that in the second to the Hebrews, he is said to take upon him the seed
of Abraham. Our seed is apprehended, that part which is common to us all, that
part where we began to transgress, that so the gift might not be personal, but
redound to all. And yet, though he took on him our seed, notwithstanding it is
styled The seed of Abraham.

For albeit Adams flesh is united, yet Abraham's seed is named; as if mankind
then began, when Faith began to flourish. None could carry away the Name in the
generation of Christ, before the Father of the Faithful: So that Abraham stands
for a whole world; I am the God of Abraham. He took upon him the seed of
Abraham, that the world might know thereby how the promise was not made to his
flesh, but to his Faith. And therefore, though these promises in Christ are
unfainedly proclaimed to All; yet, because not truly apprehended by All, the
participation is not all alike. See D. Pros. Resp. ad c. 5 Gal. and ad c. 7 and
9 Gal. etc. ^ ad ob Vin.
If you have an intuitive eye on the Oblation it self, Dr. Prosper will have
that to be for the whole world; but if you reflect on the inestimable estimable
benefit, that is found only in the Elect. And why? The world lying in
wickedness, would have none of it; so that in his sense, the Savior of the
world could not but affirm, that he came to save only the sheep that were lost
of the house of Israel, all others despising the riches of his Goodness. He
graciously wooed, they gracelesly rejected him. Nevertheless, he dyed not
altogether in vain, though his Death proved not their Life, no more then he
can be said in vain to have created to everlasting bliss, the Angels that fell;
it being the Wisdom of the Lord hereby to make manifest, that the default was
not on his part, but on their own neglect and contempt of his Cross: some
putting him away quite, others confessing him with their mouths, but not
permitting him to reign in their hearts. Our Lord, by uniting to his person
that nature which is common to us all, and suffering death for the same cause,
whereunto we all hold up our hands, and plead guilty, may truly, says
Prosper, Pros. ut supra.
be called the Redeemer of the world. But in regard All do not taste the fruit
of his passion, the benefit accrues to them, concerning whom it is written, That
the Prince of this world is cast out; they alone applying his Merits to heal
their Miseries. For as the Cup of Salvation is fruitless to him, the faith of
whose soul is not open to receive it; so likewise is Christ's Oblation.

Upon this Argument, the Apostle enforces his Exhortation; Seeing we have not
any bare or naked Title, but our Tenure is in the validity of these Promises;
seeing we boast to have the life of grace in us, which the dis-inherited have
not, let us cleanse our selves. And surely there is not a stronger Motive to
stir up our practice of this Duty, then these few words, that we challenge an
interest in these Promises. If entitled to Christ, where then is his
Character? where is the Discipline of Christ? Superficial sanctity, and titular
respects, make us no better then some Apothecaries Boxes, whose glorious
inscriptions, and varnished outsides, are inwardly stored with nothing but
hypocrisy and emptiness.

These Promises are singular Promises, and worthy Gods performance only. Who
would have thought that the Red Sea could have been divided? the weak water,
which is moved with a Feather, should serve as a pavement to walk upon? that
the Snn should stay his Course, as it were forgetting his going down? that
water should abundantly stream from the flinty Rocks? These the Almighty
promised; and according to his Promise, effected. Seeing then we have these
singular promises, let US cleanse our selves.

These promises, are special Promises; God rules us not as Pharaoh ruled
Israel, with a Rod of Iron, toyling them in their task of Brick, and allowing
no Straw; but he commends our well-doing, and helps us to do it. He infuseth
his assisting Grace, to keep us from the danger of a relapse; and strengthens
the weakness of our Nature, which upon every temptation is ready to start back.
And when all that is done, is done by our native Allegiance; yet his liberal
bounty surpasses our conceiving; when for a broken service on earth, he makes
a promise of Heaven. Seeing then we have these precious Promises, let us be sure
to cleanse our selves; for no unclean thing enters into the heavenly gate.

These promises are most certain Promises, as proceeding from his immutable
will. Hence it is, that although Flesh and Blood, in our best Contemplations,
meet with many difficulties, and reason and sense apprehend many
impossibilities; yet, under hope, we believe above hope, and give God the
glory. Abraham considered not his own body, how it was dead; he regarded not
the deadness of Sarahs Womb; nay, when the heavy Mandate to kill and sacrifice
his only son Isaac, did seem to contradict the promise, That in Isaac all the
Nations should be blessed; yet the Patriarch believes beyond all
impossibilities, resting on this sure foundation, and unmovable, Faithful is
he which promises, Heb. 10. And thus the true seed of Abraham, do not stagger
at the horror of their separation, nor the ugliness of death, nor the
corruption of their flesh, nor the rortenness of their bones, nor the dust and
ashes whereinto they must be dissolved; they anchor and fasten on this ground,
All these promises are certain, they are yea and Amen. In the horror of the
Grave, they are the seed of Immortality, which is sown with us, and makes us
hope to spring up anew to eternal Glory.

Now as these promises are most certain, as arising from his will; so they are
unfeigned, and void of all Sophistry, as proceeding from his Verity. The
promises of the world are smooth and counterfeit; fair in pretense, empty of
performance. They are but skindeep; put them to the Piercer, make trial of
them, they are without blood. They gnaw on the bark, there is no sap in them; it
being the Complement of too many, to promise any thing for present
satisfaction. The Tongues of a great part, are tipped with Italianism, you must
not show your selves so rude, as to entertain their courtesies; for they, like
to our Oar-men, look one way, and row another.

I remember Barclay, in his Icon Animorum, relates how the Italians, when they
are most offended, will make the largest tenders of humanity; that so, by the
privilege of friendship, they may the more subtly work their revenge. But our
Lord God is not carried away with any fluctuation, but remains continually firm
upon his Square. He urges, and seriously presses, to an acceptance of his
willing profers: To this end he stretches out his hands all the day long,
sends forth his messengers early and late, to convince sinners, to terrify and
shame them out of their sinful courses. Peter, 2 Epist. 3 chap. 9 verse.
abundantly testifies it: First, Negatively, The Lord is not willing that any
should perish; having no primary intention, or antecedent thought of their
destruction, before they give occasion. Then he proves Affirmatively, That the
will of God has a positive act in procuring their Salvation; because he wills
that all should come to repentance. Well might he say, says Bernard, That he
will not the death of a sinner, who dyed himself to save sinners. In the 23
Chapter of this prophecy, verse. 11. He protests, and confirms it with an Oath,
to make his promise more firm and stable; As I live, says the Lord, I do not
delight in the death of the wicked: Yea, rather then he will fail in his
purpose of doing his people good, he falls to expostulations, urges them to
give any color of reason, why they will rather perish in sin, then be
reconciled to him: Why will ye dye, O house of Israel? Is there no hope? will
ye not return? will nothing prevail with you? no means? no promises of saving
mercies? no threatenings? no judgments? will ye not enter into Covenant with
me? why will ye not? Why will ye dye, O house of Israel? So in the sixth of
Micah, and the third, O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have
I wearied thee? come and testify against me. As if the Lord had said, What
could I have done more to my vineyard, that I have not done to it? I have
offered Mercy, and it has been refused; gracious helps and means, and
neglected; blessings, and not regarded: I have waited for your Conversion, and
ye have not returned. And what is there in all this, that makes you so
unwilling to lay down your weapons of Rebellion, that ye have taken up against
me? And lest some should charge God foolishly, that his promises are but
shadows, like to man's impostures, in the 25 verse, he justifies himself and his
dealings with them: Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not
your ways unequal?

And indeed, seeing a double heart, which harbors honey in the mouth, and gall
in the breast, is abominable before him; how can it be thought he should
promise one thing, and will the contrary? Non mutat voluntatem, sed vult
mutationem, as Saint Austin expresses it; De civ. Dei.
he does not change his will, but wills a change; the alteration is not in the
Disposer of the thing, but in the thing disposed of. And therefore, when Saint
James calls him The Father of Lights, he presently adds the propriety of the
Sun, that fountain of Light, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of
change. Indeed, the Moon alters nothing, but she is first altered her self: if
she cause a flux and reflux of humors below, she waxes and waneth in her light
above. But the Sun, which so turns the hue of all this lower world, continues
still the same; and when it scorcheth most, is never the warmer. So the Lord,
upon some occurrences, changes his Creatures, continuing himself unchangeable.
Does he promise Life, and yet inflicts Death? That promised Blessing, was upon
condition of our obedience; so that if we perform not the condition, no marvel
if we fail of these promises. Seeing then we have these unfeigned promises, let
us not be wanting to our selves, but let us fall to our work, which consists in
the Act of Renovation, Let us cleanse.

You see the Connection and Dependence of the words; it is not, Having these
promises, let us defile our selves, but, let us cleanse ourselves. The Liberty
of a Christian, implies not looseness, but holiness. These promises are the
ground of our Obedience, and Obedience is the first step to the Throne. It is
the true Badge and Cognizance of a Christian; it was Christ's in Example, it
must be ours in Imitation. It is the Kings Highway to Heaven, the way beaten
out unto us by the Kings own Son; with whom, if we will reign, we must cleanse
ourselves, and crucify the old man within us; with a godly revenge, executing
those Offenses which would have condemned us. We are to put off the old man, as
we do our Garments, orderly, and by parts; now cleansing one sin, then another,
until we have freed our selves from their accursed League. All the Levitical
cleanness under the Law, the washing of the Priests, cleansing of the people,
of the Altar, the Temple, the Gates and Entrances of their Houses; What were
they, but so many mysteries of their purifying from the turpitude and deformity
of sin? God requires the same of us in substance, which was prefigured in these
Ceremonies. The Altar is our heart; the House of the Lord, our bodies and
souls, which are the temples of the Holy Ghost; the People and Gates, are we
here assembled, whom of no people, he has made a people, that we should be
holy as he is holy, sanctifying our Affections and Actions, which are the Gates
and Doors through which the Spirit of Grace is to go in and out. Christ has
not redeemed us to be altogether sedentary, dull and lazy; but to be
Operative, and furnished with good works. It is true, God gives the Ability;
yet he will have us to make use of it. He will not take all the pains himself,
and leave us idly to depend on him. For to sit our selves down, and lay all
on the Divine Providence, is just the sluggish Knave in the Fable; who, when
his Cart was overthrown, would needs have his God Hercules come down from
Heaven, to raise it up again, whiles himself would be Spectator, and give
aim. The Members of Christ are not Stocks and Stones, insensible, without
studying of goodness; they are not Ficulnus, inutile lignum, like the Image of
Baal, and the Stump of Dagon; they will not suffer the Graces they have
received, to sleep in them, but will put their hands to the plow, and labor in
the Vineyard.

We acknowledge the necessity of preventing Grace, for the Inchoation or
beginning of what is good: we believe there must be his Cooperating Grace, to
assist our well-doing; and his subsequent Grace, to perfect this mundifying or
cleansing work. For it lies not in man's will, nor in his running; but in the
Mercy of God, the only Sufficient and Efficient cause of Renovation to Life
eternal. Therefore, says God to his people, Isai. 43. I, even I am he, that
puts away thy Iniquity for my own sake. I, with an Ingemination; even I,
excluding all other means; for my own sake, removing all other Motives: Yet,
without we both will and run, we shall not obtain the Reward. The Lord, says
Prosper, Pros. Res^. ad c. 8 and 5 Gal.
offered Salvation to Jerusalem, not for their own deservings, but of his
Mercy; yet they obtained it not, because they would neither will nor run. The
Scribes and Pharisees despised Gods Counsel; but they would neither will nor
run, but kept still their old pace, and so they perished, the Kingdom being
taken from them, and given to such, as by Grace, both will and run, and bring
forth the fruit thereof.

Up then, sluggish soul; arise, thou that sleep, unfold thy hands, and gird
they self to the Battle: behold, thy Enemy has entrenched thee, thy flesh has
compassed in thy soul; and now the only means to subdue it, is to purge and
cleanse all peccant humors. The very word does import, that the Apostle intends
not the destruction, but the obedience of the body; that as the body received
life and motion from the soul, so it might return a willing service. For God,
who requires our bodies as a reasonable and living Offering, means not we
should destroy them in our humiliation, or with a careless dis-respect, quire
put off man, to become Christians. It is only, let us Cleanse our selves. And
thus I am fallen on the proper Object of this Act of Renovation, Let us cleanse
OUR SELVES. The world is full of cleansing and scouring the spots and stains it
finds, but the spite is, it works not on the right Object, Our selves. Men
run with open Mouths to reprehend the sayings, Vix. satis apertum os. Salust.
and to reform the deeds of others; they think their tongues too backward in
uttering what they have coriceived, and under color of rectifying and reducing
each aberration to the primitive integrity. A foul practice, under a fair
pretense. If things be thus or thus ordered, what is that to thee? There are
imperfections and defects enough in thy own bosom. How many are the
corruptions exalted against obedience to be subdued? how many infirmities to be
bewailed? But it is the distemperature of minds discontented at any thing
present, to be always discussing what they observe without, seldom or never
taking a diligent survey of their own weaknesses that are within. They are wont
to have Lyncean Eyes to others; more eyes then the Leopard has spots, not a
more shall escape their censure; but as blind as Moles to themselves, more
blind then Bartimeus, which knew not Men from Trees. They cannot see beams at
home; the reason is, because they are in love with the property of the eye,
which sees all but it self. Indeed, the eye sees it self; yet not per lineam
directam, but by reflection: so they see their own enormities, yet not per
radios directos; but per ambages, and circumloquia.

Neither will they see them so, till judgments force them, till they be brought
upon their knees. Pharaoh, in the eighth of Exodus, becomes somewhat tractable;
but it is when a storm drives him to it. Balaam, in the twenty second of
Numbers, bows, and gives good words; but it is when danger is near him,
otherwise they will disguise their impiety. But such as these, are reproach
enough unto themselves; and seeing they make Scripture a witness of their
folly, we will pass them over with a Sponge.

It shall be our care to dive into our own breasts, to sit in the Watchtower
of our own hearts, viewing and rectifying the relapses and declinations of our
selves. If aspersions be cast upon our best Actions; what a joy will it be,
that we should be guilty of Goodness, and be made to commit Charity? Thus the
Disciples of Christ knew nothing of the State, they studied themselves, saying,
Master, is it I? Mat. 26. Not, Master, is it He? The disciples of Saint John
ask, Master, what shall we do? not, What shall they do? We must obey some, hear
others, love all, cleanse our selves.

The summons shall be, Give an account of thy own stewardship. Peter therefore,
when he would be smattering in beloved John's affairs, receives from our
Savior no other answer but this, What is that to thee? Joh. 21. It may be that
sharp reproof made St. Peter give charge against busy medlers, as against
theft and murder: No man must suffer as a Thief or Murderer, nor as a
busie-body, 1 Pet. 4.15. Well may they be coupled; for many times these
Polypragmatiques are their own civil murderers. A prying Eye, and a busy Hand,
has commonly an unquiet heart. And thus, having endeavored to purge out this
Itch of Curiosity, which, like a troublesome Thorn, lay in the way, our passage
will be more clear from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, which is the
task, together with the parts and faculties infected. You see my Matter; but
where is the time to deliver it? May it please you to suspend your Royal
Patience till the next Opportunity, and we will give you an account of all. In
the mean time, let us not hew out unto our selves, Cisterns that will hold no
water; but let us have recourse to the fountain of Living waters, of which,
whosoever drinks, shall never thirst after the impurities of the flesh, but
shall have the world crucified to him, and himself unto the World.

Let us pray with holy David, Wash us, O Lord, again; and again wash us through
from the pollution of the flesh and spirit. 1 These 5.
Now the very God of peace sanctify us throughout, in spirit, soul and body,
and keep us blameless to the coming of our Lord; that so, having our fruit here
in holiness, our end may be everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

2 Cor. chap. 7. last part verse. 1. -- From all filthiness of the Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.


SERMON. XIII.
THis later part does search the sore: a difficult work; it being not
contracted to any one special part, but extended from the Crown of the head, to
the sole of the foot. The virulent matter has diffused its rancor through all
the Veins and Nerves of the body; nay, it runs from the outward to the inward
man, the Spirit has drunk up its Venom. Not only the Flesh, but the Spirit,
is to be cleansed from filthiness; which is the matter to be wrought upon, and
that in the full extent, From ALL filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit. And
lastly, this purifying act without interruption, is to be in a continual
progress, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

The ugliness of sin appears by the several Names and Characters wherewith it is
branded in the Scriptures. In the sixteenth of Ezekiel, it is compared to the
pollution of a new born Child. In the thirty sixth Chapter, the same Prophet
likens it to the impurity of a removed woman. In the first of John, to the
rottenness of man in his grave. David, viewing the deformity of his sins, roars
for the disquietness of his heart, finds no rest in his bones; which made him
implore the Lord to cover them, and blot them all quite out. It is too
manifest, that many harbor some one corrupt affection as their darling; and
because they are fortified against the assault of all others, they make fair
weather withal, and think all is well with them. The starved Niggard, falls
foul upon the full Epicure, and the Epicure jeeres the Niggard. The Covetous
counts himself a good Christian, because he is not debosh'd, not given to
licentiousness. And the Voluptuous would be esteemed a good Christian too, in
that he abhors all wretched fordidness. This party, and delicate obedience,
supplicates to God for a dispensation in Naaman's form: When I bow my knee to
Rimmon, said he; to Mammon, says the Covetous; to Bacchus, says the Riotous;
to Venus, says the Libidinous; to Mars, says the Furious; God be merciful to
me in this. But the true Convert is at defiance with each sin; he remembers how
Herod, a man that never knew the power of goodness, in many things heard John
Baptist gladly; yet, in one thing, he would be Herod still, in his filthy
incest he would be no Changeling. Whereupon, the regenerate Christian reserves
no peculiar Closet for any bosom sin; for he considers, if we leave but one
inlet of out souls open to folly, Satan, that old Serpent, who lies in ambush
for all advantages, may as well by that, creep in, to our perdion, as by many
apparent breaches. The Ship may be sunk by some little insensibleleak, as well
as by the violence of the waves breaking in upon it. The least dram of poison
is enough to infect the soundest Constitution. One prevailing Disease, may kill
the body, as well as many: so one Dalilah, one corrupt lust adhering to us,
will destroy both body and soul, no less then a multitude of sins: the reason
is, because the least sin is as mortal in it is nature, as the greatest. Hence
it was, that Christ suffered exactly in every part, and rose again completely
with all his parts, to show that we also, who are Christ's, should be thoroughly
mortified to sin in all parts, and cuickned to righteousness in every point.
The body is not sound, so long as the remainder of a Disease nestles in it; no
more can our souls be clean, if one corner be left unswept.

In the natural body, if one part be exceeding hot, and the rest exceeding
cold, it is a symptom of some distemper within; but if there be an equal
temper of heat throughout, then all is well. So it is in the spiritual man; if
our blood shall rise at the hearing of an Oath, and yet can be content to cheat
our neighbor; that is a sign all is not well within, because true obedience
must be in all integrity. For seeing the Almighty made every part and faculty
of our bodies and souls, and used no partner in the work, he will never admit
the Devil as a Cope-mate to part stakes with him; but like the true Mother of
the Child, will have all or none. Thus we read that Christ cast out of Mary
Magdalene seven Devils, Mar 16.
he left not one: he cast a Legion of Devils out of another, not one was left
behind; Mar. 5.
to lesson us wholly to put off the old man, and whatsoever has any affinity
with sin and Satan, as the Romans expelled the whole Race of the Tarquins out
of Rome. Our purgative therefore must be general, from ALL filthiness, and that
of the flesh and spirit, which are the parts so much infected.

The flesh is sometimes taken in Scripture for the general Mass of Corruption,
as it is repugnant to the Law. So the Apostle, in the fifth to the Galatians,
reckons Pride, Envy, and such like, among the works of the flesh: yet flesh
here, passes for that other part, which, with the soul, builds up the whole
Man, in regard it is put directly opposite to the Spirit. And well it may be so
put; for this pollution of the flesh, which cleaves to the substance as Chaff
to the Wheat, has depraved our whole Nature; and so, not our hands only, but
our hearts too; as well the inward man, as the outward; the inside, no less
then the outside, must be cleansed and purified.

I find it storied of devout Anselm, how, on a certain time, he cast his eye
on a Shepherds Boy; who, having caught a Bird, tied a stone to the leg, by
which means the Bird could no sooner mount and soar aloft, but the stone drew
her down again: And so that holy Archbishop, having a sympathy or feeling of
humane infirmities, fell a weeping, and condoled the miserable state of Man by
Nature, who could no sooner by pious Contemplations endeavor to ascend into
heaven, but his Corruptions forthwith enforced him to the earth. The noisome
steam and exhalations of our sensual affections, cloud the rational faculty or
power of our Reason, and so damps the clearness of her operations.

It Is worth the while to eye the order of the words, Let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness: First, of the flesh; then of the spirit, the rebellious
motions of the flesh being the matter and fuel of sin. Our flesh is both our
worst, and nearest enemy; and the worst, because our nearest. Well may the
whole life of Man be called a continual warfare here on Earth, since every one
carries his greatest Adversary in his own bosom. And upon very good ground is
Heaven said to be got by violence, when our own flesh, like a ponderous and
massy weight, is repressing us from aspiring thither. I cannot now wonder,
that Saint Paul, as one amazed and much astonished, breaks forth into this
passionate exclamation, Romans 7. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Seeing the Law of the Members hinders the good
which we would do, and drives us to the evil we would not do.

Now if it much humbled Abraham to remember he was but dust and ashes; Genesis
18.27.
far more it should humble us, knowing we are much worse, lumps of sin and
corruption: Our bodies and souls being no better then Sterquilinium super
sterquilinium, one dunghill tumbled upon another. As for those wrangling
disputes, Whether the first motions of the flesh be formally or materially,
properly or improperly sins, let them take their rest; it is truly concluded on
all sides, and every one must be abundantly sensible, that they are fomes
peccati, the Matter, the Tinder, Womb of all ungodliness; and therefore are
absolutely to be curbed, not once to be admitted, or at least presently
expelled. Elias cloud was but a little one at first; 1 Kin. 18.
yet afterward it became a covering for the whole heaven. And so the smallest
spark of ill motions, may burn into a vast flame. For sin is of a spreading
Nature, it never stays where it begins. Give but the least Serpent room for his
head, and he will easily wind in his whole body. The heart being once defiled,
we yield our members weapons of uncleanness to uncleanness; so fruitful and
teeming a Mother is the inbred Concupiscence of our inordinate Nature. When
sinful motions spring up, use them as Hercules used the two Snakes, strangle
them in the Cradle, in the swathing band, in the very beginning.

Two main enemies to this Act of Renovation, or cleansing the lusts and
vicious habits of the flesh and spirit, are intemperate Eating, and immoderate
Drinking. For the body carries the soul, as the Horse the Rider; which, if too
vvantonly fed, will either run away, or dangerously throvv him. A surfeited
and unruly body, is no habitation for the soul; but a prison, a place only to
enclose the spirit, not to entertain it. When the belly is fullest, there is
most room for Satan; because the soul is never more fraught with sin, then when
the fleshly Epicure is most distended with meat. Let him be glutted, and all
the day after will serve for nothing but to sin, or at least to sleep in. To
this purpose Satan set on Jobs Children in the place of their banqueting, and
made their Table their Snare, their Dainties their Bane. Let not us then
improve sin by the same trade our first Parents purchased it, by eating; for
the time will come, when God will destroy the belly, and the meat; when the
very flesh, so carefully maintained, will serve for nothing but to maintain the
Worms that destroy it.

The other Capital Vice which crosses Mortification, is immoderate using of
Drink* They are both near of blood: For what is a Clutton, but Qui mensuram
stomachi non novit, who delights in nothing but eating and drinking? Would you
know why the Sunday is better known to the Drunkard by the Alehouse, then the
Church? The Devil has taken possession in his swinish breast; and that makes
him still run headlong to those waters. It is true, Judith 13.2.
that Judith killed Holofernes; but we read that the wine began his death. It
were good then to hearken to Saint Peter's prescription, Be sober, 1 Pet. 4.5.
and watch.

The better to prevent the like incursions upon the whole man, the Forts and
bulwarks of the soul, the exterior senses, are to be well manned and kept safe.
The ear and the eye are the two special inlets to all Treasons and Conspiracies
against the flesh and the spirit. It is hard to say where lies the more danger:
sure I am, the lower house masters the upper; the Law of the members exact
obedience of the Law of the mind, the flesh of the Spirit. Job, in his twelfth
Chapter, makes the ear the Taster of the soul, as the mouth is for the belly;
as if no word went down to the heart, but what the ear approves. Now, if the
heart be full, the mouth must vent, if not run over; and if the tongue be wide,
the ear will be wide too. This makes profaneness, which is a pain to the
Christian, a pastime to the Carnal, because we delight to speak of those things
whereof we delight to hear. Hence is it' that the Tale-teller, and the
Tale-receiver, are of as near confederacy, as the Thief and the Receiver,
inseparable companions, sworn brothers. In Cant.
Devout Bernard makes no more difference betwixt them but this; the one carries
the Devil in his Tongue, the other in his Ear. Take then Saint Luke for your
Counselor, Luke 8.18.
who bids you take heed how you hear. For seeing Nature has left the ear
without any door or stop, the least sound which approaches those trenches, may
be admitted without resistance. If it be not a clear sound, then (...),
rottenness of speech is like to convey corruption of manners. But upon better
view, we find the eye the arrantst traitor; the easiest entrance for assaults
against the flesh and the spirit, lies that way.

The eyes are the windows of the soul; and if the windows be not shut close, or
well guarded, access will be wrought for dangerous Enemies. It may be
questioned, whether ever sin had took footing in the world, had it not crept in
by the windows of the eye? That which first induced Eve to taste the forbidden
Fruit, was this: She saw 'twas goodly to the eye. What brought Achan into
destruction, but the waving up and down of his Eye? So soon as he saw the
Wedge of Gold, and the Babylonish Garment, his desires were enflamed, and
steal he must. Who knows not that David's eyes were a burning-glass to set both
body and soul in Combustion? For collecting the beams of Bathsheba's shining
beauty, he was set on fire with that was precious in her. And so, by the
sparkling lure of the eye, Bathshcba lost her honor, and Vriah his head.

I could show you how we read in Saint John, of the lust of the eye; in Saint
Peter, of the adultery of the eye; and how Solomon, forbidding to look on the
wine while it is red, and sparkling in the Cup, intimates there is a
drunkenness of the eye. And though it was Seneca's reproof, an Apostle might
have owned it, Etiam oculis gulost sunt; it may be truly said, that, in some
sense, there is gluttony in the eye. Such a Mass of Corruption lies lurking in
the little Orb of the Eye: Job 31.
so that Jobs resolution may be ours, which is to make a Covenant with our
Eyes, not to take in these treacherous Temptations, lest the alluring
blandishments of the flesh, which pass through the eye, do quench the spirit.
For as there are carnal delights, wherewith the body is chiefly infected; so
there are the spiritual impurities wherewith the spirit is defiled. Illa
majoris sunt infamiae haec culpae; carnal sins bring greater infamy and shame
unto men, but the spiritual leave a greater blot imprinted within. Those make
men like Beasts, but spiritual uncleanness make men like Devils. Therefore
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness, not only of the flesh, but of the
Spirit, which is the other part put opposite to the flesh.

Here the Curiosity of the School is much troubled, how the Soul, being a
Spirit, and so immaterial, can receive contagion from the Flesh. Much puzzling
there is in loosing the knot, in determining the Controversy. Aquinas, as I
conceive, is most satisfying; who, 1a 2ae q. 83. Artic. 13.
seating the subject of sin in the body and soul united, imputes all that is
amiss to the Agency of the Spirits, hurrying in the seed. For these Spirits,
says he, being of a middle nature, betwixt the body and soul, and withal, the
Instruments of Generation, do instantly convey the Species or Impressions of
sinful imaginations from the Parent to the Child, whereby all the faculties are
suddenly depraved. But what need all this ado? We are sure we are fallen into
the puddle and filthy sink of sin; let us strive more how to get out, then
enquire how we fell in. It is a plain case, that Pride, Envy, and the like, are
the Biles and Ulcers of the Soul; and therefore the Imposthumation must be
launc'd, the cure must be endeavored. The first turpitude of the Spirit, which
comes to be cleansed, is Pride. It was so bold as to intrude into heaven, and
thence threw an Angel into hell.

This should abate the Crest, and reverse the Arms of the highest Spirit; for
if God spared not his Angels, he will not spare the best of men, who are but
dust and ashes, if their attempts be proud.

Pride would be perking in Paradise, and forthwith Adam was cast out. Mount not
then aloft like an Egle, Desiit esse quod erat, quia voluit essc quod non erat.
but consider our first Father lost the perfection of being innocent, by aiming
to be transcendent. It would set up its plumes in the Court, and so turned King
Nebuchadnezzar a grazing. They then that are sibi ipsis suffeni, smoothers to
themselves, forgetting their Nature and their Maker, must know this, Homo esse
perdidit, quia se ultra hominem estimavit; he became a Beast, that would needs
be more then a Man.

Of the same wing with Pride, is the towering Vice of Envy. This is a destroyer,
a murderer from the beginning. Saint Basil faies, (...) and (...), are as like
in Nature as in Name. They are Correlatives, slaughter being Envies intimate
and Familiar. Cain first envies his Brother, then slew him. Envy is rightly
called toxicum charitatis, the bane of Charity: for whereas Charity causes us
to rejoice at the happiness of one another, this makes his Neighbors welfare,
the envious man's Disease. It excires them in whom it raigns, to deal with their
brethren as the Jews did with Christ; who, when they came to speak of his
miracles and glorious works, were very remiss and sparing; then they concealed
his Name, Hic Homo, this FELLOW does many Miracles, John 11. But when they
wrote the Title of his feigned Crime upon the Cross, there most maliciously
they published his Name. Hic Homo would not serve the turn; but Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews; and that in three famous Tongues, Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin; written too in Capital Letters, that all men might run and read it.

Yet of all Vices, this of Envy seems the justest, in that it brings along with
it its own Vengeance. For the envious man, because he cannot consume another
heart, most viperously devours and eats out his own: like unto a Be, who
stinging another, loses at once her own strength and life: Or like to Flies;
who, while they strive to extinguish the light of others, torment and burn
themselves in the flame. Therefore God should do great injury to the envious,
if he placed them in Heaven, where is nothing but Joy. For prosperity being the
Object of Envy, it would increase their sorrow. Rightly then is hell allotted
for such Vipers, where they shall see nothing they may envy at. The safer to
steer our course amidst these corruptions of the flesh and Spirit, Saint Paul,
in the fifth to the Galatians, brings a Catalogue of spiritual fruits against
the works of the flesh. The fruit of the spirit, says he, is love, joy,
gentleness, faith, temperance, and the like; in which fruits, if ye abide, ye
shall never fall, but be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
pollutions which are in the world, through lusts, 1 Peter, Epist. 2.

But this is not all; another stumbling block of offense is to be removed; and
so much the rather, because flesh and blood either makes it a mere nothing, or
so small, as they think it shall never be brought to trial; and that is the
Thought of flesh and blood.

Our Thoughts, indeed, are free from inquisition in the Law of Man; they are
not so in the Law of God. That calls to Examination idle Thoughts, no less then
idle words. For the intention of ill, as it is open to Gods Eyes, as the ill it
self; so it is as odious where it is nourished in the heart with full consent. A
man may thus Think himself to hell: The reason is, because, as in actions which
be good, God accepts the desire, where we want ability for the deed: so, in
those which are bad, his punishments take hold of the thought, where we want
means for the outward act. Our Savior calls a lustful thought adultery: St.
John styles a malicious thought murder. Well then may the Church pray,
Cleanse, O Lord, the thoughts of our hearts, by the inspiration of thy holy
Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee; for unless these thoughts be purified,
there will be no progress in goodness, no perfecting of holiness in the fear of
God, the last and best part, it being the (...), the top and the complement of
all our Perfection.

After our Mortification, we must not stay there, as Israel did at the foot of
the hill, Exodus 19. but with Moses, ascend into the Mount of God, and improve
our holiness. The Israelites gathered Manna every day but on the Sabbath; to
signify, that until the everlasting Sabbath of Rest, there must be no standing
still in our Christian growth. They are but Embryo's in Religion; Children, in
their first Conception, who have their nourishment still sent into them without
their Knowledge and will: at the best, but Babes, who are continually sucking
the Milk, the first Principles. Men of a full growth, perfect Men, are to
digest solid Meat, fortifying the power of Christ that is in them by spiritual
exercises. They, who aim to be glorious Citizens above, proceed here, as the
Sun, in a constant path, and grow in brightness till they attain the height of
perfection. Boast not then of thy undaunted Faith, unmovable Grace, for if
thou do not long and endeavor to be increased in Faith, and furthered in
Sanctification; I doubt whether any spark of Faith, any atome or grain of
Grace be in thee or no. That desperate saying was the Devils dictating; I am
predestined to life, and so what matters my endeavor, I am sure to be saved?
For while we are Viatores, Passengers on the way, it is good providence to fear
as well as to hope.

I do not in this mixture of flesh and spirit, expect we should be all
sp^ritual; that were not to be of the Church Militant, but Triumphant. Novatus
and Pelagius scrued Man to such a purity, as might make him free from all
weaknesses; so that when he prayed for forgiveness of sins, it was rather
humiliter then veraciter, out of modesty then truth. Indeed, I read that Saint
Paul, touching the righteousness of the Law, lived unrebukably, even before he
was converted: Men's eyes could spy no fault in him. In the first to the
Corinthians, he protested that he knew nothing by himself. In the twenty fourth
of the Acts, he avows to the face of his most quick-sighted Adversaries, that
he truly worshipped the God of his Fathers, believing all things in the Law and
the Prophets, had hope in the resurrection of the dead, and labored to keep a
clear Conscience toward God and Man. In the twentieth of the Acts, he takes
the Elders of the Pharisees to witness after what manner he had lived with them
at all seasons, serving the Lord with all humility, and with many tears; and
how he passed not for Bonds and Afflictions, neither was his life dear unto
him, so that he might fulfill his course with Joy. When he was now ready to be
offered up, and the time of his departing was at hand, his Conscience could
give him this Testimony, I have fought a good fight, and finished my course, I
have kept the faith: from henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of
righteousness. And yet notwithstanding all this his righteousness, in the third
to the Philippians he confesses he has not attained to that perfection of
Grace he ought to labor for. And if not so, then out of his own mouth, he was
not pure from sin. For, S. Aust. to Jerome. Ep. 29.
quicquid minus est quam debet, ex vitio est; what we do not so well as we
ought, we do amiss. But if not Saint Paul, then who may pharisaically think
himself perfect, or as the Angel of Laodicea, wanting nothing? If any should
dare thus to overvalue his borrowed Talents, he will show a brain as empty of
understanding, as a heart of Devotion. They magnify the arm of flesh, more
then reason will admit, who, because they find some passages in Scripture
concerning the innocence, justice and perfection of Gods Children, do simply
infer, That every jot and punctilio of the Law may be fulfilled. Saint Austin
gives a good Rule, Cum dicitur cujusque rei perfectio, qua in re dicatur
videatur: When the perfection of any thing is named, we must consider wherein
it is named. Job may be righteous, compared with whom he lived; the Publican
may go to his house more justified then the Pharisee, yet not absolutely
justified. The Spouse in the Canticles may be fair among Women; yet her beauty
not such, but she complains of her blackness. The Gospel-purity is not here
full, absolute and complete; it is only in part, in respect and in constancy of
sincere endeavors. And therefore it is added, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God.

Holiness rooted in the fear of God, does not mix with carnal respects; it is
single, not mercenary; sincere, not counterfeit: Painted Rottenness, and
glistering Vice, is an abomination to the Lord. And therefore, of all Nations,
a dissembling Nation is styled The People of Gods wrath, Isaiah the tenth, as
fittest for the fire of his burning ire. That then we may not have our portion
with Hypocrites, let our Hearts and Souls be purified with a sound Faith,
bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, having our
Minds entirely swayed with the Fear of God; making it appear by outward
Expressions of Humility and Reverence, that the right Spirit of Gods Fear is
upon us.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, that so you may be
Partakers of a Glorious Inheritance among them, who have cleansed themselves
thoroughly from ALL filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and purifyed their
Bodies and Souls in the Blood of the Lamb.

AMEN.

Deo Gloria, mihi venia.

1 Pet. chap. 5. verse. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in due time.


SERMON. XIV.
THe Apostle having considered in the last words of the former Verse, how the
Almighty looks on the high-minded as on his Opposites, whom he resists to the
uttermost: and on the contrary, that he is gracious to such as are lowly in
their own eyes; hereupon he strongly urges every one to humble himself, that
he may be exalted. In the former part of my Text, which is an Exhortation,
there is an Act, the Act of humbling: the Object of that Act, your selves;
humble your selves, not others: We have work enough at home, why should we
busy our selves abroad about the weaknesses of our Brethren? The Motives
inducing this humiliating Act, are two; the one implied in the illative term,
[therefore] God resists the proud, humble your selves therefore: The order is
expressed in the words which follow, under the mighty hand of God; Gods hand is
mighty, therefore humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.

The later part, which is the reason of the Exhortation, contains the honor
indulged to the truly humbled, Exaltation; together with the Author thereof
prefixed, that HE may exalt you; and in the close is set down the opportunity
of the time, in DVE time: Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in due time.

My Theme or Subject, is Humility, a virtue more praised then practiced; and
yet it is a foundation whereon all other Christian duties are builded. That this
groundwork may be well laid, we are to consider the effect which comes by it.
In the precedent Verse, we are exhorted to deck our selves inwardly with
lowliness. Indeed, our translation reads, Be clothed with humility; but the
Original (...), signifies not simply clothing, but bedecking: the Apostle then
esteems it an Ornament, and that so beautiful and well-pleasing in Gods Eye,
that he adds grace unto it; He gives grace to the humble, says that Verse.

The Scripture is copious in this point, that the heart which receives most
from God, ever thinks least of it self. It was the humble speech of Abraham, I
am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. he is made the Father of the Faithful. It was
the submissive voice of Jacob, I am less then the least of Gods Mercies, Genesis
32. he is made his brothers lord. John acknowledges he is not worthy to loose
the Latchet of Christ's Shoe, Luke 3. he is made his Redeemers Baptist. The
Centurion cries out, He is not worthy Christ should come under his roof, Mat.
8. his servant is restored to health: a gracious reward of his lowliness. The
blessed Virgin professes her self the Lords Handmaid, she is made the Mother of
God incarnate. So true is that of Saint Austin, Qui sibi displicet, Deo placet:
To fall out with thy self, is the next way to make God thy Friend. Thou shall
be so much more glorious in the sight of the Lord, by how much the more
contemptible and inconsiderable thou art in thy own estimate. It was Samuel's
inter'gatory to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. When thou wast little in thy own eyes, wast
thou not great in the eyes of God? All waters run naturally to descending
places: so do the influences of supernatural graces to the lowly, who are as
Valleys; not to the proud, who are as Mountains. A full Stomach will not
digest more Meat: so a haughty mind is incapable to receive any store of
blessings. The Pharisee thought himself full, he went home empty, Luke 18. One
cause, says Seneca, why men are not wise, is because they think themselves
wise already; so many come not to their wished for height, because too soon
they think so high of themselves. He that will enter into a house with a low
door, must first stoop; Christ is the door of Heaven; and he that will enter
there by him, must of him learn to be lowly in heart, Mat. 19.

Many things teach us humility: First, the Omnipotent Majesty of God, in whose
sight the Stars, some translate the Angels are unclean, Job 25. and therefore
there is in us a nullity, in respect of his irresistible greatness. Secondly,
our Name, homo ab humo, bids us to reflect on the despicableness of our
extraction, to descend in domum Figuli, where we may find Clay, or the basest
of all Elements, Earth, to be the Original Matter of our first being. The
consideration whereof, forced the Persian Emperor, haughty Xerxes, to pour out
tears, in regard none of his formidable huge Army should be alive within an
hundred years; and thereupon to proclaim himself a King of Dust, and not of
Men. Again, the Contemplation of our Souls will help to humble us; the
faculties whereof being sore wounded, since our fall in Adam. The best rarities
we have, are but dona, Gods donatives; they are given, and that ad Beneplacitum
Dei, we have them not by Lease. Besides, that which we know not, is more then
that which we know; if one be wise, another is wiser; and where is the more
Grace, there is the more sense of the want of it; therefore no cause to glory
therein.

Moreover, knowledge often begets a high conceit, Scientia inflat; Humility
serves as a Pin to prick that windy Bladder of Knowledge.

Consider likewise how the greatness of your endowments do greaten your burden,
add to your charge, and enhaunse the reckoning. For, to whom much is given, of
him much is required. If thou have five Talents, thy Lord will look for the
increase of five, Mat. 25. Do not then despise others, as lacking those good
parts, which you seem to have; but make your selves equal to them of the lower
sort, Romans 12. and in giving honor ('it is not in taking honor) go one before
another, verse. 10. Experience also shows, that little Keys are placed by the
great; and little Pipes, with the great, make good Music: So it is in the
condition of man's life, little and great, the mighty and the mean, sort well
together in mutual Offices.

The least member in the body, the least pin in the building, the least nayl in
the work, has its place and use; none are to be contemned. The favors which
the humble enjoy, I conceive to be arguments to humble us. Blessed are the poor
in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. as if it were prepared
for none but such. To him will I look, even to him that is of a poor and
contrite spirit, and that trembles at my words, Isai. 66. As if God would
vouchsafe none so much as a look, but the humble. What shall I say of Christ,
the exemplary pattern of Humility? Did thy Prince, being Lord of Lords, make
himself of no reputation? Phil. 2. Drink of the brook in the way? Psalm. 111.
Take the form of a Servant, and will thou domineeringly lord it over thy
Fellow Servants? Thy Redeemers Head hanged down upon the Cross; do not though
then, who art but a subordinate Member, be eager to be set up on Thrones;
rather let pride have a fall, let us fall down and kneel before the Lord our
Maker; for he comes to resist the proud. Humble your selves therefore, even
therefore, because God resists the proud: which is the first Motive in my Text.

The Original speaks more emphatically, (...), God sets himself in battle array
against him that has a proud look. For (...), is a military word, signifying
in order to set against: So that the Lord does instruere aciam, even gather an
army of his Creatures against the insolent. He is not tied to vindicate his
honor merely by an army of Men; he can raise an army of his lowest Creatures,
able enough to confound the proudest Pharaohs, the most deified Herod's: an army
of Flies, or an army of Locusts; an army of Frogs, or an army of Lice; an army
of Drops, or an army of Dust: He can raise an army against the proud out of his
own Flesh; an army of Worms, or an army of spots; an army of fiery
Inflammations, windy Convulsions, watery Defluxions: He can raise an army out of
his own soul; an army of vain Follies, and ruinous Devices. If God be against
us, who can be with us? Neither is he limited to apparent and sensible ways,
he can destroy the proud by secret and hidden blows. When Nebuchadnezzar was
proud of his goodly and gorgeous building, a Voice from Heaven said, Thy
Kingdom is departed from thee; and presently he was exiled, and made free
Denison of the fields seven years, Dan. 4. This sin has a long repentance.
Goliath, the glory of the Philistines, was resisted only by a stone which was
flung at him, and his own Sword cut off his head, 1 Samuel 11. Antiochus
threatened to make Jerusalem a common place of burial for the Jews; God smote
him with an invisible incurable disease in his Bowels, wherewith he was
tormented till his death, 2 Machab. 9.

Secondly, God resists the proud by hindering their purposes: when Zenacharib,
the proud King of Assyria, intended the destruction of the Jews, God, by his
Angel, slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand of his Camp by night; and
only by the hearing of a noise, a blast, he was so scared, that he turned home
into his own land, where he fell by the Sword of his own Sons, 2 King. 9. Saul
proudly purposed David's destruction; 1 Samuel 23.27, 28.
a Messenger on the sudden tell'd him a Rumor, that the Philistines had
invaded the Land, and he turns from pursuing David.

Thirdly, God resists the proud by turning their Counsels upon themselves, and
ensnaring them with their own mischiefs. The proud Princes of Babylon condemned
Daniel to the Lions Den; but the Lions devoured them, their Wives and Children,
Dan. 6.

Lastly, God resists the proud by taking away the things whereof they are
proud. The Damsels of Israel are threatened to have all their bravery and
ornaments taken away, Isai. 3. The Cormorant, proud of his riches, was bereaved
of them, Luke 12. So if we be proud of our strength, God will take it away by
sickness; if of beauty, by an Ague or the small Pocks; if of wit, by an
Apoplexy, or doting folly. It Is evident, the Almighties word stands as a Law,
which says, He that exalts himself shall be brought low, Luke 18. He that is
proud, shall come to shame; nay, to destruction, Prove. 12. And thus, from the
Argument of Illation by way of resistance, I proceed to the other Motive in
regard of the mighty hand of God: Humble your selves therefore under the mighty
hand of God.

But has God a hand? Yes: as he has an Eye, Foot, and the like; not properly,
truly and literally; but improperly, figuratively, in a borrowed sense, by way
of similitude or resemblance. So the Apostle, expressing the exercise of Gods
supreme power, speaks (...), after the manner of men, who are wont to be
humbled by the hand. So when God by his mighty power dried the Sea, softened the
Rocks, turned the River into Blood, staid the Sun, darkn'd the Moon, and made
the whole earth to tremble; the Psalmist calls this might of his power, the
might of his hand; Psalm. 11^.15.
The right hand of the Lord has brought mighty things to pass: It is the might
and strength of his power, which orders all things according to the Counsel of
his own will. It is He who in due time will exalt us.

He, not Chance or Fortune; but He, and He alone; shall exalt, not tread down;
in due time, not perhaps in a time expected, but then, when it shall be more
requisite, more comfortable, even in due time. Now if all true advancement be
from God, he then that is exalted, and not by the Lord, is exalted with a
Vengeance. Haman was so highly exalted, that he was reputed as Haman the high:
but because it was not this HE in my Text who exalted him, all his honor
quickly decayed; for when he expected to be raised to the high seat of Dignity,
a Halter was his comfort; they hanged him on a Tree which he had prepared for
Mordecai. How did Abimelech weary and waste himself in obtaining a Kingdom? but
because he took not the right Method in coming to it by the Lord, the prime
Author of all glory, all his pomp lay in the dust: a silly woman cast a piece
of Millstone upon his head, and brake his Scull, which was the bane of all his
hopeful endeavors, Judge. 9. In the eleventh of the second of Kings, Athaliah
reigned. Queen over all the Land; but because the Lord set her not up, but her
own bloody Ambition, by destroying the Seed royal, not long after she was slain
by the Sword. Let us therefore rather want, then be great on any terms, which
are not godly and righteous. It Is better to endure poverty, then to be potent
by parting with piety. The purchase is extremely dear, when we part with our
souls in the bargain.

Again, it is He the LORD which exalts; why then boastest thou thy self,
sacrificing to thy Nets, as if by thy wit or worth thou could add one cubit
to thy stature, one mite to thy millions, one grain to thy graces? Without me,
says Christ, ye can do nothing, John 15. And, without God, says the Apostle,
you can have nothing, 1 Cor. 4. What says the Psalmist? Except the Lord build
the house, they labor in vain that build it: and except the Lord keep the
city, the watchmen watch in vain, Psalm 127. And whom the pride of heart
promoteth, though they should make their nest as high as the Eagle, the Lord
will bring them down thence, Jer. 49.16. Yea, though his excellency mount up to
the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever
like his own dung, verse. 6, 7. Do not then in your endowments, say thus: I have
gotten by the might of my power; but look up rather to God, who has so poured
out his blessings on us, that we should remember to give up our blessings to
him, praising and magnifying his holy Name, that he may exalt you.

We see in Nature, that the greatness of enjoyments infer the lowest
condescentions; the more the Tree is laden with Fruit, the lower it bends to
the ground. Hence it is, that many come short of honor, though it be most men's
aim, because they would ascend to be honored, without descending to be
humbled. The old Romans, in building one Temple to Virtue, and another to
Honor, conjoined them in such sort, as none could enter into that of Honor,
except he first made a passage through this of Virtue. In like manner it is Gods
Ordinance, that none be exalted in his upper Courts, but such as contentedly
submit to stoop and pass through the low wicket, and narrow door of Humility
here below. This is exemplified in little and lowly David, whose Humility
translated him from the Sheepfold to the high seat of Princes; yea, of the
Princes of his people. We confess, every one that is humble, does not here with
Saul, find a Kingdom, while he is seeking his Fathers Asses, 1 Samuel 9. Yet
many mean Apprentises, who have endured the heat of the day, and the drudgery
of the night, have been advanced to the Skarlet and golden Chain of a Lord
Mayor; and sure it is within the memory of man, that poor Scholars have ascended
to be Lord-Bishops.

But this exaltation of the lowly, is raised by degrees; for though God be ever
the same in himself, yet he is not always so in us; though he loves his beloved
to the end, yet his love has some intermission. And this he does in his
infinite wisdom; for the withholding of that we desire, increases our desire;
the more we stay for it, the more we long after it. We commonly never know the
benefit of a thing, but by the absence of it; our health would not be so much
esteemed, if it pleased not the Lord we were sometimes sick. The long absence
of a Friend, makes him the more welcome at his return. Thus the only wise
Disposer of all things, often times delays his Mercies, substracts his Comforts,
withdraws his gracious Presence, to the end we may know our selves, and seek
after him with greater fervency and devotion. The humble have their crosses,
but they are only for the trial of their Virtues. What if we be humbled under
the mighty hand of God? the same hand which smote us, shall make us whole, and
lift us up; and that in DVE time.

All things have a time, orderly things a due time. In bestowing his Mercy, the
Lord regards the circumstance so well as the substance; not only in time, but
in due time. That Is the grace of a favor, to do it opportunely, orderly, and
conveniently, in a due time. Food and Physic given in due season, prosper
well; but the most necessary of these out of due time, does hurt rather then
help. God has this gracious attribute among the rest, He is a present help in
time of need, Psam 9.9. (That is) he performs it in extremity; then, when the
mind of him who is in affliction, does most greedily covet and desire it. To
every thing, Eccles. 3.1. there is an appointed time; whatsoever is done,
suffered, enjoyed, whether natural, voluntary, or involuntary, it has a set
time wherein it is beautiful and comely. And though long, yet at length every
promise, every threat, every prediction, shall come to his just period and
performance. So it is expressed in Habakkuk the second, The vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie: though it tarry,
wait for it, because it shall surely come, it will not tarry. It is the madness
of the world, not to stay the time God has designed, but they must straight
have their longings. Good Moses was overtaken thus, expostulating with the
Lord, Exodus 5. Since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy Name, he has vexed this
people more, and yet thou have not delivered thy people at all: He thought it
much to expect Gods due time. In like manner the souls of those that lie under
the Altar, cried, Lord, how long? thou art holy, and just, and true; do thou
not judge, avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Revelations the
sixth. But they received answer, They must rest for a season, till the fullness
of time. Nothing befalls us, but in Gods time; which we must attend, not
prescribe. In the one hundred twenty ninth Psalm, God suffered evil men to plow
the Church, and so make long Furrows on the back of it; Yet, says the Prophet,
the Lord will cut the cords of the wicked: their plow shall have no more traces
to be drawn with. The Church may be given over to be vexed and tormented for a
certain season; but when the holy One has done his work, when he has
sufficiently corrected his people to their amendment, then he breaks the cords,
the traces, and bonds asunder.

The Israelites groaned a long time under Pharaohs burdens; but when four
hundred and thirty years were full, the period which God set, the fit time;
then, upon the very same day, they were delivered, and Pharaoh utterly
destroyed, Exo. 12.41. There Is a clear place for this, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Where,
speaking of the Enemies of the Church, it is said, His foot shall slide in due
time. Perhaps you may complain and think it too long, but it is not too long;
if it were any sooner, it would be too soon. In DVE time his foot shall slide:
Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb.
10. That is, he will not tarry a jot beyond the due time and season that is
fittest. When blessed Mary, the Mother of the Lord, would have had him to turn
water into wine, he tell'd her she must stay her time, for my hour is not yet
come, John 2. (i.) The hour wherein it might be more acceptable, and the
miracle more profitable for them, for whose sakes the blessed Virgin desired it
to be done. So though he exceedingly loved Lazarus, yet he would not make such
have to help him, as was desired, John 11. And why? even because he who knew
all things, knew this also, That when he was dead in his grave, the time was
most fit,

First, in regard of God, because thereby to him would accrue the greater glory.

Secondly, in respect of Christ himself, because by such an extraordinary Act,
he should the more soundly confute and confound the Jews. And besides, his
Disciples, through this Miracle, were the more strongly confirmed in their
belief. Wherefore, in the midst of our pressures and calamities, let us abide
cheerfully, and comfortably look for Gods due time. For the All-sufficient
helps at a pinch; when all help fails, then is he seen. Does Jacob want bread
at home? Genesis 45.
then Joseph is heard of abroad. Though he would not deliver Jonas from the
tempest, Jonas 2.
he did from the Whales belly. The greater the danger was, the more his glory.

The better to win you to wait Gods leisure, as Abraham did, bethink your
selves how many a long look God has made for us. Rev. 2.
Has he not stood at our Doors knocking and calling, till his head was full of
dew, Cant. 5.
and his locks full of the drops of the night? Forty days he staid for Nineve,
Jonas the third. Forty years for Jerusalem, Psalm the ninety fifth; and a
Century for England. How much more then should we wait on him, till he will
have mercy; ingeminating our prayers for help, until he heales our bones, since
he has promised that he will rise and have mercy upon Zion? Psalm 102.

We now, O Lord, humble our selves before thee, in praying to thee, and by a
thankful Remembrance of thy Meritorious dying for us.

Now therefore exalt us in thy strength, refresh our souls with the Comforts of
thy holy Spirit, that we may glorify thy holy Name, trust in thy promises, and
hope in thy Mercies, through Christ's Merits; to whom, with thee and the holy
Spirit, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, be rendered all praise and
thanksgiving, service and obedience, from Generation to Generation. Amen.

John 1. first part verse. 14. The Word was made Flesh.


SERMON. XV.
THese words, though few in number, are in meaning large: Take them
Historically, so they are a short Creed: Take them Figuratively, so they
contain the mystery of the blessed Sacrament: Take them Morally, so they sum up
the practick end of all our preaching. Thus, as I conceive, they set forth unto
us, a threefold Incarnation of our Savior; His Incarnation in the Womb, in
the Eucharist, in the Life of a Christian. One way he is incarnate by himself
alone; the second way he is often made flesh by our subordinate Ministry, that
is, sacramentally; and a third way he is to be made flesh by your tractable
duty. The Historical sense I have heretofore examined, and by command, 'twas
made publicly extant. Therein I showed three members growing out of the Text;
the Person Assuming, the Nature Assumed, and the Manner of the Union. The
Person Assuming, the Word, the second Person of the Deity; the Nature Assumed,
Humane, by the Name of Flesh; the Manner of Union, secretly and wonderfully
wrought, not by carnal generation, not by conversion, or mixture of substance,
but by mere making; The Word was MADE flesh.

The sum of the first member was this: That by the Name of Word, the Son of
God, or Gods inward Conception and pure Reason, was here signified; (for a
Spirit has naturally no other Son but such) and that he was signified by the
Name Word more properly and personally then by any other. More properly then by
the Name Son; for that name is common to Adam, Luke 3.28. and does not
sufficiently distinguish from the uncleanly and material birth of Creatures.
Likewise that he is named by Word more personally then by Light, Wisdom,
Image, which without some further Adjunct, agrees to other persons of the Deity.

From the second Member, this is the Extract, That the incomprehensible Word
took Flesh to become sensible: that he so manifested himself for our Salvation,
which could not be wrought by taking any but humane flesh, the same that
offended. Flesh, man's worser part, as well as the better, to save him wholly.
True flesh, to save him indeed. Flesh in general, to save many; not flesh
restrained to a particular humane, but elevated to a divine Person. That such
generality was most congruous with his all-spreading Divinity; that the Comfort
thereof extended the Capacity of Salvation to us Gentiles and Sinners, as well
as to the Jews; that flesh being so contemptible and vile, and yet taken by
Christ the Natural Son of God, was also a Motive to Humility. The Contents of
the last member were these; That his temporal or second Conception, was merely
a making; not humane generation joined with carnal Knowledge, but a secret
over-shadowing and workmanship of God, joined with the Virgins: That thereby it
was pure in it self, and fit to cleanse others: That this making was no
conversion either of Word or Flesh, no mixture of both, but only a distinct
reception of humane nature, into the personal subsistence of the Deity: That
there arose from this Union, an ample transfusion of Royal gifts and
prerogatives, whereby the humane Nature was highly advanced; and likewise by
that Nature, our humane Persons, who, by this means, have a near Consanguinity
with God, and great hope by that Consanguinity.

Thus much Historically, for your constant belief: I will now proceed to touch
the same Text sacramentally, for your future benefit; for in the Sacrament also
the Word is made Flesh.

Word is now to be taken in another sense, not substantially for the Person of
Christ, but effectively, for the word by him spoken, the word of Consecration,
first pronounced by our Savior, and afterward by us: Or else for a further
effect of that word, grace conveyed by Christ's Institution, and our Ministry,
into a sacramental body. And then for the Word made flesh, you have grace made
meat; grace, the beam of his Godhead in bread, the Deputy of his Flesh and
Manhood; which if ye eat religiously with a believing soul, as well as
naturally with a digesting body, not only as bread, but as a Sacrament, then
eat and live, be as gods indeed, knowing good without evil. For then the bread
is not more really converted into your flesh for bodily strength, then the
flesh of Christ is truly united to your souls for the strength of the Spirit;
truly united, not by the identity of Nature only, so it was before, but by
lively Operation. The incarnation made the Sacrament true, the Sacrament makes
the incarnation beneficial. For Sacraments are not only solemn Ceremonies, and
significant Commemorations of Christ's death; but exhibitive Conduits of Life to
us; through which, if they be not stopped by our own wilful or negligent faith,
grace will constantly flow.

Many similitudes there are betwixt these two Nativities: Though that were
transacted in a Stable, and this in a temple; yet commonly in both places
Christ is laid in a Manger, a dusty filthy Manger; else the beasts cannot feed
about him, profane Menbeasts, barbarously sluttish through pretended purity,
excessively proud through Christ's humility. As there the Word was true God, so
here he is true grace; as there he was perfect man, so here he is perfect
bread, bread indeed, the true staff of Life; transubstantiated into flesh, I
will not say, nor consubstantiate with flesh, (for what need this?) but the
body of Christ so truly present, (though I know not fully how) that you may
safely call the consecrated bread, the body of Christ.

Again, as the Word did not assume any particular humane person, but flesh in
general; so grace is here annexed to general bread; general, for the many
grains whereof it was made, to signify the Unity of fit Receivers: general for
the making, it may be ordinary and usual bread, to signify the indifferency of
the Receivers, any Gentile of any estate, any well-disposed Christian, may come
and welcome.

Besides, as the Word was not converted into flesh by the Union there; so grace
is not here transcorporated into bread; the mere bodily eating will not
ingratiate. One touch of faith was once more medicinable, and may be still,
then either was the thronging of the rude multitude to our Savior, Mat 9.
or the gross eating of him can be to you.

Lastly, as the wise men came worshipping and bringing presents at our Saviors
substantial birth, Gold, Myrrh and Frankincense; so they that are wise, will
reverence his sacramental birth; they will bring their Treasure of Charity to
relieve his poor, they will bring the Myrrh of repentance to imbalm and bury
the old Man of sin; their incense of prayer and devotion, whose sweet savor
may ascend up to heaven. One main difference I find: Christ was then lodged in
a pure Virgin, but our vile Carcasses have been deflowered or defiled with
diverse fleshly and worldly lusts. What shall we say then? Shall we cry out with
the Centurion, Mar. 8.8.
I am unworthy that thou should enter under my roof? Luke 5.8.
Or with Saint Peter, Lord, depart from me, for I am a sinner? Not so, Lord;
but let thy blessed Spirit joined with our own sighs, fan our inner parts; that
though still unworthy, we may be somewhat more worthy of so high a Guest.

If the Word be made flesh in the Sacrament: and you the receivers, then
whenever you come near, address your selves like the blessed Virgin, while
the earthly Angel thus saultes her, Luke 1.28.
Hayl Soul full of grace, the Lord is with thee: Then must you necessarily
stand amazed; V.30.
but he proceeds, Fear not, behold, thou shall conceive, V.31.
and bear a Son, his Name is JESUS. Then put thou on the Modesty of blessed
Mary; what said she? How may this be, V.34.
seeing I know not a man? So say thou, Lord, how may this be, since I know thee
not, not as I ought? V.35.
The same answer may serve for both, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the most High shall overshadow thee: Then take blessed Mary's
Faith, and ready Obedience, V.38.
Be it according to thy word; then her humility, esteeming thy self far
unworthy of such honor, V.48.
and he that is mighty will regard the lowliness of his Servant; Then break out
into her thanksgiving, My Soul does magnify the Lord, V.46.
and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior: And be sure of her Charity,
resolve to visit Elizabeth, V.40.
and to live in Amity with thy kindred in Christ.

This instruction in one respect is like the Ant's provision, to be laid up
against another season. Providence may lay it up, but folly, I fear, will be
the Keeper: what say the Many, the Multitude? It need not be used till Easter.
How are we fallen from the Primitive Zeal toward this heavenly food? the time
has been when it was daily bread; and need not we pray it were permitted to be
made so now? The sad face of these warring times being drawn with as deep a
shadow as that. But men, for the most part; use it scarce yearly; and by their
wills, take it once in an age; just when they are dying, then they call for the
means of good living; and when they can sin no more; they think of repentance
and pardon; so condemning all their former life, by their own judgment and act
at last.

But be it sadly considered; is this a sound reason to excuse our backwardness,
I am not in Charity, I am clogged with weights of sin, or I have some lusts to
be fulfilled? Then say likewise, I am sick, and therefore unapt to take
Physic; I have soars upon me, and therefore will touch no Plaster; I am
almost starved, and therefore will eat no bread: But say others, this Physic,
this Plaster, and this Food, if not rightly used, is dangerous and deadly: so
is prayer, so is preaching, so is thy common bread, so is every thing which God
has given for our welfare: but as evil is not to be committed for love of
good; so is not good to be omitted, for fear of evil.

Wherefore invert thy frigid reason, and endeavor to draw near: do not forbear
because thou art in malice, but force thy self to be in Charity, that thou
may communicate. Do not hug thy sin, and complain it makes thee unfit, lest
thou be found to prefer that sin before Christ; but rather renounce it with thy
heart, and Christ is ready to be received. If still thou think thy self
unworthy, know, that so to think, is the best part of thy worthiness.

Let the words I have spoken concerning the enlivening of this God-uniting
mystery, both excite your appetite of receiving the substance, and instruct
your devotion in the manner of receiving it. Then these things which I have
delivered, being rightly performed at the sacramental Incarnation, you shall
soon be well gone with a third Nativity, even the Moral, which is to be ripened
by a religious and dutiful practice of Christ's holy precepts. For thus in
Morality, the Word is also made flesh; which is the third sense proposed.

The Word, I say, is made flesh, as before substantially in the Womb, when
Christ came down to us; and then effectively in the Sacrament, where he meets
us half way: so now affectively in our Christian morality, whereby we travel to
him; and through which he descends to the heart, and there takes deeper hold;
and still by the same spiritual way, still by an over-shadowing of the Holy
Ghost, and Man's obedient Faith.

Take heed then how you hear, for Christ is in the Voice. As the Word in the
Flesh was spiritually conceived; so now in the sound he cannot be conceived
carnally, nor impregnate a heart which is filled with unclean desires. When
that which you hear, is well digested, when it thrives and grows into bodily
action, when the engrafted Word buds out, and brings forth fruit after the
spiritual graft; then is the Word perfectly incarnate, then it has gotten
living Members masterable to the best use; eyes to look up, knees to pray,
hands to give, and a mouth to praise. See that ye thus use your Members.

If the Word be so prevalent in you, as to make you, subdue the unruliness of
the flesh to the Governance of the spirit, to drown the habit of excess in the
Cup of the Eucharist, to consume the fire of lust and the fire of stife with
the fire of Devotion. If ye observe with all your power, a sober, a clean, and
Virgin-like behavior, adding your Fiat and obedient consent to the Word
spoken; Christ is much alike made flesh in you, as in the pure and blessed
Virgin. See you strive to put this in practice.

If, remembering the word of Christ, ye overcome the sollicitous dotage of this
world, with meditation of heavenly treasure, and proceed to make friends of
unrighteous Mammon, scattering the superfluous dust of your pockets, or doales
of your basket, the Word is almost literally made flesh; flesh in thy hand,
flesh in him that is fed also; and He, whom thou feedest, is Christ. Me you
fed, Mat. 25.35, 36. V. 40. etc.
Me you clothed, Me you lodged; 'twas I, says our Savior. And well shall ye
be while this is practiced.

But those, thou will say, are tokens of a Moral, Foster-parent, not of one
that brings forth Christ indeed. Be it so; yet if Christ esteemed his Moral,
his Foster-Parent better then his Natural, as merely natural, do thou esteem so
too. In comparison of obedient Hearers, he seems to vilify his own Mother: M^^
^^. 48.
Concerning her, he asks who, who she was; He seems strange to her, for our
learning; but his obedient Hearers he freely acknowledges, V. 4^.
Behold my Mother, my Brothers, and my Sisters: And as Christ spoke, so blessed
Mary thought of her self, according to her wonted humility; for, says the
Gospel, Luk 2.19.
she laid up his sayings in her heart. She had not so much of him already, but
that she needed a further Conception: Better it was to bear him in soul, then
to have born him in body.

However, great resemblance there is betwixt bearing, and true hearing. Saint
Paul communicates the acts of the one to the other, breeding, fashioning,
travel: My Children, I am in travel again till Christ be fashioned within you,
Gal. 4.19. When the Word begins to curdle, and qualms come over the
Conscience, then is Christ a breeding; when godly purposes are conceived,
Christ is a fashioning; when our bowels yearn with heavenly longings for
execution, then we are in travel with Christ; and when we come to action,
Christ is delivered; yet still remaining within. Will thou farther know how he
lives within? Even as thou do, by Motion, Heat, and Food: By Motion upward,
in love of heavenly things; downward, in fear of infernal: by Heat also, that
of Zeal and Devotion: by Food likewise, continual supply of the word, which
repairs what sin has wasted; and not without a restraining digesting faculty,
which turns the food to nourishment, to growth, and fruit.

Yet Christ, when he was upon the earth, did not live upon the Word only,
sometimes on bread. Feed him now with bread also, not only with that bread
which thou receivest in the Sacrament, sometimes with that thou shoudlst give
to others; to others, that thy self may live in Christ, and He in thee.

Why did the Woman cry out, BLESSED is the Womb that bare thee, Luke 11.27.
and the Breasts that gave thee suck? What need of a Womb, when thou have a
fruitful heart? What need of Milk, when thou have strong Meat? Or why no care
but only for this Milk, the sincere Milk of the Word? Give Christ the
strongest Meat a poor man can eat, feed him with such Breasts as Kings, in the
sixtieth of Isaiah, are said to have, with protection of his weak, bounty
toward his little ones.

Beloved, there is not a woman, nor a Virgin, no nor a man here, but by some
kind or other, by obeying the Gospel, may be the Mother of Christ, his blessed
Mother; and, if you believe the Prophet, may have breasts to give him suck.
This is easier for you to believe, then for blessed Mary the Message brought to
her; you have her Example, she had none. And shall you then, all the sort of
you, be Mothers of Christ? Doubt it not: Be only in some measure pure as HE,
holy as HE, righteous as HE, humble as HE, charitable as HE; as HE by word and
Example bids you, and Christ will grow within you. Then if his flesh be
blessed, blessed shall you be, you that hear his Word, and make it flesh by
doing.

AMEN.

S. Matthew, chap. 12. verse. 36. But I say unto you, That of every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give account at the day of judgment.


SERMON. XVI.
IN this Chapter Christ is questioned, blasphemed, and blasted with the infamy
of casting out Devils by the power of the Devil. For the Pharisees, the men
principally intended in the Text, had their eyes so blinded with malice, that
seeing, they might not see, or at least not acknowledge the wonderful miracles
of our Savior, to proceed from the Spirit of God; Pride puffed them up with an
affectation of being called Masters of Israel; and caused them, by way of
Prerogative, to assume that cenforious humor of judging others, which here
they put in practice upon the Judge of the whole world. The unsettled multitude
was herewith amazed, verse. 23. In this Sea of distraction, lest the Church
might suffer Shipwreck; Christ, in the riches of his mercy, becomes the Pilot
himself, draws the directing Compass, makes the Card they must sail by,
preaches to them what they ought to follow; and by showing the danger of a
less sin, seeks to divert them from a greater. The drift of his Argument being
this: Delude not your souls in extenuating your Offenses; Obloquies so well as
blasphemies, not only grossly evil, but trifling idle speeches, shall be
charged upon you in the last Enditement. So that in the Text is observable, a
Trespass objected, consisting in single words, not simply as words, but as they
are qualified, and discerned to be extravagant, IDLE words. Secondly, a process
certainly to be issued forth, and an impartial Verdict to pass against them, in
regard He that neither deceives nor can be deceived, expressly assures it, That
they shall come to a strict account at the day of judgment, which is the time,
even the last day of the world, when Gods Justice shall be thoroughly
accomplished. But I say unto you, That of every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account at the day of judgment.

Christ's sayings are (...), Principles to be believed, not Premises to be
proved: so that it is enough to hear from his mouth, Ego dico, I say unto you.
Indeed, it is lawful to lay the positions of men in the balance of examination,
that reason may be pondered and poys'd with reason; but this honor is ever to
be given to the words of Christ, that we should say with the Centurion, Mat.
8.8.
Speak the word only. Humane Reasons are like Comets, not fixed in any Orb of
truth; but our Saviors Doctrine is like himself, sound and heavenly.

Now though I may say with Tertullian, Uti Languentes cum vacent a sanitate, de
vonis ejus tacere non norant, etc. Tertull. de patien.
That as they, who languish with sickness, are most prone to talk of health,
not because they enjoy, but desire it: so I exhort you to a moderation, a
pertinency of speech, rather as one that would have it, then as one that
possesses it. Yet because sometimes a diseased Physician may prescribe
healthsome physic, and a deformed Engraver carve a fair pourtraiture; I trust
God will bless these my weak endeavors, while for my own and your good, I have
made my self a common Remembrancer to prepare our particular accounts against
the coming of the Lord. But first I am to examine the Offense in its qualified
Notion, which is every idle word.

It Is well stated by the Philosopher and Divine, that words were ordained to
set forth Gods glory, man's gratitude, and to keep up civil commerce. For by the
use of speech, we understand each others wants; and so are accommodated
mutually to communicate convenient supplies. If then our words tend not to the
Love of God and our Neighbor, the Law shall judge and condemn them as a
scandalous waste of that rich Talent and powerful Gift of Rational discourse.
Why has the only wise Creator locked up the Tongue in a dark hole, as in a
prison; shut and barred it in with Teeth and Jaws, but to prevent impertinent
idle Language? And is it not seated betwixt two sovereign parts of man, the
brain and heart, that by the assistance of a right understanding, and
wellordered will, the tongue may be kept within the bounds of rectified Reason?
If it break out into intemperate swearing, it fills the man with iniquity: so
speaks the Son of Syrach, 23 Ecclus. v. 11. and by his bad example corrupting
the Family, derives a heavy curse to his posterity. The Plague, as it follows
there, shall never depart from his house. But do not I herein seem a rigid
Precisian, more strict then Christ, making him to mean more then he does? Shall
the God of compassion, whose mercy is over and above all his works, be so
severe as to call us to account for these smaller trifles? If our Savior
literally signified, that our idle words, sins of so mean a quality, should be
examined by such a fiery trial; how is it that St. Paul speaks to Ananias, God
shall smite thee, thou whited wall? Act. 23. Does not the Apostle's example
intimate that Christ spoke here by way of hyperbole, or excess of speech, so
that he strains not so high indeed, as we bear the world in hand? Surely no;
for the speech of Saint Paul is no curse, but only a reprehension, conjoined
with a denouncement of Gods future judgment. He says not, I PRAY God to smite
thee; but only it shall come to pass, that God shall smite thee. Which, in
effect, is, God will not suffer thee to escape unpunished. And therefore,
because it might be objected, that David, in the 109 Psalm, almost throughout,
seems to run upon Imprecations or Curses; Saint Austin answers, Many times In
verbis male Optantis, intelligenda sunt praedicta Prophetantis; Aust. in Ps.
108.
That which is spoken in manner of an Imprecation, is indeed but a prediction
what God in future times will do to the Enemies of his Church and Glory.
Besides, The Prophets were not obnoxious, though they used Imprecations, in
that they had their warrant from the Lord himself; their Commission to bless or
curse, was dictated to them. As for us, obligat praeceptum generale, ubi no est
privilegium speciale; having no particular dispensation, we are still obliged
to bridle our tongues from scandalous words, Jam. 1.26.
else our religion is vain. The everlasting Law of the Lord is, Thou shall not
raise or receive a false report, Exodus 24. In the twenty seventh of
Deuteronomy, he is cursed that smites his Neighbor secretly. And Saint James
charge us, not so much as to grudge one against another, Chap. 5.9.
lest we be condemned.

I grant, idle words, as every other Vice, has a latitude and degrees: there
is a word of a deep and double dye, of a full extent, commensurable with the
fierceness of Gods wrath; the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 23.12. significantly terms
it a word clothed about with death, the Garment sticking not so close to the
body, as death does to his soul, who usually utters it. And there be words of a
lesser size, and smaller measure: In the fifth of the Proverbs, we read of
Ropes, and Wain-ropes of Sin. And Isaiah the fifth Chapter, mentions funiculos
vanitatis, slight cords of vanity. Of this sort is (...) a frivolous word,
(...), an unsavory speech, and (...) saucy jesting, which is wont to be
nick-nam'd pleasant conceit. It Is too true, this kind of Vice is become the
Mode, the Garb, the Music of these times. Men offend so considerately herein,
that they think it no less then a great commendation to be so courtly impious.
They are so much in love with this Art of sinning, that the disuse thereof is
esteemed mere dullness, and want of breeding. Yet Saint Paul's Rule is, Ephesians. 5.
that foolish talking, and scurrile jesting, should not once be named amongst
us: where it is observable, that (...), which the Moralist styles Vrbanity, and
ranks amongst Moral Virtues, the New Testament interprets direct scurrility,
and brands it as a great Crime. For this facile accommodation, this sporting of
a luxuriant Wit, to humor some and displease others, is no better then a breach
of the sixth Commandment, in regard it prepares and often occasions effusion of
blood.

Hence is it, that Christ, the right Interpreter of his Fathers will, gives us
to understand in the fifteenth of Saint Matthew, that to be angry without a
cause, to say Racha, Thou emptybrain, Thou fool, Pish, or the like unadvised
terms, is sufficient to discard us from our heavenly Inheritance, if the Lord
be not pleased to (...), to connive at it, as the Holy Ghost phraseth it in the
seventeenth of the Acts, but to observe this contemptuous and provoking
behavior. The reason may be, because (...), unclean, unseemly communication,
abates the servency of devotion, corrupts and deads Gods graces in us. (...),
scoffing neglect, slackens the heat of Charity, and unties the knot of
Friendship. Flesh and Blood is most sensible of derision: how often does David
complain, he was made a scorn and byword? Saul had not many minutes of life
left, yet he prayed his Armor-bearer to kill him, 1 Samuel 31.4.
because he could not endure to hear the uncircumcised to reproach him in a
jeering insolency. We know Rehoboam, 1 Kin. c. 12.
through an unpleasing speech, lost ten Tribes at a clap. Wherefore Saint
Bernard well says, Ser. 3. de Custod. ling.
Leviter volat, sed graviter vulnerat; A term of disgrace passes suddenly from
out mouths, as lightning out of the Clouds; but like lightning, it strikes the
inmost parts after a various manner. For it wounds the Conscience of him that
speaks, gives scandal to those which hear, and takes away the lively heart of
such as are made the Argument, the Subject of undervaluing Scoffs and Jeers.
The Parthians, as Dion relates, shot Arrows against Lucullus his Soldiers with
two heads, which were set on in such sort, that although they were forthwith
drawn out of their bodies; yet the one point of the head would still remain in
the flesh, which caused their destructions. Such Arrows are daily sent abroad
by those scoffing Michols, who delight to sit in the feat of the scornful; and
so perniciously are they picked and headed, that albeit they be presently
recalled and drawn back; yet they often leave such a scar, such a pestilent point
in the soul, that many times it bereaves it of Gods favor, which is the life
of the soul. What then shall be done to those calumniating tongues, which are
bent like bows for outrageous lies, that they may shoot at the upright in
heart, throwing dirt in the face of Authority, reviling those who ought to be
obeyed for Conscience sake, traducing them to walk in craftiness, and to handle
the word deceitfully; when, as it is in the second to the Corinthians, and in
the fourth Chapter, in declaration of the truth, they approve themselves to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God? Christ has already sentenced such
to be of the Devil, since his works they do. He is accustomed to deprave those,
which most excel, being herein not unlike Fencers, who sometimes cunningly take
aim at the Foot, when their intent is to reach the Head. So Satan, and his
detracting accomplices, by defaming the worthiest of Gods Servants, do project to
bring the true worship of God into contempt, as many by blaming the Servant
have sought the overthrow of the Master.

The Syriack, (...) Hebr. (...) Kerats Chald. scidit, and Syriace per metaph.
accusavit. Inde nomen Syriac. (...) Kartso Accusatio, calumnia, unde addito
verbo (...) Achal, quod significat edere, Acal-Kartso, accusavit, q. d.
accusationem, vel calumniam edit. Inde nomen participale (...) Oeel-Kartso,
Accusator, Diabolus' quasi calumniis vescens.
in many places of the New Testament, instead of (...), sets down, says
Shindler, (...), Ocel-kartso, Accusator, quasi edens accusationem, The eater of
Accusations: from which name I observe, that as the doing of his Fathers will
was Christ's meat and drink; so, in in opposition thereunto, to calumniate the
Children of obedience, is the main Food of the Devil and his Adherents.

Of all idle words, which tend not to any good, the murmuring seeret VVhisperer
has the most excessive number. His tongue buzzeth false rumors into credulous
ears, raises commotions as causeless, as pernicious; makes the multitude
believe there is a Snake under every Leaf; and although we protest tabulis
consignatis, and confirm it by the sure testimony of an Oath, that as we have
printed in our books, so we have in our hearts; yet these fame-defacing
surmisers, publish up and down, that our bosom, like Rachels tent, has Idols
hid in the Straw; or like a Philistin's Temple, has the Ark and Dagon under
one Roof. These never cease crying out to the Church, as the Devil did to
Christ, Cast thy self down, humble thy self before us. The Church, albeit rent,
and almost ruined, is yet too glorious in their eyes; it faring with these men,
as with those, who standing on the earth, look up to lofty pinnacles, which
still seem to waver and ^^and awry, when the defect is in their own ^^ght.

The truth is, the fault lies in the discontented, self-seeking, levelling
Spirits, who choose rather to scarrifie, then close our wounds; casting Coals,
and kindling strife betwixt the supreme and subordinate, that the whole Nation
may be set on flame and in Combustion. The Priests of old, caused the Oracle to
answer according to King Philip's humor: These have delivered the sense of
Gods sure Oracles, sometimes one way, sometimes another, as the wind and tide
best served to foment faction and tumult, making the spiritual Manna of the
word to have a several taste, according to every man's palate, as the Rabbis
said the Israelites corpora^ Manna had. But the Lord, who changes not, will
not acknowledge such Changelings for his Messengers; for if we study to please
men, we shall not be the Friends of Christ. I could wish all Pretenders would
consider seriously, that no murmuring so secret shall go for naught; and the
mouth that speaks lies, slays the soul, Wisd. 1.11. Which mischievous effects
proceed not from any native disease radical in the tongue, but only by
sympathy and consent with an ill disposed heart. As we see the head may suffer
pain and anguish, not so much from any obnoxious quality inherent in it, as
from the fumes arising out of a distempered and foul stomach. For words, as
consisting of Letters and syllables, are indifferent in their own nature; they
are made guilty, as they speak the temper of that breast from whence they flow.
Index est Animi sermo, speech is the Character, the Stamp, the Image of the
Mind; and so may justly be punished for its bad message, as a guiltless
Ambassador may be evil entreated, because his Errand distasted. In respect of
the concurrence and mutual correspondence betwixt the heart and tongue, our
thoughts are called (...), words of the mind. We read in the seventh of Saint
Luke, Simon said within himself; his thinking was speaking. Our thoughts
indeed, for want of the tongues forming and articulating, are not audible to
the ears of man; yet God understands their Language, he hears what we think. In
the twenty fifth verse of this Chapter, Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said
unto them: He discerns the re^ellion of our imaginations, the intemperance of
our affections; and if they be not razed out of the book of his remembrances,
by the grace of Repentance, he will judge them accordingly. So that we had need
to call our idle thoughts to examination, as well as our idle words; otherwise
one day they will both be brought to trial. Before the Lord, evil thoughts are
as much sins as evil deeds; as much perhaps, though not as great. Wherefore as
Christ was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: Isa.
53.
so he was delivered (...), even for our slips, as the Original expresses it
in the fourth to the Romans, and the last Verse.

This should make us tremble at Gods judgments due to our very trifling
lapses, since for these also our Savior shed his precious blood: we can be so
favorable to our selves, as to think the desire only to do a good work,
though there want ability to do it, is as well accepted with God, as if it were
done. And we must know too, that the contrary is as true; the desire of any
iniquity is as odious to the Omniscient Majesty, as the Act of Commission is.
Wherefore Saint John, 1 Epist. chap. 3. verse. 15. makes hatred of the heart,
murder before God. So that our conscience should be affrighted at each petty
puny offense; for one error may multiply into many. Solon, as Plutack reports,
reproving Thespis a Poet, for lying in his Play, Thespis answered, It was not
material to do or say such things, considering all was but in sport. Yea, but
replied Solon, if we commend lying in sport, we shall find it afterward in
good earnest. Christ, who is the Word, delights in our words when they are
conformable to his will; and therefore Satan, to cross him therein, makes the
first open entrance into irregular courses upon trivial occasions, as idle
words, which may serve to bring on, and usher in more outrageous evils. For the
unclean Spirit, having once insinuated and got entertainment in ou^ hearts by
these slight skirmishes, he will easily introduce seven other Spirits, nay, a
Legion, worse then himself. Let it then be our discretion and religion, to
strangle and suppress ill motions in the womb so soon as conceived; for if we
suffer them to ripen into idle words, they may prove the shame and destruction
of the Speaker. To make the account exact, every farthing must be expressed;
and so in the strict severity of Gods Justice, not only our crying sins, but
idle words, and vain thoughts, will be summed up, if they be not washed out by
relenting tears. Whence it is clear, that the arraigning our selves at the Bar
of our own Conscience in this life, is the only way to be acquitted hereafter
through our surety, Christ Jesus. For God loves to behold his Justice
prevented, by our accusing and condemning our selves, as being unwilling his
last destructive sentence of execution, should be served upon our persons: yet
take this Caution along also, If we call not our selves to account in this time
of Truce, but leave God to do it at the general Audit of all flesh, Mercy is
then out of date, there is no more parleying, but utter defiance; body and soul,
both will be forfeited without any Reprieve from eternal death: which refers me
to the circumstance of time, when this account is completely to be made, at the
day of judgment.

That there shall be a general Judgment, is granted by the very Devils, who, in
the eighth of Saint Matthew, are said to believe and tremble at the fearful
expectation of it. The Knowledge whereof in the general is imparted to us here,
that the Terror of the Lord might not overtake us like a violent storm, not to
be prevented, because not foreseen. To this end the last judgment is sometimes
decyphered by the name of a day, sometimes of a night. It Is styled A night, to
exci^e our vigilance, or watchfulness in expectation of its coming, which is
said to steal upon the world like a thief in the night. It Is called A day, to
make us blush in remembrance that our secret sins shall be disclosed, and the
thoughts of our hearts revealed as clear as the Sun in his brightness shining
at high noon. Again, this day of Judgment is said to be the last day: First,
to demonstrate Gods fatherly Tenderness over his Elect; many of them are yet
unconverted and unborn, therefore his goodness stays till their number be
accomplished. The Souls of them that lie under the Altar, Revelations the
sixth, did cry, How long, Lord, holy and true? do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them which dwell on the earth? And answer was there made, They
should rest for a season, till their Brethren and Fellow Servants should be
killed as they were. Our account is likewise posted off till the day of
Judgment, to declare the bountifulness and patience of the Lord, which waits
from year to year to see if at the last we will return to him in a true
reconciliation. And here is great inquisition of the certain time when the
Judgement-day shall be. It Is common in every mouth, how the Jews had a
prophecy that the world should continue six thousand years; two thousand
before the Law, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand under the Gospel.
Aug. lib. 20. Civ. Dei, c. 17.
Many of the Fathers conjectured it so to be, because it was created in six
days; strangely mistaking that phrase of Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 2.
One day with the Lord is as a thousand years. Cypr. de Exhort Mart. c. 11.
Lact. l. 7.
Lactantius was peremptory, that the world could not continue above two hundred
years in his age; but it has lasted those two hundred, and a thousand years
besides; which condemns his presumption.

In our time, a Cabalistical Calculator of our own Nation, has concluded from
the numeral Letters of Elohim, that the half year after one thousand six
hundred fifty two, should be the undoubted stint and period of the worlds
continuance, as you may find it in the thirteenth Chapter of his Book, Dr.
Alabaster,
entitled, Ecce Sponsus venit: And so his bolt is shot vainly. In points of
this nature, it is good to take Saint Paul's rule, Sapere ad sobrietatem, to
think soberly, Romans 12.
not above what we ought to think. Where the Holy Ghost in Scripture has not a
tongue to speak, we should have none to enquire; for if we fail in matters
which are subject to sense, and have their proper causes from our selves, what
are we like to do in things which are far above the point of our Horizon? The
time and season of the Lords final appearance, the (...), the last end of the
termination of the world, and all things therein, the Father has reserved in
his own power; and so it becomes not us to pry into the Ark of his secret
counsel, but we must content our selves with things revealed. Therein we may
read in legible Characters, that the end of our own particular lives draws
nigh; nay, it is like a Cloud in the Zenith, imminent over our heads, at the
very point to drop down.

Indeed, when I reflect on this iron age, wherein Pandora's boxes are opened to
infect mankind, Satan is broke loose in glozing lying tongues, which nourish
divisions from Dan to Beersheba: though I cannot say they are signs of Christ's
immediate present coming to judge the universal world; yet they may presage,
that the god of this world has so puzzled the understanding of such as are
seduced, that they cannot see how he projects that the particular private
judgment of each soul at the day of death, may surprise them unawares to their
utter ruin.

Concerning the Place where the world shall be judged, I cannot conceive how it
should be, Aquin.
as some have imagined, in the Valley of Jehosaphat, or on mount Olivet, whence
Christ ascended, or any where else on the surface of the earth. For if you
allow bodies distance and place, as they must be allowed, there is no earthly
place so large as to contain so many Myriads of people as shall appear in that
day. But I suppose the Tribunal shall be erected in the Air, where every eye
may see him, according to that of Saint Paul, 1 These. 4.
We which remain shall be caught up also with them in the Clouds, to meet the
Lord in the Air: and shall be ever with the Lord. There needs no question to be
moved touching the Person by whom we shall be judged; for all judgment is
committed to the Son, in the fifth Chapter of Saint John. And he has commanded
us to preach to the people, that it is He, who is ordained to be the Judge of
the quick and dead, Act. 10. The title to this judgment belonged to him as the
Son of God; judgment being the indelible Character of the Godhead: The power
of actual execution is in him as the Son of Man; none but Christ in the flesh
can instrumentally execute it. The whole Trinity, Aquin. part 2. ^. ^9 ad jus
supplem. ad (...) part In conclus.
says the Schoolman, may be said to judge by equal right of Authority; but to
the Son is delivered by a peculiar propriety the promulgation of the final
sentence, in regard he has taken our nature upon him, whereby all mankind may
see the Judge by whom they are to be doomed. So that Christ's coming in the
Clouds, cannot choose but be a terror to the impenitent and obdurate sinners:
they shall see him gloriously appear in that very flesh which they
dishonourably pierced and crucified by a continual progress in their Crimes.
But it shall be a jubilee and endless joy to the faithful, who shall behold him
their Judge, who was their Advocate and Surety, who will quit all their scores,
and free them from eternal death.

Wherefore seeing ye look for such things, 2 Ep. c. 3.
be diligent, as Saint Peter exhorts, that ye may be found of him in peace,
without spot, and blameless. And since our vain words are registered in the
Volume of Gods Book, and are like to be urged against us before no less an
Assembly then the whole world; it behooves to take heed to our tongues, that
they hale not down Gods Vengeance by execrable Oaths, which to our shame and
grief do daily sound in our streets as loud and terrible as thunderclaps. Let
the long-suffering of God win us to renounce whatsoever has affinity with the
least sin; remembering that if we abuse the riches of Gods mercy unto
wantonness, we do but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. For on that
day, the terrible day of the Lord, the day of judgment, he will no more knock
at the door of our hearts in a gentle wooing voice, but will stretch forth his
mighty Arm to give the deadly stroke, the stroke of everlasting horror both to
soul and body. From which the Father of Mercy shield us, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A SERMON Preached in Bow-Church LONDON, On the Anniversary Meeting of
Herefordshire Natives, June 24. 1658.

BY RICH. GARDENER, D. D.

We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
Servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of that power
might be of God, and not of us, verse. 7.

Ad hunc stylum pio, and officioso animo, non vani Nominis appetitione, ac
nugatoriae ostentationis accessi. S. August. Ep. 89. ad Honoratum.

London: Printed for Sam. Speed, at the Printing-Press in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

St. John 19. verse 27. Then said he to the Disciple, Behold thy Mother. And
from that hour that Disciple took her to his own home.


GIve me leave to signify in all meekness, you are not to expect
London-measure, extended prolixity; I ever minded the strength, not length of
matter; my endeavors tending to speak much in little, not little in much: My
discourse, I doubt not, will prove seasonable on this Anniversary Meeting,
although I have not chosen, according to my wont, an Argument consonant and
suitable to the day. The ancient Rubric of the Church, makes the whole business
of this day to be of John the Baptist: I follow not that direction now, to
prevent misprision of captious times, and because I hold this Text more useful
for your Audience, which treats not of John the Baptist, but of John the
Evangelist; it was he to whom Christ said, Behold thy Mother; and he was the
Disciple, who from that hour took her to his own home.

To dispel and clear some mists hovering about the Text, which otherwise may
cloud and darken your understanding, consider that our Savior was now in
extremity of pain and torment on the Cross; the whole outward man was battered,
and every part besieged with a distinct death; he felt his Fathers Arrows
sticking in his holy sides, drinking up his innocent blood for our
transgressions; yet when in the midst of his Agony, he saw his dear Mother and
beloved Disciple standing near the Cross, as one regardless of the Gall and
Bitterness of his own sufferings, of the pricking anguish in his hands and feet
by the Nails, in a sympathy his heart yearns and commiserates his Mothers
misery, whose soul was now pierced with the sword of Sorrow. His Zeal had a
smart sense of the wants she might be exposed to after his decease; and
therefore casting a loving glance on the Virgin and Disciple, he says to his
Mother, Behold thy Son, verse 26. and here to the Disciple, Behold thy Mother.
Now we are not to fasten on the Rind and Bark of the Letter; the words are to
be understood in a sound sense, and cum grano salis. It cannot be conceived the
blessed Virgin, blessed among women, blessed above women, should have John for
the natural issue of her womb: St. Matthew, chap. 4. does catechize us, that
John was the Son of Zebedeus; but by these endearing appellations of Son and
Mother, our Savior signifies his meaning was, that Disciple should as much set
by her, have her in as high estimation, as if from her bowels he came breathing
into the world.

Few have so learned Christ: The world abounds with (...), unnatural Imps, who
either support not at all the weakness of their needy Parents; or, if they have
a touch of remorse, their aid is after such a penurious scant manner, that as
the Orator says of the poor prisoners pittances, (...), it is not sufficient to
keep them alive, and yet will not suffer them to dye. Excellent persons to make
Scribes and Pharisees of! They taught the people to answer their indigent
impotent Parents craving help in their necessity, by saying, It Is Corban, Mar.
7.11. (i.) they had already distributed to pious and charitable uses, and so
had done enough; stood discharged before God; no further thing to be required
at their hands; leaving them from whom they received their lives, to starve and
perish. But Christ tell'd them there, in stead of Gods Commandments, they
taught their own traditions. The Ethnicks will rise up in Judgment against such
flint-hearted wretches. Valerius Maximus has set down a remarkable story of a
Daughter, who visiting her Father in Prison, condemned there to dye by Famine,
prolonged his life by fostering him with the Milk of her breasts; which being
discovered to the Magistrate, the Result was an applause of the Daughter, and a
release of the Father. Sordid-spirited, close-fisted miscreants, are to be sent
to the Beasts of the Field, and Fowls of the Air, to learn Wisdom, as Job
speaks, chap. 12. verse. 7. The Stork in her youth, cherishes the old days of
her Parents. It is the odious Generation of Vipers, which gnaw out the bellies
of their Dams, seeking their own lives with the Dams death. Genesis ^. 46.47.
Joseph is a memorable pattern of filial observance. He in a time of dearth
sent for his aged Father, gave for his convoy Wagons, and all provisions
necessary for his Voyage; and being arrived in Egypt, seated him in the
fruitfulest part of the Land.

In the twelfth verse of the forty seventh Chapter, he nourished his Father, so
we render it; but our Translation comes short of the force and strength in the
Original, he nursed his Father, (...), Lechem Lepi hataph.
Ad os parvuli, or in os parvnli panem vel cibum ingerendo; which Mr. Calvin
says some expound that he sed his Father, being unable to feed himself, by
putting the meat into his mouth, after the usage of a Child. The interlineary
Bible has it in the Margin, quemadmodum parvulus alitur; and from thence it is
in our English Marginal Note, nourished according to the little ones.
Bellarmine, in his Opuscula, I hope you will not start at the words of an
Adversary, where they have a tendency to inflame true devotion, brings in
Christ thus speaking of his holy Mother: I took but one life, my humane life,
of my Virgin Mother; yet for that one, I gave to her three lives: I gave to her
a humane life, when together with the Father and the holy Spirit, I created
her: For he made all things, and without him was made nothing that was made,
John 1.3. I gave her the life of grace, in that I quickn'd and regenerated her
with my Spirit. I gave to her also the life of glory, in that I dyed for her,
to the intent she might not perish, but have life eternal. I carefully provided
for her in my life and death. What a spur should this be to the naturalness of
our love? 2 Cor. 8.8.
How should it summon all our parts to help our Parents, as we be able, if
necessity require? Though we strive to do the utmost we can do, and what we
cannot do, we shall never requite the expense, the molestation, the homely
offices they have sustained in our minority, nurture and education. It seems
Saint John was of this persuasion; for so soon as Christ bid him to behold the
Virgin as his Mother, that engaging title wrought so upon him, that like a
regardful Son, forthwith he obeys the charge, and from that hour took her to
his own home.

[From that hour.]

A right Disciple and Follower of Christ, is upon the wing for holy duties,
prepared every hour; yea, on a sudden, with Samuel, 1 Samuel chap. 3. verse. 4.
he answers at the first Call. When God enjoined Abraham to offer up his only
Son Isaac for a burnt offering, upon one of the Mountains, which he would show,
he does not deliberate and examine circumstances, how this could stand with the
promise, That in Isaac all the Nations of the earth should be blessed; but the
Text says, Abraham rose early, he would not put it off till noon, to perform
that strange astonishing Sacrifice, Genesis 22.3. When Christ called on Zacheus in
the Sycamore-Tree, to come down, and to prepare for his entertainment at his
own home; Saint Luke records it in the nineteenth chapter, and the sixth verse,
that he made haste, receiving him not repiningly, but joyfully. Peter and
Andrew upon Christ's first call, left their Nets, and immediately followed him,
Mat. 4. Whatsoever thou take in hand, instanter operare, Eccles. 9.10.
straightway, quickly, instantly do it with all thy power and might; for true
Devotion is of a sprightly readiness, lest its inward fervency or zeal, by
delay, wax cold and neglectful. Had the Apostle made a demur, consulted with
flesh and blood, the worldling would have rounded him in the ear, that this was
a Legacy utterly to be rejected. Indeed, a gift of gain both hands may be open
to receive, but the bequeathing a necessitous mother to your maintaining, is a
business of another nature; it is a hard province, and who will undertake it to
his certain loss? Must you of all others be commended into this charge and
trouble? Such would have been the Plea of a carnal churlish Nabal. But
Eagle-eyed John viewed these sublunary respects as things below him. His
Devotion flies upward, looks steadfastly on the Son of Righteousness, considers
he cannot do too much for such a Master, who before the rest, owned him for the
best beloved Disciple; and to signify the confidence he reposed in him above
all others, would trust none with the care of his Mother, but him alone. And so
out of a thankful mind, even presently takes her to his custody; and that not
for the date or term of set years by covenant, but freely, so long as she
lived; which, if you will give credence to Nicephorus and Rome's Legend, was
the space of eleven or twelve years from that hour of Christ's death.

This religious fact, and continued fidelity of John, should rouse all
Trustees, to whom is appointed the disposing of the substance of the dead, to
be constantly honest, and faithful in their trust. The neglect whereof has
cooled the Zeal of many inclined to liberality, causing them to withdraw the
Oil from their shining and burning Lamps; it being voyc'd to be a common fault,
an accustomed manner to pervert and subvert the Testators sense and meaning,
whereby some designed for Executors, are reproachfully branded for Executioners
of Wills. I profess in all sincerity, I never heard this renowned City tainted
with such a guilt, but that you are strictly tender of the Wills, and of what
is put into your hands to be kept for others; so that whatsoever is laid up in
your public Chamber for pious uses, is secure and safe, fastened like a nail
in a sure place, Isai. 22.23.
as the Prophet phraseth it. You have given a good example, but it is copyed out
byfew. Sure this barbarous inhumanity toward the defunct, was unknown in the
primitive times: Saint Paul is positive in the third Chapter to the Galatians,
verse. 15. that though it be a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, none does
abrogate it, or add any thing to it. Read the thirty fifth Chapter of Jeremiah,
and mark how God rewarded the Rechabites for their obedience to their Fathers
will. I set, so speaks the Prophet, before the children of Rechab, bottles full
of Wine, and said to them, Drink Wine. But they said, We will not drink wine:
for Jonadab our father commanded us, saying, You shall drink no Wine, you nor
your Sons for ever. Which they observed, only because it was the will of their
deceased Father. Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
Jonadab the Son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me, (i.) to be
in my favor, for ever, verse ult. Labor then to keep a good Conscience, to
deal justy and uprightly before God our heavenly Father, and before men in all
concernments imposed upon us, and undertaken by us. 1 These. 4.6.
What says the Apostle? Let no man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any
matter. With what horror at the day of the Resurrection shall the Child meet
his Father, the Wife her Husband, one Brother and Friend another, if they have
falsified the trust deposited in them? Suppose thou have no outward Relations
committed to thy charge, yet thou have an inward man, thy Soul, to be attended
and carefully looked to. If thou do not cherish that spark of Eternity, if
thou starve that particle of Divinity, the Lover of Souls will urge it as done
to his own Image. Here a question is moved, why Saint John leaves his own name
unmentioned. In the beginning of this verse, it is not, Then he said to ME,
Behold thy Mother, but to the Disciple whom he loved; and in the subsequent
words he says not, I took her, but that Disciple took her to his own home.
It Is conceived he omitted his Name, that his Modesty might check and curb
affectation of vain glory.

Never was there more need that a Copy hereof should be drawn forth at length,
then in these days. We fast, we pray; there is a great deal of preaching,
hearing, making a formal glittering show of godliness in external worship; but
where is the power of it? Let none as a false brother misinterpret, and so
misrelate me, as if I oppose devout praying, and frequent preaching. For I
should joy to see the earth full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the Sea, according to the prophecy, Isai. 11.9, that all the people be
taught of the Lord, Isai. 54.13. yet let me put you in remembrance, Saint James
advice is, Jam. 1.22. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your selves. As if he had thus enlarged himself: Your hands must be open to do,
B. A. in Locum.
as well as your ears to hear; doing the word must be preserved as well as the
hearing it; conscience of practice is to be joined with curiosity of knowledge;
for bare hearing is an illusion, a cozening your selves. I add; it is no better
then a thirst after a vulgar esteem, to get a Name, to be counted (...), not
only some body, but some great one in religion. Augustus was very ambitious of
preserving a Name; for he gave commission to the Pretors of Rome, not to suffer
his Name Obsole fieri, to be worn out of use: he would have it kept up in grace
and dignity. But what speak I of a magnificent Emperor? So great is the foolish
and inconsiderate desire of Fame, that scarce a Church can be whited and
adorned with two or three painted Fringes, but Parietes Medius Fidius, the
walls forsooth must proclaim the Names of those small Officers in whose
Wardenship 'twas so beautified; and yet all this while they were free on others
cost, the stock of the Parish. To them, in another sense, may be applied that
in 1 Cor. 4.7. That which thou boastest of is none of thy own: and if thou
did receive it, why did thou glory? But seek not your own applause when you
do any good. Romans 12.8.
He that gives, Rom 2. verse. last.
let him do it with simplicity. Be sincere, that your praise may not be of man,
but of God. Saint John, without blowing a Trumpet, took Christ's Virgin Mother
to his own home; which makes it evident she was a poor woman.

One might have thought that blessed Mary, Christ's Mother, born of the blood
Royal, for she was naturally descended out of David's Loins, should not be
constrained to live by the Alms and Cost of a Disciple: That Joseph, her
betrothed Husband, right heir to the Crown of Judah, should not be brought so
low, as to be fain to labor for his living. Who sees not how applyable this
Story is? But the wheel is turned, and who am I should take it in hand again?
It stands with our humility and obedience, to keep the same motion with the
lesser under-wheels, as the great upper Master-wheel of the whole Universe
shall move us. If the Divine Providence, which orders all things, will hae me
or thee, which whilome sat at the upper end, to come down, and sit lower,
let us not expostulate, but quietly humble our selves under the mighty hand of
God, and in a pious resolution, say as David in a great extremity said, 2 Samuel
15. Behold, here we are, let the Lord do to us as seems good in his own eyes.
If Royal Extractions become levelled with Joseph and Mary, in such an
exinanition, I trust, without offense, I may wish they may with them possess
their Souls in patience, and account the defalcations med cinal Diminutions.
For since they are become sensible that a little contents nature, they may the
better endute the want of magnificent abundance. As for the accumulation of
worldly accoutrements, they serve only for pomp and state, which infer more
cark, and care, and disturbing fear. Therefore, in the heaviness of
dereliction, cast thy burden upon the Lord, who many times is most near us,
when he seems to stand farthest off; as loving to show his mercy in our misery,
his power in our weakness. The Lords Mother here stood under, or near the
Cross, destitute of all outward help; but there was a Disciple standing by,
pre-ordained to sustain her, who from that hour took her to his own home.

[To his own home.]

And now after all this travail and pains, I am informed my labor is lost,
having framed a Castle in the Air, without any Foundation on the Earth. For in
the Original it is simply and barely put down, He took her to his own: The bold
English, who use to speak out, have in their Translation superadded house and
home. The ground of this Variance is a strange long mistake of Peter's words,
Mat. 19.27. because there Peter, as Prolocutor for the rest, said to Christ, We
have forsaken all, and followed thee; many of the Fathers (to whom God was not
pleased to reveal all Circumstances) have translated the Greek, (...), from
its proper to an improper signification. They will not have it so understood,
as if John took her to his own possession, (for by their verdict he was one of
those who utterly forsook all for Christ's sake) but that he took her to his own
care, to help her the best he could out of the contributions of the faithful.

The Romanists, who lie at the lurch by too much subtilty, to make plain things
obscure, when it conduces to their own interest, cry up this ancient
interpretation as Catholic, and the contrary as Heretical; thereby intending,
from the Apostles practice, to exalt the supererogating Vow of voluntary
poverty. The Anabaptists, from hence, condemn propriety of Goods, as
inconsistent with, or opposite to the Gospel. So that it may seem I have
undertaken a difficult province, to justify our Church in rendering Saint
John's taking the Virgin Mother to his own habitation.

But I doubt not to demonstrate to each discerning Spirit, that after their
call to the Apostleship, John, with the rest, had a propriety in their Houses,
Movables, Tenures, personal and real Estates. For though it is recorded they
left all, yet 'twas in a qualified sense; they left not all simply and wholly,
but so far, and so long, as they might be impediments to their Commission of
propagating Faith in Christ, or preaching the Gospel, and no otherwise. They
could at their pleasure return to the possession and use of what was theirs.
This is confirmed, Mark 1.29. when they were come out of the Synagogue, Jesus
entered into the house of Simon, with Andrew, James and John; where, after
their desertion of all, it is still Simons house. So Matthew 4.14. he came into
Peter's house. The better to declare his Vindication, or challenging it for his
own, he entertained Christ and his fellow Disciples, with a banquet therein: So
much is collected from verse 31. which restifies that his Mother-in-law, newly
by him recovered from a Fever, ministered to them. After this, as a wealthy
Citizen of Capernaum, he paid Tribute-Money, Mat. 17.27. And which proves they
mean'd no absolute perpetual abnegation, abjuration, or renouncing of their
temporalties, but only a willing sequestration from them, during their Labors
and Employments abroad for the gathering of the Saints, the enlarging the
borders of the Church; Peter, Joh. 21. after Christ's Resurrection, is named to
have used the Ship and Nets as his peculiar. Matthew, after his calling from
the Receipt of Custom, made Christ a great Feast in his own house, Mat. 9.11.
Mark 2.14. Now this Evangelist John's Fortunes were greater then his fellow
Fishers; it being observed, Mark 1.20. that he had Mercenary Servants in the
Ship to attend his Father Zebedee, when, on Christ's summons, he left them to
wait on him. Were it not then a weak Collection, that he, of all the rest,
should sacrifice to the Goddess (...), devoting himself to scandalous wilful
beggary, when it cannot well be conceived how he should receive and accommodate
holy Mary without an abiding place, and some constant Revenue? Who sees not
what a derogation it would have been to the Son of God, yea, to any of his
faithful Servants, to dedicate the charge of a tender Mother to an errant needy
Vagrant of small value, and little worth? This indeed had been a goodly
providing for the Mother of Him, who was God!

Cardinal Baronius, of no small account in the Romish Hierarchy, foreseeing
such a scandal, cites the Ancients asserting John to have held his house seated
on the hill of Sion, and that for the nobleness of his descent, he was in great
favor with Caiaphas the high Priest, to whom he made sale of his Territories
in Galilee. The best Critics declare that (...), in the Greek, signify the
same with (...), which always implies reality of Substance; El Betho.
and with (...) in the Hebrew, that is, into his own House, and so consequently
confirms John's taking her to a habitation of his own. Grotius in Locum.


Neither can there any thing in Scripture be found, which on just cause may be
judged to contradict the truth hereof. First, the Apostles do not relate they
left all, by their example to teach us to vow mendicity, to embrace penury as a
state of perfection. If it had heen so, Saint Paul, 1 These. 4.11, 12. verses,
would not command us to work with our hands, that we may have lack of nothing:
yea, if that were good Doctrine, how comes it to pass, 1 Cor. 16.2. he wills
every one to lay by him in store, for the ministering to the Saints, as God had
prospered him?

If we may store up, and please God too, we need not to disclaim our proper
Goods, but rather to preserve the materials of Charity, that the Lord may be
glorified through the liberal distributions of such who are enriched in every
thing to all bountifulness, 2 Cor. 9.11. Whence I conceive that a godly wise
man may desire always to have all sufficiency in all things, Verse. 8. Verse. 12.
as they are subservient, necessary means to undertake great matters of
Religion, and to make him abound to every good work, which causes, through
him, thanksgiving to the Lord.

There being certain Virtues not practiseable by the poor, as this was of
John's supporting the distressed Virgin; why does the Apostle say, Phil. 4.12.
I know how to want, and how to abound? But to instruct, if it please God to
exercise his patience with suffering want, he was ready to serve him in all
obedience; but if it seemed meet to his divine Wisdom to furnish him with
abundance, he knew how to use it to the Glory of God with thankfulness.

Besides, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who came into the world, that
we, through his poverty, might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. did not lead so base
and sordid a life, as some pretend, but had a competency of needful provisions.
For in John 13. we read it was Judas Office to keep the Bag, and disburse his
Cash. The Disciple Philip, John 6. makes a demand of two hundred pence, as it
were out of his Stock. In the second of John, his Disciples were sent to buy
meat out of his own purse; to which end, the Disciples thought in the
thirteenth of John, verse twenty nine, that Christ bid Judas to buy those
necessaries they had use of against a festival day. They talked, Mat. 28. of
selling the precious Ointment. All which are as Clouds of Witnesses, that the
Primitive times did not hold a voluntary dereliction of worldly wealth, a state
of greater perfection then others, as the Church of Rome imposes on the World,
to magnify the beggary of Capuchins, Hermits, and Anchorets.

Secondly, it is against all reason, that the Apostles relinquished all on this
respect, that it is unlawful to retain any thing as our own peculiar. For God
has not created man to inherit the earth in common. It Is registered, Deuteronomy.
32.8. the most High divided the Nations their inheritance, he has separated
the Sons of Adam. And having commanded the Land of Canaan to be divided, he
gave in charge that the inheritances allotted, should not be alienated from one
Tribe to another: so that several and distinct possessions are Gods Ordinance.
When the Children of Israel were come into the Land of Canaan, every Tribe had
his possession allotted by Joshua. The tenth Commandment forbidding us to covet
any thing that is our Neighbors, implies our Neighbor to have Goods peculiar
to himself.

Again, if such as be rich had no right in their riches more then others, the
Apostle would have so instructed them, and wished them to renounce their
wealth: but his Counsel is, that they be not high-minded, that they do not
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, 1 Timothy 6. It is not enjoying
of our worldly Treasure, but our setting our hearts on it, the inordinate love
thereof, to the hinderance of our service toward God, which we are utterly to
forsake. If the holding of Estates in private, had displeased the Almighty,
then when Zacheus, upon his receiving Christ into his house, said, Behold,
Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor; Christ would have rebuked him for
his possessions; but his answer was, Luke 19. This day is Salvation come to
this House. We read of others in the New Testament, who were full of goods; as
Joseph of Arimathea, the Eunuch, Lydia, Tabitha, the women which followed
Christ out of Galilee, Act. 21. Yet there is not any reprehension of them, or
condemning any propriety they enjoyed. This Anabaptistical community, was an
Opinion taught by Plato in his time. Afterward the Heretics called
Apostolici, were of the same mind, because it is written, Act. 2. they had all
things common. But they did not consider the community then was a necessary
policy, being daily in danger by tyranny, to have all seized and taken away
violently. Besides, 'twas not enforced by any Law, but they voluntarily
tendered what they had; which caused Peter to answer Ananias, Act. 5. While it
remained, was it not thy own? That which was sold and made common, was not
disposed as every one pleased, but distributed according to their several
necessities. Moreover, if no single person has any right to his Goods, what
needed Naboth to keep such ado about his Vineyard? It was not Ahab, but Naboth,
that on this account was in jurious, by usurping to himself what was not
confirmed to him by a rightful Title. The eighth Commandment will be thought
superfluous: Can we be said to steal that which I may as justly call mine, as
thou thine? If propriety be not established, Almsdeeds will be useless, Family
provisions needless, foreign Merchandising quite neglected. None will expose
themselves to the horrors of the depth, the insolences and violencies on the
Land, if He, who scarce steps out of his own Horizon, has as much interest,
and that without any charge, as the Adventurer, who plowing up the Furrows of
the Ocean, imports the advantage and gain. Hence will follow the decay of
Commonwealths; for no Nation has a full subsistency of it self; all lend
mutual strength and help to each other, whereby they are supported and held up
in a flourishing state.

To draw to an Application, which is the quickening, as it were, the life and
soul of every Sermon. To speak strictly, the propriety of earthly things is
God's alone, Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. The silver is mine, and the
gold is mine, Hag. 2.9.
says the Lord of Hosts.

He that has transferred the right thereof on thee, expects, in the managing
and usage, thou do communicate to the necessities of the Saints. If thou
niggardly lock up that which is more then thou needst, thou do injure Gods
poor ones, who need more then they have. Should you say, If such a commanding
Object of Charity were presented to you as Christ's distressed Mother, you would
readily sacrifice your Estate to sustain her? Behold, Christ in the 12 of Saint
Matthew, verse. 50. calls all those who do the will of his heavenly Father, his
Mother, Brothers and Sisters: disperse out of your private store to raise a
stock for relief of their wants; and with John, you have expressed an operative
effectual regard of Christ's Mother.

Tenacious Misers may pretend what they will; though we extol not good works so
high as to make them to be the price of heaven, yet they are not to be reckoned
so low, as if they availed nothing toward it. For we are Gods workmanship,
created unto good works, which he has prepared that we should walk in them,
Ephesians. 2.9, 10. Yea, to be cold in doing good, is to srustrate the end of our
Redemption. Tit. 2.14.
Christ, says Saint Paul, gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, and to
purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

The rightly ordained Orthodox Ministers of the Church of England, do preach
and print, that good works, in the concernments of Salvation, are necessary
quoad praesentiam, non quoad efficientiam: Though God in the Act of
Justification, eye them not as if they had an influence or efficacy to justify
us; yet he beholds them as Concomitants and evidences of that Faith through
which we are freely saved by grace. They are constant Attendants of true Faith,
as Maids of Honor are of their right Queen. Up then, and be doing, and the
Lord will be with you: make your Lamps to burn bright with the Oil of Chariry.
For pure religion and undefiled, is to visit the fatherless and widow, and to
keep our selves unspotted of the world, James 1. To do good forget not: for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. So well pleased, that
whatsoever ye do to one of these, he takes it done to himself, Mat. 25.45. And
therefore will return it with good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over, Luke 6.38. Let this Festival meeting be like to those in the
Primitive times, which were called in the Greek (...), because in those
Christian Love Feasts they distributed out of their fullness to the relief of
their necessitous Fellow Members. In Exodus 23.15. God will have none of his
people in keeping of their Feasts to appear empty before him; something must be
offered, and that from a willing heart, Exodus 35.5. Gifts which are extorted,
and come grudgingly, Seneca rightly calls Lapidosa beneficia, being as irksome
in receiving, as bread given with greet in it, is in the eating. It Is the
cheerful Giver God loves, 2 Cor. 9.7. The Land is full of Objects of Charity:
you can scarce go up and down the streets, but you may hear many complaining
they have been wounded by extravagant Thieves, stripped of their Livelihood, and
left to the wide world to sink or swim. So that there is need of many pitiful
Samaritans to bind up their wounds, to pour Oil into their sores, to resent
their miseries, not with the tongue-deep, empty ceremonies, Jam. 2. Depart in
peace, be ye warmed, be ye full; but in doing good for them by hand and purse.
For who stops his ears to their cries, he also shall cry himself and not be
heard, Prove. 21.13. Dives, in his life time, regarded not Lazarus plaints, and
Christ gives no ear to his howlings in hell. But especially let the bowels of
your compassion be stirred within you, your hands opened wide toward the Lords
Ambassadors, the Disposers of his secrets, who in many places are under great
suffering of much want. My Blood was ready to curdle, my Heart to bleed, Dr.
Dramball, B. Berry.
when a Right Reverend Overseer of Christ's Flock, a learned Champion of the
Truth, published in print not long ago, he was forced to take care for his back
and belly, when he should be studying the good of Souls. To come home to you: I
deny not, but that this Metropolis, wherein you have improved your Estates,
ought to partake of some signal token of your respect to it; yet the instinct,
the Impression of Nature, will prompt you to advance the welfare of the Country
of your Nativity: there your Charity should stream forth in a full source, and
extend it self according to the measure of the line of your proportions. The
County is of no large extent and circuit; 2 Cor. 10.13.
yet it is greatn'd, in that it has been the Womb of honorable Extractions.
Thence descended the illustrious Cliffords, Cecills, Scudamores, the very
ancient Family of Croft's Knights, with others of eminent gentry. Camden.


And, which accumulates its Renown, thence that famous Bradwardine, Archbishop
of Canterbury, had his Origin and Name; who, in that age wherein he lived, for
his deep learning and variety of knowledge, was styled, The Profound Doctor. So
excellently learned judicious Mr. Cambden expresses it in his Britannia.
Touching the said City of the Shire, may it not be said of it, as Lot did of
Zoar, Genesis 19.20. It is not a little one? Yet that little one is highly
magnified abroad for its prowess; it exceeds many great ones in number of
well-endowed Hospitals, Monuments of Bounty and Liberality. Do not degenerate
from your Predecessors, who lived before you; be as virtuous and nobly minded
as they were; honor the Lord with your Substance, as far as you are able,
remembering he that sows liberally, shall reap liberally, 2 Cor. 9.6. Fill
the bellies of them, who are ready to starve; clothe such who stand shivering
for want of raiment; apprentise ingenious Children who want supplies to be put
to Trades; and be assured, all your love will be requited and returned
sevenfold into your own bosoms. He that gives to the poor, Prove. 19.17.
lends to the Lord; and if so, be not weary of giving, and well-doing; never
was any one a loser by his God.

Now the Eternal, Invisible, only wise GOD, who does all things accoridng to
the Counsel of his own Will, give us Grace to be Charitable to our own Souls,
by distributing out of our store to the want of others; that neither the Moat,
nor the Rust, nor the Canker of our Mammon, may endite us of unfruitful
engrossing the Lords Talents to Self-interest.

We beseech him to enable us with contentfulness in all Estates, with
cheerfulness in tribulations, with confidence in his saving help, though he
should slay us; that so when we are to leave our earthly home, we may be taken
into his Celestial Habitations, where with blessed Mary, devout John, and with
all Gods Elect people, we shall worship and enjoy his beatifying Presence in
eternal holiness and happiness: which God grant us through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A TABLE of the Texts on which the precedent Sermons were preached; with the
page where each begins.
Sermon. Page Sermon. 1 Luke 13.23, 24. Page 1 Sermon. 2 John 2.11. Page 18 Sermon. 3
Luke 7. part of verse. 47. Page 34 Sermon. 4 Gal. 5.24. Page 54 Sermon. 5 Col. 1.20.
Page 71 Sermon. 6 Luke 23.42. Page 87 Sermon. 7 Ephesians. 1. ult part verse. 19. Page
105 Sermon. 8 Matthew. 9.20, 21, 22. Page 125 Sermon. 9 Matthew. 9.22. Page 141 Sermon.
10 Matthew. 26. ult part verse. ult. Page 157 Sermon. 11 Heb. 12. first part verse.
6. Page 177 Sermon. 12 2 Cor. 7.1. Page 196 Sermon. 13 2 Cor. 7. ult part verse. 1.
Page 216 Sermon. 14 1 Pet. 5.6. Page 235 Sermon. 15 John 1. first part verse. 14.
Page 251 Sermon. 16 Matthew. 12.36. Page 264 The Sermon preached to the
Hereford-shiremen on John 19.27. Page 284
Reader, Excuse me in giving Notice, that besides these there are Sermons of
Dr. Gardiners, heretofore printed, on the following Texts.
1. Genesis 45. verse. 8. 2. St. John 1 chap. verse. 14. 3. Chap. 2. Matthew. verse. 2.
4. Chap. 8. Romans verse. 11. 5. 1 Ep. St. Paul to Tim. chap. 4. verse. last.
Latin. 6. 1 Ep. to Tim. chap. 2. verse. 1, 2.
Cooperentur in bonum.

An Advertisement of Books worth buying, to be sold by Samuel Speed, at the
sign of the Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MR. Caryl his Exposition, with practical Observations on the Book of Job: In 4.

Mr. Greenhill his Exposition on Ezekiel, with useful Observations thereupon:
In 4.

Mr. Ainsworths Communion of Saints: In 8.

-- Arrow against Idolatry: In 8.

Mr. Sadlers Enchiridion of the Art of Physic: In 8.

A Pattern of Catechistical Doctrine, by the Reverend Father in God, Lancelot
Andrews, Lord Bishop of Winchester: In 12.

FINIS.

