THE BUDDINGS AND BLOSSOMINGS OF OLD TRUTHS: Or, Several practical Points of
Divinity, gathered out of that sacred Evangelist St. JOHN, Chap. the third,
from Verse 22. ad finem.

By that worthy Light and Lamp of Heaven, Alexander Gross, Bach. of Divinity,
and late Preacher of Ashberton, in Com. Devon.

LONDON, Printed by W. Bentley for Andrew Crook, at the sign of the green
Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader;
I Am constrained in a double respect to salute thee with a brief Epistle.
First, by custom, whose bare word is holden and embraced as a law. Secondly,
by necessity, the Author of the Book being dead, leaving the notes with me:
Death interrupting him could not preface it; so that either the Book must come
to thee without an Epistle, or I must write one.

Two things briefly I shall acquaint the Reader withal: First, with the
Author. Secondly, with the Work.

For the Author, his name was Mr. Alexander Gross, Bachelor of Divinity, and
Minister of Ashberton in the County of Devon; he was a painful, a faithful
Minister of Christ; a skilful, a powerful dispenser of the Word, the proofs of
which were his constant and incessant employments in preaching twice every
Sabbath for many years; yea, and that in the Bishops times, as also that he
might keep men from drunkenness and other deboist practices, he was wont to
preach every Holyday in the year.

Which Ministry of his was very effectual, many being converted by him. Those
two things which make a complete man had an happy conjunction in him, (viz.)
integrity and judgment: yea, he had that which made him a complete Minister,
namely, that he would speak his mind fitly, and that he durst speak it freely;
a proof of the former you have cleared in his writings that are already in
print, and are printed as he preached, where you may find clear method, sound
proofs, pregnant similitudes, plentiful illustrations, pithy persuasions, sweet
insinuations, powerful inforcements. For his freedom of speech in reproving of
sin, even to the faces of the greatest, many are able to testify, and
particular instances I could give.

I have heard him very much commended for these things:

1 That he was an excellent Scripturist; and it is reported that he had them
(ad unguem) he was in all his preachings very full of Scripture.

2 That he was blessed with an excellent memory, seldom used any note in his
Pulpit, though he always wrote Notes of what he preached.

3 That he was a man furnished with that heavenly gift of prayer, in which he
excelled most men; some Ministers have told me, that they have much admired his
ability in that holy Exercize.

4 That he was a man hating novelties, and yet abhorring superstition; he stuck
close to the ancient truths of God, and contended earnestly for the faith.

5 That his life was an excellent Paraphrase on his Doctrine; his Doctrine and
Life disagreed not: As he was a Preacher of holiness; so he was a practiser of
holiness. What is spoken of Saint John, may be spoken of him; That he was a
burning and shining light: and I know that many wicked men that hated him for
his goodness, shall in the day of their visitation bless God for his good
words and good actions.

In a word, he spent his time, his strength, his all for God; and at last, he
died in a good old age. A little before his death he preached on that passage
of the Psalmist, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and (as I was informed by a
godly man, his hearer) that he was so wonderfully carried forth in his
preaching, that he much feared he should not long enjoy him; and so it
happened, for a short space after he died, and now injoyes the glorious
presence of the God whom he so faithfully served.

As concerning this work left in my hands, I have little more to say, besides
what the parents of the blind man said of their son, (though in some
respects it is newly come forth, yet in regard of the truth and substance of
it) it is old enough, let it speak for it self.

This I shall say concerning the Book, that there is nothing in it but what is
sound and orthodox, which cannot be said of many Books that come abroad: the
matters contained in the Book are plain and easy to be understood, food it is
for babes, and nourishment it may give to strong men.

A few hints I have here given you of what you may read more largely in the
Book:

1 That the Ministers duty, it lies mainly in the endeavoring the conversion
of sinners, the drawing home of souls to God.

2 That the peoples duty lies in attending upon their Ministers and Ministry.

3 That the redemption of Christ it is effectual to some of all Nations, but
not to all in all Nations, Matthew. 8.11. Rev. 5.9.

4 That men may not at their own pleasure leave their callings, but follow them
while God does give ability to perform them.

5 That the Sacrament of Baptism must be carefully administered to such as are
capable of it; and that it must be administered in pure water without any
mixture, etc.

6 That the clear and open shining of the Gospel has been attended with much
contention.

7 That contentions have been in Gods family.

8 That self-love and ambition are many times an occasion of contention.

9 That men have of themselves no ability to do good.

10 Gods servants must not seek their own, but the honor of Jesus Christ.

11 That all the faithful are joined in spiritual wedlock with Christ Jesus.

12 That the Lord Jesus bears a singular love to his Ministers.

13 That Gods faithful Ministers are after a special manner acquainted with his
counsels.

14 That the calling of the Ministry requires some good preparations and large
abilities.

15 The voice of the Lord Jesus heard in the Gospel is the joy and rejoicing of
a sound Christian.

16 That the conversion of sinners by the Ministry of the Word is the great joy
of the Ministers thereof.

17 Those are least conceited of their own goodness, that are best and most
sanctified.

18 The revelation of the Lord Jesus unto men is by degrees.

19 Christ the Redeemer, the Son of God, by eternal generation

20 The Lord Jesus has pre-eminence above, and dominion over all creatures.

These with many more excellent points shall thou find in this little Book
worthy your view, God grant that your hearts may be as Cabinets to retain and
keep these jewels: it is true, that the matters are common, and the ordinary
subject both of many Sermons and printed Books in these days; yet we know,
that the commonest meats do yield the most wholesome nourishment, whereas new
found dishes do but clog the stomach, and fill the body with unwholesome humors.

And for the preventing or removing of all prejudicate opinions which may arise
concerning this Book (as though strumpet like, any bastardly brood unlawfully
begotten should be fathered and fastened upon so divine a penman) this I can
more than promise (verbo Ministri) that there is nothing in it for matter or
manner, either spurious, or surreptitious; nothing but what is genuine, and the
Authors own, the immediate issue of his working brain, and flowing from his own
pen.

This I shall promise the Reader, if he shall like of what is in this Book, I
shall present him shortly with another of this Author: In the mean time I refer
this to thy serious reading and gracious benefiting, who am

From my Study at Stratcley, in Armington, Com. Devon. Thy Servant in the
Gospel JOHN WELDEN.

John 3. the 22. etc.
After these things came Jesus and his Disciples into the Land of Judaea, and
there he tarried with them and baptized, etc.
THe Sun in the Firmament is never wearied, but comes forth like a mighty man
rejoicing to run his race, casting forth his bright and glorious beams in
whatsoever circuit of the Heavens he moves. Jesus Christ compared to the Sun.
The Sun of righteousness Christ Jesus (in like manner) is never weary of well
doing, but his lips were always dropping knowledge, and feeding Souls with
heavenly understanding, his Lamp was always burning, his cloud was always
distilling the dews of heavenly Doctrine, in all companies, on all occasions;
he, like a faithful Shepherd, sought to gather home the straying sheep to
Gods fold, like a good guide to reduce the erring travelers into the right
path, like a careful Physician to heal every diseased Soul. No place, no
company but received some benefit by his presence, having instructed Nicodemus
in the Doctrine of Regeneration, he came now into the Land of Judaea, and there
baptizeth: After these things Jesus, etc.

Christ baptized by John on the 10th year of his age.

Christ calling of Disciples.


Our Savior about the thirtieth year of his age came into the desert unto John
to be baptized of him, being baptized, he was led by the spirit into the
wilderness, where he fasted forty days and forty nights, from thence he
returned to John in the desert, at which time he called John, Andrew, Simon,
Peter, Andrews, brother, from thence he returned into Galilee, and in his
journey called Philip and Nathaniel, and comes to Nazareth, where he was
brought up, and there after a few days being invited to a marriage, The first
maracle Christ wrought.
he came to Cana, where he wrought his first miracle, after this he went to
Capernaum, and from thence to Jerusalem, where he taught, wrought a miracle,
and discoursed with Nicodemus, about the point of Regeneration, In the Conexion
of the words.

Christ care and practice to win Souls.

1. Christ journey. 2. Attendants. 3. Commoration. 4. Work.
Christ baptized none.


as we have largly set down in the beginnig of this Chapter. From thence he
came into the Territories of Iudaea and there baptized.

In the connection of these words we have presented before us.

1. The careful and constant practice of Jesus Christ to win Souls to God, and
to communicate to them the knowledge of the truth.

2. In the words we have his journeying into the Land of Judaea.

His attendants, the Disciples.

His commoration, or stay there he tarried.

His work, the administration of baptism, yet not by himself but by his
Disciples, as appears in Ioh. 4.2. Jesus himself baptized not, but his
Disciples.

I shall begin with the connection of this history, wherein we have discovred,
Christ constant endeavor. Doct.
our Saviors constant practice, and from thence, draw this conclusion. That we
ought in all places to busy our selves in well-doing, specially in endeavoring
the conversion of Gods people:

As the clouds cause there dewes every day to distill more or less: as the
beast every day yield their milk, and the Stars continually send forth there
light. So must we according to our best abilities be always doing good,
always watering the Souls of our brethren, with the dewes of holy admonition,
with the milk of Gods word, showing the way of salvation to them by the light
of the truth.

This charge the Apostle gives, Heb. 3.13. But exhort one another daily while
it is called to day, etc. To this the promise of profiting is annexed, Gal.
6.9. And let us not be weary of well doing: For in due season we shall reap, if
we faint not. And the Apostle will not have this duty in any case to be
forgotten, Heb. 10.24.25. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love,
and to good works. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see
the day approaching.

What Paul gave in charge to Timothy, may in a more general manner be given in
charge to every Christian, 2. Timoth. 4.1, 2. I charge the therefore before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing, and his Kingdom: preach the word be instant in season, out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine.

Be instant in thy calling, in seeking the good of thy brethren, in season,
and out of season, exhort, rebuke, reprove, with all earnestnes, and long
suffering.

The grounds why we ought to busy our selves in well doing, specially in
endeavoring the conversion of Gods people, are these.

Pet. 5.8. as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour) shall be
prevented of that advantage, which otherwise he will get against us. The flynig
bird is hardly smitten with the Arrow, the industrious and diligent person
allows Satan no time to tempt him, when David was idle then the devil
ensnared him, 2. Sam. 11.

Solomon speaks concermnig outward poverty, or riches, that, he becomes poor
that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove.
10.4. The same is true as to inward riches, or poverty, that a lazy slothful
heart becomes poor in grace, but the diligent heart makes rich in grace, to
this very purpose is that passage af Jesus Christ in the Luke 8.18. take heed
therefore how ye hear, for whosoever has, to him shall be given; and
whosoever has not, from him shall be taken, even that which he seems to
have. This is the way to thrive in grace, namely to exercise and improve it for
the good of others, for as Solomon says, Prove. 19.17. he that has pity on the
poor lends to the Lord: and that which he has given: will he pay him back
again.

Heb. 3.12.13. Take heed, brethren, least there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief, in departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily
while it is called to day, least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin:

thoroughly, the often shining of this light does make the way appear the more
plain, we can in nothing more honor the Gospel, or benefit our brethren than
in seeking to perfect their conversion.

Luke 10. to see them err and not instruct them, to see them sorrowful and
not comfort them, to see them barren in grace never laboring to make them
fruitful. Where is the Disciple that imitateth his Savior in doing of good
continually, as he goes up and down? Where is the man that with Mordecay,
Esther 10.3. that seeks the wealth of his people and speaking peace to all
his seed? who with Nehemiah seeks the welfare of Israel, as it is in Neh.
2.10.

Who is it that with Job becoms eyes to the spiritually blind, feet to the
spiritually lame? Job 29.15. I was (says he) eyes to the blind, and feet to
the lame, etc. Who is it that becomes a Father to the poor, searching out the
state of there Souls? that breaks the jaws of sin, and plucketh the spoiled
Soul out of the teeth of Satan, as Job did in another case, verse. 16.17. of
that 29. Job, I was says he a Father to the poor, and the cause which I knew
not I searched out. And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil
out of his teeth. Whose bowels are so full of compassion to his brethren,
that fitteth and prepared himself, to cloth there Souls, as Dorcas prepared
garments to cloth there bodies, Acts. 9.39. Who is it that seeks his
straying brethren, as the Shepherd his wandering sheep? Eze. 34.12. Where is
the Father in Law that with Lot, Genesis 19.14. speaks to his sons in Law,
saying. Up, get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy this City.
Where is the Father that with David gives incouragment to his children to go on
in the Lords Work? 1. Cron. 28.9. to know God, and serve him with a perfect
heart and willing mind; Where is the Master of the family that with Abraham,
commands his household to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment?
Genesis 18.19. Where is the Minister that holds not his peace day nor night, that
makes mention of the Lord and keeps not Silence? That gives him not rest till
he establish and make Jerusalem a Praise in the earth, as it is in Isa. 62.6.7.
Where is the bountiful Christian, that does in Spiritual things as Solomon
charge we should do in temporal, Ecl. 7.

Who is he that comes as Abigal to David? 1. Sa. 25.25, 28. Who redeemeth the
time? Who seeks opportunity? who imbraceth the offered occasions to do good?
If we examine our selves we may all lay our hands up our mouths, and confess
our selves guilty, we have all more, or less withheld the waters which should
have refreshed the thirsty, the light which should have guided the ignorant,
the food which should have fed the hungry, the staff which should have
sustained the weary, etc.

And as long as we are thus slothful and backward in this behalf it does
discover

1. That we have no bowels of compassion toward our brethren. Who can see his
brother taken prisoner by the Prince of darkness, led away captive in his
chain, wounded to the death with sin, pressed down under the heavy burden of
iniquity, stripped naked of the rich and precious garment of true holiness,
altogether defiled with the dirt and slime of Sin, if he have any compassion in
him, and not seek to deliver him? how can he chose but pray as the Church, Act.
12.3, 4, 5, 6. and endeavor as the angel, verse the 7.8. Shall Abram raise an
army to deliver Lot, Genesis 14.14. Will God have men to show such compassion to
an enemies ox or ass? Exo. 23.4, 5. How much more to the Souls of our
brethren, captivated by Satan, led astray by or sunk under the burden of
sin, surely this is the truest compassion, the sweetest mercy, the best kindness
to help the Souls of our brother out of the snare of Satan, according to that
of St. Jude verse 22.23. And of some have compassion making a difference, and
others save with fear pulling them out of the fire, etc. Men think all the
mercy appears in giving food for the belly, apparel for the back, but what
is lands and revenews to one confined to perpetual imprisonment, what is food
to the diseased, who needs Physic, what mercy is this to trim the house, and
leave the inhabitant in prison? I may say as the Lord in Isa. 58.5, 6, 7. Is it
such a fast as I have chosen a day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow
down his head like a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him?
willt thou call this a fast and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the
fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the hevy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are
cast out, to thy house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that
thou hide not thy self from thy one flesh? So is this the compassion the Lord
looks on for a man now and then to feed, cloth, the hungry naked body? is not
this the compassion the Lord looks at to help thy brother off with his wicked
bands, to undo his heavy burdens, to break his yokes, etc.

2. That we have no hearty and sanctified affection to our brethren. How can
we say we love them, if we seek not to remove sin from them, read that place,
Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: Thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. The love of Christ
appeared not in making his servants rich, or advancing them to worldly
dignities, for they are for the most part a poor despised people, as it is in
Zeph. 3.13. But his love appeared in causing a light to shine to them who sat
in darkness, Mat. 4.16. In opening the eyes of the spiritually blind, as it is
in Isa. 35.5, 6. In turning men from iniquity, as it is in Acts the 3. verse
26. In teaching them to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12, 13, 14.
In making us the Sons and Daughters of God as you have it in 1. John 3.1. In
washing us from the spiritual filthyness of sin, Eze. 6.7, 9, 10. And in this
manner must we show our love toward our brethren, that it may appear we love
the Jewel and not the casket, the soul, and not the carkase, that our love may
be fastened on Gods image, and not on that which is but dust and ashes, that the
fruit of our love may be everlasting, Prove. 13.24. What Solomon speaks there he
that spares his rod hates his son, but he that loves him chastneth him
betimes. So in this case, he that loves his field manureth it, he that loves
his tree pruneth it.

3. That we have not unfeigned love to God. No better argument of love to God,
than in seeking to take from men that sin which God does hate, to restore them
to holiness wherein God does delight, and therefore this is made an argument to
demonstrate Peter's love to Christ his feeding his sheep, John 21.17. by this we
shall gather them home to Gods fold, make them Members of Christ's body, heirs
of Gods Kingdom, servants in Gods family, Trees in Gods Orchard, soldiers
fighting Gods battles, and so shall show our love to God by being a means of
bringing much honor to him, and to them that seek not the good of there
bretherens Souls, I may say as in the 1. Joh. 3.17. How dwells the love of
God in him?

4. That we have no feeling of the goodness of God in our Souls, of the lively
opperation of his word, of our happiness in being in Christ: had we the sense
of this, we would with David in Psa. 66.16. Invite men to us and say, Come and
hear all ye, that fear God, and we will tell you what he has done for our
Souls, and we would being converted strengthen our brethren, as you have it in
Luke 22.32. We would say as the Samaritan Woman, Ioh. 4.29. come see a man
which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ? and as they
that were sent to spy out the Land, when they saw it and how good it was
encouraged the rest to go to it, saying in Iud. 18.9. Arise, that we may go up
against them, for we have seen the Land, and behold, it is very good and are ye
still? be not sloathfull to go, and to enter to possess the Land. Even so those
that have felt and seen the goodness of the Lord, are ready to encourage
others Saying, to those that stand still, arise, why ly ye still, why are ye
slothful come into the way of God that is so good, so pleasant.

5. That we have no feeling of their misery, did we feel there sin as a heavy
burden upon our Souls, as a thorn in our sides, as a burning fire in our own
bowels, it would make us mightily to awaken them out of sin, as the Woman of
Canaan, having her Daughter vexed with a devil, cried out; have mercy on me O
Lord, thou Son of David, for my Daughter is grevously vexed with a devil,
Math. 15.22. So will it be with a soul that has had any feeling of the misery
of sin, it will cry out, in the behalf of poor sinners, have mercy, O Lord, for
we have brethren greivously vexed with sins and devils.

6. That we are not greived, to see Gods Law transgressed as David was in Psalm.
119.136. rivers of tears run down my eyes: because they keep not thy law, the
ways of God neglected, as Lam. 1.4. that the name of God is dishonored.

7. That we are not troubled, at the beholding of their sinful conversation as
2. Pet. 2.8. That they are not as Cananites to Israel, Iud. 2.2, 3. as the men
of Mesech to David Psalm. 120.4. as the Daughters of Heth to Sara, Genesis 27.46.
Were they such a grief we would pray to God to convert them, as we would to
cure a man of the plague in our Families, to root thorns and briars out of
our vineyard.

8. That we do not fear the provocations of the Lords wrath, (against the place
where the Kingdom and Church wherein we live) by their sin, did we consider how
for the adultery of one Zimri and Cosby the plague might fall on all the
people, Number. 25.8, 9. How for the disobedience of one Jonah the whole ship
might be in danger of miscarrying, Jonah. 1. How for the theft of one Achan,
the whole army might be defeated, Ios. 7. did we consider and lay to heart how
many evils may befull us for the sin of them that dwell about us, we would do
as Ezra did, Exra. 10.1. and according to our best abilities, by prayers
tears, entreaties, endeavor their reformation.

As Iron sharpens Iron, as it is in Prove. 27.17. So let us sharpen the Souls of
our brethren. Let us be to them as the rock to Peter, Math. 26.75. as Philip
to Nathaniel, John. 1.45. let us be to them as Horse men and Chariots, to
stir them up to drive and draw them forward, as bellows to kindle and blow up
the gifts of Gods Spirit within them, let us communicate what we have received,
like good stewards feeding Gods family, like fruitful trees yiedling some
fruit, like shining stars casting out some light. As Mary opened her box of
alabaster, and perfumed the house therewith, Luke 7.37. So let us with our
gracious speeches, holy instructions, and pious discourse leave a gracious
savor behind us, and impresse some good in them that are with us. As wicked
men sleep not until they do some mischief, Prove. 4.16. No more let us take
rest unles we do some good, as Jacob would not let the Angel go till he blessed
him, Genesis No more let us depart from our brethren, without leaving some
blessing behind us. And to the end we may do good in all places and companies,
consider these things.

1. Let us make a spiritual use of earthly things. As our Savior by the water
which the Samaritan Woman drew, took occasion to speak of the water of life, by
fishing with nets in the Sea, took occasion to speak of catching and drawing
out of the Sea of sin, by the drawnet of the Gospel, by the pearl took
occasion to speak of the precious pearl of the Gospel, by sowing of seed took
occasion, to speak of the word sown in the hearts of men. This is a blessed use
of things earthly, it sweetneth our Meditation, it plainly informs the
weakest understanding, it strongly convinces, it deeply in presses upon the
memory, we find like Sampson a honey comb in the Lion, and fetch water from the
rock.

2. Let us be well acquainted with the sacred Scriptures, let us get the word
of God to dwell with in us plenteously, Coll. 3.16. and then as a full
fountain sends forth waters, a full cloud pours out the rain, so shall
our lips drop down knowledge: when there is much fuel in the fire it gives
heat, to all that come nigh to it; if the Word of God be as a fire in our bones,
it will make us that we shall not be silent, see it in Job, in Job 32.18, 19,
20. in Jeremiah, Ier. 20.8. in David, Psalm. 40.10, 11.

3. Let us get our hearts inflamed with love to God, his word, his ways, we
easily break forth into, a large and full discourse of the persons and things
we entirely love, the worldly man of his wealth, the voluptuous man of his
pleasures, the ambitions man of his honor, every man's tongue is ready to
discourse of the object of his love, so David the commandments being his love,
see what he says, Psa. 119.46, 47. I will speak of thy testimonies also before
Kings, and will not be ashamed, and I will delight my self in thy commandments
which I have loved. This will make us with the spouse to enter into a large
discourse of the diety of her Savior, Cant. 5.11. of his judgment and
understanding in all things, verse. 12. of the sweet manifestation of himself in
his ordinance, verse. 13. of the excellency of his actions, depth of his
councels, verse. 14. of the stability of his proceedings, of the amiablenesse
and uprightness of his carriage toward his chosen, verse. 15. of the sweetness
of his voice and the singular comforts which flow from him, reside in him,
verse. 16.

4. Let us get our Souls filled with the knowledge of the Lord and of his
ways. We must first inform our selves before we can well inform others; the
Lamp can give no light unless it self be first filled with Oil, the blind man
is not fit for a guide, therefore David prays, Make me to understand the way
of thy precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous works, and that of the Prophet
in Isa. 50.4. The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned that I
should know how to speak a word in season, to him that is weary, etc. We must
be skillful like Physicians to apply our exhortation aright, it is not enough
to speak, but it must be to edifying, to good purpose, so as it may minister
grace to the hearers, therefore, Prove. 15.2. The tongue of the wise uses
knowledge aright, etc.

5. Let us labor to be thoroughly affected with the goodness of God toward
our Soul, to be assured of the forgiveness of all our sins, to have a lively
feeling of Gods love, and the joys of his spirit, and this will make us ready
and cheerful in teaching others, as we have mentioned in that of David, Psalm.
51.12.13.14.15. Restore me to the joy of thy salvation: and uphold me with thy
free spirit. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee, etc. And that Psalm. 66.16.

6. Let us strive to be truly good, and gracious, sanctified throughout both
in our Souls, and also in our bodies, let grace be as a fountain of living
water in the heart, and the speech shall be as many gracious streams issuing
from it. As waters to the city, as silver to the needy, as food to the hungry,
so shall be the speech of a gracious man, Prove. 10.11, 20, 21, 32.

If these things be in us, we shall not be idle nor unprofitable, but we shall
communicate of what we have received, impart what we know, stir up others to
attain the like measure of grace and assurance with us. And let not any say
like the sluggard there is a Lion in the way, if we seek the good of men's
Souls, we shall be hated, reproached: say not they are dissolute, or wordly
businesses shall be hinderers, for as Solomon says, Eccl. 11.4. He that
observes the wind, shall not sow; and he that regards the clouds, shall not
reap. But look upon Christ, the Prophets, Apostles, Gods precept, bretherens
wants, Gods blessing, Gods acceptance, clearing of thy own conscience, joy
which will accompany the due performance, and so go forward in it without
fainting. So much for the first point.

We have seen the connection, next we are to take notice of the words, and
therein first of all the place whereunto he journied, namely into the Land of
Judea: that is into that part thereof which was nigh unto the city Aenon, a
city situate in the Tribe of Manasses, thither he came to show himself a
Savior to them, to tender life and salvation, to declare Gods counsel; he did
not stay altogether in one place: but went from place to place, to publish the
tidings of life. Thereby showing thus much.

Christ Jesus.

As the Sun in the Firmanent, (though not all at once, yet by succession) does
cast his light and heat upon all the parts of the earth, more or less. So the
Son of righteousness sooner or later brings some out of all places, and
nations, from darkness to light, from death to life, from ignorance to the
knowledge of the truth.

This was shadowed, as some conceive, by the four corners of the Altar, and
sprinkling of blood round about it, Exodus 27.6, 7, 8. nothing the
all sufficiency of Christ's death, the plenty of his bloodshed, the
manifestation of him to the four corners of the world, by the ministry of the
Gospel.

This was Prophesied, Zzech. 14.8. And it shall be in that day, that living
waters shall go out from Jerusalem: half of them toward the former sea, and
half of them toward the hinder sea: in Summer and in Winter shall it be. As
the sea sends her streams to all the corners of the earth, as the King
swaying over the parts of his Kingdom, Psalm. 72.6, 7, 8. He shall come down
like rain upon the mowen grass: as showers that water the earth. In his days
shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace, so long as the moon
endures he shall also have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the river unto
the ends of the earth. Therefore he gave his Apostles a large commission, Math.
28.19. Go teach all nations, etc. and long before he told the people, Math.
8.11. I say unto you that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit
down, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God; and this was the
tenure of their song, Rev. 5.9. And they sung a new song, saying, thou art
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain,
and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation: The grounds of the point are these:

Isa. 11.10. In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for
an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious. And in Isa. 55.5. Behold thou shall call a nation that thou know
not; and nations that know not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord
thy God, and for the holy one of Israel, for he has, glorified the. And hence
God is said to will the salvation of some of all nations, 1. Tim. 2.4.6.

Romans 9.15. causing light to shine on them that sat in the shadow of death,
Math. 4.16. found of such which sought him not, Isa. 65.1.

Ezekiel. 2.5. and Romans 10.18.

Dan. 2.44. the strength of the stone is commended in dashing in pieces that
great and goodly image.

Christ's arms are spread abroad to embrace all comers, as you may gather from
these places, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be saved all the ends of the earth,
etc. Isa. 59.20. So, Act. 10.34. God is no respecter of persons but in every
nation, etc.

Luke 15.4. John. 10.16. Sounding the trumpet of the Gospel in their ears,
awakening them out of sin, when they sleep like Lazarus in the grave, Ioh.
11.44. Casting in the drawnet of the Gospel, fetching them like fish out of
the bottom of the Sea, Math. 13.48. As a man diggeth for jewels out of the
deep places of the earth, Mal. 3.17. As a shepherd goes upon the mountains for
his lost sheep, Luke 19.8. As the Husbandman fetches out his corn among much
chafe, Math. 3.12. So does our God gather his people some from the East, and
some from the West. As he caused of all beasts to come into the Arc, Genesis
Hence are those passages, Isa. 49.6. and 22. and Isa. 60.11, and Ier. 3.14. one
of a city and two of a family. Some he fetches out of one family, some out of
another, some from there nets, Math. 4.22. Some from the receipt of custom,
Mat. 9.9. Some from the plough, some from behind the ewes, as David to be a
King, Hos. 1.10.

Sodom God has his Lot. In Pharaohs Court his Joseph, in Ahabs house his
Obadiah. No soil so bad but being well manured may hear some good fruit, he
that can out of stones raise children unto Abraham, can turn the most stony
hearted to be an obedient people. His chosen are every where dispersed, and
therefore let us be every where employed in gathering them to God, let us sow
our seed in every barren field, administer Physic to every diseased soul,
apply some eye salve to every blind eye; with the Samaritan, pouring oil and
wine into every wounded soul; with David, delivering the sheep out of the
jaws of the bear, with Lot persuading our brethren to come, out of the Sodom
of sin; being converted our selves, let us labor to convert others. Did we
conscionably exercise this duty, these things would follow.

1. The earth would be full of knowledge, as the Sea of waters, the light of
the moon would be as the light of the Sun, the clouds of ignorance would vanish
like the vapor before the Sun, and every man would know the Lord from the
greatest to the least, the great things of Gods Law would be no more as a
strange language, Hosea 8.12. or as a sealed book, Isa. 29.11.

2. The consciences of men would be no more like seared flesh, as in 1. Tim.
4.1. they would not rest so securely in sin, as in 1. These. 5.3. but this like
the cock would remember them, as in Mat. 26.74. like a goad would awaken them,
Eccl. 12.11.

3. They should not take such pleasure in sin, iniquity should not be so
tooth-some to them, that which is now as honey should become as gall to their
Palate, what now is as a delightful way should become as a thorney path. As
the hand writing made Baltazar tremble, Dan. 5.5. as hue and cry to theefs, as
the looking glass to the spots in the face, this would rend the Vyzar, scatter
the refuge, and hiding place which they have made for their sin.

4. They should be brought to repent of their sin, to humble themselves under
the mighty hand of God, to cast away their iniquities as a menstruous rag, or
garment, to turn of God, to break off from their sins by repentance, as in Acts
2.37. and 2 Samuel 12.13.

5. They should not be so barren in the graces of the Spirit, they should not
be like a child sucking dry breasts, like a Tree whose roots have no moisture,
like the sluggards field, Prove. 24.32. grown over with thorns and nettles; but
as trees standing by the rivers side, they should bring forth much fruit, like
children sucking at a full breast they should grow apace, Prove. 10.21. Deuteronomy.
32.2.

6. They should not be so earthly minded, the world should not have so much of
their affection, time, service, care, it should not have such Dominion over
them, it should not so press them down, like a heavy burden; but their hearts
should be settled on things which are above, and they seek the Kingdom of God
and his righteousness, Math. 6.33. and count all things dung and dross, etc.
Philip. 3.8.

Bethesda, that he shall be cured, if Naaman go to Jordan, there is hope that
he shall be cleansed, if you manure and sow your field there is hope of
reaping. As all sorts of people attend the Sun for light, so must they the
Lords Ordinances for direction in the way to heaven.

As appears by the next thing here observable, Christ's attendants, who went
with him, the Disciples. They did not leave him, but continually traveled with
him, and attended on him, whence note this thing.

and attendant upon their faithful teachers: As the Scholars attends the
master, as the child the breast. So must we, 1 Pet. 2.2. as newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the Word, etc. Job 23.12. It is Jobs speech, neither
have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words
of his mouth more than my necessary food. As it is storied of Ruth her speech
to Naomi, 1 Ruth 16. Entreat me not to leave thee, or return from following
after thee; for whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will
lodge; thy people shall be my people, etc. So must we be as to Gods Ordinances
and faithful ministers, not depart from them, but go where they go, etc. Thus
it was with persons of old: in 13 Acts 42. the gentiles there besought Paul
that the Word before taught might be preached to them, etc. and in the 17 Acts
11. it is spoken of the men of Berea, they received the word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, etc. So in the 20 Acts 37.38. there
the people attend Paul, and wept sore when he spoke of seeing their face no
more. If you ask why Gods servants must be constantly conversant with and
attendant upon their faithful teachers; it will appear, if you take notice of
these particulars:

Mal. 2.5, 6, 7. The Priests lips keep knowledge, and people should seek the
Law at their mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, etc. these
are nurses as you have it, 1. These. 2.7. these are spiritual parents, 2 Cor.
4.15. these are guides, in the way, Romans 219. as the children suck the breasts,
attend their perents, and travelers are conversant with their guides, so must
these be with the Ministers of the Lord.

Because God has promised a blessing hereunto, Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man
that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors,
as he that lay daily at the gates of the Temple received a blessing, Acts 3.6.
this the Psalmist mentions, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou chosest,
and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: We shall be
satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple, and that
place, Matthew. 7.7, 8.

sheep wanting a Shepherd, a traveller wanting a guide. The people soon
erred, when Moses was but a little while absent. Israel could not go forward to
Canaan, longer than they had the light of the fiery Pillar to direct them, if
God smite the Shepherd the Sheep are Scattered, the Wise men knew not how to
travel longer than the Star shined to them.

Ephesus, Rev. 2.4. If the bellows blow not, the fire of it is own accord will
extinguish; the world will steal away our affections, if we do not constantly
attend the Gospel of Christ; if the child do not feed, his strength will
decay, if we do not constantly visit God we shall soon forget God, the world
will quickly steal away our hearts from the Lord.

Romans 1.17. From strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. Like good travelers going
onward in the way without cessation. Now without these we shall be like
Pharaohs Chariot which moved softly, and perished in the red Sea. Perseverance
in grace requires constancy in attendance upon Gods Ordinances.

rather draw a vail before, than such as will take away the scales of ignorance
from the eye of their understanding, preferring flattery before faithful
counsel, desiring to be dawbed over with the untempered mortar of deceit, as
in Ezekiel. 13.11. than to have their ruinons walls of sin pulled down, wishing
that the messengers of God had no eyes to see, nor tongues to reprove them for
their sin, as Isa. 30.10. loving no doctrine but what gives liberty to their
corruption, Ier. 5. ult.

But as long as men's hearts are thus averse from attendance on Gods
Ordinances, thus void of love to Gods Messengers:

1. They can never be well acquainted with the misery of their one estates. He
that vieweth not himself in the looking glass cannot know his spots, he that
estrangeth himself from the Physician, knows not the state of his body, he
that will not try his metal in the fire cannot know whither it be gold or
copper, so no man can understand his condition without the ordinances; read
those places, Romans 7.9. and Acts 9.17, 18. and Rev. 3.17, 18.

2. They cannot be unfainedly humbled for their sins, Peter wept not till he
heard the cock crow, Math. 26.75. the Jews were not pricked in their hearts
till they heard Peter preach, Acts 2.37. The Church must first see her
teachers, and hear a word behind her, before she defile her Idols, Isa. 30.20,
21, 22. and Ier. 31.18, 19, 20. and Romans 7.24.

3. They cannot be separated from sin, if Naaman go not into Jordan he cannot
be cleansed, 2 King. 5. if the fan be not used the chafe and corn cannot be
severed, Math. 3.12. read also John 15.3. and Ier. 23.29.

4. They can never have experience of the happy estate of Gods servants, of the
good things that he has provided for them that love him, of the sweetness of
his Ordinances, these cannot be, as Psalm. 46.4. A river, the streams whereof
make glad the heart. But as waters in a sealed fountain, these cannot be* as
Eccl. 11 7. Light which is sweet and pleasant: But as light under a bushel, as
a treasure under the earth, as an unknown language. They cannot say with
Jeremiah in the 15 Ier. 16. nor with David in the 119. Psalm. 72.

5. Their Consciences can never be truly pacified, for the publication of
reconciliation is by the ministrey, as 2 Cor. 5.20. the stormy and tempestuous
Sea of a troubled soul cannot, be quieted, they cannot be assured they shall
be saved, Romans 10.17. Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

The streams of Gods loving kindness flow not with an equal fullnes into all
corners of the earth. To some God affords his mercies, his blessings
spiritual, as a river of great strength, of much depth running for many ages
together; to others as a weak stream, a shallow brook soon dried: among
some he erecteth the means of life, as a Lamp full of oil giving much light,
shinnig very long; to others as a Lamp with little oil, giving a slender
light, soon gone out: to some the means of life are as a Summers day, clear,
glorious, of long continuance; to others as a Winters day, more obscure, more
short, as Joseph in the distribution of his meat, and apparel among his
brethren, gave five times as much to Benjamin, as to any other of his
brethren: So our God in the distribution of the means of life, gives five
times as much to some nations, to some particular places, as to others.

Thus our Savior in the first beginning of his ministry passed by Jerusalem,
like a traveller making a very small stay: but in the Land of Judaea he
tarried, as a sojourner making a longer stay among them, revealing himself more
fully, unfolding the mystery of salvation more plainly: from whence we may
gather this.



As the continuance of the fiery Pillar was a great blessing to Israel, Exodus
40.38. So is the continuance of the fiery and shining Pillar of the Gospel, to
all that are appointed to travel from Egypt to Canaan. As the continuance of
the light shining in Goshen was a great blessing to Israel, when Egypt sat in
darkness, Exodus 10.23. So is the continuance of the light, to any Nation, or
particular person, or assembly, when others are left in ignorance.

This is apparent by Gods gracious and comfortable promise made to the
Gentiles, Isa. 60.11, 20. Therefore the gates shall be open continually, they
shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought, verse. 20. The Sun shall no more
go down, neither shall the Moon withdraw it self: for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be at an end.

And also to the Jewish Church, as some conceive under the new Testament, Isa.
62.6, 7. I have set Watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never
hold their Peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not
silence; and give no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth.

And this does God put into the hand of his Church as a burning Lamp, to give
her light in the dark night of affliction, Isa. 30.20, 21. And though the Lord
give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction; yet shall not thy
teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy
teachers: and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying; This is the
way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left.

The reasons of the point are these.

Abraham's reservation of the inheritance for Isaac, was a greater Testimony of
his favor, than if he had given hin all the movables bestowed on Ismael: So
Gods donation of the ministry of the Gospel, the means of life eternal, is a
far greater favor than if he had given all the moveable and mutable wealth of
the world: Earthly things are but as favors bestowed upon a servant, but the
Gospel is a Jewel peculiar to the wise, Jer. 3.14, 15. Turn O Backsliding
children, says the Lord: for I am married to you: and I will take you one of a
city and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zyon: and I will give you
Pastors, according to my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding: read also, Isa. 62.5, 6.

Christ is present, Math. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them: and Rev. 1.13. in the midst of the 7
golden Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man clothed with a garment
down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, Mat. 28.19, 20.
I am with you to the end of the world. As the tree of life in the midst of the
garden, so is Christ in the midst of such assemblies, affording them food and
nourishment unto life eternal.

Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12. and John 16.13.

Cant. 2.2. all their fruit is but like sower to this sweet and pleasant grape,
all treasure is but like dross to this gold, Philip. 3.8. strip them but of
this Robe, and all their Ornaments are but as rags; therefore, 1 Samuel 4.42.
Phyneas wife said when the Arc was taken away by the Philistines, the glory is
departed from Israel.

Math. 5.14. and that passage of Solomon, Prove. 6.23. the commandment is a
Lamp, and the Law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life. As
food is to the body without which it must needs languish, 1 Pet. 2.2. Job
23.12. As a Shepherd is to the flock, Eze. 34.8. As a nurse is to the child, 1
These. 2.7. As dewes are to the ground, Dutr. 32.2. As a weapon to the Soldier,
Ephesians. 6.17. As Physic to the diseased, Psalm. 107.20. Isa. 57.19. As the
Samaritan to him that lay wounded between Jericho and Jerusalem; So is the
Gospel to the Lords people: As Moses Rod to Israel to open the rock to divide
the waters; So is the Gospel to make way through trouble, to give comfort in
the midst of all affliction: As the continuance of things so needful is a
great temporal blessing: So is the continuance of the Gospel a singular mercy
to any people.

Christ walked in the midst of the golden Candlestick when he revealed himself
unto John the Evangelist, Rev. 1.13, 20. Here is the School wherein we learn
true wisdom, 2 Timothy 3.16. This is the fountain, the Jordan, wherein we may
wash and be clean, John. 17.17. This is the river, whose waters will make our
hearts rejoice, Ps. 46.4. This is the pure gold, which will enrich us, Rev.
3.18. This is the warlike weapon, which like David's sling and stone, will give
us conquest over our enemies: These are the waters, which will cause us like
trees planted by the waters side to increase and fructify in great abundance,
of a little one to become a thousand, and of a small one a strong Nation, Isa.
60.22. all these seriously considered, we shall plainly see that the
continuance of the Gospel is a singular blessing.

Ezekiel. 1.26. he has not left them without vision, Mic. 3.6. they have not been
as clouds without rain, as wels without water, as dogs without tongues, as
eyes without sight, God has not suffered the Philistines to stop up Abraham's
wells, nor surprise Isreal's Arc, the Lord has not dealt with us as he
threatened to do with them in another case, Hos. 13.15. To dry up our Springs
and our fountains, and to spoil our treasury of all her pleasant vessels, but
rather on the contrary, as, Isa. 41.17, 18. They that sat in darkness have
seen a great light, Isa. 9.3. The barren womb is become mother of many
Children, the Candlestick, which had none, have had shining lights erected in
them, the breasts which have been dry have been filled with milk, the pits
which were empty have been replenished with water. The fathers have seen the
rising, and the children have not (God grant they never may) see the setting of
this Sun, the Fathers have been fed with this Manna, and the children have not,
through any spiritual famine, been constrained to go from Sea to Sea to seek
this bread, Amos 8.11, 12. It has not vanished like a vapor, but like the
cloud which Eliahs servant saw, it was little as a man's hand in the beginning,
1 King. 18.44, 45. yet through his blessing, who is the Ocean of all goodness,
it has overspread even the whole Land, and watered many places thereof; it
has not been as a tree of dry roots, but from a little plant it has grown
to a great tree, like the tree in Nebuchadnezars vision, Dan. 4.11, 12. It has
not like the waters of Teman been soon dried up, but like the waters of the
sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5.

Though the wild boar of the forest has often endeavored to root up this
vine, though the Antichristian Locusts with the smoke of Popish Doctrine have
sought to put out this light, though the spiritual Philistines have labored
to Damme up this well, though they plotted, devised, and combined the
accomplishment thereof with their confederates, as much as ever the Philistines
did the taking away of Sampsons locks, the putting out of Sampsons eyes by
corrupting their Dalila, that all like Sampson might be constrained to grind to
their mill, and to dance to their Pipe, Iud. 16.21, 25.

Though the great Dragon has striven with his tail flattering and fawning on
some like a Dog that moves his tail, persecuting others, as a Serpent beats
and wounds with his tail, to draw the stars from heaven, teachers, and
professors from the Gospel: Yet hitherto has the Lord amongst us caused this
vine to flourish, this fountain to send forth refreshing waters, this star
to shine. Many years has he dug and cast soil about the roots of this
tree, Luke 13.7. Long has he endeavored like a Hen to gather us as Chickens
under his wings, Math. 23.37. Often has he sent his messengers, to woe us to
reconcile us. So that we may say as God himself does, what could he have done
more, then he has done for us, Isa. 5.2. Treason, Power, Malice, has been
discovered, defeated, false Doctrines, trees which were not of Gods planting,
have hitherto been plucked up, the Lions coming in sheeps clothing have been
shunned by the Lords flock, and the Factors of Rome have had no good utterance
for their deceiptfull wares. But the Gospel, happily, and well were it, if not
unthankfully preserved. Christ has tarried with us longer than in the Land of
Judea; we may say as, Cant. 2.11, 12, 13. Lo, the winter is past, the rain is
over, and gone. The flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of
birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. The figtree
puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grapes give a good
smell, etc.

Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the
Lord. I will pay my vows to the Lord, now in the presence of all his people.
How should we all study day and night how to honor that God, who has so
honored us above many other nations: These things it should cause.

1. This should cause us to love God most entirely: how do we love the hand
which heals us when we are sick, the hand which feeds us being hungry,
which delivers us being captivated, which cloatheth us being naked, which
brings a light to us being in darkness, which advances us to honor out of
the dust: how much more should the goodness of God inflame our cold, revive our
dull affections, how can we look on these tokens of Gods love, and not be
ravished with admiration? How can we set in this Banqueting house, and not be
sick of love? Cant. 2.4. How can we live so long under the burning beams of
this Sun, and not burn with love to him, who has loved us? How can we receive
so much from God, and not gladly leave all for the love we bear him? Is not
the heat of the fire answearable to the quantity of the wood? Is not the depth
of the waters in the Channel, proportionable to the water distilling from the
clouds, arising from the fountain? remember you not that place, Luke 7.41, 42,
43. Has he not given and forgiven us, more than others; therefore let us
accordingly in our love go beyond other people.

2. This should cause us to love the Gospel most unfainedly: we have had the
experience of it, we have seen the wonders it has wrought, the powerful
effects it has produced, we have seen the blessings which have accompanied it,
how the hand of God has been with it. It is said of David that all Israel and
Juda loved him, because he went out and in before them, and God was with him, 1 Samuel 18.14, 16. We have had as blessed experience of the goodness of the Gospel,
of the long continuance of it, of the mighty power of God accompaining it,
toward us, against our enemies, as ever the men of Judah and Israel had of
David, and therefore we should now set our hearts upon it. As Solomon says in
another case, Prove. 5.19. Let her be as the loving hind, and pleasant roe, let
her breast satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished with her love.

We should be so affected with it, that with them, John. 6.34. We should say,
Lord, evermore give us this bread, that with Peter, Math. 17.4. We should say
it is good being here, if thou will let us make here three Tabernacles, etc.
and with David, Psalm. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better to me than
thousands of gold and silver, and as the spouse, Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me
with the kisses of his mouth, etc. Long continuance in the School causes the
Scholars delight; this is the instrument of our peace, safety, comfort, and
direction: therefore as Israel, 1 Samuel 4.5. When the Arc of the Covenant came
into the camp, shouted with a great shoute, so that the whole earth rang
again; so should we for the continuance of the Gospel.

3. This should make us resemble God abundantly in holiness and true
righteousness. The Iron that lies long in the fire, burns like the fire;
Naaman that has been seven times in Jordan comes forth cleansed: if the Sun
shine long the air is fully enlightened, Moses was but forty days in the
mount, and his face shined, we have been more than forty years in this mount
with our God, and therefore we should shine in holiness; trees that have long
grown in a fertile soil, much cost, art and labor bestowed about them bear
much fruit, Psalm. 1.3. as in the 2 Pet. 3.11, 12. Seeing then all things shall
be dissolved what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness: So in this case seeing the Gospel has been so long continued; so
powerfully preached, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation.

4. This should fill our mouths with praises and thanksgivings, it should make
us to rejoice as the wise men at the beholding of the star, as the Angels at
the birth of Christ. But if instead of loving God, of delighting in the Gospel
of God, of resembling God, of consecrating our selves to God; of magnifying him
for his long continued merices. We dishonor God, we disgrace the Gospel by our
Religious conversation. What can we then look for at the hands of God; but
that he turn our long and shining day into a night of everlasting darkness,
what can we expect but that he take away our Candlestick, Rev. 2.5. Put out our
Candle, Acts 13.46.

3. Let us try whither as the long continuance of the Gospel is a blessing in
it self, so it be a blessing to us, 1 Samuel 4. Israel had the Arc, rejoiced in
it: Yet the Philistines had the victory. Many shall say at last, Luke 13.26.
and yet verse. 27.

Therefore that it may appear to every man's own conscience, that it is a
blessing to him: it will appear by signs and fruits thereof.

Heb. 4.12. 2 Cor. 10.4.5. 1 Samuel 5.4.5.
it has purged the disease of the Stomach, it has like a mighty weapon
overturned the hold of Satan, like the Arc it has cast down even Dagon it
self, it has not only paired the branch, but cut through the root of sin.

Mat. 11.29.
to become as a garment about thy back, what was once as a thorney way, to
become a plain a smooth path, what was once as a moate to thy eye, is now
become as the light, a pleasant thing thereunto, it is no more a trouble but
meat and drink to do thy Fathers will, John 4.34. Psalm. 40.8. 1 John 5.3. all
these places intimate as much.

Christ and thee, 1 Cor. 11.2. 2 Cor. 5.18.
it causes thy heart to cleave to him, as the heart of the bride cleaves to
the bridgroome, as the stones in the building cleave unto the foundation, with
firmeness, and with affection, it takes thee out of the wild Olive, and
grafteth thee into the living vine, it separateth thee from the World, causes
thee to give a bill or divorce thereunto, it makes the World, whom thou once
entirely affected, to become as a Husband that is dead, and it does contract
thee unto Christ, and whereas heretofore thou have lived toward Christ, as
toward a stranger, whom thou knew not, affectedst not, regardedst not, now
you live to him as a wife to her Husband, you know Christ, converse with
Christ, open the secrecies of your Soul to him, ask his counsel, know the
excellency of his love toward you, obey him, delight in him, meditate upon
him, study in all things how to please him; Much more might be said but this
will sufficiently discover it.

4. Is the long continuance of the Gospel such a blessing, then let us be
careful so to walk toward the Lord, that it may shine like the Sun to the
end of the World, that it may be to us and our posterity as an everlasting
fountain, whose waters may never be dried up, that may shine like the fiery
Pillar, from one end of our jorney to another: And for that end let us be
careful.

1. To remove our transgressions far from us. God will ever be our friend, it
we handle sin as an enemy, if we cast this out of our bosom, he will most
graciously embrace us, most abundantly communicate his mercies to us. It is sin
only that causes God to estrange himself from us, to deprive us of his
blessings, the thorns and briars occasion the Husbandman to withhold the soil
from the vineyard, the sower grapes cause God to pull down the hedge, Isa. 5.4,
5, 6. Ungodlines sets God against us, and us against his Ordinances, if the
Philistines love his Dagon, the Arc cannot long continue, if Ahab keep his
resolution of going up to Ramoth Gilead, Michaia, shall surely lose his freedom.

2. We must take heed of losing our first love, we must not put our hand to the
plough and look back; we must not with Israel long again for the fleshpots of
Egypt, but grow more and more in love with God and his ways, thirst more after
Gods goodness, and God shall replenish you with his mercies.

3. We must not grow weary of Gods Ordinances: as Israel of their Manna, as
diseased stomachs of their food, as soar eyes of the light, as ulcerous bodies
of a strait garment, as bruised backs of a heavy burden: But we must strive to
take more delight and comfort therein, to feel more sweetness, to perceive more
efficacy, to find a greater stability of faith thereby wrought. The longer a
man travelleth in the heat of the Sun the more his body is warmed; the longer
a man does exercise in any trade, the more contentement and delight he finds
in it; make it then your delight, Isa. 58.13, 14. Hunger and you shall be fed
seek, and you shall find; But if we grow weary of the Ordinances, as they in
Amos 8.5. The Lord will remove the Ordinances, as in verse. 11.

4. We must not oppose, reproach, nor disgrace the Messengers of the Lord;
abuse the Kings Messengers he will send no more: When Hanun abused his
Messengers he sent no more in Kindness; abuse the Physician and thou may
languish without cure, Acts 13.45, 46. Mar. 6.11. Let then their feet be
beautiful Romans 10.15. Let him be as one of a thousand, Job 33.23.

5. We must bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, let it be as seed sown in
good ground, as soil about the roots of a good tree, as milk from the Mothers
breasts making the child grow, 1 Pet. 2.2.



The last thing here considerable is his action, his work, what he did. He
baptized, not that he did it by his one hands but by others, as appears in
that place, John 4.1, 2. Yet he is said to do it. To teach us.

Christ the Ordainer: he must be a Minister, called and Sanctified of God
thereunto that does administer it: But yet it is the Lord that gives efficacy
unto it.

Moses smites the rock, but it is the Lord that stands before him, and
causes the water to gush out, Exodus 17.6.

The Priests and the People compass the walls of Jericho, and sound the rams
horns, but it is the Lord does overthrow the city, Iosuah 6.16.

It is Paul plants, etc. but God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. And this
the Baptist acknowledged, Math. 3.11.

King. 6.27. So if God do not help we cannot. Our duty is to use the means; it
is Gods goodness and mercy to give the blessing, as Prove. 21.31. The Horse is
prepared against the day of battle, but salvation is of the Lord, so faithful
and able ministers must be provided, but yet the Lord gives the blessing, 1
Cor. 3.5.

and the efficacy of every Ordinance depends upon the ordainer of it. Why are
the waters of Jordan more effectual than the waters of Abana and Parphar to
wash away the Leaprosy of Naaman, but because God has ordained them thereunto,
2 King. 5.10. Why should Moses Rod divide the waters rather than another staff,
but because the Lord has commanded it to be used, he ordains it, and makes
it to accomplish that whereunto he does send it, Isa. 55.10.11.

Bethesda can do nothing unles the Angel move them, John 5.4.

The Philistines can never unfold Sampsons riddle unles they plough with his
heifer Judge. 14.18.

Let God withhold his Spirit, the Word will be as a sealed book which we cannot
understand, you may read that the wisdom and understanding of the Word is by
the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.17. So John 16.13.

Let God withhold his Spirit, and the Word will be a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3.6.

And for the Sacrament; that will be as a shell without a kernel, as a dry
tree without fruit, as a fountain shut up.

work. Yet the Lords arm is strong, the Lords eye is clear, he is every way
sufficient, he will make his Ordinances effectual, he will do great things by
weak instruments, Psalm. 8.2. Babes and sucklings: our one weakness must not so
much dishearten, as Gods power must give incouragment to us. The consideration
of Gods alsufficiency, must make us pass through all difficulties, with
confidence, chearfulnes, and much courage. Though we are as empty vessels yet
in God is fulness, though it be a task to hard for any humane strength, a
burden to heavy for the shoulders of the very Angels, a labor which no created
power can accomplish. Yet the Lord having given us commission, he may look on
us and say, as he did to Gideon in another case, Iud. 6.14. Go you messengers
of the Lord of Hosts, you that are full of power, by the Spirit of the Lord and
of judgment, and of might, Mic. 3.8. Go on in this your might, and ye shall
save the chosen of the Lord out of the hands of their enemies: have not I the
Lord sent you, and if any reply as Gideon did, Iud. 6.15. O my Lord! how shall
I convert, how shall I save this people, behold I am weak and frail, a Lamp
wherein is little Oil, an arm wherein is small strength, the most unworthy
among the many thousands that bear thy name. Yet as the Lord answered Gideon,
verse. 16. So will he answer us, surely I will be with thee, I will guide,
assist, encourage thee, and thou shall smite down the sin of the people as one
man, thus Ier. 1.6, 7, 8. and Isa. 49.2. Like a sword to pierce, open, prick
and wound the consciences of men; Hid, me in the shadow of his hand, protected
me against the snares of men, and has made me as a polished arrow to pierce
deeply and speedily into the hearts of the people.

And since it is the Lords work, the faithful messengers of God, the leaders
of his army, may say one unto another as Ioab did to Abishai his Brother, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be strong, and let us be valiant for our people, and for the Cities
of our God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his eyes.

2. Since God gives the efficacy, the ministers must take heed that they go
not in their name, bragging and boasting like the great Goliath of their own
abilities, presuming like the Sons of Sheva without any commission from God
to cast out the unclean Spirit, least as Goliath, so they be foiled in the
battle, least as on the Sons of Sheva, so the unclean Spirit leap upon
them, and prevail against them. But as David went against the great Goliath,
not in his own, but in the name of the Lord, and prevailed, so must the
ministers of God, if they desire the conquest, they must go in humility,
sensible of their own weakness, as Gideon was of his Iud. 6.15. As Moses was of
his, Exodus 4.10. Such God will guide in judgment, Psalm. 25.9. And shall do
great things, Psalm. 45.4.

They must go in faith, in the name of the Lord Jesus they shall be able to do
great things, Acts 3.16. Thorough this they shall cause the walls of the
Spiritual Jericho to fall, they shall subdue the Kingdom of Satan, stop the
mouth of the Roaring Lion, quench the violence of fiery Concupiscence, raise
the spiritually Dead unto a new life, make the weak strong, the faint-hearted
valiant, put to flight armies of strange and strong corruptions, work
righteousness, and seal up to men's Souls Gods promises, as the Apostle does in
another case speak of Faith, Heb. 11.30, 33, 34, 45.

They must go in Gods counsel and not in their own wisdom, David could do
nothing in Saul's armor; but with his sling and his stone he cast Goliath to the
ground. Humane inventions, Philosophical speculations, like Saul's armor, fit
not Gods Messengers, they are as a blunt weapon having no power. The Word of
the Lord is as a two edged sword, the stones gathered out of the Scriptures,
slung with the sling of faith prevails mightily against sin, Jer. 23.22.

3. This must teach the people to take heed that they rest not in the naked
receiving of Gods Ordinances from the hands of the Minister; this is not
enough; but as the Minister, so Christ must also baptize; as the one baptizeth
the body, the other must baptize the conscience; as the one preaches to the
ear, so the other must preach to the heart. Otherwise, as the heart of Simon
Magus, so may ours after baptism, be full of the gall of bitterness; Ismaels
circumcision of the flesh availed not the heart remaining uncircumcised, the
washing of the sow does not cause her to be a lamb, as long as her swinish
nature is not changed; the ravens feathers become not white by being in the
Arc with the dove; Esau is not accepted of God, because in the same womb with
Jacob, the same waters prove a swallowing gulf to the Egyptians, which were
dry ground, a safe and sure way to Israel. That Arc, which, causes the house
of Obededon to prosper, causes the men of Ashdod to perish: It is not the
possession, but the fruitio^ of Gods Ordinances that makes them effectual,
not the naked having, but the sound application makes them powerful to
salvation.

What avails the shining of the Sun upon the blind, that has not an open eye
to entertain the light? What is Physic in a Box; virtuous herbs in a garden,
if not applied to the diseased Stomach, to the wounded member? What is raiment
in a Wardroab, or cloth under the arm, if it be not put on the back? What are
apples above the head, waters under thy feet, if thou feed not on the one, if
thou drink not of the other, do not thou starve between both? What is a
fair and stately building to thee, if thou take up thy abode in the open
field, does not dewes fall upon thee, does not the Sun scorch thee, does not
the cold pierce thee? What is remission of sin, what is resurrection to a new
life represented in Baptism, what is it to thee, if thy lusts be not
mortified, if thou rise not by virtue of it to a new life? What is it to thee
that the word is a Lamp, if thou apply it not to thy feet, that it is as milk
in the breast,if thou suck it not, that it is a spiritual weapon, if thou gird
it not about thee, that it is a seed if not sown, if not hidden in the field of
thy heart? Say not then as he did, Iud. 17.13. Now I know the Lord will be good
unto me, seeing I have a Levite to be my Priest: But if thou will have Gods
Ordinance prove a blessing, if thou will know thy self blessed in the having of
them, cease not till thou find it, as a shining Star, a burning Lamp,
enlightening thy understanding, filling thee with knowledge of Gods love to thy
Soul in Christ, as the candle fills the house with light, the waters the Sea,
till they wash thy sin from thy Soul, as waters wash dirt from the body, as the
fan drives chafe from the corn, as Jordan washed away Naamans Leprosy: Till
they stablish thy says, as a strong foundation supporteth the building, as
firm roots sustain the tree, a strong hand upholdeth him that is led by it.
Till they warm thy heart, inflame thy affections, as the fire warmeth the
house, as the Summer Sun does warm the air. Till it make thy love to God and
his ways as a vehement flame, as coals of much fire: Till it make thy peace
as deep as the rivers, even a peace passing all understa^ding.

4. This must teach men to seek to God for the efficacy of his Ordinances,
desire him to make them as a launcing knife in the hand of the Physician, as a
Sword in the hand of the Spirit; Desire him that when Moses strikes with the
Rod upon the Rock, when the Minister does press the Word upon our stony hearts,
that he will stand before, show his powerful and gracious presence there in
making them to melt, in causing them to become contrite and broken, for as
Psalm. 33.16, 17. There is no King saved by the multitude of an host, a mighty
man is not delivered by much strength, etc. So without Gods blessing, unless
he put his hand to it it is but vain, as, Psalm. 127.1, 2. Except the Lord
build the house they labor but in vain, etc. For as Prove. 10.12. The blessing
of the Lord it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, so in this case.

Therefore as the Daughter of Caleb desired her father, having given her south
Land, that he would also give her springs of water, Iud. 15.19. So God having
given us his Ordinances, let us desire him with all to give us his Spirit. As
his ministers like seeds men sow the seed of his word, so we must desire God to
join therewith the dewes of heaven, that it may not lie like seed in dry
ground, withering for want of moisture. That the Messenger of the Lord, may not
stand knocking in vain at the iron gates of our unregenerate hearts, but that
the Lord will open our ear and heart, our eyes to see, our hearts to attend,
believe, obey, as he opened the heart of Lydia, that he will make his
Ordinances as seed sown in good ground, as the bow of Jonathan, which turned
not back and the sword of Saul, which returned not empty, 2 Samuel 1.22. As the
cake and cruse of water whereof the Prophet did eat and drink, and went in
the strength thereof to Horeb the mount of God, 2 King. 19.8. That we may be so
refreshed, replenished herewith, that we may thereby go from strength to
strength, till we appear before God in Sion, Psalm. 84.7.

5. As the efficacy is the Lords, so let the praise be Gods, let the hand,
which does the work, receive the honor, the faithful instrument which God
uses is worthy of double honor, of singular love for his works sake: David
may have the praise for giving Goliath the overthrow; The wise men may rejoice
to see the Star leading unto Christ Jesus. The feet of the messenger must be
beautiful in the eyes of the people, as one of a thousand to them, but yet
still as he is Gods instrument, as a Lamp that has received his Oil from Gods
Olive, as a vessel filled with water flowing from the Ocean of all goodness, as
a star held in the hand and receiving all his light from the Sun of
righteousness, the Ministers must be so respected, as that God must in and above
all be honored, loved, praised, and rejoiced in. If Joshua smite the country
of the hills Ios. 10.40, 41. It is because the Lord God of Israel fought for
Israel, verse. 42. So if any, or all the Lords Iosuahs, the spiritual leaders
of Gods Armies smite the sins of men, which were high as the mountains, or
deep as the vale, which were for Dominion like Kings, for continuance like a
living spring, for extent like the deluge overflowing the whole man, if these
be beaten, if their life be taken away, it is because the Lord God of Israel
has fought for Israel. If any tree of Paul's planting do grow, if any field do
flourish by the watering of Apollos, it is because the Lord has given the
increase. If any man learn wisdom, if any man be presented perfect in Christ
Jesus by Paul's labor in the ministrey, it is thorough the working of God who
works mightly in him, Coll. 1.28, 29. If David have escaped the Lion, and the
bear, conquered, slain them, delivered the lamb from them, it is because God
was with him, wrought for him, 1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36. If any Shepherd of Gods
flock, have delivered any of Gods Lambs out of the jaws of the roaring Lion,
it is the Lords doing, and as the Psalmist touching Israel deliverance from
Egypt; So may we all say touching the deliverance of Gods Israel from their
spiritual bondage, Psalm. 44.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. We have heard with our ears, O God!
our Fathers have told us, what works thou did in their days, in the times of
old; how thou did drive out the heathen, with thy hand and plantedst them;
how thou did afflict the people and cast them out, etc.

Therefore let every Soul that has tasted of Gods goodness say in this kind,
that has felt the mighty arm of God in the weilding of this weapon, that has
had any comfortable experience, of the moving of Gods Angle in this poole; Let
him bless the Lord that has given him counsel, that has caused his reins
to instruct him in the night season, Psalm. 16.7.

As Hanna celebrated God for the birth of a Son: So let every regenerate Soul
praise God for his new birth and say, 1 Samuel 2.1, 2, 8. He raises us from the
grave of sin, from the dust of iniquity. He lifts up the poor Souls from the
dunghill of sin, to set us among them that are Kings, and Princes unto our God.

Verse. 23.
And John also was Baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because their was much
water there, and they came and were Baptized.
FRom the practice of our Savior descend we to the labor of the Baptist,
wherein we may take notice of.

1. His constant practice in his calling, notwithstanding Christ had now
manifested himself. 2. The quality of his employment. 3. The place where. 4.
The reason why. 5. The concourse of the people to him.
1. Christ began publicly to teach, to shine like a glorious Sun, yet the
Baptist did not therefore cease from his calling, but continued constant, not
saying that Christ is come, therefore I may be silent: hence mark.

Noah, who as he went in, so he would not come forth again but by the Lords
commandment.



2. The quality of the Baptists work, he baptized. This baptism administered
by John, and that administered by our Savior was the same.

In regard of the Author and authority, John 2.33.

2. In regard of substance and thing signified, Remission of sin in Christ.

3. In regard of the sign, Water.

4. In regard of the Ceremony, Washing the body.

5. Inregard of the efficacy and effect, Offering forgivenes of sin to all true
believers, Acts 19.4. thus they agree.

They differ:

In regard of time, the Baptism of John was before Christ's Baptism. The
Baptism of John sealed up remission of sins to believers in Christ to come.
The Baptism of Christ is extended to all people, John's Baptism extended only
to the Israelites; The Baptism of our Savior has greater measure of
efficacy, than the Baptism of the Baptist, because the Spirit after Christ's
passion and ascension was more plenteously given.

Bellarmine contendeth that the Baptism of the Baptist was not the same with
Christ's, that such as were baptized by him, were again to be baptized by
Christ's Baptism. But this is not so, for otherwise we should not have the same
baptism with Christ, for he was baptized by John. And as by his circumcision
he sanctified the circumcision of the Fathers, so by his baptism, he
sanctified ours; otherwise their should be two baptismes, which the Scripture
contradicts, Ephesians. 4.5. One baptism.

Baptism thus administered by our Savior, by the Baptist, it shows.

Sacrament of Baptism must be carefully administered to such as are capable of
it.

This is the first Sacrament of the new Testament by the washing of water,
representing the powerful washing of the blood and Spirit of Christ, and so
fealing our new birth, and entrance into the Covenant of grace; read these
places, Ephesians. 5.26. 1. Cor. 6.11. Heb. 10.22. John 3.5. Tit. 3.5.

As the benefit represented, and sealed by it to the faithful is great: So the
authority of it is not humane but divine, it was brought into the church by the
commandment of God, by the Ministry, first of John; therefore called the
Baptist, after sanctified and confirmed by our Savior himself, being baptized
of John, and giving commission to his Apostles, and Ministers, to continue the
same in his Church unto the end. In this Sacrament there are two parts.

The outward Element of Water, John 1.31. With the action of washing, Ephesians.
5.26. In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. That which is signified
by this is the blood and Spirit of Christ, Heb. 9.14. 1 Cor. 6.11. Washing away
both the guilt, and filthiness of sin, Acts 2.38. Ezekiel. 36.25. Yet this
spiritual and inward does not always accompany the outward washing for how
ever God by his Minister offer unto all, yet the elect only are effectually
partakers of the benefit thereof, and that not always as soon as they be
baptized; but after they be once converted and ingraffed into Christ, Gal.
3.27. Then Baptism does ever after become a fountain for sin, and for
uncleanenes, Zach. 13.1. And this does wash from all sin, original, actual,
sins before and sins after Baptism, and that perfectly in respect of the
guilt, Isa. 1.18. Though inperfectly and by degrees, in regard of the
pollution, and power of sin, John 13.10. Psalm. 51.

Thus you see the authority and benefit of the Sacrament. Let therefore every
one that has participated of it, be careful, as he is thereby received into
the number of Gods people, brought within the Covenant of God, So

1. Let him live as one of Gods Family, and not as a stranger, as a friend and
not as an enemy.

2. Let him strive to find that Union wrought between him and Christ, which is
represented by Baptism, Gal. 3.27.

3. Let him be sure, that as his body, so his conscience be baptized, the
inward man be renewed, Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21.

4. Let him get the assurance of the pardon of his sins, Acts 2.38. Cease not
till by the best testimony of Gods Spirit, the witness of thy own conscience,
and the saving fruit hereof thou be assured of the same.

5. Ever remember the obligation wherein thou art hereby bound to believe and
obey, Romans 6.34.

6. Ever keep thy conscience sincere and unspotted, 1 Pet. 3.21. And then in
the deepest affliction thou may find much comfort, for as the rising out of
the water of Baptism may assure thee of the comfortable passage, thorough the
waters of all afflictions, and of a future resurrection to glory, and happiness.

2. Since the authority and benefit is so great, we are much to blame that deny
our presence at this Ordinance, for

1. It is a parcel of Gods worship.

2. We should pray for a member more received into the Church.

3. Give thanks that God vouchsafes this grace and favor to him.

4. We might be put in mind of our own covenant. A shame it is that we cannot
a little while afford our presence, to a duty so behoofull; so comfortable.

3. The place where the Baptist did Baptice was in Aenon a city near unto
Salim, whereof is mention, 1 Samuel 4. Two cities nigh unto Jordan. The Baptist
remained not still in one place, he baptized our Savior in Jordan, now he
Baptizeth in Aenon, hence learn.



The more largely the means of salvation are divulged. 1. The more the goodness
of God is commended. 2. The more the name of God is honored. 3. The more Souls
are converted. 4. The more Satan's Kingdom is weakened. 5. The more excuseles
men will be in the day of judgment.

all places where we come, going up and down seeking whom to save, as Satan
compasses the earth seeking whom he may devour, compassing Sea and Land to
turn men to God, as the Pharisees did to make a prosylite; an embracer of their
superstition.

Were our care and diligence thus manifested, were our time thus redeemed, our
abilities thus exercised, then.

1. We should leave in all places a sweet savor behind us.

2. We should prevent the commission of many evils.

3. We should take from Satan much advantage which he now has against us.

4. We should enlighten many blind understandings.

5. We should revive many dejected Spirits.

6. We should make fruitful many barren Souls.

7. We should reclaim many wandering sheep.

8. We should replenish the fold of Christ Jesus.

9. We should make the Gospel glorious.

10. We should multiply our own graces.

11. We should make our appearance at last very comfortable before Christ Jesus.

Thus of the place.

4. The reason why he baptized there: because their was much water there; other
places afforded not so much water as this place did; therefore he made choice
of this where you may see.

1. That the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered in pure water
without any mixture.

2. That in ancient time the whole body of the baptized did use to be washed.

3. That Ministers ought to make choice of the most convenient places for the
execution of their office: of each of these a word or two.

Sacrament of baptism, must be administered in pure water without any mixture.

As Naaman washed in the River of Jordan without any thing mingled with it and
was healed. So must we in this Jordan. For so was Christ himself baptized,
Math. 3.16. So was the Eunuch baptized, Acts 8.38, 39. Therefore called
washing, Ephesians. 5.26. Acts 8.36. Acts 2.41. Math. 28.19. Thus they, 1 Cor. 10.2.

This answers the water flowing from our Saviors side, as the Wine in the
Lords supper does answer the blood, which our Savior shed, and this does
represent the thing thereby signified the washing away of our sins. Therefore
Augustine: August. haeres. 46 cont. Maniches.
Toll aquam and baptismus non erit.

Where by the way we may see the Manichees refuted, refusing to use water in
baptism, because as they fondly conceived the devil and not God had made the
water.

Their error discovered, who would not baptize with water? because John
baptized with water, but Christ baptized with the Holy Ghost.

Their practice confuted, who instead of sprinkling water did impresse the
form of a cross with a hot Iron in the forehead of their children, because it
is said that Christ did baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire,
understanding that literally which was meant Spiritually.

The weak conceit of such overturned, as think the child may be baptized in
Wine, Oil, or other liquour, whereas, Acts 8.36. Ephesians. 5.26. Water is the only
sanctified and appointed Element.

It also overthrows the error and presumtuous practice of the Papists in
adding Salt, Oil, Spittle, etc. to the Element of Water, a practice savouring
of no less pride than ignorance. For it is not in the power of any man or
Angel, but only of God to appoint the matter of a Sacrament; No man must dare
to add to any of Gods Ordinances, no creature can make them more complete and
perfect, Dutr. 12.32. Whatsoever is by nams invention annexed to it is
will worship, which God abhors, Coll. 2.24. Such as has neither precept or
example in Scripture to warrant it, but are taken partly from Iudaisme as Salt,
Partly from Iudaisme. Partly from blind zeal. Partly the abuse of the Churchs
practice.

Use.


and Oil, partly from their one blind zeal as spittle, and partly from the
abuse of the practice of the Church in the time of persecution, used to preach
and baptize in the night by candle light, and hence the Papists will have their
candles burning in the day.

But to leave these cold and comfortles discourses, let us return to our
selves, and as the water is the Element in Baptism, so let us labor to see
that Baptism in us produce such effects, as the water uses to do in things
subject to the operation thereof: and,

1. As the water does wash the body, so let us be stirred up to get our Souls
washed from sin, and uncleanenes, this is the worst dirt, a filthiness which
does most defile, a Leprosy which does most deforme, no spot so sordid, no
blemish so uneasily removed, no deformity but this causes us to be refused of
God, it is not unwashen hands, a polluted face, but an unwashed Soul which the
Lord does hate, this is that the Lord would have us put away, Jer. 4.14. All
other washings are nothing worth, the heart remaining unclean, unwasht; it is
not so much the outside, as the inside of the platter does defile the meat,
therefore the Lord will have both to be washed, James 4.8. And this David's
Prayer, Psalm. 51.2, 7. This is Gods promise, and the work of his Spirit upon
all his chosen children, Ezekiel. 36.26. This is a testimony of his surest love,
Ezekiel. 16.9. The sweetest favor that he bestows on any of his servants: to
wash away their sin is a greater mercy and higher honor, than to cloth them
with the richest raiment, and seat them in the most eminent places of dignity,
for as, Exodus 29.4. Aaron and his sons were washed with water before they
ministered in the tabernacle, so must we wash, before ever we can Minister unto
God in any acceptable manner; as, John 13.8. Christ washed Peter's feet, else he
could not have part in him, so unless we be inwardly washed, we can have no
part in Christ, as Levit. 1.9. The inwards and the legs of the burnt offering
was to be washed in water: So must our inward parts be washed before we can
offer our selves to God.

Therefore as Naomi advised Ruth intending to, join herself in wedlock with
Boas, Ruth 3.3. Wash thy self therefore and anoint thee, etc. So let me advise
as many of you as intend to join vour selves in this holy wedlock with Jesus
Christ wash your selves from your iniquities, anoint your selves with the Oil
of grace, be clothed with the garment of true holiness, that so God may delight
in you.

2. As the water does supply, and make soft and tender the grounds whereon it
falls, things cast into it: So must we labor to find our hearts (by virtue
of the grace of the Spirit represented and comunicated to us in baptism) made
soft and tender, flexible and obedient to the will of God. This is Gods work
in the heart of his people, Ezekiel. 16.4. Turning the hearts, which were as hard
as stones, into hearts as tender as flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. This is a sweet and
delightful Sacrifice unto him, Psalm. 51.17. This is a subject capable of Gods
Word, as the broken and tender ground is capable of the seed, Ier. 4.3, 4. Gods
eyes are mercifully bent toward them, he will communicate his comforts in a
plentiful manner to them, he will not behave himself as a stranger, but as a
most loving friend toward them, Isa. 57.15. A contrite heart is a loadstone,
of more force to draw the love of God to us, than all worldly Ornaments, Isa.
66.2. A jewel of more price with God than many rubies, 1 Pet. 3.34. To whom
will God be a Physician to to heal the wounds of the Soul, but to the broken
heart? Psalm. 147.3. With whom will he be present? to whom will he be a sure
defense but the contrite heart? Psalm. 34.18. To whom will he make his Gospel a
joyful tidings but the broaken? Isa. 61.1, 2. Who will have a joyful harvest?
they that sow in tears, Psalm. 126.5, 6. That goes forth weeping: This is one
end of our baptism, one fruit thereof in all Gods people, Luke 3.5. And
therefore let us all strive to be made partakers of it.

3. As the water does quench the flaming and burning fire, so let us strive to
feel the virtue of our baptism in extinguishing all the fiery lusts that are
within us, in quenching all sinful and libidinous and disorderly affections,
as a man cast into a deep water will feel his body cooled, burning heats
removed: so must we strive to feel all unlawful heats in our Souls, by virtue
of this water extinguished; therefore resembled to a grave, wherein all our
lusts are buried, and how strong soever before, yet now they are as a dead
body, which does every day more and more consume, Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6.

4. As the waters does cause the herbs, grass, trees, and plants arising out
of the earth to grow, and flourish: So must these waters of baptism cause us
to grow in Sanctification, to be like the willowes, Isa. 44.3. Like the tree,
Psalm. 1.3. This is that God requires, 2 Pet. 3.18. This is the property of all
the trees in Gods Orchard of Gods Planting, Psalm. 92.13, 14. We must imitate
our Savior, Luke 2.52. As the children in the family grow, so must we, as many
as are children in Gods family, grow to further perfection in the grace of Gods
Spirit. Like good Scholars in the School of Christ; Like Israelites moving
after the fiery Pillar; Like Jacobs driving his flocks, though slowly, like
Josuah more and more subduing the Cananites which opposed; Like David in his
wars against Saul, growing stronger, and Saul weaker, this will make us able:

1. To discern the things that differ, Heb. 5.14.

2. To take the opportunities God affords for the welfare of our Souls.

3. To run with chearfullnes the race which God has set before us.

4. To conquer with facility all oppositions.

5. To depend on God with much assurance.

6. To appear before him, with much boldness, confidence, and gladness. Thus of
the first point, the second was this.



Christ went down into Jordan, Math. 3.16. The Eunuch and Philip went into the
water, Acts 8.38.

Resembled to a burial, wherein not one part, but every member is buried, Romans
6.4. Wherein the Apostle sets forth three degrees of our Sanctification.

1. The first Mortification, whereby the power of sin is destroyed; resembled
by the putting into the Water, and expressed by a death of sin.

2. The progress of our Mortification, resembled by the resting of the body
under the water, and expressed by a burial with Christ, because as the body
buried does continually moulder, so does sin in them that are Gods Children.

3. Vivification, Newnes of heart and life, resembled by the rising of the body
out of the water, and expressed by a resurrection out of the grave; See
Perkines 1 volume Page 74.
Thus the whole body was then dipped or dived into the water, as diverse
Councels testify.

Yet not of absolute necessity it should be now, In former times men of age
were baptized.

There country was hot.

Few of ripe years baptized with us, our country cold.


as it was then. For then they were for the most part of mature age before they
were baptized, being such as were converted from Paganism, they were,
instructed in the Christian faith, and desired Baptism before they did
participate thereof. And besides their country was very hot.

But now few of ripe years are Baptized, our countries are cold, and therefore
the sprinkling of water upon the child is used, and that without any injury
unto or violation of the Sacrament, and that for these reasons.

1. Because Baptism does signify a sprinkling, as well as a dipping into the
water.

2. The thing signified, the sprinkling of Christ's blood upon our consciences,
is signified by the sprinkling of the water upon the Child, as well as by
dipping it into the water: The Analogy between the sign and the thing
signified remains.

3. The weakness of the Children requiring it. The Ceremonial, must give place
to the Moral Law, charity and necessity may dispense with ceremonies, and in
equity mitigate their sharpness, they being ordained for man, and not man for
them.

Only that which was thereby in baptism represented unto them, and unto us,
and which we are to learn from it is this.

That as the whole body was dipped in the water, so the whole man must be
renewed, every sin must be renounced, every good duty practiced, every faculty
of the Soul, every member of the body must be sanctified, graciously exercised
in the duties of Godliness. As the floor of the house was overlaid with gold
within and without, 1 King. 6.30. So must we have the inward and the outward
man adorned with the grace of the Spirit, we must like the spouse be glorious
within, and richly arrayed without, Psalm. 45.13. Thus Ps. 119.128. and Luke
1.6. To the end we may so do consider: That,

1. By this we shall resemble God, as the air thoroughly enlightened does
resemble the Sun in brightness; hence the change wrought in Gods Servants, the
restoring of Gods image, is likened, not to the putting off of a glove from the
hand, or a shoe from the foot, but the putting off of the whole raiment, Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24.

2. Hereby we shall show the truth of repentance, which like Noah's flood
drowneth hills and valleys, all sins: like a faithful Physician lets out
the corruption out of every wound.

Counterfeit repentance. True repentance. Unsound repentance.
Counterfeit repentance like Saul spares Agag and the best of the beasts: But
true repentance like Samuel sheatheth the sword in Agag too, even in the
dearest sin. Unsound repentance like Pharaoh will let the aged men go, some old
sins wherein the sinner has now no more pleasure; But Pharaoh will not
suffer the younger ones to depart, no more will the unsound heart suffer his
new sins to depart; wherein for the present he takes delight. But sound
repentance like Moses will carry away all; not leave so much as a hoof behind,
even the dearest sins, as dear as an Idol to the Idolater shall be removed,
Isa. 30.22. Sins as pleasant as the body shall be rejected, Math. 5. verse. 29.

3. Hereby we shall show the life and power of our obedience, and subjection to
the will of God, The life of obedience.
when we subject our selves to him in all things: When with Abraham we put our
knife to the throat of our only Isack, if God command it; that obedience is
true which is universal. True obedience
An obedient servant observes every Lawful precept, a loyal subject
conformeth to every Lawful injunction of his Sovereign. Jesurod will do many
things; Jehu will kill Baals Priests, and overthrow his idols, but he will
still adore the Calfe in Dan and Bethel. It is Asa that puts away the idols
of all the Land; that removes his own mother because an Idolater, 2 Cron.
15.8, 12, 15, 16.

4. Hereby we shall discover the strength of our love to God, when no sin is so
dear, Strength of love.
but our love to Gods will constrain us to renounce it as dung; When no duty
is so irksome to flesh and blood but we will gladly do it. Therefore, John
14.23. Christ sets it down as a note of love, the keeping his Words. You may
remember what Dalilah said to Sampson, Judge. 16.15. So how can thou say thou
love God, if thy heart be not with him, if thou reserve any sin which God
hates, if thou turn thy feet from any duty which God commands.

5. Hereby we shall give God occasion to take much delight in us, as a Master
in a Servant, Occasion of Gods love.
observing all his precepts, as a Gardner in a tree whereof every limb is
richly laden, a General in an army whereof every soldier is well armed,
experienced, ready, and succesfull in the battle. This universal Reformation
and obedience is a very sweet Sacrifice to God, 1 Samuel 15. To obey is better
than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams, Prove. 11.20, Such as are
upright in their way are his delight.

The way to find delight in Ordinances.
6. Hereby we shall find much delight in Gods Ordinances: as a healthy stomach
in food, as a sound body in a warm garment, as David in the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.16.
As the Wisemen in the star, Math. 2.10. Then their feet indeed will be
beautiful, Romans 10.15. Then Christ's mouth will be lovely indeed, Cant. 5.16.
Then they will be well able to say as Saul did, 1 Samuel 15.13. Blessed be thou
of the Lord, I have performed the commandment of the Lord.

7. Hereby we shall have much peace in our consciences, they shall be as an eye
that has no mote to trouble it, as a Kingdom that has no rebel to annoy it,
as a Ship that has no leake to disturb it, Psalm 119.165. Great peace have
they that keep thy Law, Hebr: They shall have no stumbling block.
and nothing shall offend them; as in Exodus 11.7. Not a Dog moved his tongue
against them. So what barking soever their be without, their shall be
tranquillity within, and that not a little but much, Isa. 48.18. as 2 Cron.
15.15.

Therefore be diligent, be vigilant, be careful, get the whole man to be
Baptized, get thy heart Baptized, that, Math. 5.19. it may be no more the
fountain of murders, adulteries, false witnesses, blasphemies; Get thy tongue
Baptized, that it may be no more, as a fire of iniquity, a defiler of the whole
body, a setter on fire of the course of nature, etc. James 3.6, 8. Get thy
hands Baptized, that they may labor working the things that are good, Ephesians.
4.28. Psalm 26.6. Get all the faculties of thy Soul Baptized, that thou may
see the things belonging to thy peace, that Ephesians. 3.18. Thou may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the height, breadth, length, depth, and to
know the love of Christ, etc. That thou may love, Dutr. 6.5, 6. the Lord with
all thy heart, etc. That thou may chose the good, and hate the evil, that
Romans 6.13. thou yield not thy members as instruments of unrighteousnes unto
sin, but yield your selves to God, etc. That thou may deal with thy sin as
Iosuah with the men of Ai, Jos. 8.26. Draw not back thy hand till all thy sins
be destroyed: Do as Caleb did, Ios. 14.9. Wholly follow the Lord thy God,
follow him fully, and then as Moses promises him, surely the Land, wherein thy
feet has trodden, shall be thine inheritance, and thy childrens for ever: So
in the name of the Lord Jesus will I promise thee, that all the great and
glorious things whereof thou have heard, all the peace, joy, glory, whereof the
Word of the Lord does make relation, it shall be all thine for ever and ever.

5. The last thing herein noted was the wisdom of the Baptist in making
choice of the most convenient place for his purpose, such a place where was
much water; a place commodious for Baptism: Teaching us.



As Fisher men make choice of such places in the water where in all probability
their is most fish to be taken; so must these Fishers of men, Math. 4.19. Cast
in the draw-net of the Gospel, where there is hope of drawing most Souls unto
God, out of the gulf of sin. The Husbandman sows his seed in the soil,
which is likely to bring forth the best crop, so must these spiritual
Husbandmen, 1 Cor. 3.9. Sow the seed of Gods Word among such people, as like
good ground will receive it, and bring forth the fruits of it, Math. 13.24.
Hence Prove. 9.34, 5. Wisdom is said to send forth her maidens to cry upon the
highest places of the city, etc. They went not into blind corners where was
little or no people, but on high places, therefore are those places, Acts 18.10.
Acts 13.46, 47. John 7.37. Psalm 40.9, 10. The grounds of the point are these.

Math. 5.14. John 5.35. The light is not set under a bushel, or in an obscure
corner of the house; but on high in an eminent place, Math. 5.15.

Cor. 10.24. The Apostles practice, verse. 33. The contrary whereto is generally
practiced, Philip. 2.21.

of God, and riches of his grace is commended, the more men are convinced, made
excuseless, and if they convert not, God in their condemnation shall be more
glorious.

Paul, 1 These. 2.19, 20. For what is our hope, our joy, our crown of
rejoicing, are not even ye, etc.

Isa. 8.18. Behold I and the Children, whom the Lord has given me, are for
signs and for wonders in Israel, etc.

None has a better recompense, Dan. 12.2. Wealth and honor will not comfort a
Minister at the last day, but the faithful discharge of their calling, the
gaining of many Souls to God.

done to the Church: As in marriage the common quere is, what portion, not what
piety, what birth, not what new birth, what kindred on earth, not what kindred
with God, what riches, not what goodness: So it is often in Ministers choice of
places, what value is the benefice, to what Sum amounts the stipend, not
what people, what number, what quality, what hope of doing good, what hope of
bringing honor unto God.

Making it manifest, that they came into the Ministrey to live, rather than to
teach other men a new life; to fatten themselves, not to feed others, to cloth
themselves with the fleece, though the devil take the flesh, contrary to the
charge of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.2. Many men that would be loath to marry to an
old wife of a barren womb, that would be loath to hew timber wherein is
nothing but knobs, to sow in a field wherein is nothing; but thorns briars,
rocks, quagmires, yet if the maintenance be large will adventure upon a barren,
stoney-hearted, untractable, and unteachable people, which in all probability
will never hear, and obey the Gospel.

1. If the Minister must make such choice of the people, it is behoofefull,
that the people should also be circumspect in their choice of their teachers:
They will not have their meat dressed by a Leprous cook, they will not have
their bodies cured by an unskillfull Physician, they will not be led in an
earthly joruney by a blind guide, they will not put their flock in his hands,
that cannot see the Lion when he comes, that cannot discern the Sheep from
the goats. And yet is it not strange they will commit their Souls into the
custody of one, that is as the Prophet describes, Isa. 56.10, 11. Blind guides,
dry breasts, etc. that take up their habitation under such, as are clouds
carried away with every tempest; wells without water, as it is in 2 Pet. 2.17.
Or else commit their Souls to men of lewd life, whose Doctrine has no
authority in the peoples consciences; God in his just judgment casting dung in
their faces, Mal. 2.3, 9. Making their persons as unsavory salt to be trodden
under foot of men, Matthew. 5.13.

Yet such men, though they strengthen the hands of the wicked, Ier. 23.14.
Cause the Sacrifice to be abhorred, 1 Samuel 2.17. Are a remarkable sign of Gods
indignation, Mic. 2.11. A curse to the people, Mic. 3.6. Yet into the hands of
such they commit their Souls, their only jewel, The right and left hand of
Ministers.

Sound Doctrine and a holy life compares to wind and tide carrying the Souls to
the haven of peace. Doctr.


whereas this should be their choicest care; to settle themselves where the
light of the Gospel shines most clearly; where this seed is sown most
plentifully, where the Minister builds with the right hand of sound Doctrine,
and with the left hand of a good Conversation, where Life and Doctrine go
together, like fire and heat, like oxen drawing well in one yoke, like wind
and tide carrying the Souls of the people speedily to the haven of eternal
peace, this was the care of the people here. They came to the Baptist and were
Baptized of him: whence learn.

That it is the duty of the people carefully to frequent such places, where
they may most plenteously and effectually enjoy Gods Ordinances.

The people came here to the Baptist where was much water.

As the Eagles go far for their prey, Mat. 24.28. The Queen of the South came
from far to hear Solomon, Math. 12.42. So must we to hear that wisdom of
God, which will make us wise unto salvation: When we want it we must run to and
fro to seek the Word, Amos 8.12. As Jacobs sons went to Egypt for corn,
Genesis 42.1, 2. So must we for bread for our Souls, Math. 3.5. Mark. 8.1, 2, 3.
It is Gods precept that men should seek the food of our Souls, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.

Jordan by which he washes away the Leprosy of the people, the waters of Abana
and Pharphar have no power to do it, Ephesians. 5.26. This is the warlike weapon, 2
Cor. 10.5. The Sounding Trumpet, John 5.25. and 1 Cor. 3.5. 1 Timothy 4.16.

Manna to Israel, as the milk to the child, 1 Pet. 2.2. As the dewes to the
ground, Isa. 55.10. As the water out of the rock to the thirstly people in the
Wilderness, as the cake and cruse of water to the Prophet, in the strength
whereof he went to Horeb, 1 King. 19.

And therefore as men frequent the market, where is store of bodily provision,
so must we the spiritual market, where is spiritual provision for the Soul.

Because they are very dull and need after to be put in mind, 2 Pet. 1.12.
Their hearts are hard and have need of frequent dewes, their Souls are filthy,
and have need of much washing; the dross of iniquity sticks very fast in
them, and they have need of much fire to purge them, our understandings are
blind, and we have need of much light to shine into them, we are apt to forget
God, and have need of often remembrancing.

Israel fell to Idols, when Moses was in the Mount; as the wise men knew not
how to go forward when the light of the starr failed, Joash fell to Idols as
soon as Jehojada was dead, as Iud. 2.19.

Sampsons riddle, a hidden mystery, a sealed book, a strange thing, hardly
wrought in our hearts, as Characters in a hard stone, and therefore have need
often to be urged, repeated, pressed, as an unknown language must be often
spoken before we can understand it, Isa. 28.10. An unknown way often
traveled, a fountain of that depth that we cannot draw forth the water of it.

Levite will persuade us to stay, Judge. 19.9. Like the Harlot it will allure us
from going our right way, Prove. 7.13. Like Dalilah she will cause us to sleep
upon her lap, and cut of our locks. The devil like Pharaoh will lay heavy
burdens upon us to stop us, and therefore we have need of very much
encouragement to set us forward.

Esau and Jacob, Cain and Abel, Saul and David, and therefore there is need of
much labor, often instruction, powerful preaching to win us to love that
which we naturally hate, to practice that which we do now abhor.

This discovers the folly, and profaneness, and condemns the practice of
such, as, content themselves without the powerful, and plenteous Use of Gods
Ordinances. That come not to the Baptist, resort not to the places where God
has set up the light of his truth.

Many will travel far and near to the Counselor for advise about their
earthly estate, to the Physician for the health of the body, to foreign
countries for silk, spices, gold, silver, and such like Merchandise, that will
not step out of doors, at least not out of their own parishes, for the food of
their Souls, having none at home. As if men had more liberty allowed them to
provide for their bodies, than for their Souls; as if that might be done to
preserve the casket, which may not be done for the preservation of the jewel:
that done for the preservation of the house, which may not be done for the
preservation of the inhabitant; as if God had confined men within the precincts
of a parish, to be damned for want of instruction; when we may have enough
abroad for the fetching.

The people in the days of the Baptist were not of these men's minds, if they
had, they would never have gone out of the Region of Judea to him, they would
never have come to Aenon to be Baptized of him, because there was much water
there; But it is plain, that such men, as are so careless of frequenting the
means, never knew

1. The necessity of them, they knew not that these are as needful to their
regeneration, as seed to the bringing forth of corn, as light to discover the
path wherein we must walk, as eyes to the body, as dewes to the ground, without
which the one is in darkness, the other withers.

2. That they never felt the comfort of them; had they felt how good the Word
of the Lord is, had they felt them as a River, Psalm 44.1. As Noah's Dove
bringing an Olive branch, as the message of life, as Romans 10.15. Ps. 19.20.

John 6.34. As Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1.26. As Jonathans Soul clave to David, no
cost, pain, reproach among men should withhold you from it; but as John
continued till he was cast in prison, so would you as long as you had any
liberty, which is the next thing here noted, and from whence we may collect.

That Gods Ministers must be diligent in their callings as long as God does
give them ability and freedom to perform the same.

This is Paul's charge to Timothy, 2. Tim. 4.2. It is Gods Mercy to vouchsafe
such, Isa. 66.1. It was the Apostles resolution, Acts 20.24. Peter thought it
behoofefull* 2 Pet. 1.12. This Paul practiced, 2 Timothy 29. and Ier. 36.5, 6.

Because Satan is never weary of hunting the overthrow of Christ's Kingdom, of
seeking the ruin of Gods people, 1 Pet. 5.8. His instruments, Math. 23.15.
These are always sowing their tares, therefore we must be as diligent in
seeking the welfare of the people, we must keep watch as long as the enemy does
lay seidge, we must look to the flock as long as the roaring Lion seeks to
spoil them, Acts 20.28.

Because the work is not yet brought to perfection; the conquest is not yet
fully obtained, therefore the Soldiers must still fight, the house is not yet
finished, therefore the builders must still work, the sheaves are not yet
brought into the garner, therefore the Husbandman may not sleep, the journey
is not yet ended, therefore the guide must still go forward, the Amalekites are
not wholly subdued, therefore Moses must still lift up his hands.

The Cananites are not fully overcome, therefore Josuah must continually wage
war against them.

Corruption will gather strength if it be not subdued.
3. Corruption will still gather strength if it be not continually subdued by
the Ministrey of the Word, diseased bodies will soon corrupt, overrun with
corrupt humors, if they be not daily physicked; the clearest garden will be
full of weeds, if the gardners hand be not continually employed about it, the
purest garment will gather dust, if it be not brushed, the best vessel will
contract some filth, if it be not cleansed.

4. Received gifts and graces will decay, if holy means be not used; if the
dewes distill not, the corn in the field withers, if the breasts send not
forth milk, the child languisheth; the fire will go out, if fuel be not still
administered.

Ezekiel. 34.3, 4. slothful and sluggish Husbandmen, who can see Gods vineyard,
like the sluggards vineyard, overgrown with thorns and briars, and not reach
out the hand to purge it, who can see the Dogs and Lions devour the flock, and
yet sleep and securely, never seeking the safety of the flock.

5. This must therefore occasion both Minister and people to be constant in
their callings, never weary in the duties of Godliness; but still with Paul
pressing forward, Phil. 3.13. Still following the fiery Pillar like Israel out
of Egypt, redeeming the time, using well all the opportunities God affords,
delighting to run the race he has set before us, striving to draw near to him,
to walk more worthy of his favor vouchsafed to us, of the calling wherein he
has set us, not looking back with Lots wife, not lusting with Israel, but as
Noah continued constant in the building the Arc, so let us be constant to the
end, in the duties God has enjoined us, and so like Noah we shall escpe the
deluge of destruction, which will overtake other people.

VERSE 25.
THe Gospel seldom enjoys amy long or succesfull progress without
opposition: The Sun shines not many days, but some clouds arise to obscure
and darken it: The Corn cannot spring so fast, but some weeds will spring up
among it to overtop if. If foraigne enemies fail, domesticke jarres and
quarrels shall be raised, rather than Christ's Kingdom shall go forward without
contradiction: the Disciples among themselves, shall be at variance, rather
than the School of Christ shall enjoy quietness: No sooner did our Savior
publicly undertake his office, his Disciples baptize, people frequent their
baptism, but then their arose a question between some of the Disciples of John
and the Jews about purifying: In which words we may take notice. I. Of the
time when this question or controversy arose: then. II. Of the parties between
whom it arose, some of John's Disciples and the Jews. III. The matter
whereabout their controversy was, about purifying: First of the time, then our
Savior came into Judea, tarried there, his Disciples baptized many, he poured
the gifts and graces of his Spirit upon them, many resorted to him, the
day star of the Gospel began now to shine more clearly, the way of life and
salvation had more travelers in it than usual, and now began the contention,
whence note.

Gideons Lamps, and the cry of the sword of the Lord and Gideon, made the
Midianites to sheath their swords each in others bowels: Judge. 7.22.
Herod and the men of Jerusalem were much troubled, when the Star, pointing out
the birth of the newborn King, appeared, and our Savior himself has
beforehand told us, Mat. 10.21, 22, 34. And you know the parable, Matthew. 14.25.
Luc. 12.49, 50, 51, 52, 53.

Israel began to hearken to Moses, Exodus Mat. 13.
then Pharaoh raised his forces, when the good wheat was sown, then the
envious man sowed his tares, the enemy cast not tares in, before the careful
Husbandman had sown good seed.

King. 18.17. pestilent Persons, Acts 24.5.

is preached, the more Satan's Kingdom is shaken, the more the number of his
soldiers are abated: and therefore he stirs himself so much the more to
defend his own Kingdom against the ministry of the Gospel: when a house is
beset, a city, a country beseidged, the Master of the Family, the Gouvernour
of the town, the Prince of the country girdeth on his armor, stirs up all
that are under him for the defense of the House, Town, or Kingdom; they that
slept are now awaked, they that were on the bed, are now in the street, in the
field, they who were naked, are now strongly armed, thus Zach. 3.1. Acts 13.8.
therefore, etc. Luc. 11.21. As the thunder sends down the lightning, so does
the thunder of Gods Word cast down the Devil, Luc. 10.17, 18.

Christ to flourish, as it was to Saul to see David thrive, to Esau to see
Jacob prosper, to Pharaoh to see Israel increase, it is to him as a prick in
the eye, a thorn in the side, an arrow in the bowels, fire in the bones, a
grievous torment, Matthew. 8.29.

when the word has been faithfully preached among them; much coin that has
been thought good, has been found naught by the touchstone, many bodies have
discovered much distemperature after the receiving of Physic, Romans 7.8.

Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.11. as Exodus 32. They that joined in adoring Idols, when
Moses came sheathed their swords in each others bowels.

Sanballat and Tobihu were grieved to see Nehemiah to build up the walls of
Jerusalem, Neh. 2.10. thus Acts 13.45.46.



river making them glad, Psalm. 46.4. A feast of sweet and savoury meat, 2 Cor.
2.15. A joyful message, Romans 10.15. A healing medicine, Jsai. 57.19. A word of
much peace; like the Olive branch to Noah; like the voice of Christ to his
Disciples in the tossed Ship, rebuking the winds and the waves of the Sea; like
Jordan to Naaman washing away the sin of their Souls. 3. To wicked men it is
accidentally an occasion of disturbance, increase of sin and condemnation, an
unsavory food, 2 Cor. 5.15. a wounding arrow, Psalm 45.5. a killing Letter, no
healing medicine, 2 Cor. 3.6. Like soil to some grounds, making them more full
of weeds, like the Sun to some eyes, making them more dark: but shall we
therefore say it were better the Sun did never shine, because it is offense to
diseased eyes, that there were no Physic, because it makes some diseased
patients more sick, that it were good that no dewes did distill, that no soil
were cast upon the ground, because some fields grow the more full of weeds;
shall we condemn the use of swords, because Saul fell on his sword and killed
himself; the use of fire, because children instead of warming do burn their
fingers in it, the use of water, because Pharaoh was drowned in the red Sea?

Canaan with the people thereof rise in arms at Josuas coming into the
country, Israel must not be offended, Josua must not go back: If Pharaoh rage,
thereaten, lay heavy burdens; upon Israel, when they set their faces toward
Canaan, turn their peace into trouble, set the whole Kingdom in a combustion;
yet they must not account it strange, nor foolishly charge Moses their leader
therewith. It is not Eliahs Prophecy, Exhortation, Doctrine; but the sin of
Ahab and his Fathers house that troubled Israel: it is not David's fault, but
Readiness envy that breeds the quarrel between them. It is not the Gospel but
our corruption, not the preaching but our transgressing of the word breeds
all the dissension: It is.

1. The strength of our love unto sin that causes so much enmity against the
Gospel, and the preachers thereof: It is Herod's love to Herodias that makes
enmity between him, and the Baptist, Mar. 6.2, 21. It is not so much the Woman's
song, that Saul had slain his thousand and David his ten thousand, as Saul's
pride and love of honor did occasion the contention between him and David, 1 Samuel 18. It was Mica his love to his Idol that made him stir up the men of
Dan to run after him, Iud. 18.23, 24.

2. The guiltines of our conscience: Were our faces clean, the looking glass
would never trouble us: Were we good grain, current silver, the fan the
touchstone could not disquiet us, Da. 5.5. Had Baltazars heart been sound, the
handwritting on the wall could not have filled him with such shakeing: had not
Adam eaten of the forboden fruit, the voice of God walking in the garden could
not have been such an offense unto him.

3. Satan has such sway in the hearts of wicked people, they are under his
command, so obsequious unto his beck, Ephesians. 2.3. so careful to support his
Kingdom, so devoted to his service, that they will bear arms against all his
enemies, cast in prison such as seek the ruinating of his Kingdom, Rev. 2.10.

4. The dissimilitude and discord between wicked men and Gods Children is so
great, that they can no more agree than fire and water, than the Lamb and the
Lion, the Dove and the Raven, the malignity of sinful men's hearts, not the
Gospel and power of Religion is so great, that the Father becomes a stranger
to the Son, the Mother a stepdame to the Daughter, natural friends accusers,
executioners of them, that are in the bond of nature most strictly tied to
them; it turns smiling into frowning faces, Math. 10.21. pleasant tongues
into quivers se^ding out venomous, arrows, bowels of compassion into bowels
of iron, helping into destroying hands, as Saul maligned, reviled, threatened
Jonathan for affecting David, 1 Samuel As Esau hated Jacob, because he had
obtained the blessing, so do sinful men malign the people of God, because
they love the truth, because they shine in the grace of the Spirit. This is the
fountain whence the bitter waters of strife do flow, the root whence all the
branches of discord do spring, as in another case, Hos. 13.9. so in this, thy
contention, thy quarelling is of thy self, a fire of thine own kindling, a
seed of thine own sowing; but to me in the Gospel is true peace, therefore
they are much to blame, that blame the preaching of the Gospel, because
accompanied with contention, that like the Philistines will needs have it
removed, because it cannot agree with Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.4, 6. Like Demetrius
accuse Paul, because his Doctrine stands not with his gain, and the honor
of Diana, Acts 7. They are silly travelers that are offended, refuse to go
forward, that will have the horse legs cut off, because the beating of their
hoof upon the pavement does make the Dogs to bark, cowardly soldiers, that
will not follow the Drum, because the sounding thereof does awaken the enemy.
Fond men that will have the light hidden under a bushel, because diseased eyes
take offense at it, because wicked men rebel against it, Job 24.13. Was it
ever otherwise, was not Christ a strumbling block, a stone of offense, 1 Pet.
2.7. Was not Herod troubled to hear of his birth, Mat. 2.2. Did not Adam run
when he heard the Lords voice, Genesis 3. Was not Jeremy a man of strife and of
contention to the whole earth, Ier. 15. Was not Amos accused for speaking of
hard words, Acts 24. The Apostels for seedsmen of seditions, it is the power of
the Gospel to awaken the consciences, to shake the hearts of the wicked; it is
the honor of the Gospel, a seal of our Mynistry to be opposed by them the are
unsanctified, the fruit of the Gospel to make a separation between the
reprobate and Gods chosen, Ier. 15.19, 20, 21.

not any just occasion hereof, for Satan will most diligently endeavor it, he
will take hold of any thing that may stir up this fire, take all occasion to
sow this seed, do his utmost to make these clear waters foul, that he may
take the fish living in the same; and therefore to frustrate Satan's policy in
their behalf, we must study to be quiet, and to have our hearts knit together
in love, to join as stones in one building, as soldiers in one army, as
mariners in one Ship, to help forward the cause and Gospel of God, against all
furious oppositions, to defend the Gospel and maintain the honor of it
against all spiritual pirates, that seek to rob us, either of the being, or
well being of the same, and that we may continue and enjoy this peace, we must
labor,

1. To be truly humble and meek, and of a teachable and tractable Spirit; the
low shrubs are quiet, when the trees of high tops are tossed, and shaken with
the winds: no such enemy to peace as pride and haughtiness of Spirit, Prove.
13.10. Prove. 28.25. Pride, like the wind in the Sea, makes men to toss and
roll to and fro, troubles the calm Waters, but meeknes has the promise of
peace, Psalm. 37.11. And is prescribed as a rule to preserve peace, Eps. 4.2, 3.

2. To be truly wise unto salvation, to see the things which belong unto our
peace, to discern the things which differ, ignorance of the manner of Gods
proceeding, of what is good and beneficial for our salvation, 1 Cor. 2.8. Want
of ability to judge what is good for us, is the cause of much strife: But true
wisdom, Ia. 3.17. is the way to peace, Prove. 3.17.

3. To be patient in hearing the word of exhortation, Heb. 13.22. Receive it
gladly when it launceth as well as when it heals, Psalm. 141.5. Get thy heart
so affected, that thou may be able to say to every one that admonishes
thee, as David to Abigal, 2 Samuel 25.32, 33. Why did Israel murmur and strive
against Moses, but because they wanted patience; Why did the Libertines gnash
the teeth on Stephen, but because they were of an impatient mind, and could not
endure the word of exhortation.

4. To live in no known sin, but universally reform thy ways, apply thy self
to every commandment of God, if thou leave but one unruly person in the
family, he will distrub the whole house; if you leave but one leak in the Ship,
the water coming thereat will disturb all that are within the same. What bred
the strife between Herod and the Baptist, but Herod allowing himself in that
sin of incest, Mar. 6.20.

5. To love Gods Word unfainedly, to delight in it as in the light of our eyes,
to feed upon it as upon the food of our souls, to walk by it as by the rule of
our conversation, this is the means to breed true peace, Isa. 57.19. This has
the promise of peace, Psalm. 119.16.5.

6. To be of one mind and of one heart in things of the best nature, to be
guided by one Spirit, to attend on Gods word with one consent, as Acts 2.1.
Phil. 2.1, 2. Let us agree in this and we shall agree in all other things.

7. To love one another unfainedly, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. This will cover many
infirmities, pass by many weaknesses, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6, 7.

8. To construe all that is done and spoken in the best sense, till the
contrary does evidently appear, the want of this breeds strife, 2 Samuel 10.4.
John 11.47. Matthew. 2.2.

9. To use the gifts we have received to the glory of God, the good of his
Church, the edification of the faithful in the knowledge of the truth, the
encouragement of our brethren in the way of godliness, to the discountenancing
of sin, and not to the disgracing of the godly, the maintenance of any evil.

10. To bear with the weakness of our brethren, to suffer wrong, rather than to
contend or quarrel: Abraham gave Lot liberty to chose, Genes. 13.8.9.

Thus of the time, next of the parties between whom; some of the Disciples of
John and the Jews, which believed in Christ and were Baptized of him, both
parties were baptized, attended Gods Ordinances, yet contended.

Acts 15.39. Genesis 27.41. Cor. 11.12.

Cor. 3.3, 4. Luc. 22.24.

strangers to the power of godliness, nay enemies to them that shine in holiness,
Gal. 1.29. They were both circumcised, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5, 6.

Genesis 27.41. 1 John 3.11. Like Joseph's brethren.

Matthew. 18.7. 1 Cor. 11.19.



2. Let this occasion such, as are called to the profession of the truth, to do
what in them is to have peace with all men, specially among themselves: and
that. 1. Because such breaches are most advantageous to Satan; what makes
more for a foreign enemy than civil wars, brawles and contentions between
the people of that Kingdom or city which he goes about to possess. 2. Because
this gives greatest cause of scandal to the adversaries of the truth, when
Absolon the Son of David's love rebelled against him, then Shemei opened his
mouth to revile David. 3. This casts great disgrace upon the Gospel of peace
whereof we make profession; We profess our selves to be ruled by the Gospel of
peace, to be the subjects of the Prince of peace, to be travelers in the way
of peace, to be possessed by one and the same Spirit of peace: If contrary to
all this we live like Salamanders in the fire of contention, do we not much
dishonor the Gospel? The Gospel teaches us to be innocent as doves, meek as
Lambs, and can we without the reproach thereof contend like Dogs and Lions? 4
This exposes the Gospel, the Church to ruin; a divided Kingdom cannot stand;
a distracted army flies before the enemy, a disjonted house soon falls to
the ground: when the evil Spirit came between Abimelch and the men of Shechem,
it was not long before both came to ruin, and this takes away the comfort
they might have in the Ordinances of God, the sweet refreshment they might find
in that holy and mutual Communion that ought and otherwise would be between
them: When the Wood is dispersed that fire extinquisheth which otherwise would
burn. 5. Hereby the doing of much good to our brethren is hindered, a divided
stream cannot drive that mill which a full stream will; one stick cannot give
that heat which many can. 6. Hereby assaults, afflictions become much more
burdensome, than they would be: many hands can easily bear that weight, which
is a burden insupportable to one arm: A Ship strongly linked and joined
together will endure that storm, which will sink, a leaking Ship to the
bottom of the Sea. 7. Hereby many times the Ordinances of God are perverted.
Physic is turned into poison, the Lamp is made a stumbling block, the staff
is become a snare, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18. And therefore all that bear the name of
Christians, specially they, who profess themselves to be the friends of
Christ, the Children of light, the lovers of the truth, the Family of God, the
Disciples of Christ's School, must strive to have their hearts firmly linked,
and knit together in Christ Jesus; Leading a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. And according to that charge of the Apostle, let us be all
of one mind, etc. 1 Pet. 3.8.9, 10, 11. And especially let us be careful to
agree in matters concerning life and salvation; which is the next thing to be
considered, the matter where about this controversy was, about Purifying.

To purify is to make that clean and pure, which was foul and defiled, this
was typically done by the blood of bulls, goats and beasts before the coming of
Christ, Heb. 9.14. Sacramentally by Baptism under and since Christ, Ephesians.
5.26. But effectually by faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, which makes us
perfectly pure by imputation, and imperfectly pure by sanctification, Acts
15.9. By purifying here, Baptism is most probably conceived to be meant: For
so the Disciples of John in the next verse complain to their Master that
Christ Baptized: this then presents the matter of there controversy,
Baptism, the nature of it, the fruit, which they, who are truly baptized,
obtain, Purity, from the first we may learn.

Pet. 2.1. Acts 15.1, 2. I might relate an infinite Catalogue of Heresies,
which in all ages have pestered the Church of God, and causing strivings
between the people professing Christ: as between Jacob and Esau in one womb,
who shall have the the pre-eminence, as between the two Women living in one
house, whose should be the living, and whose should be the dead Child, 1 King.
3.23. and the reason of it arises:

1. From the wisdom of God hereby intending to try the integrity, the faith,
love, and constancy of his people, as Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. So 1 Cor. 11.18.

2. For the better illustration of the truth, the more the light of the Word is
opposed, the more it shines, the more cavils are raised against it, the more
Gods people are stirred up by study, prayer, meditation, conference, to seek
out the truth of it, many grounds of Religion, many points needful to
salvation, would never have been so clearly unfolded, had they not been by
Heretical cavillers opposed: Moses Serpent devouring the counterfeit Serpents
of the magitians was more abundantly declared to be a true Serpent, than it
could, if their had been no such counterfeits; The Gold enduring the fire,
shines the more brightly, thereby shows its excellency, the Sun consuming
the clouds does thereby show its force and efficacy.

3. From the Perverseness of many Men's minds living within the pale of the
Church, such as in the pride of their hearts will not submit unto sound
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.

4. From that self-love which swayeth in many living in the Church of God, that
are lead by affection more than by sound judgment, that seek themselves more
than the honor of God, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. They depended on the persons of men more
than on the Word of God.

5. From the desire that many within the pale of the Church have to fulfill
their own lusts, some are swayed with pride, some with covetousnes, some with
envy, some with one lust, some with another, hence, 1 Timothy 6.5. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7,
8.

6. From the wisdom of God in discovering Hypocrites, Heretics, men of
corrupt minds, unsound hearts, infatuated judgments and vile affections, that
all his Children may discern and shun them, 2 Timothy 3 9. Thus God brings good
out of evil, truth out of falsehood, as he brought light out of darkness in the
first creation, as Sampson fetched meat out of the eater, sweet out of the
sower, and as the wind by shaking does often fasten the tree, so these
quarrels, contentions Heresies, these blasts, which at first do shake, do in the
end the more confirm the people of God in the truth: according to that of
Augustine; Aug. de vera Religion. c. 8.
Haeretici plurimum prosunt, non verum docendo quod nesciunt; sed ad verum
quaerendum carnales, and ad verum aperiendum spirituale Catholicos excitando:
Lib. 1. c. 9.
and Euagrius per eos qui Ecclesiam diserpserunt, recta fedei dogmata
emerserunt.

Ismael in Abraham's house did disanull his Family to be a house of good and
faithful people, or some rebels in a Kingdom do disable it to be a good and
well governed Kingdom. Yet the Papists, wanting other arguments, labor much
to prove us not to be the people and Church of God, because there be, Stromat.
lib. 7.
as they say, inter Evangelicos varia de Religione dissidia; But this is no new
Calumny, no sound argument; for we may learn from Clemens Alexandrinus, that
then the Jews and Philosophers objected to the Christians, their discords and
controversies about matters of faith, upon whom he retorted the darts of their
own quiver, confuted them with their own arguments, as once David cut off
Goliahs head with his own sword, telling the Jews that they themselves had
many Sects among them. Pharisees, Saduces, Essens, and as touching the
Philosophers he reckons up innumerable factions among them, and therefore
tells them, if they did not for their divisions cease from their Philosophy,
and condemn it as evil, because their Philosophers, erred in many things, how
could they condemn the Christian Religion for the dissensions of Christians.
Tell them; that Christ and the Apostles had foretold them, that there must be
Heresies, adding further, that multiplicity of sects prove not the falsity of
Doctrine, but must breed a more earnest investigation and searching out of the
truth: For tares grow with the wheat; and unprofitable sour grass with the
best garden flowers, and yet the Husbandman did neither ceas to dress the
vineyard, nor the gardner the garden: the same may be given in answer to the
Papists, for none at greater variance than themselves among themselves, who can
reckon up the discords between the Popes themselves, the secular Priests and
Jesuits, the Monks, Canonists and the like: they must first heal their own
wounds before they can object our scarres. Yet their discords will not justify
our contentions, no more than quarrels between thieves, cut-purses, drunkards
will justify the contention of honest and sober men; but we must bewail the
discords that are amongst us, pray to the God of peace to suppress, attend the
word of peace the instrument, with which God does use to work: and therefore
let me say to you as the Apostle does to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.13, 14.
Let us labor for sincerity of heart, freedom from corruption, this sin is the
cause of all quarrel, nothing is more effectual to quench this fire than the
water of sanctification, which is the internal baptising of the heart, and for
this the outward baptism is called a purifying: whence note.

Paul resembles it to a grave, wherein our corruption is buried like a dead
man, Romans 6.4. Other to a sprinkling of water, not upon the body but the
conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. not the putting away the filth of the flesh, etc.

Christ, Gal. 3.27. None are in Christ but such as are sanctified, 2 Cor. 5 17.

Luc. 3.3. Marc. 1.4. True repentance there is none, where there is not
sanctification, where sin, like filthy dirt in the house, is not washed away.

Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. Now none are true and living members of that body, but
such as are truly cleansed from their sin.

Pharaoh and the Egyptians were in the red sea as well as Israel, but they
were drowned, Israel had a safe passage, as Jo. 6.63. You must feel the
quickening Spirit move in your Souls in the use of this Sacrament, as the Angel
moved in the Pool of Betheshda, or the diseass of your Soul will not be healed;
you must find your lusts mortified, it is nothing worth your bodies are washed,
if the fire of concupiscence within be not quenched, as Gal. 6.14, 15. Nothing
in the Kingdom of God is of any account but only a new creature, therefore
under circumcision he comprehends the pre-eminence of the Jew, which though
it were much, Romans 3.1. Romans 9.4. by uncircumcision, the wisdom, strength,
love, Policy of the Gentile, though of great esteem in the eyes of the world,
yet of no account in the eyes of God: Regeneration, sanctification are in chief
esteem with him; not the noble, wise, rich, strong creature, but a new
creature, see Luc. 16.15. 1 Cor. 1.26. and 1 Timothy 4.18. Therefore as Gideon
pulled down the Altar his father had erected, and then set up another at Gods
commandment, as men put off an old and then put on a new garment, so let us
Ephesians. 4.22. whatsoever we have hither^o have been, let us be so no more, but let
us strive to be such, that it may be said of us, as 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.

VERSE 26.
IN this Verse we have set before us the occasion of the controversy, between
some of John's Disciples and the Jews, the Disciples of John saw the people
frequent our Saviors Doctrine more than they did their Mr the Baptist; and
hereupon took occasion to quarrel with them, came to the Baptist, and
complained of it, as loath to see their Masters honor overshadowed by the
shining of a more glorious Sun. 2. Their ignorance, they heard what the Baptist
had taught of our Savior, they saw what he did to our Savior, how he Baptized
him, but yet did not understand that Christ was the Son, the Savior and
Redeemer of the World. 3. The danger of overmuch admiring the persons of our
teachers, they ^o admired his person, that they did not rightly conceive his
Doctrine, that they did disable Christ, and cried up the Baptist 4. The
fidelity of the Baptist in his calling, for so they confess, that the Baptist
did bear witness of Christ. 5. Their envy at the success of Christ's Ministry,
of these in their Order. From the of these we learn.

Abimelech and the men of Shechem, Iud. 9.
turning their Union into division, their love into hatred, their peace into
trouble, this is a bellows kindling the coals of strif betwee^ such as are
knit together in the strictest bonds: why did Joseph's Brethren sell him into
Egypt but out of self-love, Genesis
because they would not be subject to him? Why else did Eliab quarrel with
David, 1 Sa. 17.28. This made Saul seek the life of David a most faithful and
beneficial Servant: this disturbed the peace, even of the Apostles, Luc.
22.24. and Solomon makes it a general rule, Prove. 13.10.

Luc. 15.18. Dan. 6.4. Phil. 1.15.

Phil. 2.21. and our Savior discovers this as the special cause of the
Pharisees contention against him, Ioh. 5.44.

Sam. 17.28. This made the Pharisees think that our Savior came to take their
place from them.

David be a wall about Nabals men and possessions in the Wilderness, 1 Samuel
25.16. yet Nabal, that regards no man but himself, will rail at him, abuse
him, if he demand any assistance from him, so Jud. 8.1. and Jud. 12.1, 2, 3.
Thus self-love made the Pharisees, who should have rejoiced in the coming of
Christ, as at the appearing of the most glorious and comfortable Sun that ever
did shine, to be full of indignation at it.

enjoy any true peace, to receive any true comfort by Gods Ordinances, to hold
any comfortable Communion with Gods Servants, to pluck up this evil weed, to
quench this fire, to hew down this tree, to suppress this self-love and
haughtines of Spirit, no more seeking our selves, no more serving our lusts, no
more living to our selves, no more accompting all fish lost which comes not
into our own net; all the Oil spilt that is not put into our Lamp, the honor
misplaced that is not bestowed on us, as they Mic. 3.5. But let us learn.

1. To deny our selves, our own lusts, reason, ends, Jo. 8.50. 1 Co. 10.24.
Gal. 6.14.
desires, living no longer to the flesh, Mar. 8.34. Let us become little in our
eyes, lower and viler than dust; truly apprehensive of, and thoroughly
affected with our own sin, with our own unworthines, and we shall find little
occasion to contend with our fellow brethren, to envy the graces of God in
them, but rather desire them out of their abundance to communicate to our
necessities, and this is their surest way to honor, as our Savior said in
another case, Math. 10.39. So in this case he that seeks his own honor
shall loose it, but he that forsakes his own praise he shall find it, as Ioh.
8.50, 54. Luc. 14.11. Before honor humility, etc. Ia 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.6.

2. To live wholly and altogether unto God, seeking his glory, bringing forth
fruit to him, devoring our selves wholly to his service, as the wife forsakes
her fathers house, becomes her Husbands, and seeks how to please him; So
must we leave the World, and things most dear to the flesh, and study how to
please the Lord, this is given in charge, 1 Cor. 10.30. To this we are
earnestly persuaded, Romans 12.1, 2. 2 Cor. 5.15. and did we make Gods honor the
mark, whereunto we level all our arrows, did we make this the end of our
labor and desires, as Phil. 1.15, 16. We would be glad, if God might be
honored whither by our selves, or by any other instrument, and did we thus
glorify God, we should not fail to receive honor from the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.30.

3. To seek the good of our brethren, as one member in the body does seek the
good of another, to communicate what we have received as the full clouds do
their rain to the barren grounds. This is required, 1 Cor. 10.24. practiced 2
Cor. 12.14. This is the way to abound in the grace of the Spirit, to shine in
holiness, not the envying of other men's spiritual welfare, but endeavoring to
increase it, 1 Cor. 9.6. Heb 6.10.

4. To rejoice in the welfare of our brethren as in our own, not like Cain
that murdered Abel, because more righteous than himself; Not like Esau hating
Jacob, because he had obtained the blessing; Not like Saul maligning David,
because he had slain his ten thousands, when Saul himself had slain but his
thousand, but rather because with David, 1 Chro. 29.17. 2 Cor. 12.26. John 12.
Ephesians. 4.

The second thing is their ignorance; they heard what testimony the Baptist
gave of our Savior; yet they understood it not, for then they would not have
envied, but readily followed him as others did.

Christ, heard the Doctrine he delivered, gave some Testimony of their love,
for they followed him; but yet understood not his Doctrine, Ioh. 6.60, 61. This
is also verified in Nicodemus, Ioh. 3.5, 8, 9, 10. In the Women of whom Paul
speaks, 2 Timothy 3.7. Yea, some undertake to be guides to others, themselves
not knowing the way, 1 Timothy 1.6, 7. and this so comes to pass.

1. Partly thorough the spiritual, high, and heavenly nature of divine things,
which the carnal eye cannot discern, 1 Cor. 2.14. A riddle which the natural
man cannot unfold, unles he have Gods Spirit, verse. 11. As Sampson told the
Philistines, they could not have opened his riddle, unles they had plowed which
his heafer.

2. Partly thorough some base and by ends which men propose unto themselves,
making their attendance on the word, a hook to take some other fish: Judas
followed Christ, because he did bear the bag, the Disciples because they had
eaten of the bread.

3. Partly thorough the sinister notives which stir up some to attend upon
the Word, the novelty, the applause accompanying carnal relations to the
teachers of it, to them that do embrace it, horror of conscience, dismal
fears, which cause them to attend on it, the Raven comes into the Ark for
fear of the Deluge, Ahab humbles himself when a judgment is threatened.

4. Partly thorough the deceitfulnes of many men's hearts, supposing it enough
that they do hear, though they do no more, never searching as the Bereans did,
Acts 17.11. Never enclining the ear and applying the heart unto understanding,
as Solomon gives charge, Prove. 2.2, 3, 4. But as Ier. 7.10. as Prove. 7.14.
therefore Ioh. 1.23, 24, 25.

5. Partly thorough the just judgment of God, who sends a spiritual slumber
upon some, that seeing they shall not perceive, and hearing they shall not
understand, Isa. 6.10. but Isa. 29.11. Whereunto agrees that of our Savior,
Mat. 13.13, 14. and 2 Cor. 4.3.



1. True knowledge is always accompained with true humility, contrition of
heart, meeknes of Spirit and a Holy teachablenes, the whole man will readily
subject, it self to every Ordinance of God: So that he who was once an
indomitable beast, now a child, a weak man, Gods Minister shall lead him, Isa.
11.6. True knowledge takes down the haughtines of the Spirit, breaks the
obstinacy of the heart, makes man say as Paul did, Acts 9.6. as Cornelius,
Acts 10.33. and makes him with Job, Job 42.6. puts him altogether out of
conceit with himself, 1 Cor. 3.18. thus Ia. 3.17. The wisdom which is from
above is gentle, easily entreated, as Naaman having the sight of his Leprosy,
hearkened to the advice of a maid to go to the Prophet, and afterward to go to
Jordan by the persvasion of his Servants, Mat. 11.29.

2. True knowledge is accompanied with unfeigned purity of heart and life: all
the nasty corners of the Soul are swept which before the shining of this light
were altogether overspread, with the dirt of sin and iniquity: as the shining
of the Sun dispelleth darkness and scatters the thick clouds which hang in the
air; so does saving knowledge drive away the sin of our Souls, therefore Ia.
3.17. The wisdom from above is pure, and purifieth the Soul where it
dwells, Psalm. 19.8, 9. It makes the transgressour cast away his sin as a
menstruous garment, Isa. 30.22. Their Souls are not like a dirty book; wherein
is nothing but the hand writting of sin and Satan, but the Law of God is
written therein, Ier. 31.33, 34. They are no more as strangers, but they are
returned unto God, Jer. 24.7.

3. True knowledge is accompanied with bowels of mercy and compassion to our
fellow brethren, we are grieved to see them in the snare of Satan, labor to
the utmost of our abilities to free them, Psa. 119.136. As Moses labored to
bring his brethren out of Egypt; As Paul when his eyes were opened, and he
instructed, he labored to turn men to God, Acts 9. He built all up as fast a
ever he did pull down, was as diligent for Christ, as ever he was laborious
against Christ, as abundant in his labor, as he was before in persecutions,
all his threatenings were turned into encouragements.

4. True knowledge makes us industrious in embracing all opportunities for the
furtherance of the work of grace, to become rich in sanctifications, to be
freed from sin more thoroughly, to perform holy duties more cherefully, more
acceptably, to be able to withstand temptations more strongly; as a man fallen
into the hands of thieves, having his eyes open watches every opportunity to
go from them, a wise merchant observes the mart, an understanding Husbandman
takes the seasons of the year, so will the Children of God entertain the
fittest opportunities to pray when their hearts are most affected with the
fence of sin, most moved with the desire of grace, Jon. 2.1. As Jonah prayed
out of the Whales belly, the Jews came to the Apostles, when their hearts were
pricked, Acts 2.37. Anna prayed when she was affected with the fence of her
barrenness, 1 Sa. 1.6, 10. We must be always instant, 2 Timothy 4.2. Ephesians. 5.15.
Prove. 8.34.

5. True knowledge valueth the best things at the highest rate, it esteems
dross as dross, and gold as gold, 1 Cant. 1.2. The earth is a transitory vain
and flitting thing, a snow melting before the Sun, a crackling thorn, whose
fire is as soon extinct, but it esteems spiritual and heavenly things as
things of an abiding nature, as a tree never barren of fruit, a fire never
going out, as a Jewel of greater price than all the world, thus Psa. 119.72.
Psa. 84.10. Phil. 3.8. Luc. 18.28. It does not as Luc. 14.18.

6. True knowledge is accompanied with a holy jeolausy, vigilance, fear, care,
that it may not fall again into any sin, having once gotten it self free,
having had experience of the heavy burden of sin, having felt the wounding
arrows of an accusing conscience, being acquainted with the propensity of his
heart unto sin, thorough the remainder of corruption, wilines and industry of
Satan, having felt how hard the passage was from Egypt to Canaan, how full of
anguish the throws of his new birth were, how difficultly the broaken bones
were healed, and being sensible of the peace, and comfort of his present
estate, he is fearful, and careful that he may not lose it; Like a man
gotten out of some dangerous gulf, where the darkness covered him, the Mire
defiles him, Serpents sting him, heavy burdens oppress him, and whence he had
no power to get himself free, nor no Sun could shine upon him, no licour could
refresh him, no musical instrument could delight him, where every thing seemed
as the shadow of death, a dreadful terror to him, will be careful to keep
aloof off never to full in again, so the Children of God that has escaped
this Dungeon of Sin wherein, etc. will look well to himself, he will no more
come near this forest that he fall not into this Lions mouths, 2 Cor. 7.10,
11. 1 These. 5.22. 1 Cor. 10.23. Genesis 34.10. These and many such are the fruits
that grow on this tree, the eams which issue from this sun, and these must we
be able to find in truth wrought in our selves, or else our knowledge is vain,
and this knowledge must we all strive, if we purpose to know the things
belonging to our peace, and to attain this, we must be sensible of our
spiritual blindness, otherwise, Io. 9.41. We must bewail it as Prove. 5.4. We
must cry after it as blind men did for eye sight, we must wait upon the Word,
the instrument of our illumination.

The third thing here observed, was the fidelity of the Baptist, though these
Disciples of John did not embrace Christ, yet they do acknowledge that the
Baptist taught Christ, and gave testimony of him:

Tim. 3.7. That all may say as they did of our Savior, Marc. 12.14. So we show
the integrity of our hearts the God, the sincerity of our minds in the
performance of our calling; so shall we convince the consciences of our
hearers, be partakers of much peace within us, and give much the more cheerful
account of our callings, it is our joy, 1 These. 2.19, 20. But if this cannot be
yet. Isa. 48.4. Ezekiel. 33.33. Acts 20.26, 27. The next thing is the danger of
admiring the person of the person, beyond what is convenient.

Iam. 2.1. To the charge, 1 These. 5.13, 14. 1 Timothy 5.17. Of this the men of
Corinth were not innocent, they were much devoted to the false Apostles, so
much as they undervalued the true: 2 Cor. 11 20.
A just reproof for such as so fasten their eyes upon blind guids, and other
insufficient Ministers, in whose Lamp is either none, or at least no good
Oil, that they reject the best teachers; Like the Philistines, who were so
deeply in love with Dagon, that they removed the Arc, like seduced Israel, 1 Samuel 5.4, 5, 6. That forsook the living Fountain, and dug broaken
cisternes, that forsake the living God, Ier. 2.12. and made supplication to
Baal, who could not hear, these men's knowledge must needs be according to the
wisdom of their instructours; 1 Ki. 18.19.
there growth must be like the milk flowing out of the Nurses breast, and
surely of all such, both teachers and hearers may that of the Psalmist be
spoken, Psa. 115.5, 6, 7, 8. Lastly they envied the success of our Saviors
Ministry, it grieved them to see so many attend his Doctrine, frequent his
baptism.

grieveth to see more Corn in another man's field, more Sheep in another
mans-fold, more Fruit on another man's tree than on his own; every Child ought
indeed most entirely to affect its own breast, every scholar his own Mr,
every soldier his own leader; yet not so as thereby to envy the breasts which
yield more milk, the Mr whose Scholars grow more abundantly in learning, the
General, whose soldiers are more victorious, more succesfull in their battle,
so to affect Cephas as to despise or envy Paul or Apollos is a stream flowing
from a carnal Fountain, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. To envy the succesfull Ministry of any
faithful teacher, is a branch springing from a very accursed root, Acts
13.45. an argument of a blind and obstinate mind, Joh. 9.28, 29. A sign they
never truly learned as their own Minister faithfully taught them, an apparent
testimony that they value the person above the Doctrine, Joh. 5.45, 46, 47.
That they are not guided by sound reason, but blind affections, an evil guide,
a wandering star, an unskilful pilote, seldom ever setting at the stern
but it causes shipwrake; for multa nos cogit facere affectus, Hieron. in
Epist. ad Fabian.
dum propinquitatem respicimus corporum, and corporis and animae offendimus
creatorem; affection makes us do many things, and while we fasten our eyes
upon the nearenes of our bodies, we offend God the Creator both of Soul and
body.

Let us all therefore strive to have our hearts so affected with the glorifying
of God, so bent to the setting forth of his praise, that we may rejoice to see
the Kingdom of Satan beaten down, the Kingdom of Christ to flourish; the
number of Gods people increase, the seed of the Word plenteously sown, the
Lords vineyard well manured, many trees of righteousness planted in the Lords
Orchard, the diseased Souls of our brethren healed, whosoever be the Physitican
curing it; the Lord may use whom he pleases, convey the water of salvation to
the Souls of his people by what cisterne he will, he is free in the
dispensations of his favors, he may do with his own what he will, our eye
must not be evil, because Gods eye is good; but where the graces of God are
most conspicuous and apparent, there let our love, be most strongly fastened,
considering, that a man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven:

VERSE 27.
THe disease has been discovered, the cure ensues, the wound opened, the
plaster is now to be applied, ambition, self-love, envy at the multiplication
of Christ's Disciples, was the disease of the Disciples of the Baptist. Serious
considerations of Gods freedom in the dispensations of his graces, bestowing
them on whom he pleases, is the matter John answered, and said, a man can
receive nothing, unles it be given him from heaven, whence from the connection
of the words we may observe.

the argument, the Lord of the vineyard used, Mat. 20.15. for the answering of
them, that envyed at the wages given to them that came last into the vineyard,
and hence also the Apostle persuadeth all men to humility, sobriety,
contentednes and industry in their places and callings, without insulting one
over another, without advancing themselves one against another, Romans 12.3, 6,
7, 8. and to the same purpose the Apostle, to take down the insolency of such
as did excel, and to appease the murmuring of such as had more slender gifts
bestowed on them, labors: with the men of Corinth, to consider what
themselves once were, followers of dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12.2. Whence the gifts
bestowed on the Church had their original, from God, verse. 11. Why they were
given, to proffit withal, verse. 7. and the consideration of this is very
effectual.

Ps. 84.10. though he has made us but as one of his hired servants, Luc.
15.19. We shall say with Jacob, Genesis 32.10. and with Paul, Phil. 4.11. as
Solomon says, of the laboring man, Eccl. 5.12. so it will be with us, whether
we have little or much, our hearts will be quiet considering it is Gods free
gift, and far beyond our desert.

not, this will cause us to bless God for one talent, if we have no more, to
be thankful for a dish of green herbs, if we have no better cheer, though we
have not the full vintage, yet if we have but a few gleanings of Gods love, yet
we will bless with Naomi, Rut. 2.20. Though we have not so large a mess, and
so many change of apparel as Benjamin, Ier. 43.34. Yet if we like Joseph's
brethren be sensible of our unworthines, of the wrong we have done to our
Joseph, we will be glad, if Ps. 128.3. we have but one mess, but one suite of
raiment, Psa. 127.5. Though our Children be not like Olive plants round about
our table; Though our quiver be not full of these arrows, yet if we be
sensible of our unworthines as Hanna was, of her barrenes, we will bless God
for one Child, 1 Samuel 2.1. I mean for any one good gift, that God shall bestow
upon us.

Mat. 25:25. This will make us careful, not to hide our talent (though the
least) in a napkin, Mat. 5.15. Not to put our light under a bushel, not to
quench our Lamp, though there be but little Oil therein, not to hide our
Grain in the garner as covetous men do their Corn, that the Souls of the poor
curse them. Prove. 11.26. But like good stewards, careful servants, diligent
Husbandmen we will employ it to the advantage of our Lord and Master committing
our seed to the earth, that it may increase, causing our light to shine that
other men may see our good works, and glorify our father; as every fountain
sends forth a stream according to what it has received, every star gives
light according to the light infused into it, knowing that for this end, we
have received, 1 Cor. 12.7. Mat. 10.8.

Heb. 6.11, 12. 1 Cor. 4.16. 1 verse. 11.1. Ia. 5.10, 11. Not to murder Abel,
because more righteous, but to tread in his steps, to labor for his faith, not
to envy David for his great conquests, but to strive after the like victories.

Job 33.23. As Apple trees among the thorns, as stars among the clouds, as
flowers among the weeds, all our delight will be on them that excel in virtue,
Ps. 16.3.

men's endowments, when the light and luster of their virtues begins to
trouble our diseased and malignant eyes, when at any time the pleasantness and
fertility of Naboths vineyard causes Ahab to languish and repose himself upon
his bed; when Esau conceives hatred, devises mischief against Jacob, because
he has gotten the blessing; when our hearts begin to repine, because the cloud
of Gods bounty had dropped more abundantly on others than on us, let us look
upon the state of our own Souls, let us consider how there is nothing in us,
why God should bestow any thing upon us, why we should expect any thing at his
hands; Let us consider how the Lord is no way bound to us, but may do with his
blessing, what he will, and no man can control him, or lay either
indiscretion, or injustice to his charge: And then as David, playing on the
Harp, appeased Saul's evil spirit, so shall this appease the distemper of our
Spirit, and without murmuring magnify the wisdom and freedom, of God in the
dispensations of his mercies; and for the better inuring of our hearts
hereunto, consider we,

1. That God does distribute his gifts most wisely and justly, as may serve
most for his own honor, and the good of his people, as he has in great
wisdom disposed the body natural, and all the members thereof, and
accordingly given them abilities suitable to their several places, so he has
also in great wisdom dispensed his favors to all the members of the
mystical body of Christ Jesus, he has done all things in number, weight and
measure, and Psa. 145.16, 17. As he has filled the Sun, Moon and Stars with
such quantity of light as may make most for the benefit, and ornament of the
whole universe, so has God dispensed to his people, etc.

2. That God has bestowed some gift upon every one of his family, he that has
least has enough to make him everlastingly happy, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9. No tree in
Gods Orchard, but has some soil about his roots, no vessel in Gods house, but
has some liccour, Mat. 25.15.

3. That to murmur against our brethren, is to murmur against God, for the
graces they have are not of their own getting, but of Gods bestowing, and
therefore as Moses said, Exo. 16.8. So it is in this behalf, therefore
Augustine, Quoties hominibus praesse desidero, toties Deo meo praeire contendo;
As often as I desire to be preferred above men, so often I strive to go before
my God, as arguing discontentednes in the place wherein God had set him.

4. That it is far better to use well the little we have received, then to
envy our brethren, because they have what we have not, he that has least does
not employ it so well, but he might make better use of it, and the good use of
what we have will give much contentment for the present; and has the promise
of a large increase for the future, to him that has shall be given, Mat.
15.23, 29. Prove. 11.25.

5. That what God has communicated to others, is not for themselves; but for
the good of them that shall need it, the cloud has rain for the dry ground,
the Sun has light for the dark air, the tree has fruit for the hungry
stomach, the eye has sight for the body, he that gathered much Manna, gave to
him that had little, we are but stewards.

6. That the beholding of the graces, which are in them, must provoke us to
pray for the like measure of grace, to use all holy means to attain the same
degree of holiness; when the prodigal saw what they enjoyed who lived in his
fathers house, he desird to be as one of them.

7. That envying at other men's abundance, will rob us of the comfort of our
endowments, as Esth. 5.10, 11, 12, 13. Saul so maligned David for his mighty
conquests, that he lost all the comfort, he might have gathered from his own
victories.

8. That God does give as much as we have ability well to manage, vessels put
to Sea are laden according to their strength, the Master of the family places
all according to their abilities, Mat. 25.15.

9. That God will expect from us but as he gives to us, Luc. 12.48.

10. That a faithful employment of what we have received, shall surely be
accompained with a blessed increase, a little sown in good ground husbanded
well brings a competible increase.

Thus of the connection, prescribing a remedy to the disease of the Disciples of
the Baptist; in the words themselves, we have set before us. 1. Our own
emptines, a man can receive nothing of himself, by his own art, industry,
ability, worth he can receive nothing, bodily or spiritual, transitory or
eternal. 2, The Fountain whence all the good we enjoy like so many streams do
flow; from the first we learn.

Mat. 7.18. to an unclean Fountain sending forth none but unclean Waters,
Job 14.4. to a black-Moore that cannot make himself white, Jer. 13.23. to a
dead man that cannot perform any action belonging to the living, to a wild
Olive, Prove. 11. Col. 2.13. and therefore the Apostle strippeth man of all
inclination or motion unto good, Romans 11.19. 2 Cor. 3.5. and the Psalmist says
of men generally they are all become abominable, Ps. 14.3.

Tim. 2.26. as subjects to their Sovereign, Ephesians. 2.3. Yea, to show their
ready subjection, they are subject as Children to the parent, and they are
violently bent to the fulfilles of the will of Satan, Io. 8.44. They are not
compelled to it; but it comes freely from them, it is their delight, their
bent, they will do no other.

Jericho and Jerusalem, have robbed him of true grace, and have left him
destitute of the life of God, Ephesians. 4.19. a stranger to God, Ephesians. 2.12. Free
from righteousness, Romans 6.20. A vessel in whom is no good liccour; a tree
whereon grows no good fruit, a house wherein not one living person, not one
good and holy vessel, can be found, Romans 7.18. The Apostle was privy to it,
acquainted with it, and does freely acknowledge it, that in his corrupt nature,
so far as he was unregenerate, there was no good thing, nothing acceptable to
God abiding in him: Prosper. cont. Collator.
Manifestissime patet animis nullam habitare virtutem: sed omnia eorum opera
immunda esse atque polluta: Habent sapientiam non spiritualem, sed animalem,
non caelestem sed terrenam, non Christianam sed Diobolicam non a patre luminum,
sed a Principe tenebrarum, Prosper contra Collator. Cap. 13.

Prove. 24.30. not one good tree growing in it, therefore aptly resembled to a
wilderness overgrown with the thorns and briars of iniquity, Isa. 55.13. The
whole man is altogather polluted, Genesis 6.5. a Servant of sin, Romans 6.16. Omnis
infidelium vita peccatum est, and nihil est bonum sine summo bono, Prosp. in
Aug. Sentent. 106. and Epigr. 81.

Job 33.27. Even the Words of the living God, Ier. 23.36. Makes a stumbling
block of a shining Lamp, a killing sword of an healing Medicine, Tit. 1.15.
Wresting the wholesome word of God to their own damnation, 2 Pet. 3.16.
Spiderlike sucking poison out of the purest flower, as all that was touched by
the dead became unclean, so all that they go about becomes unclean to them,
Hag. 2.13.

Christ, 1. Cor. 1.23.
in whom is all fulness to supply our wants, is to the Greeks foolishnes, to
the Jews a stumbling block, to all carnal and disobedient people, a stone of
offense, 1 Pet. 2.7. A grin, a snare, Isa. 8.14. not the way, the life, the
truth, Ioh. 14.6. the preaching of the Gospel, the instrument of our conversion
to God, reconcilement and ingrafting into Christ, Romans 10.17. The seed of their
regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. Of their vivification and bringing out of the grave
of sin, Joh. 5.25. whereby they are fitted to receive and do good, this is a
distasteful food, an offensive light, 2 Cor. 2.14. Ioh. 3.19.

Acts 17.28. we can not move a finger without him, Ps. 104.27, 28, 29. Acts
17.25. and for moral virtues and actions, though we have also some abilities
remaining since the fall of our first parents; yet these are also the gift of
God, 1 Cor. 12.4. Ia. 4.15. But as for turning to God, doing any thing savingly
good, we have no ability at all left with us* we are broken vessels, all the
good, we once had will out, and nothing but the slime and the mud of the
filthiness of sin remains, Joh. 15.5. 1 Cor. 15.10.

Romans 5.8. and to weaken the arms of God, by whose power alone (we are kept
unto eternal life) 1 Pet. 1.5. and teach that we by the abilities, remaining
in us can turn to God when he calls and inviteth, and that he does only
invitare excitare, persuadere, but not mutare, the disposition, bent, and
qualification of the heart, so that God deals with us as we do with men in a
dead sleep, call and cry to awaken them, as a Master with a froward Servant
promising, threatening, as with men within doors knocking at the gate, looking
when they of their own accord will open; this they teach, but this is a
Doctrine repugnant to sacred Scripture, teaching that God is both the Alpha and
the Omega of our salvation, works both will and deed, Phil 2.13. That we have
no life of grace within us till God revive us, Ephesians. 4.19. That we cannot come
to God, till God does draw us, Ioh. 6.44. A Doctrine it is repugnant to the
Doctrine of all orthodox Writters: Enchir. cap. 30.
Quid boni operari potest perditus, (says August.) nisi in quantum a
perditione liberatur, and a council says, si quis per naturae vigorem bonum
aliquod cogitaret, aut expeteret aut eligeret, Can. 7.
absque illuminatione aut inspiratione Spiritus Sancti qui dat omnibus
facultatem consentiendi, and credendi veritati, haeretico fallitur spiritu, non
intelligens vocem Dei in Evangelio, Joh. 15.5. A Doctrine first defended by
Pelagius for maintayning whereof both he and his Disciple Celestius were
condemned by the censure of Ccxliij. Bishops in the Council of Carthage, 418.
Afterward taken up by some others, and now revived by Papists and Arminians;
all treading the steps of their Heriticall father Pelagius: a Doctrine by which
they do exceedingly impair the grace of God, spoil him of much praise due to
him for our conversion, a Doctrine which makes carnal man proud upon his own
abilities, secure and careless, having strength in himself at any time to
embrace Gods tendered favor, a Doctrine by which they make it manifest, that
themselves were never sensible of their own weakness, vileness, inability to
what is savingly good, that they never perceived how uneasily Satan is cast
out, how powerful sin is, and how hardly it is overcome, how difficult the
change of the heart, how hardly the image of God is restored, the light of Gods
face, peace of conscience, assurance of the forgiveness of sin is gotten, had
they ever known this they would never presume upon their own strength; but
would with Paul, Romans 4.27. Had they beheld the deep dye, and filthy spots of
sin, they would with David, Psa. 51.1, 2. Had they been in this storm they
would with the Disciples, Mat. 8.25, 26. Had they ever felt this burden, they
should have found it more easy to shake off a mountain from their backs, to
pull their skin over their heads, as to cast away there sin, as easy to
withstand a deluge of water, or a furious Horse rushing into the battle, as to
withstand their lusts, they should have found that all the water in the bucket
of their humane abilities would not quench one spark of this fire, that all the
arrows in their quiver would not make this enemy remove one foot, that all the
ingredients in their shop, all the herbs, in their garden would do nothing
toward the cure of his wound; But they should find as, Matthew. 17.10. the woman
spent all upon Physicians, and could not be cured, so they Mar. 5.26.

Jacob to be less than the least of Gods Mercies, to be altogether unfit for
any good duty, unable to perform any work pleasing in the sight of God, Isa.
64.6. Genesis 32.10. Not boasting of our own abilities, as once Goliath did of his
strength, least the Lord overthrow us as he overthrew him, 1 Samuel 17.10. Not
presuming like the Sons of Sheva to cast out Satan by humane art, and the
powers of nature, least he leap on us as he did on them, Acts 19.15, 19. Not
striving with the builders of Babel, to ascend the glorious rest of heaven by a
Babel of our own building, least the Lord confound us as he did them, Genesis
14.4, 8. Let us not glory with the Pharisee, that we are not as the Publican,
Luc, 18.11. Let us not grow insolent of a few moral endowments, a little
gilded brass, a few painted flowers, as once Rabseca boasted of his Masters
victories, having overcome a few nations, whose God were stocks and stones,
least as the Lord gave him and his Master, so he give us a shameful overthrow
at the last, 2 King. 18.33, 34, 35. But let us seriously consider how we have
no beauty in us for which the Lord should set his love upon us, Ezekiel. 16.6. No
strength whereby to vanquish the enemies that rise against us, Romans 5.8. No
understanding to discern the things which differ, Prove. 30.2, 3. No ability to
comprehend the deep things of God more than a blind eye to discern colors, 1
Cor. 2.14. No quickness of sight to discry the snares of Satan, to find out the
corruption of our hearts, but that as Agar said, Prove. 30.18, 19. So may I say
of him, that we have no aptness in our selves to any good duty, more than the
thorn to bear figs, the bitter fountain to send forth sweet waters, Mat.
7.17. And when we are thus low in our own eyes, then we shall be capable of
matter, of the highest and most eminent nature, Acts 9.3. When Paul was cast
from his Horse, brought low, made blind, then he was fit to receive
instruction, then we shall long after the light of Gods face, Luc. 15. the
dewes of Gods grace; when the prodigal saw himself a companion of swine, then
a place in his fathers house was much desired, then we shall complain with
much feeling of the sin of our Souls, of the iniquity of our hearts, as Isa.
6.5. Then we shall be to pour out our Souls feelingly, and cry mightily to the
Lord as Jonah did, Ion 2.1. He slept while he was above the water, then the
Lord will be favorable unto us, Isa. 57.15. and shall vouchsafe salvation unto
us, Job 22.29. Job 33.19. to 28.

Christ Jesus, the less we have in our selves, the more earnestly let us beg
to partake of his abundance, let the sense of our hunger cause us to feed the
more frequently with the milk which comes from the breast of the Scriptures,
let our dulnes cause us the more carefully to apply this light to our feet and
this Lantern to our paths; Let our barrenness cause us with Hanna to pray with
tears for grace as she did for a Child, let our inability to resist the
enemies of our Souls, cause us to pray for Gods presence and assistance, as
Moses did for Gods assistance with Israel in their journey to Canaan, the
greater storms of affliction do arise, the more strongly let us fasten the
anchor of our faith upon the Rock Christ Jesus, let our nakedness cause us to
long the more to be apparelled with the royal robes of Christ's righteousness;
Let our uncleanness make us desire the more earnestly to be washed in the
Jordan of Christ's blood, the heavy burden of our sin cause us the more to
desire to be unloaden, the more the heart is chased, the more the water brooks
are desired: the more the torment of the disease is felt, the more the healing
Medicine is longed for: the more the force, fury, and near approach of the
enemy is beheld, the more aid is desired: so the more sense we have of our own
weakness, unmorthines: the more feeling we have of our sin, of the arrows of
Gods displeasure wounding our consciences, the strength of our corruption and
the violence of Satan, the more earnestly, humbly, feelingly, let us address
our selves unto God, and so the Lord of his fullness will supply our wants,
communicate the riches of his grace; his goodness is the Fountain whence we
must draw, the treasure whence we must fetch all spiritual riches, as the next
thing to be observed plainly teaches.

Iac. 1.17. No Merchandise sold at so easy a rate as that which after Solomon's
estimate is more precious than Rubies, and Prove. 3.14, 15. for Isa. 55.1. As
the cloud freely pours down his rain upon the thirsty ground, so does God
his blessings upon the thirsty Souls of men, blessings of every kind both
spiritual and temporal, of the right hand, and of the lest are freely
bestowed, touching blessings of the most eminent nature our Savior speaks,
Rev. 22.17. touching favors of inferior condition, Psalm. 104.28. Yea, the
very wicked drink of the water of this Fountain, and are relieved by the
bounty of this hand, Job 22.18. So that the Apostles question may well be
proposed to every person, 1 Cor. 4.17. and the reason hereof is,

Nehemiah does acknowledge, Neh. 9.25. Psalm 68.9, 10. and thus the Prophet
ascribes all the welfare of Gods people to his goodness, Zach. 9.15, 16, 17.

Ephesians. 2.12. All things are become impure, Tit. 1.15. We have broken the
Covenant, and have made forfeyture of all we did enjoy, so that we can lay
claim to nothing by virtue of any promise from God, till we be in Christ,
according to that of the Prophet, Hos. 2.19, 20, 21, 22.

Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. so 1 Cor. 4.6, 7. This is a jewel of which God
will not suffer himself to be robbed, the only thing that God aims at in
all his works, Isai. 42.5, 6, 7, 8.

Babel of Popish merit, challenging eternal life and glory as a wages due to
their labors, as a fruit growing upon the trees of their own planting, a
harvest arising from a vineyard of their own manuring, for thus they teach;
V^squ. in commentar. in 1.2. qu. 114.
Opera bona justorum ex seipsis absque ullo pacto and acceptatione digna esse
remnueratione vitae eternae. 2. Operibus iustorum nullum dignitatis accrementum
provenire ex meritis aut persona Christi, etc. Whereas the Baptist, a man of a
more sanctified Spirit, and profound judgment, than any sly and subtle Jesuit,
taught his disciples, that a man could receive nothing unles it were given, not
merited, and whatsoever these Rom^sh Doctors do now teach their Apostatized
Romans; yet Paul, a chosen vessel of God, a man that was extraordinarily
converted, richly endued with the grace of the Spirit, in labor more abunda^t
than any other Apostle, taught the Romans of his time, that the wages of sin
was death, but the gift of God was eternal life, Romans 6.23. and our Savior
taught his Disciples, Luc. 17.10. Whereupon Hierome, si inutilis qui fecit
omnia, Ad Suts^^^o. cont. Pelag.
quid de illo dicendum qui explere non potuit, and St Paul teaches that not
only the actions, but the passions also added thereunto hold no proportion of
condignity with life eternal, Romans 8.18. For should we be able to merit
eternal life by our works, win the crown by our own strength, then we should
turn the fountain of Gods favor into a well without water, where should
there be any place for Gods bounty: If we could merit, and make salvation a due
debt, then Christ should have spent his labors, borne the heavy burden of
afflictions, undergone the ignominy of the cross and shed his blood in vain,
Gal. 2.21. Then there should be no more place for grace, Romans 11.6. Non est in
quo gratia intret, ubi meritum jam occupavit. Bernard* in Cant. Ser. 67.
therefore Ephesians. 2 8. and yet we do not take away the reward, because we deny
the merit of good works, for in the keeping of Gods commandments, Psa. 19.11.
and Prove 11.18. But the question is whence he that sows must expect to reap
so great and sure a harvest; whether from Gods justice, which he must do, if he
stand upon merit, or from his mercy, as a recompense freely bestowed out of
Gods gracious bounty, and not injustice due for the worth of the work
performed, which question the Prophet Hosea has sufficiently resolved, Hos.
10.12. The Lord does crown his graces, adding an increase to that which he
has given and enabled us well to use, Psalm. 62.12. giving an increase of glory
according to the measure of grace bestowed, so that originally and in it self
this reward proceeds merely from Gods free bounty and mercy, but accidentally
in regard God has bound himself by his Word and promise to comferr such a
reward, so it proves after a sort an act of justice, as 1 John 1.9. The thing
promised is free, and by us undeserved, and if God should fail in performance,
yet do us no wrong, but wrong himself; and therefore Canaan was called a Land
of promise not of merit, Dut. 9.5. Neh. 9 8. Ja. 1.12. 2 Timothy 4.8. Not just
because of our merit, but because of Gods promise, In Psalm. 33 Conc^.
therefore Augustine fidelis homo est credens promittenti Deo; fidelis Deus
exhibens quod promisit homini, teneamus fidelissimu debitorem, quia tenemus
misericordissimum promissorem.

Endor, Baalzebub Egypt, or Assyria, as if there were no God in Israel, as if
there were no Oil in Gods Lamp, no strength in Gods arm, no light left in the
Sun or his favor; let us not go to broaken cisternes, but say with Peter, Ioh.
6.68. this is that we are commanded to do, Amos 5.4, 5, 6. It is at the Lords
gate that we must knock, one beggar does not make supplication at another
beggars door, but at the gates of the rich; what are all creatures in respect
of God but beggars, they have no water in their own wells, but what distilleth
from the cloud of Gods bounty, therefore Mat. 7.7, 8. the Lords ears open to
hear, his hands are open to relieve, Exo. 22.23. 1 Ki. 18.26.
Though Baal be deaf and cannot hear his suppliants, yet the God of Israel
will surely attend to the cry of his people, let us silence out crying sins,
let us turn our feet into the path of Gods precepts, and the Lord shall hear
our requests, Job 22.23. to 28. Let us in the sense of our wants, in the
humility of our Souls, draw nigh unto the Lord, and then Psa. 102.17. Let us
pour out our Souls before the Lord, as the full clouds do their rain, let us
cry out as a woman in travel, and though we were as dead men, yet we shall
live, Isa. 26.16, 17, 19. Let us not waver but believe, and we shall obtain,
Ia. 16. Let us come before the Lord with sincere and unpright hearts, and then
Ps. 145.18, 19. Let us have no more to do with sin, but say as Ephraim to his
Idols, Hos. 14.8. let us take us Words, verse. 2.3. and then verse. 4.5, 6, 7.
Let us win on God with patience and constancy, and the Lord at length will look
upon us in mercy, Heb. 10 35. Whatsoever be our want, in the Lord is all
fullnes, all readiness to supply us, therefore as Ia. 1.5. So if thou want
faith knowledge, patience, if thou want tendrings of heart: peace of
conscience, sense of Gods love, or any other good blessing, ask it, and the
Lord will surely bestow it on thee: Hanna was troubled with her barrenness and
cried to the Lord, and he opened her womb. Solomon considered the weightines of
his calling, and sought wisdom, and the Lord gave him wisdom: Sampson was
much oppressed with thirst, called on the Lord, and the Lord gave him water,
Iud. 15.18, 19. In like manner when the barrenness of grace, want of knowledge
does afflict thee seek it at the hands of the Lord, and the Lord shall grant
the supplication of thy Soul unto thee; had we but hearts to seek we might
enjoy what now we want; the ignorant might be full of knowledge, the empty Lamp
might be full of oil, the weak faith, which shakes like a withered reed,
might be like a Cedar of deep and strong roots, the Soul, which is like a
barren vineyard, might be full of grace, like the valleys overspread with Corn
and good pasture, the naked Soul might be well armed, richly apparelled, the
dejected Spirit might be full of comfort, the mind that is pressed down with
worldly cares, like a cart with sheaves, might soar aloft as on eagles wings
unto the heavens, the unstable Soul might be as well fastened, the wilderness of
the life might be made a Paradise; a sweet Communion with God, a holy fellow
ship with the saints might be maintained, and much delight might be found in
Gods Ordinances, Isa. 41.17, 18, 19. Isa. 44.3.

This must teach us to receive all as from God, whatsoever our care, labor,
industry has been, yet let us not look upon what we possess, as upon yarne of
our own weaving, fish of our own taking, Hab. 1.16. Upon a house of our own
building, as Dan. 4.30. But let us look on all we have as on Gods blessing, a
gift from Gods hand, a light shining from the sun of Gods bounty, though Paul
plant and Apollo water, the increase is Gods: though Israel fight, the victory
is the Lords; 2 Cro. 20
whatsoever evil is in us, whatsoever evil is committed by us, is the seed of
our own sowing, whatsoever evil is inflicted on us, is a wages of our own
deserving, whatsoever good we work it is the labor of Gods finger, whatsoever
good we receive it is of the fulness and freedom of Gods bounty, therefore we
must all say, as 1 Cor. 29 11, 12, 13.14.15, 16. for Prove. 21.31. Therefore let
us fasten our eyes on all both internal and external endowments, as on
shewers falling from the cloud of Gods love, as on gifts given by the Lords
hand, even the least, the meanest, as well as upon the fairest of our
possessions; this will make us the more sensible of Gods love, the more ashamed
of our ingratitude and disobedience, this will the more endeare and oblige our
hearts to God, this will make us the more thankful, the more circumspect, and
heavenly minded in the use of them, nothing does more occasion the abuse of
Gods blessing, than forgetfulness of the hand whence they have there original
and beginning, Ps. 78.10, 11.

4. This may acquaint us with a sure way how to be provided for in all estates,
to find a supply in all our wants, to have some liccour always in our vessel
to refresh us, some fruit upon the barrenest tree to relieve us; God you see,
is the giver of every good blessing, all comes from him, therefore get into
his favor, and you shall want no good thing, be regenerate, become a new
creature, make God your Father, and your wants shall be supplied, let the
prodigal return, and in his Fathers house there is all manner of provision,
his Father kindly entertaining him, Luc. 15. So let us do, etc. for as Mat.
7.11. this has the promise, Psalm. 84.^^. Used as a motive to stir up men to
fear God, Psalm. 34.10. to follow Christ, Matthew 19.29.30. This will bring us
within the Covenant* gives us interest in all Gods blessings, we shall be in
league, and Job 5.23, 24, 25, 26. We shall enjoy security, boldness toward God,
tranquillity and cheerfulnes in our hearts, Job 11.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. It is
not a carnal and vexing care, a greedy heaping up of things of the earth, that
will be sufficient defense, a never setting light, a never failing stream, but
the fruition of Gods love is the way to win it, Mat. 6.33. this Psalm. 23.^. If
God be Shepherd, he will provide pasture, and Ps. 37.25. it is iniquity, an
ungracious conversation that brings want, Pro. 13.25. Eccles. 5.13.14.

5. Is every good gift from God? comes it all from him? then let us remember
that we must give an account of all we do enjoy, we are not Lords but stewards
of Gods blessings, such as must yield account to God of all our abilities,
though it be long before the Lord call us, yet he will at length require a
strict account of all our doings, how we spent our time, our strength, our
temporal blessing, our spiritual graces, how they have been improved, what
increase has been made, therefore as the Apostle said in another case, 2 Cor.
1.24 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. So in this case use what you have received, not as Lords to
do with it what you list, but as they who must be accountable to the Lord, and
that not only for the greatest but also for the least blessings, as our
Savior said, Mat 25 19. Rom 14.12.
we must render account of every idle Word, so we must render account of every
little favor, which God has bestowed on us, the time will come, Luc. 16.2.
Therefore we should think of this that we might be able to do it with joy, Heb.
13.16.

6. As it is all from God, so let us be careful to employ it to the honor of
God, his good ground receiving good seed yields a good increase, as the good
servant, Mat. 25.20. as it comes from heaven, so let us use it in a heavenly
manner, to the praise of him whose dwelling is in the heavens; this their very
original does challenge, To. 11.36. This the Dominion, that God has over all,
does claim, this the end, which God proposes to himself in all his works,
does require, Prove. 16.4. Rev. 4.11. Ephesians. 1.5, 6. and it is the charge, 1
Cor. 6.20. and if we neglect this, we abuse the gift we have received, it is a
wrong to the creature to restrain it from the service of the Creator. I. It is
a wrong to the light, to hide it under the bushel: to the seed to withhold it
from the earth. II. We rob our selves of the comfort, we might enjoy in the
good inployment of our received Talent, Gods service well performed is
comfortable, not only when it is finished, but even in the very performance of
it; Paul and Silas sung before they had the crown, even while they were in
prison, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. It is a joy to the husbandman to see the Corn spring,
though long before the harvest, a comfort whereof the sluggard is utterly
deprived. III. We expose our selves to an utter deprivation, of what we have
received: the one Talent was taken from him that did not employ it, and it is
generally threatened, from him, that has not shall be taken away even what he
has, etc. Prove. 11.24. IV. We discover our selves to be altogether vile and
evil; it is evil ground that after much soil and seed is full of weeds, a
corrupt body that after much Physicking is more diseased, therefore Mat. 25.26.

7. This teaches us to wait and depend upon God for every good thing, and in
the use of means to seek to God by prayer for a blessing, for as his goodness
gives us the means, so his providence must make them effectual for our
benefit; thus Jehosaphat's eyes were toward the Lord for help in the day of
distress, 2 Chro. 20.12. Thus David would not look to the earth, and seek for
help among the things there below, but Psalm. 5.3. Thus the Prophet would have
them look unto the promise which God had made to their forefathers, Isai. 511,
2. and the Psalmist, Psa. 44.5, 6. Thus Nehemiah used means, but prayed unto
God for a blessing, Neh. 4.9 and this even Joab had respect unto, 2 Samuel 10.12.
and indeed without this, Psalm. 127.1, 2.

8. This must stir up the hearts, of men to love and praise God, every man
according to that which God has bestowed upon him; according to the number and
the measure of our graces must be our thankfulness, we have nothing, but it is
the Lords gift, and many are his favors challenging thankfulness from us, the
Donation of his Son, Joh. 3.16. the giving of his Word, Ier. 3.15. the
separating of us from the workers of darkness, 1 Pet. 2.9. says in his
promises, Ioh. 6.29. peace of conscience, forgiveness of sin, sense of Gods
love with every other good grace, they are all the gifts of God, 1 Cor 2^1. We
were not worthy of any of this, but deserved the contrary; when we deserved
death the Lord gave us life, when we sat in darkness, and the shadow of death,
and were worthy to be so left then did God send us light, Mat. 4.16. When we
were in bondage the Lord made us free, when we lay like the man between Jericho
and Jerusalem, robbed, wounded, Luc. 10.30. then did God like the merciful
Samaritan help us, when the Leprosy of sin had altogether overspread us, then
did the Lord wash us in the Jordan of his Sons blood, 1 Ioh. 1.7. when we
could expect nothing, but everlasting burnings, then God turned his consuning
fire into a shining Sun, our tempestuous Sea into a calm River, our Hell into
a Paradise: and oh that we had hearts to love him, laud him, delight in him,
for this his goodness and mercy toward us.

9. Lastly this serves, for the great comfort of the Children of God, every
good thing is in their Fathers hand, he that loves them is the Lord of all
things, Psa. 23. therefore they may rest themselves assured that they shall
never want any good thing: Psa. 34.10.
were these things in the hand of any stranger, they might, in the hand of an
enemy, they surely should lack them, but now since all things are in the hand
of God, be sure of this. I. God will give you the best things, though Ismael
have the movables, Isaac has the inheritance, if Esaa have the fatnes of the
earth, yet Jacob shall have the birthright; if profane men have what the
bodily eye does see, yet, 1 Cor. 2 9. II. You shall have a competency that
which shall give contentment, Phil. 4.11. You shall have such peace therewith
as will make the coursest dirt more pleasant, than the danitiest feast, Prove.
15.15. III. You shall have that which God does see to be best for you, as a
loving Physician, a wise father gives what is best for his child, for his
patient, so will our wise and loving God do for us.

VERSE 28.
THe matter contained in these Words has been already opened for the most
part, only here we may observe. I. A reprehension of that particular sin
whereof they were guilty. II. How hardly men are brought to the knowledge of
the truth being once possessed with prejudice. III. The desire of Gods people
to have all the glory given unto Christ, not to rob him of the least part of
it: The first of this will teach us.

Isa. 58.1. and 2 Samuel 12.11, 12. Mar. 6.20. Acts 2 36.



Sam. 15.14, 19. When the Lot was cast on Achan than he confessed, so 2 Samuel
12.13.

Tim. 3.16. and consolation of the dejected, thus as they are styled, so shall
they show themselves, seers, stewards, Physicians, guides, lights, and thus
Ier. 15.19.

Ps. 141.5. 1 King. 18.21. Heb. 13.23.

The second point teaches us,

Christ, they would not be driven from it, Ier. 38.4 1 Ki. 22.8. 1 Ki. 21.20.
though he plainly told them he was not, Mat. 13.56, 57. Ioh. 7.52. By this
means things appear in other colors than indeed they are, as to him that
looks thorough a glass of a red color things seem to be of a red color,
therefore let us take heed that this weed arise not, stand not in the garden of
our hearts, quench it like fire, destroy it like stubble, Isa. 20 8. Psa
57.3.17. Let us ground the persuasions of our hearts upon apparent testimonies,
which will not deceive us. Ps. 2^.9 Acts 10.33.
Let us still be of humble disposition, readily subjecting our selves to the
Doctrine of Gods Word. Let not affection, conceit, fond opinion, but a judgment
well informed be our guide. Let all truths find entertainment, approbation,
subjection, so shall the Word bring comfort, stablish our faith, reconcile and
draw us home to God, assure us of his favor; enrich us with his grace. I. But
if prejudice possess our hearts, bear sway within us, we are taken in Satan's
snare, we shall be lead like blind men into the pit of our destruction, he has
put out the eye of the understanding, that we shall not see the glorious light
of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4 II. The sweet waters of life will be to our Palate as
bitter as Gall, the most sumptuous feast shall be but as the bread of adversity
and the water of affliction, Mal. 3.14. The most pleasant and delightful light
will be either an offense to the eye, or at least as a Lamp without Oil, Job
34.9. All Religious and holy exercises will be as a cloud without rain, as a
vine without grapes. III. The wisest counsel will be taken either as flattery,
or as treason, the truest testimonies of the sincerest love will be looked on
as baits upon the hook to draw the fish to his death, as meat spread by the
fowler, an allurement to the snare, 2 Samuel 10.4. IV. Prejudice, like a diseased
stomach, turns good food into corrupted humors, 2 Cor. 2.14. Like a diseased
eye it beholds things in contrary colors; Like David in one case it takes
friends to be enemies, and enemies to be friends, 2 Samuel 19.6. Like thorns and
briars in the field, it causes the seed of the word that it can take no root,
Matthew. 13.12. Like Sheba, that blew the Trumpet of Rebellion, it causes the
people to disclaim the Messenger of the Lord, and to say they have no part in
his Doctrine, 2 Samuel 20.1, 2. Like the evil Spirit that arose between
Abimelech and the men of Shechem, it does breed a great division and hasten,
their ruin, Iud 9.23. Like a disease in the body, it makes men greedily
embrace, what will nourish it, Ahab being possessed with prejudice against the
Prophet, cast him into prison, opened his ears to the false Prophets, who
deceived him, 1 King. 22. for the prevention whereof we must labor.

1. For a sound judgment to be able to discern the things which differ, to
make choice of the things which are most excellent, a clear eye judges and
distinguesheth colors best, delight is most welcome to that sight which has
most perfection, sound Doctrine has best approbation among men of sound
knowledge and good understanding, and surely as Paul said in another case, Acts
26 2.3. So may the Minister of God say in this case, and therefore 1 Cor.
14.20. Col. 1.9. 1 Cor. 10.15 1 These. 5.21. but ignorance is the common cause
of prejudice, 2 Pet. 2.12.

2. For a good affection, an entire love to the Messenger of the Lord, this the
Apostle requires, 1 These. 5.13. This will cause us to hearken to their
Doctrine with diligence, to endure the word of exhortation with patience, to
embrace it with thankfulness, to subject our selves to it with readiness, we take
bitter pills contentedly from the Physician whom we affect, and you know what
the Apostle says of love, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6, 7.

3. We must strive for an humble and teachable Spirit, the broken ground
entertaineth the seed, the meek in heart do readily subject themselves to the
Doctrine of salvation, the yoke of Gods precept is not irksome to the humble,
therefore, Mat. 11.29 and were we humble as Christ was, then as he,
notwithstanding all his sufferings, Isa. 42 2. no more would we stir, and cry
and make a noise, and tumult, when the axe is said to the root of the tree, we
would not kick against the Word of the Lord, though it prick like a goade, and
pierce like an arrow, Ex. 12.11. Ps. 45.4. The humble ^oul shall find sweetness
in it, it shall be a word of glad tidings, Isa 61.1. a pleasant food, Psalm.
22.26.

4. Carefully try all things by the touchstone of Gods Word, examine it by
that line wherein there is no crookednes, weigh it in that balance, wherein is
no deceit; try it by that touchstone, which will infallibly distinguish
between good and reprobate silver: the day, 1 Cor. 13 13. that is the light of
Gods Word, Romans 13.12. shall make it manifest: the fire, Gods Spirit, speaking
in the Scriptures, will certify you of the truth of what was taught, therefore
Isa. 8.20. 1 John 4.1. Acts 17.11. By this means shall ye find, that it is not
so much man as God that speaks: by this means ye shall perceive more power
in it, attend with more fear and reverence to it, and subject your selves
thereunto with more willingness.

5. Allow not your self in any evil way, be not wedded to any sin, but
resolve in the uprightness of your hearts, to subject your selves to the whole
will of God, be glad to be informed in any truth, and be able to say to Gods
Messenger, as Cornelius did to Peter, Acts 10.33. and the people to Moses, Deu.
5.27. Then shall not your hearts rebel against any truth, not distaste any
wholesome Doctrine, not take offense at any godly exhortation, more than a
traveller, resolving to go to his journeys end does to be guided in the right
way when he strayeth, or a sick man desirous of a freedom from all diseases,
does at the good counsel of a wise Physician, but shall with David, 1 Sa.
25.32, 33. The allowance of sin makes true Doctrine unacceptable, godly
admonition unwelcome, the tidings of peace an occasion of trouble, the sweet
flowers gathered out of the garden of the Scriptures, as a bundle of noisome
weeds, the honey comb of the word as gall; therefore let us put iniquity far
away, and let no iniquity dwell in our tabernacles; and then we shall receive
the word without prejudice.

The Third thing
is the Baptists, denial of himself the removing of all that honor from
himself, which they would falsely have ascribed to him.

Jesus; This is given in charge, 1 Cor. 6.20. this we are taught to make our
first Petition, Mat. 6.9. This the Saints, Angels of God have refused to
receive, when men either ignorantly or superstitiously would have bestowed it
on and have willed them to give it unto God and Christ, Acts 10.25, 26, Acts
14:14, 15. Rev. 19.10. our Savior blamed the want of this in the Pharisees,
Joh. 5.44. and the Lord plagued them that, neglecting his, sought their own
glory, Acts 12.21, 22. Dan. 4.30, 31.

Rev. 1.5. every knee must bow to him, Rom 14.11. He has dominion as King over
subjects, Isai. 43.15.

Joh. 1.3.

Pet. 1.19. 1 Cor. 6.20. The Captivne being ransomed must live to him that did
redeem him, 2 Cor. 5.14.

Christ is the head, they the members, Christ the Husband, they the Spouse,
Christ the Prince, they the subjects, therefore these must above all things
seek the honor of Christ, as the Apostle says of the wife, 1 Cor. 7.34.

Jesus is more dear to Gods Servants than their own lives, neither honors,
riches, pleasures, nor success in worldly undertakings is so delightful to
them, as the glorifying of the name of the Lord, Acts 20.24. Acts 21.13.

Jesus, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Isai. 42.8. therefore Psa. 148.13.

Christ, so themselves may have honor, that regard not though the Sun of Gods
glory be overshadowed with an everlasting Eclipse, so the corrupt meteor of
their vain glory may shine, the extinguishing of the shining Lamp of the
Gospel, the ruinating of the Walls of Syon, the breaking down of the hedges of
Gods vineyard, the plucking off the grapes which grow on the Lords vine, the
entering of the wild boar, Psalm. 80.12, 13, 16. All this does not trouble them,
so the trees in their own Orchard flourish, bud, blossom, bear, who knows
not that Satan is now let loose, his chain lengthned, his fury and his
indignation great? Whose eyes do not behold, that as, Rev. 6.12. thorough the
insolency, and pride of Antichrist, the glorious Sun of righteousness is
eclipsed, The Doctrine, Rev. 9.7
the Sacraments, the Worship of God is made black with heresies, superstitious
Idols, and the Church bloody with wars, tyranny, oppression, persecution? Who
sees not the bottomless pit is now opened, the smoke ascending, the smoaky
Doctrine of the Pope arising, like smoke out of a great furnace to obscure the
Doctrine of life, and salvation by Christ? Who sees not a fearful Apostasy,
Rev. 6.13.
the stars falling from heaven, Doctors, Bishops, learned men, like
vanishing Meteors to fall to the earth, the World, the flesh, earthly honors,
Idols? Who can but see how out of this smoke of Popish Doctrine, there comes
forth a multitude of locusts, Rev. 9.
Priests, Jesuits, Monks, who like the locusts leap from earth to earth flying
aloft in the air, savor not the things of God, but only the things here
below, like the locusts go together in great troops, singing the sonnet of
their prosperity, leap and delight in idleness, enter the meadows, green
pastures, and eat up all the green things? Who sees not bow they incroach
upon us as the Sea upon the earth, when it has eat thorough the banks, as a
fire upon the town when it has once fired one house, as the frogs on the Land
of Egypt till they made it stink? Exodus 8.6, 14.
Besides who hears not the bla^phemies and hideous swearings who sees not
the swinish drunkenes, the matchles pride? who hears not of the whoredoms
and fornicacions among us, of the strange contempt of the Gospel, by all which
the name of God is blasphemed, Romans 2.24. yet who almost regards this, whose
eyes gush out as David, did? Psalm. 119.136. Whose countenance us sad as
Nehemiahs was? Neh. 2.3, 4. Who rend his garment and his Mantle as Ezra did?
Ezr. 9.3. If but the hemme of our own garment be touched, but the least spot
of disgrace cast on us, we are much displeased, disquieted; but who lays to
heart the dishonor done to God? If men may keep up their own Dagon, they care
not what become of the Lord's Ark, 1 Samuel 5.4, 5. If their Ship may row in a
secure haven, they care not if the Ship of the Church sink in a storm, Amos
6.6. If they may be rich, they care not though the Church be poor, if they may
be crowned with the earthly glory, they care not who take the crown of Gods
praise from him; like Gallio, they care for none of these things, if they may
be at ease in Syon, Amos 6.1, 6. Whereby it is manifest, that they are not Gods
Children, for a good Child seeks his Fathers honor more than his own, that
they are not the spouse of Christ, for the Wife is grieved to see her Husband
dishonored, that they love not the Lord Jesus, delight not in the Gospel, seek
not that honor which comes from God, but that which comes from men: were it
otherwise, the loss of their own peace, plenty, revenew, praise would not be
so offensive to them, as to see God dishonored; but as these men grieve not to
see God dishonored, forbear not to rob him of his praise, so the time is at
hand wherein God will cover them with shame, 1 Samuel 2.30. Ezekiel. 28.2. to 9.
Dan. 5.22, 23, 24. 1 Samuel 2.29.

2. Therefore this must occasion every one of us neglecting our own selves,
thoughts, ends, to seek the honor and the glory of our God, and give the Lord
the praise due to his name, let this be the prime desire of our Souls, Psalm.
71.8. Let us long after this as much as ever Rahel did after Children, Genesis 30
1. And as we are or will make it appear that we are the Children of God, so
let us set our whole hearts, and all our strength to glorify him, for this does
God challeng by virtue of our sonneship, and his own dominion, Mal. 1.6. and
this let us make the choice of our endeavors, Mat. 6.33. this let us value
before our own life, Joh. 12.27, 28. yea, let us desire life chiefly for this
end, Psalm. 118.17. and unto this let us frame all the abilities we do enjoy,
whether inward or outward, Prove. 3.9. Let every talent be employed to the
advantage of our great Lord and Master, let every creature become a string to
sound out Gods praise, Psalm. 113.1, 2. Let soul and body, like well yoaked
oxen draw in this yoke, let all the members of the one, and all the faculties
of the other, like an army of well trained soldiers fight these battles, let
the heart in thinking, the will in chosing, the affections in embracing, the
eye in seeing the ear in hearing, the hand in working, the tongue in speaking,
the foot in walking aim at the honor of God, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psalm 103.1, 2. thus we shall answer Gods goodness, Isa. 43.20. shall
have honor in the eyes of Gods Servants, 2 Samuel 6.22. so shall we accomplish
the end, for which God has delivered us, 1 Cor. 16.35. rejoice in Gods
presence, 1 Cor. 16.28, 29, 33. So shall we show our thankfulness for his
mercies, so shall it appear that we have been sensible of his goodness toward
us, mindful of the vows we made in our distresses, Psalm 66.2, 11 12, 13. So
shall we be sure of honor, when others are buried under the dust of ignominy,
so shall the clouds of all our disgrace be turned unto a bright and shining
Sun, our dunghill into a palace, our wilderness into a paradise, our thorney
into a golden crown, Isa 58.13, 14. Though we are now as a desolate widow,
yet we shall be the spouse of Christ, Isai. 62.3, 4, 5. and so here.

VERSE 29.
IT has ever been usual with Christ, the Prophets, Apostles, and all the
Agents, whom the Lord has used for the edification of his Church, by
similitudes drawn from things temporal and earthly to express, unfold, and
lay open things spiritual and heavenly; because hereby the nature, and use of
such things is plainly unfolded, clearly perceived, firmly remembered, the
judgment is informed, the conscience convinced, the faith established, the
affections most warmed, even the shallowest capacities left excuseles;
therefore the Baptist having labored to cure the error of his Disciples,
acquanted them with the pre-eminence of our Savior above them; that there
might no scruple remain, he expresses the whole matter by a common
similitude, likening the Church to a spouse, our Savior to the Bridegroom or
Husband of the Church, and himself to the Bridegroomes friend, therein
plainly showing, that not he but Christ was the head of the Church, that not
to him, but to Christ must the Church be gathered, and that it his joy to see
men by the Word of Christ, the Ministry of the Gospel converted, as the friend
rejoices to see the spouse joined in wedlock to the Bridegroom whom he loyeth.

Wherein we may more particularly observe. I. The near and sweet relation
between Christ and the faithful, he is the Bridegroom and they the Bride. II.
The affection between Christ and his Ministers, they are his friends. III.
Their office, as a friend persuades the spouse to join herself in wedlock
to the Bridegroom, so do Gods Messengers persuade men to convert and turn to
God. IV. Their commission, they speak not of themselves, but they stand and
hear what the Lord will say to them. V. The joy they have in searching out,
and publishing the tidings of life and salvation, he rejoices to hear the
voice of the Bridegroom. VI. The singular comfort they take in seeing their
labors succesfull, in beholding many to turn unto God; his joy is full: from
the first we learn.

Christ Jesus; this is promised, Hos. 2.19. This is a title by which the Lord,
for the comfort of his Church, styles himself, Isa. 54.5. and the Ministry of
the Gospel, by which this spiritual marriage is wrought, is termed a
marriage feast, Mat. 22.2, 3. And the Apostle expresses it by the marriage
between a man and his wife, Ephesians. 5.23, 30. And Solomon in his song of the
marriage between Christ and the Church, does very familiarly thus express the
Union, and near conjunction between them, Cant. 1.14, 15, 16. Cant. 2.3, 4. and
Psalm. 45.10, 11. And fitly is our Savior likened to a Husband.

1. For his Dominion over the Church; as the Husband is the head of the Wife,
so is Christ the head of the Church, 1 Cor. 11.3. and Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians. 5.23.
He is a head over all in regard of all creatures, in regard of his absolute
Dominion, as the King is head over all living within his Kingdom, subjects and
rebels, the Master head over all within his family, whether they love or hate
him, so Col. 2.10. But Christ is after a more sweet comfortable and gracious
manner the head of his faithful people, as the Husband is the head of the
Wife, not swaying by tyranny, but ruling by love.

2. In regard of his love as a Husband does his Wife, so Christ does love his
Church, Ephesians. 5 25. Jonathans love was never greater to David than the love of
Christ to his Church, it is a great love, a strong love, an everlasting love,
Joh. 13.1.

3. In regard of his care, as the Husband takes care for the wife, so does
Christ take care for the Church, he is a keeper that does never sleep, a
Master of a family that is ever thinking of doing good to his people, he is
never weary of seeking their welfare, Isai. 42.11. Isai. 32.2. Mal. 3.16.17.

4. In regard of his presence among them, as the Husband with the Wife, it is
his promise, Mat. 28.20. Their heart is his throne, Ephesians. 3.17. and they are
said to be brought into the Kings Chambers, Cant. 1.4. and he has given them
his Word, Isa. 45.1, 2. Psalm. 76.2

5. In regard of his directions, as the Husband gives counsel and direction
to the Wife, so does Christ to the the Church, as the Sun in the Firmament
gives light to the inferior parts of the World, so Christ the Son of
righteousness gives light to his Church, Joh. 1.9. Without him we set in
darkness, Mat. 4.16. It is he does guide our feet into the way of peace, Luc.
1.79. he Joh. 1.18. Col. 2 2, 3. and Matthew. 11.17. therefore Mat. 17.5.

6. In regard of his Union with the Church, as the Husband is one with the
Wife, no more twain but matrimonially one flesh, Mat. 19.6. so are Christ and
his Church mystically one, Ephesians. 5.30. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. By virtue whereof we
have a most glorious condition, Psalm. 8.4, 5. Angels for our attendants, Heb.
1.14. an entrance into heaven, we do already in part possess it, Ephesians. 2.6.
Ioh. 5.24. an assurance of sufficient supply of all things, Joh. 1.16.

7. In regard of the many gifts which he bestows upon the Church, as the
Husband bestows gifts upon the Wife; so does Christ on his Church, he led
captivity Captive, and gave gifts to men, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. as Ezekiel. 16 6. as
Luc. 15.19, 20, 22. so 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. sonneship with God, Ioh. 1.12. interest
to all that Adam lost, 1 Cor. 3.21. freedom from the bondage of Satan and our
own corruption, Joh. 8.36. access to the throne of grace, Romans 5.1, 2. peace
with God, Ephesians. 2.14. and such as 1 Cor. 2.9, 11.

8. In regard of making the Church fruitful, as the Wife without the Husband
is barren, so is the Church without Christ, Joh. 15.5 as a desolate wilderness,
as a womb shut up; but by our conversion to Christ, and conjunction with him we
become as a vineyard, sown with much seed, as a Mother of many Children,
plentiful in the grace of the Spirit, Isai. 54.1, 2, 3.

And the Church is filty resembled to a Wife.

1. In regard of her subjection, as the Wife is subject to the Husband; so must
the Church be subject unto Christ in all things, Ephesians. 5.24. she must not live
as she list, make laws of her own, forget like a harlot the guide of her
youth, but she must follow Christ, Mat. 17.5. He has all authority and power
given him, all is made subject to him.

2. In regard of affection, as the Wife loves the Husband, so must our hearts
adhere to Christ, he must be in our eye the fairest of ten thousand, we must be
sick of love, Cant. 5.10. so love him as to leave all for him, Psalm. 45.10,
11. Luc. 18.28. Mat. 10.39.

3. In regard of chaste reservation of our selves, as the Wife must reserve her
self for her Husband, so must the Church reserve herself from all others,
from seducers, from the world, from the devil, from the flesh, Mat. 4.10. The
want of this much provokes God, and breeds grievous afflictions, Hos. 2.6, 7.

Christ the Husband of his Church, is he joined in spiritual wedlock with
them? then this may assure all Gods faithful servants, that Jesus Christ does
bear a singular love, and fervent affection to them, a love that passes the
love of women, as David said of Ionathans love, a love most sweet, most
pleasant, most wonderful, a love wherewith we cannot but be much affected, if
we look

1. Upon the order of it, Christ loved us first, as the air heated by the Sun
is hot; so Christ loves us, before we love him, 1 Ioh. 4.19. The savor of his
good ointments in our nostrill draw love from us, Cant. 1.2. He seeks us as a
Shepherd the straying Sheep, Isai. 65.1. He woeth and inviteth us before we
think of coming to him, Matthew. 22.4.

2. The freedom of his love, there was nothing in us why he should love us, we
were void of all spiritual beauty and comelines, a barren wilderness, an
unsavory carcass, a garden altogether overspread with weeds, unworthy of any
love, deserving all hatred, Ezekiel. 16.6. therefore Hos. 14.4, 5. Romans 5.8.

3. Upon the truth of his love, he did not love in word and in tongue only,
but in heart and in deed also, his love was not a painted but a real fire, not
an empty well, but a full stream, he loved us not for any by or base end, but
for our good, for Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Ioh. 15.13.

4. The quality of his love, it is a pure and heavenly love, a love fastnying
it self chiefly upon the Soul, a love respecting our spiritual and
everlasting good, a love causing him to sanctify us, to make us vessels of
honors, to wash away the Leprosy of our Souls in the Jordan of his blood, Tit.
3.4, 5.

5. The quantity or measure of his love; it was not a little sparkle, a small
stream, but a fire of much wood, a strong flood, a love that cannot be
paralelled, Joh. 10.11. Joh. 15.13.

6. The continuance of his love, it is not like a morning dew that soon
vanishes; like a fire in straw which soon extinguisheth, Hos. 6.4.
like a tree of no roots that quickly withers, but the love of Christ is a
constant love; like a living fountain always flowing, a Sun never setting,
the fire on the Altar always burning, a love more permanent than the
mountains, Isa. 54.10. for Jerem. 31.3. and Joh. 13.1.

7. The fruits of his love, no such grapes grow on any vine, no such flowers as
these in any garden, no Bridegroom bestows such rich tokens of love as
Christ does on his spouse, Ezekiel. 16.9, 10, 11. In his love he raises us out of
the grave of sin to a new life, Ephesians. 2.5. as he raised Lazarus, Joh. 11.44.
In his love he makes us conquerours, Romans 8.37. In his love he has made
himself a Sacrifice to God for us, Ephesians. 5.2. In his love he has reconciled
us to God, given us interest in all good things, filled us with much
consolation, 2 These. 2.16. Washed us from our sin, Tit. 3.4, 5. Rev. 1.5, 6.
The consideration of all which should much affect our hearts, like a burning
Sun melt away the icy coldness which is within us, like a powerful lodestone,
it should draw our hearts again to love him, like a musical instrument
sweetly tuned, it should much affect us, like sweet wine it should make our
hearts cheerful, and fill us abundantly with love again to him.

Christ is their Husband, loves them most entirely, and therefore will surely
be avenged on them that wrong them, as a Husband on him that abuses his Wife,
as David, 1 Samuel 30.17. so will the Lord discover his indignation against them
that abuse his people, therefore likened to a jealous man, Zach. 1.14, 15. he
will plead the cause of his people, Isai. 51.22, 23. as Sampson, Iud. 15.7, 8.
so will God on them that wrong such at have betrothed themselves to him, they
are dear to God, Zach. 2.8 they are his Jewels, Mal. 3.17. He will not endure
that to be abused and cast into the dirt: they are his flock he is their
Shepherd, Psalm. 80.1. and as 1 Samuel 17.34, 35. so will God deal with them
that prey upon the lambs of his fold, thus Pro. 11.8. though the Lord let them
alone for awhile to correct and humble his people, yet as the Goldsmith
extinguisheth the fire, when the Gold has been thoroughly purged, so will God,
Isai. 10.12. Though the Lord spare till their sin be ripe, yet at length as
Isai. 13.8. so though they are as a rod to scourge Gods people, yet the Lord at
length will break them in pieces, Isa. 14 5, 6, 7. thus Ier. 30.16, 17. as
Adoni-bezek said, Iud. 1.7. so shall wicked men say at last, as I have dealt
with Gods people, so has the Lord dealt with me, Zech. 1.18, 19, 20. They
that cast the three Children into the fire were burned, they that caused Daniel
to be cast into the Lions den, were themselves devoured of the Lions, Dan.
3.22. Pharaoh that pursued Israel was swallowed in the red Sea, Dan. 6.24.
Therefore let every man take heed how he reach his hand, or open his mouth
against the people of God, Exo. 14. how he touch the Lords anointed, or do his
Prophets any harm, 1 King. 13.4. Psalm. 105.15.

Christ, to yield an internal, external, universal, cheerful, hearty, and
spiritual obedience unto him, as a careful and respective wife to the
Husband, not as a slave to a tyrant, not as a servant to his Lord, but as a
Wife to the Husband, as a son to the father with love, and cheerfulnes, this
is the commendation of the Romans, Romans 6.17. the property of Gods people,
Psalm. 110.3. has gracious acceptance, 1 Samuel 15.22. a blessed recompense, Job
36.11, 12.

2. To love him entirely, fervently, incessantly, above all creatures, with all
the powers of our Souls and bodies, Mat. 22.37. None must be so dear to us, as
Christ, our love to him must be as a stream of much water, as a chimney having
a great fire, Mat. 10.37.

3. To delight in him, as the Bride in the Bridegroom, to esteem and rejoice
in him, more than in all the World, thus Phil. 3.8. and this he gave in charge,
Phil. 4.4. thus Cant. 2.3. Psalm. 94.19. to this they are invited, Isai 55.1, 2.

4. To depend upon him firmly, as upon a sure friend, a firm foundation, a
never failing rock, his ability, his faithfulness, his love invite us hereunto,
they that trust in him shall never fail, Ier. 17.6, 7. their undertakings
shall be succesfull, 2 Cor. 20.20. their consciences shall be full of joy and
peace, Romans 15.13. their is not another on whom we may repose our selves, Ioh.
6.68.

5. To rest our selves contented with him as the Wife with the Husband, not
joining any corrivals with him, though we have nothing besides, yet having him,
we have enough, as Elkana said to Anna, 1 Samuel 1.8.

Jacob thou art mine, Isai. 43.1. Gods interest and propriety in his servants
must support them in all dangers, encourage them in all fears, assure them of
a happy passage out of all troubles, be unto them as the honycomb in the belly
of Sampsons Lion, as water out of the rock to Israel, Iud. 14. Exo. 17.11.
they may upon good ground say with the Psalmist, though they be poor and
needy, and Psalm. 40.17. but more particularly the near Union between Christ
and them may comfort them:

1. In regard of reproach, though the World despise there, as Rahel despised
bleare-eyed Leah, though in their eye they be black, Cant. 1.4. and like the
tents of Kedar void of beauty, as a garden without flowers, as a tree without
leaves and blossoms, a face without comeliness, looked on as signs and
wonders, Isai. 8.18. esteemed as the dung and offscouring of all things, as of
all men the most miserable; yet Jesus Christ is their Husband, the Prince of
the Kings of the earth has joined himself in wedlock with us, 1 Cor. 4.13. 1
Cor. 15.19. we are all glorious within, comely in his eyes, fair as the Moon,
and clear as the Sun, Cant. 6.10. No estate so honorable as the estate of Gods
people, none in the eyes of men more despicable, none in the eyes of God more
beautiful, in the eyes of men they are like the Pelican in the wilderness, etc.
Ps. 102.6, 7. in the eyes of God as the beautiful Doves, Cant. 2.14. Though
they seem black as scullions, whose lodging is in the chimneys, yet Ps. 68.13.
they shall be beautiful, let the honor that God affords us sustain us
against all the dishonor, that man can cast upon us, let the crown of glory,
which God has provided for us, cause us patiently to wear the crown of
thorns, which wicked men do put upon our head; Rev 2.17. Let the new name that
God has given us, cause us contentedly to endure the casting out of our name
as abominable among men, let our Union with God enable us to endure a
separation from men, Luke 6.22. for how contemptible soever we are in the eyes
of men, yet Isa. 62.3, 4 therefore Isa. 51.7, 8.

2. In regard of enemies hating us, advancing themselves against us, insulting
over us, the Lord Jesus he is our Husband, he is a faithful friend, he will be
a wall of fire about us in stead of all munition to defend us, to destroy them
that rise against us; a wall round about us, no place shall be undefenced, and
this he will be for ever, Psa. 125.2. and he will not only be a defense, but a
glory to us, Zach. 2.5. He will appoint salvation for walls and bulwarks, he
will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on him, Isa. 26 1, 3. He
will be a sure foundation, bearing up all that are builded on ^im, a victorious
Captain of the Lord of hoasts, Ios. 5.14. make his people conquerours over all
that rise against them, Romans 8.37. he can easily subdue their adversaries,
Psalm. 29 The love of the Lord Jesus must weigh down the hatred of all enemies,
the light of the Kings face will countervale the frownings of many inferior
persons, the shining of the Sun comfort the traveller against the clouds
which hang over his head, thus Psa. 46.6, 7.

3. In regard of the failing of all earthly friends, though, these forsake us
and stand aloof off from us, as from men that have the pestilence, Psalm.
38.11. though they run from us as mice from the barn, when the Corn is gone,
as mariners from the ship, when it is broaken and begins to sink, though
they break the bands of nature in which they were tied to us, though our
familiar friends offer us the greatest injuries, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. though
they which have been lodged in the same womb with us contend against us, like
Esau against Jacob, Mat. 10. though their hands lay heavy burdens on us, whose
breasts have nourished us, whose knees have dandled us, Psalm. 27.10. Though
father and mother fail us; Yet Christ is our Husband, his love is
unchangeable, his friendship is a tree which never withers, a bow that never
starteth, a chain that never breaks, a Lamp that is ever full of Oil,
allway shining, the love of Christ is like the cruse of Oil that did not fail
with using, 1 King. 17.16. Like the shoes and garments of the Israelits, that
did not wax old with using, Deuteronomy. 29.5. Though Orpah went back yet Ruth clave
to Naomi, so though all thy friends go back from thee, yet Christ will still
cleave unto thee, Mat. 28.20. he will not be as a Liar, nor as waters that
fail, Ier. 15.18. but as Mat. 5.18. so the love of Christ is perpetual, Isai.
9.6. Isai. 54.8.

4. In regard of barreness in grace, though we are as a woman of dry breasts, a
field wherein is little Corn, as a tree wherein is a small portion of fruit;
yet here is comfort, Christ Jesus is our Husband, he can, if we be instant with
him, he will make as fruitful in the grace of the Spirit: as the Lord opened
the womb of Sarah, Genesis 18.10. when the time was past in the course of nature,
Ps. 113.9. and makes the barren woman the mother of many Children, so can ke
make us fruitful in all holiness, like trees planted by the water side, Psalm.
1.3. like an orchard of pomegranats, Cant. 4.13.

5. In regard of remaining corruptions and imperfections; 1. If there be much
ignorance in us, and we see the things of God but darkly, as the man that had
his eyes opened did at the first see men as trees: The Lord Jesus is in the
bosom of his Father, Mar. 8.24. in him are all the treasures of wisdom, Joh.
1.18. and he is our Husband, therefore he will instruct us more perfectly, Col.
2.3. In his School we shall learn wisdom, he will give us his Spirit, Ioh.
14.26. he will open the Scriptures, Luc. 24.32. He will give us pastors to feed
us with knowledge, Ier. 3.14, 15. and Luc. 1.77. he will open the sealed book,
Rev. 5.2. 2. If we be weak in faith Christ will strengthen us and make us
strong in faith like Abraham, Romans 4.20. Cause us like trees to be rooted in
faith, Col. 2.7. he will mightily persuade us Romans 8.37, 38. 3. If we find our
Souls like a diseased body annoyed with sin, as with a strong disease, Jesus
Christ is a Physician, he will heal us, Hos. 6.1. If our consciences be
burdened, he will ease us, Mat. 11.28. Isai. 61.1, 2. as Mat. 8.25, 26.

6. In regard of perseverance, though Satan buffet us, though our corruption
like a heavy burden press us down, though the World hang like birdlime about
the wings of our Souls; Though we sometimes think and are ready to say of sin
and Satan as David did of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. I. Yet let us remember we are
married unto Christ Jesus, and that for ever, Hos. 2.19. there is no
dissolution of this wedlock, being in his hand we shall be held fast, Ioh. 10
28. We shall be kept by the power of God unto everlasting life, 1 Pet. 1.5.
Satan may win now us, but Christ will not suffer our faith to fail, Luke
22.32. the Ship of our Souls may be shaken, but it shall not sink, we may
receive many wounds in the battle, but yet we shall have the conquest, as 2
Cor. 4.8, 9.

The next thing is the affection which Christ does bear unto his messengers, he
calls them his friends; the friend of the Bridegroom: a friend is one whom
we do entirely love above others, and use more familiarly and privately than we
do others, as David did Jonathan, and of such a friend Solomon says, Prove.
18.24. A friend of God is one to whom God imparteth his mind and secrets, so
familiarly and fully, as one friend does to another, Genesis 18.17. and the
Apostles, Ioh. 15.15. and thus does the Baptist style himself the friend of
Christ, noting the love which Christ did bear unto him, and the understanding
which he had of Gods will and counsel, whence,

Christ Jesus does bear a singular love to his faithful Ministers. II. Gods
faithful Ministers are after a peculiar manner acquainted with Gods Counsels.
III. Every faithful Minister of God is an unfeigned friend unto God. First of
the first of these, Christ Jesus does bear a singular love unto his faithful
Ministers; this appears plainly. I. By the place wherein see has set them,
made them his Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. stars in his right hand, Rev.
2.20. his mouth, Ier. 15.19. keeper of his vineyard, Cant. 8.11. steward of his
family, 1 Cor. 4.1. The nurses of his Children, 1 These. 2.7. II. By the trust
he commits to them, the instruction, conversion, edification, salvation of
his people, hence are they called Fathers, 1 Cor 4.15. Saviors, Obad, verse.
21. 1 Timothy 4.16. builders, 1 Cor. 3.9. watchmen, Heb. 13.17. Shepherds having
the custody of Gods flock, Ezekiel. 34.4, 6. the charge to feed Gods people, Ioh
21.17. III. By the service they do him like Soldiers, they lead his armies,
fight his battles, subdue sin and Satan his enemies, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Cor.
10.5. Isa. 49.2. Psalm. 45.4, 5. Like Husbandmen they root up the thorns and
briars in the Lords vineyard, break up the fallow ground of men's hearts, sow
therein the seed of Gods Word, plant trees of righteousness, and like good
Husbandmen bring much fruit unto the Lord, Ier. 1.10. 1 Cor. 3.6. Like
Shepherds they gather home the lost Sheep to Gods fold. Like Fishermen by the
draw-net of the Gospel they draw the Souls of men out of the gulf of sin. IV.
By the acception of the wrongs done unto them, he takes it as done to
himself, as a King takes the wrongs done to his Ambassador as done to
himself, Luke 10.16. Exodus 16.8. V. By the care he has to defend them, the
arm stretched out against them shall wither, 1 Ki. 13.4. the tongues which
mock them shall not go unpunished, 2 King. 2.24. 2 Cor. 36.16. and it is the
Lords promise, Ier. 15.19, 20, 21. VI. In regard of the recompense provided for
them, their love and labor shall not be in vain, they that strive lawfully
shall have the prize, 2 Timothy 2.3. their work is with the Lord, Isai. 49.4. as
they shine by their Doctrine and conversation now, so shall they shine
hereafter, Dan. 12.3. VII. In regard of the love they bear unto him, Joh.
21.16. a love which makes them industrious in their callings, 2 Cor. 5.14.
joyful to see men convert unto the Lord Jesus, 1 These. 2.19, 20. ready to lay
down their life, Acts 20.24.

Jesus, to order themselves in such manner, that the Lord may still continue a
friend unto them, as, men near about earthly Princes, enjoying the favor of
their Sovereign are careful to keep, so must we by our holy walking, sincere
faithful and frequent, teaching be careful to keep the favor of the Lord
Jesus. II. This must encourage them to bear the hatred of wicked men, because
the Lord is their friend, to be patient in the bearing the difficulties of
their calling, the Lord will recompense them.

Christ is a friend, this is required, These. 5.13. not an ordinary but a
singular love, a peculiar honor and respect, 1 Timothy 5.17. and surely there is
great cause, for I. These are your spiritual parents, by whom you are begotten
again to God, raised out of the grave of sin to a new life, John 5.25. II.
These are the instruments, by whom we are enabled to behold the great things of
the Law of God, these are the lights of the World, Mal. 2.7. these are as the
fiery Pillar to Israel, Exo. 13.21. as the star to the Wisemen, Mat. 2.10.
III. These are the Lords Champions, by whom we are delivered out of sin and
Satan's bondage, these are the Priests, who by sounding the Trumpet of the
Gospel cast down the walls of Jericho, 2 Cor. 10.5. Ios. 6.20 Luc. 10.10. Per
ipsos Christum induimus per ipsos dei filio conjungimur per ipsos membra beati
ipsius capitis efficimur: quomodo ergo isti nobis non solum reverendi magis
quam Reges aut Judices: sed etiam nobis magis erunt honorabiles quam parents.
Chryso. de dignitat. sacerdot. l. 2.
who by the thunder of the Word threw Satan down like lightning. IV. These are
the Messengers who bring glad tidings of peace, that come like Noah's dove with
an Olive branch, Romans 10.15. These are the cisternes by which God conveyeth the
waters of life to the Souls of his people, the Word of in God their mouth is
the power of God unto salvation, these are Gods Angels, Rev. 1.20. and
Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. Christ Jesus, Gal. 4.14. they must be to
us the choice, and most welcome men in the World, as one of a thousand, Job
33.23. As the light to the traveller, as the counselor to the client, as the
Pilot to the Ship, our guides and instructours in the way of life and true
holiness, for according to the second observation,

Gods faithful Ministers are after a peculiar manner acquainted with Gods
Counsels, as a bosom friend is acquainted with the counsels and purposes of
his friend, so are the faithful messengers of God after a peculiar manner
acquainted with Gods will and counsel; therefore called Ambassadors, 2 Cor.
5.20. an Ambassador knows the Kings mind and counsel; called the light of
the World, Mat. 5.14. the stars in the right hand of Christ, Rev 1 16. to
show, as these are filled with light for ruling the day and night, Genesis 1.16.
So are Gods Messengers replenished with divine and heavenly knowledge, Job
33.23. Who for this end are also. I. Called interpreters for the evident and
plain unfolding of the mind of God contained in his Word, Genesis 29.10. As Jacob
rolled away the stone, opened the Wells which were shut up, that so the sheep
might drink, so do these open the sacred Fountains of living Water, and by
the bucket of their wisdom do draw waters out of the Wells, which are deeper
than the Well of Jacob. II. By their nearness unto God, they are his mouth, Je.
15.19. His fellow laborers, 1 Cor. 3.9. his stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. III. By the
place wherein he has set them, he has made them as eyes to the body, Cant.
7.4. As watchmen to the city, Jsai. 62.6. as guides to the blind, Romans 2.19. as
Physicians to the sick, Ier. 6.14. IV. By the charge given to the people, to
attend to their Doctrine, to seek the knowledge of the truth from them, as
water from a full Fountain, Mal. 2.5, 6, 7. And that they should be thus
acquainted with Gods counsel is very behoofull.

1. In regard of the high and heavenly nature of the Scriptures, which they
must unfold, these are like Sampsons riddle, of that difficulty, that they
cannot be opened, unles we plow with Gods heifer, a storehouse, whole lock
and door cannot be unlocke without Gods key, a light which cannot be beheld
with a humane eye, a treasure which cannot be dug up with the hand of humane
abilities, this is a wisdom no where to be learned but in the School of
Christ, an ability which cannot be attained but by the peculiar work of Gods
Spirit; Sapientissimum esse oportet and perspicacem in omnibus sacerdotem, and
mill ut dicitur ex omni part oculos babentem, says Chrystome, and this
another calls, ars artium, scientia scientiarum, and Augustine, tanta est
Christianarum pofunditas literarum, ut in eis quotidie proficerom, si eas
solas, ab ineunte pueritia, usque ad decrepitam senectutem maximo otio, summo
studio, meliori ingenio conarer addiscere, etc. Therefore the Apostles must
stay at Jerusalem till the Holy Ghost were given: Luc. 24.49.
the deepest counsels of men are but a shallow brook to this foord, as Prove.
18.4. so much more are the Words of Gods mouth, and as Prove. 20.5. so he must
be a man of understanding, who will draw out these waters, for 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. In regard of the wiles of Satan, his devices are deep, Rev. 2.24. not a
shallow but a deep water, 2 Cor. 2.11. the ways of sin and Satan are as Agur
said in another case, Prove. 30.18, 19. they have need of more than Eagles eyes,
who shall trace them out, Rev. 12.9.
he is an old Serpent, full of subtilty, experience has added much to his
natural policy, the Shepherd has need of much wisdom that shall keep his
flock from this Lion, the guide must have his eyes open, look circumspectly
about him that will keep the feet of them that are conducted free from this
snare, he must be a wise General, who will perserve his Spuldiers from the
arrows of this warrior, none but Gods counsel can give us this wisdom.

3. In regard of the craft and subtlety of Satan's instruments, he does not
chose the foolish, but the Serpent the wisest of the beasts, Genesis 3.1
he takes not babes but the Wisemen, the great disputers of the earth, 1 Cor.
1.18, 26, 27. Absolon has Achitophel whose counsel was as the Oracles of God.
The adversaries of Gods truth, the men, whom Gods Messengers must encounter
with do take crafty counsel, Psalm. 83.3. they hide their wolvish nature under
a sheep skin of fair pretenses, Matthew. 7.15. their dark and diabolical
intendments under a white, an innocent, and angelical appearance, 2 Cor.
11.14. therefore likened to foxes the subtilest among beasts, Luc. 13.32. Cant.
2.15. Unto merchants, none of the weakest reach among men, 2 Pet. 2.3. to men
for their wisdom, to women for their faculty in alluring, to horses prepared
to the battle for their courage, to Lions for their cruelty, to Scorpions for
their poisoning the Souls of men with false Doctrine, Rev. 9.7, 8, 9, 10. To a
Leopard. I. For their variety of heresies, superstitions, traditions, resembled
by the Leopards spots. II. For their pleasures honors, riches, voluptuous
living, easy attaining of life eternal, art of drawing many to them resembled
by the sweet smell of the Leopard. III. For their speed and swiftnes in
executing their plots, in spreading their Doctrines, likened by the swift
motion of the Leopard. IV. For their malignant disposition against Gods people,
as the Leopard flies upon man, pulls out his eyes; so do these keep the
people in blindness, rob their bodies of their temporalls, and their Souls of
their Spiritualls, they are also likened to the feet of a bear for their
fast-holding of what they get, Rev. 13.2. and 2 These. 2.9, 10. To encounter
with such enemies, so furnished as these, there is need of much wisdom, need
of being well acquainted with Gods counsel.

4. In regard of the difficulty of discerning men's foul-diseases, sinful men
dig deep to hide their sin, Isai. 29.15. as Achan hid his golden wedge, Ios.
7.22. they keep their sin close as Rahel sat fast upon her Fathers Idols, Genesis
31.34. and Ier. 17.9. this is a thief which we shall never find out by a Candle
of our own kindling, a disease which will never be healed by a medicine of our
own making, like the evil Spirit which would not go out by the Sons of
Sheva's conjuring, but Ier. 23.22. therefore Cant. 7.4. The teachers of the
people are likened to a tower for their vigilance, to a tower of Ivory for
their purity, to eyes for their understanding, to Fishpooles for the letting of
the people to see the face the quality of their estates, for watering them with
the Doctrine of life and salvation, to a nose like the Tower of the Lebanon for
their judgment in finding out the sins, and discerning the states of the
people, as men discern smells by their nostrils.

5. In regard of the weakeness of men's capacities, they cannot conceive the
things of God unles we plainly unfold them, rightly, and powerfully apply
them, they cannot walk in this path unles we guide them, Acts 8.31. they are
Children and we must draw forth the breasts of the Scripture to them, they are
ignorant and know not the sound of this music, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. 1 Cor. 15.7, 8.
1 Timothy 5.18.
unles we give the distinction, they cannot feed on the Corn in these ears,
before the Ministers of God, like the ox do tread it out: Therefore in these
and such like respects, it is very needful that every faithful Minister
should be after a peculiar manner acquainted with Gods counsel.

of God, and have not after a peculiar manner acquaintance with Gods counsels,
are altogether unfit for the Ministerial function, the blind are unfit to lead
the way, descry the snares, foresee the thiefs, forewarne their followers of
ensueing dangers, dissuade them from the crooked, encourage them in the right
way, a lantern without light is unusefull, a Lamp that has no Oil is
unprofitable, ignorance in them that possess the place of Ministers, does not
only make them unprofitable, but also very perilous to the people, as an
ignorant Physician to the patient, an unskilful Pilot to the Ship, Mat. 15.14.
II. They have no approbation in Gods sight, Hos. 4.6. (Considera says Jerome)
sacerdotis esse officium de lege interrogantes respondere: si sacerdos est,
sciat legem Domini: si ignorant legem Domini, ipse se arguit non esse sacerdotem
Domini, sacerdotis est enim scire legem and ad interrogationem respondere de
lege: A blind eye is as no eye, an empty well is as no well, cathedra non facit
sacerdotem, sed sacerdos cathedram, non locus sanctificat hominem, sed homo
locum; Qui been sederit super cathedram honorem accipit ab illa, qui male
sederit injuriam facit cathedra, Chrysostom. in Mat. 23. III. These cannot descry
the cunning of Satan, the grovth of sin, the good from the bad any more than a
blind Watchman can see the coming of the enemy, a blind Gardener the increase
of the weeds, or a blind Shepherd the goats from the Sheep, he cannot
separate the precious from the vile, Ier. 15.19. Eze. 22.26. IV. The account of
these men at the last will be fearful, when they shall be constrained to
answer for all the Souls that have perished for want of instruction, these
cannot say as Paul, 1 These. 2.19. Acts 20.26. but as Ezekiel. 3.18. and such as
have Pastors not acquainted with Gods counsel, unable to inform them in the
way of life and salvation, are bound neither by the Laws of God nor godly men
to attend upon them, and whosoever does confine himself to them has no more
sure ground to expect salvation, than a Child depending upon my breast, having
no breasts.

Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. able to Minister a word in due season, Isa. 50.4.
Like a good steward bringing forth new and old out of his store, Luke 13.52.
Like a Lamp full of Oil giving much light of heavenly knowledge, 2 Cor. 4.6.
Like fountains full of these waters, as the Fishpooles of Heshbon, that so
they may refresh the wearied Souls of Gods people.

Ier. 3.15. to build them up in grace, to hew them, square them, and fit them
for the Lords building, 1 Cor. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.11. to guide them in the way
wherein they should walk, Luke 1.79. to resolve them when they are doubtful,
Mal. 2 7. to open to them the great things of Gods Law, Acts 10.33. to comfort
them when they are afflicted, Isai. 50.1, 2. to heal them when they are
wounded, Isai. 61.1, 3. Therefore come to these as Jacob to Egypt for
bread-corn, when there was a famine, as the men of Gibeon to Iosuah, when they
were beseidged by the Amorites, Genesis 42.1. as Israel to Moses when they were
stung by the fiery Serpents, Ios. 10.6. as the Children to the nurses ordained
to feed them, Neh. 21.6. Open your ears to their Doctrine, subject your necks
to the yoke of Gods precepts, Ephesians. 2.7. Follow their counsel with
cheerfulnes, and you shall find your Souls replenished with many sweet
consolations, and as themselves are, so will they cause you following their
counsels to become the friends of the Lord Jesus, and thus are we come to the
third observation.

Joh. 15.15. men after Gods own heart, Jer. 3.15. and Paul found his heart
cleaving unto God so firmly, that Romans 8.38. And every Minister must endeavor
to show himself the friend of Christ.

1. By walking in the steps of Christ, by being holy as Christ was holy, by
yielding sound obedience to his precepts, by shining in the integrity of his
conversations, this is the way to testify our love and friendship, 1 John 5.3.
and Joh. 15.14. He that lives ill is an enemy to the Lord Jesus, though he
preach well, the gall of bitterness is in his heart, though he seem to have a
honeycomb in his mouth. Like Judas, he betrayeth Christ by his ungodly
walking, while he seems by his Doctrine to give him a friendly salutation.

2. By their diligent, conscionable, faithful, and powerful preaching by
being instant in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. By dividing the word
aright giving every man his portion, 2 Timothy 2.^5. as Eccles. 11.2, 6. Taking
every opportunity, Gal. 6.10 going up and down doing good and teaching the
Servants of the Lord the way of God, making it their joy and their glory to
turn men from iniquity, 1 These. 2.19. 2 Cor. 1.11, 12.

3. By bearing contentedly all reproaches, by undergoing readily any loss, for
the honor of Christ, for the testimony of his truth.

4. By doing the duties of our calling with a willing and ready mind, 1 Pet.
5.2, 3. in love, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and as the Minister must in this manner show
themselves the friends of God; So must the people show themselves to be the
friends of Christ by attending on the Word diligently, receiving it thankfully,
subjecting to it patiently, readily, cheerfully, bringing forth the fruit
thereof abundantly.

The Third thing
in the Verse was the Ministers office, as the friend of the Bridegroom
prepares a Bride for him, so do Gods Ministers persuade, prepare, and fit the
people to join themselves, in a Holy wedlock to Christ Jesus.

Christ Jesus, as Abraham's Servant sought a Wife for his Son Isaac, made an
oath to be faithful, praying for good speed, Genesis 24.9, 12. gave the Woman
bracelets and a golden earering, verse. 22. would not eat till he had done his
errant, verse. 33. commended the riches of his Master, verse. 35.36. So must the
Ministers of the Lord, seek, woo and persuade men to join themselves unto
Christ in a spiritual marriage; Hence Paul says he had espoused the
Corinthians to one Husband, that he might present them as a chaste virgin unto
Christ, Mat. 22.1, 2, 3.
2 Cor. 11.2. and the Ministry of the Gospel compared to the marriage feast,
the Ministers unto Servants inviting men to the wedding, and by the use,
fruition, sense, and feeling of his Ordinances, the spouse was made sick of
love, and filled with vehement and earnest longings after Christ Jesus, Cant.
2.4. and this the Apostle shows to be their chiefest labor, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
and so they make it:

1. Because it brings much honor to God, as Prove. 14.28. So by the increase
of godly men, the bringing of many to yield ready and cheerful subjection
unto God, is the name of the Lord much honored: by this the Scepter of Christ
Jesus is erected in the hearts of men, Psalm. 52.10.
the Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles are constrained to bow before him, to
subject their necks to his yooke; to plow up the fallow ground of their hearts,
and to bring forth fruit unto God: by this they are brought to confess their
sin, and to give glory unto God, as Achan, did when the Lot was cast upon him,
Ios. 2.19. by this they are turned from Idols and wordly vanities to serve the
living God, 1 These. 1.9. by this their nature is changed, Isa 11.6. they are
made to be at peace with God, and among themselves; by this of a barren
wilderness, they are made a fruitful vineyard, Isai. 35.1, 2, 5, 6, 7.

2. Because it is very pleasing unto God, the returning of the prodigal was
delightful to his Father, Luc. 15, 20, 21.
as appears by the have he made to meet him, by the entertainment he gave
him; the bringing home of the lost sheep does much rejoice the Shepherd, so
the conversion of sinners is very pleasing unto God, Luc. 15.7. What the
bringing of many sheass into the barn is to the Husbandman; what the birth of
the Child is to the Mother, the same is bringing of many to the new birth, the
gathering home of many Souls into Gods garner, it is not the adorning of the
body with gold and silver, but the adorning of the heart, which is in the sight
of God of the greatest price, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. It is not the bestowing of much
riches upon men, but the making of them rich in the grace of the Spirit which
God respects.

3. Because this does bring the greatest ruin unto Satan's Kingdom, this like
a key opens the prison doors of sin, and brings forth the Souls of men to
liberty, as the Angel brought Peter out of prison, Act. 12.7. this overturneth
his strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.11. drives him from his former possession, Luc.
11.21. as the breaking of the pitchers, shining of the lights, with the cry of
the sword of the Lord and Gideon, put the Midianits to flight and gave freedom
to Israel, thus Isai. 9.4, 5.

4. Because this is most profitable for the people, this of dead does make them
new and living creatures, Joh. 5.25. of dry trees does make them like trees
planted by the waters side, Psalm. 1.3. of barren Souls it makes them
fruitful, like a Mother of many Children, Isai. 54.1. of a desolate and
forsaken people, it brings them to a holy fellowship and honorable Communion
with Christ Jesus by working faith in them, Ephesians. 1.13. By separating them
from profane persons, like sheep from goats, Chafe from Corn, Mat. 3.12. Ier.
23.29.

Christ, do separate them from Christ, in stead of drawing the hearts of men
unto God, and to the love of holy duties, do like Absolon steal away the
hearts and affections of men from delight in the works of sanctification, from
subjection unto Gods precepts, 2 Samuel 15.6. Some, like the false Apostles, seek
to marry the people to themselves, not to Christ; seeking their own praise not
the honor of the Lord Jesus, as the Disciples of the Baptist would have had
their Master have taken the honor to himself, which was due to Christ; so
there are some Masters labor to make their Disciples give them the reverence,
obedience, praise, which is due to Christ alone, by making their sayings to be
a Law, an infallible ruse which must be followed, giving pre-eminence or
equalizing their traditions, and unwarranted Doctrines to the Scriptures,
exercising Lordship and tyranny over the faith and consciences of men, rather
than assisting them, contrary to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.24. and that of
our Savior, Mat. 23.8, 9, 10. as if they were authors, when they can be but
instruments, the fountain, when they must be like cisternes, conveying the
waters of life, which they receive from God; the Sun, when they must be but
stars in the right hand of Christ, shining in the light which they receive
from him, Ier. 6.14. II. Some draw others from Christ by their false Doctrine,
flattering them in their sin, speaking peace when there is no peace, healing
the disease of the people deceitfully, like an unfaithful Physician, Ezekiel.
13.10. daubing with untempered mortar like a deceitful builder, promising
liberty when themselves are the servants of sin, 2 Pet. 2.19. III. Some hinder
men from coming to Christ, harden them in sin, by opposing, and disgracing the
wholesome Doctrine, and gracious admonition given by their fellow brethren, by
sowing tares to choke the wheat, by withstanding like Elimas, Acts 17.18. Mat.
13.28.
Acts 13.8. by forbidding them to speak, Amos 7.10. by seeking to alienate the
hearts of the people from them, Gal. 4.17. by encouraging the people in evil,
1 King. 22.11, 12. IV. Some hinder men from coming to Christ by their silence,
they teach not the way of life and salvation, Amos 7.10.
they open not the danger of the natural man's estate, they acquaint not men
with the riches of Gods mercy, but Isai. 56.10, 11. A man that is both blind
and dumb is an unfit man to make a marriage, so they who are spiritually blind
and dumb are no way meet to persuade the people to join themselves in wedlock
unto Christ, they cannot open unto them the honor, peace, safety, and comfort
whereunto they shall be advanced; they cannot with powefull and invincible
arguments work upon and move their affections; they cannot make their words
pierce like goads, Eccles. 12.11. and cause the people to cry out, Acts 2.37.
They cannot give the knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 4.6. They cannot with Paul
espouse them, unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. but Jer. 10.21. V. Some hinder the
people by their profane walking, Ier. 23.14. As the people stood still when
they came to the place, where Ahasel, who went before them, fell down, 2 Samuel
2.23. So when the people see their leaders fall, they stand still, have no
heart to go forward in the way of life, this is a stumbling block, a snare, a
gulf, the Word is usually made unprofitable, when the conversation is profane
and carnal, good Doctrine and evil walking is like a yoke of oxen, the one
drawing forward, the other backward; Loquendi authoritas perditur, Nazienzen.
quando vox opere non adjuvatur.

Tim. 4.2. wherein it is that they ought chiefly to be employed, even in
reconciling men unto God; and to the end the Ministers may be able to
accomplish this great work, make this heavenly marriage between the Church, and
the son of the great King, they must do as Abraham's Servant did, when he went
to make a marriage for his Masters Son.

1. Abraham's Servant received instruction what he should do, Genesis 24.3, 4. So
must the Ministers of God receive instruction, be taught of God before they
become teachers of others: the Sun was filled with light before he became the
ruler of the day, the Sea with water, before it undertook the watering of the:
Luke 24.49.
earth the Apostles staid at Jerusalem, the Holy Ghost was poured down upon
them, before they went forth to preach the Gospel, the Lamp must be filled with
Oil before it can give light to others, Timothy know the Scriptures from a
Child, 2 Timothy 3.16. Paul had his eyes opened, Acts 9.^7. Isaiahs lips were
touched, Isai. 6.6. he had the tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4. Ier. 1.9. and
Mal. 2.7. whereas 2 Pet. 2.17.

2. Abraham's Servant made an oath to his Master to be faithful, Genesis 24.9. so
the Minister of the Lord must be faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. and 2 Timothy 2.2.
unfainedly seeking the glory of God, faithfully unfolding the whole counsel of
God, keeping back nothing either out of fear, fraud, or sloth, Acts 20.26, 27.

3. Abraham's Servant made supplication to God, that is journey might be
prosperous, Genesis 24.12. so must the Ministers of the Lord make fervent prayer
unto God for a blessing upon their endeavors, that the Word may be as seed
sown in good ground, Mat. 13.24. As the sword of Saul and bow of Jonathan
which returned not empty, 2 Samuel 1.22. As Moses rod to the Rock, turning the
stoney into a repenting heart, Exodus 17.6. As eye salve to the blind opening,
the eye of the understanding, Rev. 3.18. Deuteronomy. 32.2. As dew to the dry ground
causing it to flourish abundantly in the grace of the Spirit, thus Phil. 2.9,
10, 11. Col. 2.9. and Ephesians. 6.18.

4. Abraham's Servant left all other inployments and attended this; so must the
Minister of the Lord wholly employ himself in the duty of godliness, and the
work of his Ministry, 2 Timothy 2.4. This is a task requiring our best abilities,
our most serious thoughts, our whole time, therefore 1 Timothy 4.15. We must be
instant in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. take all opportunities, Isai.
62.5. be as vigilant to save as Satan to destroy the Souls of the people.

5. Abraham's Servant gave this employment the pre-eminence, he would not eat
till he had done this errand, Genesis 24.33. so must the Minister of God, leaving
all other business, attend his; follow it with all speed, with all care, with
all industry, neither pleasure nor profit must be an obstacle to it, but as all
men, Mat. 6.33. So especially the Ministers of the Lord must seek the Kingdom
of Christ, this must be their meat and drink as it was Christ's? Ioh. 4.34.

6. Abraham's Servant related the great riches of his Master, and how he had
given all to his Son Isaac, Genesis 24.35, 36. so must the Ministers of God
acquaint the people with the gloriousnes of Gods nature, the honorable
condition of Christ, the blessed estate they shall enjoy, the dignity whereunto
they shall be advanced, that so their hearts may be affected with Christ, lead
unto repentance by Gods goodness, and moved to join themselves in wedlock with
the Lord Jesus; To. 2.4.
greatness, riches, dignities prevail much in earthly marriages, a powerful
loadstone to move and draw affections, 2 Pet. 2.4.
all the excellencies in the World are in this Bridegroom; nothing can be
desired but it may be found here in perfection, therefore 1 Cor. 7.1. Romans
12.1, 2.

3. Is it the chiefest labor of the Minister to persuade the people to turn
to God, to join themselves in wedlock with Christ? do they cry day and might
for this, Isa. 62.3.
do they leave all other inployments to accomplish this work? Then this must
stir up the people to turn to God, to yield up themselves into the hands of
Christ, Romans 6.13. to give themselves unto God, 2 Cor. 8.5. and Romans 6.17. for
I. This is the chiefest end of the Ministry, the most comfortable use of the
word, even the reconciling of men to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. therefore called the
Ministry of reconciliation, verse. 18. as the special employment of an
Ambassador is to make peace, so is the special labor of Gods Ambassadors to
make peace between God and his Servants, 2 Cor. 5.20, 18.
therefore Acts 26.17, 18. II. This advances us to the highest dignity, this
makes us to be a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9. the spouse of Christ, fair
and beautiful as the great light of the World, Cant. 6.10. as the comeliest
person decked with the choicest ornaments, Cant. 1.1, 11. This incorporated us
into Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. this makes us citizens of the new Jerusalem, Ephesians.
2.19. this makes us Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. No such way to
honor as to leave the broad way of sin, and to set our feet in the way of Gods
cammandements, Romans 2.10. to sow in righteousness is the way to reap in mercy,
Hos. 10.12. Gal. 6.8: III. This brings us to the surest safety, the strongest
defense, this makes God to be a wall of fire, Zach. 2.5. this causes Christ,
Isai. 32.3. Job 22.23, 25. No walls are so sure for defense, no weapon so
succesfull for conquest as a godly conversation, a Holy Union with Christ, he
will bear us as an Eagle bears her young, Deuteronomy. 32.11. and Zach. 12.6, 7, 8.
We shall be as fire, and they as stubble, we shall be as the wind, and they as
the chafe, we shall be as a house builded on the rock, and they as the waves
of the Sea dashing themselves in pieces, with the great assaults which they
make against us. IV. This procures the truest and sweetest peace, this turns
the tossing and raging Sea of a troubled conscience into a pleasant calm. This
like Noah's dove brings an Olive branch of peace; like the Star to the Wise
men fills the heart with much joy and gladness, this uniteth us to the Prince
of peace, reconcileth us to the God of peace, makes our hearts the temples of
the spirit of peace, for Romans 5.1. and Ioh. 16.33. this is the fruit of
holiness, Romans 2.10. the attendant of an heavenly mind, To. 8.6. in this
stands the Kingdom of God, Romans 14.17. and of this, all that walk according
to the rule of Gods Word, shall infallibly participate, Gal. 6.16.

The 4th thing
is the Commission, the Ministers of God have before they do undertake this
calling, they go not of their own accord, but they stand and hear: they wait
upon God for instruction, they deliver not their own devices, but they wait
upon God for his counsel and direction.

Mat. 5.14. as the well with water, for Mal. 2.7. Deuteronomy. 32.2. as the General
with skill and valor, for 2 Timothy 2.3. as the Physician with art to discern
diseases, and to apply right remedies, Isa. 61.10. As nurses have milk in their
breasts, 1 These. 2.7. As Aaron was anointed, Exodus 29.21. So must the Ministers
be anointed with the grace of the Spirit, Jer. 1.5. as they must be furnished
with abilities, so their Doctrine must be warranted by the Scriptures, they are
Gods mouth, and therefore must not speak their own but Gods language, Ier.
15.19. Gods Ambassadors, and therefore must not deliver their own but Gods
message, 2 Cor. 5.19. furnished they must be with abilities.

1. Because the work they undertake, is a work of great weight, the glory of
God and welfare, of the souls of men is so deeply interest; Onus vel ipsis
angelis formidandum as Bernard speaks, a task requiring the strongest arm to
effect it, a building the laying of whose foundation requires much wisdom, 1
Cor. 3.10. a labor so hard, that the Apostle proposes the question, 2 Cor.
2.16.

2. A work of great difficulty, the Scripture, Joh. 4.11.
like Jacob's Well are deep, our own arms are too short to reach unto the
waters therein, a heavenly language to the unfolding whereof, the tongue of the
learned is required, Isai. 50.4. The hearts of men are very deceitful, they
must handle the Word of God skilfully, who will make it like a two edged sword
dividing between the bone, and the marrow, the joints and the Spirit, Heb.
4.12. the new birth is a hard work, requiring a skillful midwife, much labor,
Gal. 4.19. abundance of strength, the rooting up of these briars, the planting
of the trees of holiness in the Lords vineyard, requires strong hands, men
furnished with good gifts, Ier. 1.10
if we look on the difficulty of bringing men out of the bondage of sin and
Satan, we may say as Moses did in another case, Exo. 3.11, 12.

3. A work resisted by forcible and subtle opposition, the emenies of man's
salvation are many, powerful, crafty, violent, striving to hold the winds of
the Gospel, that they may not blow, Rev. 7.1. standing at the right hand of
Josuah that he may not Sacrifice, Zach. 3.1. an old and subtle Serpent, Rev.
12.9. his Soldiers are strongly armed, Rev. 9.9, 10. ready to withstand the
messengers of the Lord, as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8. and
therefore Gods Ministers must not be like naked men without arms; but
thoroughly furnished with every good gift.

4. It is the grace of the Spirit, which will make them abundant and plenteous
in their labors, this will make them like the Sun rejoice to run the race
which is set before them, Psa. 19.5.
like the full clouds pour out abundantly their waters for the refreshing of
the Souls of Gods people; This will make them that they shall not be silent,
but as Job 32.18, 19, 20. This will constrain them to labor, make the Word of
God be as fire in their bones, this will be as a spur in their sides, so that
they shall say, as 1 Cor. 15.10.

And as they must be thus qualified, so their Doctrine must be warranted by the
Scriptures.

Because that Doctrine alone, which is grounded upon the Scripture does, I.
Open Gods counsel, will and purpose touching our eternal salvation, in these
alone God speaks; this is the letter wherein the mind of God is unfolded, the
looking glass wherein we may see the beauty of Gods holiness, Psalm. 27.4. All
other writings of humane learning are in this regard, but like painted lights,
dark Lanternes, like the images, Psalm. 115.5, 6. Men of the greatest wisdom,
undertaking to declare Gods counsel, without the sound study of Gods Word, may
say as Job did, Job 42.3. and confess as he did in another case, Ps. 139.6.
therefore Paul who revealed the whole counsel of God, Act. 20.26. taught
nothing but what was grounded upon the Law and the Prophets, Acts 26.22. Acts
28.23. II. This does enlighten the understanding, make us wise unto salvation,
2 Timothy 3.16, 17. therefore Joh. 5.39. III. This does comfirme the faith of Gods
people; This is a sure foundation a firm anchor, all other Doctrines are but
sand, this is a sure Word, 2 Pet. 1.19. This is no deceitful bow, but like the
bow of Jonathan it never returns empty, it always accomplisheth that whereto
it is sent, Isa. 55.10. it is sure, Psalm. 19.7. As the Lord said of Eliakim,
Esa. 22.23. So may I say of the Word of God, Psalm. 111.7, 8. IV. This is mighty
in beating down the holds of sin, this makes the mouth of Gods Messenger like
a sharp sword, Isai. 49.2. their Doctrine like sharp arrows in the hearts of
men, Psalm. 45.4. making them to stoop and humble themselves, Acts 2.37. this
like Canon shot battering down the strongest walls; like a burning fire trying
the Metal, making a separation, all Doctrine without this is weak, like a
withered reed; like a dead carcass, Mat. 7.29. V. This has a regenerating
virtue, 1 Pet. 1.23. therefore likened to good seed, Mat. 13.23, 24. a voice
awakening the dead in sin, Ioh. 5.25. therefore called the Word of life, Phil.
2.14.

Isai. 29.11, 14. an usual argument of much profaneness in the people, Mic.
2.11. a great advantage unto Satan: what may not the Lion do, when there is no
Shepherd to watch over the flock; can it be that the weeds shoud not increase
when there is no gardener? the army miscarries whem there is no expert
commander, were not the Sheep scattered, Ezekiel. 34.4, 6. What comfort can you
take in Gods Ordinances, when you have not a guide to interpret and apply them,
are they not as a pleasant light hidden under a bushel, which your eyes see
not; as a sealed fountain full of delicate waters, which your palates taste
not, as a letter full of love and glorious promises, as musical instrument
making a sweet harmony, which ears hear not, Acts 8.31. What hope have you
that your Souls shall be cured, if the Physician have no knowledge of the
disease, do you not know that, Pro. 29.18. How can you think the walls of
Jericho shall fall, if the Priest cannot sound the Trumpet of the Gospel, how
shall the adder be brought to cast out his poison, if the charmer have no skill
in charming, how can it be but that the Souls of the people must be like the
sluggards-field, if the keeper of the Lords vineyard, be either ignorant and
cannot, or sloathfull and will not dress it, nothing more prejudicial to man's
salvation, than the want of a competency of gifts in them that must instruct
them.

Israel, are weary of the pure and plain Manna of the Word of God, and fall a
lusting after the onyons and Garlic of Egypt, humane traditions, poetical
fictions, Philosophical speculations, which have no more virtue to cast out
Satan, than the Sons of Sheva had, Acts 19.16. 1 Samuel 17.
no more power to overthrow this Goliath, than David had in Saul's armor, these
are like a broken bow starting back in the day of the spiritual battle; Like a
broken vessel holding no water of spiritual refreshment, to comfort the Souls
of Gods people; Ier. 2.12 Ier. 23.28. Mat. 23.27. Mat. 21.19.
Like chafe which will never take root, never bring forth any good fruit,
like the Apples of Sodom, or a Pharisees sepulcher, though fair without, yet it
is but as dust and dead men's bones within, such as gives no good nourishment;
Like the fig tree, that had many leaves made a flourishing show, but bore no
fruit, and to such as teach after this manner may that of Eliphas to Job be
well spoken, Job 15.2, 3. and to them that delight in and rest upon such
Doctrine that of Rabseca, 2 King. 18, 20, 21. may be filty spoken, and surely
what Job said of his friends, Job 13.4. may be truly said of these Physicians
and all their Medicines, they are all of no value; yea they are not only vain
but dangerous, not only chafe that nourishes not, but a snare that
entangleth, a hook that destroys, Iac. 2.14. therefore Col. 2.8, 22. and
Isai. 8.20.

These. 2.13. though the men be a vessel of wood, the word is a rich treasure,
and the power is of God, 2 Cor. 4.7. and the power of God indeed it is to save
the soul of every one that does beleve, Romans 1.16. and to such as tremble at
this Word will God look Isai. 66.2. and it is the commendation, which Paul gave
of the Galatians, that they received him as an Angel of God, Gal. 4.14. He that
attends not with reverence shall never clearly conceive what is contained in
it, never feel his heart thoroughly affected with it, nor be able with a lively
confidence to rest upon it, the very Word of God unreverently received is
entertained but as a humane testimony, looked upon but as a withered reed,
trusted but as the language of an uncertain friend, therefore come with such
affection and disposition of heart, as Cornelius did to Peter, Acts 10.33. and
then thou shall be convinced, the secrets of thy heart made manifest, and
falling down thou shall worship God, and say that God is in his Messengers of a
truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. II. Believe it firly, rest upon it assuredly, even as
if thou did hear the Lord himself speaking from heaven, the Minister is but
the Ambassador, the Message is Gods, what they speak on earth, God does ratify
in heaven, Mat. 16.19. therefore let me exhort you, as Iehosaphat did the
people, 2 Cro. 20.20. build upon it as on a rock that does not sink, upon a
staff which will not break, upon a fountain, which never dries up, Mat.
5.18. this works humiliation, repentance, Iona. 3.5. makes men desirous of
sound instruction to be rightly informed, Psalm. 119.66. causes them to fear,
Exodus 14.31. makes them patient and constant in the midst of all
adversities, Psa. 27.13. causes to wait in the deepest trouble, Isai. 28.16.
III. Reform speedily, thoroughly, unfainedly, whatsoever their Doctrine finds
to be amiss within you; as thou who art a drunkard, userer, swearer, and
woulest reform, if God did send an Angel from heaven, or did himself appear
unto thee to rebuke thee; even so must thou reform now, when the messenger of
God does speak unto thee: say not as the rich Glutton did, Luc. 16.30. If God,
or an Angel from heaven, or a damned Spirit from Hell were sent to teach us; we
would repent; but remember Abraham's answer, verse. 31. It is a great mercy of
God to speak unto us by men, that we may be able to endure their voice, to
understand their language, and therefore we should with Israel, Deuteronomy. 5.27.
with Israel we should put away Baal and Ashterosh, 1 Samuel 7.3, 4. with them,
Acts 19.19. with Peter, Mat. 26.75. with David, 2 Samuel 12.12. with Ephraim,
Jer. 31.18, 19. It is our reformation will prove we are good hearers: our
obedience will testify the goodness of our affections; the casting away of our
sin does best argue a right entertainment of the Word, Ja. 1.21, 22. IV.
Comfort your selves soundly in the Doctrine of life and salvation, God will
make good to the faithful whatsoever good things his Messengers out of his
Word do declare unto them. God will fulfull them all in their season, Luke
1.20. as Jos. 23.14. not one thing of all the good things whereof the Ministers
of God do now inform you shall fail, treasure up the comforts which they
propound out of the Word of the Lord, and be as sure of them, as if you did
already enjoy them, Isa. 25.9, 10.

The 5th thing
is the comfort the Ministers of God, and all the people, that love Christ do
conceive in hearing, meditating upon, and publishing the tidings of salvation,
rejoices greatly, because of the bridegroomes voice.

Psalm. 8.9, 10. Ier. 15.16. and Paul called it a finishing of his course with
joy, Acts 20.24. Herein they see the great things of God; the sight whereof is
more pleasant to the eye of the mind, than the sight of the Sun is unto the eye
of the body: as the Psalmist says of the mariners, Psalm. 107.24. so may I say
of the Ministers of the Lord, they go down into the deep, and behold the holy
and heavenly wonders of the Lord. II. Hereby the Word of God does cast a sweet
savor in their nostrils, and becomes as a warm fire in their bones: often
traveling among the flowers refreshes us with their smell, the bruising of
spice makes the sent thereof the more odorifeous in our nostrils. III. They
are glad to do any service to bring any honor unto God, it is their meat and
drink to do the Lords will. IV. They are glad to do good to others, to inform
their judgments, stablish their faith, cleanse their affections, comfort their
hearts, quicken them in the duties of holiness, and make them rich in the grace
of the Spirit.

work of the Lord with cheerfulnes, that rejoice not of all opportunities to
publish the gladsome tidings of eternal happiness: but to go about the Lords
business by constraint, as a lasy horse driven with the whip; as a sluggard,
that must be compelled to his labor, this want of delight in Ministers in
their calling argues want of love unto God, want of a lively feeling of the
goodness and operation of the Word of God within them; want of zeal for Gods
honor, want of hatred against sin, want of true compassion to the Souls of
Gods people, inconsideratenes, unsensiblenes of the weighty calling they have
taken upon them, of the fearful account they must render unto God for the
Souls of whom they have the oversight.



As this has relation particularly to Ministers, so it is generally true of
all faithful Christians, of every godly man that loves Christ, every one that
is his friend, hears the Bridegroomes voice and rejoices greatly.

Christ in the preaching of the Gospel, as Israel shouted at the presence of
the Arc, 1 Samuel 4.5. so do the people of God at he presence of the Gospel, as
appears by the examples recorded in this behalf, Acts 8.8. Acts 2.46. Acts
13.48. 1 These. 1.6. II. By the entertainment they give the faithful Ministers
of the Word, Gal 4.14. Job 33.23. Acts 21.17. III. By the charge which is in
this regard given, Phil. 2.28, 29. IV. By titles given and attributed to the
Gospel, Psalm. 89.15. Luc. 2.10. 1 Timothy 1.11 V. By the promise which God has
made, Jer. 31.12, 13, 14. Isai. 35.2.

Pet. 1.19. Ps. 119.105. for as the light is pleasant to the eye, Eccles. 11.7.
so it is a pleasant thing to Gods people to behold the light of the Gospel. II.
To the dewes; as the dewes rejoice the ground, make it green and pleasant, so
does the Gospel rejoice the hearts of the people, Isa 35.1, 2. III. To milk; as
that delights and nourishes the Child, so does this Gods Children, 1 Pet.
2.2. IV. To wels of water, which afford much refreshment to the thirsty
traveller; so does the Gospel to the Souls of Gods people, Isai. 12.3. V. To
ointment poured out, because as that is very savoury to the nostrils of men, so
is this to the nostrils of Gods people* Cant. 1.3. even the savor of life unto
life, 2 Cor. 2.16.

Christ Jesus, replenished with exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet.
1.4. A garden overspread with sweet flowers, a shop full of precious ointments,
and savoury perfumes, a tree, every branch whereof is laden with most pleasant
and comfortable grapes, a proclamation of peace, Acts 10.36. a treaty of Union,
2 Cor. 5.18, 19. the profer of a free pardon, Mar. 1.4. a marriage feast
between Christ and the people, Mat. 22.2, 3, 4. gladsome tidings, Romans 10.15. a
relation of the high and incomparable love of God to man; of the victories,
which our Savior won, the downfall of Satan, Romans 10.15.
sin, and the shutting up of the gates of Hell, the large endowments, high and
honorable privileges of Gods people, all matter of the truest, sweetest, and
most lasting joy, and therefore cannot but make the hearts of Gods people
exceeding joyful.

Mat. 2.10. Luke 15.8.
as the woman in the parable rejoiced at the finding of the groate which she
had lost, thus the Apostle, Romans 18.15. alleges that of Isai. 52.7. to
signify that the coming of Gods Messengers unto such is very desirable, their
preaching sweet and comfortable, their words being sweet as honey, as drink to
the thirsty, bread to the hungry, alluring and drawing them, like a loadstone,
their conversation being clear as the Sun, as their lips, their Doctrine, so
their feet, their walking was holy and upright, and their Message altogether
replenished with comfort.

Jonathan and David better accord than the heart of a sincere Christian, and
the faithful Ministry of the Gospel, and surely as David said of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26. so may every faithful servant of God say of Gods Word, Ier. 15.16.
Ps. 19.10.

Christ and his faithful people, they are his friends, Ioh. 15.14. members of
that body whereof Christ is the head, 1 Cor. 12.12. joined in wedlock with him,
Ephesians. 5.30. and therefore as the Bride rejoices to hear the voice of the
Bridegroom, so do they to hear the voice of Christ, Cant. 5.16.

Christ; This like a bellows blows up the coals of their affections; like
the warm Sun, it heateth their frozen hearts, causes them to be rooted and
grounded in love, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. So to love him as to leave all for him, Mat.
10.37. to despise all in comparison of him, Luc. 14.26. an affection so strong,
that nothing can breed a separation, Romans 8.35, 38 and loving Christ so
fervently, they cannot choose but rejoice abundantly in him; love and joy like
joint companions go together, Gal. 5.22. like the Sun and the light they will
not he separated the one from the other.

does attend it, the Spirit of God which is the Fountain of all joy is given
with the Ministry of the word, this is the key by which our hearts are opened,
and the Holy Ghost admitted into our Souls; hence, Acts 10.44. 1 These. 1.6.
Acts 13.52.

Cor. 4.6. their faith is confirmed, Ephesians. 1.13. victory over Satan obtained,
Ier. 31.11. their hearts are so softened and made tender, as ground by the
dewes, Deu. 32.2. Isa. 55.10. their affections are purified, as the Corn by the
fan, Mat. 2.12. Ier. 23.29 their consciences are purified, Isa. 57.19. their
love and zeal is increased; of a small drop these affections become like a
flowing stream, of few sparks become a burning flame, of weak plants they
become tall trees full of good fruit, and hence as Acts 3.8. so Isa. 35.5, 6.

Ios. 6.20 Iud. 7.22. 1 Samuel 4.6, 7. Mat. 23.37. Mat. 24.1, 10.
the Word of God is the surest shield, the strongest shot; the sounding of the
Trumpet prevailed more against the walls than much Canon shot, the shining of
the Lamps, the cry of the Sword of the Lord and Gideon, put the Midianites to
flight, sooner than an army of men: the Arc put the Philistines in greater
fear than all the Israelitish army, when the Ministry of life was removed from
Jerusalem, their house lest desolate, then the Temple was cast to the ground.

Sam. 4.21. Joseph and Mary went up and down sorrowing when Christ was lost,
Luke 2.46. so the people of God are full of heaviness at the absence of the
Word, La. 2.6, 12. Ps. 74.9.

1 Ioh. 4.6. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. 2 Samuel 6.16.
an apparent testimony that we are not of God, that we have not tasted of Gods
goodness; he that does not with David dance before the Lord's Ark, has not
David's heart, wants David's love, is a strangers to David's sense and feeling
of the working of Gods Word and Spirit within him: He that looks on this as
on a vessel without water, a tree without fruit, a Lamp without Oil, Acts
17.18.
has a heart without grace, who is it, but a Stoic, a man of a stupefied
heart, a seared conscience that accompteth Paul's preaching to be but babbling,
that says Job 21.14. A thief hides himself from light, Ioh. 3.20. Who but
the deaf takes no comfort in pleasant music? Psalm. 58.5 Mat. 11.17. Who but
they that know not the things belonging to their peace, Luke 19.42. are not
delighted with the Gospel of peace? how can thou be the Child of God, if thou
rejoice not to hear the voice of thy Father? How can thou be the Bride of
Christ, if thou art not affected with the language of thy Husband? How can
thou be a new creature, if like a newborn Child, thou art not delighted with
the milk of these breasts? How can thou be a traveller toward the heavenly
Canaan, and not be glad to see this fiery Pillar shine before thee? How can
thou be a man of a hungry stomach, and not be glad of this honeycomb? How
can thou be experienced in the assaults of Satan, and not rejoice at the
having of this weapon; he cannot be the faithful servant of God, that finds
no delight in the Word of God.

Psa. 27.4. Why they thirst after it as dry ground thirsts, Ps. 63.1 Why they
seek it, Amos 8.12. why they encourage one another, Zach. 8.21. why they wait,
Pro. 8.34. as Ioh. 5.5. Acts 3.3. why they say, Ioh. 6.34. It is music to
their ears, and they like David, 2 Samuel 6.16. it is Isa. 25.6. and as Eccles.
10.19. it is the joy and rejoicing of their hearts, Ier. 15.16. It is the Sun
that gives light to them in darkness, the staff that sustaineth them in their
weakness, the Arc bearing them up in the deepest deluge of troubles; the
Fountain affording refreshment when all their water brooks do fail, therefore
no wonder they attend upon it.

Cant. 2.4. comfort stay and glad our hearts, as they with their bottles, Hos.
5.3. made the King glad, and if we do rejoice at it indeed: it will appear.

1. By our conscionable preparation to it, as sick men prepare their stomachs,
and Husbandmen their vineyards before the one receives Physic, or the other
sows his seed; so do they that delight in the Word, for this is Physic and
seed, which they, who wisely husband their Souls, and highly value the wored of
the Lord will not suffer to be sown among thorns and briers, but as Exo.
19.10.

2. By our frequent meditation upon it, man often thinks upon that wherein he
rejoices, thus Psalm. 11.2. delight is a loadstone that draws the thoughts, a
Chariot that carries the mind with an irresistible force to the thing rejoiced
in.

3. By our constant attendance on the same, if we delight in it we will wait
patiently and constantly upon it; we will hearken diligently what the Lord will
speak unto us; we will be no strangers in Gods house, but we will take every
opportunity to go thither, desire to make it our habitation, Ps. 27.4. account
it our happiness to have admittance within the gates of his house, Ps. 84.10.

4. By our high valuation of it, as the Sun above the Candle, pure wheat above
chafe, gold above dross, honey before gall, Psa. 119.72, 102. Ier. 23.23.
Prove. 8.10, 11.

3. This must stir up every man to rejoice and delight himself in the
preaching of the Gospel, as in the School of Christ where alone true wisdom
is to be learned, in the food of our Souls, whence spiritual strength is to be
gathered, in the light, which alone shows the way to the life, which is
eternal, and for that end we must be. I. Truly sanctified, and then as the
Baptist leaped in his mothers womb, when he heard the voice of the mother of
our Savior, in whom Christ was conceived, so shall our hearts rejoice to hear
the voice of our God in the Ministry of his Word, Psa. 97.11. Ps. 32.11. II.
The Word must be hidden in our hearts, Ier. 15.16. It must be as fire in our
bones, Ier. 20.9. as Wine in our stomachs, Mat. 13.45. III. Come with a longing
appetite to it, as to a delicate feast, Isai. 25. Prove. 27.7. IV. Get assurance
that the comforts thereof belong unto your own Souls: propriety and interest
in the good things of God will fill our hearts with joy and gladness in the
Lord, when we can claim them as our inheritance, then we shall rejoice in
them, like the Psalmist. V. We must sell all, Ps. 119.111.
put away whatsoever may hinder the power and efficacy of the Word of God, the
scales must be taken from Paul's eyes, or the light of the Sun will afford him
no comfort, so Ia. 1.21. 1 Samuel 7.3, 4. Mat. 13.45.

This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

The last thing
is the great joy the Baptist conceived in beholding the people to convert and
turn unto God, in seeing the Kingdom of Christ to flourish, the eyes of men
to be fastened on him, the hearts of men to embrace him, the Ministry of his
word to be effectual; whence note,

THat the conversion of the people does make the Ministers of God exceeding
joyful, as the Bridegrooms friend rejoices, when he has prepared a spouse
for him, so does every faithful Minister of God, when he has prepared a Bride
for Christ, likened to the joy of harvest when the Husbandmen and his Servants
gather in the sheafs into the barn, to the joy of soldiers when they divide
the spoil Isai. 9.3. as Moses rejoiced and sung when he had led Israel out of
Egypt, from the bondage of Pharaoh thorough the Red Sea; so do the Ministers
of God, when they, Exo. 15.1.
by the blessing of God upon their industry, have brought the people of God out
of bondage of sin and Satan, hence 1 These. 2.19, 20. this filled his mouth with
matter of glorying, 2 Cor. 9.2. The relation which Titus made to Paul of the
repentance, faith, love, constancy of the Corinthians made him exceeding
joyous, 2 Cor. 7.4, 13. Phil. 4.1. so great that it makes them rejoice in
affliction, the welfare of the people is very comfortable even when the
Minister is in much trouble, Phil. 2.2, Philemon, verse. 7. Ioh. 3. Ephesians. 4. Ioh.
2.3.4.

Christ, the object of their love, 2 Cor. 6.11. 2 Cor. 2.4. a love which makes
them, Phil. 2.17. and 2 Cor. 7.3. and therefore as they love them so they
rejoice in their welfare verse. 4.

Cor. 12.14. 1 Cor. 10.24 Phil. 1.8, 9. never did Rahel more desire Children,
than they do the regeneration of the people, this is the choice of all their
wishes, the most servent of all their longings, for this they make them
petition, Ephesians. 3.14. as Isaac for the opening of the womb of Rebecca, Genesis
25.21. as Hanna for the making of her barren womb fruitful, 1 Samuel 1.10. and
as she showed herself joyful, thankful, when God gave her a Child, 1 Samuel
2, 1, 2. so do Gods Ministers, when God does open the hearts of the people, as
Acts 16.14. and Isai. 54.1.

Isai. 65.2, 3. that they have not, as Hos. 8.7. But they see that the Word in
their mouth has been as a two edged sword, Heb. 4.12. as seed in good ground,
Matthew. 13.23. as the dewes upon the Herbs, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Isai. 45.8. and 26.19.
Hos. 14.6, 7. Psalm. 133.3. aad therefore Phil. 2.16,

Isai. 61.1. to give deliverance unto Gods people, to raise them out of the
grave of sin, as the Prophet revived the dead Child, 1 These. 2.19.20. and as
Luc. 10.17. so etc.

Luke 3.4, 5. Ier. 1.10. 2 Timothy 2.3. encounter with many enemies, Ephesians. 6.12.
Gal. 4.19. and therefore as Ioh. 16.21.

Cor. 9.10. Ier. 23.22. as Leah said, Genesis 29.32.

Paul himself is first converted before he is sent to preach the Gospel, Acts
9.3. and Isai. 6.5. Mal. 2.5, 6, 7.

lost sheep, the Physician in recovering his patient, the steward in the
welfare of the servants of the family, the nurse in the growth of the Child,
the Ambassador in the reconcilement of the people, so do the Ministers of God.

Psalm. 119.136. Isai. 49.4. Jer. 9.1. Luke 19.41, 42.

Mat. 25.23. and so Dan. 12.3. Prove. 11.30. he, if any, lays up a sure
foundation against the World to come.

Isa. 8.18. shall look on God with more boldness than he that can say, behold
the many Benefices, Ecclesiastical Dignities that I have gotten, these will be
miserable comforters then, but 1 These. 2.19. Prove. 11.4. 2 Cor. 1.14.

growth of the Corn and pasture, the steward the welfare of the family; that
Minister must needs be full of profaneness, who maligneth the spiritual
prosperity of the Lords Servants, it is either weakness or sickness in the eye,
that makes the light offensive, it is an evil Master to whom a good Scholar
does prove unpleasant; he can never be the Bridegrooms friend that cannot brook
his spouse, a good Ambassador that affects not the embracers of true peace,
a good servant that likes not the trees which grow and bear blossoms, in great
abundance, it is fearful in any, but espeally in Ministers to dislike others
for their holiness, Ezekiel. 34.3. Like butchers that kill the fat, with the
Pharisees account them accursed, Joh. 7.48.

2 Cor. 2.3.
reform not by their Doctrine; but continue like bad ground, Heb. 6.6, 8. Like
deaf adders, Psa. 58.5. Like knobby timber that will not cleave, like a wild
ass, Ier. 2.24. this makes them weary, Ier. 20.9. this puts them out of
courage; Like Peter when he fished all night, and could take nothing, Ioh.
21.3. this does provoke them to impatience, Jer. 9.1, 2. breeds many
complaints, Isai. 53.1. this fills their Souls full of heavines, as Anna's
heart was of bitterness when her womb was barren, 1 Samuel 1.16. this makes them
complain of loosing their labors, Isa. 49.4. as Ier. 12.13. Hag. 1.6. makes
them grieve for the dishonor done to God, as Josuah grieved when Israel fled
before the men of Ai, Ios. 7.9. fills their Souls with sorrow, to see them
still in the gall of bitterness in the bondage of Satan, as it grieved David to
see his Son rebel, 2 Samuel 15.30. the parent to see his Child still abiding
upon his languishing bed, Luke 19.41.
as Christ grieved to see the obstinacy of Jerusalem, and Ier. 13.17. Isai.
22.4. This is no small sin to grieve the Souls of Ministers, to frustrate their
labors, to disanull their endeavors, to make them uncheerefull in their
undertakings, to make them, say, as Jer. 51.9. as 1 Samuel 15.11, 14.

David, 1 Cro 29.17. Jud. 5.1, 2. So do the Ministers of the Lord rejoice to
see the people offer themselves willingly unto God, this does more comfort them
than a feast of the choicest dainties you can provide for them, more delight
them, than if you did bestow much gold and silver upon them, to win your Souls
to God, is more pleasant to them than to win the whole World, as Psalm. 69.30,
31. so in this case: therefore let this move your hearts, work upon your
affections, provoke you to repentance, persuade you to holiness; that the hearts
of Gods Ministers may rejoice, and in making them after this manner joyful,
you shall make them more fervent in their prayers, Col. 1.8, 9. more frequent
in their labors, Isai. 52.5. a good draught gives encouragement, to a second
casting in of the net, as 1 Samuel 17.34, 35. more entire in their conversations,
like a virtuous loadstone, it draws them to a holy fellowship with us, more
free and familiar in their counsels, more patient in their afflictions, more
bold and couragions against all oppositions, more plenteous in all internal
and external comforts.

There are ways by which the people may administer much comfort, occasion much
joy in the faithful Minister of the Lord. I. By their holy language, gracious
counsels and encouragements, for the strongest is many times much comforted
helped and edified by the weak, the General is many times comforted by the
common soldiers; the little sticks set the greater logs on fire, Prove. 27.9.
Sometimes Jethro is able to advise Moses, Aquila can instruct Apollos, Abigail
give good counsel to David, and Psalm. 8.2. therefore Romans 1.11, 12. and the
people may strengthen the faith of the Minister, by praying for him, by
ministering inward and outward consolations to him, by expressing such
subjection to his Doctrine, as may plainly testify that God has sent him, and
given him this honor to be an instrument of much good to his Church. II. By
visiting the faithful Minister of the Lord, as the presence of the Children
rejoice the father, the presence of the flock does comfort the Shepherd, so
does the presence of the people refresh the Minister for, 1 These. 2.17. and as
Prove. 27.17. so does the face of Gods people, like a Whetstone sharpen the
affections of the Minister when they began to grow dull, and therefore Paul
calls it a refreshing, being like dew to to the ground, drink to the thirsty
traveller, 1 Cor. 16.17, 18. 2 Timothy 1.16, 17. III. By amending at the reproofs
they administer, censures they impose: it comfort the parent to see the
Child bettered by correction, it comfort the Husbandman to see the tree
bettered by pruning, so 2 Cor. 7.12, 13. IV. By being full of love to their
fellow brethren, delighting in them that excel in virtue, joying together as
members of one body, sheep of one fold, stones of one building, helping,
comforting and edifying one another in their most holy faith; this the Minister
of God knows will much adorn the Gospel, improve the graces of the people,
strengthen them in the truth, make them rich in every good gift, and therefore,
Phil. 20. verse. 7. V. By growing in all the graces of the Spirit, as the nurse
rejoices at the growth of the Child, the Husbandman at the growth of the Corn,
so 2 These. 1.3, 4. VI. By the joyful entertainment of the Word of God,
receive it as the dry ground the rain from the cloud, as the hungry Child does
milk from the mothers breasts; let their feet be beautiful in your eyes, Romans
10.15. dance as David before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.16. and then as Paul, 1 These.
1.2, 6. VII. By constancy in the ways of God, steadfast confidence in the Lord
Jesus, when he sees them like Job trusting in God, though God seem to kill
them with letting Satan loose upon them, Job 13.15.
suffering wicked men to disturb and pierce them with their venomous arrows,
when he beholds them rooted like strong trees, and builded like houses upon
the rock, Col. 2.7. Mat. 7.25. when he sees them like good travelers going
from strength to strength, Ps. 84.7. when he sees them like good soldiers
keeping their ranks, following their leader, not shrinking for the presence,
threatrings, power, or malice of the enemy, when he shall hear them answer him,
as Ionathans Armor-bearer did him, 1 Samuel 14.6, 7. this does rejoice him, Col.
2.5. VIII. By yielding him a competent maintenance, good wages increases the
industry and cheerefulnes of the laborers, strong and deep water, carry the
Ship with pleasantnes, and drive the mill swiftly, good pay and much spoil
makes the soldiers courageous in the fight; though it be baseness for any
Minister to make his wages, his bodily advantage; prime end of his labors, yet
when they see the hands of men are open to communicate things temporal to
them, to yield such maintenance as may enable them to love both with credit and
comfort, it proves a great refreshment, no small encouragement, for this Paul
did much commend the men of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.3, 4. 2 Cor. 11.9. IX. By their
constant attendance on the Word of God, when they wait on the gates of Gods
house, as the lame man did for an alms at the gates of the Temple, when they
flew to the house of God, Act. 3.3. Mic. 4.2.
as the streams to the Sea, as the diseased to the Physician, Luc. 4.40. when
the whole parish can say to the Minister of God, as Cornelius to Peter, Acts
10.33. when they come men, women and children, Deuteronomy. 31.12. when as Acts 2.1.
this makes the Minister of the Lord cheerful, puts life and courage into
him, this makes him frequent in his exhortations, comfortable in opening and
applying the promises of salvation, many buyers make the Merchant glad, many
guests make the cook laborious, much fish causes the fisherman willingly to
cast in the net, thus 2 Cro. 30.25, 26, 27. But on the other side the absence
of the people is occasion of much grief, it troubles the Master of the freast
when the invited guests come not, and the nurse when the Child will not suck;
Mat. 22.7. 1 Samuel 20.27. Luke 1.4.
it troubled Saul when David's place was empty, it grieved the Prophet when the
people came not to the solemn feast; think on this beloved, put these things
in practice with diligence, if you mean to comfort and encourage your
teachers, if you mean to have a blessing upon their labors, if you mean to
fulfill their joy, as the people fulfilled the joy of the Baptist.

VERSE 30.
MEn of the best and most sanctified abilities are least conceited of their
own goodness, the deepest rivers run with the greatest silence, the fullest
vessel gives the least sound, the more we partake of Gods fulness, the more
sensible we are of our own natural emptines, the more fully we are
encompassed with the light of the Sun, the more we see the deformities of our
bodies and of our garments, the more fully we are acquainted with what is
amiss within us, the more vile we are in our apprehensions, the more we see
our selves obliged unto God for his goodness, the more we see our selves bound
to give him the glory of all our abilities, and with the Baptist to become even
ignominious, that God and the Lord Jesus may appear the more glorious:

The Baptist in these words showed his Disciples, that as the day star,
though bright and glorious in it self, yet when the Sun appears does
altogether vanish, so he, though greater than all the Prophets, in going more
imediately before Christ, in pointing him out more plainly, more fully than
any other, yet Christ the Sun of righteousness now appearing, he must become as
a light that is extinguished, the eyes of men must be no more fastened on him,
he must now become as nothing, and Christ must be all in all, his honor,
applause, respect, attendance, and high estimation, which he had in the hearts
of the people, must decay and become as nothing, and all men must now fasten
their eyes on Christ, attend his Doctrine, believe in him for salvation,
embrace him as the fountain whence all felicity does take its original, as
the tree of life, the Prince of their peace;

In the Words we have set before us. I. The wonderful humility of the Baptist
in translating all the honor unto Christ, in being contented to decrease. II.
His care to have all the honor ascribed unto Christ, though with the loss of
his own honor among men, he must increase though I decrease. III. The
exceeding glory of Christ, or the graduall manifestation, of the honor of
Christ, the glory of Christ was such, that the Baptist, though greater than all
the Prophets; yet was nothing in comparison of Christ, and such was the honor
of Christ, that it did not all appear at once but by degrees; it was an
increasing honor, from the former we learn.

Mat. 18.3. Ioh. 10.27. Mat. 10.16.
are least tainted with pride, ambition, and high conceits of their own
worthiness, the sheep, the most gentle among cattle, the dove, the most meek
among birds, this they are exhorted to put on as a garment to cloth them, Col.
3.12. this they are charged to seek, Zeph. 2.3. this is required more than all
external sacrifice, Mic. 6.7, 8. this is one branch on every tree growing
within the pale of Gods Orchard, Mat. 11.29. Gal. 5.22.
the lesson of every Scholar in the School of Christ, the livery of every
follower of the Lord Jesus, a fruit of Gods Spirit in all Gods Servants, and
that Gods Children are an humble people does appear.

1. By the sight and sense of their own unworthines, they are in their own
apprehension unclean as any leper, men of polluted lips, full of abominations,
altogether vile Job 40.4. full of corrupt, and unsavory wounds, void of all
soundness, replenished with loathsome diseases, Psalm. 38.5, 7. the chief of all
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. their estate in their apprehension, is as a house,
wherein is no one good thing, no one clean person, Romans 7.18, is as a garden
full of filthy weeds, a vineyard overgrowne with thorns, a tree that has
nothing but fading leaves, a fountain full of unclean waters, a body covered
with rotten rags, Isai. 64.6. so that they abhor themselves, and repent in
dust and ashes, Job 42.6. and being thus vile in their own apprehension, they
must needs be humble.

2. By the stirring, struggling, and striving nature of sin within them, it is
not asleep, it lies not like a dead man, as it does in the hearts of carnal,
and unregenerate people, but it fights, and warreth like a Soldier, Gal.
5.17. It is not like a resty jade in the pasture, but in the bridle under spur
whip; It is as pricks and thorns in their sides, as the Canaanites were to
Israel, Judge. 2.3. as a heavy burden on their backs, Psalm. 38.4. as a dead
body, a rotten carcass, unsavory, noisome, hateful, a continual vexation,
Romans 7.24. afflictions are very availeable to make and keep a man humble, but
the feeling of the nature and operation of sin, as working more immediately
upon the soul and conscience, is much more forcible to drive man out of
himself to make him humble, this will make a man endued with a prophetical
Spirit to say, Prove. 30.2, 3. It will make a man of the rarest endowments of
the greatest industry to say, Romans 7.24. and for this it is that God does leave
sin in the hearts of his Servants, 2 Cor. 12.7.

3. By the continual, subtle, and violent assaults that Satan does make
against them, he spreads snares, and lays stumbling blocks in the way to
make them fall, he seeks as a Pyrate to rob them, like an enemy he lays
continual siedge against them, 1 Pet. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.12.16.
hunteth like a roaring Lion to make a prey of them, he casts his fiery darts
at them to affright such, and if it were possible, to burn, and utterly
consume them, he raises many storms within and without to disturb and amaze
them, so mighty, so incessant, so fraudulent are his attempts, that as Israel
said in another case, Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3. So do Gods people in this case, and by
this means it comes to pass, that as the Princes of Israel, and the King
humbled themselves when Shesack had taken some of their Cities and was come up
against Jerusalem, 2 Cro. 12.5, 6, 7. so the people of God perceiving how this
Prince of darkness takes advantages against them, how he is in continual war
with them, how they are buffeted by him, do still walk humbly before the Lord,
and this is one use God does make of him, 2 Cor. 12.7.

4. By the disposition and qualification of their hearts, of Lions they are
become Lambs, Isa. 11.6
of hard they are become soft and tender ground, trembling at the Word of God,
Ier. 4.3.
contrite and break thorough godly grief and sorrow, as a high building beaten
to the very dust, Ps. 51.8
as a strong body having all the bones broken, emptied of all conceit of their
strength, abilities, excellencies, Act. 9.4.
cast like Paul from the horse back to the ground, denying themselves their
own reason, affections, purposes, thoughts, ends, renouncing their own
wisdom as folly; Psalm. 31.12. Ps. 147.3.
looking on themselves as on a Lamp that has no Oil, as on a broken vessel
wherein is no liquour, as on a wounded body wherein is no soundnes.

5. By the nature and operation of true and saving grace, wheresoever this
takes possession, it makes the heart meek and humble according to the sway,
and dominion which it bears, the full ear of Corn boweth downward, the full
laden ship goes deep in the waters. The nigher Abraham came to God, the more
humbly he thought of himself, Genesis 18.27. The more grace any man has, the more
he sees the deformity of his own hearts; the obliquity of his ways, the
unprofitablenes of his works, Luke 17.10. it makes them loath themselves,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 31. This makes them esteem others better than themselves, Phil.
2.3. to neglect temporal and external dignities, Heb. 11.24. Christ Jesus, in
whom was the fulness of all holiness, was the most complete, and absolute
pattern of all meekness, Mat. 11.29. Ioh. 15.3. this is a jewel wherewith
they be always adorned, a garment with which they be every day clothed,
without this they think themselves naked, 1 Pet. 5.5. Humility waits on true
grace, like the handmaide upon the Mistress, like the thread following the
needle, the light attending the Sun, the Daughter the Mother, Ruth Naomi, Gal.
5.22. this is one of the waiting maids belonging to this Princess, one of the
branches which springs from this root.

6. By the work of Gods Word upon their hearts, this like a hammer does break
and bruise them, like fire does melt them, Ier. 23.29. like an axe laid to the
root of the tree it does cast them to the ground, Mat. 3.10. like dew it does
soften their hearts, which are hard as clay under a long Sun shine, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Like a warlike weapon it does cast down the mighty Holds of sin, makes high
thoughts stoop, 1 Cor. 10.5. makes hills to become low as the Valleys, Luke
3.5. As the Priest looking upon and pronouncing the leprous unclean caused him
to lay his hand upon his mouth, and to cry unclean, Lev. 13.44, 45. So the
Minister of the Lord, presenting to Gods people the leprosy of their Souls by
the Ministry of the word, causes them, Acts 2.37. Romans 7.9. As David by his
persuasions and proffers, 2 Samuel 19.14. so God by the Ministry of the Gospel
does bow the heart of the people, Psalm. 45.5.

7. By the opinion and apprehension they have of their own works, their best
performances, their sincerest duties, they look upon them as on water running
through an impure channel, on silver mingled with much dross, a heap of Corn
mixed with much chafe, an apple having much rotteness within it, their
understanding like Leah is bleare-eyed, their faith like a palsy man's head has
much shaking in it, Joh. 11.44. their will, like Lazarus, comes forth of the
grave bound hand and foot, Genesis 32.31. their love is but like a fire in green
zeal, like the flying of a bird whose wings are broken, in their best duties
they halt like Jacob, and find occasion of humiliation after the performance of
their choicest service, need to pray for forgivenes of what is amiss, for Job
9.3. Psalm. 143.1, 2.

8. By the afflictions which do befall them, Mat. 8.25. Luke 22.31. Ps. 129.3.
Hos. 6.1. Heb. 12.7.
they are a ship tossed, a tree shaken, corn winnowed, spice bruised, a field
plowed, a patridge hunted, a body Physicked, a Child corrected, an ox in the
yoke, a tree under the pruning knife, Zeph. 3.12. Psalm. 34.19. Heb. 11.25. and
this will keep them low and humble, this will make them stoop, and bow down to
the commandments of the Lord. Ier. 31.18.


9. By the base estimation the World has of them, they are in the eye of the
World as the dung, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. as
monsters, signs, wonders, Isa. 8.18. Zach. 3.8. gazing stocks, Heb. 10.53.
excommunicated persons, Luke 6.22. pestilent people unworthy to live upon the
face of the earth, Acts 22.22. Acts 24.5. driven into dens and caves, Heb.
11.36, 37. and by this means they are also kept meek and humble.

10. By the sight and apprehension they have of God, which others have not,
they by faith see him who is invisible, are sensibly affected with the beauty,
brightness and Majesty of his holiness, so affected with it, that as Daniel,
when he saw the vision, Heb. 11.37.
Dan. 10.8. So they in this manner beholding God, to be a God of infinite
holiness, righteousness, wisdom, are ashained of their own corruption, and all
thought of their own excellency departs from them, this makes the very
Cherubins cover their feet, Isai. 6.2. and verse. 5. now put all these together,
and they make this argument; that people, who are affected with the sense of
their own unworthiness the struggling of their corruptions, assaults of Satan,
whose hearts are broken endued with true grace, melted by the Word, basely
conceited of the best of their works, laden with affliction, reproaches in the
World affected with the beauty of Gods holiness, that people is an humble
people, but thus are Gods people.

estate of all men of high, haughty and ambitious Spirits, of men that are
puffed up with the conceit of their own excellencies, that soar (at least in
their own imagination) upon the wings of their own abilities, who will needs
increase in the eye of the World, though it be to the decrease of the honor of
Christ, and to the reproach of their brethren, such men are surely strangers to
the Spirit of the Baptist, have little experience of the heavy burden, of the
loathsome nature of their own corruptions, of the merit of their doings, the
wages due to their labors, this is a sin arising from present and the increase
of temporary and common endowments, either internal, or external: when men
look on humane abilities as Nebuchadnezar upon his palace, Dan. 4.30. as the
peacock upon his feathers; as Rabseca upon his Masters victories, 2 King.
18.33. then they swell, this is a sin arising also from the forgetfulness of
God, men consider not that all they have is rain falling from the cloud of
Gods bounty, fruit gathered from the tree of Gods favor, and hereupon they
magnify the strength of their own arm, celebrate Philistia, like the Dagon of
their own wit, and endeavors, Hab. 1.16. of this the Lord forwarned Israel,
Deuteronomy. 8.14. and of this we have all great cause to be very careful, for. I.
This is a sin repugnant to our very original and beginning, we are not our
own workmanship, a house of our own building, Job 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
but the hands of the Lord have formed us, now shall the vessel magnify it
self against the potter? Isai. 29.16. Deuteronomy. 32.18, 19. but Isai. 64.8. and
besides God made our bodily part out of the dust, whereon our feet tread, Genesis
2.17. hence Job. 4.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. pride is a sin which does repugne our
very creation. II. This is a sin repugnant to the tenure of all our endowments,
our goods, and life's are held at the will of the Lord, we are but stewards, he
may take them when he pleases according to our abilities will be our
reckoning, 1 Cor. 4.1. Luc. 16.2. so that in our selves we are an empty vessel,
having nothing but what God has given, Genesis 31.9. Iac. 1.17. III. This makes
us incapable of the grace of Gods Spirit, a full vessel is incapable of new
water, a full hand of a new gift, a full stomach of food, these say to
instruction as Esau to Jacob I have enough, Genesis 33.9. thus Rev. 3.17. Ioh.
9.41. While Paul was on horseback he was incapable of instructions, therefore
the Lord smote him to to the ground, Acts 9.3. IV. This makes God to cross,
curse and punish us, to be after a peculiar manner an enemy against us more
than against any others: pride makes a man set himself in Gods seat, rob God
of his honor, reject Gods precepts, despise his fellow brethren which are Gods
Workman ship, and for this does God become an enemy to the proud, and when he
gives grace to the humble, yet he resists the proud, Iac. 4.6. When he does
increase the gifts of the meek, he will take away what he has given to the
proud, leave them destitute like a Well without water, a tree without fruit,
leaf, or branch, hence Luc. 1.53. They who feel themselves empty like hungry
stomachs, Matthew. 5.6. thirsty like dry grounds, the Lord will give abundantly
to drink out of the Wells of salvation, but the rich, such as be puffed up with
the conceit of their own goods, these shall remain like empty vessels, empty
of the true knowledge of God; joy of the Spirit, sense and feeling of the Word
of God in his heart, as a man will send away him whom he knows to have money
enough without an alms from his door, and as a King takes away weapons,
places of dignity from them, that lift up themselves and rebel against him,
Luke 14.11. The higher men do exalt themselves, the more God will abase them,
as 2 Sa. 15.2. Acts 12.22. therefore let us take heed of all high conceits of
our own excellencies.



1. By the instrument or means which does work it; and that is the preaching
of the Word of God, the Law and Gospel together, this does awaken the
conscience like a sounding trumpet, this throws down high thoughts, as the
sounding of the rams horns did the Walls of Jericho, Ios. 6.20. this has made
you with the jailour, Acts 16.31. with Paul, Romans 7.9. this light has caused
you to fall to the ground, like that Acts 9.3. this like Daniels vision, Dan.
10.8. you have felt how the Lord has pricked your conscience with this goade,
Eccles. 12.11. How the wounding of this arrow have made you fall down before
the Lord, Psalm. 45.4. How this looking glass, this Sun has acquainted you
with the spots that stick in your Souls like dirt in a garment, and has made
you vile in your own eyes, you have experience how God has laydsiedge against
your Souls, how by the Ministry of his word, he has made you see your own
weakness, caused you to lay down your weapon, yield up your selves, and seek
and sue for peace, you have felt how the Gospel of God has shined like the
warm Sun into your hearts, and has melted your frozen affections, and how
God, by his goodness has lead you to true repentance, and made you truly
humble, as Ios. 5.1, 7, 5. Iud. 5.45. So the people of God have found at the
coming of the Word, as Psa. 97.4, 5.

2. By your reverent meek and lowly attention to, and entertainment of the
Word of God, receiving it as from the mouth of God himself, 1 These. 2.13. as
that which is the instrument wherein and whereby God will show himself,
powerful in the work of salvation, Romans 1.16. as the Scepter by which Christ
will sway in our hearts, as the Child attends with an awful reverence to the
voice of the Father, the subject to the voice of the King, the Wife to the
voice of the Husband, so do all Gods people attend with all humility to the
voice of God their Father, King, Husband in the preaching of the Gospel, Isai.
66.2.

Ephesians. 3.17. by the comfortable Communion you have with him, blessed enjoyment
of him, To. 5.5. by the experience of his love shed abroad in your Souls like
dew upon the ground, Ps. 24.7.
of his dominion and sway in your hearts like a King in his Kingdom, of the
rare endowments wherewith he does enrich you, as the dweller does adorn his
house, and as the low valleys are clothed in the spring with grass and
flowers: the humble soul is the house where God will dwell, Isai. 57.15. and
as the inhabitant is present, rules, Ioh. 14.21. Ps. 149.4.
and manifests himself in his house, as he garnisheth, defends keeps his
house, so does God the humble, and this does every humble man find the Lord to
be to his soul, Ioh 14.23. Romans 8.9, 13, 14, 15.

4. By the holy, gracious, experimental and saving knowledge you have of God
and his Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.3. Mat. 3.12. Isa. 61.1 Ephesians. 1.13 14.
that is, by the gracious taste you feel of the goodness of God in your hearts,
of the working of his Word upon your Souls, in purging out your corruption,
subduing the lusts which fight against the Soul, healing the wounds which sin
and Satan, darts have made in the conscience, stablishing your faith, sealing
up the forgiveness of sin, acquainting you with the counsel and purpose of God
toward your Soul; the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. are revealed to them
who are humble as babes, Mat. 11.25. as the poor man by his wisdom delivered
the city, so the poor in Spirit, Eccle. 9.14, 15.
they only have the wisdom to know the things of God, and to deliver their
Souls, Prove. 11.2. Psalm. 25.9. for these only do subject themselves to the
Doctrine of life and salvation, Isa. 11.6. and Isai. 61.1.

5. By the joy which you find in your hearts, when the Children and Church of
God are delivered out of any dangers, enriched with any favors, and when the
adversaries thereof are suppressed, Romans 12.15. the meek do mourn with them
that mourn, are afflicted with the affliction of Joseph, Hab. 3.16. Ezra. 9.3,
4. Neh. 1.4. and therefore they rejoice at their welfare, as at their own
prosperity, take the mercies of God bestowed on their brethren as on
themselves, therefore Psa. 34.2. Psa. 69.32. to rejoice at the promotion of the
Gospel, increase of Gods people, enlargement of Gods Kingdom for the Gospels
sake, is as a sign we are humbled.

6. By the emptines and vanity which you find in the creature, in every thing,
saving in God, in your own endowments, in your works, in your possessions, in
all the furniture of the earth, when you look upon the wealth, riches,
pleasures, applause of the World, and on all your own personal gifts, and can
say of them all as the Psalmist in another case, Psa. 33.16. they are all
vain, for the day of battle, wherein we must fight against Satan and our
corruption; when we can in affection value them as an empty vessel, a broken
cisterne, a cloud without rain, a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint, as a
sheath without a sword, a shell without a kernel, a Lamp without Oil, a vain
thing, when we can set the Worlds counsel and proffers thereof at naught, as
they did the counsel of the Lord, Prove. 1.25. When we can esteem it as the
Lord calls it, Amos 6.13. When we can look upon it as upon an Egypt, Isa.
30.7. the comforts thereof as on that, Zach. 10.2. when we can willingly
account all loss, Phil. 3.8. and (...) in this manner deny our selves, and
seek all fulness in God a lone, and cast our selves wholly upon him, this is a
sign that we are truly humbled, Mar. 8.34. 1 Pet. 5.6, 7.

Mat. 11.29. a lesson without the learning whereof they could not be his
Disciples, Mar. 8.34. and it should be our care in the first place to learn
this, as men in their buildings first dig low, and lay the foundation, else all
the building besides will fall, so must we first lay a deep foundation, or else
all our other labor will soon come to nothing, and to this let us be moved.

1. Because the more we have denied our selves, the better we shall be approved
with God, the less we are in our own eyes, the more precious shall we be in
the eyes of God, Isa. 66.2. things which in their own apprehension are poor
and base has God chosen, 1 Cor. 1.27. the deformed bush was the tree wherein
God appeared, Exo. 3.2.

2. Because the less we see in our selves the more we shall see in God and
Christ, the hungry see, abundance of goodness in that food which the full
stomach despises, they who want this humility, say of God and his Ordinances,
Job 21.14. Mal. 3.13. but the truly humble utter another language, Psalm. 63.1,
2, 3. Psalm. 84.10. Psalm. 27.4. they who want this Isai. 53.2. but to others,
Mal. 4.2.

3. Because the more humble we are, the less irksome wrongs, injury and the
burdens of affliction shall be, the lowest trees and buildings are least
assaulted and endangered by the wind, thus Neh. 1 2 3. 2 Samuel 16.11.

4. Because the more humble we are, the more we may be assured of our nigher,
and more spiritual and familiar converse and acquaintance with God, for the
more thoroughly we apprehend the beauty of Gods holiness, the more apprehensive
we are of, and the more we are affected with our own vileness, Genesis 18.27.

5. Because the more humble we are, the more we shall fructify in the grace of
Gods Spirit, Iac. 4.6. as Genesis 29.31. the low valleys do usually drink in most
rain, bear most fruit, as Psalm. 63.13. so Neh. 24.5, 6.

6. Because the more humble we are, the more honor we shall have, Jud. 6.15,
16. Prove: 15.33. as Abigail who cast herself at the feet of David was
afterward made his companion in wedlock, 1 Samuel 25.41. as Luke 5.8, 9, 10. so
Luke 14.11. as Luke 15.16, 22.

7. Because the more humble, the more sweetness, nourishment and spiritual
refreshment shall we suck from the breasts of the Gospel; this will make the
Ordinances of God to be as a pleasant river to the thirsty soul, as Physic to
him that is laden with many and dangerous diseases, Job 33.22, 23. as a hand
taking of a heavy burden from another man's shoulder, Mat. 11.28. as the shadow
of a great tree refreshing the wearied traveller, Isa. 61.1
Gods Ordinances are not so sweet and delightful to any as to the truly
humble, a lively sense of our own vileness, a true apprehension of our own
unworthiness makes Gods Ordinances much the more sweet and savoury to our
palates, Prove. 27.7. Mat. 5.6. their understandings shall be filled with
knowledge, their affections with lone, zeal, holy and fervent desires, their
hearts with peace, and all manner of contentments, they shall find such fulness,
such satisfaction in them, as all the World could not afford the like unto
them, in trouble they shall be filled with peace, in affliction with patience,
in times of opposition with courage, in the days of scarcity with contentment,
hence Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 22.26.

8. Because the humble shall have a competent and comfortable portion of things
appertaining to this life, they shall find a blessed contentment in their
estate, a mervellous fulness in the little they do enjoy, God will so frame
their minds, that a little shall quench their thirst, 2 King. 4.43. a little
shall satisfy their hunger, a little shall fill their hand, God will put such a
fullness into it, that they shall find no want, but shall say, Psalm. 16.5, 6.
their estate shall be like a little vessel full of liccour, a little tree well
laden, a little spring always running, a little shell filled with a good
kernel, like that widows cruise, 1 King. 17.14.15, 16. Ioh. 6.11, 12 13 as
Ioh. 2.7, 9. So can Christ make the poor estate of Gods people, which is weak
and slender as water, to become pleasant as wine, when the great estate of
others is like a great vessel empty of liccour, a great shell without a
kernel, great dry bones without marrow, a high tree without fruit, as Eccles.
5.12. this is a privilege belonging to the meek, Psalm. 37.11. Matthew. 5.5.
Psalm. 34.10.

8. Because the humble shall persevere unto the end in the way of the Lord, in
the duties of true holiness, trees of deep roots endure the violence of the wind
best; houses of a deep foundation stand longest: the more humble men are, the
more earnestly they seek to be filled with that fullness which is in God, the
more firmly they rely upon God, the more contentedly they receive and sustain
all wrongs and injuries; the less advantage Satan has against them, the more
willing and cheerful intertainement they give to all whole some instruction,
the more fully does God pour out his Spirit upon them, and therefore these of
all others continue most constant, Isa. 29.19.

Thus of the humility of the Baptist, next of his care to give all the honor
unto Christ, he must increase but I must descrease, the eyes of men must be
fastened upon him, their hearts and affections must be carried to him, him must
they intertaine as the sole author of their salvation, and in less account
must I be among them.
Christ Jesus may be thereby made the more glorious, we must be contented to
become as nothing, that Christ may be the more honored in the eyes of the
people, we must not seek our selves, but the things of Christ, Phil. 2.21. we
must cast a veil before the beauty of our own faces, if it may make that face
of Christ appear the more beautiful in the eyes of the people, we must cast
down our own crowns at his feet, that all may veil and bow unto him, Rev.
4.10. We must be content to wear a crown of thorns upon our own heads, if
Christ's crown may be thereby made the more conspicuous, this was David's
resolution, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21, 22. this was the practice of Moses, Heb. 11.24,
25, 26.

Cor. 5.15. our Souls and bodies must be yielded up into his hands, Romans 12.1.
our abilities, lives, services must be wholly devoted to him, we must study how
to honor him, be glad of any opportunity to magnify him.

Christ must be more dear to us than any other thing, goods, liberties, lives,
must not be so precious in our eyes, as the honor of God, this we must esteem
before all our own substance and treasure, as the pearl before dross, the
Sun before the Candle, Acts 20.24. Jos. 7.9.

Christ to be honored than to see themselves held in great reputation, they
rejoice more to see the prosperity of Christ's Kingdom, than to look upon the
success of their own estate, it does more comfort them to bring honor to
Christ than to gain abundance of honor to themselves, hence Ga 6.14.

Christ did willingly loose his honor to make us honorable, he became a
Servant to make us free, poor to make us rich, a subject to the Law to make us
Kings, ignominious to make us glorious, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 8.9. therefore
we should gladly leave our own honor to honor him.

Jesus, to become as worms and no men, to be contented to have their names cast
out as odious, to have their faces covered with shame, Psalm. 69.7, 8, 9. that
God may be honored; and for the framing of our hearts hereunto we must
consider. I. What a vain thing it is to have the praise of men without the
praise of God, what is it but an empty vessel that yields no liccour, a deaf
ear that bears no grain, an empty language that gives no comfort, at last
therefore rightly termed by the Holy Ghost vainglory, Gal. 5.26. II. How to
have the praise of men with the dishonor of God is the way to loose our praise
at last both with God and men, and to be buried under the dust of irremoveable
shame, Acts 12.22, 23. Dan. 4.26, 30, III. How the loosing of honor among men
for Christ is the way to get honor both with God and with all good men; the
very dishonor cast upon us for Christ is a greater honor than any dignity the
World could confer upon us, Heb. 11.26. 2 Samuel 6.26. Mat. 19.29. IV. How the
approbation of God and of our own conscience is a thousand fold better than
the approbation of all the men in the World, it is the praise of God, the
witness of a good conscience that gives peace to the heart, boldness toward
God, confidence in the day of distress, assurance of a good estate, of a happy
condition in respect of God, Romans 2.28, 29. 1 John 3.19, 20, 21. V. How there
can be no saving grace in that heart, no acquaintance with Christ, no
experience of the goodness, power, excellency, and efficacy of Christ in that
soul which is regardles of the honor of Christ, that seeks its own
applause, Joh. 5.44, 1. Pet. 5.5, 6.

The last thing in this Verse was the manner of manifesting Christ Jesus, he
must increase.
CHrist Jesus is not fully and at once but by degrees revealed unto his
Servants, the Sun appears by degrees; so does the sun of righteousness by
degrees manifest himself unto his people: the blind man in the Gospel saw men
as trees, first he saw obscurely, afterward he saw more plainly, thus Cant.
2.8. he was seen as on the mountains a far of; then verse. 9. he came nigher,
Joh. 16.29. Luc. 24.31. And our Savior does after this manner reveal himself
unto his people. I. Because of their infirmity, as we reveal things to
Children, teach them a little, and things easy at the first, giving them milk
and not strong meat, Iac. 16.12. Mat. 9.16, 17. II. Because they shall be
sensible of the difficulty of obtaining it: they shall be enforced to seek,
Prove. 2.2, 3. search Ioh. 5.39, to wait, Prove. 8.34. III. This he does to
humble us for our ignorance and removing corruption.

Christ as Scholars in learning, apprentices in their trades, we are not
perfect, 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. therefore with Mary, Luke 10 39. with the lame man,
Joh. 5.5. we must not set still, but 2 Pet. 3.18. we must not cease but strive
to be filled, Col. 1.10.

Christ Jesus revealing himself unto them more graciously, his Kingdom does
increase within them, the longer they are in Christ the more clearly they
understand his will, the more sensibly they are affected with his love, the
more glorious he is in their eyes, the more firmly they cleave to him, the
more strongly they build upon him, the more abundance of contentement they find
in him, the more cheerfully they follow him.

VERSE 31.
THe Baptist having endeavored to remove from himself the sinister opinion
which the Disciples conceived of him, now he plainly delivers his opinion of
Christ, shows by another comparison how far he excels all others, how
much he is superior to all others, likening Christ to a King or supreme
Commander, who speaking from his throne or tribunal is to be hearkened unto
with all reverence, but likeneth himself to one whose seat is in the dust,
infimetily inferior unto Christ, he who comes from above, who is not only
God-man, but also God, who teaches divine and heavenly things, in whom is
nothing but that which is heavenly and full of Majesty, he is above all in the
excellency of his nature, authority, power, wisdom and ability to unfold Gods
counsel, being the only begotten of the Father, in the bosom of the Father;
no creature, man nor Angel being any thing in comparison of him; but he who is
of the earth, even every man, who has an earthly original and beginning, is
earthly, ignorant carnal, weak, savouring of the things of the earth, and can
no further savor, perceive, or speak of the things of God, than as they are
revealed to him, by him, who is from above. The Words set before us. 1. Christ's
excellency. 2. Man's indignity. Christ's excellency is set forth. 1. By his
original he comes from above. 2. By his Dominion, he is above all. Man's,
indignity is set forth. 1. By his original or from whence he is, from the
earth. 2. By his quality or disposition, earthly. 3. By his practice; speaks
of the earth: first of Christ's original he comes from above, that is usually
in Scripture said to be from above, which is from heaven, Acts 2.19. which is
excellent and of great account, of a spiritual and heavenly nature, Gal. 4.26.
or does belong to a heavenly life, Col. 3.1. The Son of God is said to be
from above, because he is God coequall with the Father according to his divine
nature; from the Father by eternal generation, as he is the second person in
the Trinity, he is said to come from above, in that he assumed our nature into
the unity of his person, dwelt in our flesh, appeared in the form of a servant
to work out our redemption.

Christ Jesus, who came to work out our redemption with a divine, and heavenly
original and is even the Son of God by eternal generation, Prove. 8.22, 23,
24, 25, 30. Psalm. 2.7. Phil. 2.7, 8. Mat. 3.17. and this it behoved him to be.

Ioh. 3.16. 1 Ioh. 4.16.

able to tread; a cup, which our Savior himself prayed might pass from him;
a passion which made him sweat drops of blood, which constrained him to
complain of desertion, Psalm. 22.1.

Mic. 6.6, 7. Isa. 40.16. the debt was so great that all the World was too
little to make satisfaction, Isa. 53.10, 11. as Psalm. 49.6, 7.

Rev. 5.3, 4, 5. therefore Ia. 1.18. Col. 2.3. Matthew. 11.27.

Gal. 4.4, 5. He, that was the Son of God, became a Servant to make us the
Sons of God by grace, who were the Servants of sin by corruption, he emptied
himself that we might be filled.

Ier. 2.22. Abanah and Pherphar could not wash away the Leprosy of our Souls,
nothing but the Jordan of Christ's blood could do it, 1 Ioh. 1.7. This
quenches our burning lusts, extinguisheth our carnal and worldly thirst, as
Christ came by blood to justify us, so he came by water to sanctify us, 1 Ioh.
5.6, 8. these things he could not work for us, were he not omnipotent,
alsufficient and from above.

to lead to life eternal, as King. 6.26. so may all the creatures in the World
say in this behalf, and as Psalm. 33.16, 17. so much more in this case,
therefore it is in vain to build on this; for these are as God said of Egypt,
Isai. 31.3. It is to no purpose to cry to them for they will be as deaf as
Baal, 1 King. 18.26. as the Psalmist said of promotion, Psalm. 75.6. so it is
also true of this spiritual promotion, it comes neither from the Sea, nor
from the Land, it cannot be gotten by strength, bought for money, won by
policy, but as Solomon said Eccles. 9.11. so in this case, and as Job 28.12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. so of salvation, for Ioh. 1.13. it is Christ, that is
made unto us of God, 1 Cor. 1.30. earthly abilities have no power hereunto,
these are a weapon too weak to throw down the holds of sin, Satan will say to
these as to the Sons of Sheva, Acts 19.15. these have no power to enlighten
the understanding, 1 Cor. 2.10. no ability to purify the conscience, Dan. 5.5,
6, 7. to cleanse the affections, it is the word and spirit that makes wise
unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.17. that gives peace, Isa. 57.19. reconcileth to God,
2 Cor. 5.19. our salvation is wholly from the Lord, Ier. 3.29. and therefore
let us regard and fasten our eyes upon the means, which is from above, more
than on the means which is here beneath, let us seek for happiness from above
where it may be had, and not here below where it cannot be found, let us not
seek for grapes on thorns, and for figs upon thistles, like them Luke 24.5.

Christ, and his Ordinances have such slender entertainment, why they are no
more respected among the men of the World, they are from above, they are not of
the earth but from a foreign country, as the Sodomites resolved to deal
hardly with Lot, because he was a stranger, Genesis 19.9. so does the Sodomitish
World with Christ, Ioh. 15.19. Joh. 9.29. 2 Pet. 2.12. these things are above
their earth, 1 Cor. 2.14. as Joh. 4.11. they have no bucket to draw, these
things have no savor in their nostrils, 2 Cor. 2.16. as Job 24.17. so Ioh.
3.20. the head stone of the corner is a stone of offense, the way to life is
become a stumbling block, 1 Pet. 2.7. Ioh. 8.22, 23.

Christ Jesus from above, is his original divine and heavenly? then we must
also labor to be borne again from above; to be endued with divine and
heavenly wisdom, that we may know him, so the many blessings which come by
him, a carnal, an unsanctified knowledge cannot conceive him, an unregenerate,
a profane heart has no sense and feeling of these things, the carnal palate
cannot relish these dainties, the unsanctified eye cannot behold this light,
the profane heart cannot intertaine these mysteries, Isa. 29.11. Christ
appears as a worm and no man, Psa. 22.6. as a face wherein is no beauty,
Isa. 52.14. as a storehouse having no treasure, things heavenly must be looked
on with a heavenly eye, holy matters must be discerned by a holy understanding,
entertained with sanctified affections, therefore we must pray with the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.18, 19. with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.33. and when our
understandings are thus enlightened from above, then shall Jesus Christ be
glorious in our eyes, Cant. 5.10. as the appletree among the thorns and
briars, Cant. 2.3. as the Sun among the clouds, as King David in the eyes of
his subjects, more worth than ten thousand of the common people, 2 Samuel 13.3.
like Saul the head above all the residue of the people, beyond measure more
beautiful, more excellent than all the World. II. Then shall we behold in him
all fullness, all sufficiency of all good things, such as eye has not seen,
nor ear heard of shall we find in him, 1 Cor. 2.9. we shall find him to be a
living fountain, whose waters never fail, Joh. 4.14. to be a tree never
barren but always bearing, Rev. 22.10. a sure rock never sinking, Isai. 32.2. a
Sun yielding all fulness of contentement to his servants, Psa. 84.11. so that
they shall say as Elkanah to Anna, 1 Samuel 1.8. and upon better ground than
Esau, they shall say they have mongh. III. Then they shall cast themselves and
their burden upon Christ, as upon a never failing friend, a sure foundation, a
strong Pillar, a Sepheard able to deliver the flock out of the paws of the
bear, and the jaws of the Lion like David, a wall of fire able to defend his
Servants and consume their enemies, for Psalm 9.10. IV. Then shall they have a
low estimation of the things of the earth, look upon them as on waters, that
pass away, as on empty vessels, as on cobwebs soon sweept down, Job 8.14. as
on a slippery place where is no standing, Psalm. 73.18. as on dung and dross of
little value, Phil. 3.8. as on things yielding no true contentment, no sound
comfort, no sure defense, but are as chaungable as the wind, as a garment,
Psalm. 102.26. and therefore they fasten not affections on things here below,
but on things above.

Christ from above? is his original divine and heavenly, then this may comfort
all the Children of God. I. In regard of their emptiness, he has all fullness,
he can abundantly supply our wants, Ioh. 1.14, 16. as the Sea and full clouds
fill the channels. II. In regard of our ignorance, he is full of knowledge, as
the Sun of light, able to make us wise unto salvation. III. In regard of
unrighteousnes, he is from above, he is full, and altogether righteousness; he
has long Roabs to cover us, Ier. 23.6. IV. In regard of trouble of conscience,
he is a Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. Ephesians. 2.14. Mat. 8.26.

Thus of Christ's original, next of his Dominion.
CHrist Jesus has pre-eminence above, and Dominion over all creatures;
therefore called the King of Kings, Rev. 1.5. the great King, Rev. 12.5. Phil.
2.9, 10. and Dominion he has. I. In regard of creation, Col. 1.16, 17. II. In
regard of gubernation, Ioh. 13.3. the very devils are subject to his command,
Mar. 5.8. III. In regard of subjugation, 1 Cor. 15.25. IV. In regard of his
office, for the executing of Gods judgment upon all men and evil Angels, Ioh.
5.22. Dominion he has over his own people. I. As head of that body whereof
they are members, 1 Co. 11.3. II. As a redeemer having first bought us, 1 Cor.
6.26. III. In regard of conquest, having obtained victory over sin and Satan,
Col. 2.15. IV. In regard of possession, having erected his Kingdom within
them. V. In regard of protection being a continual defense unto them, Isa.
32.2.

Christ, cast his precepts behind their backs, make him an enemy by their evil
works, cause him, in steed of being a comfortable and shining Sun, to be a
consuming and burning fire; needs must their estate be dangerous for Christ
whom they dishonor, whom they provoke, is above all, none is able by his
strength to make his part good against him, no wicked man shall by any device
be able to escape from him, he will not be born down with might, he will not be
appeased with money, he will not let any man escape for his nobility, or place
of eminency, though your estate were as glorious, rich, strong as the image in
Nebuchadnezzars vision, Da. 12.32. yet verse. 34.35. none can exalt himself
against him, but to his own destruction, Mat. 21.44. there will be no hiding
place from his wrath, he is above all, all the creatures are at his command,
like the Centurious servant, Mat. 8.9. They are his armies to execute his wrath
upon his enemies, he is above all, there is no hiding of our selves from him,
Psalm. 139.5, 6, 7. Amos 9.1, 2, 3, 4. The strongest shoulder is too weak to
bear the burden of his indignation, the frownings of his face will make the
stoutest heart to stoop, all the nations of the World are in his hand but as
the drop of a bucket, Isai. 40.15. as chafe before the wind, as stubble before
the fire, Nah. 1.4, 5, 6. Iniquity is so repugnant to his nature, to his
honor, to his office, so advantageous to Satan, so averse to this Kingdom,
that it shall not escape without punishment, where it is found without
repentance: no hiding, no vailing, no vain and frivolous pretenses shall
excuse or patronize us, but as the arrow smote Ahab, 1 King. 22 34.
though he disguised himself in the battle, so will the arrow of Gods
judignation smite all ungodly men, notwithstanding all their disguisements; for
Prove. 21.30. though they be never so high, God will bring them down, Obad verse.
4. he will tread them as the dust under his feet, Psalm. 110.1. If they want
their garment, Mat. 22.13. If they refuse to be subject to his government,
Luke 19.27. As it was with Sodom, that would not have Lot to rule over them,
they were burned with fire and brimstone, so will it be with such as will not
suffer Christ to rule over them, however they may flourish for a time like the
old World, promise themselves great things like the rich man, Luke 12.19. yet 2
These. 1.8. Psalm. 2.9.

2. This sets before us their folly, who neglect and leave Christ Jesus, and
pursuing and following other things, turn their backs on him, who is from
above, and turn their faces on the things which are here below: leaving the
living fountain, and digging to themselves broken cisternes, a folly very
manifest. I. Mat. 16 18. Ioh. 10.28.
Because Christ is above all in power; none so able to deliver out of danger to
preserve in safety, he is a sure rock, they who are builded on him shall not
sink, he has a strong arm, there is none shall pluck his people out of his
hand, he is a faithful keeper, Psalm. 32.7. He is a Lion, at whose roaring all
the beasts of the forest shall tremble; Deuteronomy. 32.11. he is an Eagle bearing
his people upon his wings, an Arc sustaining them in the deluge of trouble: he
has power to restrain the fire that it burn not, the winds that they blow
not, the Seas that they be not boisterous, all creatures are in his hands, and
he can turn them for us or against us, Luke 11.21. Ioh. 11.44. Genesis 18.14. Now
is it not great folly to forsake this rock, and build upon the sand, like the
men of Shechem, to leave the shadow of this tree, and to hide our selves under
the bramble, to leave this shield and to arm our selves with brown paper, to
forsake Christ, and trust to the World which will prove a leaking ship in the
stormy day, a broken bow in the battle, able to do nothing.

2. Because Christ is above all in wisdom, all treasures of wisdom are hid
in him, as in a storehouse, Col. 2.3. as light in the Sun, as waters in the
Sea, he is able to endue us, to fill us with the truest, the sweetest, and most
useful knowledge, he is able to frustrate the policy of all our adversaries,
discover and defeat all the stratagems of the old Serpent, he knows how to
heal all the diseases of our Souls, he can teach us how to get the favor of
God, Ephesians. 4.20. how to become the Sons and daughters of God, how to find
sweetness in his Ordinances, Isai. 48.17, 18. how to attain peace in our
consciences, contentment in all estates and conditions, how to make a healing
Medicine of very poison, how to use an enemies sword as a launcing knife: now
what folly is it to leave him, to reject his counsel, and follow them who
cannot teach us the Lords way, open Gods counsel, make us wise unto salvation,
that cannot show us how to win the favor of God, how to get freedom from
Satan, this is a wisdom which the World does not know, which her Schools
cannot teach, which her treasure cannot buy, Job 28.12, 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2.7,
8.

3. Because Christ is above all in love, all the love of the Creature is but a
sparkle to that flame which is in Christ, but a shadow to the substance of his
love: Jacobs love to Rahel, causing him to serve for her seven years in the
heat, and in the cold was much: Jonathans love to David was wonderful, but
Christ's love does far excel them, Joh. 15.13. never such love manifested, a
love so strong, that like a mighty stream it did beat down all the banks of
opposition, Cant. 2.8. a love like an ever living Fountain always yielding
waters of refreshment, like the fire on the Altar always burning, Jo. 13.1. A
Sun that never sets, though sometime for a moment eclipsed, Isai. 54.7. This
is a love as high above the love of men, as the Heaven is above the Earth, as
the Sea in deepth does excel the shallow brook; a love so deep, so
wonderful, that the line of our reason cannot fathom it, Ephesians. 3.19. A love so
sweet, so pleasant, so full of contentement, that it bears a man out against
all the hatred of the World, it makes a man cheerful in the deepest
affliction, Romans 5.5. Confident in the strongest opposition, constant in the
duties of Religion, full of inward rejoicing, heavenly meditations, holy and
gracious desires, Cant. 1.2. better than Wine: Wine is one of the most
comfortable Creatures, rejoicing the heart of man, Psalm. 104.15. makes the
life joyful, Eccles. 10.19. causes to forget affliction, poverty misery,
Psalm. 31.6, 7. but the love of Christ sensibly felt in the hearts of his
Servants, does far excel all worldly pleasure, and causes such as drink
thereof to forget their bitterness, poverty and sorrows: Now is it not great
folly to leave this love of Christ, so far above all love, for the love of
the World, which like a shallow brook is soon dried up; like a tree of rotten
roots is soon withered; like a morning dew soon gone, many times soon
changed into deadly hatred; like Amos love to Thamar, many times full of fraud;
like Dalilahs love to Sampson; like Judasses kiss to our Savior.

4. Because Christ is above all in Care: No Watchman so vigilant, no Keeper so
careful as Christ is over his people, he keeps them as a man will keep the
apple of his eye, Zach. 28. he makes them up as a man will make up his
Jewels, Mal. 3.17. he leads them like a careful guide in a desolate way,
Deuteronomy. 32.12. becomes with them as a Shepherd with his flock, Isai. 40.11. As
Jacob dealt with his Sheep, Genesis 33.14. so does Christ with the Sheep of his
pasture, Isai. 42.3. he deals with them as a Physician with his patient, Isa.
61.1. as a vine-dresser with his vine, Isai. 27.3. as Phil. 2.20. So it is much
more true of Christ: and therefore it is great folly to neglect him, who is so
careful for us, and to set our hearts on that, which has no respect unto us,
no care for us, no thought if we perish.

5. Because Christ is above all in goodness and sufficiency; in him is all
fulness, Rev. 22.1. he is a tree of life laden with twelve sorts of fruit,
whatsoever good thing the Souls of man can desire, Rev. 22 1.
it is fully in him above measure John 3.33. so fully, that we shall be able to
desire no more in him, so much that he can quench our thirst, John 4.14. he
will fill us with good things, Luc. 11.1, 52. he will satiate our Souls with
fatness, and fill us with goodness, Ier. 31.14. He can fill the understanding
with knowledge, the heart with faith, love, zeal, and every good gift, in
prosperity he can fill us with meeknes, in adversity with patience, in a low
estate with contentedness, in every condition, he will be enough unto us; If we
do but embrace him, turn our hearts to him, settle our affections upon him,
then as Solomon gave charge in another case, Prove. 5.18, 19. so shall we find
in this, for they who convert unto Christ, have the promise, Ier. 50.19, 20.
His Ordinances are the breasts, which yield the milk that satisfies, Isa.
66.11, 12. The River that refreshes, Psalm. 36.8. Is it not now exceeding folly
to leave Christ in whom is such and so great fullness?

3. Has Christ pre-eminence and dominion over all creatures, then this must
teach us to give Christ pre-eminence.

1. In our knowledge, if we know nothing else, let us not be ignorant of him,
who ever be a stranger to us; let us get and maintain an holy entire, and
gracious acquaintance with the Lord Jesus, for he is our portion, Psalm. 16.5,
6. and therefore as a man will know his own Lands, and revenewes, though he
remain ignorant of all other men's possessions; so must we know Christ Jesus,
and our interest in him, of whatsoever beside we are ignorant of, he is our
Husband, our beloved, Can. 2.16. he is our Shepherd, Isai. 40.11. he is our
Prophet, our teacher, Acts 10.38. he is our Physician, Isai. 61.1. he is our
Friend, John 15.13. and therefore as a Woman knows her Husband above all
other men, the Sheep know the voice of a Shepherd, and will not hearken to the
voice of a stranger, as the Scholar knows his teacher above all other
instructours, the sick man his Physician, and a friendly and loving man
knows his friend which is to him as his own soul; Deuteronomy. 13.6. So must we
know Christ Jesus above all others, with a more clear, familiar, affectionate
and delightful knowledge, than we know any other, we must study to excel in
this knowledge, this must be the first lesson we learn, the art we should
every day study, we must cry after this, Prove. 2.2, 3. strive to be filled
therewith, as the air with light, Col. 1.10. to grow herein as good Scholars
in learning, 2 Pet. 3.18. esteem all knowledge as vain without this, 1 Cor.
2.2. and account this our best gain, Prove. 4.7, 8. a tree bearing the sweetest
fruit, Prove. 3.16, 17. a knowledge surpassing all other knowledge for
profoundnes, pleasantnes, profitablenes, holiness, as far as the Heavens are
above the Earth, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. therefore rest not till you are better
experienced in this knowledge, than in any other knowledge.

2 Let us give him pre-eminence in our fear: fear him above all creatures,
fear to offend him rather than any other whatsoever beside him, fear the
loss of his favor, the frown of his displeasure; rather, as the Wife fears
the Husband more than the handmaid, the subject the King more than his fellow
subjects, the Servant his Lord and Master, more than his fellow Servants:
Christ is the Husband of his Church; the King of his people, the Lord and
Master of his Family, all creatures are his subjects and Servants, yea, the
very Angels are fellow servants with us, Rev. 22.9. therefore let him have the
pre-eminence in our fear, none so well able to recompense our obedience, none
so powerful to revenge our disobedience, the loss we sustain for him turns
to our best advantage, Mat. 19.28, 29. the service, we perform unto him has
the best wages, Romans 2.10. the headship which he has over us, the price which
he has paid for us, the interest, which he has in us, the great things he
has done for us, the good things he has bestowed on us, the glorious things
he has provided in the Heavens, his ability to support us in all assaults, to
comfort us in all afflictions, to deliver us out of all troubles, the many
relations which are between us do challenge pre-eminence in our obedience, and
bind us to exalt him in our fear, as God has exalted him in his place, Acts
5.29, 30, 31, 32. Mat. 10.28. thus Heb. 11.26, 27. Pet. 3.13, 14, 15. all
creatures are nothing in his hand, none can hurt us when he is pleased with us,
none can defend or comfort us, when his indignation is kindled against us,
therefore Rev. 14.6, 7. he gives victory to such as fear him over their
enemies, therefore Rev. 15.3, 4. and it is the charge, 2 King. 17.36. to 39.

3. Let us give him the pre-eminence in our thoughts: as he is above all, so he
ought to be thought upon before all, his own worthiness, his goodness,
compassion and love to us does challeng: and the love which we should bear to
him, ought to enforce us to yield him precedence in our thoughts, and the first
fruits of our meditations, he should be the last we think on in the evening,
the first we think upon in the morning, the companion of our thoughts in the
whole days travel, as the Wife thinks on her Husband with more frequency,
with more delight, with more seriousnes, and affection, than on any stranger:
so must we think of Christ the Husband of our Souls; this is the charge, Mat.
6.39. thus the spouse, Cant. 3.1. the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.6, 12. We must think
upon his loving kindness in the morning, as David did, Psalm. 59.16. Meditate
upon him and his works in the evening, as Isaac did, Genesis 24.65. yea Ps. 55.17.
He must be always in our thoughts as the person whom we must fervently affect,
the treasure wherein we principally delight, Mat. 6 21. The fountain whence we
draw the waters of sweetest consolation, thus Psalm. 119.97. we must think upon
him in prosperity that we be not lifted up in adversity, that we be not
overmuch dejected, that we run not to forbidden means for deliverances, in
peace as on the author of our welfare, in sickness as on the Physician that can
heal us, in heavines as on the friend that can speak comfortably to us, in
trouble as on him that has authority to appease the stormy tempest, as on the
eagle that has wings to cover us, as on the rock that can cast a comfortable
shadow to refresh us: in time of distraction and doubtfulness, as on the
Counselor which alone is able to advise us, in time of temptation as on the
shield which alone is able to defend us from all the fiery darts of Satan,
under the sense of sin as on the Jordan, which alone is able to wash and
sanctify us in all wants, as on him that can give all fulness of contentement to
us in the midst of our possessions; as on him, whom we must honor with all
our abilities, we must think upon him, how to please him in every estate, in
every undertaking: all our thoughts must be toward him as the streams to the
Sea; as Moses charged Israel touching the Word, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8. the like
charge let me give to you touching Christ, it shall not be in vain, for Mal.
3.16.

4. Let us give him pre-eminence in our speeches, let him be the choicest and
chiefest matter of our language, let our tongues become trumpets sounding his
praises, and clouds plenteously dropping down the knowledge of Christ to
others, as a man speaks freely, frequently, fully, unweariedly of the beloved
of his heart, so must we of Christ the beloved of our Souls, thus the spouse
speaks of him, when she had lost him, she speaks to the watchmen, enquired
for him, she spoke of him to the foreign congregations, makes a large
relation of his excellencies, Cant. 5.10, 11, 12. this is the charge given, 1
Pet. 4.11. Ephesians. 4.29. this was David's promise, Ps. 119.46. this is a singular
fruit of Gods grace, and work of Gods Spirit in the heart of his Servants,
Isai. 19.18. a property of their conversion, as every man speaks the language
of his own country, he may now and then speak in another tongue, but this
has the pre-eminence above all others. This language is most seemly, most
holy, most pleasant, most profitable, this like light shows the way of life
by informing the judgment, this like fire does warm the affections, this like
water does wash away spiritual filthiness, this like dew does make men
fruitful in the grace of the Spirit, this like the crowing of the cock to
Peter does make men go out and weep bitterly for their sin, Matthew. 26.75. This
like the box of ointment casts a sweet savor in the nostrils of Gods
people, Joh. 12.3. This like a goade drives them forward in the ways of God,
Eccl. 12.11. This discovers our love of Christ, or delight in Christ; for out
of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, therefore renomce all
profane, and abridge all worldy, language, and let Christ have the pre-eminence
in your speeches.

5. Let Christ have the pre-eminence in your choice; as he is above all, so do
you chose him before all, it is usual with men to chose what is in it self
most excellent, what will prove most beneficial, what will exalt to the
highest honor, endow them with the greatest riches, give them the sweetest
pleasures, now there is no creature in it self so excellent as Christ, for he
is as the apple tree among the trees of the wood, Cant. 2.3. as the Prince
among the creatures, Rev. 1.5. as the Sun among the Planets, Mal. 4.2. above
all principalities and powers, Ephesians. 1.21. he is the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and the express image of his person, and has a more excellent name
than the Angels, Heb. 1.3, 4. He can advance us to the highest honor, make us
conquerours over all opposers, Romans 8.37. make us Sons, Gal. 4.5. yea, Kings
and Priests to God, Rev. 1.6. a chosen generation, a peculiar people, 1 Pet.
2.9. He can endow us with the best riches, he can bestow those gifts upon us,
which are not to be found in the bowels of the earth, nor to be bought with the
wealth thereof, Job 28.12, 13, 14, 15. riches, which the World does not know, 1
Cor. 2 9. Ioh. 14.16, 17. riches which the thieves cannot steal, which death
cannot take away, Mat. 6.20. Rev. 14.13. an abiding substance, Heb. 19.34. the
unsearchable and glorious riches, Ephesians. 1.5. and 3.8. the very reproach of
Christ is greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: to be scandalized,
traduced, persecuted, cast out as vile for the cause of Christ, is better and
more gainefull in the judgment of Gods people, than to win the World with the
denial of Christ: he can bring us in to the Paradise of the choicest
pleasures, make our Souls as a watered garden, satiate us with fatness, Ier.
31.14. make us drink abundantly out of the rivers of his pleasures, Psalm.
38.6. every way replenish and content us, so fill us with his presence, favor,
goodness, that we shall have no cause to complain of any emptines, but
whatsoever we want, we shall see it all in him. Therefore let us choose him
above all others, as Moses did, Heb. 11.25, 26. as Paul did, Mat. 4.20. Psalm.
119.30. Phil. 3.8, 9. Let him be in our eye the fairest of all persons, Cant.
5.10. let us join our selves in wedlock to him before all others, for as
Prove. 16.16. so it is much more true of Christ the giver of wisdom, the
author of every good blessing, and Psalm. 33.12. for as Jud. 8.2.

6. Let us give him the pre-eminence in our faith, as he is above all, so let
us trust him, and rely upon him above all; He is not sand, but a sure
foundation, Matthew. 7.24, 25. It is our best wisdom to build upon him; Let us
not trust upon any arm of flesh, any created abilities, for these can do
nothing without him, if he put not a fullness into them, they are an empty
vessel, a dry breast, a fruit tree like that in the Gospel, Mat. 21.19. a
rotten ship that breaks asunder in the stern, a Ionahs gourd that is soon
withered, Io. 4.8. there is no trust to be put in it, Ps. 62.9, 10. Job 8.14
Iud. 9.15. Ps. 78.22. Let us trust in the Lord Jesus, draw nigh unto him with
our hearts, cast our selves and our burdens upon him, put our self into his
hand, trust him with our Souls, with our bodies, with our credits, with our
possessions, trust him in prosperity, when we have the abundance of all things,
rely on him alone as if we had nothing, trust him in adversity when we have
nothing being as confident, as if we had all things, as the Apostle says of
patience, Ia. 1.4. So let me say of faith, let faith have his perfect work,
trust the Lord in every estate, in every undertaking, in every affliction,
trust him in health, in sickness, in liberty, in bondage, in riches, in poverty,
in temptation, in peace, trust him in six and be not doubtful of him in seven
trouble, for he is above all, he can do all, nothing is impossible, if we can
believe. Mar. 9.23. all things shall be according to our faith, Mat. 9.29.
there is water enough in this Well, if we have faith like a bucket to draw,
there is riches enough in this storehouse, if we have faith, like a key to
open, there is stedfastnes enough in this rock, if we have faith like a sure
anchor to lay fast hold upon it, there is no danger so great, but if we have
faith in him, we shall pass thorough it, Matthew. 17.20. by faith we shall do as
they did, Heb. 11.29, 30, 31, 32, 33. By faith Christ dwells in us, is become
ours, and then nothing can be too hard for us, when he is omnipotent who is
within us, 1 Samuel 17.45. Goliath was better armed, but by faith the Lord was
with David, by faith the Lord is our strength, Psalm. 37.39. and Marc. 5.26, 29,
34. this is Gods precept, 1 Ioh. 3.23. this is the way to prosper, Ier. 15.5.
therefore as 2 Cro. 20.30.

7. Let Christ have pre-eminence in our love, as he is above all, so we must
love him above all creatures, the choice, the strength of our affection must be
bestowed upon him, Deuteronomy. 6.4. We must love him with all manner of love, as the
work the of his hand that framed it, the creature the Creator, for we are the
work of his hands, Col. 1.16. as the subject loves his gracious Sovereign,
for he is the Prince of our peace, Isa. 9.6. as the ransomed loves him that
redeemed him, for he is our Redeemer, 1 Timothy 2.6. as the Disciple loves the
teacher, for he is our Master, Mat. 10.24. as one friend does love another, for
he is our choicest friend, John 15.13. as the Wife the Husband; for he has
joined himself in wedlock to us, so we must love him with creatures love, a
subjects love, a ransomed man's love af, a true love, etc. Hos. 2.19. none in
himself so worthy to be beloved, none ever can so well deserve our love, none
will, none is able so abundantly to requite our love, none does or can so well
entertain our love, none can yield such abundant satisfaction to our
affection; therefore let us give him the chiefest room in our affections, let
us have our hearts so wrought upon, that with the spouse we be even sick of
love, Cant. 2.4. that Psalm. 73.25. that 2 Cor. 5.14.

8. Let Christ have the pre-eminence in our joy, as he is above all, so let us
rejoice in him more than in Father, Mother, Child, Wife, or any other
endowment, as Paul said of the Thessalonians, so let us say of Christ, 1 These.
2.19, 20. this was the Apostles charge, Phil. 4.4. and his resolution, Gal.
6.14. Gods people can see nothing but Christ, worthy to be rejoiced in, the men
of the World do hate them, Ioh. 15.19. the strength and riches of the world
have vanity and changeablenes in them, Psa. 33.17. Psalm. 60.11. 1 Cor. 3.20,
21. the peace and pleasures of the World are great strangers to them, their way
is full of thorns, their day full of clouds, their habitation is like a house
in the wilderness, their condition like the condition of Pilgrims, Psa. 34.19.
1 Pet. 2.11. only Christ is their comfort, Phil 3.3. He brings remission of
sin, reconcileth them to God, and therefore in him they rejoice, Romans 5.11. He
makes peace for them, works peace in them, he reveals Gods counsel to
them, 1 Cor. 1.30. therefore verse. 31. they have nothing whereof to rejoice but
it comes from him, therefore behoofull they should rejoice principally in him,
and turn all matter and occasion of rejoicing to rejoicing in Christ.

9. Let us give him pre-eminence of Dominion in our hearts, in our lives above
all others, above the World, above Satan, above our own corruption; Let Christ
have the whole possession of the heart, let sin like Dagon be cast to the
ground, 1 Samuel 4.5.
and the Kingdom of Christ like the Arc erected: let the whole man be made
universally subject to him, let the eye in seeing, the ear in hearing, the
tongue in speaking, the hand in working, the foot in walking, the heart in
thinking, the understanding in judging, the will in chosing, the affections in
embracing or refusing, show their subjection, yield unto Christ the chief
Dominion: every Member, every faculty must be so serviceable, that Christ may
be able to say of it, as the Centurion of his Servants, Mat. 8.9. They must all
wait like Ahimaaz for their commission, and run as soon as Christ shall give
their charge unto them; This is the Apostles charge, Romans 6.13. his
commendation of the Romans, verse. 17. Christ must have no corrivals, he must
reign as King alone, he will not live as a Servant, it must not be in this as
Solomon saw it sometimes in another case, Eccles. 10.7. Christ will not walk on
foot, and the World, Sin and Satan on hors-back, no neither will he ride in the
same Chariot with them, 2 Cor. 6.14.15. as he is above all, so he will rule
over all.

10. Let Christ have the pre-eminence in all our undertakings, as he is above
all, so let us above all things seek his glory; let us as it were set Christ
upon our shoulders, that he only may be preheminent, that he only may be
seen, and we like men stand in the crowd not taken notice of: if Christ may be
honored, let us be content to be reproached, if be may be enriched, let us be
willingly made poor; thus the Baptist was content to be as a tree that
withers, that the beauty of Christ, the tree of righteousness might be the
more glorious, to lose his honor, if thereby the honor of Christ might
increase: so Paul 2 Cor. 4.3. he exalted Christ, did not preach himself, did
not set forth himself, show his wit, learning, eloquence, hunt applause, but
sought only how to make Christ glorious, as a man that carries a light to
direct others, does not put forth himself, but puts forth his light that all
may see by it; a man that goes to take fowl puts forth his bait, but hides
himself, so Gal. 1.10. Acts 20.24. 1 Cor. 10.31, 33. Acts 3.12. In all these
things we must study to give Christ the pre-eminence.

This serves for the singular comfort of all Gods Servants, who by a lively
faith are ingrafted into Christ, and have embraced him as their Husband, their
portion, and the only beloved of their souls, there is no cause of repentance,
of going back, of leaving Christ, though Christ be alone as Naomi was, in much
affliction, in much reproach, poverty, envy, trouble, yet they may well say to
him, as Ruth to Naomi, Ruth. 1.16. and to all that shall question with them
hereabout as Pilate answered them, Ioh. 19.22. what I have chosen, I have
chosen, I will not reverse it, and to all you that have laid hold on him, that
have entered into Covenant with him, let me say as Paul in another case to the
Galatians, Gal. 5.1. stand fast in the choice you have made, suffer not your
hearts to be divorced from Christ, to be brought again in bondage to the World;
let not honors, pleasures on the one side, nor taunts, reproaches,
persecutions, losses on the other side divide your hearts from Christ, as once
the evil spirit made a breach between Abimelech and the men of Sechem. Iud.
9.23.
But ever remember whatsoever the World proffer, or threaten; Christ is above
all, he will make a large satisfaction for all, and therefore having Christ,
comfort your selves.

1. Against adversaries, be they never so powerful, subtle, violent, full of
fury and indignation, Christ is above all, above all in wisdom, turning all
the devices of the crafty Achitophels of the earth into foolishnes, 2 Sa. 1^,
31.
and Isa. 44.25. he takes them in the snares of their own spreading, in the
pits of their own digging; there is, Prove. 21.30, 31. for he can do great
things, Job 5.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. he is above all in power, he can open the
prison; Acts 12.7, 8. he can divide the Sea, Exodus 14.30, 31. he is a man of
war, Exodus 15.3. he is a valiant Captain, Ios. 5.14. he can make us valiant,
Psalm. 60.12. he can make one of us chase a thousand, Ios. 23.10. If he be the
leader of the army, he can overthrow the Walls of Jericho with the sound of a
Rams horn, Ios 6.20. Jud. 7.13.21.
he can smite our enemies with blindness, send a trembling into their hearts,
overturn them with a barley cake, and make their bowels sheaths for their own
swords; it is all one to overcome with few or with many, to cast down with a
stone or with a sword, with a Jaw bone or with a thousand men, with a goade or
with a multitude of Canon shot.

2. Against the strength of sin, the mighty power of Satan, though our lusts be
as untamable as the wilds beasts in the forest, yet he can put a bridle into
their lips, though they be like the bloody issue, which no Physician could
cure; Ier. 2.24 Mar. 5.26.
yet Christ is above all, he can dry them up, though they be like a deep, a
strong, and swift running stream, he can stay them, though they be like Trees of
a deep Root, of a mighty growth, yet he can pluck them up, though they be
strong holds, yet he can cast them down, as David took the fort of Syon
notwithstanding all the strength thereof, 2 Samuel 5.
so 2 Cor. 10.5. he can tame the Lion, Isai. 11.6, 7. the virtue of his death
can make iniquity to moulder like a tree, whose roots are rotten, like a house,
whose foundation is decayed, like a body which has received a deaths wound,
though it be as strong as the buildings of the Temple, To. 6 4. Mat. 24.1, 2.
yet as that was cast to the ground, not one stone left upon another, so can
Christ cast down our sins, that not one lust shall remain upon another: as
David overthrew Goliath, and made all the Philistines fly: 1 Sa. 17.
So will Christ overthrow Satan and put all our lusts to flight, the same power
that opened the eyes of the blind, that healed the lame, that raised the dead,
can and will do the like for us. He is above all, who is our Savior, our
Physician, our Husband, our Friend, the beloved of our Souls; therefore think
of this and be comforted,

3. Against spiritual assaults and grievous temptations, perplexity and anguish
of conscience, though no bed can give us rest, no Sun can give us delight, no
Fountain afford refreshment, no Music can give any comfort, no friend, no
earthly treasure, no tidings give contentment, but all paths are paths of
Thorns, Exo. 15.25. 2 King. 4 40.
every speech dreadful as Thunder, every Fountain as the waters of Marah, all
manner of comfort that can be presented, like the Prophets pottage, whereof
they cried there was death in the pot, yet the Lord Jesus is above all, he is
the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. he he can still the stormy Tempest, Math. 8.26.
he can cast out the unclean spirit that casts men into the fire and into the
water, Mark 9.22.
into manifold troubles and perplexities, he can cure the stinging of the fiery
Serpent, Math. 21.6, 7. he can bind up the broken heart, and heal the wounded
spirit, Isa. 61.1.
though it be a burden in supportable, yet he can give us ease, Matthew. 11.28.
he can make our peace like a River, turn the winter of our sorrow into a
pleasant spring, Isa. 48.18.
the Hail and Thunder of trouble into the Sunshine of sweet and pleasant rest.

4. Against all reproaches and contumelies. Christ our head, our sovereign, our
husband is above all, Isa. 53.2.14.
therefore though for the present we are in the eye of the world as our Savior
was, a face wherein was no beauty, a dry Tree without leaves, Isa. 8.18. 1 Cor.
4.9. Heb. 10.36. Joh 7.47. Jer. 30.17. 1 Cor. 15.19. 1 Cor. 1.26.
without fruits, signs, wonders, spectacles, gazing stocks, a cursed people,
outcasts, the worst of all sinners, the most miserable of all base things, and
things which are not; yet let us remember that Christ is above all, and that we
are Members of the body whereof he, who is the head, is above all the spouse of
that husband, who is the Prince of all Kings: let us remember whatsoever we are
in the eye of the world, yet in, and through Christ we are, Exodus 19.5. as the
Sun, Phil. 2.15. Jewels, Mal. 3.17. Kings, 1 Pet. 2.9. the most honorable and
glorious people in the world, therefore Cant. 1.9, 10, 11. Cant. 6.10.

5. Against all wants. Christ Jesus, who is ours; is above all, in him there is
all fullness: Therefore let us comfort and assure our selves in all our
necessities, there shall no good thing be wanting, for all things are in Christ
in a transcendent manner, after a more full and larger sort than in the
creature, as light is in the Sun after a fuller manner than in the Gloe-worm,
he, who has him, if he be well experienced in him, shall find enough to supply
himself; if a man want love from the world, the love of the Lord Jesus will
abundantly recompense it, as the love of the King, of the Master, will
abundantly recompense the want of the love of the beggar, of the servant: if a
man want honor, estimation, respect among men, to be honorable in the sight
of God, to have sonship with God, heirship with Christ will largely answer it:
if a man want fellowship with men, fellowship with God, Christ sufciently
countervaileth it: if a man want rich and glorious apparel, the royal roabs of
Christ's righteousness, the Needle-wrought Garment of sanctification will
abundantly supply that want: if a man want dainty food, have nothing but the
bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, the spiritual dainties which
God affords his servants will be sufficient, he who has Christ has all
things, has him, who is above all things, he has Lands, Gold, Silver, honor,
peace, pleasure, and more than all this, as he who has the Sun has the light
which is in many Torches, and more: again if a man want an earthly object
whereon to fasten his love, his trust, whereon to express his joy, whereto to
reveal his mind; yet Christ is above all, and on him, and about him, he may
with more delight and fullness of contentment express his love, his joy, his
trust, desire and speech, than to any creature in the world, so that this
should exceedingly comfort us in all our wants, for Ephesians. 1.21.22.

6. Against the fierceness of Gods anger, the mighty force of Gods
displeasure, Isa 33.14.
though it be a fire which all the water in the world cannot quench, as the
roaring of a Lion that makes all the beasts in the forest to tremble, Amos
3.8.
like a mighty wind rending the rocks. Nah. 4.5. like that 1 Kings 19.11. an
Arrow that dries up the spirits, Job 6.4. a burden which no created shoulder
can bear, a Sword whose prickings, a Scorpion whose slingings, a rod whose
lashings none can without desperation endure, though it makes profane men at
last say as once Job in the extremities of his anguish did, Job 3.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. that Rev. 6.16. though like the appearing of the
handwriting, Dan. 5.4, 5. like the tidings, Jos. 5.1. though it be of all
terribles the most terrible, of all noises the most hideous, of all fires the
most hot the most fervent, of all Arrows the most sharp, of all Gall the most
bitter, of all Clouds the most dark, of all ways the most Thorny, of all
burdens the most heavy, of all tidings the most dismal; yet fear not, the
Lord Jesus is above all, Romans 8.34. Heb. 12.24.
he is at the right hand of his Father interceding for us, he will stand
between us, and his fathers indignations, his blood speaks better things than
the blood of Abel, Romans 5.9, 10. 1 These. 1.10. by him we have access to God,
Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 2.17. he will turn the consuming fire into a warm and shining
Sun, the exceeding wind into a still voice, the stormy Tempest into a calm,
the dreadful voice into a joyful sound, Mount Synai into Mount Syon, he will
bring us from Mount Ebal to Mount Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 11.29.

7. Against the difficulty of attaining grace, working, perfecting true
holiness, though it be a work of the highest transcendency, a work not to be
wrought by the finger of men, or any angel: not sound in any earthly Mine, a
flower not growing in our Gardens, a Tree not to be planted by the Art of the
choicest husbandmen, though Job 15.14. though 2 Cor. 3.5. though Ier. 13.23.
though Mat. 7.15, 16. though Isa. 11.6. though Ier. 2.24. Ier. 17, 9. though as
Martha told Christ, Ioh. 11.39. so we stink in the grave of sin, yet Christ is
above all, though Abana and Pharpar cannot wash away Naamans Leprosy, yet
Jordan can, though the Disciple cannot cast out the unclean Spirit, yet Christ
is able, he can turn the Lion into a lamb, the thorn into a vine, as he turned
water into Wine, he can open the eyes of the blind, the ears of the deaf, heal
the hands that are withered, the feet that are lame, he can stop the bloody
issue, cure all diseases, he can send his Spirit into our hearts, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
Ioh. 1.29. Ioh. 8.36: 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 These. 5.23. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. therefore
think on this and be comforted.

Thus of Christ's excellency: next let us look upon man's indignity,
described by his original of the earth; Man is resembled to the earth; in
regard of the bodily part whereof he consists; he was made of the dust, and
in regard of the corruption he has contracted, dishonorable condition
whereinto his sin has brought him; for as the earth of all the other Elements
is most subject to men's feet, tends downward, is full of slime, corruption,
and the receptacle of worms, vermines and many noisome creatures, so are the
bodies of men brought into a low estate, even as low as hell thorough sin: the
minds of men are altogether downward upon the things of the earth; dens of all
uncleaness: such does the Baptist show man's original to be to his Disciples,
to teach them not to magnify man, nor to think over highly of him, but to
ascribe all honor unto God and the Lord Jesus, who is from above: whence
learn,

Genesis 18.27. composed of the dust in regard of his bodily, and visible parts,
Genesis 2.7. his foundation is said to be laid in the dust, to note his frailty,
easily cast down as a house builded on no better foundation than the dust, Job
4.19.

which covers us by day, and is not put off by night, should always mind us
hereof, be as water to quench, as a warlike instrument to throw down all high
thoughts which exalt themselves, the flowers have beauty, the trees have
blossoms, leaves, fruit, the Cattle have strength, the stars have brightness
and glory, but what has the dust whereof to glory; no Creature has less
cause of glorying, than man has of himself, if we look either upon his earthly
original or corrupt condition, since the fall of Adam; therefore as the
blackness of the Peacocks feet take away the pride he would otherwise take in
his feathers, so must the dusty condition of man take away all occasion of
glorying, which may arise from the other endowments God has bestowed on him.

Cor. 1.20. Ioh. 3.8. Exodus 3.2, 3. Zeph. 3.12.

Christ, David, thought it much, that he having stood behind the Ewes, should
be advanced in marriage with an earthly Kings Son, how much more should we
magnify the Lord for advancing us to Wed-lock with Christ the Son of a
Heavenly King, so did the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.3, 4. Oh! let this till our hearts
with love to God, with joy and confidence in God; let this cause us to study
how to walk worthy of the loving kindness and mercy of the Lord, let us in
nothing provoke him.

Thus of his original, next of his disposition, earthly: before we proced any
further in it, how the Baptist could say he was of the earth and earthly,
whether in saying so he did not offer wrong, and injury to his Doctrine in so
saying, since it is said, Ioh. 1.6. and Mat. 21.25. also Luc. 7.30. Resp. this
is a comparative speech, between the Baptist and our Savior in regard of whom
he was as nothing, no more than, no, nor so much as the Earth to Heaven, the
Servant to his Lord, the Candle to the Sun. 2. the Baptist shows what man is
being once set in opposition against Christ, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Heb.
12.20.
even the most excellent, then he becomes earth, dust, corrupt, unprofitable,
intimating plainly that if his Disciples did so fasten their eyes on him as
thereby to neglect Christ, then how holy, how Heavenly, how excellent soever,
yet he should be to them as an earthly and a carnal man. 3. He shows what
man is being considered in himself, and of himself, nothing but earth, and
earthly disposed. 4. Though his Doctrine and commission were from heaven; yet
this was not a stream from his own fountain, a light of his own kindling; but
he had it from above, it was the Lords and not his, thus you see how and why
the Baptist said he was of the earth and earthly, thereby teaching,

Exo. 15.28. 2 Kin. 4.49.
a stream whose waters are altogether slimy, bitter, unsavory, like the waters
of Mara, unwholesome, like the pottage in the Prophets pot till grace be
infused; as the tree was cast into the water by Moses, and the meal into the
pot by the Prophet, therefore likened to a corrupt tree whose nature and fruit
are both naught, Mat. 7.17. to a vine bearing no other but sower grapes, Isai.
5.4. to evil ground bearing thorns and briars, Heb. 6.8. to swine wallowing
in the mire of sin, trampling the precious pearls of the Gospel and
sanctification under their feet, Math. 7.6. to a sick man whose Palate is
altogether disordered, Romans 8.7. 2 Cor. 2.14. to a dead man, whose inclination
is wholly to the earth, Ephesians. 2.1. and therefore Psalm. 14.3. Genesis 6.5, 5. and
this is moreover manifest,

1. By the absence of all true and saving grace, there is nothing of heaven
remaining in him, their souls like the pit, whereinto Joseph was cast, are
empty, having no water of grace in them, Genesis 37.24. like a barren womb that
has neither birth nor conception, a barren Tree that bears no fruit Hosea
10.1. like a man fallen into the hands of thieves, like him, Luke 10.30. stripped
of all the apparel which should cover his soul, robbed of all the jewels of
grace, wounded and half dead in his very natural abiliaments, of whom that may
be verified which the Prophet speaks of Niniveh, Nah. 2.10. the natural man
is empty and void, and wast, blackness covers his soul, he is full of
uncleanness, there is no heart nor courage for God remaining in him; and which
the Prophet said of Nebuchadnezar, Jer. 51.34. the natural man may much more
say of sin, and Satan, the great Nebuchadnezar, the great Babylonish Prince of
darkness: He has crushed them, and made them empty vessels, taken away their
heavenly riches, and has cast them out of Gods favor and gracious presence,
made him as a naked house, wherein is no inhabitant, no household implement,
Romans 7.18. all their abilities to good are now become like Jeroboams withered
hand, which he could neither put forth nor take in, so they are neither able to
reach forth to any good, nor take their hands in from any evil.

2. By the presence and the fullness of all sin, Ps. 140.3. Ps. 5.9. Isa. 11.6
being full of uncleanness, as pits in a rainy day of water, as an Adder of
poison, as a grave of rottenesse, as a Lion of fierceness, as a Cage of
unclean Birds, as the sluggards field of thorns and briars; as the Prophet said
of the people, Ezekiel. 7.23. the Land is full of bloody crimes, the City is full
of violence, so is the body of man full of iniquity, and the Soul is full of
uncleanness, as the waters in Egypt, which were clear, were turned into
blood, so that the fish died, and the Rivers stunk, so that all the faculties
in the Soul and Members of the body are corrupted, perverted, and the grace,
which once was in them, is utterly dead, and man is now become as an unsavory
carcass in the nostrils of God.

3. By the Dominion and sway of Satan, he rules like a King Ephesians. 2.3. leads
like a Tyrant, 2 Timothy 2.26. works like a Blacksmith upon his Anvill, Ephesians. 2.2.
is worshipped like a God, 2 Cor. 4.4. affected, reverenced, obeyed like a
father, Ioh. 8 44. as ready to execute his commands, as the servants of Absolon
were to accomplish his, 2 Samuel 13.28. 29. If he bid then wait an opportunity to
do mischief, they wait, bid them open their mouths to revile, blaspheme, use
filthy communication, presently they swear, reproach, and utter unseemly, and
corrupt language, etc.

4. By the wonderful agreement which is between the carnal heart and sin, and
the world, these like Simeon and Levi they are brethren in evil, like Herod and
Pilate they conspire against Christ, the truth, the life, the power of
Godliness: like Jehu and Jehonadab they give the right hand of fellowship one
to another, and ride both in one Chariot, and what combats soever may seem to
be between them: however, sin may sometime trouble the natural man's conscience,
how sick soever it may make him for the present, yet with the Dog he will eat
up again his vomit, he will never so fall out with sin, but he will soon be
friends, he will be able still to call it brother, as Ahab after his wars with
Benhadad could ask, is my brother Benhadad yet alive, and though the Lord
command him to destroy his sin, give it into his hand, gave him all advantage
over it; yet as Ahab made a Covenant with Benhadad, and let him go; so will
the natural man with his sin: sin is the natural man's Absolon, David warred
against Absolon, but has had no purpose to destroy him, so the natural man
(when his sin does sometime disturb him) begins to make a little war against
it, but never means to set himself so to work as to destroy it: sin is the
natural man's Paradise wherein he does desire to live, his path wherein he would
always walk; the companion, with whom he delights to communicate, the
forbidden Tree of whose fruit he delights to eat, the fountains of whose
waters he thirsts to drink, the only recreation wherewith they desire to be
refreshed, Prove. 14.9. they can say of sin and the world, as Ruth of Naomi,
Ruth. 1.15, 6. they will not be entreated to leave it, but when it goes they
will go with it, if it go into captivity, into prison, into noysom diseases,
into poverty, reproach; nay, though they are surerely and infallibly showed
that it goes to Hell, yet they will go with it.

5. By their dislike of holiness, and all the means teaching man to lead a
holy life, this is like fetters to the man possessed with an unclean spirit,
Mark. 5. Psalm. 2.
they break these cords as he brake them, like the Sun to diseased eyes, Job
24.13. like a Candle to him that has stolen goods, Ioh. 3.19.20. like the
handwriting to Baltazzar, Dan. 5.5. no weed so unsavory to their Nostrils, Dan.
5.5.
no Gall so distastefull to their Palates, no noise so terrible to their Ears:
this is a stranger, they will give it no entertainment, an enemy they will make
war against it, Romans 8.7. they watch an opportunity as Judas to betray Christ,
as Esau to murder Jacob, so they to betray to destroy this if possible they
might, it is as offensive to them as Mordecai to Haman, Hest. 5.13.
nothing can give them contentment as long as this prospers, by which it is
apparent that the natural man's disposition is altogether carnal.

below, as the streams go down the Channel, or the earth moves down toward
the Center; not think it strange that the carnal world wonders after her own
lusts, Rev. 13.3. Jude 18.24.
as the Popish idolatrous world after their beast, that they pursue the earth
and the vanities of the same as Micah pursued his Idol, that they lie
overwhelmed in sin as once the world was overwhelmed with the deluge, that Hill
and vale, high and low, rich and poor, learned and ignorant, even all (a few
poor despised, yet sanctified Souls excepted) given unto covetousness and
carnal lusts, as the Prophet long since complained, Ier. 6.14. Matt. 7.13. 2 Chronicles. 10.21. 1 Samuel 20.27.
that the broad way is full, the narrow way has few travelers, that Baals
house is full, the seats in Gods house, like the seats in Saul's house in the
new Moon, were empty, yesterday and to day, Sabbath after Sabbath, that the
world, the earth, riches, honors, pleasures are in great request: heaven,
religion, holiness, duties of sanctification in little, or none at all. Marvel
not I say at this, shrink not back from God, leave not the Lord Jesus, for this
the three hundred Soldiers left not Gideon, though many thousands went back
from him, Jud. 7.6.7.
Joshua and Caleb turned not back from following the Lord, though Israel
besides did, and perished: let Peter's resolution be your practice, though all
men forsake him, yet go not you back from him, be not moved, be not shaken at
the sight of the multitude of profane persons, for all men are earth and
earthly, and 1. They are ignorant and see no beauty, no benefit, no pleasure in
the way of Godliness, it is to them as a light under a bushel, a fountain shut
up, Luke 19.42. these are like the Gods, of whom Daniel spoke, Dan. 5.23. these
are, as Ier. 5.4. Psalm. 82.5.2. they are sick and cannot relish the good
things of God; their Palate has lost its taste; bread is as gravel, Wine as
Gall, a feast of the choicest heavenly delicates, as the white of an Egg which
has no taste, or unsavory meat which cannot be eaten without salt, Job 6.6.
what our Savior said to Peter in one particular, may be universally verified
of every carnal man, thou savourest not the things of God, 2 Samuel 19.36, 37.
but of men, and what Barzillai said to David in another case, every carnal
man may say of himself unto God, I am old in sin, and cannot taste the Word of
the Lord, and let not me be pressed to this, and that duty of holiness to follow
the Lord with such preciseness, but let me return to mine own way, fashion
delights, etc. 3. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. 1 Timothy 4.
They are dead in sins and trespasses, no more feeling of sin than a dead man
of the disease, no more sense of the working of Gods Word, then feared flesh of
the prickings of a needle, as Psalm. 6.5. so there is no thought, no remembrance
of God among carnal men, they have no thought of Heaven, life eternal, the
way and means tending thereunto. 4. They know not things of any better nature
than the earth, the Cattle know not any better thing than pasture in the field,
water in the brook, and therefore never look after wine and other delicates: so
the natural man knows nothing but this World, not knowing the comforts of
the Gospel, the sweetness of Gods love, the pleasantness of the peace of a good
conscience, think there is no clearer nor warmer sun, no more pure nor pleasant
stream, no sweeter music than peace and prosperity in this World; Ioh 4.10
Ioh. 6.26.
the Woman of Samaria knowing no other water than such, as was in Jacobs Well,
asked not water of life from Christ, knew not what he meant when he spoke of
it, the unsound Disciples knowing no other bread than that which nourishes the
body, thought not upon the bread which nourishes the soul unto life eternal.
5. They are inconsiderate, hasty, and violent in the pursuit of their own
projects, in accomplishing their own purposes, in running their own way, in
following their own counsel, in fulfilling their own lusts, therefore likened
to the Adder, Psalm. 58.5. the wild ass, Ier. 2.24. mad men, Jerem. 17.9 they
have in heart to consider what the issue will be of all their evil doings,
though they set thorns, yet they think they shall gather grapes, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
though they serve sin, yet they think the wages shall be eternal life, though
they sow to the flesh, yet they hope to reap life everlasting, thus Psalm. 36.1.
and though they be like them, Isa. 65.4. like him, Mar. 5.4. 5. Though they
have fellowship with the workers of the works of darkness, though they be men
of swinish condition and conversation, though there souls be full of the breath
of abominable things, though they break the strongest bonds of Gods precepts,
wound themselves with many lusts as with swords and spears, yet like them,
Isai. 65.5. they spare not to think to say they are better than the dearest of
Gods Children, so highly are they opinionated of their own goodness, so
strongly are they wedded to their own afflections, that all admonition is but
as water upon a black Moor, dew upon a rock, it makes no impression, but as
Solomon says, Prove. 27.22. Now this being the qualification, order,
disposition, bent and course of every natural man's heart and life, it is no
marvel that the World is generally profane, nor let any go back, because there
are so few, that set and keep their feet constant in the way to life.

2. Is this the condition of corrupt man since the fall of our first parents,
are they all earthly, carnal, full of sin; then this may assure us, that in
this estate there is no salvation, the natural man's way will never lead him to
Heaven, Romans 6.23. 1. His work is evil, his wages will be death eternal, his
seed is naught his harnest cannot be good, Gal. 6.3. 2. There is nothing in
him, but earth, and therefore Heaven cannot be his habitation, Ier. 4 14 Mat.
15 19. Isai. 5.4. Deuteronomy. 32 32. Ri. 30.6 33. Then. 3.17. Isai. 5.20, 21. Act.
12.7.
his soul is a vessel full of unclean waters, his heart is a fountain of all
abominations, the best of his fruit is, but sower grapes, Sodomitish Apples,
gilded brass, fair without, soul, base, rotten within. 3. When he thinks
himself most rich, he is poor and blind, and naked, when he thinks himself
most wise, best sighted, he knows not light from darkness, sweet from sower,
good from evil; when he thinks himself most free, then he is as fast
fettered as ever Peter was, when he lay bound between the two Soldiers, for so
do they between the World and Devil in the Chains of their corruption, when
he thinks himself most secure, then he is nighest to destruction, 1 These.
5.3. like him, Luc. 12.19. that natural man is a stranger to God, Christ, the
Covenant, Ephesians. 2.12. an enemy by his evil works, Col. 1.21. a habitation for
the unclean Spirit, Luc. 11.20, 21. a Servant of iniquity, Romans 6.17. a
Soldier in Satan's army, a branch in the wild Olive, a goat and no Sheep, a
thorn and no Apple Tree, a Lion, a Bear, a Swine, a Vulture; no Lamb, no Deer,
and therefore in that estate must look to drink of no cup, but of the cup of
Gods wrath, to have no companions, but the Devil and his Angels, no lodging
but eternal darkness, that is his portion, the Lord will surely give it him,
there is no way, no hope of escaping, for Luc. 13.3. Unless you turn from the
way of sin to the way of life you must perish, Ioh. 3.3. Heb. 12.14. no man
shall see him here in his word revealing himself to be a gracious father to
him, in his holiness sanctifying him, in his love affecting him with his
savours, in his presence presenting himself in a loving manner to him, nor
shall ever be filled with his glorious presence hereafter, therefore be not
deceived, dream not of mercy before there be a desertion of all iniquity, of
Gods goodness before you be lead to true repentance, Psalm. 104.4.

3. This will meet with and discover their folly who boast of their natural
abilities, inclination, and freedom to God, to renounce sin, to embrace
salvation; to follow the call of God when they please, as if they had as ready
a disposition to execute the Lords command, as ever the Centurions Servants had
to do his, of whom he said, Math. 8.8, 9. As if they were as strong in grace as
Sampson in bodily strength, able to break the cords of iniquity, Jud. 16.9.
Jon. 1.6.
as if they were but reeds and rushes, as if they were but fallen a little
asleep in sin, like Jonah in the bottom of the ship, the voice of the Minister
was presently able to awaken them, as if sin were not like the skin to the
flesh hardly pulled of, like the marrow to the bone uneasily gotten out, but an
old outer garment upon the back easily cast off: But here we see that the
Baptist does not say we are fire whose sparks naturally fly upward, nor watery
vapors, which are easily exalted by the influence and attractive power of the
Sun, but earth and earthly, whose nature is ponderous, heavy and altogether
tending downward, no more able, no more inclinable to any thing savingly good,
than the earth is able of itself to ascend upward, or to speak in the language
of the Prophet, then a black-Moor can make himself white, or a Leopard change
his spots, Ier. 13.23. and surely these men's error might easily be discerned,
if they did but well weigh, and thoroughly consider.

1. Their indisposedness to all good, yea, their aversness from it, their
enmity against it, their indisposedness to it expressed by a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke, Ier. 31.18. by a wild ass running over hedge and
ditch, refusing to be taken, Ier. 2.24. by a dead man that has no disposition
to rise out of the grave, Ephesians. 2.1. by a Lion and a Leopard which are
altogether fierce, Isai. 11.6. by evil ground which naturally bears nothing;
but Thorns and Briars, Heb. 6.8. by stones and Rocks which have no
disposition, to turn into water or soft ground, Exek. 36.26. their enmity
against all good is expressed by a Serpent refusing to hear the voice of the
charmer, Ps. 58.50. by a thief striving against the light, Job 24.13. an unruly
subject breaking all the bounds, which are set him by his Sovereign, Psalm.
2.2. an implacable enemy that will not, that cannot be reconciled, Romans 8.7.
and surely if we well weigh, if we have any true experience of the violence and
mighty force of our corruption, we may say of that as St. James does of the
tongue, Iac. 3.7, 8. so in this case, we may say of our corruption, all other
fierce beasts have been tamed, but who can rule this, this is a horse of that
force, that man cannot bridle it, a fire of that strength, man cannot quench
it, a Lion of that fierceness man cannot tame it, a Sea of that force that man
cannot stop it; none, but he that put a bridle into the nostrils of Senacharib
can bridle this unruly monster.

2. The power of sin, resembled to a conqueror leading captives, Romans 7.23. to
a Master whom we serve, at whose beck we move, Tit. 3.3. to a King reigning
over the whole man, as a King over the people, Romans 6.12. to a death which has
the whole command of the body; there is nothing remains to resist it, Col.
2.12. such a forcible disease it is, that as no Physician could heal the bloody
issue, Marc. 5.25, 29. so none can cure this, but only he that cured that.

3. The dearness of sin, it is tenderly beloved, the palace wherein the
natural man delights to dwell, the pleasant wine which he drinks, the
only manchet whereof he desires to feed, Prove. 9.17. the only Companion
wherein he takes comfort; Jud. 18. Genesis 24. Mat. 27. Psalm. 7.
this is to him as the Idol to Micah, as the mess of pottage to Esau, as the
forbidden fruit to our first parents, as the pieces of money to Judas, as the
golden wedge and Babylonish garment to Achan, this is the Dalilah whereon they
dote, the Child which they feed, the infant whereunto they draw out both their
breasts, the game which they pursue, the Music whereat they dance, the
treasure for which they search, they love sin as Jonathan David, they will
strip themselves of their best garments to apparel it. 2 Samuel 18.1, 2. as
Jacob loved Rahel, they will serve in the heat, and in the cold, in all
estates, endure all miseries for it, this is pleasant to their eyes, Genesis 3.6.
delightful to their Palates, Job 20.12 a precious pearl in their hands, as
the signets on their finger, the mistress of their affections, they will spend
all in the service of it, Prove. 23.21. they will suffer all miseries rather
than forsake it, Prove. 23.34, 35. they will go weeping after it, as Phaltiel
after Michall, so great is their love to it, that no persuasions, no
threatenings, shall breed a rejection of it.

4. The tenderness of it, therefore likened to the eye, it is grievousnes to put
out the eye, a man will endure any member to be wounded, any injury to be
offered to any part of the body rather than to his eye, Mat. 18.1. for this
also it is likened to the mortifying of the members, making the members of the
body dead by giving them many blows, by piercing them with many wounds, Col.
3.5. the natural man will not have his sin, his beloved one to be touched,
Amos 7.10. the Baptist must not meddle with Herodias, Ahab will not be crossed
in his journey to Ramoth Gilead, they will not have the Hemme of this Garment
touched, 2 Samuel 18.5.

5. The inherency and thorough mixture of sin with the soul, and deep die of it
upon the heart, as water and wine are so mingled, that the skilfullest hand
cannot make a separation, the Ivy and the stones so combined, that unles the
Wall be thrown down, it can not be removed: so is sin and the soul so mixed,
that no skill of man or Angel can divide them, it is as the marrow in the
bones, as the juice in the root, as the roots infolded and wrapped up in the
earth, the bones must be broken, Psalm. 51.8 the fallow ground must be plowed
up, Ier. 4.3. before sin can be plucked up; it is a deep stain, water cannot
wash it, nitre cannot purge it, the best humane abilities have no power to
remove it, Ier. 2.22. it is a Leprosy of that calour, depth and strength, that
the Water of Damascus cannot purge it, no River but Jordan can heal it, Isai.
26.10. Prove. 27.22. Amos 4.6, 7, 8. Pharaoh, Exodus 5.6, 7, 8. Ahas, 2 Cro.
28.22. Isai. 1.5, 6. I might add many more, but by these things it is
sufficiently manifest what strangers we are to all abilities of turning our
selves to God, and working out our salvation, before the Lord do put the life
of grace into us, and by his Word and Spirit, as by his Horsemen and Chariots,
do draw us forward in the way of life and happiness.

4. This will teach us not to ascribe too much to any man, of themselves they
are earth and earthly disposed, even the very best among all men, the
excellency wherewith they are endowed is not of themselves but of God, it is
the dew from his cloud that does make them fat, the treasure of his
storehouse, that does make them rich, the work of his finger that does make
them differ; we are all empty vessels, the fullness which we enjoy comes from
above, barren fields till the Lord does water and dress us: therefore as we
admire not the vessel which holds good liquour, but rather the Tree which
bare the Grape that made the liquor, so let us not so much admire the Creature;
the wooden vessel that has the excellent Treasury, as the Creator that gave
the Treasure to him, 2 Cor. 4.6.7. we are but the Casket, the Jewel is the
Lords, we are but the Lamp, it is the Lord does give the Oil, Ioh. 15.5. 1
Cor. 4.1. Phil. 4.13. Phi. 1.8.
without him we can do nothing, we are altogether dependant upon him, all our
abilities are the Lords talent, we are but stewards, thorough Christ inabling
we can do all things, but if Christ do not enable, man can do nothing, God is
the Alpha and the Omega of all the good we enjoy or do, therefore as Mar. 2.11,
12. Acts 3.11, 12. I Gideon overthrow the Midianitish army, it is not so much
Gideon as the Lord has done it, therefore first they cry the Sword of the
Lord, and then Gideon, Iud. 7. Exo. 14.
the Rod was used in dividing the waters of the red Sea; yet Moses and Israel
give the praise unto God, Exodus 15.6. therefore Col. 1.29. Paul labored not of
himself, but more or less according to the measure of Gods working in him, so
1 Cor. 3.5. intimating that they were but instruments, God was the chief Agent,
Gal. 2.8. Acts 16.14.
that if they brought any to the knowledge of the truth, it was the Lord that
did open the understanding, if they turned any man to the faith, it was the
Lord did open the heart, if they brought comfort to any man's Soul, it was the
Lord that spoke peace unto the conscience, teaching them whosoever were the
instrument, yet to give the whole praise to God the chief Agent, to have God
and not the persons of men in admiration.

5. Let therefore our own worthiwess, our own indisposednesse unto any good
cause us to give the praise of our whole salvation unto God, acknowledging him
to be the soul, and only fountain whence all water, which gives refreshment
to our Souls have their Original, the more we see our own emptiness, the more
feelingly let us acknowledge the Lords fullness, the more we look upon our own
poverty, the more let us magnify the full and open hand of God toward us, the
more let us laud him, rejoice in him for his abundant goodness, the more let
us study to please him, to honor him, to walk in all sincerity before him,
striving in all things to make him glorious, utterly denying our selves; saying
as the Psalmist, Psalm. 44.3. for as we are earth and earthly, so we speak of
the earth, which is the third thing here noted, their practice, they speak of
the earth, their employments are earthly, their actions are carnal.

9. The whole labor and practice of un-regenerate people is earthly and
carnal, as the whole fruit of a corrupt Tree is: so Matthew. 7.18. men are all
like Travelers out of the way, every foot they step is awry, Psalm. 58.3. our
whole work is but a Spiders Web, and increases no better than a Cockatrice
Egg, Isa. 59 56.

Reas. Because the Root and Original is evil, and as men speak of the Country
and parentage whereof they are, so men being of the World, of the flesh, speak
and do the works thereof, 1 Ioh. 4.5.

2. Because the whole man is full of sin, as the Sea full of waters, a dead
body of rotteness, an undrest Garden of weeds, the eyes are full of vanity, the
tongue full of evil communication, the hands full of idleness, full of blood
of unrighteous dealings, the heart full of uncleanness, and hence stream all
kind of abominations, Matthew. 15.19.

Gal. 5.19. Brass, Tin, Iron, base Metal, Ier. 6.28.30. as the Psalmist says
of men, Ps. 62.9. so may the natural man say of all his works, whither of
piety, or common equity; of his way toward God, or toward man, they are
altogether vanity, and surely if God should lay our deeds in the balance as
Baltazar was, that would be found of us, Dan. 5.
which was written of him mean mean tekel upharsin, you are laid in the
balance, your works are weighed which are found too light, the Kingdom of
glory is departed from you.

2. We may behold here the recompense due to our works, as they are the work of
sin, so death is the wages due to the same, an evil race, a dishonorable
price, a bad seed an uncomfortable Harvest, an evil ground burning will be the
issue of it.

3. Therefore since our Original is earth, our disposition earthly, our talk of
the earth, our whole practice carnal and worldly things, tending to the
irrecoverable ruins both of soul and body, let us strive to get forth of this
miserable and uncomfortable estate to find a gracious change and alteration
wrought in our hearts, let us get the fallow ground of our hearts to be broken
up, Jer. 4.3.
that we may sow no more among Thorns, that we way no more conceive Chafe, and
bring forth stubble, Isa. 33.11. that we may be made free from sin, and become
the servants of God, Romans 6.22. that the old man with all his lusts, like a
menstruous garment, may be put off, Col. 3.9.10. Luc. 1.79.
and the new man like a rich and royal roabe put on, that we may no longer sit
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, but that we may behold the glorious
light of the truth, and the comfortable light of Gods face, and that our feet
may be guided into the way of peace, that all old things may be put off, and
all things become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. that we may lead a new life, speak a new
language, love with new affections, discern with new judgments, and be made
partakers of new favors, receive a new name, Rev. 2.17. let it be the choice
of our cares, the strongest of our desires, the first of our labors, the chief
of all our endeavors to put off sin, Romans 13.14.
to put on the Lord Jesus, to make no more provision for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof, but provide for the welfare of the Soul, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. but
2 Cor. 5.15. as David Psalm. 132.2, 3, 4, 5. so let us enter into Covenant with
our God, not to take any rest, any pleasure, not to seek any worldly store, any
earthly contentment till our souls of a den of thieves, of a lodge of unclean
spirits be made a habitation for the Lord to dwell in, as Genesis 8.9. as Ruth.
3.18. so let there be no rest till you are returned unto your God, till you
have made your peace with him, till you find in your selves a sanctified and
holy alteration, and to the end we may no longer continue in this corrupt and
sinful estate; let us

1. Be sensible of our sin, as a Thorn in our side, Jude 2.3.
a prick in our eyes, as sensible as Israel of the Cananites, as the chased
Heart of the wounding Arrow, and then as the Heart goes to the water brooks,
Psalm. 42.1, 2. as the Traveller of a heavy burden, and then as Israel groaned
under the burdens Pharaoh imposed, and sought freedom, so shall we: as a woman
of her travel, and then as she has no rest till delivered of her burden, so
shall we take no rest, till delivered of the burden of our corruption by
regeneration: the sense which David had of his sin made him earnest to be
washed, Psalm. 51.2. this made him pray, Ps. 38.1, 2, 3. thus Acts. 2.37.

2. Be thoroughly affected with the vileness, the dishonourablenesse, the
dangerousnesse and uncomfortable issue of sin. 1 Be affected with the vileness
of it, as the eye with an ugly spectacle, the nostril with an ill savor, the
palate with unsavory food, the stomach with meat, repugnant to it, there the
Psalmist was affected with his sin, as with a loathsome disease, Ps. 38.5.7.
thus Job 42.6. as Jobs friends beholding the loathsome disease, how it
disfigured him, how deformed and unpleasant it had made him to the eye, then
they sat down and wept: so shall we do when we are thoroughly afflicted with
the vileness of our sin. 2. with the dishonorablenesse of it, it leads into
bondage, 2 Timothy 2.26. into poverty, strippeth the Soul naked, Rev. 3.17. it
casts into a ditch of spiritual filthiness, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5. it cloatheth
the Soul with menstrous rags, Isa. 30.22. Isa. 64.6. as Isa. 20.4, 5. so sin
leads us away prisoners and captives, not only the buttocks, but the
shoulders, also, even the whole man uncovered, and were we thoroughly affected
with this, we could not but be afraid and ashamed, Romans 6.21, 3. with the
dangerousnesse of it; how as long as this is not repented of, and renounced,
your Souls are as a bird in the snare, as a condemned malefactor every day
looking for execution, as bad ground nigh to burning, as a woman with Child,
Heb. 6.8. Zeph. 2.2.
whose travel is near, as a rotten ship in a stormy tempest, every moment ready
to sink, never able to return to the Haven, as Cattle in fat pasture, Jer.
12.3. 2 Pet. 2.3. an estate wherein is no escaping, 1 These. 5.3. Jer. 11.11. 4.
The uncomfortable issue of sin, how the Honey will turn to Gal, the wine into
water of Marah, the manchet into Gravel, Jer. 2.19. their Paradise into a
Thorny wilderness, their pleasant stream into a tempestuous Sea, Amos 8.9.10.
however with Agag. 1 Samuel 15, 32. yet verse. 33. as Dalilab to Sampson, as Jael
to Sisera, Isa. 24.6.7. were the hearts of men thoroughly affected with this,
did this sink deep into their Souls, then surely they would never rest in that
estate, but with the Jailer, Acts 16.29.30. as the Disciples in the storm, Mat.
8.25. this will make them run as the men of Gibeon, Ios. 10.6.

3. Be careful and willing to be instructed, shut not the eye against the
light, stop not thy ear against the voice of the truth, withdraw not thy
shoulder, make not thy heart as an Adamant stone, Zach. 7.11.12. but wait upon
the posts of Gods house, Prove. 8.34. lie as the lame man for an Alms daily at
the Gate of the Temple, Acts 3.2. fasten thine eyes on this Sun, be thou
constant in Christ's School, behold and view thy self thoroughly in this looking
glass, Romans 7.8.9. Ier. 31.18.19. let thine ear be open to the crowing of this
Cock. Matt. 26.75. let thy heart embrace this as the ground does the seed, and
thereby thou shall be new born, Ia. 1.18.

4. Come unto Christ by fervent prayer, as the blind men by the highway side,
as the Centurion for his servant, the ruler for his daughter, open thy estate,
discover the condition of thy Soul unto the Lord, pray with Ephraim, Ier.
31.18. Psalm. 80.7. as Solomon asked neither riches, nor long life, nor the life
of his enemies, but only wisdom, 1 King. 3.9. so do you ask neither wealth nor
honor, prosperity nor pleasure, but above all things ask for the saving grace
of the spirit; pray for the dews of grace, as Eliah for rain upon the earth,
and as the Lord caused a cloud to appear, which though little at first, yet at
length it covered the whole heavens, so shall God cause the power of his spirit
so to distill into thy Soul, that the whole man shall be cleansed from all
iniquity, and to labor for this estate let us be persuaded;

1. Because this will interest us in all Gods favors make all things to become
ours; to be comfortable, helpful, beneficial, this will make God to be our
God, our Father, Christ to be our friend, Mediator, Advocate, Husband, Sun,
Shield, Prince of peace, the Spirit of God to be our comforter, Ioh. 15.26. our
guide, Io. 16.13. to be our earnest penny, and our Seal to assure us of the
Lords mercy and loving kindness, Ephesians. 1.13.14. a fire to warm us, 1 These.
5.19. water to cleanse us, Isa. 44.3. the Ministry of the Gospel to be a
Ministry of reconciliation to us, 2 Cor. 5.18. a pleasant light to shine unto
our feet, Psalm. 119.105. a heavenly Manna, pure milk to feed our Souls, 1 Pet.
2.2. a goad to drive us forward, Physic to heal us, a weapon to kill sin, and
defend our Souls, all the earth shall be serviceable to us, this life and the
life to come shall be ours, 1 Timothy 4.8. we shall be the richest people upon
earth, have better revenues than all the mighty men in the World, Psalm. 34.10.

Because this will enable us to find many sweet and heavenly comforts in Gods
ordinances, this will make them full of precious and choice delights to our
Souls, this will make them be a delicate and dainty feast, Isa. 25.6.
this will cause us to behold them as a letter of love from the Lord Jesus, the
Bridegroom of our Souls, this will make them sweet as the honeycomb to our
palate, Psalm. 19.10. even the rejoicing of our hearts, Jer. 15.16. this will
make them more precious than any Treasure, Psalm. 119.72. more pleasant than any
tidings, Luke 2.10. this will make them the savor of life to our Souls, 2 Cor.
2.14. this will make them speak peace to our consciences, Isa. 57.19. this will
make them as a banquet to the hungry stomach, Cant. 2.4. this will make them as
the Dove to Noah, as the Star to the wisemen, as the water out of the Rocks to
Israel, this will enable us to say of them as David of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26.

3 Because this will cause all to work for our good, if we be regenerate;
whatsoever is against us, shall in the issue be with us, prove beneficial for
us; as David said of Shimei's railing, 2 Samuel 16.11. So the fiery darts which
Satan casts, the venomous arrows which the evil speakers quiver shoots,
the heavy burdens which the hand of the potent enemy imposes, imprisonment,
sickness, poverty, temptations, disgrace, and whatsoever it be, it shall all
by the gracious hand of God be turned to our good, if we like David be men
after Gods own heart; for Tit. 1.15. all shall be for their welfare, all shall
be blessed to them; the sword which is unsheathed against them shall like
Goliah's sword become an instrument to cut off the enemies head; 1 Samuel 17.
the envious practices of their brethren shall be a means of their advancement
as in Joseph; Genesis 41.40. Psa. 7.15, 16. Jude 14.
the pit which is dug, the snare which is spread for them, shall take and
entangle him that spread it; every obstacle shall be turned into a furtherance;
every burden into wings; every lion shall have a honeycomb in his belly. This
is the privilege of Gods people, the prerogative of sanctification, an
inducement full of power to persuade all that are not past feeling to return to
God by true repentance, to serve him in holiness and true righteousness.

4. Since the natural man's works are all naught, water of a poisonous
fountain, fruit from an evil tree, let us all examine and try our selves what
our works are, whether they be good or evil. And this we shall discern.

1. By the fountain whence they spring; all good works must come from a good
and a sanctified heart: The good ground which brought forth, Luk.. 1 5
good fruit, resembled a good and honest heart; and Matthew. 12.35. Matthew. 7.17.
all the works of a carnal man are dead works in regard of their original nature
and issue, none but a new creature can do the works of new obedience: All our
actions are actions of uncleanness, till we be washed and justified by the
blood of the Lord Jesus.

2. By the rule by and in obedience to which they are done. They must not be
done after our fancy, in obedience to our own will; our Sacrifice must be
offered with fire from Gods Altar; what we do must be that which God required,
and it must be done, because God has required it. Lev. 10.1, 2. 1 Samuel 15.22.
out of conscience to Gods precept.

3. By the faith and persuasion we have in our heart when we do it. We must
believe that God in Christ is well pleased with us; we must bear fruit as
branches of Christ, else it will be in Gods account as sour grapes, Heb. 11.6.
As we must ask all, Col. 3.17.
so we must do all in the name of Christ.

4. By the affection wherewith it is performed. It must not arise out of fear,
nor proceed from constraint, but out of unfeigned love to God: This must be the
first mover in all our undertakings, 1 Cor. 16.14. 2 Cor. 9.7. as Jude 5.2.

5. By the circumstances wherewith it is apparelled, as Prove. 25.11. for
Eccles. 3.1. and Matthew. 6.3, 4.

6. By the end whereunto it is done. We must chiefly look unto God, all our
arrows must be levelled to his glory, as to the chiefest mark; we are not our
own but his, by our election he has chosen us, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. By our creation he
has made us for himself, Prove. 16.4. By our redemption he has bought us to
himself, 1 Cor. 6.20. By our vocation he has called us to show forth his
praise, 1 Pet. 2.9. and to him must we live, 2 Cor. 5.15. If our works be thus
qualified, we may be sure they come from a regenerate spirit, and are well
accepted of him who is above all.

This is a repetition of what was formerly spoken, to show his disciples that
they must needs subject themselves to Christ, and to let them see how difficult
it is; he does again repeat it. So that you see the repetition and the reason
of the repetition. The former may teach us.

Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.12.
that they may understand it more clearly be awakened by it more effectually,
affected with it more thoroughly, that it may be imprinted upon their hearts the
more effectually; that it may abide with them the more constantly. People must
not think it unprofitable to hear the same points of doctrine often pressed
upon them. Naaman went seven times into Jordan, Peter's cock crowed thrice.

From the other we may learn,

Romans 3.27, 28. Gal. 2.21. Gal. 6, 11. Romans 8.1.

Ephesians. 2.8, 9^ Ephesians. 2 12 Psa. 53.2 Luke 19.42.

Romans 7.9. Rev. 3.17. Joh. 9.41.


and altogether rely upon Christ Jesus: therefore the Baptist does again and
again press it. This occasioned the Apostle so often to discover to the
people the insufficiency and vanity of their works; the impossibility of
attaining salvation by their own abilities; the necessity of cleaving unto, and
relying upon the Lord Jesus. And the reason hereof is because natural men are
strangers to Christ, they know him not, they have no feeling of his fullness
and sufficiency. 2. Because men's eyes are very strongly fastened upon their own
strength: and the worthiness of their own doings. 3. Because corruption is
strong, sin is pleasant, the carnal heart is hardly brought to deny it: a
tree of deep roots; a building of lime and sand; a rock with many strong holds.

This must therefore cause us to search into, and to meditate upon our
vileness, to be well acquainted with our unworthiness, with the sway which
sin and Satan bear within us; with the propensity, yea violent inclination
of our hearts to sin, with the punishment due to us for our transgressions,
with our own emptiness, and all creatures disability to satisfy Gods justice,
that we may lift up our hearts unto, and fasten our eyes wholly and altogether
upon the Lord Jesus; that being sensible of our own weakness, we may rely on
his strength; being acquainted with our own emptiness, we may seek to be filled
with his fullness; seeing our own nakedness, we may desire to be clothed with
the rich and royal robes of his righteousness; beholding our own uncleanness,
we may with Naaman have recourse to this Jordan; seeing our own weakness, and
the strength of sin and Satan within us against us, we may with Jehosaphat,
2 Chro. 20.11. we may say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 44.6, 7. Seeing the
insufficiency of all earthly Physicians, looking upon all our earthly abilities
as upon Physicians of no value, we may as Mark 5.26.29. being affected with our
sin as with an insupportable burden, we may come to Christ to be eased,
Matthew. 11.28. Being acquainted with the evil of our own estates, we shall the
more magnify the Lords mercy and loving kindness toward us: The more
apprehensive the patient is of his disease, the more he is affected with the
skill of the Physician curing him, Tit. 1.15, 16.

This must cause us to endeavor to be thoroughly acquainted and affected with
that fullness and alsufficiency that is in Christ Jesus, as the Baptist
insisteth upon the same by repeating it again, that he is from heaven, that he
is above all; so must we again and again fasten our meditations hereupon,
daily search into the depth of this fountain, continually look upon the
treasure in this storehouse; be ever fixing our eyes upon this bright and
glorious As Zacheus ran and climbed up aloft to see him, Luke 19.4.
so must we raise our hearts and our affections from the world, and ascend up
unto God in our affections, that we may take a through view of Christ Jesus, as
Ezekiel. 8.8, 9, 15. So also in this case dig through a wall, cast away all
fleshly impediments, remove the sin which stands as a partition wall between
us and Christ; labor for the key of knowledge to open this door, and behold
the wonderful fullness that is in him: Look once, twice, ten times and again,
and still you shall behold and find in him more then at the first: As the
Prophet bid his servant 1 Kings 18.43, 44, 45. so go you up, look toward the
sea, that ocean of goodness which is in Christ Jesus; and if you return and
say you see nothing in him, yet go again, look and meditate seven times more
upon him, and you shall see a cloud arise at length which shall have fullness
of rain in it; you shall behold all abundance in him, as Acts 6.15. So when we
look steadfastly on Christ, then we shall behold beauty, brightness and glory in
him; then we shall see Col. 2.3. Phil. 3.8. 1 Cor. 1.24. And with this fullness
of Christ we should labor to be affected.

1. Because this will breed denial of our selves, the contemplation of his
holiness will make us ashamed of our own uncleanness. As the looking-glass
makes a man blush to behold his face which is full of spots; so Isa. 6.5. Job
42.5, 6, his riches will make us ashamed of our poverty; his beauty will make
us blush to consider our own deformity; his holiness will make us ashamed of
our profaneness; the contemplation of his all sufficiency will make us see
that in comparison of him our light is but a gloworm to the Sun; our treasure
is but dross to the choicest pearl, our goodness but as the thorn and
bramble to the Vine, Olive, and Fig Tree, Gen 41.4.
as Pharaohs lean kine to the fat.

2. Because this will take off all confidence from the world, and make men say
as John 6.68. Hosea 14.3. This will make them see that all the world is sand,
and that he alone is a firm and sure rock; that all the world, Mat. 7.2. Isa.
32.2. Isa. 36.6.
like Egypt, is a withered reed, and Christ alone is an iron pillar, a brazen
wall, a sure resting place: This will cause us to esteem the world a spiders
web, Job 8.14, 15. as a moth-eaten garment, as a rotten staff, as the fig tree
that bears no fruit, as a cloud without rain, Psalm. 102.26. 2 Pet. 2.15. Rev.
22.1. Mat. 14.28 Mic. 4.1.
a well without water. This will make us look upon Christ as upon a tree laden
with the choicest fruit, as upon a fountain replenished with the purest water:
This will make us resort to him as the Eagles to the carcass, flow to him as
the waters to the Ocean, as Noah to the Ark when the earth was overwhelmed, or
leprous Naaman to Jordan, as the lame man to Bethesda, Psalm. 20.7. Isa. 17.7.
Isa. 45.22.

3 This will make us joyful in having Christ; whatsoever we have besides, be it
much or little, be our estate rich or poor, Psalm. 16.6.
honorable or ignominious; Psa. 16.6.
we see enough in Christ, and the more we see in him, the more we shall rejoice
in having interest in him. This will make us say of Christ as the Apostle of
the Philippians, Phil. 4.1. This will fill us with exceeding great joy, as the
star made the wise men rejoice exceedingly, Matthew. 2.10. This will replenish us
with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. As a full feast rejoices an
hungry stomach, a full hand rejoices a poor beggar, a full breast rejoices
the hungry child; so that fullness which is in Christ puts much joy into the
hearts of Gods servants, Jer. 31.13, 14.

4. This will ravish our hearts with love unto Christ; this will make us long
after him, make us sell all to have him; as a man will give many pieces of
silver for one precious stone: This will make us serve in the heat and in the
cold for him as Jacob for Rachel: Psa. 42.2.
This will make us leave all we enjoy, do all he requires, suffer all that
can be imposed; nothing shall be too hard to be endured; nothing shall be so
dear to us but we will depart from it if the Lord require it; when we behold
the fullness of his beauty, the most beautiful creature will seem to have no
beauty. When we are once apprehensive of that power, majesty, and goodness
which is in him; all the world will be as a dry tree, a withered arm, a vain
thing: This will exceedingly ravish our souls, make us sick of love, Cant. 2.4.
constrain us to do all for him, 2 Cor. 5.14. make us say with Peter, Matthew.
7.17. and Prove. 31.29. Thus of the repetition of these words, He that is from
Heaven is above all.

Verse 32.
The Doctrine of life and salvation is of all things the most infallible, the
most certain; yet of all things has the worst entertainment in the world:
This is the surest guide, yet has the fewest followers; the best merchandise,
but has the fewest buyers; the best Physic, but has the smallest number of
Patients; the truest narration, but finds the smallest credence in the world.
Mat. 7.
This is the Rock whereon the wise man builded, which the rainy tempest could
not overthrow: This world, as the sand whereon the foolish man built, whose
house soon fell: This like the bow of Jonathan which returned not back, and the
sword of Saul that returned not empty: 1 Samuel 1.22.
The world like Israel, a bow that started back in the day of battle: This like
a fountain, always full of water; the world like the brooks of Tema, dried up
in summer. Yet notwithstanding all this, the world has audience, affection,
attendance, acceptance, when little or no respect at all is given to Christ
Jesus; for though that which he testifies be no other then what he has seen
and heard, yet no man receives his testimony.

As in the former verse the Baptist commended our Savior from the excellency
of his person; so in this verse he commends him by the certainty and truth of
his Doctrine. That which a man does both hear and see, and whereof he is able
to persuade another man's conscience that he must needs know with a most certain
and sure knowledge: But in such manner does our Savior know what he speaks,
therefore that must needs be most sure and most certain which he teaches: And
to the end the Baptist might persuade his Disciples to believe in Christ, he
does commend Christ's Doctrine to them from the certainty of it, intimating to
them, whatsoever imperfection, error, or deceit might be in other men's
doctrine, whatsoever occasion there might be of doubting, yet the doctrine of
Christ must needs be true, free from all error: And though it be a doctrine
thus void of all exception, so wholesome, good, holy, heavenly, profitable; yet
there is no entertainment given thereunto by the world, few believe it, love
it, subject themselves unto it.

In the verse we have 1. The certainty of Christ's Doctrine in it self. 2. The
entertainment given to it in the world. From the first learn.

Psalm 12.6. Therefore called a sure word, 2 Pet. 1.19. A foundation whereupon
whosoever is built sinketh not, Ephesians. 2.20. A word more durable then the world,
Matthew. 5.18. Letters more firm, more lasting then such as are written with a
pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, they shall never be defaced nor
blotted out; like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, they shall not alter.
Likened to a fountain of living water, which is pure and constant, Jer. 2.13.
And it is evident,

1. By the nature of the Author of it, he is the truth it self, John 14.6.
Without sin, without guile, 1 Pet. 2.22.

2. By his fullness of knowledge, Col. 3.2, 3. John 3.33. As the Sun is full of
light, the Sea is full of water; so is he full of knowledge.

3. By his near union and communion with the Father, John 1.18. Matthew. 11.23.

4. By the opposition which this Doctrine was to meet with from wicked men and
devils, who would surely have overthrown it, if there had been any error or
imperfection in it; but this is tried silver, Psalm. 12.7. A sure vessel, Luke
23.4. Acts 4.12.

6. For the establishment of the faith of Gods people, who must be builded
thereupon, Ephesians. 2.20.

6. For the discovery of sin, Heb. 4.12.

7. For the pacifying of the conscience, against all assaults and accusations,
Isa. 57.19. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.

rooting, a light that cannot be darkened: other foundations may fail, and
light too may wax dim; but this abides for ever, therefore believe it.

For the more full setting home of this upon you, to believe, put confidence on
this Doctrine of Christ, take these following considerations.

1. Because it is a Doctrine most beneficial, a doctrine of consolation, Heb.
6.17, 18. A doctrine healing souls, Matthew. 8.13. and bodies, opening the eyes,
Matthew. 9.28, 29, 30.

2. Because it makes all prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Like the Ark of Obed-edom:
it makes a man like the tree by the waters, Jer. 17.7, 8.

3. Because it is the key that opens the doors of the Kingdom of grace to
souls, Matthew. 21.31, 32.

Now that we may believe, consider the following particulars.

1. Cast away sin: if ever we would believe, we must have nothing to do with
sin: read these places, Mark 1.15. Psalm. 50.16. Psalm. 66.18. 2 Cor. 6.14. John
9.31. 2 Timothy 2.19^

2. Deny your selves: consult these Texts for this, John 5.44. Romans 7.9. John
9.41. Romans 7.18.

3. See the fullness that is in Christ, meditate on it, Genesis 17.1. John 6.68.
John 14.10, 11.

4. Attend the word, Romans 10.17. Acts 16.14. Ephesians. 1.13.

Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1.16. Follow it as a shadow, the body; and that you may
do it aright, follow it

1. Heartily, Romans 16.17. Psalm 119.168. 1 Cor. 16.14.

2. Fully: as 1 Kings 18.21. Number. 14.24. 1 Kings 11.6.

3. Universally, Luke 1.6. Psalm 119.128. James 2.10. In every link,
ingredient.

4. Freely, willingly, Psalm 110.3. Psalm 119.32. 2 Cor. 8.3. Phil. 1.15.

5. Holily, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.

6. Constantly, not going back like Israel, Judge. 7.3. Like those mentioned, 2
Pet. 2.22.



1. An instructing word, Ps. 119.99. 2 Timothy 3.17.

2. A purifying word, Matthew. 3.12. Jer. 23.29. John 17.17. purifying as Jordan.

3. A quickening word, Phil. 2.14.

4. A pacifying word, 2 Cor. 5.19.

5. A rejoicing word, Jer. 15, 16. As the Star to the wise men, Matthew. 2.10.

6. A fructifying Doctrine, Matthew. 13 24. Deuteronomy. 32.2.

But to pass by that observation, and to come to a second, which may be
gathered from the second particular, namely the entertainment this doctrine of
Christ had, the generality of the world received not, entertained not, loved it
not, no man: very few that is; whence observe



Of four grounds in Matthew. 13.24. but one savingly received the doctrine of
salvation.

This the Prophet complained of, Isa. 53.2. Isa. 65.2. Jer. 8.6. We read of a
few Pearls, a few Vines.

Matthew. 20.16. now only those are capable of wisdom, Matthew. 11.19.13.11.



Job 21.14. Isa. 53.2.

Cor. 5.14. Saul and David.



Matthew. 6.24. 1 John 2.15. Matthew. 8.34.

Canaan, and but few embrace the Gospel and receive it.

Not to leave the way of life because few embrace it. It is no wise project for
men to lodge among Tombs, because mad men did, as the Scripture mentions, or to
forsake meat because sick men do: Nor is it any wisdom for men to leave the
way of life Christ Jesus and his Gospel, because the generality of men in the
world do.

3 This must cause to try what entertainment we give unto Christ, whether our
hearts be open to receive his testimony or shut against it; whether it be to us
as the dew to the dry earth, or to the hard rock; as Music to the hearing, or
to the deaf ear; as a friend, or a stranger; as a Physician, or a wounding
enemy; and this will be discerned,

1. By the abandoning and exiling of sin: no man gives credit to the
testimony of Christ, no man gives entertainment unto Christ, but he thrusts
sin out of the doors of his heart. No man entertaineth his Sovereign into his
house, but he cleanses his house, beautifieth and adorneth the several rooms
thereof; the woman that wiveth her self in wedlock, puts off her menstruous
and unseemly raiment; the Sun appearing in the Horizon, the darkness, clouds,
misty and filthy fogs are dispelled; no man entertaineth Christ the Lord of
life, the Prince of glory, but he purges his soul, 1 John 3.3. Departs from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. No man joyneth himself in wedlock with Christ, but is
Psalm. 45.13. Ezekiel. 16.9, 10. The Sun of righteousness arises and shines in
the horizon of no man's soul, but with healing in his wings; he heals their
spiritual diseases, endoweth them with strength of grace, and makes them fly
from sin, as Moses fled from his rod when he saw it turned into a serpent,
though before it was always in his hand, he made continual use of it; so when
men entertain Christ once with their souls, though sin were never so
pleasant, delightful, profitable to them, yet now they hate it as the only
enemy of their souls, complain of it as the heaviest burden, labor to root
it out as the most noisome weed.

2. By the neglect; despising, rejecting of the world: When the Sun appears,
the candles are extinguished; when the Prince comes, the fellowship, the
presence of beggars is not regarded; when Christ is once entertained into the
soul, such is his Beauty, Fullness, Majesty, Glory, that then the world, though
before very glorious, yet now it is as dung, Phil. 3.8. As withered grass, Isa.
40.8. As a dead thing void of life, beauty, profit, Gal. 6.14. As a thing of
naught, Amos 6.13. This makes them sell all for this pearl, leave all to
entertain him; to forsake goods, Heb. 10.3, 4. Friends, Matthew. 10 37. Life,
Rev. 12.11. This makes the grapes of the choicest worldly Vine be full of
soreness; the cup of her sweetest wine to be full of poison; the purest
manchet full of gravel.

3. By the holy fellowship and communion we have with Christ, as many as
receive him, put their confidence in him, have fellowship with him, as the
Scholar with the teacher; they sit at his feet, they hear his voice, Lu.
10.39. Jo. 15.15.
as one friend with another; communicating their mind to him, he imparting his
councels unto them, shedding the warm and shining beams of his love into their
hearts, and their hearts reflecting with love again to him, as the spouse with
the Husband after a more entire manner then with any thing in the world, as the
servants with the Master of the family, as the members with the head of the
body; his presence with them, his dominion within them, his love to them, is
vouchsafed and apprehended after a manner unknown to the unregenerate world;
he is to the world a sun under an Eclipse Psa. 53.2. to true believers, as the
Sun in a clear day Mal. 4.2. to sinful men as a stranger, Ephesians. 2.12.1 Jo.
1.6, to others as a brother, a man well known Cant. 8.1.

4. By the comforts we find in him, he refreshes and receives the souls
of all such as entertain him, comfort and delights their hearts, more
then all the pleasant things of the world, Cant. 1.2. he is to the souls of
believers, as the star to the wise men, Math. 2.10. As a feast to the hungry,
Rev. 3.20. as the shadow of a great rock to the weary. Jsa. 32.2. as a precious
pearl to the poor; Math. 15.44. when all the world like Baal, is dumb and
cannot utter a word of comfort, then does Christ rejoice the hearts of his
servants To. 3.5. when the world is like an empty pit, then is Christ as a
fountain of living waters, refreshing the souls of his children, Psa. 4.6.
when the abilities of the earth are as a candle extinct, then is Christ to his
servants a glorious Sun Psa. 5.6. when the world is like a dry breast, then
Isa. 66.10.11. God does give comfort to all true believers, 2 These. 2.16.
making their joy answearable to their sorrows, 2 Cor. 1, 5. he will speak
unto them when their consciences are perplexed, as once he spoke to the
disciples, Mat. 14.26.27. as John 14.1.18. Acts. 18.9. and 23.11.

5. By the spiritual liberty and freedom we gain by believing in him, by
opening our hearts to entertain him, though we are oppressed, reproached,
assaulted within and without, burdened with variety of corruptions, ladden
with manifold afflictions, yet entertaining Christ into our hearts by faith, we
shall 1 Jo. 5.4. and To. 8.36, 37. be like Cyrus, Isa. 5.1.2. so 1 Jo. 3.8.
Heb. 2.14. so that all that give credit to Christ's testimony do feel the
fetters of sin smitten off, the burden of the iniquity removed, the holds of
Satan cast down, they themselves delivered Isa. 1.74, 75. made free Jo. 8.36.
from the dominion of sinful lusts, free from the tyranny of Satan the Prince
of darkness, free from the world that it cannot carry us away captives, free
to know God, free to love God, free to believe, receive, and delight in God.
Romans 6.18. no more the children of the bond, but of the free woman, Gal. 3 31
no more like Lazarus in the grave, but like Lazarus risen, walking after,
following, and eating with Christ, obeying, delighting, and rejoicing in him;
no more going about the duties of holiness by compulsion, but like the elders
Iud. 5.3.

6. By the matter of our mediation having entertained Christ into our hearts,
we think of Christ (the things appertaining to his kingdom, more then of any
other thing whatsoever. As the Wife thinks of her Husband, more frequently,
more affectionately, with more freedom, fullness, strength, with more motion of
love, then of any other man's; the good subject spends more, and better
thoughts about his Sovereign, then about a foreign Prince; so all they who by
a lively faith have betrothed themselves to Christ, given up their names to
him, do frequently, and fervently, meditate upon him, and his testimonies,
Phil. 4.8. Cant. 3.1. Psa. 1.2. Phil. 3.20. Heb. 13.14.

7. By the simplicity plainness and integrity of our hearts, true believers,
are true Nathaniels, like Christ, in whom there was no deceit, Io. 1.47. 1 Pet.
2.22 Io. 19.23.
their disposition, their conversation is like Christ's Coat, without welt or
guard, therefore likened to Doves. Mat. 10.16. to little children, Mat. 18.3 and
Romans 16.19. like bounglers, that have no skill, no art in working what is
unlawful, this is the exoration of the Apostle, Phil. 2.15. and this is the
care of Gods servants. Acts. 23.16. And this is the joy of Gods people, 2 Cor.
1.12, and by these things may we know whither we have entertained Christ or not.

Verse. 33.
It is not the least, but the choicest labor of Gods faithful ministers to
breed faith in the hearts of Gods servants, the nature of this is most
excellent, the presence of it most pleasant, the use of it most profitable, the
opposition against it very strong, the honor arising to God from it very
great; therefore the baptist endeavors from the singular use and benefit of
faith on the one side, and from the danger and damage of infidelity on the
other side, to persuade his disciples to believe, tells them, that he who has
received his testimony has set to his seal that God is good.

He whatsoever he be, of whatsoever condition, or calling, of whatsoever
place or Country, who has received his testimony, has hearkened to the voice
of Christ with his ear, comprehended the message of Christ with his
understanding, opened his heart, embraced it with his affection, builded his
confidence thereupon, that man has put to his seal, consented, subscribed,
acknowledged, confessed, published, declared that God is true, that all the
words which Christ has spoken are the words of God that there is no deceit in
them, that God is faithful in fulfilling all his promises, from whence the
Baptist teaches us.

That it is a great honor to God that his servants do by a lively faith
embrace and build upon his promises, Romans 4.29. Exo. 14.31. with. Exo. 15.1.
as man is honored when his words are believed, his promises imbraed, so is
God, etc. and God by this means is honored. First by then acknowledging of of
his truth and fidelity, nothing is more dear to God then his truth no sacrifice
more acceptable to God, then a lively faith, whereby we publish him to be a
true, a faithful, and a righteous God, a God of truth Deuteronomy. 32.4. a faithful
God, Deuteronomy. 7.9.

2. By the acknowledging of his power and Alsufficiency; hereby we declare to
all the world that power belongs unto God, Psa. 62.11. that he is
Alsufficient, Genesis 17.1. that he can do whatsoever pleases him Psa. 135.4, 5.
Genesis 18.14.

3. By relying wholly upon him for life and salvation, not leaning on any arm
of flesh, not trusting to any of our own, or others works, but acknowledging
our own righteousness to be but rags, Isa. 64.6. our own Vessel to be
empty, the fruit of our own Tree to be sower grapes, the wages of our own
work to be death, and therefore going out of our selves unto God, and relying
on him by faith, we do glorify his name, 2 Cor. 12.9. 4. By departing from
iniquity, believing the promises of mercy, the threatenings of Wrath, we humble
our selves for our iniquities, are moved to repentance. Jona. 3.5. Acts. 15.9.

5. By becoming living members of Christ, Io. 15.9.
fruitful and bearing branches in the true Vine Christ Jesus, Jo. 15.8.6. by
addressing our selves to God by fervent prayer for comfort in heavines, for
deliverance in dangers, for peace in troubles, Psa. 116.10.

7. By giving us victory over all assaults, To. 8.36, 37. 1. Jo. 5.4.

Use. This therefore will teach us that it is a great sin not to believe, a
great dishonor to God not to give credit to his word, to hear and not receive
his testimony, to have the promise of life unfolded, and not heartily embrace
it, not firmly build upon it, for hereby they call the truth of God into
question, make God like a man, Nu. 11.19.
that may lie, and the Son of man that may repent; rob God of his truth, which
is most essential, and proper to him, yea take away that which is most dear
to him, and judge him unworthy to be believed, and therefore in the 1 e. of Jo.
5.10.

2. Hereby they think of God, as a broaken bough, a withered reed, a weak
arm, a God insuffient to fulfill, Isa. 59.13,
what he has promised, a God unable to provide for them that depend upon him.

3. Hereby they build upon some other foundations, seek for somewhat in the
creature which they imagine is not to be found in the Creator, 2 Kings. 1.6.
with Ahaziah leaving the God of Israel and go to Beelzebub with Israel;
forgetting the rock, sa. 30.1. Deuteronomy. 32.18.
that made them they go to Egypt for assistance in the day of trouble.

4. Hereby they disobey and rebel against God, they shake off that yoke of
subjection which God has put upon them, therefore the unbeleefe of Moses and
Aaron is called a transgression, Deuteronomy. 32.51. and rebellion, Number. 27.14. 2
Kings. 17.14, 15.

5. Hereby they dishonor God in the eyes of others, give an evil example,
become a stumbling block to their brethren, confirm many in evil, Numb. 20.11,
12.

6. Hereby they despise the good things which God has provided for them, which
God has promised unto them, the fountain of his loving kindness is reputed
an empty pit, the glorious sunshine of his favors is looked upon as a lamp
without oil, as a tree without fruit, as a hive without honey, Psa. 160.24.

7. Hereby they grow discontented with their estate, repine against God as
against a hard master that dealt not well with them, enjoining a labor not to
be performed by them, as if God had brought them into a condition wherein he
could not preserve them, into a danger out of which he could not deliver them,
made a promise which he was not able to accomplish, Psa, 106.25. Hereby they
deny Gods Soverainty and dominion, they harkened not says the. Psalmist. Psa.
106.25. that is, they detracted from Gods authority and dominion, they would
not be guided by his voice, ruled by his counsel, but would fight against the
Amalekites, go into the land of promise, when God forbad them Deuteronomy. 1.42,
43.44. thus you see now greatly God is dishonored by infidelity,

2. Therefore as we do desire to make the name of God glorious, to do any
thing pleasing in Gods presence, let us labor to believe his word, to consent,
subcribe, and yield to the truth of his testimony, to search after the
through-knowledge of it, to embrace it with most hearty and unfeigned affection,
to build upon it as upon a sure foundation, to rest upon Christ alone for life
and salvation, to get a gracious persuasion in our hearts of the goodness of
God in Christ toward our own souls, to stay upon Christ, as upon a sure
pillar, 1 Cor. 3.11. Heb. 6.19.
to build upon him, as upon the only foundation, a foundation which will not
fail, to fasten our faith upon him, as the mariner his Anchor on a sure rock,
and as 2 Chronicles. 32.8. so let us rest our selves upon the promises of God; no
other has promised life and salvation, no other can confer the remission of
sin, and life eternal, no other can deliver from Hell, sin and Satan,
therefore let us take off our hearts from all other, and rely only upon him,
Isa. 45.22. for there is no other name, Acts 4.12. and all the promises which
God has made in him are most certain, 2 Cor. 1.20. most constant; whatsoever
change there be, this fails not; Isa. 40.8. this like the Sea continues full
though other water brooks do fail, these are most pleasant and delightful,
full of refreshment, delight and comfort to Gods people, Psa. 23.4. and in
believing Gods promises, in geting interest in them, in building upon them, we
shall be drawn to attend Gods ordinances with delight, 1 Pet. 2.3. Job. 23.12.
as the child sucketh the breasts, as Job desired it more then his appointed
food, to come as to our fathers house, as into our friends presence, to be glad
with David Psa. 122.1.2.

We shall stir up others to seek God in the use of his ordinances, we shall
call others, Jsa. 2.2. we shall strive to bring them to the Physician of their
souls, to make them partakers of his Grace, Lu. 22.32.

3. We shall be full of love to God, and to his ways, Gal. 5.6, 7.

We shall be rich in all good works, like a tree full of fruit, a garden full
of sweet flowers, and thus shall we abundantly glorify God by believing, and
to this we should be induced by considering the fullness and Alsuffici- of
Christ Jesus; for,

Verse. 34.
He whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives not the spirit
to him by measure.

The Baptist here rendereth the reason why they do put to their seal that God
is true, when they do receive, the testimony of Christ, even because the
testimony of Christ is the testimony of God, for Christ is come from his
Heavenly Father, and God alone does speak by him, for so, Jo. 7.16. Jo. 14.24.
Heb. 5.5, 6. wherein we may consider.

1. Christ's authority, he whom God has sent speaks the Words of God:

2. His sufficiency, for he has not received the spirit by measure; first his
authority, he was sent of God, equal with God, in regard of his Divine
Essence, but inferior to the Father according of his humane nature, office of
a Mediator; the Sun is said to be sent, in that he was appointed, put forth,
and furnished with gifts and authority to fulfill the office of a Mediator.
Gal. 4.4. and to speak the words of God in that, as a Messenger declares not
his own mind, but his who sent him; So Christ does deliver the mind and
Council of God the Father, from whence we may learn, that the doctrine which
is delivered by Christ Jesus, is most holy and infallable, the very word of
God, who is truth it self, a doctrine of power, to convince, Mat. 7.28. full
of light to give knowledge, Mat. 4 16. a key opening Gods Council, which is
hidden from the wise men of the World. Lu. 10.21.22. a Doctrine not to be
reproved, but worthy to be believed, Jo. 8.46. therefore to this we should
come, upon this we should wait, as upon the light which alone is able to show
us the way of life, as upon the School wherein we may learn true wisdom, 2.
Tim. 3.17. as on the Jordan, which will cleanse us from our iniquities, Jo.
15.3. This we should embrace as the seed which will beget us again unto a new
life, Jo. 1.18. As the voice which will raise us, Jo. 11.44. Jo. 5.25. On this
we should feed, as on the Milk, which will make us grow in the grace of Gods
Spirit, 1 Pet. 2.2. this we must follow as the fiery pillar which will lead us
to the Heavenly Canaan, this we must use as the Spiritual weapon which will
beat down the holds of sin and Satan, Exo. 13.31. 2 Cor. 10. Lu. 10.17.
which will cast him down as the thunder does the lightning; thus we must
affect, as the means of peace, and reconcilement between us, and our God. Much
more might be said of this, but we have lately heard of this more largely.

One thing more may be learned out of these words from the preparation of
Christ to his office; as he coming to preach the Gospel had his commission
from God, spoke no other but the words of God, so it sets before us the duty
of Gods Messengers, and teaches us:

Gods Ministers must be sure, that God do give them their commission, and that
they preach nothing but what is Gods will and council. First they must have a
commission as an Ambassador must have a commission from his Sovereign. So,
Heb. 5.4.5. This is so needful that without it they cannot discharge their
calling., To. 10.15. Therefore wisdoms Maidens? Christ's Ministers, went not
of their own accord, but were sent, Pro. 9.3. And the Prophets of old, went
not upon their own head, but the Lord sent them, Jer. 44.4. The disciples of
our Savior had also authority given before they undertook this function Mat.
10.16. as they must have their commission, so they must deliver none but Gods
mind and message to the people; an Ambassador may not deliver his own but his
Sovereigns message to the people, it was the Lords charge, Ezeck. 2.7. It was
Paul's care 1 Cor. 11.23. and 1 Pet. 4.11. And it was Peter's comfort, 2 Pet.
1.16. 2. Cor 1.11.12. 2 Cor. 4.1.2.

Their commission they must have from God.

1. Because otherwise they cannot faithfully open the mind and council of God;
how can they preach accept they be sent, unless they be furnished and prepared
by the Lord? how can the Sun shine if light were not put into him? the Soldier
fight, if he be not trained up in military discipline, and furnished with
weapon.

2. Because otherwise they cannot preach Christ, but themselves; not seek the
Glory of God, 2 Cor: 4.5. Mica. 3.3.
but their own ends, as the false Prophets did who ran when God did not send
them.

3. Because otherwise they will not convert the people from sin but confirm
them in sin, not make them loath, but rather bless themselves in their
iniquities, Ier. 14.14. Ier. 23.16. Not turn them to God, but drive them from
God. Ier. 27.15.
Neither must they preach any thing besides Gods council.

1. Because this alone has power to discover men's sins, Heb. 4.12. This is a
light discovering of all their spots, this will find it out, though never so
deeply veiled, never so artificially hidden; as, Psa. 19.5. so it is true of
this Doctrine.

2. Because this alone can awaken the conscience like Peter's Cock, Eccles.
11.13: Acts. 2.37. This makes them cry, Romans 7.24.

3. Because this does purify and cleanse the soul from sin, all other
doctrines are but like the rivers of Damascus unable to cleanse the leprosy of
Naaman. This is the fan Matthew. 3.12. The fire, Ier. 23.29. This does drive away
the evil spirit.

4. Because this does pacify the conscience, Christ's voice stilled the raging
tempest, the Dove brought the Olive branch, Gods word is the word of peace;

5. Because this makes men fruitful in grace, Jer. 23.28
the chafe is sown, in vain, the good ground brings the increase, the
pleasant rivers makes the earth fruitful; other doctrins like the water, 1
Kings 2.19.
about a Jerico make the souls of men barren.

a Serpent instead of fish.

2. Therefore this must cause the people, fervently to desire, earnestly to
pray, and carefully to labor for such ministers as are sent of God, and duly
qualified for that calling; as sick men desire a skillful and faithful
Physician, as passengers desire a careful understanding Pilot, to convey them
over rough and dangerous waters, travelers desire a good and circumspect
guide, in a doubtful way, which must be run with much speed, and that upon
pain of death; as the soldiers entering combat with potent and politic
enemies, desire wise, courageous, and experienced commanders, and leaders.
Sin is a disease of all diseases the most dangerous, a malady not curable by
the hand of the most skillful Physician, a leprosy like Naamans, the Rivers of
Damascus cannot cleanse it, no passage so dangerous, as the passage of a
Christian between Egypt and Canaan; no gulfs, no rocks, no sands, no stormy
tempests, no mischievous and bloody pirates so hardly avoidable, as sin and
Satan; no snares so uneasily discerned, no bypath so difficultly avoided, as
the crooked ways of iniquity: no enemy so strong, so cunning, so violent, as
Satan, no conquest so uneasy, no overthrow so full of danger, and therefore
Gods ministers who must heal this disease, conduct the people over this
passage, make them conquerers over their enemies, must be abundantly
replenished with all their utmost graces; and Gods people must do their utmost
to obtain the most fit means for this calling: men commonly desire the best
food for their bodies, the best seed for their ground, the best Physic for
their diseases, the best council for their weighty undertakings, the best
armor for the day of battle, the best coin to put in their treasury; it is a
great shame that men should have no regard to their souls, whether they be fed
with manchet or gravel, with wheat or chafe, whither they have wholesome
Physic or poison given to them, whither they have good coynor reprobate
silver, brass and tin, or led, given them and that you may a little more
clearly see the folly of men, contenting themselves with blind and
insufficient guides, the great necessity of able teachers look,

1. Upon the secrecy and depth of sin, how deep it lies, how uneasily found
out, how roughly it is gilded over, like base with good metal, how much it
is loved, how men are uneasily brought to reject it, it is deep like a tree of
deep roots, there must be much digging to find it, Io. 1.6.
like a deep wound there must be a skilful Surgeon to search out the depth
of it; it lies like Jonah in the bottom of the ship, so Jsa. 29.15. Josua.
7.21. Prove. 30, 18, 19.20. Therefore the ministers of God must be able to apply
the word aright to make it pierce like a two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12. Psa. 49.2.
that 1 Cor. 14.25. Heb. 4.12 Isa. 49.2.
It is also artificially veiled, curiously and cunningly covered, as the rotten
bones under a whited. Sepulcher, as poison under a golden cup, or sweet Sugar;
brutish and beastly lust is covered under the white and comely apparel of love.
Pro. 7.18. Covetousness under the vail of frugality and application of things
to better uses, Io. 12.5, 6. drunkenness goes under the name of love, and
preserving amity between men; profanation of Gods day, under the vizard of
recreation, thus Iehorams, wife coming to the prophet, fained her self to be
another then she was; so sinful men that their iniquity may not be found out
fain themselves to be others then they are. Jehu, 2 Kings. 10.20. Mat. 15.8.
Mat. 8.2. Lu. 11.44. Therefore Gods ministers must be replenished with much
knowledge, that they may discover their deceitfulness and disclose their
Hypocrisies, take away this deceitful vail from their faces, and make them see
their own vileness as Samuel dealt with Saul, 1 Samuel 15:13.14. That they may
say as 1 Kings. 14.6. That they may convince them, and make them ashamed of
that wherein they glory, and bring them to see, Number. 7.9.24. And as sin is
deeply rooted, cunningly covered so is it also strongly loved, men are loath to
depart from it, it is as pleasant wine Pro. 9.17: As sweet Sugar, Job, 20.12.
They are loath to leave it as Rabel her fathers Idols, the hearts of men are
wedded to it; strongly set upon it, and with much violence and eagarnesse
pursue it, Pro, 23.35. And there fore Gods Ministers must be both skillful and
earnest, to make men hate what they love so strongly, to make the^ trample
under foot as dung what they esteem more precious then gold; to reject as
gravel, what they delight in as the purest manchet, to distaste as gall, what
now is pleasant as honey to their palate.

2. Consider the strength of sin, and Satan's hold, it is a strong Castle
uneasily beaten down, the Devil is no weakling, but a Prince, Ephe. 2.3. 2
Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 2.4. Mat. 7.24.
a Potent adversary, it is not every one can conquer him, a bow without arrows,
a minister without abilities can do nothing to this adversary; powder of
humane eloquence, though it make a great noise, cannot shake the powers of his
Kingdom, an Axe without edge, a Sermon without Zeal, and courage cannot cut
the roots of this tree; the Devil does no more regard such men's preaching, as
preach not with power, and in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit,
then he did for the sons of Sceva conjuring, Acts. 19.15. Instead of casting
him out of others, he will enter further into them themselves; therefore like
good soldiers they must be well furnished with spiritual armor and 2 Cor.
10.5. Psa. 45.5. their arrows must be sharp.

3. Consider the depth of Gods councels, how uneasily unfolded, opened,
applied, how these are a riddle, which like Sampsons riddle cannot be
enterpreted, unless we plough with Gods Heifer; deep things of God which
cannot be found out but by Gods Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11. A way that cannot be
known without a guide, Acts. 8.31. A sealed book, which we cannot read
unless we have some one to open it, Isa. 29.11. Neither are the Lamps which
reserve the greatest portion of this oil so full of light; nor the fountains
which hold the largest measure of knowledge so full of waters, but that with
Paul they may say, who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2.16.

4. Consider the number, the subtlety, and the power of them that seduce to
sin, that lead to error, and that provoke to evil, that spread snares, and
cast stumbling blocks in the ways of Gods people. The envious man has many
servants that sow tares among this Wheat, Mat. 13.25. Many Factors that sell
deceiptfull wares, that make merchandise of the souls of the people, 2 Pet.
2.3. Many mountebanks that apply healing salves before ever they search and
open the wound, Jer. 6.14. Many unskilful builders that daub with untemperate
Mortar upon a rotten wall, before ever they pull down the ruinous places,
Ezekiel. 13.10. Many clouds without rain, many breasts without milk, 2 Pet.
2.17. Many lazy Husbandmen that sow before ever they break up the fallow
ground of the hearts of Gods people, Contrary to that, Jer. 1.10. Many
deceivers transformed into Angels of light, 2. Cor. 11.11. Many Lions in
sheep Skins, Mat. 7.15. Many that with Ahabs Prophets, bad us go on and
proper, 1 Kings. 22.12. Therefore behoofull we should make choice of able
ministers, that may teach sound Doctrine, convince opposers, lead us forward
and build us up in the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus in despite of all
oppositions.

5. Consider our dullness, deadness, security; backwardness, Israel cannot
travel longer then the fiery Pillar does shine before them, Peter will
continue in the denial of his Master if the Cock do not crow to awaken him;
Mat. 26.75. Exodus, 32.1.2. Rev. 2.4.
Israel will erect a golden calfe if Moses do but a little absent himself from
them; if Jehojada once dye, the Princes of Juda will leave the house of the God
of their Fathers, and serve groves, and Idols, 2 Chro. 24.18. The best men with
the men of Ephesus, will forget their first love, if they live not under
faithful Ministers; as the best garden will grow barren if it be not weeded,
the best tree will grow wild, if it be not pruned, the soil will become
unfruitful if the dewes fall not upon it, the strongest body will grow weak,
if good food be with holden from it; the best ship will miscarry, if it want a
good Pilote; therefore 2 Pet. 1.12. This is the Pillar which supporteth us, the
word of life which keeps life in us, Phil. 2.14. The breast which gives food
to us 1 Pet. 2.2. The cloud whose dewes water us, and makes us fruitful in the
grace of the Spirit, Deuteronomy. 32.2.

6. Consider how hardly a true and lively faith is wrought without labor, men
are persuaded and assured of their salvation; what industry constancy,
fervency, and shill, is required, and must be used before the judgment can be
informed, rightly to descerne the things which differ, before the will can be
inclined to chose the things which are most excellent, before the affections
can be cleansed, the heart purified, the holds of sin cast down, the soul
made free from the service of evil, and free to the love of God, and of what
is truly good, as in 2 Kings. 4.32, 34.35. So the Minister must again and
again exhort instruct and pray before the life of grace be restored, 2 Timothy
5.14.
the conscience pacified, the fruits of a new life infallably apparent, and the
heart thoroughly persuaded of Gods goodness toward it in the free remission of
all sin; all temptations quelled, all objections answered and the pardon of
fine sealed: Naaman went seven times into Jordan before he was washed, 2 Kings.
5.14.
the Cock crowed thrice before Peter awakened, our Savior stood long at the
door, before the Spouse stirred up her self to open, to come forth to him,
Mat. 26.75.
she sought long ere she could and him and Cant. 2.5. she speaks to the
Ministers to comfort or sustain her by the Ministry of the word; and Romans 1
11. and Acts. 14.2.22.

7. Consider the sweet and singular comforts which the powerful Ministry of
the word breeds in the souls of the people of God, how it is unto the eyes
of their understanding as the light of the Sun to the eye of the body, whereof
Eccles. 11.7. So it is to them a pleasant thing to behold the things of God, as
Mat. 2.10. So does the light of the word rejoice joyce the people of God. Isa.
9.2, 3. Lu. 10.23. How it is unto their ears as the harp in David's hand
chasing away the evil spirit; How a very joyful sound, Psa. 89.15. How it is
unto their palate as the sweetest honey, Psa. 19.10. As the daintiest feast,
Isa. 25.6. How it is to their feet a burning light, guiding them into the ways
of peace. Lu. 1.79. How it is to their thirsty souls, as a wel-spring of
living waters to the thirsty; and their troubled consciences, as the
Olive Branch to Noah, as the still voice to Eliah; to their weary spirits, as
Horsemen, and Chariots, to drive, and carry them forward in their journey, to
the high and Heavenly habitation, which God has prepared for his people; and
out of all this, we may abundantly behold the necessity of an able, constant
and powerful Ministry, and the folly of them that content themselves with
Lamps that have no Oil, with Messengers that have no tidings, with such at
least as like the evil servants, hide and employ not their talent.

3. This must occasion the people, to try whether the Ministers, who are set
over them, be sent of God, or whether they be come of their own accord. This
you may descerne. 1. By the soundness, and the fullness, and holiness of their
knowledge, in the matter of life and salvation, for as the Sun ruling, the
world is full of light, the Sea watring the earth, is full of Waters, so must
the Ministers of God be full of knowledge, therefore called stars, Rev. 1.16.
And light, Mat. 5.14. Guides, Acts. 8.31. Shepherds, Ephesians. 4.11. Captains, 2 Timothy 2.3. Stewards, Lu. 13.52. And it is Gods ordinance, Mal. 2.7. Gods
promise, Jer. 3.15. The contrary to this, is an argument men are not sent, Hos.
4.6. Jer. 2.8.

2. By the holiness and integrity of their conversations, Kings send not
rebels to reclaim others, they who are tainted with the Plague themselves, are
very dangerous Physicians; no man will willingly take Physic from them, but
Lu. 4.23. therefore God does purify and cleanse his Messengers from iniquity,
Mal. 2.5, 6. And 1 Timothy 4.12. And therefore our Savior, Matthew. 5.16. and
Isaiah was cleansed, Psa. 511 12.13.
Isa. 6.5. And Paul proposes himself and the rest, for an example, Phil.
3.17. The contrary to this, argues want of commission, Jer. 23.14. 1 Samuel 2.17.
Mat. 5.3.

3. By the fervency of their Zeal and affections, they must be full of courage;
coming forth, as it is said of the Sun, Psa. 19.5.
like Bridegrooms out of their Chamber, and rejoicing like mighty men, to run
the race which God has set them, being like burning iron, warming them that
are about them; thus the word, as fire shut up in Jeremy his bones, Jer. 20.9.
Examples hereof, we have in Eliah, 1 Kings 18.21. Zacharias, 2 Chronicles. 24 20.
In the Baptist, Mat. 3.7. In Stephen, Acts. 7.51. In Paul, Acts. 34, 20. The
want of this is taxed, Matthew. 7.29. and Rev. 3.16.

4. By their sincere and Heavenly Doctrine, such as God sends delivers Gods
message, good nurses give wholesome milk to the children, good Stewards give
not gravel, but good bread to the family, thus 2 Timothy 2.15. They give every
man his portion out of Gods word, knowledge to the ignorant, reproof to the
obstinate, comfort to the afflicted, encouragement to the opposed, and 1 Pet.
4.11. Tit. 1.9. And then Jer. 23.22. But the contrary hereunto, Mica. 2.11.
Lam. 2.24.

5. By their industry in their calling, expressed by the similitudes of
Husbandmen, builders, 1 Cor. 3.6, 9. Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.3. It was prophesied,
Isa. 62.5. Charged 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Timothy 4.15. Practiced, 1 Cor. 15.10. But the
want of this, discovers want of commission, Isa. 56.10.

6. By their grief to see men sinful, as a good Physician to see his patient
diseased, a loving Nurse to see her child sick, thus 2 Pet. 2.8. Jer. 9.1.
Jer. 13.17. Psa. 119.136. But Acts. 4.2.

7. By their seeking of the Glory of God, and the good of his Church more then
themselves, or their own good, 2 Cor. 4.5. 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Cor. 10.33. 1 These.
2.19. But 2. Pet. 2.3. These meeting together in a Minister, are assured
evidence that God has sent such one in mercy to his servants.

8. By their constancy in their calling, and religious and holy conversation;
such as God sends, are not like a broken Bow that starteth back in the day of
battle, like the sluggard that would not walk because there was a Lion in the
Street, like the sloathfull man that would not sow because it was cold; they
grow not weary of the work of the Lord, their calling is a delight, no trouble;
their work is pleasant no iron yoke to them, and therefore as Eccles. 11.6. So
they sow in the morning, in the Evening are constant in embracing every
occasion, looking unto God for a blessing; though they fish long with Peter,
and catched nothing, yet at Christ's command, they cast forth the net in hope of
a good draught at last, they know that God has several hours for men's
conversion, some at the third some at the sixth hour, some at the ninth hour,
some at the last hour of the day, so must they continue constant to the last
hour in their calling, and if none convert by their labors, yet they know that
their endeavors shall not be altogether fruitless, Jsa. 49 4 And therefore
they are not like Meteors, and blazing stars, shining for a season, and then
fall to ground, but like the sun they are constant, in their care; this was
Gods charge to Jeremy, Jer. 15.19, 20, 21. And it was his practice, Jer.
20.9.10. This was Paul's resolution, Acts. 20.24. And this he verified, 2 Timothy
4.7. This the Apostles also manifested, it was within them, as a fire not to be
quenched, as a stream not to be stopped, Acts. 4.19.20. But Apostasy from God,
either in doctrine or conversation, may justly call into question their
commission; Demas once accounted a fellow laborer, Philimon, verse 24.
afterward proved an Apostaticall lover of the world, 2 Timothy 4.10. And Rev.
12.4. Faithfulness to the end in the Ministerial calling, is a gracious
testimony that God has given them a commission, and that he has sent them
for the good of his people.

Thus of his authority; Next let us look upon his Alsufficiency. Authority
without ability, is like a sword without a hand; ability without authority, is
like a hand without a sword, both insufficient, both of little use, but where
both concur, they make a man complete to fulfill the calling he has
undertaken; therefore that the Baptist might the better move, the more
effectually persuade the hearts of his disciples, to embrace, believe, and
build upon Christ, he commends him not only by his authority, whom God has
sent, he speaks the word of God, but also by his Alsufficiency, for God has
not given the spirit by measure. Some extend these words to Gods abundant and
common dispensation of all good things, why being the fountain of all
goodness does largely pour out his blessings, and yet is not emptied any more
then the Sun of his light by Shining, or the sea of water by sending forth many
streams to water the earth; he that draws out of a vessel, what he gives
comes at length to the bottom, but he that dippeth out of the Sea never
comes to the bottom, the abilities of the creatures are soon like a little
vessel drawn dry, but God never gives so much but there is a great fulness in
him at the last, as there was at the first, his hand is never short that it
cannot help, his arm is never weary that it cannot give assistance, it is
never low water but always full Sea with this goodness; a singular expression
of the transcendency of God beyond and above all creatures, a powerful
lodestone, to draw men to God from the world, a singular encouragement to men
to rely upon God, as on a sure foundation, which will never sink; to draw
nigh to God, as to the fountain of living waters, which will most certainly
refresh us, as to a tree laden with all forts of fruit, bearing new fruit
every month, an admirable comfort to Gods children that their God is their
stay, and their strength has such fullness in him; but they who interpret
these words to be spoken of Christ, give the best and most proper
enterpretation, for the purpose of the Baptist was not so much to commend and
set forth the fullness and excellency of God whereof, there was not then any
question, but of Christ, of whose Alsufficiency the disciples of the Baptist
were both ignorant and doubtful, therefore he sets before them the full
treasury of all goodness, which was in Christ, intimates to them that in
Christ alone was that sufficiency to be found, which would make them wise,
holy, just, free, happy; from him they should derive and draw that which the
world could not afford them, for God had given him the spirit not by measure,
Christ and God the Father are one in regard of Divine Essence 1 Jo. 5.7. that
is incommunicable and cannot be given, but God the Father gave the Son, his
personal subsistence, as a Son, as a second Person, whereof David speaks,
Psa. 2.7. And also Solomon, Pro 8.24 25 29.30. And God has also given the
Spirit that is the Grace of the Spirit unto Christ as man, as Mediator above
measure, in a most abundant and large measure; as he is the Son of God by
eternal generation so he has infinite power, Wisdom, justice, Holiness,
Goodness; as he is the Son of God, by Grace of Hypostaticall Union, so he
has also all the former virtues, but not in that measure as they are in him,
as he is God, but yet in such measure, as they do wonderfully excel all the
excellencies in men and Angels, as the Sun does the Stars in brightness,
Col. 1.19. Others received and do receive the Spirit in measure 1 Cor. 12.7.
That is slenderly, and this from Christ, Ephesians. 4.7, as we receive water from
the Sisterne but to Christ as man, it is given above measure, that is largely,
abundantly, far more then to any creature.

In the words, we have 1. a Giver, God. 2: The gift with the equality of it,
the Spirit. 3. The measure, or how much is givers not sparingly, not nigardly,
but plentiously, above measure. 4. The receiver, the party to whom it is given,
to Christ.
From the first we may learn.

Doct. That God is the Author and giver of every blessing enjoyed by any
person or people; the royal robes wherewith Christ as man was apparelled,
came out of Gods Wardrobe; the singular Jewels wherewith he was adorned, came
out of Gods Storehouse, therefore much more the blessings and endowments
conferred upon people of inferior condition, as all the light in the Air
comes from the Sun, so James, 1.17. As the Rain comes from the cloud, upon
the earth; so does every good thing come unto us from the Lord, nothing is due,
nothing is merited, all is given, Jo. 3.17. Therefore God is by the Apostle
styled the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God in whom all goodness
resideth, as water in the fountain, from whom all goodness is derived, all
blessings Issue as waters from the fountain, as branches from the root, a God
giving both spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal favors; all that
we possess, is fruit from his Tree, grain out of his Garner, liquor out of
his vessel, the Lords hand makes all, Eccles. 11.5. We cannot gather if God
do not scatter; we cannot receive, if God does not open his hand; we cannot
be satisfied, if God does not fill us, Psa. 104.28.

Reason. Because God has in himself all goodness originally independantly,
compleately, and others have it by the communication, as God will work it in
them, give it to them; as all nourishment is in the root, and from thence sent
up into the branch; all waters are in the Sea, and from thence sent in the
channels of the earth beneath, and in the clouds above, as in so many bottles
for the watering of the earth; Exodus 34.
so all goodness in God he deriveth to us as he pleases, therefore the
Psalmist, ascribes all to the Goodness of the Lord. Psa. 68.9.10. And Psa.
65.8.9.10.11.12.13. And,

2. Because God has Sovereignty, and dominion over all, right and interest
into all, he is the Lord, the creature the servant; he is the Workman the
world with all the fullness thereof, his workmanship; he is the King, all the
creatures his subjects; the servant can have nothing but what his Lord will
allow him, all tallents are in Gods hand, he has both the dominion and the
disposition of them, Psalm. 24, 1. Mat. 5.45,
he may do with his own what pleases him, and hence, 1 Chro. 29.11, 12.
Deuteronomy. 8.18.

3. Because all second causes, are no further helpful, comfortable, and
beneficial to us then as God is pleased to put an ability, and fullness into
them, as God is pleased to cause his blessing to accompany and go together with
them, as Jo. 15.5. So without God all that we have can do nothing, and as
Jsa. 30.7. So all abilities without God will help in vain, their strength will
be to set still, as Jer. 10 5. So it will be in these, to do neither good nor
harm, men may glory of their abilities, as Israel of the Arc, but if God be
not there, the Arc will do no good^

4. Because we are altogether empty, in and of ourselves, dry trees, barren
fields, bearing no fruit; and empty Vessels, without any licquor of grace; we
are, Rev. 3.17. desolate houses, in whom dwells no good thing, To. 7.18. and
Hos. 10.1. Nineveh, Nah. 3.10. And therefore well might the Apostle say, what
have thou that thou have not received.

5. Because we are able to discern nothing, we are all gone astray Psa.
14.3. We are like a wilderness, like the sluggards field, as full of sin as
that of thorns and briars, Pro. 24.30. After our conversion, when we have
done our best, we do but that like Jacob, in the way of Gods commandments,
our best apparel is very menstruous, best grain has much chafe, and our best
coin has much dross mingled with it, Jsa. 64.6. So that when we have done
all we can do, we are unprofitable servants, we have deserved nothing, Lu.
17.10.
and therefore whatsoever we enjoy, it must needs be Gods gift.

6. Because all do exspect, and look for every behoofull gift at the hands of
God, as the eye waits on the Sun for light, the sucking child on the breasts
for milk, the providence of God extends it self to all creatures, to all
persons, to all seasons, occasions, and conditions, he does not like the
Carpenter build a house, and then forsake it, like a careless Pilote leaving
his ship in the stormy tempest, but God guides, preserves, feeds, and
sustaineth all that he has made in him, Acts. 17.28. From him, Psa. 104.27.

Use. Is all we enjoy, all that does relieve us, Gods gift? is it he is the
Author, and the giver of all, then let us seek to God for every good gift,
whereof we stand in need, as. Ja. 1.5. So if any man want grace to subdue his
corruption let him ask of God, for he gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.
If any man want wisdom to discern the things which differ, to know the deep
things of God, let him seek it at the hands of God, for this is also Gods
gift, Matthew. 16.17. If any man want faith let him ask of God for this is also
the gift of God, Phil. 1.29. If any man want peace, let him seek it from the
Lord, for it comes from him. To. 16.20. If any man want love let him address
himself to God for it, for he is love, 1 Jo. 4.8. And the God of love, 2 Cor.
13.11. If any man want patience, let him sue to God, for he is the Author of
it, To. 15.5. As the lame men came to Bethesda to be healed, Io. 5. 2 Kings. 5.
Act. 3.3.
as Naaman came to Jordan to be washed, as the lame man lay at the gates of
the Temple for an alms, so come you to God to be healed, to be cleansed, to
be enriched with every good gift, he alone can supply your wants, Hos. 13.9.
All other helpers are Physicians of no value, you shall be constrained to come
to him at last, go whither ye will for the present, Mar. 5.29. You shall be
constrained, Hos. 14.3. All the world shall say as, 2 Kings. 6.26, 27. He
alone has promised to lend the hand of assistance, to open the fountain of
his Loving-kindnesse, to warm us with the Sunshine of his countenance; to
delight our souls with his comforts, Mat. 7.7. Mat. 11.28. Psa. 81.10. He
alone knows our wants, is acquainted with our weaknesses, he knows what we
need before we ask, Nah. 1.5. He alone cares for us in our distress, as a
father for his child, a Shepherd for his flock, his eyes are upon us, Psa.
14.15. He is sensible of our afflictions, Isa. 63.9. As a mother of the
affliction of her child, Isa. 49.15. Therefore let us not go to Egypt, to
Baalzebub, to Endor, let us not go to the Physicians which have no skill, to
the trees which have no fruit, to hives which have no honey, to the
storehouses which have no treasure, to the lamps which have no light, to
withered hands which have no strength, but let us go to God, in whom is all
fullness, all goodness, all abundance, and he will surely give, if we ask
in faith, Iam. 1.5.6. In humility, Iam. 4.6. In sincerity, Psa. 145 19. In
fervency. Iam. 5.16. In constancy, Lu. 18 3.

2. Over all blessings: Gods gifts are the free favors of his hand, then be
not proud of thy great abundance; art thou advanced above others, is the roots
of thy tree, more abundantly watered then others, has the Sun shined more
warmly on thee and thy dwelling, then others, have thou more feathers in thy
nest, in thy wings then others have; be not proud, it is all the gift of God;
what have thou which thou have not received, have thou riches, have thou
honors, are not these branches growing upno Gods Tree, 1 Chr. 29.12. 1 Samuel
2.8. Psa. 75.6.7. Have thou knowledge, is thy soul full of light; is not this
a Lamp of Gods kindling, Col. 1 26.27. Have thou faith is not this a work of
Gods finger, Jo. 6.29. Have thou holiness, is not this a garment of Gods
weaving, of Gods putting on, Ezeck. 16.8.9.10, Was not thine iniquity purged
with a Coal from Gods Altar, Isa. 6.5. Think upon any gift, any endowment, of
the body, or of the mind, wherewith thou art adorned, and see if it be not a
stream of Gods fountain, a letter of his writing, an undeserved favor, of
Gods bestowing; look upon the freedom of Gods goodness, think upon thine
own unworthiness, meditate upon Gods end and purpose in the donation of his
favors, be affected with thy walking unworthy of Gods mercies, let thy
thoughts be upon the strict account whereunto God will call thee, for the
employment of all the favors he has bestowed on thee, and then be not high
minded but fear.

3. Is every blessing, every good thing we enjoy Gods gift? then let us give
God the praise of all, let us so employ all that we may glorify God in the
use thereof; as they have their original from him, so in their use they must
serve him, Romans 11.36. Who, says the Apostle planteth a Vineyard, and eats
not of the fruit thereof? who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk? 1
Cor. 9.7. So shall God feed us, shall God plant us, shall God water us, shall
God bestow upon us all manner of blessings, and shall not he have the praise
thereof? shall not he be honored with it? Prove. 3.9. Shall not all be so
ordered, so disposed, that God may be magnified? according to that 1 Pet. 4.11.
Is not God who has made all, who has preserved all, who has done all for us,
worthy of praise, Rev. 4.11. Is not this the voice of all creatures, do they
not all say, Rev. 5.13. And shall not man who has drunk deepest of the cup of
Gods mercies, tasted most abundantly of the River of Gods Loving-kindnesse, be
thankful to him for his blessings; and study to glorify him in the use of
such talents as you has received from him? and to the end we may glorify God
in the use of his gifts, and be thankful for his mercies,

1. We must look upon, and take notice of every gift, of every blessing we
enjoy, as of a gift coming from Gods hand, as on a dew falling from Gods
cloud, as on fire taken from Gods Altar; look not so much upon second, as upon
the first cause; upon inferior means, as upon God who does all in all; raise
your hearts to this pitch, that you may be able to say with Jacob, Gen 30.8.
Genesis 33.5. With Joseph, Genesis 48.9. As Moses taught Israel to say, Deuteronomy. 26.9.
So thou must be able feelingly to say, God has given me his Word, his
Sacrament, his spirit; God has given me health, strength, liberty, food
raiment, Wife, children; take it all as a gift of God, and then thou shall
strive to give God the glory of it, Deuteronomy. 26.10.

2 Labor to get your heart thoroughly affected with the goodness of God
therein; strive to see it, to take it as a singular mercy from the hands of
God, to read therein the lively characters of Gods Love, to taste the
sweetness, and goodness of God in the same, to be stirred up to rejoice in
God thereby; and then we shall seek to glorify God therein, as 1 Samuel 1.27,
28. She was affected with Gods goodness, in the gift, and therefore gave the
same again unto God; and to this we are exhorted Psalm. 34, 7, 8. And of this we
have example, Psa. 38.17, 19.

3 Be thereby stirred up to love God, let it be as a Bellows blowing up thy
cold affections; as beams from the Sun, warming thy heart, as a Lodestone to
draw thee nearer unto God, Psalm. 116.1, 2. And then he disputed with himself,
casts about what course to take that he might glorify God, verse. 12. this
will constrain them to do all for Gods glory, 2 Cor. 5.14. This will make them
esteem nothing to dear for God, Rev. 12.11.

4. Be hereby drawn to rest and depend upon God, as upon an Alsufficient Arm;
an iron pillar, a sure foundation; as a sick man upon a Physician, full of art
and skill to cure him, as a poor man upon a rich friend, abundantly able to
supply him, as a child upon a loving father, able to releeve him; to this the
people exhort one another, upon the sight of the great things which God should
do for them, in giving Christ to them, in working their spiritual feedom, Isa.
26.12.3, 4. Psalm. 61.3, 4, 5. Confidence in God will, surely animate us to do
good; a man cannot believe in God, but he must also live to God Psalm. 37 3.

5. Be hereby put in mind of God, let every gift you receive, every blessing
you enjoy, be a monitor, to bring God to your remembrance; to make you think
upon the Alsufficiency which is in him; from whom all these things flow, as
water from the fountain; to make you consider how respectfull God is unto you,
how mindful he is of you, how abundant his mercy and loving kindness is
toward you, every favor must be as an Ambassador testifying Gods goodness,
as the voice of Watchmen to bring the Lord to your remembrance, Deuteronomy. 8.13.18.
Psa. 63.5.6.

6. Be hereby occasioned to rejoice and delight thy self in God; as rich
gifts and liberal testimonies of love from a friend cause the receiver to
rejoice in his love, so must the many gifts which he bestows on us cause us
abundantly to rejoice, and delight our selves in God, who is so mindful of us,
so open-handed and plenteous in his mercies toward us, this must be as sweet
sounding Music in our ears cheering up our dull and drooping spirits; as Wine
filling our heavy hearts with gladness. Psa. 28.6.7.8. 1 Samuel 2.1. Deuteronomy. 12,
7. Deuteronomy. 16.11.

7. Endeavor to employ all thy abilities to the best uses, in the way wherein
they may bring most honor to God, like a good Steward seek not your own, but
your great Masters advantage, bestow upon the maintenance of Gods worship,
every man in his calling, place, and according to the measure of the gift God
has given to him, Exodus 35. from the 20. to the 30. and 1 Chro. 29.3.6.9.10.
If thou have knowledge instruct Gods people, if thou have courage, oppose Gods
enemies; if thou have joy magnify God with praises; if thou have sanctity,
faith, patience, meekness, show it by thy contempt of the world; patient
bearing of afflictions; holy, grave, and religious carriage; glorify God by
giving a good example to others; if thou have earthly abundance, say with the
Psalmist. Psa. 16.3. As 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Chro. 12.7.

Thus of the giver next of the gift, not the world, not external, and
transitory riches, not earthly and vanishing honors, but the Spirit, none
dearer to God then Christ, none more regardfull of Gods Glory, none ordained to
a more honorable service, and therefore without controversy God bestowed on
him the chiefest gifts, the rarest pledges of his Love; and what are these but
the gifts of the Spirit; from whence learn,

Doct. That the holy and saving graces of the Spirit, are of all other gifts
the most excellent: as the Sun excels the Gloe-worm, the Vine is to be
preferred before the bramble, the purest and most perfect wine befor-the
smallest water; so are the gifts of the spirit to be preferred before all the
endowments of the world; these like Beniamins portion are five-times as good as
any of his brethrens; like Isaacs Inheritance, far better then Ishmaels
movables; this is evident, by the titles and attributes given to these graces,
as precious 2 Pet. 1.1. Exceeding great and precious, Verse. 4. unspeakeable
and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. Unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. deep things of God,
1 Cor. 2.10. Excellency of knowledge, Phil. 3.8. Things more Excellent, To.
2.18.

2. By the similitudes used to express the nature, excellency, worth, use and
comfort, of them; the Sun and Moon, the most glorious among the stars, Cant.
6.10. Doves the most harmless among the birds of the Air, Cant. 2.14. Trees
of Frankinsense; the choicest of all spices, a Garden enclosed, wherein are
trees of the choicest nature, a fountain sealed, a fountain of living and
streaming Waters, of all waters the most pure and pleasant. Cant. 4.14.15. wine
and ointments, the chiefest liquor of the grape, Cant. 1.3. Gold and Silver the
purest metals in the earth, Cant. 1.11. An Inheritance choicest among
possessions Col. 1.10.11.

3. By the comparisons which the Holy Ghost, does make between these and the
choicest gifts of the earth, Pro. 3.14.15. Pro. 8.11. Cant. 4.10. Eccles.
9.16.18.

4. By the price which Gods people have put upon them, Phil. 3.8.

5: By the charge given to seek and embrace them before and above all other
things, Mat. 6.33. Pro. 8.10. And these are of blessings the most Excell^nt.

1. Because these have the most excellent author; all things are the common
work of Gods hand, but grace, holiness, and true righteousness, are the
Crown of his Labors; the Glory of his workeman-ship, as the Sun to the
Candle, as the Flower to the common Grass a fruit of ^he Sanctifying finger of
Gods Spirit, Gal. 5.22

2. Because they are of the most pure excellent nature; these are Gold without
dross, trees not having one fading leaf, nor one rotten branch, these are of
a Holy, and Heavenly original; as it was foretold of men; in regard of the
paucity of them, Isa. 13.12. So it is true in regard of the saving grace of
Gods Spirit, it is more precious then fine Gold even then the Golden Wedge of
Ophix, Job. 16.28.17.18.

3. Because these are the best, the choicest and most lively expressions of
Gods Image; it is not gold and silver, gorgeous apparel that makes a man like
God; but true holiness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4 22 Therefore God does not say be
ye rich, for I am rich, be ye strong, for I am strong, ascend you the steps
of earthly dignity, for I am glorious, though this be true; but be ye holy
for I am Holy. Lev. 11.44. other things are rich, as the earth has store of
treasure in her bowels, other things are strong, for so the Rocks are, other
things are glorious, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, Flowers, but holiness is that
which does peculiarly express Gods Image.

4. Because this is the gift which God bestows on them that are dear to him,
the Sun shines on the bad as well as on the good, the worst men have often the
largest portion of earthly good things, their tree is most fully laden, their
cup most plenteously filled, the wicked man's Barnes must be enlarged to hold
the fruits which God has given him, Lu. 12.18.19. Psa. 17.14. But the saving
graces of the Spirit; these are the jewels which God bestows on his own
children, these are the riches with which he does endowe them, all things are
Gods gift, but in comparison of this they are as no gift, at all, Prove. 19.14.
So etc. therefore, 1 Pet. 5.5.

5. Because these are the choicest, and surest testimonies of the Love of God
to our souls; he gives common and worldly endowments to his enemies as well
as to his friends, the Master of the Family gives food, raiment, some-time
money to the servant as well as to the child, the Rain falls on the Rock as
well as on the ground, Eccles. 9.1. But as the Master of the Family shows his
love to his children, in putting them to School, giving good education to
them, so does God show his Love to his Children in training them up in the
School of Christ, in educating them with the saving knowledge of his will, in
framing their hearts to love him, and to walk sincerely and uprightly toward
him, when he leaves others in darkness and in the shadow of death; as Christ
shows his Love to Lazarus, in raising him out of his grave, Jo. 11.44. So
does he show his Love to us, in raising us to a new life; as he showed his love
to Israel, in causing the Sun to shine upon them; when all Egypt sat covered
with darkness, so does he open the Fountain of his Loving-kindnesse in
causing the light of his truth to shine among us, Jerem. 3.14.15. Isaiah
62.5.6. Psalm 87 2.7.

6. Because these do most endeare men unto God; these like a Lodestone draw
the Love, care, and goodness of God toward us, cause him highly to esteem us,
tenderly to affect us, carefully to watch over us, mightily to defend us, as 1 Samuel 16.7, 8. So it is neither for riches, honors, nor beauty that God
respects us; neither Dives wealth, Absolons beauty, Sampsons strength,
Achitophels Policy, Senacharibs victories, nor Solomon's royalty, can move or
draw affection from the Lord, but the holiness and sincerity of his servants,
Isa. 57.15. Isaiah. 66.2. Pro. 11.21. Psalm 16.3.

Use. Our spiritual gifts of all others the most excellent; are these the
grain, and world the chafe? are these the sweet, and the earth the sower
grapes? then behold and be astonished at the strange and wonderful folly of
the greatest number of the world, who like the Jews of old prefer Barrabas
before Christ, who like Esau value a mess of earthly pottage above a Heavenly
birthright; like revolting Israel, are more affected with Egyptian Onions and
Garlic then with the best fruit growing upon the Heavenly Canaan; what more
frequent amongst men then to cry after the things of the earth; like the
horsleeches two daughters, Pro. 30.15. what more common then to run after
riches, honors, pleasures, as Mica after his Idol, Jud. 18.23.24. How many see
we rising early, setting up late, and eating the bread of sorowfulnesse, to
dig silver out of this Mine? how many behold we wounding and piercing
themselves with sharp thorney care, intangling, and wearing themselves with
worldly snares; for trivial and transitory riches; how many see we making
shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience, to load themselves with this
treasure; what more usual with men then to deprive themselves of rest, peace,
all true comforts, to neglect God, their souls, heaven, the Crown of Eternal
Glory, for the vanishing cloud of worldly abilities, as if all our felicity,
safty, comfort; stood in the having of the abundance of the earth, the saving
grace of Gods Spirit were nothing worth: but these men's folly will be easily
descerned, if they would but look

1. Upon the vanity of the world; what is the riches, and honors, when thou
have it, without the grace of Gods Spirit; but as the Apostle said of false
teachers, 2 Pet. 2.17. It has no filling, satisfying, nor contenting virtue in
it, Isa. 50.11. Hag. 1.6. If at any time they have abundance, and seem like the
first Kine in Pharaohs dream to be fat, yet presently one thing or another
arises like the second Kine in Pharaohs dream to deceive and devour all the
fat; so that still the soul is an empty vessel; a barren womb, not satisfied.

2. The impotency of these outward things, they are weak, unable to defend
themselves or their owners; like the Idol gods unable to keep themselves, and
therefore must be kept by their worshippers; the rust will consume it, the
thief steal it, the fire burn it; if the Lord smite thee with sickness,
though with Asa, thou had a kingdom, it cannot procure health for thee; if
God send an enemy, and thou have horses swift of foot yet it will not deliver
thee, Isa. 15. Psa. 33.16. If thou have all kind of delights, art seated in a
Paradise of worldly pleasures, yet if God does send a dreadful noise into thy
ears; then will thou run like Adam to the covert; If God awaken thy
conscience it will be with thee as with Balshazar, Dan. 5.4, 5. Zeph. 1.18.

3. The impiety, it is full of truble; as Achans golden Wedge troubled the
whole army, so the things of the world if they be not sanctified, if men want
grace, to esteem, affect, and employ them as they ought, they are a great
trouble as Adams forbidden fruit in evil men, as a heavy burden to the back;
as a net full of snares to the feet, as a bed of thorns in the night, Pro.
11.17. Pro. 15.6. As the Sea, where are most waters; are most tempests

4. Their commoneness a flower grown in the worst, as well as in the best man's
garden; a livery worn by Gods enemies, as well as by Gods followers; a gift in
the hand of a reprobate, as well as in the hand of Gods chosen; Eccles. 10.7.
Solomon saw servants on horseback, and Princes on foot, and we may easily
see the servants of sin, the bondmen of Satan on horseback, on the Throne,
in place of eminency, enriched with the abundance of the earth, men as Princes,
men richly adorned with the grace of the Spirit; men who are conquerors over
Satan, and their lusts, who are Kings and Priests to God, go on foot, are in
a low state, of no reputation in the world; the most wicked usually are most
favored, and suck most milk out of the breasts of the world. Jo. 15.19. Job.
12.4.5.6. Is it not great folly to neglect the graces of the Spirit, which are
so sweet, so pure, so full, so pleasant, so peculiar to Gods people, so
precious, as nothing in the world is sufficiently able to express it, and to
seek after the things of the earth, which are so vain, so weak, so beggarly,
so troublesome, so common, that he that has the greatest abundance of them may
be and often is the devils bondsman, an abomination in Gods sight, a vessel of
Gods wrath, a firebrand of everlasting destruction.

2. Therefore since the graces of Gods Spirit are of all gifts the most
excellent; this must cause us 1. To desire them most, earnestly to long after
them, as Rachel after children, Genesis 30. 1. As the thirsty ground after water,
the hungry soul after food, th, man that sets in darkness after light Psa.
143.6. Psa. 42.12. Cant. 3.1. Isa. 26.8.9. 2. To use all diligence to get them,
all business, set apart, all other gain neglected, let us seek to be
partakers of Grace, of the Spirit, as the Wise men left their own country to
come to Christ, the disciples left all to follow him, so let us take off our
hearts from the world, from carnal friends, and from whatsoever is dear unto
us, and seek to be endowed with heavenly riches; let us. Pro. 2.2. 3. Let us
with David. Psalm, 27.4. desire to dwell in the house of the Lord all our life,
that we may behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple. Jer.
50.4. and Dan. 9.3. Let us by hearing, premeditation, fasting, and by all holy
means seek this grace,

3. Let us value it more highly then all the treasures of the earth, for Job.
28.19. Psa. 84.10. Psa. 119.72.

4. Let us love it more entirely then any other endowment; give them the
pre-eminence in our affections, the chiefest room in our hearts, let us
enlarge desires of our hearts toward them, let us bestow the strength and
quintessence of our love upon them, let us so affect them that with the Spouse,
we be sick of love, Cant. 5.2. So love them that it make us long for them,
Psalm. 119.20. so love them that with Jacob we serve an apprentiship for them.

5. Let us rejoice and delight in it more then in all earthly treasure, as
Matthew. 2.10. So we to see any star of Grace appear in the heart, as Anna,
1. Sam. 2.1. So we for our new birth, thus Psa. 4.6.

6. Let us receive it more thankfully, as Eccles. 16.1. Gal. 6.14.

7. Let us treasure it up more carefully; when Achan had gotten a golden Wedge
he hid it.

8. Let us receive the saving graces of the Spirit more thankfully then any
common endowments, and render more praise to God for this then for any other
favor, let us be more thankeful for our new birth then for noble birth, so for
victory over sin then for conquest our all bodily enemies, for the riches of
grace then for all worldly treasures, for knowledge, faith, love, meekness,
patience, the joy of the spirit, then for all the choicest jewels, and most
precious praises in the world. As we receiv a cup of pure and pleasant wine
more thankfully then a cup of small water; a piece of gold more thankfully then
a handful of ordinary and common earth; as Theodosius gave more thanks that he
was a member of the Church than head of the Empire; so should we give more
thanks that we are the members of Christ Jesus, than for the greatest earthly
present whereunto the hand of the world can advance us: 2 King. 5.
as Naman was thankful for the purging of his leprosy, so let us for the
washing away of the filth of sin: Exodus 15.
as Moses sang praises to God for their deliverance from the hand of Pharaoh;
so let us for our deliverance out of the hands of Satan; for the donation of
the spirit and the grace wherewith we are enriched, Ephesians. 1.3. This was the
Saint's practice, Col. 1.12, 13. We should say for this, as David did, 2 Samuel
7.18, 19, 20, 22. so should we com and stand before our God, and say, Who are
we, O Lord God, that thou should bring us hitherto, that of slaves thou
should make us thy free men, that of men dead in sin, putrified in the grave
of corruption, thou should raise us to a new life of thorns and briars thou
should make us fruitful and bearing vines, of strangers thou should make
us thine own adopted Children, of poor and blind and naked, thou should
make us rich with the saving grace of thy spirit: and this was yet a small
thing, but thou have also prepared everlasting mansions for us to dwell in,
immortal crowns for us to wear upon our heads, a glorious and ever shining sun
to give us light, Psalm. 16.11.
even fullness of joy at thy right hand for ever: And what can we say unto
thee, our God, for all these things? how can we sufficiently laud thee for thy
goodness, for in this are all the motives and inducements of thankfulness. If
you will sing for refreshment received in the day of drought, as Israel did for
the spring of water, Number. 21.17. here is our welspring of everliving water,
Joh. 4.14. If ye will bless God for victory as Debora and Baruc did, Jud.
5.1. Here is that which inableth you to tread Satan under foot, Romans 16 20. and
makes you more then conquerers in all assaults, Romans 8.36. If you will offer
sacrifice and make vows as the heathen mariners for the appeasing of the
tempestuous and raging Sea, Jona. 1.16. here is that which appeaseth a greater
storm, which breeds a sweeter peace, Phil. 4.7. If ye will give thanks for
the opening of your eyes which were blind, as the blind man did, Joh. 9.38.
here is that which opens the eye of the understanding, inableth you to see
the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2 9.10. This is the sword which conquereth, the
Physic which heals, the music which delights, the milk which nourishes,
the wine which cheereth, the friend which comfort, the hand which enricheth,
therefore we should be thankful for this above all other blessings.

7. Let us treasure up these gifts most carefully, as the husbandmen hide the
good seed in the ground, that it may be preserved from the fowls of the aer,
take root, and bring forth increas: as rich men lock up their jewels in strong
chests, place them in close and sure rooms, that the hand of the thief may not
reach them; so must we with all diligence hide, and with all carefulness keep
the saving grace of the spirit; it is our choicest endowment, it will yield us
most comfort, do us most good, stand us in most stead, as the people said of
David, 2 Samuel 18.3. Thou art worth ten thousand of us: so the grace of the
spirit is worth ten thousand of your sheep, oxen, gold and silver; therefore
be as careful to keep it, as the people were to keep David, as a man would be
to keep the apple of his eye, or his right hand. It was Solomon's charge to his
Son, a charge often repeated to make him heedful of it. Proverb. 3.21. and
4.23. urged by our Savior, Rev. 2.21. and 3.12. The like may be seen in Paul,
Tit. 1.9. 1 Timothy 6.12.13.14. Satan, the the World, the Flesh will all strive to
wrest from us the grace of the spirit, by force, by flattery, by promises and
provocations: Jud. 16.16.
as Dalila labored to cut away Samson's locks, so will these strive to rob us
of God's saving grace; therefore we must give all diligence to keep it.

8. Let all God's people be contented, how slender soever their outward estate
be, though you wash not your feet in butter, neither does the rock yield any
oil; though your root spread not out by the waters, nor the dew lay not all
night upon your branch, though your outward glory be not fresh, nor the bow of
your wordly strength renewed in your hand as Job's was, yet if your souls be
washed in Christ's blood, if the, oil of grace be powered upon them, if the
dew of God's grace rest upon them, if they grow in holiness as trees planted by
the waters side, if the inward glory of the soul be fresh, if the strength of
grace be renewed, if God's external ordinance and your internal grace be like
the bow of Jonathan that turned not back, and the sword of Saul which returned
not empty from the blood of the slain and from the fat of the mighty: if this
conquer your corruptions, prevail against Satan and the world, though your
earthly estate be like a small river, a lamp with little oil, a tree with few
branches, yet having the saving grace of the Spirit, you have the best, having
this they have enough. As God answered Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. Complaining verse. 8.
so may all men endued with the saving grace of the Spirit, if they complain of
any want of absence of any outward good, or presence of any outward evil,
be answered, The grace of God is sufficient: this is a feast to the hungry,
Prove. 15.16. an inheritance to the poor, Psalm. 119.111. armor to the assaulted,
Ephesians. 6.13. this is instead of all other blessings, as the sun is instead of
all other lights, therefore all God's people should say as David did. Psalm.
16.5.6. for 1. Tim. 6.8. and we should all resolv with Jacob. Genesis 28.20.21.
grace is the best portion, the most abiding substance, the tree whose leaf does
never fade, the fountain whose waters are never dried up, the store-hous which
yields the best riches, a garment like them once worn by Israel, it wears
not out with using, like the widow's barrel of meal and cruis of oil, it will
feed and not consume, nor grow dry with drawing forth; a catalogue of blessings
do ever attend it, the light of God's face (which ministers more joy than the
brightest Sun of worldly prosperity) does always accompany it, a singular and
satisfactorie fullness is ever to be found in it, and therefore rest your selves
contented with it. Prove. 19.23.

Motives, quickening, stirring, moving, induceing, and leading us to the
practice of all these duties may be drawn,

1. From the dignity, Honor, Eminence, and Excellency of their estate above
all other estates and conditions of men, and estate exceeding other estates, as
far as life exceeds death, as far as liberty excels bondage, light
darkness, for others are dead in sin, Col. 1.22. bondmen to Satan, 2 Timothy 2.26.
sitting in darkness and the shadow of death, Mat. 4.16. but these are alive to
God, free from sin, Romans 6.11.18. and have seen a glorious light, Isa 93. These
have the most worthy and honorable original, they are the regenerate offspring
of the everliving and most glorious God, Isa. 1.18. Ioh. 1.13. These have most
honorable kindred, Heb. 2.11. Luke 8.21. calling, 1 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet. 2.9. These
are not strangers but Sons, Ioh. 1.12. not rubbish but living stones in God's
building, 1 Pet: 2.5. not thorns and briars in the forest, but fruitful and
bearing trees in Gods Orchard. Cant. 4.14. even trees of God's planting, Isa.
16.3. Holiness is the surest way to the best preferment, the only step to be
unchangeably and gloriously advanced, this shall bring men (like Joseph) out of
the prison to be advanced into the second place not of an earthly but a
heavenly kingdom, this shall make them shine as the Sun, Mat. 13.43. set a
glorious crown upon their head, Rev. 2^10. for, Mat. 19.28. As Saul was the
head of the people, so shall these be the head of all their brethren, Isa.
58.13.14. men do much for honor; be good, you shall be great.

2. From the joy which does accompany the true and saving grace of the spirit,
the opening of the womb to the barren, of the prison to the captived, of the
hand to the needy, the filling of poor with riches, of the diseased with
health, of the heavie-hearted, glad tidings, of the hungry with the choicest
delicates, cannot so warm the soul, so rejoice the heart, so solace the inward
man as a gracious measure of true holiness. The joy of Anna for the birth of a
child, 1. Sam. 2.1. the joy of Saul and the men of Israel, and the day of
their enemies overthrow and Readiness Coronation, 1 Sam^ 11.15. the joy of the
Citizens of Susan in the time of Haman. Est. 8.15. the joy of the rich man in
filling his barns, Luke 12.19. the joy of the Soldier in dividing the spoil
Isa. 9.3. is not so great as the joy of the new birth and spiritual coronation
of God's people, the overthrow of the holds of Satan, the filling of the soul
with the saving graces of the spirit; this joy to other joys is as a full
stream to a few drops, as a flaming fire to a few sparks, as a bright and
shining Sun to the light of a candle, ready to extinguish, this is a full joy,
Ioh. 16.24. great joy, Acts. 8.8. glorious and unspeakale joy, 1. Pet. 1.8.
constant and abiding joy, Ioh. 15.11. a Sun which shines when all other
vanishing meteors of comfort are extinct, Prove. 13.9. all the causes of true
joy do accompany a godly life, God's favor, God's presence, God's blessing,
sense of God's goodness, assurance of a gracious issue out of all dangers.

3. From the stabilitie and stedfastness which does attend it: men that are
endued with true grace, are like a house upon a sure foundation, like a tree of
deep roots uneasily moved, therefore likened to a tree by the waters side,
Psalm. 1.3. Psalm. 52.8. and Pro. 14.11. they are held in a strong hand Ioh.
10.28. they are built upon a sure rock, Mat. 16.18. they are compast about with
a strong defense, Zech. 2.5. hence Psa. 31.20.21. 1. Sam. 2.9. Prove. otherwise
Psalm. 73.18, Hos. 13.3.

4. From the presence of God vouchsafed to it: God's gracious presence is
yielded only to such as are endued with true holiness, amongst them will he
be as a General among his army, a shepherd among his flock, a teacher among his
scholars, a father among his family, defending against adversaries power,
instructing them in holy duties, encouraging them in all their undertakings,
feeding them with his ordinances, watering them with the dews of his spirit,
he will frustrate all assaults of the enemy, Zeph. 3.15. he will fill the
souls of his people with gladness, v. 17. make them a prais and glory among the
people as flowers among the grass, as the lilly among the thorns, Zech. 2.5.
they shall enjoy all abundance, Joel. 2.26.27. if they fall into affliction it
shall not consume them, Exodus 3.4.

5. From the happy, gracious, and comfortable issue whereunto it leads: how
full of storms soever the sea be, yet it always brings to a peaceable haven;
though the seed twice be full of tares, yet the harvest is ever replenished
with joy; though the godly man meet at first (like Samson) with a lion, yet at
length he shall seed upon the honeycomb of consolation; though he pass like
Israel thorough the red sea, the wilderness Jordan, yet he shall have a land
that flows with milk and honey; though he now wear a crown of thorns, yet he
shall hereafter wear a crown of glory; though his drink be now mingled with
gall and bitterness, yet he shall drink out of the river of God's pleasures;
though David was long oppressed, yet at length he attained the Kingdom; though
the three children were cast into the fiery furnace, yet they attained honor
in the province of Babylon. So Isa. 65.13.14.15 Isa. 35.4.5.10. Ecl. 8.11.12.

From the gift descend we to take notice of the measure of the gift: not
scantly, slenderly, sparingly, but above measure, abundantly, plentifully,
fully. Whence learn,

is the Son of righteousness full of true holiness, and even according to his
humane nature exceedingly filled with all goodness, even full of the holy
ghost, as the fountain is full of waters. This fullness of his was many ways
evident: 1. by the fullness of his wisdom, his lamp was full of oil, it gave a
very great light, a light enlightening all the world, a wisdom breeding
admiration in them that saw it, Mat. 13.54 a wisdom whereby, as the Psalmist
says of himself, Psalm. 119.98.99. so and much more may it be verified of
Christ; for in him, Col. 23. and Ioh. 1.18. has a most full and intimate
knowledge of God.

2. By the fullness of his power, it was not a withered arm, but an arm endued
with fullness of strength, able like David to conquer the Bear, the Lion, the
great Goliath, able to dash his enemies in pieces like a potter's vessel, Psa.
29. a stone hewn out of the mountains, breaking in pieces the image
representing the glory, riches, and strength of all kingdoms. Dan. 2.44. Able
to heal the sick, raise the dead, ransom the captived, nothing was too hard for
him.

3. By the fullness of his holiness, his face had neither spot not wrinckle,
there was no defilement stuck in his garment, his soul was a field, no tares
mingled with his wheat, a garden all flowers, no weed, a tree all bearing, no
barren withered, no unfruitful branch upon it, as it is said of Absalom, 2.
Sam. 14.25. so it is 1. Pet. 2.22. Ioh. 14.30. 1. Pet. 1.19.4. by the fullness
of his love, a love like a full Sea, a flameing fire, a strong Chariot, that
drew him from heaven to earth, from the highest honor to the deepest ignominy,
from a paradise of pleasures, to a wilderness of sorrows: his love to us, of a
Lord caused him to become a servant, Philip. 2.7. of a Sovereign a subject,
Gal. 4.4. of rich poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. of a joyful man, a man of sorrows, Mat.
26.38. It brought him from the throne to the cross; from the highest heavens,
to the lowest parts of the earth, Joh. 15.13. Joh. 15.9. As the Father so loved
him, that he communicated all good things to him, sustained him under
affliction, and delivered him from the power of hell and the grave; so does the
Son so love us, that he imparteth all good things to us, bears us up in all
our distresses, and delivers us from all miseries. 5. By the fullness of his
patience, he was the mirror of meekness, the perfect pattern of true humility,
Isa. 53.7. 1 Pet. 2.23. He was one in whom patience had her perfect work, Jam.
1.5. patient in poverty, patient in ignominy, patient in sorrowfulness, patient
in doing, patient in suffering, patient in life, patient in death; the patience
of Job and the Prophets was marvelous, yet as 2 Cor. 3.10 so their patience
compared with his, was no patience; therefore well might he propose himself
for an example, Mat. 11.29. and thus full of all grace it was requisite our
Savior should be.

1. In regard of the holy, precise, exact and perfect rule of the Law, which
he was to fulfill; every letter of his life must without any the least
variation answer the copy; every faculty of the soul, the disposition of the
whole man must be suitable to this frame, every thought of his heart, every
motion of his affection, every word of his mouth, every deed of his life, must
be as arrows falling neither under nor above, but fully pitching upon this
mark, therefore Gal. 4.5. Matthew. 5.17.

2. In regard of the love God bears unto him, and wonderful delight which
he had in him; as Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1.4, 5. as Joseph, Genesis 43.24. so our God
gives portions of grace to all his children; but to Christ he gave a worthy
portion, more then five times as ample as to any of his brethren, because he
had a more abundant love to him, Isa. 42.1 Mat. 3.17.

3. In regard of the Office he had undertaken* to be a Mediator between God
and man, a peacemaker, by appeasing of Gods wrath in suffering for man, by
making him just, Phil 3.9. by being found clothed not in their own, but in the
righteousness of Christ: the party dying and satisfying the law for another,
must be innocent, and not, die for his own offense; the righteousness which
makes another just, must be free from all blemish, therefore 1 Pet. 3.18. 2
Cor. 5.21.

4. In regard of our emptiness; we were all poor, and therefore it behooved
him to have a full hand to make us rich: we were all blind, and therefore it
was requisite he should be full of knowledge to make us wise: we were all
sick, and therefore it was needful he should be a skilful Physician to make
us whole: all unclean, and therefore behooffull he should be full of holiness
to make us pure: all captivated and dead in sin, and therefore needful he
should be full of power to ransom us. Hence that prophecy, Isa. 61.1. that
invitation, Rev. 3.17, 18. Isa. 55.1. for Joh. 1.16. Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

5. In regard of the enemies he was to conquer; Sin, Satan, Hell, Death; trees
not able to be rooted up by any mortal hand, walls not able to be beaten down
by any cannon shot, fetters not to be broken by any created strength, enemies
not conquerable by the most valiant among men: as all Israel trembled till
David came, 1 Samuel, 17. so Heb. 2.14. this is the Moses dividing the waters,
Exodus 14.21. this is the Sampson bearing away the gates of Gaza, this is the
David delivering his sheep, this is the Cyrus opening the two leaved gates,
Isa. 45.1. this is the Angel bringing Peter out of prison, Act. 12.7.

6. In regard of the depth of Gods counsels which are to be opened; a well
whereof none can drink, before Christ roll away the stone, as Jacob did, from
the wells mouth; a riddle which cannot be unfolded, unless we plow with Gods
spirit; a sealed book, which none but the lion of the tribe of Juda can open; a
vision, which none of the Astrologers, only Joseph and Daniel, can interpret
it: for Mat. 11.27.

7. In regard of the ministration of his kingdom, and government of his Church
and people: none so great a charge, so many people to rule, so many great and
strong enemies to oppose, subdue and conquer; therefore he is said to be
girded with the sword Justice; by his Word, the sword of the spirit, striking
the hearts of rebellious people, to bring them into subjection, to ride upon
the word of Truth, by the ministry of the Gospel defending his chosen, beating
down sin and superstition, working many wonders, striking terror into the
hearts of his enemies, and for the accomplishment hereof, he is said to
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, to have received more
grace then all men or angels, Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. for thus also it is said,
that the spirit of God does rest upon him, filling him with all heavenly gifts
and graces, the spirit of wisdom, fullness of knowledge in the things of God,
the spirit of understanding, promptness and readiness to know all things of
what nature or condition soever; the spirit of counsel, faculty and
quicksightedness to free himself out of all perplexities; the spirit of might,
courage to teach the truth, and to oppose, shake and overthrow all falls
doctrine, and to reprove their wicked conversation; the spirit of knowledge, a
sure and firm understanding of things; the spirit of fear, filial, cheerful
and perfect obedience, Isa. 11.2, 3, 4.

Observe. Isa. 512. 1. In external appearance, he was outwardly of low estate,
Phil. 2.6, 7. but the more contemptible he was in his outward condition, the
more evident was the work of the God head manifesting it self therein. 2. He
wanted beauty in the eyes of carnal men; the sun seems not beautiful to the
blind, but to such as have the eye of understanding savingly enlightened, he
is the fairest of ten thousand, Cant. 5. verse. 10.

Use. This by way of instruction shows where to go to have all our spiritual
wants supplied and furnished: Christ is the fountain in whom the Father has
put all fullness, he is the Physician that can cure us when we are diseased,
the Conqueror able to deliver us when we are captived, the Counselor able to
advise us when we are doubtful, he is the Teacher which can instruct us when
we are ignorant, Isa. 9.6. therefore when all the cisterns of the world are
broken, holding no water, when no physician can cure us, when all storehouses
are empty, and no hand can enrich us, when all lips are shut, and no tongue can
comfort us, when all waters, like Abana and Pharphar have no healing virtue, no
cleansive power; then, like the woman, Mark 5.11. let us come to Christ; like
Naaman, 2 King. 5.14. let us come to the Jordan of his blood: for in his hand
there is power to heal the wounded soul, in his blood is efficacy to purge away
the filth of sin, which no nitre can purge; in his word is virtue to comfort
the troubled soul, which no voice of man or angel can quiet, Isa. 50.4 in him
(as the Apostle says) dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. in
him it has pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. all
fullness, both for number and measure of graces: there is in Christ an absolute
compleatness, 1. In respect of members, Ephesians. 1.23. 2. In respect of
inhabitation of the divine nature, Col. 2.9. 3. In respect of power and
authority over all both in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.4. In respect of merit. 5.
In respect of grace; in him is fullness of wisdom to make us wise, fullness of
redemption to make us free, fullness of righteousness to make us just, fullness
of sanctification to make us holy; and he is made to us of God, 1 Cor. 1.30.
therefore to him let us come, Mat. 11.28.

2. This by way of confutation, reproves and confuteth all Saint-worshippers
and Meritmongers: in Christ is all fullness; there needs no supply from Saint,
Angels, or Works; a fullness is no where to be had but only in Christ, he is
able to save us to the utmost, his royal robes are long enough to cover us, his
arm is strong enough to deliver us, he needs not another to be joined with
him; he trod the wine press of his Father's wrath alone, Isa. 63. he is the
lamb slain from the beginning of the world, which takes away the sin of all
believers in the world, John 1.29. neither Saint nor Angel, but Christ has
purged away our sin, and is set down at the right hand of God, Heb. 1.3. he
makes reconciliation, Heb 2.17. he offered himself, Heb. 7.27. all other are
broken cisterns, weak shields, such as will not cover us in the day of Gods
anger: therefore it is not kiss the Saints, but the Son, Psalm. 2.12.

3. By way of exhortation, this seems to stir up men to labor for fullness of
grace, to be replenished in measure, as Christ is above measure: as the
members of the body are answerable to the head, the branches in the tree
answerable to the fullness of the juice in the root of the tree; so we, who are
members of the body whereof Christ is head: branches in the true vine should
labor a blessed fullness of all graces; we should strive to be full of
knowledge, as the sea full of waters, Isa. 11.9. abundant in love, 1 Thessalonians.
3.12. perfect in patience, Isa. 1.5. full of joy and peace in the holy Ghost,
Romans 15.13. full of faith in believing God's promises, full of courage in
maintaining God's truth against all opposition, Act. 6.8. rich in all good
works, 1 Timothy 6.18. like trees bearing much fruit, lamps holding much oil,
vessels filled with good liquor; like travelers going forward, like rich men
building their barns greater, enlarging our hearts more and more toward God
and his ways; this is the Apostle's charge, 2 Pet. 3.18. this is Saint Paul's
earnest entreaty, 1 These. 4.1. and for increas of grace of grace we should
strive.

1. Because the more grace, the more sweetness shall we find; the more
consolation shall draw from the ordinances of God, the more health; the more
comfort does the body find in the food prepared for it; the more perfect the
eye, the more pleasure it takes in the light of the sun which it beholds:
the ordinances of God do good to them that are good, Mic. 2.7. to those they
are sweet, Psalm. 119.103. joyous, Jer. 15.16. comfortable tidings, Romans 10.15.
holiness makes God's ordinances to the soul, like the chariots which Joseph
sent to Jacob, an occasion of reviving, Genesis 48.25. like a wel-spring to the
thirsty, like dew to the ground, like a feast to the hungry, Psalm. 65.4. Cant.
2.4.

2. The more grace, the more comfort we shall have in God's presence, the more
clearness we shall behold in God's countenance; the more obedient the child
is, the more favorably his parent looks on him; the more profitably the
servant does employ his talent, the more acceptable he is to his Master: so
the more full of grace, the more God will love us, the more comfortably will
he speak to our souls and couscifences, the more graciously will he manifest
himself unto us, make us glad, Psalm. 21.6. Job 33.26. he will speak to our
consciences, as the master to the good servant in the parable, Mat. 25.23. for
God will make his face to shine upon them that serve him, Psalm. 31.16. so that
when they come before him, have prayed meditated, heard his word, etc. they
shall say, as Jacob of Esau, Genesis 33.10.

3. The more grace, the more peace in our own conscience, the more boldness
toward God: it is neither riches, nor learning, nor friends, nor any thing else
but grace that can stablish the heart, Heb. 13.9. other stays are but like
Sampson's withes, easily broken as thread; this is the anchor which staieth the
ship of the soul, the foundation which bears it up, the sun which gives it
comfort, the fountain which yields it refreshment; this fills the soul with
peace in hearing, in praying; in doing; in suffering; Righteousness and Peace,
like two twins, are born at one birth; like Ruth and Naomi, they go together,
they walk in one way, dwell under roof, Psalm 85.10. Psalm. 116.165. Mal. 2.6.
Isa. 32.14.

4. The more grace, the more patiently they shall bear all affliction; this,
like Moses's rod, will divide and make a way through the deepest waters of
trouble; like Noah's ark, it will keep the soul from sinking; this will make
them, with Paul and Silas, to sing in prison, to rejoice that they are
accounted worthy to suffer for Christ; to esteem it all joy to fall into
manifold temptations, this will enable to receive affliction, as a purgation,
to remove their corruption, as a testimony of God's love, as a seal of their
living righteous in Jesus Christ; this will assure them of a happy passage out
of all troubles.

5. The most grace, the more delight they shall have in doing the will of God,
in performance of all sacred and religious duties; the more strength there is
in the body, the more easily the traveller passes on his way; the fuller the
wing is of feathers, the easier the flight is to the bird: so the fuller the
soul is of grace, the more pleasantly he does run the race of God's
commandments; this makes him say with Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.10. with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 40.8. this will make the commandment easy, Mat. 11.29. 1 John 5.3.

4. This serves by way of consolation, to cheer up the souls of God's people
in all estates; the fullness and sufficiency of Christ may be as a tree laden
with much fruit for the feeding of the hungry; a fountain filled with pleasant
water for the refreshment of the thirsty; a lamp full of oil to give light to
them that are in darkness; a singular stay, a strong supportment to God's
servants.

1. Against all wants: if they want wisdom, Christ is a glorious day star full
of heavenly light, able to discover the deepest mysteries, and make them like
words written in great characters, so that he that runs may read them, able
so to elevate the lowest capacity, that it shall clearly discern things
heavenly; counsel is his, and sound wisdom, he is understanding it self,
Prove. 8.14. in him are all treasures of knowledge, Col 23. he has opened the
eyes of the blind, and made them that sat in darkness to see a great light,
it was prophesied that in his time, Isa. 92.4. Isa. 35.5. Isa. 11.9. and as
Pharaoh said of Joseph, Genesis 41.38, 39. there is not another to be found in
whom the spirit of God is, as it is in Christ; none in heaven or earth, neither
Saint nor Angel so discreet, so wise as he; the greatest wisdom in the world
is to his wisdom, but like the wisdom of a child to the wisdom of the
choicest statesman; like the light of a candle to the light of the sun;
therefore if we want wisdom how to prevent, avoid, and save our selves from
treacherous adversaries, how to order our conversations, how to manage our
callings wherein we are placed, how to employ the talent we have received,
how to discern the things which differ, how to understand the deep things of
God; let us com to Christ, let us set our selves to school to him, and in him is
fullness of knowledge, he is our head, he will not leave his members in
ignorance.

2. If thy faith be weak, if it be withered like Jeroboam's hand, 1 King.
13.4. if it shake like the hand of a palsy man, if thy soul be full of
doubtings, as the sea of tossings, if thy heart be full of agitations and
rowlings hither and thither like a ship without anchor; yet as the man of God
prayed, and Jeroboam's hand was made whole as the other: as our Savior cured
the palsy man; so in him is fullness of ability to make thy faith strong like a
tree of deep root, like a house of sure foundation, Mat. 7. like the arm of a
strong man, he can make thee more than conqueror; he can so fasten the ship
of thy soul, that thou shall not be moved; he can so fill thee, so affect
thee with the sense of God's love, that thou shall say, Romans 8.38, 39 he can
strengthen thee to do all things. Phil. 4 13. he can stablish and settle thy
soul. 1 Pet. 5.10. Romans 16.24, 25. 2 These. 4.3.

3. If they want peace, sens and assurance of God's love, and joy in God's
spirit; if their souls be as a stormy sea, like a sick man upon his bed, full
of tossings; like Israel stung with fiery serpents, in a condition altogether
restless; like a hunted hare or chased heart, like David hunted by Saul as a
partridg, like a besieged city full of fears, like Israel's bearing heavy
burdens, working in an iron furnace, like the dove seeking a place to rest her
foot and finding none, complaining, Psalm. 38.3. in trouble, Job 30 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. yet remember in Christ is all fullness,
he is the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. Ephesians. 2.14. he can, Mat 8.27. he is
the brazen serpent, Numb. 21.8, 9. he is the physician, Isa. 61.1. the true
Samaritane, Luke 10.30. therefore comfort thy self, come to him as those of
Gibeon to Joshua, Jos. 10 6. and Christ shall remove the siege.

4. If they want holiness, if corruption like a strong disease do waste and
spoil the vigor of the soul, like an evil weed do overspread the garden of
their hearts, like a foul spot do blemish their face, like a strong tyrant do
lead them captive, like a heavy burden, fetters and tumbling blocks, do hinder
them in holy duties, and make them go slowly about the performance of sacred
exercises, if they hang like birdlime about the wings of the soul, as
Canaanites in Israel's sides; yet let this sustain them, let this revive them,
in Christ is all fullness of holiness, he has healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2.
he is like, Mal. 3.2, 3, 4. Isa. 35.6, 7, 8. he can, Mat. 1.21. Tit. 2.14. 1 John 3, 8. as Joh. 11.44. he can bring you out of the grave of your
corruption, though no nitre can purge you, yet Jerem. 2.22. yet he, Ephesians.
5.25, 26.

5. If they want temporal endowments, our outward estate be slender, our
wealth small, our love, friends, honor, respect and place in the world nothing
at all; if our outward abilities be like waters in a dry summer at a low ebb,
like the heat of fire arising from a little wood, like the light of a lamp
wherein is but little oil, though our backs be clothed with camel's hair, a
leathern girdle, sheepskins, goat-skin, or vile raiment, though we feed with
pulls, barley bread, or a few fish, have nothing but a little oil in the cense, a
little m^a^ in our barrel, though with David we be set behind the ews, with
Amos be gatherers of Sycamore fruit; with Gideon, our family be poor among
the families of the earth, and we the least in our Father's house; though with
Jacob, we have but a stone whereon to lay our heads; with our Savior, have no
room in the inn of this world, (where none but they that have store of money in
their purs are welcome) though we have nothing but a manger to rest in; yet
remember that in Christ the head of the body whereof ye are members, the
Master of the family whereof ye are sons and daughters, the husband of the
souls, in him is all fullness, he is the heir of all things, Heb. 1.3. he is
the maker, the preserver of all, the great Lord treasurer of the world, in him
(says the Apostle) all things consist, Col. 1.16. in respect of conservation,
he continues them in their being; in respect of precept, he prescribes the
laws by which nature, policy and religion are governed; in respect of
operation, in that all things move by the influence of his hand; in respect of
ordination, he appoints all things to their end; in respect of disposition,
he disposes the means to the end intended; and therefore since all things are
in him, thus dispensed by him, let us say in our needs, as the prodigal in his
wants, Luke 15.17, 10. there is enough in Christ, and therefore let this
sustain us.

2. As this comfort against all wants, so it is full of consolation against
all evils; if we be full of sin, the blood of Christ is full of virtue to
purge it out, 1 John 1.7. Heb. 9.14. Zach. 13.1, 2. If the law be full of
exactness and rigor, all the letters thereof written in blood, every sentence,
a sentence of death, though it stand like the Cherubin and flaming sword to
keep us from entering into eternal life, as that kept the way to the tree of
life, Genesis 3.24. yet in Christ is righteousness exactly to answer every title
of it, he has fullness to satisfy it, so that it becomes as a serpent
without sting, as a sword without edg, it cannot condemn the people of God;
though God be a consuming fire, yet in the merits of Christ is fullness enough
to appeas his anger, to procure his favor, to turn his angry into a pleasant
voice, his frowning into a shining face, of an enemy to make him a friend, of
one dreadful as a lion, to make him gentle as a lamb, of a stranger, to make
him the loving husband of our souls; though Satan assault with violence, though
his holds be strong, his weapons venomous, his attempts incessant, his devices
deep, his instruments subtle, his stratagems treacherous yet in Christ there
is all fullness to prevail against him, to put him to flight, to drive him to
his den, to roll a stone upon his cave, and tread upon his neck, as Joshua did
upon the five Kings of Canaan. Jos. 10.18, 24. cast him down in his own
pursuit, as he did the Egyptians Pharaoh, Exodus 14.24. disarm him as David did
Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.51. Col. 2.15. Ephesians. 4.8. if our enemies be strong, many,
violent, merciless, and we have no power, no helper, no way to fly but begin
to despair, to hang down the head and lose all our comfort, then look upon
Christ's fullness, and as Elisha said to his fearing, disquieted and perplexed
servant, 2 King. 6.16, 17. so may you say to your own souls; for Christ will
be with you, stand by you, work for you, and overthrow all such as rise
against you, Isa. 54.17. Psalm. 2.9. the stoutest opposers, the greatest
disputers, the most bloody persecutors, iron-handed oppressors, and
iron-hearted and brasen-faced dispisers shall by the Lord Jesus be scattered as
the chaff, trodden down as the dung, rooted up as thorns and briars, thrown out
as the salt which has lost his savor, and is good for nothing but the
dunghill, therefore Mat. 18.6. Isa. 35.3. these and the like are the streams of
consolation which flow from that full fountain of all goodness which is in
Christ Jesus, this is the pleasant and soul refreshing fruits which grow upon
this tree of life, the delightful and heart-rejoicing beams which descend to
the souls of God's people from this sun; therefore let us all strive for
interest in him, communion with him; let us in all estates depend upon him, in
every condition rest our selves contented with him: he has fullness of riches
for all his faithful that are now poor, fullness of honor for all that are now
in ignominy, fullness of peace for all his that are now in trouble, fullness of
joy for all that are now in heaviness, fullness of liberty for all that are now
in bonds, fullness of power to deliver all his which are in any distress: for

Verse 35. The father loves the son, and has given all things into his hands.
THe Baptist having set before his disciples the authority of Christ, the
commission which the father gave him to undertake the great and mighty work of
our salvation, having also declared the sufficiency of Christ, the abundant
effusion of the saving grace of the Spirit upon him, descends now to discover
and lay open the ground hereof, even the love of God, as if he had said, The
Father has wonderfully enriched the Son with many choice and singular
endowments, bestowed upon him a rich store-hous of all graces; and why has he
done so, because he loved the Son: so that from the coherence of this with the
former verse, we may learn

Doctr. That the bestowing of the saving gifts and graces of the Spirit is the
choicest testimony of the love of God; a greater testimony of the love of God
to fill the vessels of the soul with sanctification, then to fill the barn with
corn, the fold with sheep, the stall with oxen, the chest with gold, the life
with pleasure, or to set upon the head a crown of worldly honor; therefore when
God entered into Covenant with his people, promised to be their God, and took
them above all the people of the earth, he does not promise them a paradise of
pleasures to dwell in, a river of wordly delights to drink of, a wardrobe of
rich raiment, a treasury of gold and silver, an eminent place of wordly honor,
but the grace of the spirit, a holy fear to displeas him, a holy care to walk
uprightly before him, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40, 41. this is prophesied to be the
sequel of God's love to his people, Jer. 31. is the promise of his love, ver.
3. the testimony of it, ver. 8, 9. I will bring them from the north country
and all the coasts of the earth; literally from Babylon, Assyria, and the
Medes, where they were detained captive; spiritually from the slavery and
bondage of sin and Satan; and when will he bring the blind who cannot see the
ways, the commandments of the Lord; the lame, who cannot walk aright in the
path of his precepts; the woman with child, such as feel themselves heavy
laden with the burden of their sin, and did much long like a woman in travel
to be delivered, and he that travelleth with the child the broken hearted,
afflicted, and such as want spiritual strength to do good? but how in what
manner shall they come from their bondage? with weeping, grief for their sin,
and with supplication, with prayer for the remission of sin: but by what way
shall they be led? by the rivers of the water, their spiritual thirst after
rightetousness shall be quenched by the preaching of the Gospel, and their
souls watered and refreshed by the dews of the Spirit in a right way by the
doctrine of life, wherein is no terror, no obliquity,; and for why shall all
this be? for I a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn, that is, I
love them with a most intimate affection, they are very dear unto me, and
therefore I will bestow this spiritual favor upon them: this the Prophet Hosea
after a metaphorical manner does most lively and elegantly express, Hos. 14. v.
4. first he makes mention of the freedom of God's love toward them; then he
sets forth the consequences thereof, the fruit growing on this tree of God's
love, the gifts given by this hand of God so full of love unto them: and first
by the similitude of a Physician healing; he sets out the free remission of
their sin; by the similitude of the dew, the grace of the Spirit regenerating
and quickening to new obedience; by the similitude of the growing of the lilie,
which is an effect of the dew, he sets out the adorning of the faithful
with heavenly graces, that so both they and their services might cast a sweet
savor in God's nostrils; by the similitude of casting out of roots as Lebanon,
he expresses their constancy and perseverance in the grace of the Spirit,
notwithstanding all temptations; by the similitude of spreading their branches,
he declares their increas of the Church both in graces and also in persons,
the great glory of the Church, and the sweet savor which they should send
forth both in the nostrils of God and also of men; by the similitude of siting
under his shadow, he expresses the safety, security and peace which they
should enjoy under the protection of Christ; by the similitude taken from the
reviving of the corn, he shows their growth in grace, even by the storms and
tempests of affliction which fall upon us; by the similitude of the growing of
the Vine and sent of Lebanon, he proposes the zeal of the godly and the
fragrancy of their conversation, so that the forgiveness of sin, regeneration,
sanctified and acceptable obedience, constancy in the way of God's
commandments, growth in grace, joy and peace in the holy Ghost, zeal and
courage for God's truth, these are gifts which (above all the gifts in the
world) do testify the love of God: therefore 1 John 3.1, 2. Ephesians. 2.4, 5.

Reas. Because these of all gifts are the most excellent; these are as the
Spouse said of our Savior, Cant. 2.2. Cant. 5.10. as the apple tree among the
trees of the forest, the fairest of ten thousand: therefore called by the
Apostle, the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. preferred by Joh, above the choicest
treasure locked up in the bowels of the earth, Job 28.16. by Solomon, before the
chiefest riches in the custody of the merchant, Prove. 3.14. though other gifts
are in their kind excellent, and of great comfort to such as can rightly apply
apply them; yet as Prove. 31.29. so many other endowments deserve much
commendation, but the saving grace of the Spirit excels them all.

2. Because these gifts of all other are the most rare, most proper, and
peculiar to God's own children; these are precious pearls given to a few, they
are flowers growing in few gardens, a seed sown but in few fields, stars
shining in the firmament of few men's souls, 2 These. 3.2. earthly endowments are
a liquor put into every vessel, a sion graffed on every stock, a seed sown on
every field; but these are bestowed only on the elect, Tit. 1.1.

3. Because these gifts do bring a man nighest to God; in likeness of nature
these make a man holy as God is holy, for the truth, though not for the measure
of holiness: these make a man like God, as the child is like the parent, as
the aer is like the sun, therefore 2 Pet. 1.4. being holy, wise, simple,
sincere, immortal as God is; not in perfection, but in truth; not
independently, but by communication: hereby we have fellowship with God, walk
with him, have our conversation in heaven, are of God's counsel, Psalm. 25 9.
are his friends, Joh. 15.15. enjoy the light of his face, Psalm. 21.6. a man may
have all other gifts, be furnished with all other abilities, and yet be a
stranger to God and Christ, Ephesians. 1.12.

4. Because these gifts of all other gifts are the most pleasant, the most
delightful and full of comfort, this makes the soul of a Christian cheerful,
and full of rejoicing, Lu. 10.20. Isa. 55.12, 13. 1 Pet. 1.8. Isa. 4.6.

5. Because these gifts are of all others the most satisfactory and contenting,
these like living springs do abundantly fill the vessel of their souls, like
clouds full of rain they quench the thirst of the heart, as they do-the dry and
barren grounds, like trees laden with plenty and variety of all good fruit
they fill the hungry stomach; therefore likened to a living spring, whose
waters never fail, Jo. 4.14. to milk and wine, which quench the thirst, Isa.
55.1. to a of the choicest dainties both filling and delighting the hungry
soul, Isa. 25.6. to great gain, which quieteth the heart though enlarged with
strong desires, 1 Timothy 6.6. when all other gifts like water to a dropsy man do
inflame their thirst, and make them cry like a horsleach, and make them
miserable as the grave, Pro. 30.15, 16. then they who have the grace of the
Spirit are satisfied, as the child that sucketh milk from a full breast, Isa.
66.11. this is promised Psalm. 22.26. where the Psalmist alluding to the
sacrifices and feasts among the Jews shows, as they fed delicately, filled
themselves plenteously; so the people of God fed with the preaching of the
Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments, should be abundantly filled with
all heavenly comforts, with all saving gifts and graces, so filled that they
should be therewith satisfied: the like expression to this is used Psalm. 23.5,
6. the Psalmist thereby setting forth the large measure of grace which God
conferred on him, the abundant holy joy, and rejoicing wherewith the Lord did
replenish him

6. Because these gifts are of all other gifts the most profitable; these like
the Ark to Obed Edom, like Joseph to Potiphar, do cause all we have, all we
do to prosper. The Apostle does excellently express it, where he says,
godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of this life, and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. godliness profitable, helpful to every
duty, to every estate and condition of life; it is profitable to us when we
hear, it causes our hearts to be to the word as good ground to the seed, as a
healthy stomach to the food, it makes the Word to us as the light to the eye,
very pleasant and delightful: as music to the ear very comfortable, as a
joyful tidings to the sorrowful, for Mica. 2.7. 2. It is profitable to us
when we pray; it makes us to com before the Lord with confidence, 1 John
3.20, 21. it inlargeth the desires of our souls, strengthens our affections,
and makes them more fervent, carrying them toward God like a strong flood
which cannot be stopped, makes the cry of our souls vehement, makes them as
incense the smoke of sweet wood in God's nostrils, Jam. 5.16. this is like
Aaron and Hur to Moses, Exodus 17.12, 14. 3. It is profitable to us when we are
assaulted, it inableth us to draw nigh to God with fullness of assurance, Heb.
10.22. it makes us confident, bold and courageous, Prove. 28.1. It defends us
like a breast plate, Ephesians. 6.14. it is an Ark in the Deluge. 4. It is
profitable when we are in any affliction, It makes all troubles to be as
fire to the gold, fan to the corn, the fiery furnace to the three children an
occasion of nearer communion with God, holiness to God's people in the time of
trouble is as Moses rod making a way thorough the red sea, opening the stony
rock, as the tree making the bitter waters sweet, as the meal making the pot
which was full of death to become full of health, as a wise Physician makes a
healthful and healing medicine of that which in it self is very poison. 5. It
is profitable when we are to perform any sacred duty it is to us as wings to
the bird, as horsemen an chariots to travelers, as wind, tide, sails to the
mariner, as art, skill, and strength to him that undergoeth the labor of
handicraft, it strengthens, enliveneth, and inableth the soul with a singular
readiness, and mavelous joy, great content, and unspeakable delight to run
that race, fulfill that task with God has set him, 1 John 5.3. Psa. 40.8.
Psalm. 108.3. and Jud. 5.2. 6. It is profitable in the collection, gathering,
receiving, affective fruition, and using of all outward blessings, it teaches
us to gain them lawfully, to affect them moderately, to rejoice in them
sparingly, to use them holily, to order our selves in all our businesses
religiously, wisely, graciously, as becomes the Gospel of God, making all
outward blessings occurrents and occasions to be as feet to help us forward,
and not as stumbling blocks to occasion our fall, to be as a garment not a
burden, as a cup whereof to drink to refreshment, not a sea wherein to drown
our selves. 7. It is profitable in sickness, in death: holiness inableth us to
die with comfort, to embrace it as the most welcome of all guests, to look upon
it as a friend of a most lovely countenance, as a messenger bringing most
joifull tidings, as a Physician curing all diseases, as a key opening the
gates, giving liberty from all troubles, entrance into all happiness, as the
marriage day of our souls, this will make us (with Faninus the Italian) to kiss
death as he kissed the traitor which brought him tidings of his execution:
these are the fruits which grow on this and the like branches, this is the gain
which is gathered out of this treasury, no gift so profitable; therefore no
gift so sure a pledge of God's love to his people.

7. Because these gifts are of all other gifts the most lasting, these are
gifts without repentance, that know no change Romans 11.29. a living spring that
never fails, Joh. 4.14. a seed that never dies, 1 John 3.9. a jewel which
never consumes, Prove. 4.18. a sun that never sets; all other gifts of
whatsoever kind, worth or excellency, are but like a cloud soon dispelled, a
vessel of clay soon broken, a sandy foundation soon sunk, but they who are
endued with the saving graces of the Spirit, like trees of deep roots shall
surely stand, like trees planted by the water side, they shall not wither, but
shall be as the green olive, Psalm. 52.8. as rich treasure in a strong hand,
Job 10.28. God's covenant shall have no end, his grace shall never die, Jer.
32.39, 40. so that in all these respects, the holy and saving graces of God's
Spirit are the chiefest testimony of God's love.

Use. This will therefore discover unto us plainly; assure us undoubtedly, make
us see infallibly who they are that are best beloved of God, who are the joy of
his heart, the dearly beloved of his soul; not the men who have the largest
earthly possessions, but they whose souls are replenished with most holiness;
not they who are endowed with most lordship and authority over their brethren,
but they who have most sway and dominion over their corrupt affections, the
most holy, the most religious, the most sincere in heart, the most sanctified
in their conversation, these are God's dear ones; God regards not the rich
man for his abundance, the noble man for his birth, the great man for his high
place, the wise man for his policy, these are in the eyes of God stars of no
brightness, flowers of no beauty, pearls of no price, load stones of no virtue
to draw the love of God toward the souls of men; he is moved with none of
these things, Deuteronomy. 10.17. the best common abilities without saving grace are
but like glorious apparel about a dead carcass unable to move any affection,
or to beget desire of communion; the greatest living man will rather enter
fellowship and hold communion with the poorest living beggar then with the dead
carcass of the greatest princes of the world, though clothed in most rich and
roial raiment: so will God have fellowship with and set his eyes upon the
poorest soul that has the life of grace in him, then with the most renowned
commander on earth, being a stranger to the life of God; for Job 34.19. it is
only true piety which makes us dear and precious in God's eyes, which moves
God to fasten his affection upon us, and to delight himself in us; men may be
admired by men for their endowments, because men judge according to external
appearance, as 1 Samuel 16.6. but as verse 7. so God looks not on men because
tall in honors, high in external callings, great through a worldly abundance,
but the holy man is the object of God's affection, Psalm. 146.8. these are God's
chois, Jam. 2.5. these are God's delight, Pro. 11.20. these are a diadem and a
crown of glory in God's hand, Isa. 62.3. to these does he look, with these
does he delight to dwell, Isa. 57.15. Joh. 14 23, 24. these are unto Christ in
stead of all others, Mat. 12.50. And indeed upon whom has the cloud of God's
love distilled, on whom has the light of his countenance shined, toward whom
have the infallible testimonies of God's favor been manifested, but only to
such as are endued with the saving gifts and graces of his Spirit, to whom has
he vouchsafed his presence as a father among his children, as a shepherd among
his flock, as the sun among the stars in the firmament, surely only to such as
fear him, Psalm. 46.5. Zeph. 3.15. Genesis 28.12. upon whom does he cast forth the
light of his countenanee? whose soul does he affect with the sens of his love,
but only such as by a lively faith embrace his promises, and keep their feet
within the way of his commandments, Psalm. 11.7. Romans 5.5. to whom does he
make his Word a joifull tidings, a healing salve, a sweet savor, but only to
such as pass their time in his fear, order their conversation in a holy manner,
to them the meditation thereof is sweet, Psalm. 104.34. common favors indeed are
vouchsafed to the bad, as the rain falls on the bad ground as well as the
good, Mat. 5.45. but the special pledges of God's love are conferred only upon
the righteous, Psalm. 50.16.

But it may be you will say, That riches and honors, and these external
favors, that they are also blessings, they are water out of God's well, rain
out of God's cloud, a gift from his hand.

2. They are therefore very much deceived, who bless themselves as being God's
dearest favorites, the choicest of his beloved, because they are most
plenteously enriched with these common endowments, because their houses are
fairer, their possessions larger, their dignities greater, their earthly
delights, pleasures and comforts far excelling other: this is a sandy
foundation to build upon, a deceitful balance to weigh themselves in, a falls
rule whereby to judge of God's love; who had more pleasure than the glutton
faring deliciously, and wearing fine apparel every day, yet a fire brand of
hell? Luke 16. who richer than he that builded his barns greater, cheared up
his soul with the thought of his great abundance, yet who at the last were his
attendants but the devils? Luke 12. where was his dwelling but in everlasting
darkness? who perished in the red sea, was it not Pharaoh king of Egypt? Exodus
14. who was eaten up of lice, was it not Herod that sat upon the throne? Act.
12.22. On whom came sorrow widowed, and loss of children in one day, was it not
upon the Babylonish Queen that lived in pleasures? Isa. 47.7, 8. Who stand in
slipery places, but they who have more than heart can desire? Psalm. 73.18. Who
perish like their beasts, but they that boasted of their wealth? Psalm. 14.49.
on the other side; Who poorer than Lazarus who had resting place in Abraham's
bosom? Luke 16.8. Who had no other cradle but a manger? Luke 2. Who had not
where to lay his head, but the Son of man Christ Jesus, who of all others was
most dear to God? Who were in sheeps skins and goats skins in the wilderness,
in caves, destitute, afflicted, tormented, but the good people of God, of whom
the world was not worthy? Who were accounted as the dung and of-scouring of the
earth, but the Apostles of the Lord Jesus? the transgressors they have grown as
the grass; overtopt the righteous, as the tares the corn; advanced themselves in
the world, like the cedars in Lebanon; they have been among men, as the
Leviathan among the fishes of the sea; as the lion, bulls, bears among the
beasts of the field; as the eagle among the birds of the aer; as the tree by
the great waters, among the trees of the forest: the most unholy have many
times the greatest abundance of outward favors, and therefore we cannot but
falsely conclude them to be most happy, who have most earthly plenty, fatness
and prosperity; for having nothing but this, 1. they are dead in sin: and whom
judge we most happy, the dead with a goodly tomb, or the living that has life
in him? the widow living in pleasures was very wretched, because dead in sin
while she lived. 2. these are destitute of God's image: it is not the adorning
of the body with gold and silver, but the adorning of the soul with grace,
which is in the sight of God of great price. 3. these have no communion with
God: it is not by wealth, but by faith and holy life, that we have fellowship
with God, 1 John 1.6. 4. these are strangers to true peace: it is not wordly
riches but true grace that brings peace unto the conscience, riches usually
breed many troubles, they have unability to appeas a stormy tempest of a
troubled conscience, Ez. 19.7.

But it may be you will say that riches, honors, and external favors are
blessings also, that these are waters of God's well, rain out of God's cloud, a
gift from God's hand, and therefore also a testimony of God's love; to which I
answer, it is true, they are blessings in themselves, for every creature of God
in it is own kind is good, Genesis 1.31. they are all from the Lord the giver of
every good gift, Isa. 1.17. for the earth is the Lord's Psalm. 24.1. riches and
honor come from him 1 Chro. 29.12. the Lord sets one, and pulls down
another, 1 Samuel 2.7. all comes from God's providence, but all comes not from
God's mercy and love to them who are possessors of it; it is one thing to have
a thing by the course of God's Providence, another thing to have it from God in
love, and in favor, for God gives in wrath as well as in mercy, as Hos. 13.11.
so God gives wealth and riches in his wrath, and takes it away in his
displeasure; thus Israel had quails given, but it was in wrath, Numb. 11.33.
better they had been without them. Thus Solomon saw this evil under the sun,
riches kept for the owners thereof to their own hurt, Ecles. 5.13. when Absalon
made a feast, he invited all his brethren, prepared dainties for them, some he
invited in love, but Amon in hatred, for he gave charge to his servants, when
they should see him merry with wine, that then they should fall upon him, and
kill him, 2 Samuel 13.28. so when God prepares dainties, bestows favors to all
sorts of people, to some he does in love, to others in anger. 2, God has two
sorts of blessings, common, and special; the common belong to all, and are no
assured testimony of God's love, Eccles. 9.1. Mat. 5.45. the special belong to
his children, and are a never faling pledge of God's love toward them, 1 Cor.
2.9, 10. as Abraham has Movables which he gave to the seed of the bond
woman, but an Inheritance which was reserved for the seed of the free woman.
Isaac had two sorts of blessings, the best for Jacob, the fatness of the earth
for Esau; the Master of the family bestows common favors on the servans, but
the choice is reserved for the children. 3, External endowments are good of
themselves, but without a further blessing they prove not only unusefull, but
also hurtful; food is good in it self, but often is as poison to many sick
men; wealth and honors without grace to use them, prove like large sails, and
strong wind to a little bottom, an empty vessel, an occasion, and instrument
to overthrow it: outward endowments without inward holiness make us proud,
wanton, forgetful of God, Deuteronomy. 8.12, 13. exorbitant in our courses, like fat
pasture to a horse not accustomed to the bridle, Jer. 5.8. 4. The goodness of a
thing is not so much to be considered in what it is in it self, as in the end
why it is given, afflictions which in themselves are a fruit of sin, and in that
respect evil are yet in their use and end made good to God's people, pills which
in themselves are bitter, and distasteful to the palate, are yet in their use
and end of administration by the physician turned to the good of the patient,
so on the other side outward peace and plenty are given to sinful men to the
end they may live the more securely, sin the more freely, and at length be
condemned the more justly, punished the more severely, fat pasture in it self
is good but given to the beasts to make them fit for the day of slaughter, so
Psalm. 92.6. when Jehu prepared a large sacrifice for Baal, 2 Kin. 10. then he
slew the priests of Baal, so when God prepares a fat sacrifice for the wicked,
then they are nigh unto destruction: and so much for answer to this, that
outward things are Gods gift and blessing; but no infallible testimony of his
favor to the owner of them.

3. This must occasion every man to try whether he be loved of God, whither
he be dear unto him or not: For the discovery whereof, every man must
examine, not what riches, what earthly preferments God has given him, but what
knowledge, what repentance, what love, what faith, what purity, what meekness,
what zeal, what God has wrought in him; these are the testimonies of his
goodness and love to his children, by this he is known to be a friend, a
father, a husband to him, Isa. 44.5, 8, 13. the love of the father is known to
the child more then to the servant, when he sets him to the school, gives
him good nurture, traineth him up in good learning; so the love of God to his
people is known, when he gives them the ministry of the Gospel, Jer. 3.14,
15. brings them unto the school of Christ, makes the light of rruth to shine
in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. inableth them to comprehend with all Saints the
height depth breadth and length of his love, Ephesians. 3.19. when he washes and
cleanses them from their sins, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. as Jordan cleansed Naaman from
his leprosy, as the new born child is washed and cleansed from it is native
uncleanness, Ezeck. 16.4, 6. the Fullers love to the cloth, the Goldsmith's to
the gold is seen by purging it, Mal. 3.3, 4. as the fuller's soap does purge
the cloth, and the refiners fire the gold put into it, as our Savior showed
his love to Lazarus by raising him out of the grave, John 36.44. so it is a
sure testimony of the love of God to thy soul, when he does raise thee out of
the grave of sin, puts a new life into thee Ephesians. 2.4, 5. makes thee a new
creature, dissolveth the works of the devil, inableth thee to walk in the way
of his commandments, affects thy soul with the light of his countenance,
fills thy heart with peace, replenisheth thine inward man with grace, when of
unprofitable he makes thee proffitable, Philem. 11. of a stranger he
brings thee nigh unto himself, Ephesians. 2.17. when of a thorn he makes thee a
fruitful vine, of a lion he makes thee a lamb, Isa. 11.6, 7. of a ruinous
heap he makes thy soul like a polished palace, Is. 54.12. when of a man deaf,
blind, lame, dead, he opens thine ears to hear, thine eyes to see, thy feet
to walk in his way, and of parched ground makes thee a standing pool, Isa.
35.4, 5. fills thy soul with the waters of life Isa. 44.2, 3, 4. then thou
may assure thy self, thou art highly loved of God. It is not growth in
wealth but growth in grace that can assure the heart of God's love.

4, This directs us how and in what manner to manifest our love to our
brethren, to such as appertain, or are any way dear unto us, as God manifests
his love by giving spiritual gifts to his children, so let us manifest and
declare our love, by being instruments to convey spiritual blessings on such as
have any relation to us, temporal favors can get none but a temporal, a natural
love, they conduce but to the welfare of the body, they are transitory, there
is no continuance in them, spiritual favors are the truest testimony, the best
evidence of a good affection; therefore, thou that art a master of a family,
show thy love unto them by teaching and commanding them to keep the way of the
Lord, as did Abraham, Genesis 18.19. thou that art a father of children, teach
them to retain the word of the Lord in their hearts, to keep his commandments,
to get wisdom, as David taught Solomon, Prove. 5.3, 4, 5. thou that art a
husband, show thy love to thy love to thy wife by dwelling with her according
to knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7. thou that art a magistrate, show thy love to thine
inferiors, by abolishing and beating down sin and occasions of sin as Asa and
Hezekiah did, 1 Kin. 15.12. 2 Kings 18.4. by giving thea religious, pious, and
godly example, as David, 2 Samuel 6, 20. Samuel; as Jehosaphat did, by provoking
and encourageing them to true repentance and amendment of life; as Jehoshaphat
and the king of Nineveh did: thou that art a minister, show thy love to the
people by giving them good, wholesome and sufficient food for their souls, as
our Savior charged Peter to testify his love; thou that art a common man, a
friend, a neighbor, testify thy love by considering thy neighbor, by
assembling together, by provoking to love and good works, by calling upon them
to go to the house of God: spiritual blessings are of the chiefest use; they are
profitable to all things, and in all estates, they are the choicest ornament,
they are of the greatest price, they bring the sweetest peace, and are of the
longest continuance; and therefore if you will show your love in any thing,
show it in this; In making them whom love, partakers of these blessings.

5. This must comfort all God's children, all such as are truly sanctified,
all on whom God has poured out the saving grace of the Spirit: though the
world hate you, as Esau hated Jacob, Genesis 27.41. as Ahab hated Micaiah, 1 King
22.8. as Saul hated David; 1 Cor. 4.13. though you are of no reputation in the
eyes of men, yet comfort your selves in this, the Lord loves you, the Lord has
showed the testimonies of his choicest affections toward you; therefore be
sure that in his love he will supply you when you want, solace you when you
are heavy, deliver you when you are oppressed, raise you when you are cast down:
as in his love he brought Israel from the iron furnace, the Egyptian bondage;
so in his love he will in due season put an end to all your affliction, and
let his love be a sufficient recompense for the want of all men's affection, a
strong stay in all trouble; the King's love fully answers the beggars hatred;
the Master's love, the servants displeasure; the light of the sun, the want of
all other lights; plenty of wine, the want of small drink: his love is better
than the richest treasure, the choicest dainties, the brightest sun, Cant. 1.4.
his love is everlasting, a stream full of refreshment, a hand full of strength,
a lamp of oil, Jer. 31.3. that which is (and may well be to all that have it)
instead of all friends, peace, joy, dignity, riches, a thousand fold better
then any earthly abundance.

Thus of the Connection: in the words themselves we have set before us, 1. the
love of God the father unto Christ; The Father loves the Son. 2. the sequel of
this love; and has given all things into his hands. 1. Of the love of the
Father to the Son, whence two things are to be noted: I. That God the Father
does bear a singular affection unto his Son Christ Jesus. II. That the love of
God to Christ Jesus is the fountain of all happiness which comes to his chosen
servants. First, of the former of these.

Doctr. That God the Father does bear a singular affection unto his Son Christ
Jesus: the love of God the Father unto Christ is so great, so wonderful, so
unspeakable, that no capacity can fully comprehend it, no tongue perfectly
describe it, no similitude sufficiently express it; if I should liken it to the
sun, the sea, the whole element of fire, the glory of the sun is but a
glowworm to it, the whole ocean but as a few drops, the element of fire, but
as a few sparks of this, but slender resemblances of it; there is no comparison
between things finite and infinite; but the truth of this is manifest by the
title given unto Christ, called by a kind of excellency God's beloved, Ephesians.
1.16. twice testified to be so by an audible voice from heaven, Mat. 3.17.
Mat. 17.5. the excellency of it, by way of comparison, far excelling the love
that God did bear to the Angels, Heb. 1.5. the truth of this is moreover
evideneed.

Reas. 1. By the near union between the Father and the Son; the Son in respect
of his Godhead being one substance with the Father, as the water in the
stream is one and the same in substance with the water in the fountain,
distinguished only by relation; as one and the same man may be a father and a
son in several relations, yet but one man* hence God the Father and God the Son
are said to be one, 1 John 5.7. John 10.30.

2. By the similitude and likeness between them: as the Father so the Son is
holy absolutely, independently according to his Godhead; and also as he was
man, he knew no sin, there was no guil found in his lips, he was a lamb
without spot, pure grain without chaff, 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. 2.22. 1 Pet. 1.19.
Luke 23.41.

3. By the high and admirable privileges wherewith he endued him even as he
was man, he made his son; not only by creation, as the Angels; by adoption,
as his converted people, but by grace of hypostatical union making the humane
nature one in subsistence with the Second person in the Trinity: he has made
him head of the Church, the Fountain of grace to all his chosen, the Prince of
peace, the Lord of glory, anointed King, Priest and Prophet of the Church,
Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.4. Isa. 9.6. 1 Cor. 2.8.

Use. This must therefore stablish the faith of all God's people, cause them to
build upon Christ as upon a sure rock, a strong foundation; the love of the
Father toward him is unspeakable; the Father so loves him, that he will not
deny any petition of his, but he is heard in whatsoever he does sue for, he
puts all into his hand, as Genesis 41.40. once Pharaoh put the government of
his kingdom into the hands of Joseph, set him over all his house; and ordained,
that according to his word all his people should be ruled, only in the Throne
he would be chief: so has God the Father put all into Christ's hand,
committed the ministration of his kingdom unto him, only in the Throne God
will be chief above Christ as Mediator, and therefore as a man having a friend
in the King's Court whom the King loves above all others, he comes with
confidence, is assured that he will prevail with the King for him; the love of
God to Christ does infinitely surpass the love of any King to his Favorite, or
any other whosoever is most dear to him; the love of God to Christ is most
pure, most perfect, most full, immutable and everlasting: and therefore let us
be confident we shall find acceptance in him, for all the promises of God in
Christ are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.2. and we shall obtain whatsoever we ask in
his name, Joh. 16.23. God for the love he bears to Christ Jesus will not
deny the suits of any of his servants.

2. This serves for the singular comfort of all the members of Christ, though
they be unworthy of any love or favor, in regard of their failings and
manifold infirmities; yet God has a fervent love to Christ their head; though
the clouds of their sin hide away the light of God's face, and the Lord seem to
have forsaken them, yet he still loves Christ their head, their husband,
their friend: if the King should be highly displeased, threaten death to a
woman for some offense committed, yet if she had a husband whom the King loved
unfeignedly and earnestly, to whom he would deny no request, this would
comfort her exceedingly. Such a husband have we, and therefore we may boldly
approach unto the throne of grace in his name, we shall find acceptance for
his sake, Hebr. 10.22. Romans 5.1, 2. though Jonathan could not appeas the anger
of his father Saul against David, yet our Jonathan will surely prevail with our
God for us; though we are unworthy, yet as the man of God looked on Jeboram
for Jehoshaphat's sake, 2 King. 3.14. so will our God look favorably on us for
Christ's sake.

3, This must quicken and stir up us to love the Lord Jesus: the children use
to love where the father does, the servants use to affect where their Lord; God
the Father loves the Son, therefore let us also get our hearts inflamed with
love to him; to them that love him, all felicity is wished, Ephesians. 6 24. to them
that love him not, all evils are denounced, 1 Cor. 16.22. and many inducements
there are to move us to set our affection upon 1. the dignity, beauty, majesty,
glory and excellency of his person, Isa. 45.3. Cant. 5.10. 2. The love that he
has showed to us, Joh. 15.13. Romans 5.8. Jonathan's love to David, caused David
again to love him; fire begets fire. 3. The great afflictions he has
suffered for us. 4. The great endowments he has bestowed upon us. 5. The many
enemies he has conquered for us. 6. The great things he has purchased for
us in the heavens; these are as so many load-stones to draw our hearts unto
Christ Jesus; as so many bellows to blow up the fire of our affections to
inflame or hearts with fervent, sacred and constant love unto the Lord Jesus;
and that so much the more, because we have hence seen,

Doctr. That the love of God to Christ Jesus is the fountain of all the
happiness which comes to God's servants: as the waters come to us from the
fountain, by and through the cistern; the light comes from the sun to the eye,
by and through the aer: so is Christ the medium whereby all the goodness of God
comes unto us; and God's love to Christ is the original and prime cause
hereof; as Genesis 45.17, 18. the love of King Pharaoh to Joseph was the moving
cause of all the favor and kindness he showed to his father, and brethren, when
they were in great distress by reason of the famine; so the love of God the
King of kings, viz. Christ Jesus, is the fountain of all the happiness, peace,
comfort which is derived and communicated to the brethren of Christ Jesus, as
the Ark was the cause of the welfare of Obed-Edom's house, so is God's love to
Christ the cause of all our welfare: this was shadowed out by the ladder in
Jacob's vision Genes. 28.11, 12. reaching from heaven to earth, the Angels
ascending and descending, to show how all the goodness of God descends unto
us by and through Christ, this was also prophesied, as the Lord has put the
grace of his spirit upon the son of righteousness, to enlighten them that sit
in darkness, and why has he done so, but because he delighted in him, and
the Apostle speaks plainly, that we are accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.
Acts 2.33.

Reas. 1. Because we are from all eternity elected in Christ, as the Apostle
witnesses, Ephesians. 1.4* saying, we are chosen in him before the foundation of
the world, in him, noting the order in which we are elected, not the cause of
election, the grace of election begins first with Christ our head, and
descends to us in him, we are not first elected, and then Christ is chosen
by reason of our fall, but God out of his love did first choose him to be the
head of the body mystical, and then are we chosen to be his members, as the
head corner stone in the building is first chosen, Psa. 116.22. and then the
other stones which are to be put into the building; hence he is said to be
the first begotten amongst his brethren, Col. 1.18. to have the pre-eminence,
to be sealed John 6.27. and set apart to be the prince of our salvation, to be
foreordained before the foundations of the world, 1 Pet. 1.20 by how much more
excellent things are, by so much more timely and principally they be in God's
decree, he does not think of electing and predestinating us first as a body,
and then come afterward by occasion to think of a him who is the head; he is
the first pattern, and we are predestined to be like him Romans 8.29. and as
the master-picture and pattern is first, and then the thing which is to be
drawn by it, as in a natural birth the head comes first, and then the feet
after it, so, first was Christ chosen, then as the head or the elect and
fountain of grace, and then are we chosen in him: things in their material
existing, have one order in their intentional, another; as for example, a man
that makes a house intends to dwell under some covering, 2 he intends to
build a house, 3. to hire workmen, 4. to prepare matter; but in the execution,
he 1. sets stone and wood in place, 2, he hireth workmen, then raises the
frame, and lastly enters in, and dwells there: In order of material
existing, Christ is revealed, promised, exhibited after sin, but intended
before sin; 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. The Apostle reckoning the order in which things
exist, mentions 1. the world, 2, the elect, 3, Christ, then God, but gives us
to understand in order of intention, that God intends, first his own glory,
then Christ, then the Church, then the world out of which he intended to
gather such as should be saved by Christ, and thus Christ is the head of the
elect, and the fountain of grace.

2. Because all the promises of God are to us in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. he is
the cistern by which God has promised to convey the waters of life to our
souls; It is he who of God is made unto us all things behooffull to our
salvation 1 Cor. 1.30. it is in him that God has promised audience and
acceptance to our persons, Genesis 3.15. it is in him that the blessing was
promised to all nations, Genesis 12.34. it is in his days that all peace, and
felicity was promised to the Church Jer. 23.5, 6. it is he that brought good
and joyful tidings Micah 4.4, 5.

3, Because God has put all fullness in him for the good of his Church, as he
has put all fullness of light into the sun, for the giving of light to the
world, all fullness of water into the sea, for the watering of the earth; so
has God put all fullness into him, for our behoof that are in him, that we
might receive grace needful to salvation, Col. 1.19. John 1.16. Isa 61.1, 2.
as all Egypt fetched out of Joseph's store, as the ointment on Aaron's head
ran down to the beard even the skirts of his garment, Psalm 133.1, 2.

4. Because our life, the life of grace is hidden in Christ, even when we were
dead in sin, Col. 3.3. as the life of the tree in the winter is in the root,
the life of children, before they are born, in their parents, so our life is in
Christ, the tree of life, the second Adam, the common parent of God's people;
and as the tree when the spring comes, and the sun shines, it full of life,
buddeth and blossometh, so when the sun of righteousness arises, and causes
the light of his truth to shine in our hearts, then that life is manifested in
us which before was hidden in him, John 14.6.

5. Because all the favors and gifts which God bestows on his people are
bestowed on them in and thorough Christ, in him they have redemption,
remission, in him we are blessed with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians
1.3.7. thorough him we have all things that pertain to life and Godliness, 2
Pet. 1.3. all that God gives to any person in love, or in mercy, he gives it
in and through Christ, as the King by reason of some eminent man in the Court
whom he highly favors, bestows many gifts on them of his family, kindred,
and acquaintance.

6. Because it is in him alone that God is well pleased, Mat. 3.17. thorough
him he accepts our services, thorough him he graciously casts out upon us
the light of his countenance, as David showed kindness to lame Mephibosheth for
Jonathan's sake, 2 Samuel 1.1, 2, 11, 12, 13. so God shows mercy and kindness
to us who are lame, deformed, unworthy of any favor, even for his son's sake;
for God is in Christ, reconciling us unto himself, 2. Cor. 5.19.

Use. This may serve to assure the children of God of the stability of God's
love toward them; were they loved in themselves, their disorderly conversation,
their unholy walking, their unseemly carriage might avert the love of God from
them, but being loved in Christ, the love of God will ever continue constant
with them, for Christ is ever the same with God, always the beloved of God,
ever dear in God's sight, and hence the love of God to his people is as a house
builded on a rock, which neither wind nor water can overturn, as a sun that
ever shines, as a fountain that never fails, an everlasting love, Isa. 54.6,
9, 10. a love more durable than the mountains, a love continued when we have
no feeling of it, when we by our sin have deserved an utter extinguishment
thereof, yet in Christ we are still beloved, God has given us unto Christ for
an inheritance, God has joined us in wedlock unto Christ, and we shall be
loved for our husband's sake, a great stay it should be to God's people, that
God's love shall ever continue to them: Two things much commend Love,
Antiquity, and Constancy, we say such one has loved me 30, 40 years, and
will not fail me.

2, This move's us to labor for interest in and for a near communion and more
entire fellowship with Christ Jesus, because thorough him the love of God
descends upon us, men seek for infinite acquaintance with, and labor much for
near communion with them that are in favor with earthly princes, that they may
also enjoy the love of such worldly potentates; the like care should we use to
enter communion with Christ, that so weee might gain the love of God; and great
and sweet inducements there are to move all men to labor for this fellowship
with the Son.

1. The dignity of Christ; he is the Son of God, Psalm. 2.7. the Prince of
peace, the Lord of glory; the subject's much desire, highly esteem, entire
acquaintance with the young Prince: the like and much more should we do to
have communion with Christ.

2, The honor whereunto we shall be advanced: we shall be the sons of God
by adoption, the members of Christ, citizens of the new Jerusalem, the Lord's
freemen, a roial Priesthood, a chosen generation; we shall be in respect of
others, as the sun to the clouds, as the vine to the bramble, the lily to the
thorn, the conqueror to the captive, the son to the servant, the richly arrayed
to the naked, the Queen to common women.

3. The near relation we shall thereby have with Christ: thereby we shall be
servants of the family whereof he is Lord; subjects, of the commonwealth,
whereof he is King; sheep of the flock, whereof he is shepherd; scholars of
the school, wherein he is chief teacher; vines in the garden, whereof he is
the dresser; soldiers of the army, whereof he is the leader; members of the
body, whereof he is the head; the spouse to whom he shall be the husband.

4. The clear and comfortable knowledge we shall thereby have of the will of
God: the nearer we approach to the sun, the more light we receive; Christ is
in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. in him are all the treasures of knowledge
hidden, Col. 2.3. he can open the book with seven seals, Rev. 5.5. he can open
the deep things of God, the hidden mysteries of our salvation, 1 Cor. 2 10.
though as dark as Sampson's riddle, he will give light to such as sit in
darkness, if they do but approach unto them, Luke 1.79.

5. The sweet and heavenly sense and feeling of God's love which we shall
hereby attain; hereby we shall feel the love of God shed abroad into our
hearts, To. 5.5. be made exceeding glad with the light of his face, Psalm.
21.6. this will enable us to look upon him, as a child on his loving father;
as a malefactor on his reconciled Sovereign; this will enable us to rejoice in
the light of God's face, as in the face of our dearest friend; and as Solomon
says of a friend, Pro. 27.9. so shall we be able to say of God; as ointment
and perfume rejoice the heart, so shall the Lord our God rejoice our souls if
we have communion with his Son.

6. The blessed and unspeakable peace which we shall hereby enjoy, Romans 5.1.
the raging tempest of our souls shall be appeased, the piercing arrows of
trouble removed, the fiery darts of Satan quenched, the hideous cry of an
accusing conscience silenced, the deadly wounds of the soul healed; the heart
so quieted, all sorrow and heaviness so taken away, Romans 15.14. all inward
comforts so restored, that we shall say as Peter said of the Mount, Phil. 4.7.
It is good being here.

7. The glorious victory we shall hereby win over all the enemies of our
salvation; we shall hereby conquer Satan, as David did Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.
subdue sin, as Joshua did the walls of Jerico, Josh. 6.20. 1 Job. 3.8. pass
through affliction, as Moses and Israel through the red sea, Job. 16.35. and
pass as the three children through the fiery furnace, Romans 8.35.

8. The stability and growth in grace which waits hereupon: this will cause
the grace of the Spirit to be in us as a living spring that is never dry, as a
light that shines more and more, as an immortal seed which does not fade; this
will cause us to be as trees planted and willows growing by the river's side;
as trees bearing much fruit in our old age; this will make us to be in the
ways of God, as it was said in another case of Saul and Jonathan, lovely in
our lives, aimiable in our conversations, strong as the lion, swift as the
hind, full of courage, swift, speedy and cheerful in the ways of God's
commandments, whose bow returned not back, nor sword returned empty, whose
holy labors are not in vain, who faint not in the way of God's precepts, but
move as water to the ocean, and eagles to the carcass. And thus of the first
part, the love of God to Christ: the sequel of the Father's love to Christ
follows: and has given all things into his hands.

The ability of the Physician to heal, of the Pilot to guide, of the General to
rule the army, to conquer the enemy, of the friend, to supply in time of need,
causes the sick, the passenger, the soldier, the poor man to be much the
more confident; so the ability, fullness, and alsufficiency of Christ causes
all his servants to rely upon him, with so much the more firm dependence:
therefore the Baptist, the more effectually to persuade his disciples to
believ, rely, and rest upon Christ the more strongly, to entertain his doctrine
the more reverently, to value him the more highly, to rejoice in him the more
abundantly, to devote and resign themselves into his hands the more thoroughly,
does not only acquaint them with the love of the father unto Christ, which is
the wellspring whence all the waters of salvation flow, but also acquainteth
them with the authority, sovereignty, and kingdom wherewith he has endowed
him, he has given all things into his hand, all things visible and invisible,
all things without exception, are made his, he has full and free power, and
possession over all, and rule and administration of all; this he took not by
force, he bought not with money, but received from his father, as the only
begotten son of the father; places of government, and jurisdiction must be
neither bought, nor injuriously usurped, but given freely to the best
deservers: the father gave all into his hand, John 17.5. not that he ever was
without them as he is God, or that he was unequal to the Father, but as in
fullness of time he was incarnate, Phil. 2.8. so his assumed nature received
many singular gifts and privileges, and this, not of that which was another,
but that which was his own, as he was God; and this he received not as a
sealed fountain, to reserve all unto himself, but he received it for us, to
bestow it freely on us, for our salvation, Math. 11.27. Math. 28.23. therefore
the Apostle testifies that all is ours, 1 Cor. 3.22. and thus the Father has
put all things into Christ's hands; whence learn,

Doctrine, That God has put all creatures in subjection to Christ Jesus, and
has endowed him with all fullness to save his chosen servants. As Pharaoh made
all his people subject to Joseph, Genesis 41.44, and Joseph was endowed with
wisdom how to govern them, and had plenty of Provision to preserve them; so
has God put all creatures in subjection unto Christ, and he has all fullness
of wisdom, power, and goodness to rule, govern, and supply the wants of his
people; he has the pre-eminence above all, as the lord over the servant, as
the head over the body, Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 1.22. as the Conqueror over the
captived: This the Apostle does abundantly prove. Heb. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
by the interest Christ has in all, by the being he has given to all, by his
his equality with God, by his sustentation of all, by the purgation of sin, by
the dignity and authority vouchsafed to him, by his pre-eminence above Angels,
by the religious worship given to him by the Angels, by the eternity of his
kingdom, by the measure of grace bestowed on him, by the subjection of all
that rise against him: And this truth is moreover clearly evidenced,

1. Reason, By the Offices which he was to execute; 1. the office of a king,
and therefore he must have pre-eminence above all, as the king above the
subjects, Psalm. 2.6. therefore he is called a king set upon a holy hill, Psalm.
45.6. an everlasting king, king of Jews, Math. 2.2. king of righteousness, Heb.
7.2. king of peace, and king of kings, Rev. 1.5. 2. The office of a prophet,
Luke 4.18. and all are to wait on him, as scholars on their teacher, as sheep
on their shepherd, Isa. 40.11. as the eye waits on the sun for light, Mat.
11.29. as the offender on the Ambassador of peace, Zech. 9.10. what Job said
of himself Job 39.21, 23, must be much more verified of Christ, unto him men
must give ear and wait, and keep silence at his counsel, they must wait for him
as for the rain, and open their mouth wide as for the latter rain. 3. the
Office of a priest Heb. 3.1, 6. and on him must they wait as sick men on the
physician, as captived men on him that does ransom them, 1 Timothy 2.6.

2, By the pre-eminence given to him, the head, the husband, the prince, the
first fruits of his people, as the head is above the members, the husband above
the wife, the prince above the subjects, the first fruits before the residue of
the residue of the lump, so is Christ above the rest of the people.

3. By the miraculous works which he wrought, he turned water into wine, John
2. 8. walked upon the sea, Mat. 14.25. healed all manner of diseases, which no
physician could cure, Mark 5.25. opened the eyes of men born blind, John 9.31.
a work exceeding the abilities both of art and nature, raised the dead, stilled
the raging tempest, Mat. 8.26. cast out devils, an evident argument of his
dominion over all creatures.

4. By the potent enemies which he overcame: Goliath, the Philistine, the
Midianitish armies, Sennacherib's forces were no more to the enemies subdued by
Christ, then a molehil to a mountain, then a child to a giant, then the shadow
to the body, then rotten reeds to bands of brass, and iron. Col. 2.15. Ephesians.
4.8.

5. By the blessed change which he wrought in the hearts of men; of fierce as
lions, he makes men gentle as the lamb, Isaiah 11.6. of unclean, as the
leper, he makes clean, as Naaman coming out of Jordan, 2 Kings 5. of dead in
sin he raises to a new life, of dens of devils he makes them temples for
the holy spirit, of a barren wilderness he makes them as a fertile soil, of a
field like the sluggards field, full of thorns and briars he makes them a
very fruitful orchard.

Quest. How could the Father put all things into the hands of the Son? since
he has the same fullness, majesty, and power he ever had, and is no way
emptied by any thing the sun has received:

Reas. As a fountain fills the cistern and is no way thereby emptied, a king
sends forth his son to a rebellious people, to reclaim, reconcile, subdue
them, gives him authority hereunto, yet his own authority is hereby no way
diminished.

Reso. 2. The son is the person which does chiefly manifest himself in the
administration of the kingdom, not that the Father and holy Ghost are excluded,
but the work of the Son is most apparent, seen, and observed, and therefore to
him it is chiefly attributed.

Qu. If the Father gave all things into Christ's hands, how come's it to pass
that he was in external condition so poor, laden with so many reproaches,
that he lived in the form of a servant? why had he not lived as a King, and
glorious prince?

Reso. Christ's Kingly Office, during his abode on earth, was to give place to
his Priestly office; the priestly office was now fully to be executed, the
kingly office but sparingly manifested, that the execution of his priestly
office might not be hindered, which would have been, if his kingly office had
now been fully manifested, 1 Cor. 2.8. and therefore he often charged his
disciples to conceal the miracles which he wrought: These things thus
answered, the Use serves

Use 1. To be terror in the hearts of all profane men, of all such as are
enemies to Christ by their evil works; the power of a mortal enemy does much
affright us, he that is regardless at the barking of a dog will fly at the
roaring of a lion; the great stature and strength of Goliath made all Israel
tremble; Christ has all things in his hands, he is endowed with all power,
and authority, none shall be able to resist him, none can make his part good
against him, he is a stone hewn out of the mountains, breaking in pieces the
greatest opposing kingdoms, Dan. 2.44. a stone, whosoever falls on him shall
be bruised, on whomsoever it falls, it will grind him to powder, Rev. 5.5.
he is the lion of the tribe of Judah, if he roar in his indignation, he will
make all the beasts of the forest, all the wicked men of the world to tremble;
if he appear in his wrath, they will fly like Gaal before Abimelech; however
they make a mock of the day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 2, 3. as Gaal did of the coming
of Abimelech: as he is to his servants like the sun with healing in his wings,
Mal. 4.2. so to his enemies, will he be, as a flaming fire, 2 These. 1.8. full
of burning; as he is gentle like a gracious and sweetly disposed friend to the
one, so will he be terrible, as a man of war to the other, Psalm. 54, 5. as
he appeased the storm, to the comfort of his disciples, Mat. 8.26. so will he
raise a stormy tempest to annoy his enemies which never shall be quieted.
There are 5. things in Christ which should make all the profane men on the
earth to tremble. 1. The fullness of his power, her can dash them in pieces as a
potter's vessel, Psalm. 2.9. he can beat the mountains into dust, if he become
an enemy, if he arm himself against us, it will be with us as when Joshua
came, it was with the Canaanires, Josh. 5.1. there will no more spirit remain
within us, no friend will help us, no shield will defend us, no walls will
shelter us; he has all creatures to command, the very devils are subject to
him. 2. The knowledge of Christ, as the Psalmist says of the sun, Psalm. 19. so
it is much more true of the Son of righteousness, he searches from one end of
the, soul, from one end of the life to the other, and nothing is hidden from
his eye; he will find out the sin that lies like Jonah in the bottom of the
ship, he will find out the Babylonish garment and golden wedg like Joshua; it
was in vain for Jeroboam's wife to disfigure her self before the Prophet; it is
in vain for any man to draw off the concealment of his sin, or the hiding of
himself from the eyes of the Lord Jesus. 3. The justice of Christ; he will not
suffer sin to go unpunished; punishment shall as surely follow sin, as the
thread does follow the needle, as the heat does follow the fire, there is no
iniquity shall escape; as the careful husbandman rooteth out the thorns and
briars; as the diligent houswife casts the rubbish out of the house, as the
chaff and tares are cast into the fire, so will Christ deal with the thorns and
briars, chaff and tares, profane men of the world: therefore as the Angel said
to Lot, as David to the people, so let me in this behalf say to you. 4. That
Christ shall be Judge; it will much trouble a malefactor that his enemy shall
be his judge: Christ, whose ordinances you have neglected, whose precepts you
have transgressed, whose servants you have abused: he shall be your judge,
therefore labor to be in with Christ, as men labor to be in with the Judge,
and to make him your friend, or else you are for ever undone. 5. That Christ
alone is the Savior; if he do not deliver thy soul, as David the sheep out of
the jaws of the lion; if he do not open the prison as the Angel did to Peter;
if he do not cure you, no Physician can heal you; if his blood do not wash
you, no water can cleans you: therefore there is no hope of entering into life,
if you make not your peace with him; no beholding of God's face, unless you be
united to his Son; no reigning with him, unless you be now made conformable to
him; unless you now enter into Covenant with him, better all the world were an
enemy against him; better beg like Lazarus from door to door, better be
esteemed as a monster in the world, better live in goats skins and sheep skins
having his favor, then with all the pomp, pride, pleasure and jollity of the
world with his displeasure; if he be angry, what will you do? whither can you
go; who can help you? will not all creatures say, as the King of Israel said to
Naaman, 2 King. 5.7. Am I a God to kill and to make alive, that you come to
me? cannot all creatures join with Christ against us, as the soldiers with
the General? are not all things given into his hands? oh think on this, even
this fullness of the power of Christ, and tremble to go on in any sin against
Christ, to continue under the wrath of Christ, (for bitter at the last will be
the portion of all such as are not at peace with him, as walk not uprightly
before him, Psalm. 110 1, 2. Mat. 21.41. Mat. 22.13. I would choose rather to
live in the poorest condition in the world with the love of my Savior, than
possess the highest places of the earth, and drink of the sweetest river of
worldly pleasures, and be a stranger to the light of his countenance, and to
all that walk as enemies to the cross of Christ, I will say as Jacob did to
Simeon, Genes. 49.6, 7.

2. Is all put into Christ's hands? then this must teach all God's people, 1.
Obedience and a holy subjection to his will in all things; he has all power
and authority given him, and therefore Mat. 17.5. him we must hear; him we
must obey, as the members are subject to the head, as the wife is subject to
the husband, as the subjects are obedient to their Prince; for all this is
Christ to us; his will must be our rule, according to which all our doings
must be squared; the balance wherein we must be weighed, the light whereby
we must be guided; his precept must be to us as the fiery pillar to Israel,
at whose motion we must move, at whose stopping we must stay; his direction
is most perfect, free from all error; most wholesome it will prove, the best
counsel; most sweet, it will certainly yield the truest comfort; therefore as
the disciples Mat. 19 22. left all and followed him: so, all impediments being
removed, let us follow his comcommandement; this is his will, this is our
wisdom; in this Christ would have us give pre-eminence above all other
occasions, and not say to this (as Felix to Paul in another case;) yea, though
it transcend the limits of our capacity, though we cannot render a reason of
it, though it seem repugnant to our apprehension; yet it is enough that God
has enjoined it, and we shall find, that true obedience to his precepts is
ever attended with the best success. 2. This must teach us to depend upon
Christ with all stedfastness: in his hands are all things; he is a complete
Savior, a perfect redeemer; he is a sure rock to all that build upon him, a
never-failing fountain; though our sins be heinous, yet he has ability in
him to remove them, as he cleansed the leper; though God be at a great
distance from us, his face hidden under the darkest clouds of his displeasure,
yet Christ is able to reconcile him; though we be in more than an iron
bondage, yet he can free us; therefore let us fasten our faith and confidence
upon him, let our hearts rest in him, let us trust our souls with him, and his
gospel shall surely prove the power of God to our salvation; he will be a
propitiation for us; in him our sin shall be covered, and we blessed; in him
we shall have peace, in him we shall have access to the throne of grace.

3. Are all things in Christ's hand? then God's people must rest themselves
contented with Christ alone; he is a rich husband, the Father has given all
things into his hands: therefore bless God all you that are partakers of
Christ; say you have a goodly heritage, you have the tree which bears all
sorts of fruit, you have the pearl which is of more value then all other
riches; you have the sun, and therefore cannot want light; you have the
fountain, and therefore cannot want water; you have the Lord of glory, and
therefore cannot want honor; you have the Prince of peace, and therefore cannot
want joy; you have him that has all things, and therefore cannot want any good
things; you have enough, you have that (which if you be not defective to your
selves) will be like Elkanah to Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.8. in stead of all other
things. God has done more for you in giving Jesus Christ to you, in joining
you in wedlock with Christ, then if he had bestowed the whole earth upon you;
he has advanced you to greater honor, endued you with better riches,
replenished your soul with sweeter and more heavenly pleasures than can be
gathered out of worldly storehouses, or drink out of earthly fountains:
therefore thirst not after the world, covet not great things, be not
disquieted with the slenderness of your external estate, think not of using any
forbidden means, suffer not your affections to be stolen away from the Lord, but
delight your self in Christ, and rest your self abundantly contented with him.

4. Are all things put into Christ's hands? is he so abundantly filled with
all things? then this may comfort God's servants in all estates: whatsoever ye
want, it is all in the hands of Christ; if you want power to resist either
bodily or spiritual enemies, in Christ there is power to overcom and subdue
them all; if you want grace, if your knowledge, faith, patience be small,
Christ has a rich storehouse, he can fill you; if your outward estate be
slender, your provision small and poor, Christ can make a little go far, the
course taste sweet, as he turned the water into wine, Joh. 2.9, 10.

Verse 36.
Fullness of water in the fountain is unusefull, unless we drink thereof;
fullness of light in the sun yields no comfort, unless the eye be opened to
receive it; the best apparel gives no warmth, unless the body be covered with
it: so the fullness, goodness and all sufficiency that is in Christ Jesus is no
way beneficial, unless we get assured interest therein; therefore the Baptist
does not only acquaint his disciples with Christ's fullness, authority,
sovereignty and all sufficiency; he does not only let them see how he is a
complete Savior in himself, but does also move, persuade, exhort and stir them
up by faith to get interest in him; and this he does by a double argument; the
one drawn from the single felicity and benefit attending a lively faith in
Christ; he that believes in the Son has everlasting life: the other drawn
from the danger of not believing; but, he that believes not in the Son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him: wherein we have, 1. The
felicity and blessed estate of all true believers; he that believes, etc. 2.
The infelicity and miserable condition of all unbeleevers; he that believes
not, etc. First, of the felicity of true believers; he that, whosoever he
be, of what nation, of what estate or condition soever, rich or poor, bond or
free, that believes in Christ, that imbraceth, builds, rests and relieth
sincerely, firmly and fully upon the Lord Jesus, that man has life
everlasting, has already the life of peace inchoated and begun in him, that
life of God wrought, that immortal seed of grace sown in his heart which never
shall die: so that herein we may have, 1. The necessity of faith; he that
believes in the Son of God: it is true, that in the Son of God there is all
fullness, all things are in his hands; but we must believe in him, or his
fullness will no ways help us. 2. The gain of faith; has everlasting life: 1.
Of the necessity of faith; wherein we have the nature of faith, the object of
faith, and the extent. 1. The nature of faith, believes in Christ; that is,
does not only believe that Christ is, or that what he has said or done is
true, but believes in Christ, pitcheth and rests fully upon Christ. 2. The
object of faith; Christ. 3. The extent; he that, whosoever. 1. Of the nature
of faith; believes in: to believe sometime signifies, and speculatively to
know the Scriptures to be true; and thus the devils do, and all wicked men may
believe. 2. Sometime it signifies to assent willingly and use some kind of
joy to the word of God for the glad tidings which it brings; thus hypocrites
believe. 3. It signifies to put confidence in that which we know and assent
unto, and to make application thereof unto our selves; to depend and build
thereupon; and thus the regenerate believe. Whence learn,

Doctr. That the hearts of all true believers do rely and rest upon the Lord
Jesus for everlasting life and happiness: for faith is a leaning or resting of
the heart in and upon God, as the author of everlasting life and salvation;
this is evident by the phrases used by the Holy Ghost, to explain the nature of
faith. Pro. 3.5. Isa. 50.10. Psalm. 37.3. Psalm. 71.5. Isa. 31.1. Psalm. 62.7.
Romans 10.11. for to believe in God, or in Christ, is to cleav unto God, to lean
upon God, to rest in God, as on him who is all-sufficient to keep us here, and
to bring us to glory hereafter. 2. It is evident by the titles given in
scripture to saving faith, 2 Cor. 3.4. 2 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 3.12. 1 Pet.
1.13. 1 John 5.13, 14. (...). Romans 4 21. Col. 2.2. (...). Heb. 11.1. 3. By the
similitudes used to express it; it is likened to an house builded on a rock: as
the house rests on the foundation, so does the true believer rest on God: to
a tree rooted in the ground, whereby it is stayed against the force of strong
and violent winds: to a branch ingraffed into a vine, to a ship fastened by a
strong anchor, to a sure rock, to the betrothing or joining of a woman in
wedlock; all these express a strong and affectionate reliance of the heart upon
the Lord. 4. By the charge given by our Savior, Joh. 14 1. rest, rely and
quiet your souls in God and in me; by the exhortation of the Psalmist, Psalm.
62.8. and of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.7.

whereby the will is moved to extend it self to embrace that good which it does
approve; and therefore faith is called a receiving of Christ, which is much
more then to know Christ; it is one thing for a woman to know a man, it is
another thing to receive him as her husband; faith is not only an action of
approbation, but also of election, John 1.17. an action of the whole man,
making the good whereunto it is carried to become ours, John 6.35. The wise
merchant saw the pearl, approved of it, and, beyond that, chose it for his own,
sold all to buy it, Math. 13.45. though faith does always presuppose the
knowledge of the Gospel, yet there is no man that attaineth saving knowledge
unless this act and choice go before it, Romans 10.10. and the other be
dependant upon it; therefore the Apostle says, With the heart man believes,
John 7.17. John 8.31, 32. 1 John 23.

2. Because true and saving faith does always choos, apprehend, and embrace
Christ, and build upon him as a sufficient and fit means to deliver us from
evil, to purchase and procure for us all manner of good, they see and apprehend
in him all manner of fullness, and complete abilities, such as are no where to
be found, Cant. 5.10. they look on him, and see more beauty in him than in all
other creatures; they behold in him fullness of wisdom, to make them wise;
fullness of power, to make them free; fullness of life, to make them live;
fullness of all grace, to fill the empty vessels of their souls, John 22.5. John
6, 28. and therefore to him do their hearts cleave, and from him they will not
depart, as the Shunamitish woman, apprehending the ability of the Prophet to
help her, caught the Prophet by the feet, and would not let him go, though
Gehazi thrust her, 2 Kings 4.17. so true faith causes the believers heart to
cleav to Christ, and so to embrace him, that it will not let him go.

3. Because true and saving faith does enable us to look on God as on our
father, on Christ as on our husband; on the word, as on food well agreeing with
our palate; on the sun, as on a light much affecting the eye; on the promises
of God, as on a reconciled Sovereign; on Christ, as on our advocate; on the
Word, as on an embassage of peace; this assures the heart of the pardon of
sin; this causes God's words to be to our souls as the words of Christ were
to the Palsy man, Math. 9.2. son, be of good cheer, therefore the Apostle
says, after we believ, we are sealed; as, in mutual contracts, men set to
seals; and when we have a man's word in writing, and a seal to it, we rest
upon it, we are confident it shall be verified: so, when we believ, we put
to our seal that God is true, Ephesians. 1.13. that he will fulfill what he has
promised, and God does seal to the believer the salvation believed; a seal
distinguishes things, so God's people see themselves many ways distinguished
from others; as a seal makes things authentical, so true believers are fully
assured of God's goodness, and their future happiness, and thereby their hearts
do rest on God.

3. Because true faith brings us unto a holy communion, and gracious
fellowship, and comfortable and blessed acquaintance with Christ: hereby Christ
comes into their hearts, resideth, reveals himself, Ephesians. 3.17. and rules
there as a dweller in his house, Gal. 6.10. hereby they have fellowship with
him, as the members with the head, Romans 12.5. as the wife with the husband; by
this they behold Christ revealing himself graciously, speaking unto them
comfortably and hereby they are wrought upon to rest on Christ strongly.

5. Because true faith inableth the true believer to find much peace, and
sweet consolation in Christ, Romans 5.1. it strengthens him to conquer Satan,
to subdue the enemies of their salvation, Romans 15.14 to rejoice in the midst of
trouble, to overcom all worldly opposition, Romans 8.35. 1 John 5.4. he feels
faith in Christ to be to him as a shield in the day of battle, as the Ark in
the Deluge, a shining star in the darkest night of trouble, as the honey comb to
Sampson in the belly of the lion; and finding this in Christ, his soul
fasteneth on him, as on a sure rock; and leans upon him as upon a
never-failing staff.

6. Because true believers clearly see, and infallibly know the variety and
insufficiency of the world, they know there is a foundation whereon to build,
no other bow wherein to trust, no other shield for their defense, no other
fountain whence to draw the water of salvation, they know that Psalm. 33.16, 17.
that Psalm 62.9, 10. that Prove. 11.4. that Psalm. 44.6. they know that all
outward abilities like Job's friends are physicians of no value, miserable
comforters, and therefore their hearts do rest upon Christ Jesus, as the Dove
finding no footing returned to the Ark.

7. Because true believers do make Christ their portion, their joy, their
crown, their riches, and their glory, he is to them instead of all, they will
leav all to enjoy him, Mark 10.28. they esteem all to be dung in comparison of
him, Phil. 3.3. all to be thorns in respect of this vine, Cant. 2.2. to be
barren in respect of this fruitful tree, as the wise men rejoiced more in the
star which lead unto Christ, then in all other stars in the firmament, Mat.
2.10. so true believers rejoice in Christ more than in all the world, and
therefore their hearts cleav to him and rest upon him.

8. Because true faith in Christ is always attended with a singular love to
Christ Jesus: according to the strength of our faith is the fervency of our
love; the more we apprehend the height, depth, and length of Christ's love to
us, the more do our hearts burn with love again to him, Ephesians. 3.19. the nigher
we stand to a great burning fire, the more we are heated with it: so the
sense of Christ's love, apprehended by says, breeds love again unto the
Lord, Galat. 6.5.

Use. This serves to show us that a general consent to the word of God as
true, is not enough to bring us unto life; but besides this there must be a
peculiar resting, staying, and confidence of the heart thereupon: If an earthly
man, of ability and truth, promise us this or that help, to bestow upon us this
or that gift, we do not only know, and think, and persuade our selves that he
says true, but besides, we say, that we trust hereunto, rely hereupon, quiet
our selves, and seek no further; the like resting of the heart must we find
upon the promise of God in Christ; by this particular confidence, and resting
of the heart upon Christ, do true believers go beyond reprobates, by this do
they receiv nourishment from Christ as the sions from the stock; by this have
they claim and interest in Christ, as the wife in the husband. John 15.2. Cant.
6.3. by this have they claim to the promises of God, 2 Pet. 1.4. as the tenant
in lands granted him under hand and seal: by this is Christ very pleasant and
delightful to them, as the sun to the opened eye, Mal. 4.2. pure and precious
liquor to the thirsty, Isa. 55.1. by this are they distinguished from others,
as children from strangers, John 1.12. by this they have maay sweet relations
to Christ, which others have not, as the members to the head, the branches to
the vine: by this they stand in the time of trouble, as a ship fast anchored,
when others are tossed like a ship without an anchor, Heb. 6.19. by this
Satan's darts are expelled, Ephesians. 6.16. when others are wounded, like men that
are naked: by this believers are bold and confident, as the lion when others
fly like a hare before the the hounds, Ephesians. 3.12. Prove. 28.1. by this we have
access to the throne of grace, Romans 5.1. when others, like the foolish Virgins,
having no oil in their lamps, were shut out: by this our services are
acceptable unto God, Heb. 11.6. when others, like him that wanted a wedding
garment, are cast into utter darkness, Mat. 22.12. by this the Word of God
becomes sweet and savory to our palates, Jerem. 15.16. when as it is like gall
to others, Heb. 4.2. by this it is to us as good seed to good ground, and good
meat to a healthy stomach.

2. Therefore every man must try whether he find his heart thus to cleav unto
and to rest upon the Lord Jesus, whether he be sensible of the life and
operation of his affection this way; whether he feel his heart trusting and
resting upon the Lord, as the child upon the parent, the building upon the
foundation, the wife upon the husband; and this we must discern,

1. By the denial of our selves, and the rejection of all humane abilities, as
every way insufficient to bring us unto life; the more the heart rests upon
the Lord, the less it rests on worldly and created powers, Prove. 3.5. the
true believer knows the wisdom of the flesh to be foolishness with God, yea
enmity against God, Romans 8.7. to be a false prophet, a deceitful guide, a
withered feed, and therefore will not lean thereupon, will not trust thereunto,
any more then a traveller to a blind guide, a passenger to an ignorant pilot, a
sick man to one that will as soon minister poison as good physic to him; but
will search and seek out for a better instructor, for a surer guide: this the
Apostle taught 1 Cor. 3.18. this the wise man gave in charge, Prove. 3.7. this
the prophet persuaded, Isa. 8.19, 20 and declares the doleful issue of the
contrary, Isa. 50.11.

2. By our constant abiding with God in the time of affliction, in the hour of
temptation: the more true faith is assaulted, the more strongly the heart
lays hold upon God; the more the child is made afraid with any thing, the
more earnestly he cries to his parent to keep him, the more closely he
applies himself to him: the furious assault of the enemy causes men to lay
the faster hold upon the sword, to hide themselves in castles, and places of
sure defense: the seed sown in good ground held out to the harvest, Mat. 13 24.
so the heart which rests once upon the Lord, abides constant with him, as a
woman joined in wedlock abides with her husband till death; so nothing can
make a separation between God and the true believer; he finds such
sweetness, such goodness in the Lord, that neither pleasure nor torment, honor
nor ignominy shall remove him, Job. 13.5. To. 8.35. Isa. 50.10, Psalm. 55.22.

3. By the blessed apprehension we have of God's goodness toward us: when we
believe men will do any great thing for us, then we feel a love in our hearts
arising toward them; so we first apprehend love of God in Christ toward us,
and then our hearts rest upon him: in nature, nothing moves in desire to this
or that but as we see it lovely; no more do our souls move toward, or rest on
God, till we apprehend him reconciled, the sinful soul does see God forgiving
many sins, and then it loves much again, Luke 7.48. therefore the Apostle
having mentioned our peace with God through faith, annexeth the shedding of
God's love abroad into our hearts, Romans 5.1.5.

4. By our abundant delight and joy in God, and the light of his face; by our
alacrity in running the race of his commandments, Psalm. 37.3, 4. we must
delight our selves in God with all manner of delight, as the rich man is
delighted with his treasure, the soldier in his victories, the wife in her
husband, Romans 15.14.

5. By our well-doing, Psalm. 37.3. we must strive to be full of good works;
to be plenteous in well-doing, to be fruitful trees bearing much fruit; as
good servants well employing our talent; and so shall we give good evidence of
our faith; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7.

Thus of the nature of faith: the second thing here noted was, the object of
faith, in Christ; it receives, imbraceth, rests, and relieth upon Christ:
whence observe,

Doctr. That the Lord Jesus is the proper and peculiar object of the faith of
all true believers. God is the object of our faith, not as he is considered
simply and absolutely in himself, but as we do live to him thorough the grace,
favor, and goodness we receive from him, 1 Timothy 4.10. the word and promises of
God, by a Metonymy of the adjunct, are said to the object of faith, so far
forth as they continue in them, and exhibit unto us that which is the object
of faith. Christ, as a mediator, is the mediate, but not the ultimate object of
faith, because we believ thorough Christ in God, Romans 6.11. 2 Cor. 3, 4. 1
Pet. 1.22. and in this respect we are said to be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17. to
have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. to be betrothed to Christ, Ephesians. 5.23. this was
the doctrine of the Baptist, as St Paul relates it, Acts 19.9. the charge
given by St Paul himself Acts 16.31. this is the gift of God to his chosen
children, Phil. 1.29. and this is the foundation whereon the people of God have
builded, John 12 11. and Christ must be the object of our faith.

1. Because he alone is ordained of God to be a Savior, Mediator between us
and God: him God the Father hears, in him he is well-pleased, Math. 18.5.
him has God the Father sealed, and set apart for this work, John 3.35. he is
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. he is the promised
feed, Genesis 3.15. there is no other name Acts 12.1. 1 Timothy 3.5.

2. Because in him alone is eternal life to be found, God himself without
Christ is a consuming sire, Heb. 12.29. by reason of our sin; all the creatures
are as a dead thing, they can do us no good; all the ordinances of God are a
killing letter, God has put all fullness into Christ, Col. 2.9. our life is
hidden in him, Col. 3.3. and this was the ground of Peter's answer to our
Savior John 6.68. whither shall we go, no creature can save us, they are all
as Physicians of no value, as empty vessels, blind guids, thou alone have the
words of eternal life, thou alone can make the doctrine of salvation to
quicken us when we are dead, 1 John 5.12. to comfort us when we are dejected,
to encourage us when we are opposed, to make us wise wherein we are Ignorant:
He that harh him, has all; he that has not the Son, has nothing, 1 John
3.24.

3. Because he alone is a sure foundation whereon to build; he is a rock
which will never sink, Mat. 7.23 a friend which will never fail, a bow which
will never break; he will save at the uttermost all such as come unto him, Heb
7.25. no storm shall make shipwreck of the soul which is fastened to him by the
anchor of a lively faith, Heb. 6.19. no violent and boisterous winds shall
overturn the trees rooted in him, Col. 2.7. nor cast down the house builded upon
him.

4. Because in his blood alone is efficacy to wash away our sins: no water but
Jordan could wash away the leprosy of Naaman, 2 Kings 5. no Physician but
Christ could heal the diseased woman, Mark 5.29. none but he could cl^ans the
Leper; None but he can redeem us from iniquity, and procure remissionn of sin
for us, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 John 1.7.

5. Because in his intercession is efficacy to procure all good things for us,
at the hands of God: Jonathan may strive to intercede with Saul for David, and
not prevail; Solomon's mother may make suit for Adonijah and not be heard; men
may make suit with men for others, and not obtain their request; good men make
earnest supplication to God in the behalf of others, and their petition not
accomplished, Ezekiel. 14.14* but Christ does ever prevail with God for them that
believe, Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25.

6. Because in him alone is righteouss to make us just, he has robes to cover
all our imperfections, he can make us righteous in God's sight, Gal. 2.16.
Romans 8.1.

Use. Then this will acquaint us with the vanity of their faith, who rely on
any thing besides Christ, who trust to their work, to the naked observation of
some religious duties, to their civil righteousness; who lean on this, and make
it the object of their faith, are like the foolish builder that builded upon
the sand, like the Babylonish builders, that thought to escape the deluge to
ascend the highest heavens by a building of their own making: these are men
that go to a broken cistern for water, to a dry breast for milk, to a barren
tree for fruit, to a dumb idol for counsel or comfort; and it will be with
them as with the worshippers of Baal, 1 King. 18, 26, 27. their abilities will
prove like a deceitful man, Prove. 25.19. like a spiders web, Job 8.14. like
the Egyptians garments, Isa. 20.4. for so Isa. 59.5, 6. Isa. 64.6. when they
shall come to the trial, what is said of men, will be verified of their works,
Psalm. 62.9. and when they think to find comfort, they will go away sorrowful
as the young man did, Mat. 19.22.

2. Therefore this must stir up every man to make Christ the object of his
faith, to build and rest on him with lively and sure confidence, to be
ingraffed into him, to become a member of that body whereof Christ is the head,
to rest our hearts in him as the author of our salvation and everlasting life;
this is the commandment of God, 1 Job. 3.23. this is the pearl, for the
gaining whereof we should sell all we have; this is the price for which we
should all strive, Jude v. 3. this is the riches for which we should labor;
this is the blessing which we should uncessantly beg; we are cumbred with
Martha about many things, but this is the thing which is most needful: some
sell their birthrights with Esau for a mess of pottage for worldly and
vanishing pleasures; some with Judas sell all the comforts they might find in
Christ for a little worldly lucre; the most part spend their strength for that
which is no bread, which yields no sound and solid comfort; but if you will
be rich indeed, if you will have that which shall bring true riches and
everlasting consolations to your souls, then labor for a lively faith in the
Son of God: And that you may be able to make Christ the object of your faith,

1. You must labor clearly to see, and to be truly sensible of the vanity of
all humane abilities, you must be able to say of all humane abilities, of all
earthly endowments, as Solomon did, Eccl. 2.17. Eccl. 11.8. as Agur did, Prove.
30.8. look on these things as on a tottering fence, and then you shall be able
to rest on Christ. The woman came not to Christ till she saw a vanity in all
other Physicians, Mar. 5.29. no more do we rest on God, rely on Christ, till
we see there is no remedy elsewhere to be found; thus Hos. 2.6, 7. this was
that which caused the disciples to rest on Christ, they found not whither else
to go, Joh. 6.68. 2 Chronicles. 20.11, 12. the contrary to this was the ground of
Isreal's unbelief, Isa. 31.1.

2. You must strive to be thoroughly humble, labor for a contrite and broken
heart, you must become vile in your own eyes, be far from all ambition and vain
glory, and so you shall feel your heart to be drawn, to rest and rely upon
Christ, then the doctrine of salvation shall be sweet, then God will reveal
himself unto your souls very graciously, multiply his grace upon you abundantly
according to his gracious promise, Isa. 57.15. Psalm. 25.9.14. Jam. 4.6. and
then shall you be able to fasten your hearts upon Christ strongly, then shall
you be able to rest in Christ firmly; for Isa. 61.1. Isa. 29.19. Psalm. 22.26.
the want of this continued the unbelief of the Pharisees, Joh. 5.44. Gal. 6.3.

3. You must bring your hearts to this pitch, to seek the prais and
commendation which God gives to his people, to be approved in the sight of
God, to make it your crown, your glory and comfort to be accepted before the
Lord, to rejoice more in the inward witness of God's Spirit and our own
consciences, then in the applaus of all the men of the world; you must with
Paul 2 Cor. 1.12. and then you shall feel God will shed abroad his love
abundantly into your hearts, seal up to your souls the pardon of your sin
strongly, and enable you to rest upon him firmly, Joh. 5.44.

4. You must meditate and acquaint your selves with the all sufficiency of
Christ, be persuaded of his love, goodness, readiness to help you, see in him
more beauty, more peace, more joy, more honor, more comfort, more power than in
all the world; look upon him as on a glorious sun, and let all the world be a
glowworm in comparison, as an empty cloud to a full fountain, as a withered arm
to a strong man, and this will work, frame and draw your hearts to believe in
him. John 12.11. Joh. 10.28. John 7.31.

Proceed we now to the gain of Faith; namely everlasting life: whence learn,

Doctr. That everlasting life is the fruit of a true and saving faith.

Everlasting life is God's gift in regard of the free donation of it, Romans 6.23.

It is Christ's purchase in regard of the price paid for it, in regard of the
meritorious cause thereof, in regard of the head whence it is derived.

It is the work of the Spirit, in regard of the principal cause efficient.

It is the fruit of the Word, in regard of the external seed whence it
springs, and instrument which works it.

It is the fruit of Righteousness, in regard of the way which tends to
Christ, in whom this life is hidden.

Therefore our Savior in earnest asseveration to persuade his disciples,
hereof John 5.24. And the Evangelist shows this to be the principal purpose
of God in inditeing the Scriptures, Joh. 20.31. hence Paul, Gal. 2.20. and
plainly S. Peter speak's to this purpose, 1 Pet. 2.8, 9.

And that everlasting life is in this manner, a fruit of faith is apparent,

Reason 1. By the union which faith works between us and Christ; it joineth
us in wedlock with him, it interesteth us in all the riches of Christ as
Mediator, it makes us living members of that body, whereof Christ is the head;
it build's us upon Christ, as the residue of the building upon the head-corner
stone; it ingraffeth us into Christ, as as the branches into the vine; it
makes Christ to be ours, it fills us with fullness, it causes him to rule
within us, and to replenish us with all good things, Ephesians. 3.17. John 2.16.

Reason 2. By the interest which it gives us God's promises; this is the
foundation whereupon our faith is builded; and faith is the condition which God
requires to make us capable of what he has promised, Gal. 3.13, 14. this is
the hand by which we receiv all good things of God; this is the key by which
we open the storehouse of God's bounty, without which all the good things of
God are to us as the Sun under an eclips, as water in a sealed fountain, riches
in a treasury locked up, as the tree of Life to Adam, when the Angel kept the
way with a flaming sword; it is faith does give us claim and entrance into all
the great and glorious promises of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1, 3, 4.

3. By the application it make's of the righteousness of Christ; it covers us
with this, as with a roial robe; it heals all our sins herewith, and makes
us just in the sight of God: for what else is our justification, but the
gracious sentence of God, whereby, for Christ apprehended by faith, he does
absolve the believer from sin and death, and accounts him just unto life,
Romans 3.22, 24. Romans 9.30. Rom 8.1.

4. By the victory which it gets over whatsoever is adverse or repugnant to
this everlasting life; it conquereth sin, it purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. it
gives an overthrow to Satan, as David by his sling to Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.
therefore 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. overcomes the world, all the allurements, and all the
oppositions of it; it trampleth them all under foot, 1. John 5.4. Like David's
Worthies, it breaks through an host of dangers to drink of the waters which
are in the wells of Life, 2 Samuel 23.16. it will follow the Lord wheresoever he
goes, it will leave him in no estate, it will endure any hardness, sustain any
loss, bear any reproach, encounter with any danger, it will leave all rather
then leave the Lord; the power of faith is invincible, nothing is too hard for
it.

5. By the gracious acceptance and spiritual adoption which it procures for
us with God, whereby we are become the sons of God, 1 John 12. 1 John 3.1.
made heirs and coheirs with Jesus Christ, Romans 8.17. for as Christ in
justification is applied as a garment to cover our sins: so in adoption, he is
applied as our brother, and Prince of our salvation, Heb. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. and
by virtue of this adoption and communion with Christ, all true believers are
called the first begotten of God, Hebr. 12.23. and this sonship of theirs
remains unalterable, the dignity and happiness of their condition is
unchangeable, John 8.35.

6. By the use which it makes of all the Ordinances of God, the Word,
Sacrament, prayer, etc. which otherwise would be as unsavory meat without
taste, as a shell without a kernel, as a deaf ear of corn, as a cloud without
rain, without comfort, without any benefit at all; yea, many times a trouble, a
terror, a great disquietment, the very savor of death, 2 Cor. 2. ver. 16.

Now a lively faith make's the Word of God as comfortable tidings to the
sorrowful, Romans 20.15. as a word of Reconciliation to them with whom God is at
variance, 2 Cor. 5.19. as a healing medicine to the diseased, Isa. 61.2. as
food to the hungry, as a light to the traveller, as dew to the weary ground, as
good seed to good land, Job 23.12. It makes the Sacrament to be as a seal to
the King's pardon, Rom, 4.11. to confirm them in the assurance of the
forgiveness of all their offenses, it makes prayer strong as wings, to carry
the soul aloft to God, Jam. 5.16. it makes meditation of God and his promises
very sweet, Psalm. 104.34. so that to him that believes God's ordinances prove
an effectual means to to draw him from sin, to turn him from every evil way, to
bring him home to God, to enable him to grow up in all holiness, and to walk
before the Lord in all well-pleasing; this the Apostle intimates, Heb. 4.2.
and out of all this it appears, That everlasting life must need's be a fruit
of faith.

Use. This must stir up every man to labor for a lively faith in Christ, to
rest and rely wholly upon him, to get assured interest in him: it is not favor
with men, places of eminency in the world, abundance of riches, nor any of
these external endowments can make a man's days everlasting; this is a fruit
growing upon none of the trees in this garden; this is a stream flowing from
none of these muddy fountains; a treasure to be found in none of these
storehouses: it is not the valor of the strong, the wisdom of the politic,
the act of the learned, the honor of the mighty, the pleasures of the wanton,
the wealth and great abundance of the rich can make their estate everlasting,
Psalm. 33.16, 17. Psalm. 49.6, 7, 8, 9. The high cedars are cast down as well as
the little shrubs; the flowers are plucked as well as the common grass: it is
only a lively faith will bring us to everlasting life.

Therefore use all means to be made partakers of it; with the wise Merchant,
sell all to buy this pearl, Mat. 13. cast away all your sins, that you enjoy
this gift; with the disciples, leave the world, that you may win Christ, Mat.
4.22. with Paul, esteem all but dung and dross, that you may be found in
Christ, clothed with that righteousness, which is by faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. wait
with all diligence at the post of God's house; let the Word be as your daily
food, as your guide and counselor, let it sink into your souls, let it work
upon your hearts, let it dwell and rule within you, that so you at length have
the fruition of this faith; pray for it, desire it, long after it, as earnestly
as ever Rachel or Anna did for children, Genesis 30. 1 Samuel 1. go to God in his
house, in thy family, in thy closet, morning, evening, at noonday, at
midnight, and beg for a lively faith; say unto the Lord, Thou art undone, thou
art but a dead man, if God give not this faith unto thee; say that all riches,
pleasures, worldly endowments, are but hay and stubble as long as this is
absent: Oh! think of this, go about this, as about a matter of most need, of
greatest importance, of chiefest use, of sweetest consolation; and as Naomi
said to Ruth of Boaz, Ruth 3.18. so take thou no rest till thou have finished
this thing, till thou have by a lively faith joined thy self in wedlock with
the Lord Jesus; make a covenant with thy soul in this, as David did in another
case, Psalm. 132.4. and when you feel your hearts beginning affectionately to
lean upon and cleave unto the Lord Jesus; pray with the men in the Gospel, Mar.
9.24. you shall never have just cause to repent of your labor in this behalf;
nothing can bring you so nigh to God as a lively faith; nothing can give you
such access to God; nothing can enable you so to prevail with God, and to gain
so many good things from the hands of God; nothing can stand you in such stead,
and afford you so much comfort; the owner of this will not give it for the rich
man's gold, the noble man's honor, the King's renown, and the time will come
wherein such as now want, would give ten thousand worlds, if they had them, to
be partakers of it, therefore while God gives time and means, seek it.

2. This serves for the singular comfort of all true believers, if they have
nothing but their faith, their condition is infinitely more happy than the
worlds choicest darling, as Prove. 7.1. so the poorest condition of life with
patience and faith is better than a stalled ox with unbelief: this will supply
all wants; as the presence of the sun supplieth the want of all lights: as
David said of Goliah's sword, 1 Samuel 21.9. so I may say of a lively faith,
there is none like that; neither riches, honors, nor pleasures; for this makes
both our persons and actions acceptable to God, which no worldly furniture can
do: this in corporateth us into Christ; this gives us the fruition of all the
good things which are in Christ; this distinguishes us from all God's enemies;
brings us within God's Covenant; breeds many sweet and glorious relations
betwixt God and us; and at last brings us to peace and everlasting happiness.

The gain of faith thus unfolded, the comforts thereof thus opened, and
proposed; the danger and damage arising from unbelief presents it self, in
the next place to be considered; which we shall find to be a root bearing as
many uncomfortable branches, laden with as many sower grapes, as the other
with sweet; a spring as full of bitter, as the other of pleasant water; for he
that believes not, shall not see life; he that believes not, whose soul
cleaves not unto, whose heart rests not upon the Lord Jesus; who builds
not upon him, as on a sure foundation; who comes not to him, as to the
fountain of living water; who gets not assured interest in him; who joyneth
not himself in wedlock to him; who becomes not to him as the wife to the
husband, in subjection, in affection, in use, in dependence, and in entire
union, he that believes not, shall not see life, shall not enjoy, no nor have
the least apprehension or comfortable feeling of the felicity, peace, glory,
and fullness of all goodness, which true believers shall enjoy in the heavens;
but the wrath of God, diseases, uncomeliness, shame, sorrow, torment, all
manner of misery, all kind of calamity, all the testimonies of God's
displeasure abides on him; abides, not comes, for we are born the children
of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and so continue thorough unbelief; therefore this wrath
abides, it will not wear with time like a garment, it will not overflow the
body and soul for an hundred and fifty days, as the Deluge of old did overflow
the earth, and then abode, Genes. 7.24. but this is a fire that ever burns, a
stinging worm, which without any cessation gnaweth; a cloudy day, whose
darkness is never dispelled: so that here we have our loss arising from
unbelief set before us privatively and positively; privatively inferring a
denial, a removeal or absence of all good, of all peace, of all comfort;
positively, an imposition, inflicting, and presence of whatsoever may make man
miserable. From the privative loss, we gather;

Doctrine. That unbelief does for ever exclude men from everlasting happiness,
and all the joy of the next life: the foolish Virgins were shut out from
entering in with the bridegroom, for want of oil in their lamps, Mat. 25. Israel
of old entered not into the rest of God because of unbelief, Heb. 3.19. Heb.
4.6. the publicans and harlots believed, and found entrance into God's kingdom;
the Pharisees believed not, and therefore could not find any admission, Mat.
21.31, 32. this was the general scope and sum of the doctrine which our Savior
would have the Apostles to deliver to the people, Mark. 16.16. and no wonder
that unbelievers are excluded from everlasting happiness: for,

Reas. 1. Where there is no true faith, there is no union with Christ, no
participation of the benefits which come unto us from the Lord Jesus: but men
are as withered branches, dead members, Romans 11.20. whatsoever profession we
make of love to Christ, of fellowship with Christ, whatsoever shows of goodness
do appear, yet if we be destitute of a lively faith, we build upon the sand,
our building will fall, Matthew. 7.24.

2. There is no purity, no sanctification, no saving grace: where the root is
not, there are no branches; where there is no spring, there are no streams: it
is faith that sets the whole man a work in God's business, it is the
apprehension of God's promises which causes us to cleans our selves from sin, 2
Cor. 7.1. it is the persuasion of God's goodness that leads us to repentance,
Romans 2.4. it is our interest in Christ, it is Christ's dwelling in us by faith,
Ephesians. 3.18. it is our participation of his fullness which gives us victory of
our corruption, 1 John 5.4. it is the meditation and persuasion of what God
has done, of what he has bestowed already, of what he has provided to
bestow; this is that which causes us to depart from every evil way, 1 John 1,
2, 3. hence, Acts 15.9. hence faith without works is said to be dead, James
2.17. not that the life of faith comes from works, but because works are
second acts flowing from the life of faith, and faith is said to be made
perfect by works, James 2.22. not by essential perfection, as the effect is
perfected by the cause, but by a complemental or filling perfection, as the
cause is perfected or made complete in the production of its effect; as the tree
is made perfect in the bringing of fruit, man in the generation of his like: it
is the nature of the perfection and excellency of faith to be fruitful and
where this faith is not, the soul is like a barren woman, at best but like the
tree in the Gospel.

3. There is no love to God, his word, or people; it is faith which joyneth us
in wedlock with Christ, that breeds communion between us and God, that makes
his word sweet and savory, that makes us delight in them that excel in
virtue, therefore Gal. 5.6. not that the efficacy of faith depends upon
charity as the cause, ground, life, and being to faith, but that faith does put
forth and manifest its efficacy in the excitation and stirring up of love to
God, and his ways; so that where faith is not, there ^s no love.

4. There is no promiss of life, for all the promises of God are to us thorough
faith in Christ; 2 Cor. 1.20. Acts 2.39. without this we are aliens,
strangers, and enemies Ephesians. 2.12. and we have nothing to do with God's
Covenant, Psalm 50.16. we have nothing to do with the fruit growing within the
pale of this garden, nothing to do with the bread on this table, it belongs
not to the dogs but to the children.

5. There is no sweetness, no benefit, no consolation to be drawn from the
Ordinances of God: without faith they are as music to a deaf ear, as water to
a vessel whole mouth is stopped, as rain to the hard rock, it does not profit,
Heb. 4.2.

6. Because without faith there is no shield to defend us from the darts of
Satan, no fence to keep us from the wild boar of the forest, no weapon to
overcom the Prince of darkness, no stone to beat down this great Goliath: but
we are as a field without fence, a city without wells, a soldier without
armor, Ephesians. 6.16. 1 Pet. 5.9. without this we can do nothing; so that
unbelief separating us from Christ, filling our hearts with uncleanness,
disabling us to love God, excluding us from interest in God's promises, making
the Ordinances of God fruitless, exposing us to all Satan's suggestions,
leaving us to be led captive by him, at his will; it must needs follow, that
all unbelievers are hereby excluded from everlasting happiness.

Use. This presents before us the uncomfortable condition of all such as live
in unbelief, are not incorporated into Christ, in whom the nature and life of
true faith cannot be found, whose souls cleave not to God, as the heart of a
child to his father, as the heart of a wife cleaves to her husband, the heart
of one brother or friend to another, the heart of Jonathan to David, 1 Samuel
18.2. for this is the nature and property of faith, to cleav to God strongly,
affectionately, feelingly, with the full power of the soul, Joshua 23.6. Acts
11.23. 1 Cor. 6.17. to choose and rest upon the Testimonies of the Lord, Psalm.
119.30, 31. and such as do not in this manner believ, they shall never see
life; whatsoever great and glorious things are revealed, proffered, promised,
they shall never enjoy them; they are as fruit upon a high tree, which they
have no hand to reach; as water in a deep well, which they for want of a bucket
cannot draw; as the glorious sun to the blind, which for want of an eye they
cannot behold; to them there is no help of rest, no promiss of bliss: though
the light of God's face be better than life, the presence of Christ be
delighfull as the shadow of a great tree, though the Ordinances of God be as
marrow and fatness now, Psalm 63.5. Isa. 32.2. Cant. 2.3. Psalm. 65.5. and the
ensuing comforts of Gods people a thousand fold more glorious, yet unbelievers
shall never taste hereof; they are in bondage from whence is no freedom, in a
darkness where there shall never be no any sunrising, in a sickness out of
which they shall never see a recovery, for the Lord has denied them all good
things, as, 2 Kings 7.1, 2. so whatsoever Gods plenty or fullness be to others,
yet his hand shall be empty to unbelievers; all his gooness shall be to them
as a sealed letter which they shall never read, as a light under a bushel,
which they shall never see, Deuteronomy. 1.35. yea this shall be the least part of
their misery, to be exiles from God's face, shut as strangers out of God's
kingdom, this is a loss infinitely surpassing the loss of the whole world: yet
this is little to the damage of unbelief; for besides this, the wrath of God
abides on them. From whence learn,

Doctr. That unchangeable miseries and torments are the portion of all
unbelievers: he that had not a wedding garment, was not only excluded the
feast, but also cast into utter darkness: Matthew. 22.12, the servant which made
no use of his talent, had not only his talent took from him, but he was
besides cast out, where was weeping, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25.29. God
does not only punish unbelievers with a deprivation of all good, but also with
an imposition of all evil; he does not only leave them as chaff and tares
without the door, but he also burns them with unquenchable fire, Mat. 3.12.
Mat. 13.40. John 15.6. Therefore the Apostle says, that all that believe not
the truth shall be damned, 1 These. 2.12. the sentence of condemnation and
destruction shall be executed upon them: they shall not only be excluded from
drinking of the cup of Gods mercy, but they shall also be constrained to drink
up the dregs of the cup of Gods indignation and fury: and the sentence at the
last day will not be only from Gods gracious presence, but to everlasting
burnings, 2 These. 1.8, 9. this was the judgment befalling, the portion given to
unbelievers of old, Jude 5. and for this there is great reason.

Reas. 1. Because it robs God of his glory, takes from him the praise of
his truth, goodness, power, mercy, and constancy; which in effect, is to make
him no God at all, but an idol, Psalm. 78.41.

2. Because it is a great reproach to God: it makes God a liar, which is an
intolerable injury, 1 John 5.10. there is nothing more essential, nor more dear
to God, than his truth: he that believes not what God has spoken, esteems
of God but as of a vain and light man.

3. Because it breeds a base contempt of all the good things which God has
promised to us, it judges them to be but an empty vessel, a painted fire, a
withered tree, Psalm. 106.24, 25, 26.

4. Because hereby men do continue, live, and die in their sins; unbelief, like
a girdle, binds on sin as a suit of apparel, how much soever it be shaken and
weakened, yet infidelity will be to it as bands of brass and iron to the roots
of that tree, Dan. 4.15. there is neither removal nor remission, while we live
in unbelief, John 8.24. Job 20.11. and this is that whereof the Spirit of God
by the mouth of his Ministers does now convince the world, the obstinate, the
refractory, John 16.8, 9. 1. That they sin in not believing, embracing, and
entertaining Christ. 2. Of righteousness, that whereas they condemned him of
guilty, they are now convinced of his innocence. 3. Whereas they run on in sin,
as if there were no day of judgment, yet they are convinced in their
consciences, that Christ whom they despised shall be the Judge.

5. Because unbelief is the mother of all evil; hence it is that we run into
all manner of sin, even because we believe not his word.

6. Because unbelief does violate the whole doctrine of the Gospel; whereas
other sins are committed only against some part or parcel of the Word of God,
but this makes the whole Gospel of God to be of none effect.

Use. This therefore sets before us what a dangerous and fearful thing it is
to live in unbelief: such are every moment under the wrath of God, exposed to
everlasting destruction every hour; no assurance of freedom from everlasting
burnings, no, not for a month, without refuge, without stay, without comfort;
if God once begin to set himself against them, they are like a ship in the
stormy sea, without anchor, like a tree in the midst of a violent wind,
without roots, there is no safety, no deliverance, no salvation, Romans 2.8. Rev.
21.8.

2 Therefore let us all beware of an unbelieving heart; if this be removed, no
other sin shall destroy us; if this sway in our souls, there is no entrance
into Gods Kingdom: therefore take heed, let not this weed grow in the garden
of your hearts, let not this disease reign in your souls, let not this viper
find any resting place in your bosoms: this will disable the Ministry of the
Gospel to work upon us, it will make it as physic to a dead man, as music to
a deaf man; it will work no change, no repentance, no reconciliation, no life
of godliness; it will do little or nothing with us, Mark 6.5. it will disable
us to overcome any sin, to withstand any corruption; it will give every base
lust liberty to rule over us, Mark 9.18, 19. it will spoil us of the comforts
which the word affords, make us fear when we should rejoice, make us go
empty from the word of God, when we might depart replenished with sweet
refreshment, Luke 24.25. it will make us like Pharaoh's lean kine,
notwithstanding the fat which they eat, Genesis 41. notwithstanding all the means
which God uses, yet we shall be poor in knowledge, in love, in peace, in joy,
for it is faith makes rich in'grace: this fetches plenteously out of the
storehouse, James 2.5. it will make us weary of the ways of God, it will open
our ears to hearken to any seducing allurement, Heb. 3.12. it will give God
occasion to withdraw the means of salvation from us, Acts 19.9. to leave us to
our selves, to give us over to vile affections; and therefore strive against
it, as against a most mortal enemy; labor to be healed of it, as of a most
dangerous disease; keep from it, as from a swallowing gulf, a killing arrow, an
intangling snare; and strive by a lively faith to draw nearer to God, to build
more strongly upon God, to taste more sweetness in the promises of God, to
find more delight in your communion with God, and rest and peace everlasting
in the heaven, that not the wrath, but the love of God may abide upon you for
ever.

FINIS.

