A Patheticall PERSUASION To pray for Public PEACE: PROPOUNDED In a Sermon
preached in the Cathedral Church of Saint PAUL, October. 2. 1642.

By MATTHEW GRIFFITH, Rector of S. Mary Magdalens near Old-Fishstreet, LONDON.

(...) and Gravia Acarchia a^ ambitione ^o^ulum invasit, made irritae sunt
praesectorum hortationes; nemo studet auscultare, sed quisque imperare, ob
fastum ex inscitia natum. Nu^quid tac^bo igitur? Non ^ut; licet alii
suplantant, alii insultant la^so, alli plaudunt: Qui alit^r f^at? D^est
charitas; hin^ implacabiles and amari erratorum examinatores sedent, iniqui,
and malevoli ^ecte factorum Iud^ces, ut etiam brutis ^imus brutiores: Illa in
suum genus quiela, at nobis atrocissimum bellum erga domesticos. Nunquid tac^bo
igitur? Charitas non patitur. Pucri Babilonii non defu^rant officio, licet tres
tantum. Cum talem ^abemus ((...) protectorem, ac patronum, non silebo. D.
Basilius, de spiritu sancto, cap. 30. scil. ultimo.

The people through ambition are fallen into grievous Anarchy; Whence it comes
to pass that all the Exhortations of their Rulers are in vain: No man will
submit, but all would reign, being puffed up with pride flowing from ignorance.
Shall I then keep silence? I may not; Though some supplant, others insult over
me being down, and the rest applaud them that do insult. How can it be
otherwise, since Charity is decayed? Hence some sit no less implacable and
bitter examiners of things amiss, then unjust and malevolent Judges of things
well done; so that we are become more brutish then the very Beasts, for they
are quiet among themselves, but we wage cruel War against each other. Shall I
then hold my peace? Charity will not suffer me. The children in Babylon
discharged their duty, though they were but three. Having God for my Patron
and Protector, I Will not be silent, says Saint Basil in his last Chapter De
spiritu sancto.

London, Printed for Richard Royston. 1642.

To the Right Worshipful, The Citizens of LONDON, Grace and Peace.
Sirs,
AS this Mother City is our Jerusalem, and you are the free Denizens of the
same, who (by Gods blessing) have hitherto lived in Peace and Plenty; So, by
all kind of rights, this Sermon touching the Peace of Jerusalem, ought to be
dedicated to you; as being prepared for you, and preached to you, and that by
one of you; for I received my life at first (as being born) and my livelihood
ever since (as being beneficed) among you. And therefore, as in Reason, you
cannot but conceive that I wish you as well as my self (seeing my welfare
depends upon yours) So in Religion, you cannot but receive this patheticall
persuasion to pray for the public Peace; seeing it is pressed upon you by that
man according to Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 3.14.
David himself: the plain Song is his, mine is but the descant: The words are
his; mine but his Echo: and being such, you can expect from me but broken and
imperfect repetitions, and expressions, yet true, as the Echo always does.

The great Statesman (Tacitus) confesses that it is a most miserable thing to
fall into such times, in which men must both speak what they think not, and
also do what they approve not: and it appears by many men's words and actions,
that this is such a time as he complained of: But however others may temporize,
Psalm. 7 9.
yet I ingenuously profess, and he that is the searcher of the heart can bear
me witness, That in what I now present unto you, I have no sinister ends.
Neither hope of preferment, nor fear of punishment, shall force me to speak or
do any thing against the conviction of mine own conscience; which I shall ever
labor to keep rightly informed; as knowing (and I could wish it were generally
believed) That it is not enough to have conscience lead us, unless truth lead
our conscience.

Galat 4.78
I gladly grant that many of you are zealously affected, and it were well if
some of you were not a little infected by certain creatures of your own setting
up (I mean Lay-Levites, if I may so call them) who stretch your purses, and
straiten your consciences against the Doctrine, and Discipline established by
Law among us, by sowing the seeds of schism in the Church, Jude 8.1 Ioh. 4 1.
and sedition in the Commonwealth, under pretense of (I know not what)
extraordinary Illumination, and Revelations which those Dreamers dream of. But
it is S. John's advice, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God. And if you bring them to the Touchstone of Gods Word for
trial, you will find some of them whom you took for current, to be but
counterfeit: and like so many Glowworms, which though in the dark they sparkle
like a Diamond, yet in truth they are but Vermin.

It is hard to say, as the case now stands, whether some by their factious
activity, or others by their unseasonable taciturnity, do most mischief. Let
Politicians (having learnt of Paterculus, That Been facere odium est, male
facere gratia, nihil facere tutum est) count it good sleeping in a whole skin;
yet we that are Pastors, and to give an account for our flocks, must cry aloud,
and spare not, telling Judah of her sins, Heb 13.17. Isa. 58.1.
and Israel of her transgressions, Ezekiel. 3.^^
or God will require the blood of them that perish through our default, at our
hands. And for my particular, I profess my self ready (with the great Doctor
of the Gentiles) both to spend, 2 Cor. 12.15.
and to be spent for the Cause of Christ, and the peace of my Country, rather
then I will betray either, by conniving for company.

I need not tell you that some there be which kindle the coals of dissension
among us, and more make it all their work to blow them, being so unhappily
kindled: and it is much to be feared, That these kindle-coles will never give
over, until they have set all in a combustion, and consumed us, and themselves
in their own flame; which is a consideration worthy our prayers, and our tears,
if not our blood, to quench it. Every man in this case, should lend an helping
hand, and be as cordially forward to cure our distractions, as the devil, and
his Incendiaries have been to cause them. You do well in time of peace to
provide for War, so your provision be but for prevention: which Machiavil calls
is the life of Policy; yet it is so in us no further then it will stand with
piety. They only are safe and sure, Ephesians 6.11.
in cases doubtful, and times of danger, that put on the whole Armor of God,
having his Word for their Warrant in all their undertakings. Remember you are
Citizens properly, and not soldiers: Then take heed lest (if you put off your
Gowns, to take up Arms) you scatter in War, what in peace you gathered. God
knows that my solitary aim in this Sermon, is to direct you both in your
prayers, and practice; how to salve up our sores, and to heal our wounds: and
if in any thing that serves to so good an end, I seem too bold, or bitter, let
your grave experience make this Apology for me, viz. That a mortal wound must
be thoroughly searched, ere it can be soundly healed; and that no purgative
Medicine can bring health without some bitterness.

I would not wittingly give any man any manner of offense; and yet if (in the
faithful discharge of my duty) I should, I hope that they among you which are
moderate, will confess, That wholesome meat must not be altogether debarred
the table, though by accident it may possibly disgust some aguish Palate.

I will conclude with that of S. Paul to the Romans: To. 16.17.
Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions, contrary to the
Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such, serve
not our LORD JESUS CHRIST, but their own belly; and by good words, and fair
speeches, they deceive the hearts of the simple. For your obedience is come
abroad unto all men; I am glad therefore on your behalf: But yet I would have
you wise unto that which is good, and harmless concerning evil. And the God
of Peace shall bruise Satan under you feet shortly. The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.

So says, and so prays

Your Worships most affectionate servant in the Lord, MATTHEW: GRIFFITH.

A. Patheticall Persuasion to pray for Publike-Peace.
PSALM 122.6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.


THough the whole Scripture be given by divine inspiration, yet this book of
Psalms seems to challenge some kind of privilege and pre-eminence; 2 Timothy
9.16.
because the Penman hereof was not only a King, and a Prophet, 1 Samuel 13.14.
but a man according to GODS heart, and a lively figure of Christ: yea he was
(says Euthymius) Primiregis ^or, lingua, and calamus; The heart, tongue, and
pen of the king of Kings, and lord of Lords. Apoc 17.14.


King Alfred (whom our English Chronicle so much extolls) was wont to have the
PSALTER always with him; as Saint Hierome advised his Friend Rusticus, to make
it his Vade-mecum. John Cosmus (that holy Bishop of Constantinople) being
forced to fly from that City, took no part of his treasures with him, save
David's Psalms; which to him were both pro, and prae divitiis. Our blessed Lord
and his Apostles cite no less then Sixty Testimonies out of this book; which
is more frequently read and sung, both in the Jewish Synagogues, and also in
our Christian Congregations, then any other parcel of holy Writ: Yea the Turks
themselves swear as solemnly by the Psalms of David, as by Mahomets Alcoran.

And whereas all other parts of Scripture have their several bounds and limits
(as it were) some of them consisting chiefly of matter of Prophecy, others of
History, some serving for instruction, some for reprehension, some for
consolation; the short is, that this book of Psalms comprehends all; being
indeed a common Storehouse of good things, out of which all persons (of what
calling or condition soever) may fit and furnish themselves according to their
exigents and occasions. For which very reason Saint Basil calls this book a
divine Treasury; Saint Agustine styles it, a spiriituall Library; Saint Ambrose
terms it, a Map of holy Writ; Saint Chrysostom calls it a Panoply, or whole
Armor; Gregory the great held it the Register of the whole Scripture; and I
may truly say of it, what S. Paul does of the whole, 2 Timothy 3.^6.
that it is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness.

And, as for this particular Psalm, (of which my Text is a considerable part)
it is the general consent (in a manner) of all Divines, That it was composed,
and compiled by the sweet-Singer of Israel, upon occasion of the bringing of
the Ark into Jerusalem; and applied, and left for the use of the Church, that
so often as the Israelites should appear before the Lord at their solemn feasts,
it might be sung in public; the better to stir them up to a just gratulation,
and thanksgiving to God, for two extraordinary Benefits, whereof the one was
the establishing of the Church, and Religion in the City of David; the other
was the stating of the Kingdom, and succession upon the house of David.

And to the end that both the Church of God, and the Religion thereof; and eke
the Kingdom of David, and the succession thereof, might the better flourish,
and continue; The Psalmist (in these words of my Text) combines them together,
calling both by one name, viz. Jerusalem; and calling upon us (as one man, with
one mind, and mouth) to pray for the peace of this Jerusalem:

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

In which words of the princely Prophet, we may observe three considerable
parts, viz.

First, what it is whereunto he exhorts us; viz. Prayer: O pray.

Secondly, for what it is he thus exhorts us to pray; viz. for Peace: O pray
for peace.

Thirdly, for whose peace it is that we are thus exhorted to pray; viz. for the
peace of Jerusalem: O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

The first, viz. Prayer, is the only ordinary means by which we do obtain of
God, all such good things as we stand in need of: for what Saint Paul speaks of
godliness (in the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle to Timothy) Pietas ad
omnia utilis, 1 Timothy 4 8.
is no less true of Prayer; This is profitable to all things; having both bona
proposita, and eke bona reposita, the promises of this life, and of that which
is to come. And therefore, O pray.

The second, viz. Peace, is the principal pillar both of Church and
Commonwealth, and (by an usual Hebraism) it signifies all happiness, and
perfection; and therefore O pray for Peace.

Gal. 4.26. Exodus 20.
The third, viz. Jerusalem is from above, it is the mother of us all: And as
children are bound in duty to pray for, and procure their Natural mothers
good; so is each true child of God bound by a stronger tie, to wish, and work
the welfare of his holy Mother, The Church: and therefore, O pray for the Peace
of Jerusalem.

The first word in the Text, is Pray: This is the Act, to which we are here
exhorted; and it sets forth unto us the necessity of Prayer: O pray.

The second word is Peace: This is the Object of our Prayers; and it sets forth
unto us the commodity of Peace: O pray for Peace.

The third, and last word (in the Text) is Jerusalem: This is the Subject,
whose peace and prosperity we are all to pray for; and it insinuates unto us,
The Unity and Charity of the Church; which (as the Heathen spoke of the
Country) omnes omnium charitates in se complectitur.

Then since Jerusalem is so highly to be respected; and Peace is a blessing so
generally desired; and Prayer is a duty so necessary to be used; Oh let the
Charity of the Church, and the commodity of Peace, and the necessity of Prayer,
invite you all to put in practice, what the Psalmist here so fervently
presses; O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Briefly, since Jerusalem is maintained by Peace, and Peace is obtained of God
by Prayer, Oh let us constantly, and conscionably use the means, that we may
the better come to the end; and accordingly let us all pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem. Of these three Parts in this Order; and I begin with the first, viz.
The Act, or Duty, which at this time is too too much neglected, yet in the
Text, it is the main thing to which we are exhorted, and that is prayer: O pray.

And for my more Methodicall proceeding herein, be pleased to observe both the
matter of this Duty, and also the manner of the same. The matter is expressed,
viz. Prayer; in handling whereof, I will touch only these three things, viz.
The dignity, necessity, and efficacy of prayer.

The manner is implied; and I shall show that the Psalmist here insinuates,
that if you will pray as you are here exhorted, then you must do it first
generaliter, secondly ferventer; thirdly, presenter; fourthly, perseveranter;
lastly, practice; that is, you must pray generally, fervently, presently,
perseveringly, and practically. A word of each, and first of the matter of this
duty, and therein of the dignity of prayer, which (in 141 Psalm.) is called a
sacrifice, and that of incense; Let my prayer come before thee as incense, and
the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice: The sacrifice of incense
was well pleasing to God under the law, and therefore it was called the sweet
incense (in the 4th chap. of Numbers,) And there was appointed an alter of gold
for it (in the 40th chap. of Exodus) and this is moralized in prayer, (in the
8th chapter of the Revelation) where we read that an Angel came, and stood
at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints, upon the
golden altar which was before the throne. Mark how for the sweet incense of
prayer, there was provided a golden Censer, and a golden Altar, and an Angel
to offer it. What greater honor can a mortal man ( who is but dust and ashes,
as Abraham himself acknowledges) attain unto, Genesis 18 27
then to be admitted to friendly and familiar conference even with God
himself? and yet this is obtianed by prayer, which is defined by some, to be
an holy colloquy, or dialogue between God, and a devout soul.

Yea, Saint Chysostome terms prayer, Animam animae, The soul of a christian
soul; for as the soul is the most essential part of a man: so is prayer of a
Christian. And as the reasonable soul puts a difference between a man, and a
brute-beast, so does prayer between a true Christian, and a Heathen.

Saint Basil fitly resembles prayer to a chain of gold, wherewith the ear of
God himself is, as it were, tied to the tongue of man; for whereas Gods Seat is
in Heaven, whence all grace and goodness distills; and man's upon earth, which
is but a sink of sin, and valley of tears: There is no other chain to linck God
and man together, save only this of prayer.

And that this combines them, it is plain; for as a Christian (in the 9 Chapter
of the Acts) is described by this Periphrasis, Acts 9.27.
That he calls upon the Name of the Lord: so God himself (in the 65 Psalm) is
described by another Aequivalent unto it, Psalm. 65 2.
for he is styled, The hearer of prayers; O thou that art the hearer of
prayers, to thee shall all flesh come. And indeed to whom should we go, save
only to him who can both hear and help us? The Saints departed cannot hear us
(says Job) the Angels cannot help us. Job 5.1.
Then that (with the Papists, in their blind devotions) we pray not in vain;
let us address our selves only to God, who is the hearer of prayers. Let us
begin (as our Church does at Almighty and most merciful Father; and let us
conclude all our prayers in the name of Jesus Christ, our only Lord and
Savior: and then no doubt he will make good what he has promised. Ioh 16.23.
Quaecunque petieritis, etc. What ever you ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you.

Or, if we shall compare the Kingdom of heaven to a palace, or princely
mansion house, John 14.2.
(as our Savior does in the 14th chapter of Saint John) then is Christ
himself the only ready way conducting to this palace; and so he calls
himself (in the 6th verse of that chapter,) where he says, Ego sum via, I am
the way. And as Christ is the right way that leads to life; John. 14 6.
so faith (apprehending him) is, as it were, the door that opens to this way;
and it is so called in the 14th chapter of the Acts, Ostium fidel, Acts. 14.27.
the door of faith. And as faith is the door, so the word of God, and the
knowledge of the same, is as it were the key that opens this door, and it is
so called in the 11th chapter of Saint Luke, Clavis Scientiae, the key of
knowledge. And as knowledge is the key, Luke 11.^2
so is prayer, as it were, the ring, or hammer, wherewith we knock; the very
term is used in the 7th chapter of Saint Matthew, where our Savior (exhorting
unto prayer) says, Matthew. 7.7
Pulsate, knock, and it shall be opened.

Then (in the name of God) let us all take this hammer of prayer in the text,
and therewith let us knock, and call upon God; that he would be pleased with
the key of knowledge, to open unto us the door of faith: that so we may have
entrance by the way of life, into the palace and paradise of heaven.

But (leaving the consideration of the dignity of prayer) I come now to touch
the necessity of the same.

And this is such, that whereas Darius (in the 6th chap. of Daniel) made an
edict that no man for the space of thirty days should make any petition to
God, or man, save to the King only: Dan 6 7.
yet the prophet Daniel chose rather to be cast into the lions den, then to
forbear so long the so necessary exercise of prayer. The simple necessity
whereof will soon appear, if you will but take notice.

First, of our manifold wants, both of outward blessings, and eke of inward
graces.

Secondly, of our manifold evils, both of sin, and punishment.

Thirdly, of our manifold miseries; flowing both from temptation, nnd
tribulation.

Fourthly of our manifold dangers* for what Saint Paul speaks of himself (in
the 11th chapter of the second epistle to the Corinthians) is true of us all, 2
Cor. 11.
that we are in perils of robbers, in perils of waters, in perils by our
own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils
in the wilderness, in perils on the sea, in perils among false brethren,
etc. And since we are in the midst of so many perils: oh, what need we have to
fall to our prayers!

Psalm. 36.9.
The Prophet David (in the 36th Psalm) speaking to God, says, A pud te est
fons vitae, with thee is the well of life. And if (with the Psalmist) we shall
liken Gods mercy to a well or fountain, then may prayer be resembled to a
bucket wherewith the water of this living fountain must be drawn up: And as
the woman of Samaria (in the 4th chapter; of Saint John) said to our Savior in
another case, John 4.11.
The well is deep, and thou have nothing to draw with, etc. So may I truly say
in this, the fountain of Gods grace is unsearchably deep, and you have nothing
wherewithal to draw thence the least temporal, corporal, or spiritual
blessing, save only this bucket of prayer.

James 1.5.
For, what Saint James speaks of saving wisdom in particular, if any man lack
wisdom let him ask it of God in prayer, is undoubtedly true of all good
things whatsoever; (for they all descend from the Father of lights) and
therefore if any of you lack any of these, you must ask it of God in prayer.
You must come to God in faith, as to an ever-running and overrunning fountain
of inexhaustible goodness, and you must use prayer, as a conduit-pype to
convey the sweet and saving streams thereof unto your selves.

Apoc. ^.6.
And if Saint John (in the 4th chapter of the Apocalypse) rightly compare this
world to the sea; then may I with Saint Chrysostom) nor less aptly liken
prayer, (Velis and remis) to the sails, and oars, wherewith we must be wasted
through this turbulent sea to the haven of happiness. And as Mariners, while
they be at Sea, do ply their Sayls and Oars hard, that so they may arrive at
the Harbor where they would be: Even so needs must we apply our selves close
to our prayers, if ever we mean to obtain from God this blessed Peace in the
Text. And so I pass from the Necessity, to speak somewhat of the Efficacy of
Prayer.

Many excellent things are spoken in Scripture, to set forth the power of
Prayer; as that it both shuts and opens Heaven: Iam. 5.16 17.
For Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are (says S. James) and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth for the
space of three years, and Six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave
rain, etc. Yea, prayer commands the whole host of Heaven; for at Joshuah's
prayer the Sun stood still in Gibeon, Ios. 10.12.
and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon. Prayer has stayed the fury of fire,
Dan. 3.27. 2 King. 6.6
and made Iron swim upon the water. Prayer has made the barren womb fruitful;
as in the first Chapter of Saint Luke, Zachary thy prayer is heard, and thy
wife Elizabeth shall conceive, and bear a son. Luke 1.13.
Prayer cures the sickness of the body, as in the fifth Chapter of S. James, Is
any man sick? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them Pray for
him, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick. Iam. 5.14.
And Prayer cures the sin of the soul, too: as of David, the Publican, ^he
Thief upon the Cross, and diverse others, who as soon as they prayed, were
pardoned.

Not to trouble you with a world of other Instances, the singular power of
prayer may be discovered to the full, if you will ascend but these three degrees:

First, that which subdues all flesh living, viz. Death, 1. Cor. 15.27.
yields notwithstanding to the force of prayer; as we read of the Shunamites
child, Lazarus, the widows son of Sarepta, the Rulers daughter, and some
others; who by the virtue of prayer have been raised from death, and restored
again to life.

Heb. 2.14.
Secondly, the Devil, who (in the 2. Chapter to the Hebrews) is said to have
the power of death, is notwithstanding vanquished sometimes by the power of
prayer, Mat. 37.21
as in the 17 Chapter of Saint Matthew, where our Savior says expressly, This
kind of devils go not out save by prayer and fasting: Not by fasting alone,
(as the Papists fondly imagine, and therefore make it a meritorious work) for
fasting without prayer, is but an image of holiness, and a picture of hunger;
but it is prayer quickened with fasting that must do it.

Thirdly and lastly, God himself (who has power over death and the devil) is,
after a sort, overcome by prayer, else why does he call out to Moses, (in the
32 Chapter of Exodus) to let him alone? It seems that the fervent prayer of
Moses at that time, Exo. 32.10
did (not only vincere, but vincire) after a manner bind Gods hands, and so
hinder him from pouring the Vials of his wrath upon the people. Genesis 32 24
And (in the 32 Chapter of Genesis) the Patriarch Jacob, by wrestling,
prevailed against an Angel; which the Prophet Hoshea expounds of the power of
prayer: for, it is absurd to think, Hosh. 12.4
that by bodily strength Jacob could prevail against an Angel; but the truth is
(as the Prophet speaks) By prayers, and tears, he had power over the Angel, and
was therefore called Israel. And S. Paul alluding thereunto (in the 15 Chap. to
the Romans) uses the very phrase, Rom 15.30
(...) (Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
the love of the spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to
God.) He would have the wrestle (for so the word in the Original properly
signifies) with God by prayer, and by wrestling to overcome him. It is very
much that a true Christian is able to do in this kind, if he would stir up the
grace of God in him, and put forth his strength. It is our own fault that we
pray not as we ought, if we prevail not with God, as our forefathers have done.
That then we may now obtain this peace in the Text. Oh let us all bend and
buckle our selves to our prayers; and herein let us wrestle with God (as Jacob
did) and not leave him, until he leave a blessing behind him, even this
blessed peace, which we are all here exhorted to pray for.

And thus (having touched the Dignity, Necessity, and Efficacy of Prayer) I
have done with the matter of this duty; I come now to acquaint you with the
manner of the same. In which (as I said before) there be five circumstances
employed; whereof

The first is, that this your prayer must be general; for the Verb is here in
the plural Number, Expetite; not, pray thou; but, pray ye: It is an indefinite
expression, and an indefinite proposition (say Logicians) is aequipollent to an
universal. Then general it must be; and that in regard both of persons,
times, and places: for all persons, at all times, and in all places, must pray
as they be here exhorted.

First, I say this duty belongs to all persons; for though all cannot fast, or
give alms, or weep, or watch, or bear arms, or fight, etc. yet all may pray:
Though thou be as poor as Lazarus, as impotent as Mephibosheth, Luke 16 20 2 Samuel 4 4. Mar. 10 46 Luke 1.20.
as blind as Bartimeus, as dumb as Zachary; yet thou may pray; and thou
must pray in charity: for though thou must have Faith for thy self, and hence
thou say, I believe in God; yet must thou pray for others also; and
therefore when we pray, our Lord teaches us to say, Our Father, etc. And
whilst every one prays for the whole, the whole prays for every one.

Secondly, it is a duty seasonable at all times; for whether it be a time of
mirth, or mourning; health, or sickness; prosperity, or affliction; peace, or
war; early, or late, or at noone-tide, prayer never comes amiss; so it be
applied to the opportunity; as our Church prescribes in the Lyturgy; where we
have set prayers for all occasions.

Thirdly, this is a duty proper for all places; and for this cause Saint Paul
wills us every where to pray (in the 2. Chapter of the first Epistle to
Timothy. 3 Tim. 2.8
Be a man at home or abroad; in the City, or Country; in his family, or in the
Temple, he may pray to good purpose. For as the Prophet Daniel prayed three
times a day privately in his house: Dan. 6.10.
so S. Peter, Acts 3.1.
and Saint John went up together into the Temple at the hour of prayer. And
though prayer be good in any place, yet there is a more special blessing
promised to the public prayers of the Church. Vis unita fortior. When all
meet together in the beauty of holiness; and where there is a general
consent, the music must needs be sweet. Many instruments make the fuller
consort. God can hardly deny the harmonious prayers of a devout multitude.

Then much to blame are such Sectaries as seldom, or never come to the public
prayers appointed by the Church, no, not upon the Lords own day (and that, by
the way shows that it is not the word, but the man that they come to hear) and
therein these precisians practice that popish position pressed by Stapleton (in
the 10 of his Quodlibets) Non quid loquitur, sed quis, a bono Catholico est
atte^dendu^? when though they will flock to such preachers as they like, yet
they fly the Common Prayers, as a thing which they loath. But I would to God
that they would take notice that this their peevishness and recusancy, is not
only punishable by censures ecclesiastical and civil, but also that herein
they both neglect the right sanctification of the Sabbath: (public prayer
being a principal duty of this day, and a special means appointed by God for
the sanctifying of the same) And also forget what our Savior says (in the 21.
Chapter of Saint Matthew) My house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye
have made it a den of thieves. Mat. 21.13
Which is thus far true in all professed adversaries of public prayer; that
they do what in them lies to steal this special part of Gods worship, and
service, quite out of his house.

The second circumstance implied in the manner, is that you must pray
fervently; and this is insinuated in this particle, O! O pray etc. This (O) is
sometimes an interjection of sorrowing, ^ Sa^ 8.13
as wheu King David (bewayling the untimely death of his son Absalom in the
18. Chapter of the 2. of Samuel) cried out, O Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom, would to God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son.

But here this (O) is an adverbe of wishing, and exhorting; and it is added,
and used, the better to press and persuade you to pray with zeal, and ardency
of affection.

Martin Luther calls prayer the gunshot of the soul; and why so? but to show
that (like a gunne) it will not off without fire. The prayer of a righteous man
prevails much (says Saint James) if it be fervent. Mark the condition; Iam.
5.16.
if it be fervent; for it prevails not further then it pierces, and it
pierces not at all without fire. A bullet (as you know) flies no further then
it is driven by the strength of the powder: nor will your prayers pierce the
clouds, unless they be sent up with a powder; they must be fervent. And
fervent they will not be, unless they flow from the sense of our spiritual
wants, and from a broken, and bleeding heart. There is no music sounds so
sweet in Gods ears, as that which is made on broken instruments; for a broken
heart, and a contrite spirit (says David in the 51 Psalm,) Thou O Lord, wilt
not despise. Non musica cordula, sed cor, non vox, sed votum. Whosoever then
does pray with hope to be heard graciously, he must see that he pray not more
magis, quam amore; he must not pray faintly, but fervently? even with a flaming
affection ascending up to God in the hearty groans, sighs, and strong desires
of his soul, and spirit.

The third thing employed in the manner, is that you must pray forthwith; The
verb in the text is in the Present Tence; and so denotes that you must fall
presently to your prayers. Semper nocuit differ paratis, Delay may breed
danger. Now is the day of salvation (says the Apostle) now is the acceptable
time; And, hoc nunc nullum habet crastinum, (says Saint Augustine.) And as
Saint Paul stirs up the Romans to arise from sleep, Romans 13.^1.
by putting them in mind of the season, (in the 13. to the Romans:) so may I
justly excite and incite you to fall close to your prayers for public peace,
upon the consideration of this very season.

For if we look well about us, we shall find that we never had more cause to
pray then at this present; when as the public peace is secretly undermined by
false brethren at home, and openly impugned by the Irish Rebels abroad: There
the superstitious Papist seeking to supplant; and here the irreligious Atheist
laboring (with might in his hand, and malice in his heart) utterly to root it
out.

And therefore as the skillful Pilot at sea, seeing a slaw, or a storm a
coming, presently puts into some harbor where he may be safe, until the
danger be over: So Saint James sends us all to prayer, as the only sure haven
in time of distress, where he says, (...). Is any man afflicted? (...); let
him pray: as if he had said, Iam. 5.13.
is any man in any manner of affliction? why the sole remedy of all our
miseries, and mischiefs, is prayer?

Then if we now find that our peace is declining, and our enemies increasing,
who laugh at our distraction, labor our destruction, crying with them in the
71. Psalm, Psalm. 71.1^
Ha, ha, so would we have it, prosecute, and take them, God has forsaken them.

If we see ( Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek,) a legion of Sectaries (like unto
those other Locusts that came out of the bottomless pit) swarming at this day
among us, Apoc. 9.3.
and joining purse and forces, heads and hands against us, that so they may
bring upon us a sudden, fearful, and irreparable devastation, desolation.

Yea, if our own sins abounding at this day, (and yet unrepented off; and
which is worse, justified; and worse then that, gloried in,) do at this time
threaten some heavy judgment ready to fall upon us from the hands of men by
the sword; whom neither pestilence, nor famine, could win to turn from our
irreverence, profaneness, sacrilege, schism, sedition, and other reigning
lusts, to him.

Yet let us now, (now I say, whilst we have time to repent, and opportunity to
amend) hasten to this harbor of prayer, in the text; beseeching God in mercy to
divert this deserved judgment, and to continue his most gracious protection,
and our most sweet and blessed peace unto us.

The fourth thing employed in the manner, is that you must pray with constancy,
and perseverance; for the verb in the text (being of the present tense)
denotes Actum continuum, a continued Act; as the Schoolmen observe. Iud. ^ 30.
There be many (says Saint Ambrose) that make preces Bethulianas, their
prayers are but a composition for certain days: If God relieve them not at a
beck, and grant not what they pray for at the instant, then they grow
impatient, and will pray no longer. This is the sin which the Psalmist objects
against the Israelites, viz. That they tempted God, and limited the Holy one of
Israel; Psalm. 78.41
where note, that he who limits God, is said to tempt him. Then stint him not
to thy time, who is the Lord of times and seasons: (Though he hear not ad
voluntatem, yet happily he does ad sanitatem.) But pray continually, as Saint
Paul injoynes (in the 5. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Thessalonians)
which words of the Apostle must not be understood in so rigid an acception, as
if a true Christian should do nothing but pray: (as the Euchites held; and
whose heresy Saint Augustine does worthily confute, and condemn:) but Saint
Paul must be understood, either (secundum effectum orationis) according to the
effect of prayer, which commonly is an holy life; and qui been vivit, semper
orat. He that lives christianly, prays continually. The constant practice of
piety is a continual prayer.

Luke 18.1
Or he must be understood of perseverance in prayer: as (in the 18. Chapter of
Saint Luke) we read that our Savior propounded two parables, the one, of an
unjust Judge; the other, of an importunate widow, thereby teaching us to pray
always: that is, not only to pray at certain set hours; or only when some
special occasion is offered: but not to give over praying, until God has
heard us graciously, and answered us in mercy.

And to do this, and thus, we are both exhorted and encouraged. First, I say,
we are hereunto exhorted, and that both in the general (as in the 6. Chapter
to the Galathians) Be not weary of well doing. And also in spetiall ^as in the
62. of Esaias; Galat. 6. Isa 62.7.
keep not silence, and give the Lord no rest till he establish thee. And we are
also hereunto encouraged by many memorable instances and examples, Ma^^ Ma^^
28.^^.
as of blind Bartimeus, who gave not over calling and crying for mercy to the
son of David, till he restored him his sight. And the Canaanitish woman, which
notwithstanding so many repulses, yet continued her devotions till she obtained
her desires.

The fifth and last thing employed in the manner, is, that you must pray
practically; according to the rule of the Rabins, Verbs of sense imply action.
Your prayer must not only be Optative, but Operative. The word in the original
is indeed very Emphaticall that way; and by diverse expositours rendered
diversely: For

Some translate it, Quaerite pacem; Seek peace; and seek it not lazily, and at
leisure, but as our Savior exhorts us in the like case Quaerite primum, Seek
it in the first place; Mat. 6.^3.
even first in your intentions before other things; and first in your
affections above other things. It must be sought first both tempore et honor,
as St. Ambrose speaks. Others render it interrogate pacem; Inquire for peace:
Let it be the main interrogatory. The Churches cause stand's or fal's upon this
issue; and therefore see you put it home.

Arias Montanus has it, Postulate pacem; Require peace; If you have any
interest in man, or power with God, extend it this way.

Junius and Uremelius read it, Expet^te p^cem, desire peace; and see you desire
it ex intimis precordiis, from the very bottom of your hearts: For as this
peace (under God) is your Summum bonum, the only height of your happiness, so
must it be your Summum vo^um, The very depth of your desires.

Rhemigius out of the Septuagint, and St Hierome, render it Rogate pacem; pray
for, and procure peace: and these you must do even as a beggar (forced by
extreme necessity) sues for an alms, with much earnestnes, and importunity.
The Sum is, you must all diligently and devoutly seek, and inquire, and
require, and desire, and humbly pray for, and studiously procure this peace in
the text. For Orati^ sine oper^ nihil est, says S Chrysostom. Prayer without
practice is nothing; and nothing worth. And it is a good rule in Divinity, Pro
ill^s laborandum, pr^ quibis orandum. We must labor for those things with our
hands, which we pray for with all our hearts; and we must strive against those
evils which we pray against.

For as it were extreme folly for a man that is fallen unawares into a pit, or
snare, to lie still, crying God help, Lord help, if he did not withal bestir
himself, seeking by all possible means to get up, and to get out: So is it not
much better to say. God send us peace, as it is the manner of some dow-bak'd men
among us now adays, (who like so many Cymballs sound out of their emptiness;
and pray Ex usu magis quam ex sensu; more for fashion then out of feeling)
unless we do in our several places, and callings, to the very utmost of our
power pursue it, and labor to procure it.

I say we must all (both Prince and People, Magistrate and Minister; Nobility
and Comminalty; Clergy and Laity) even all, and every of us from the highest to
the lowest (laying all private ends, and oblique respects aside) must endeavor
to procure and preserve the public peace, and to prevent all Schism,
Sedition Rebellion, and other notorious impediments of the same.

And yet forasmuch as all our endeavors are to little purpose, unless he that
is the keeper of Israel, Psa. 127.1.
do by his special providence, watch over us for our good; therefore when we
have done all we can, Ios. 20.2.
we must even fall to our prayers again, as our only Sanctuary, and City of
refuge.

And thus (commending this duty to your Christian practice) I pass from the
Act, to the Object; or the thing which you are here exhorted to pray for; and
this is, Peace; O pray for peace, etc.

Peace (in the original) comes of a word which betokens perfection; but all
creatures by a certain natural instinct desire their own perfection; (as the
Philosopher observes) and consequently all men should pray for peace.

Gregory Nyssen, says, Pacis and res, and nomen dulce est. Both the name and
nature of peace is sweet; and not without reason; for in the fourth Chapter to
the Philippians, it is called, Phil. 4 7.
The peace of God.

And in the 13th Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2 Co 13.11
God is styled, The God of peace.

And in the 2d Chapter to the Ephesians, Peace is God himself; for he is our
peace, Ephe. 2.14
says the Apostle.

Neither is there any thing which the glorious Angels at our Saviors birth,
did more gladly congratulate unto men, when they carolde in that their
doxology, Luke 2.14
Glory be to God on high, On earth peace. Or which Christ himself (a little
before his death) did more carefully bequeath in his last will and testament,
John ^4.27.
then peace. Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto you, etc. And thence
St Augustine (in the 2^th Chapter of his third Book de verbis Domini) infers
necessarily, Non pot^rit ad Domini ^aereditatem pervenire, qui testamentum
noluerit observare. Non poterit concordiam habere cum Christo, qui discors
volu^rit esse cum Christiano. That is, He cannot come to the inheritance of our
Lord, who will not keep his testament: He cannot have concord with Christ, The
Head; who will needs be at discord with Christians, his members.

And (in his 19th Book de Civitate Dei) he says, Pax est Serenitas mentis,
etc. Peace is the minds serenity; the hearts tranquillity; the bond of amity;
and the consort of charity. The Sum is, Peace is the confluence of all good
things: Genesis 43 23.(...)
and for this cause the Jews were wont when they wished a man well, to salute
him thus, Peace be unto you: for as all mischiefs and miseries are brought in
by war: so do all health and happiness attend upon peace. And it is therefore
styled vinculum pacis (in the fourth Chapter to the Ephesians) The bond of
peace; To insinuate unto us, Ephesians. 4.3
that if all Gods blessings were to be bound up in one bundle, peace must be
the bond to tie and keep them together: for what were riches, honor, pleasure,
and whatever else the wordling makes his Idol, without peace? Esth. 5.13.
I may truly say of these (as Haman did in another case, all these things
avail us nothing without peace.

This bond of peace among the Jews was sometimes broken; and then they were at
a great loss for all earthly comforts and contentments; they were (like men in
the forlorn hope) distorted, and distracted; not knowing which way to turn
themselves. And in such an exigent do but think, or rather indeed you cannot
think, how beautiful the feet of him would have been that had brought the glad
tidings of peace: Isa 52 7.
for it put the Prophet Isaiah himself to a Quam speciosi pedes? etc. How
beautiful are the feet? etc. Genesis 8.11
As if the beauty and that of the very feet of such a one as (with Noah's Dove)
comes with the Olive branch of peace in his mouth, were so exceeding
beautiful, that it lay not in the power of a Prophet immediately inspired by
God himself, to say, how beautiful they are. And (to the self same effect, and
with no less elegancy) the sweet singer of Israel warbles forth his Ecce quam
bonum, et quam jucundum? etc. Behold how good, Psalm. 133.1
and pleasant a thing it is to see brethren dwell together in unity! Mark, he
begins with an Ecce, Behold, which is a note of singular attention, and
admiration; and he goes on with a Quambonum, etc. He propounds it
comparatively, and by way of interrogation, Behold, how good and pleasant a
thing it is? etc. As if he had said, The cohabitation of neighbors in peace
and unity, is so good and pleasant a thing indeed, that no man in words is
fully able to express it.

But however all peace be pleasant (and more then pleasant, pleasant in the
superlative degree) yet let me tell you (out of the ancient fathers, and the
schoolmen) that all peace is not good; for they usually distinguish it into
good and evil peace; and each is subdistinguished into a threefold peace. For
the evil peace (say they) is Pax inordinata, simulata, inquinata.

The first branch of bad peace, is that they term an inordinate and
preposterous peace; viz, When the superior faculty of the soul is subjugated
by, and subject unto the inferior; when Reason gives way to Sense and
sensuallity, and does acquiesse in such an inordinate subjection. But the truth
is, this is not peace properly so called; but Stupidity.

And yet for all this, the sensual Securitan applaudes himself in the vain
conceit of his own peace. He quarrels not with himself, for he denies himself
nothing. And God seems not to quarrel with him, who (being given over to a
reprobate sense) runs into all excess of riot, Rom 1.28. ^ Pet. 4.4
without the least check of a chiding conscience, or the sensible frown of an
angry Judge. Here Is Altum silentium; All peace! and yet indeed here is no peace
at all: for he is wicked; and there is no peace (says my God) to the wicked.
Which is, Isa. 57.21
as if he had said, He has neither external peace with the creatures, which
are all up in Arms against him that is wicked; nor internal peace with his own
conscience, which (so long as he lies in mortal sin unrepented of) is ever
(like the singer on the wall to Belshazzar) writing bitter things against him;
Dan. 5.5.
nor yet eternal peace with his Creator, Ier. 25.31.
who (as the Prophet speaks) has a controversy against him; and consequently
he has no peace; that is, he has no sound and solid peace.

A show of peace I grant he has; 2 Kin. 9.22
but as Iehu said to Ieram, What peace? I Will tell you: Have you heard a dying
man profess that he felt no pain? Such is ^his inordinate peace.

The second branch of evil peace is, that which they term a feigned and
dissembled peace; an exchange of complements; the ordinary court holy water of
our tim^s: in which some men (by way of salutation) say to their enemy, God
save you; when they wish with all their hearts, that the Devil had him. These
speak peace to their neighbor (says the Psalmist) when there is war in their
hearts; Psalm. 28.3.
and their words are soft as butter, when their thoughts are sharp as swords.
They have the smooth voice of Jacob, but the rough hands of Esau. And like
those beasts (in the first Chapter of Ezekiel) that had wings, and hands under
their wings, Genesis 27.2 Ezeck. 1.8.
these often obscure the hands of extreme oppression, under the wings of
extraordinary profession. Else why should the Prophet cry out, Psalm. 141.5
O let not their balm break my head, but that he plainly saw that these,
pretenders to peace (like so many blessing witches which commonly do most hurt)
do turn the very remedy into a disease; and sometimes make a sore with that
which should have salv'd it? Vngunt and pungunt, says St. Hierome. Judas like,
they betray with a kiss. And (like those other Serpents which Solinus writes
of) they would as many as they wind into their embraces: Mat. 26.49
Yea they sometimes wound them even unto death; for the Psalmist tells us, Psa.
140.3.
that the poison of Aspes is under their lips. Aspi^ ab aspergendo dicitur,
says Isydore Hispalensis. For though primo morsu dulciter tuillat; Yet ere
long it disperseth the poison thorough the veins to the heart: and herein you
may discern the nature of this dissembled peace; which by Joab of old, and too
many Iudasses of late, is made to serve as a staulking horse to prodition and
perdition.

The last branch of evil peace, is called by the schoolmen Pa^inquinata; which
word (as some Critics note) signifies both dishonest, and dishonorable; and
so denotes that there is such a peace in the world as is both dishonest in the
kind, and also dishonorable to the persons that so consederate; as St.
Augustine shows, where he says, ( Nam and latrones ipsi, etc.) That thieves
themselves (to the end they may more strongly invade, and safely infest poor
harmless travelers) do make some league of peace among themselves. Et qui
per seditionem, etc. As the same learned Father goes on, such as by sed^o^
sever themselves from the rest that are loyal Subjects, can never actuate
their pernicious intendments, unless they glue themselves to their
copes-mates, with the gum of some colorable peace.

See a sad instance hereof in that dishonest and dishonorable combination of
more then forty Jews, Act. 23 12.
which bound themselves by oath neither to eat nor drink until they killed St.
Paul. And of this nature was the compact between Simeon and Levi, Gen 49 5.
whom good old Jacob does therefore style fratres in malo; Not simply brethren,
but with this brand, Brethren in evil. Such was that in Catilines conspiracy;
The French Massacre; and the Gunpowder treason; When the Romish Priests and
Jesuited faction made a solemn vow, and sealed it with the holy Sacrament,
that they would blow up this State, and conceal the plot: And such is that of
the Popish Rebels at this day in Ireland; who (as I am credibly informed) have
tied themselves by a solemn covenant, or rather conjuration, not to leave a
true Protestant alive in that Kingdom: And if the upstart Anabaptist (which so
multiplies) prevail among us, as he did not long since in Germany, Vide Sleid.
Com. Pro. 22 10.
God knows what will become of the true Protestant in this. Sure I am, Solomon
says, that the mercies of the wicked are cruel: And whether this Sect be
godly, or not (how specious soever their pretenses are) any man that observes
how destructive both their principles and practice be to Church and State, may
easily determine.

And thus much, too much (if too much can be spoken) of the branches of this
evil peace, there being so much of it in the world at this day: And which I
have discovered unto you, as Nicander did the nature of poisons, and Aristotle
the fallacies, that you may know them to avoid them.

I come now to speak of the good peace, which you are exhorted to pray for in
the text, and this is also threesold, viz. Pax pectoris, temporis, and
aeternitatis; which may be englished, Internal, External, and Eter^^ll peace.

The first, viz. Internal Peace, is that which Saint Paul, (in the 4 Chapter
to the Ephesians) terms Peace of conscience; Ephesians. 4.7.
which peace springs from the assurance of Gods love to us in Christ, for whose
sake, in the 3 Chapter of S. Matthew, he professes that he is well pleased
with us: and that (...) implies three things, viz. That our persons are
reconciled; our sins remitted; and our actions accepted: as in the fifth
Chapter to the Romans; Romans 5.1.10.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The second, viz. External peace, is either Ecclesiastical or Civil; peace
of the Church, or peace of the Commonwealth: At both which, 2 Ki. 20 19.
the good King Hezekiah (in the 20 Chapter of the second Book of Kings) points,
when he demands, Is it not good that there should be peace in my days? Yes
questionless, it is not only good, but very good. For with the Prince of
Orators we say of the one, Iniquissimam pacem, etc. that the unjustest peace is
to be preferred before the justest War. And with our holy Mother, the Church,
we pray for the other, saying, Da pacem, Domine, in diebus nostris; Give peace
in our time, O Lord. And he cannot be a good Christian, who does not approve of
our Saviors Motto, Blessed are the peacemakers: Matthew. 5.9
and I may fitly add, Blessed are the peace-takers, too; I mean such as will
readily embrace peace, when it is fairly offered.

The third branch of good peace, is that which is called Eternal Peace, of
which we have both a prophecy and a promise, Isa. 32.18.
in the 32 of Isaiah, My people (says God) shall dwell in a peaceable
habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places. In
pulchritudine pacis, says S. Hierome, in the full beauty of peace, even in
blessed tranquillity, where there shall be no asperity, no indignation, no need,
no envy, no adversary, no end; but everlasting Peace.

Now of these three I am not at this time to commend unto you either the first
or last, but only the middlemost, viz. External Peace: which, though it
partakes of both extremes, as beginning in the one ( viz. Peace of Conscience)
and terminating in the other ( viz, the Peace of Heaven) yet Interpreters
generally hold, that this peace in my Text cannot properly be understood,
either of the Internal, or that which is Eternal Peace; but only of an outward
Public Peace. This, I say, is the Peace which you are here exhorted to pray
for.

Truly great is the blessing of peace, Pro. 17.11.
though it be but private; for (as Solomon speaks in the 17 of the Proverbs)
Better is a dry morsel of bread, if peace be with it, then a house full of
sacrifices, with strife and contention.

But as every good thing the more common it is, the better it is; Luke 1 74.
so public peace is a far greater blessing: for hereby we enjoy that excellent
privilege which Zachary sings of in the first Chap. of S. Luke, viz. That
being delivered from the hands of our enemies, we may serve God without fear,
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

And yet if we ascend a degree or two higher, viz. to the consideration either
of Internal peace of the mind, and conscience here; Ephesians. 4 7.
or of that Eternal peace which is promised us hereafter: we must needs
acknowledge each of these to be that Peace of God which passes all
understanding.

But passing over these two last Branches of good peace, as not being aimed at
by the Psalmist in the Text; I will keep my self only to this outward, public
peace, which we are all here exhorted to pray for.

And however this outward peace (in respect of each man's particular) be not so
rich a blessing as the inward; yet such and so great it is in it self, that
Artaxerxes (by the very light of Nature) said, Peace is such a good thing, as
all men desire; Pacem te poscimus omnes. And S. Paul (in the second Chapter of
the first Epistle to Timothy) proposes it as the chief Motive why we should
pray for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2.
and all that be in Authority, viz. That under them we may lead a peaceable and
quiet life, in all godliness and honesty. As if the Civil Magistrates office
had but these two ends, viz. To settle Piety in the Church; and Peace in the
Commonwealth.

And the truth is, That the Church and Commonwealth are so lincked together,
that the peace of the one, does redound to the other: for as the Secretaries of
Nature observe that the Marygold opens with the Sun, and shuts with the shade;
even so when the Sunbeams of Peace shine upon the Commonwealth, then (by the
reflection of those beams) the Church dilates and spreads it self, as in the 9
Chap. of the Acts: Acts 9.31.
Then had the Churches rest thorowout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and
were edified: and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
holy Ghost, were multiplied. Mark there how peace not only edifies, but
multiplies the Church. And on the other side, when the Countries glory is once
eclipsed, then is the Churches beauty soon dimmed and clouded, as all men (whom
the god of this world has not blinded) will confess at this day they see
plain enough in this languishing State.

Not without great reason therefore did the Lord command his peculiar people,
the Jews, even in Captivity, to pray for the peace and prosperity of the
Babylonians (in the 29 Chapter of Jeremy) and that because (...) peace thereof,
they should have peace. (...) Churches peace depends upon the peace of the
Kingdom in which it is planted. And accordingly it is the Churches prayer (in
the 144 Psalm) that there may be no Invasion, Ps. 144.13.
no leading into Captivity, no complaining in our Streets.

And yet some phanatick Sectaries there be among us, who (having evil will at
the peace and prosperity of this our Sion, and being men of desperate opinions,
and despicable fortunes themselves) count it good fishing in troubled waters;
Judge. 17.2.
not caring (with Micah their good master) how much they rend, and tear the
Churches garments, so their own may be whole: these (in the exuberancy of their
misgrounded, and misguided zeal) do both preach and pray against public Peace,
Romans 20.3.
as inconsistent with the Independency, or rather, Anarchy they aim at; and
therefore, even to hoarsenesse, they cry down all fair ways and means of
Accommodation.

And not a few (whom the Church and State find to be a malignant party) having
little else to do, make it now their trade to lie; both by wholesale, and
retayl; they invent lies, and vent lies; they tell lies, and write lies, and
print lies: and this they do as confidently, and impudently, as if they were
informed by that lying spirit which entered as a Voluntier into Ahabs Prophets:
^ Ki 22.22
and by lying and raising false rumors, they beget jealousies, and fears in
the people; that so they may foment the difference, and enlarge the distance,
between His sacred Majesty and the Parliament; and by blowing the coals (which
they themselves first kindled) may at last set all in combustion, and bring all
to confusion.

And (which makes the disease more desperate, and the cure more doubtful) when
any of the sons of peace has convin'cd these Bountefues of disturbing the
publike-weale, against both law and conscience; yet they palliate all, by
pretending the spirit, as having some extraordinary Inspirations,
Illuminations, Revelations of the spirit for all they do: But since it appears
by their seditious courses, and pernicious practices, that the way of peace
they have not known; Romans 3.17.
let all the world judge whether I may not justly apply unto these, that which
our Savior himself said to some others (instigating him to call for fire from
heaven, Luke 9.55.
in the 9 Chapter of Saint Luke) (...) etc. They know not of what manner of
spirit they are. And all men else do now begin to know them by their fruits.
Had they bin a while in their forefathers coats; Mat. 7.16.
or felt they but the pressures of War, as our dismayed and dismembered
neighboring Nations do; yea, but as bleeding Ireland does at this day; then
sure they would soon be brought on their very knees to acknowledge, That the
most glorious Crown of gold in all the world is not worthy to be compared with
the now so much contemned Garland of Peace.

God be thanked, ever since the Reformation (though our Sectaries will not
allow it that Name, until they have throwly reformed both Church and State,
even to deformity) we have lived in peace and plenty. God be thanked we never
knew what it is to hear the murdering Pieces about our ears; or to see our
Churches and houses flaming over our heads, whilst the flame gave light to the
merciless soldier to run away with our goods: we never yet heard the fearful
cracks of their falls, mixed with the confused outcries of men killing, and
encouraging to kill, or resist and the hideous schriking of women and children.

God be thanked we never saw tender babes snatched from the Breasts of their
mothers, or ripped out of their Wombs; and ere they were a span long, either
panting on the stones, of sprawling on the Pikes; and the poor pure Virgin
ravished ere she may have leave to die.

God be thanked we never saw men, and beasts lie together wallowing in their
gore, and the ghastly visages of death deformed with wounds; the impotent wife
hanging (with tears running from bloodshed eyes) about her armed husband,
ambitious to die with him, with whom she may no longer live.

God be thanked we never saw the amazed runnings to, and fro, of such as would
fain escape, if they knew how, and the furious pace of a bloody Victour; the
rifling of houses for spoil, and every villain posting with his load, and ready
to cut each others throat, for the booty they plucked out of ours. In a word,
it is palpable by our foolhardy forwardness to, and frowardness in
embroiling our selves, that we never yet knew how cruel an adversary, and how
burdensome an helper is in War.

Look round about you, and see the Christian world in an uprore, and in arms,
and a considerable part thereof even in the ashes; whilst this our Britain
(like the Center) stood unmoved; and it is hard to say, whether other Nations
hitherto have more envied, or admired us.

For which our so long, and lovely peace, and plenty; Oh what just cause we all
have to be most thankful to the God of peace, and do we now re-pay him with
repining? For want of a foreign enemy to invade us, must we needs ransack, and
ruin our selves? Bellageri placuit nullos habitura tryumphos? Oh lets take
heed that Gods mercy (being too too much abused) turn not at last to fury; and
that he deal not with us, (being so provoked by us) as he did with the
stiff-necked and unthankful Jews, Psa 78.30.
when that which went in at their mouths, he fetched out at their nostrils.
Many Nations have forfeited as great blessings, as those in which we now so
much confide, and glory, by their insolency and ingratitude. And therefore
say, my beloved Brethren, and countrymen (if in such a time of siding you can
speak without prejudice, and partiality) whether it be not now high time to
fall close to prayer, and practice, for the better preserving, and (if it may
be) perpetuating, the peace of our Jerusalem.

But some headstrong, brainsick Sectary will say perchance, as Judas did in
another case, Ad quid perditio haec? Mar. 14 3.
Why is this waste? What need we be such importunate suitors to God for peace,
seeing we already enjoy it? I wish we did! Yea, grant we do; yet since (as the
Jews did of their Manna, when they cried, Arescit anima nostra) we have
surfeited of this heavenly food; and begin to nauseate it; I must tell you,
that without prayer to God, we do but flatter, and deceive our selves, in
presuming upon the security of our peace.

There can be nothing to which I am naturally more averse, then to prophecy
evil to this ancient and honorable City, (in which I was born, and bred, and
have spent the greatest part of my life with so much comfort, and respect from
the better sort, as a poor Minister is capable of) and yet, in the general,
you shall give me leave to tell you, that the most flourishing Cities, and
Countries, have their Period; as Zenophon truly observes in his Panegyricall
Oration of Agesilaiis, That there never was any State, (be it Monarchy,
Aristocracy, Democracy, or other kind of Government) but at one time or other
it was overthrown, and came to an end, either through invasion from abroad; or
sedition and innovation at home.

And therefore however I will not take up Balaams parable touching the Kenites
against this our Mother City; Number. 24.21.
(strong is thy dwelling place, and thou put thy neast in a rock,
nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, etc.) Yet as our Savior himself
riding in triumph into Jerusalem (the people spreading their garments; and
crying Hosanna to the son of David, Hosanna in the highest) when he drew near
to Jerusalem, and beheld that City, forseeing the heavy judgment which hung
over it, he wept, and said, Luke 19. 36-41.
If thou had known at least in that thy day the things which belong to thy
peace, but now are they hid from thine eyes, etc. So I beholding this
Metropolis (our Jerusalem) with the eye of tender pity and compassion, (such as
is due from a true son to his dear mother) and premeditating with my self the
woeful miseries which our present distraction and division, may ere we be aware
bring upon us: I wish, with all my soul, that we did know in these (yet
Halcyon) days of our peace, the things which do tend to the preservation of
the same.

But I fear, I fear, that either we do not clearly see, and know them (being in
the just judgment of God now hid from our eyes) or if we do both see, and know
them, yet (notwithstanding all the preparations we make to prevent them) I
fear least what we take as physic, will prove our poison. And I can give no
other reason of our present security, confidence, and contempt, save that
remarkable observation of Livie (in the fifth of his Decads) where he asserts,
That (Urgentibus rempublicam fatis, salutares Dei and hominum admonitiones
spernuntur) when the destruction of a Commonwealth is destined, then the
wholesome warnings both of God and Man, are set at naught.

But, Oh may that never be true of us, which Demades once objected to the
Athenians by way of reproach, viz. That they would never vouchsafe to treat, or
hear of peace, but in Mourning-gowns, viz. after the loss;e of their friends,
and fortunes in the Wars.

My firm hope is, and my earnest prayer shall be, that God in mercy would turn
away this heavy judgment from us; that so we may not by woeful experience of
the more then many mischiefs of a Civil War, be forced to acknowledge that we
too too much slighted, vilified, and under-valued the inestimable benefit of
peace; but rather that in these Critical days of our yet surviving peace, we
may all have the grace prudently to foresee, and piously to pursue such lawful
courses, and warrantable means, as do make for the maintenance of the same.

And forasmuch as the principal pillars of our peace are the King, and the
Parliament; therefore let us put up our prayers to God for both. First, I say,
let us pray for the long life, and happy Reign of His Majesty: for, if the
Jews (in the first Chapter of Baruch) were commanded by God, Baruc. 1.11
to pray for Nabuchadonosor, and Balthazar his son, which kept them in slavery
and captivity; then great reason have we to pray for the peaceable and
prosperous Reign of our gracious King CHARLES, (who keeps us from temporal, and
spiritual thraldom) that his days on earth may be as the days of heaven. And
next, lets pray for the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the
spirit of the Lord may rest upon them (as it is in the 11 Chapter of Isaiah)
even the spirit of wisdom, Isa. 11.8.
and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and might, the spirit of knowledge,
and of the fear of the Lord: Ex. 18.21.
That this spirit may make them all (like Jethro's Magistrate) men of courage,
fearing God, and dealing truly; so shall all their deliberations and
determinations tend to the glory of God, the real honor, and happiness of
His sacred Majesty; and the peace and prosperity both of Church and
Commonwealth. To which I doubt not but all true Protestants will say, Amen.

And thus having showed first what you are here exhorted to do, viz. to Pray:
and next, for what you are exhorted to pray, viz. for Peace: It now only
remains, that I acquaint you for whose peace it is that you are exhorted thus
to pray, viz. for the peace of Jerusalem: for so stands the Text,

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem signifies the vision of peace: It was the Metropolis of Palestina,
and it was so denominated from two parts in it, one of which was called Jebus;
the Mount on which God commanded Abraham to offer up his son Isaac; otherwise
called Mount Moriah, or Sion, on which afterward the Temple was built, and
David's tower. The other part was called Shalom, and it was erected at first by
Melchisedech, King of Righteousness; as Lyra notes in his Gloss on the 28
Chapter of Genesis. And now if you put the two words (expressing the two parts)
together, it makes Jebushalom, and for Euphonies sake, Jerusalem.

And by this very name the holy Catholic Church is often set forth in
Scripture, as in the 41 Chapter of Isaiah, Isa. 4^.27.
where God promises by his Prophet, that he will give to Jerusalem one that
brings good tidings; that is, a Savior to the Church; as Oleaster, and others
expound it. And in the 4 Chapter to the Galathians, Galat. 14.26.
the Apostle says that Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the mother
of us all. Upon which words Hugo Cardinalis glosseth thus, In hoc quod dicitur
sursum, notatur altitudo; quod Jerusalem, pacis multitudo; quod libera,
libertatis amplitudo; quod matter omnium, charitas and foecunditas; that is, In
this, that the Church is called Jerusalem, is intimated, multitude of peace;
that she is said to be above, denotes altitude of place; that she is free, shows
her ample liberty; and that she is the Mother of us all, sets forth her charity
and foecundity.

Jerusalem then is here a type of Christ's Church, for whose peace, and
prosperity, we are bound in duty to pray continually.

Now the reasons why the Church of God is styled Jerusalem, are many; give me
leave only with a light pensil to touch some few of the chief. For,

First, as Jerusalem was the Metropolis of Palestina, and all the Jews esteemed
it as their Mother: so the Church is Matter credentium, The Mother of all true
believers; as Saint Cyprian speaks, Illius foetu nascimur, says he, illius
lacte nutrimur, spiritu ejus animamur, etc. And so truly is she our Mother, in
a qualified sense; that the same Saint Cyprian (and after him Saint Augustine)
affirm peremptorily, Non potest habere Deum, patrem, qui non habet ecclesiam
matrem: He cannot possibly have God to his Father, who has not the Church to
his Mother. And therefore no marvel though our present Sectaries, which
(renouncing the Communion of the Church) will have none of her to their Mother,
cannot endure to use the Lords prayer, in which they must say, Our Father.

Secondly, as the Israelites were enjoined by God at least three times every
year to come, Exodus 23.4
and appear before him in Jerusalem: Even so are we all bound to meet in the
Church (which is the Congregation of all Christians) and herein all true
Christians do meet together in the unity of judgment, and affection. When God
in the first Chapter of Genesis, had gathered together the waters unto one
place; Genesis 1.10
it is said, that he saw that it was good; And thereupon Saint Basil
excellently notes, that if the gathering together of the elementary waters was
good; then the gathering together of Gods people, Apo. 17 15.
(who are the mystical waters spoken of in the 17 of the Apocalypse) must
needs be very good: yea, if the one was good, the other must needs be better.
And therefore I may truly say to such Sectaries as (out of an affectation of
singular holiness separate themselves from the Church) as sometimes Mr. Calvin
himself did to the Anabaptists. When under color of perfection, you can endure
no imperfection, neither in the body, nor yet in the clothes of the Church; you
must be admonished that this your separation is caused by the devil, who puffs
you up with pride, and seduceth you with hypocrisy.

Thirdly, as Jerusalem was the chief seat both of the priesthood, 1 King 9.10.
and Kingdom; for Solomon built the Temple, and the Palace together: So in the
Church there is both the Kingdom, and Priesthood of Christ; whereby, both as a
King he raigns over; and as a Priest he instructs all the true Subjects, and
Citizens of the same. Yea in the first Chapter of the Apocalypse, Apoc. 16
he makes all the living members of his Church, Kings and Priests, in a
qualified fence. Or as St. Peter calls them, 1. Pet. 2.9
a Royal priesthood. Quid enim tam regium (says Leo) quam subditum Deo animum
corporis sui esse rectorem! Quid tam sacerdotal^, quam immacula^as piotaris
^astias de altari cordis offerne?

Psalm 76.2
Fourthly, Jerusalem was the only place in which God was known, and worshipped:
His Temple was built there; there he spoke unto them both with his own mouth,
and by the mouth of his holy Prophets; there was the Oracle between the
Cherubins; there was the chair of Moses; and there the law was both duly
propounded, and eke truly expounded unto the people: 1 Timothy 3.15.
And in the Church God is known, and worshipped aright; for this is the Pillar
and Ground of Truth, says the Apostle. That is, The Church serves to the
truth, for those special ends and uses, which pillars do to men. For

One use of pillars, is to preserve the remembrance of things past, to
posterity (to which end Absalom reared his pillar) and thus does the Church
keep the truth of God as it were upon perpetual record.

A second use of pillars, is to expose to open view such things as are fastened
upon them; as in our Cathedralls, the Arms, Scutchions, and Epitaphs of
worthies deceased, are hung upon pillars: and such a kind of pillar is the
Church to the truth; for it exposes all the Canonical Books to the People of
God.

A third use of pillars, is for the supportation of the fabric which is built
upon them: and such a pillar is the Church to the truth; Gods true Religion,
and all truth necessary to salvation is to be had in the Church, which does
indeed support the Commonwealth; and therefore they which (with Sampson in the
16th chapter of Judges) thrust as this pillar with all their might, will ere
they be aware bring the whole fabric about their ears, to the certain ruin
of themselves and others.

Lastly, as Jerusalem was built, and compacted together, a City at Unity within
it self; as we find at the third verse: Psalm. 122 3
Even so all the true Members of the Church do, and will endeavor to keep the
Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace: Ephesians. 4 3
as being all washed from their sins in the same Laver of Regeneration; all
tied together by the Sinews, and Ligaments of the same Christian Profession;
all fed and nourished by the sincere milk of the same Word; all feasted at the
Table of the same Lord; all assumed by the Spirit of Adoption, Ephesians. 4 6.
to be Heirs of the same Kingdom. In a word, Since there is but one God, and
Father of all; Gal. 4.26.
and but one Church the Mother of all; and all are but the Members of one
Mystical Body; Romans 12.4. Gal. 5 12.
and there is but one Spirit whereby this one Body is animated and informed:
and the fruits of this one Spirit are love, joy, peace, etc. Oh do but lay it
to heart, what a foul stain, and shame it must needs prove to the Protestant
Profession, if we should not be (like Jerusalem) a City at Unity within our
selves. And thus it appears, that Jerusalem here is a Type of the Church, for
whose peace and prosperity we are all exhorted to pray.

Now upon what terms the Peace of Christ's Church stands at this day, I am not
able to declare: yet what man of sound judgment, and integrity, does not see,
and grieve to see it so shaken, and shattered as it is? St. Basil (in his last
Chapter de spiritu sancto, taking into serious consideration the state of the
Church in his time) cries out, Cui comparabibus? etc. To what shall we liken
the present state of the Church? And he answers. Praelio navali, quod ex veteri
odio conflatum, adeo processit, ut ira sit immedicabilis, and utraque pars
ruinam meditetur. It Is like (says he) to a Sea Fight, which being caused by an
old grudge, is gone so far, that their wrath cannot be appeased; and either
side meditates nothing but ruin. Pone simul (says the same Father) quod densa
caligo, turbo vehemens, procella immensa, hostium and amicorum nullam
discrimen, symbola ignota, quam seditionem invidia, and ambitio fecerunt. Add
(says he) that there is withal a gross mist, a vehement whirl-winde, an huge
storm, no discerning between friends and foes, the Colors cannot be
distinguished, which sedition was raised by envy, and ambition. (...),
fundamentum doctrinae, and munimentum disciplinae convulsum est. All the bounds
of our forefathers are transgressed. The foundation of Doctrine, and
fortification of Discipline, is plucked up. Per* excessum a^t defectum, as he
goes on, rectum pietatis dogma transiliunt, alii ad Judaismu^, alii ad
Paganismum; Nec divina Scriptura, nec Apostolica traditio litem dirimit, Unus
amicitiae modus ad gratia^ loqui, and inimicitiae sufficiens causa, opinionibus
dissentire. (...): hinc, rerum novatoribus multa copia ad seditionem. (...),
etc. that is, By excess, or defect, the right determination of Piety is skip'd
over by some to Judaism, by others to Paganism. Neither the Scripture which is
Divine, nor Apostolical Tradition, can end the strife. The only means of
friendship is to speak placentia; and it is a sufficient cause of enmity, to
differ in opinions. Every one is a Divine; and hence Innovators have matter
enough of sedition. And they take upon them the oversight of the Church, who
never had any other Imposition of hands, but what they laid upon themselves,
etc. This is the History which Saint Basil (who lived within less then 400
years after the Incarnation of our Lord) writes of the state of the Church in
his time; and whether it be not a Prophecy, and that Prophecy fulfilled in
our times, I leave it in you to judge.

And if any man desire to see the Picture of the Church of God drawn to the
life at this day; let him conceive that he saw a silly poor maiden sitting
alone in a Wilderness, and beleaguered on all sides with Bulls of Bashan,
devouring Wolves, Herodian Foxes, foaming Boars, greedy Bears, grinning Dogs,
fiery Serpents, corroding Vipers, stinging Scorpions; I mean such men-beasts as
Saint Paul fought with at Ephesus, (in the 15 Chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians,) 1 Cor. 15 32.
men in shape, beasts in condition; yea and worse then beasts, says S.
Ambrose, Nam omni bestia bestialior est homo rationem habens, and non secundum
rationem vivens: She is fiercely assaulted on the one side by unbelievers, on
the other side by mis-believers; on the right hand by the contentious
oppositions of Schismatics, on the left, by the blasphemous propositions of
Heretics: openly wronged by persecuting Tyrants; and secretly wring'd by
backbiting Hypocrites. So many and many are the enemies of the Churches Peace.

But though they be never so many, and mighty; yet there be but two sorts at
this day which do especially infect, and infest her, viz. The Schismatic, and
the Papist. The one does disrumpere charitatis vincula, untying the Bond of
Peace; the other does corrumpere fidei dogmata, undoing the Unity of the
Spirit. The Schismatic is different even in things of their own nature
indifferent; and had rather lose the substance ( viz. Grace and Peace) then
yield never so little into Ceremony; He is no friend to Charity.

The Papist is almost indifferent in things of their own nature different; not
caring what becomes of Truth, to compass his own ends: He is no friend to
Verity. And Both of them spurn at the Peace of the Church, as at a common
football: Judge. 15.4.
being herein, like Sampsons Foxes, severed in their heads, but tied together
by the tayls, with firebrands between them.

No marvel then though without the Church the common enemy beards and braves
the poor Christian, despising our little number, and yet in truth, much less
then we seem, through so many inbred Sects and Schisms; when as even within
the Pale of the Church, and among those that profess Christianity; we see on
the one side (our irreconciliable adversaries) the Papists, still plotting and
practicing the ruin of the Church Reformed among us.

And on the other side, so many sons of Thunder whetting their tongues in
Pulpits, with cursed and bitter wor^s; preaching common invectives, against the
Lawful Governors, and Government, both of Church and State, and animating the
giddy multitude to take up Arms; as if the Protestant Faith could not be
supported, but by their Faction; and the power of true Religion could stand
with Rebellion? So that if ever the Church had cause to pray for peace, sure
now is the time; when the enemy springs out of her own sides and bowels.

But (alas), what horrid impiety, and extreme ingratitude it is (Viper-like) to
gnaw out the bowels of the Mother Church that bare us? May she not justly now
renew her old complaints? Ecce in pace mea, amaritudo mea amarissima. Behold,
in my peace I had great bitterness? And St Bernard shows you how, Isa. 38.17.
by running through all the degrees of comparison, thus; Amara in
persecutionibus Tyrannorum, etc. Great bitterness the Church has always had,
caused by Tyrannical persecutions; Greater bitterness, by reason of
heretical propositions; But her greatest bitterness comes from domestical
dissentitions; when (as it was foretold in the 7 of Micah) a man's enemies are
of his own household. Micah. 76.


Some Moral Divines hold Rebecca (when she bare twins) to be a Figure of the
Church; for, though she prayed to God for children, yet (finding them to strive
and struggle in her womb for priority and superiority, and feeling the smart of
that contention) she said, If it be so, why am I thus? as if she wished she had
never conceived: And it is most sure that the Church has many children, whom
she has conceived with care, brought forth with pain, and brought up with all
tenderness of affection; who yet through their grievous strife, and schism,
have so vexed, and rent her very bowels of late, that she has just cause to
wish she had never conceived them.

But however these Schismatics (as Saint Augustine speaks of Donatus) are, in
some sense, worse then the very Tormentors of Christ upon the Cross; For,
says he, Venit persecutor, and non fregit crura Chris^i, etc. The persecutor
came, and brake not Christ's legs hanging on the Cross; yet Donatus came, and
rent his Church in pieces. Christ's natural Body was whole in the hands of his
very Executioners; and yet his Mystical Body is not whole among us that are
Christians.

Yea, however these Schismatics in some sort out-act that Monster Nero's
cruelty, in ripping up the Womb of their Spiritual Mother: Ephesians. 5.1.
yet let us as dear children, rather imitate the pity, Ier. 31.20.
and piety of our heavenly Father. And as his bowels were troubled for Ephraim
(in the 31 of Jeremy) so let ours yern for our Jerusalem.

And the better to express our dutiful, and due affection to our holy Mother
the Church, let us all be exhorted to do these three things, with which I will
conclude. First, let us pray for her Peace, and prosperity: For, as S.
Augustine speaks (in his 19 Book de Civitati Dei) Tantum est, etc. Such is the
good of Ecclesiastical Peace, that nothing can be heard more acceptable;
nothing can be coveted more desirable; nothing can be found more unvaluable:
wherefore let him that has this peace, hold it; let him that has lost it,
seek it: for whosoever is not found in peace, he shall be rejected by God the
Father, disinherited by God the Son, and discarded by God the holy Ghost.

And if ever this exhortation, To pray for the Churches Peace, were seasonable;
then it is much more now; which makes me to reinforce it: For this Island
(which was but surrounded before)* seems at this day to be quite overflowed
with water; and that with water more brackish then that of the Sea it self,
even the waters of Meribah, The waters of Strife; God grant they prove not like
the waters of Marah, Exodus 17.1
bitter waters, in the end. For division ever tends to, Exo 15.23
and commonly ends in destruction; according to that in the 55 Psalm, Divide,
destrue, etc. Psalm. 55.9.
Divide their tongues, and destroy them, O Lord, for I have seen violence and
strife in the City. Mark there, how division ushers in the destruction of that
City which the Psalmist speaks of; I hope it was no Prophecy of this.

And yet are we not divided? Have we not (answerable to that in the 9 Chapter
of Isaiah) our Ephraim against Manasses,? Isa. 9.21.
and Manasses against Ephraim? and both against Judah? Have we not Sectaries
against Papists? and Papists against Sectaries? and both against the true
Protestant? Is not that certain Prognostic of the General Judgment at the
last day (pointed at in the 24 of Saint Matthew) now visible in His Majesty's
Dominions? Mat. 24.7.
when as Kingdom rises against Kingdom, and Realm against Realm?

Yea even in this Kingdom are we not divided? Have we not innumerable Sects,
and lamentable Schisms in the Church? Have we not dangerous dissension, and
digladiation in the Commonwealth? And does not our Savior tell us plainly (in
the 12 Chapter of S. Matthew) That a Kingdom divided against it self, Mat. 12.25
shall be brought to delation? And shall we not believe him? or if we do, shall
we go on, and perish, for not obeying him? Can we ever hope to prosper, whilst
we are thus divided? and whilst our divisions, Judge. 5 15.
like those of Reuben (in the 5 Chapter of Judges) are great thoughts of heart?
and those great thoughts indeed; for they are great thoughts against the
Liturgy, and great thoughts against Episcopacy, if not against Monarcy it self?
These must be confessed to be great thoughts, and so great that there cannot
well be greater. These lay the Axe to the very root; and therefore, in reason,
what can be expected but that these great thoughts should beget great troubles,
which (like so many Mathematical lines) will be Divisibiles in s^mper
divisibila? If we cast off all that is called. God among us, we must never look
for peace, as a blessing from God. So that what St. Paul speaks of himself, and
his fellow laborers (in the 7th Chapter of the 2d Epistle to the Corinthians)
may with some advantage be applied unto us: 2 Cor. 7.5
Our flesh has no rest, but we are troubled on every side, without fightings,
within are fears. And both sides agreeing in the cause of taking up of Arms (
viz. that they do it for the maintenance of Religion, Law, Liberty, Propriety,
etc.) Do we not both fight for, and fear, we scarce know what? One thing I am
sure cannot be denied, that through these groundless altercations, and
causeless fears; public peace is in great danger to be lost, if it be not
casher'd already: and as things now stand, we know not well either where to
seek it, or how to settle it. The best way that I can think on, for the
present, is this in the text: viz. To pray for the peace of Jerusalem: which
has now as great need to be upheld by your faithful prayers and endeavors;
as ever had the faint and feeble hands of Moses need to be supported by Aron,
Exo. 17.1^
and Hur^ in the 17th Chapter of Exodus. Oh then let us all fall close to our
prayers: for it is an infallible sign of a profane person, when he never puts
up an hearty prayer to God for the Church in time of distress. He is no better
then a Brat of Babel, who cannot be persuaded to pray for the peace of
Jerusalem.

Secondly, let us all (like so many good children) be prodigal not only of our
time, and estates, but even of our dearest blood, in (our holy Mother) the
Churches cause, for which Christ gave himself both an offering, and a
Sacrifice: As an offering in his life: so, Ephesians. 5 2.
a sacrifice in his death. There was never any City on earth more bravely
defended against a foreign Enemy, then was Jerusalem against Titus and
Vespatian: and only upon a conceit that this City was eternal, and should
never be destroyed. But they erred, not knowing the Scriptures: Mat. 23.37
for the truth is, that all the promises of Ierusalems perpetuity and
continuance, were not made to that Jerusalem which was built with material
walls (for that Jerusalem killed the Prophets, and stoned the men of God which
were sent unto her; and so brought the guilt of innocent blood upon her; Gal.
^.25.
and is therefore in bondage with her children even unto this day) but to the
Church of God, 1 Pet. 2.4.
that Jerusalem which (as St. Peter speaks) is compacted of living stones,
cemented with Christ's blood, built by faith, and consisting in the fellowship
of the Saints, whose maker and builder is God: Mat. 16.18
and against this the spirit of truth assures us that neither men, nor devils
shall ever be able to prevail. For, as Socrates said of his Accusers, Necare
possunt, nocere non possunt: So may I say of the enemies of the Church, that
they may kill us (if God permit) but they cannot conquer us: Romans 8 37
For (like Sampson) we shall be victorious even in death it self; at which
time, Judges 16.30.
(with the Proto-martyr St. Steephen) we shall see the heavens open, Acts 7.56.
and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God: Romans 8.31.
and if we stand for him, and he stand for us, then who can withstand us? And
yet as in Jerusalem there were factions; by which (as Josephus reports) more of
the natives and Citizens were slain within the walls, then by the common enemy
without: so it is most true that there ever have been, and that there ever will
be, factions in the Church: though I must tell you, that no one age that ever I
read of, did so abound with them, as does the present: Oh what herds, swarms,
and sholes of Sectaries have been seen of late! These are dangerous, and (if
not prevented in time) they will be deadly enemies to the peace of the
Protestant Church established by Law among us.

And to each of these, God our Father, and the Church our Mother, will say
hereafter, as the Roman Fulvius did to his revolting son heretofore; Non ego
te Catilinae genui, adversus patriam, sed patriae adversus Catilinam: Which
(with some small variation of the words) may be rendered thus: I begat not thee
to assist the Sectaries in their sedition, but the true Protestants in their
subjection, Romans 13.1.
to God for his own sake; and to his anointed over us for Gods sake; who says
peremptorily (in the 13th Chapter to the Romans) Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers: Mark, Every one must be subject, without excepting, or
exempting any one. Thirdly and lastly, let us, Oh let us all labor to heal the
breaches of the Church; as once the Israelites did to build up the walls of
their Jerusalem. See in the 2d of Nehemiah, how carefully he procured means
from Artaxerxes to reaedify Jerusalem; and how courageously and unanimously the
people of God went about it in the midst of so great dangers, that they were
faign to work with tools in one hand, and swords in the other. And thus (if we
would approve our selves to be true Israelites) must we all do our utmost
endeavor to build up the Church of God; or at least to be repairers of the
breaches that are made in the same. And this we must do the rather, because the
Romish Sanballats on the one side, and the Rammish Sectaries on the other,
strive so eagerly at this day to set up their Babell (it may be properly so
called) and to pull down our Jerusalem; as of old, Tertullian complained of the
Heretics, Nostra suffodiunt, ut sua ^dificent.

Yea, the truth is, that these our professed adversaries on both sides, laugh
at and jeer us to our faces, as Sanballat, and Tobiah then did: and yet let us
be so far from being discouraged from so religious an enterprise; that let us
go on in our prayers to God, and honest endeavors with men, until we have
brought it to perfection. Not doubting but what Nehemiah then promised, Neh
2.20.
will in due time be made good unto us, The God of heaven will prosper us;
therefore let us arise and gobnild.

And that our building in this kind, may go the better forward, let us all
mind and speak the same things: Phil. 2.2.
for if in the building of Babell, division of tongues hindered the work; Gene.
11 8
how much then in that of our Jerusalem? Then (for conclusion of all) let me
say unto you with the Apostle (in the 13. Chapter of the 2d Epistle to the
Corinthians) Be ye all of one mind, live in peace, and the God of peace shall
be with you. And with you after a special manner, viz. 2. Cor. 13.11
by blessing your prayers and practice in this kind, with peace, all kinds of
peace, viz.

Peace of body in a well-ordered temperature of the several parts; peace of
the sensitive soul, in a just restraining of the appetite; peace of the
reasonable soul, in the sweet Harmony between action and speculation; peace
both of body and soul, in a sober course of life; peace between God and man, by
faith and obedience; peace between man and man, by a mutual intercourse of
love, political peace, by the subjection of every soul to the higher powers;
Ecclesiastical peace by our joint prayers for Jerusalem; and universal peace,
by the tending of every creature to that very end for which God made it;
temporal peace here; and eternal peace hereafter.

And this he grant us, who is the God and Father of Peace; and that for his
dear Son sake, who is the Prince of Peace; To both whom, with the Holy Ghost,
the blessed spirit of peace; (three persons, and one invisible; indivisible,
and incomprehensibly glorious Lord God) be ascribed all Glory, Power, and
Praise, now and for evermore: Amen.

FINIS.

