A CHRISTIAN NEW YEARS GIFT: OR Exhortations to the chief Duties of a
Christian: Written in Latin by HARBOT. GRIMSTONE, Esquires; one of the Members
of the House of Commons in Parliament.

Translated for the more public benefit.

This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, That they which have believed in God, may be careful to maintain
good works.

Tit. 3.8. Printed by R. Daniel, Printer to the University of Cambridge. Ann.
Dom. 1644.

To my Son G. Grimstone.
I Charge thee before God, who quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ,
who witnessed a good confession that thou read these Exhortations, meditate and
teach them, unto others: that so thy profiting may be known unto all men. Let
no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example of believers in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. And the God of peace,
who brought again from the dead Christ Jesus, that great Shepherd of our souls,
through the blood of the eternal covenant, establish thee unto every good work
for the performance of his will; working in thee that which is acceptable in
his sight by Jesus Christ: These things I entreat thee, I exhort and beseech
thee, who am

Call. JAN. 1644. Thy father* Harbottle Grimstone.

CHAP. I. The Exercise of Faith.
IN the morning, after thy solemn and CHRISTIAN Prayers, standing in heart
before the Tribunal of God, thou shall make Confession of thy Faith, saying
the Apostles Creed.

2 Let the Holy Scriptures be thy chaste delight, read them often, and be sure
that Gods word is the most exact Rule of Truth. In matters of Faith admit of
nothing, but what agrees with the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.
Abide in all things, which thou have learned; For the Holy Scriptures are able
to make thee wise unto salvation through the faith of Jesus Christ. 1. Tim.
3.14. Add not unto the words of God lest perhaps thou be found a liar, and he
rebuke thee. Prove. 30.6.

3 Prefer the Bible before all treasures in the World, and as often as thou
go to read, take it into thy hands with reverence and pray after this
manner:

O Lord Jesu! reveal unto me what here lies hidden, open the mysteries,
enlighten things that are dark, define what are doubtful: Make me to hate all
vices, and to love all virtues; to tremble at thy Judgments, and to have a
respect unto thy Rewards. Preserve me in thy truth, and correct me in my
errors: Confirm me in all Truth which I stagger in; and free me from false and
noxious opinions which I stumble in: That so I may know thy Word rightly, and
perform it religiously, and may profit therein to the glory of thy holy Name,
and the salvation of my self, and others. Amen.

4 Behave thy self according to the Pattern of holiness which is set down in
holy Writ.

5 When thou art tempted to any heinous or beastly sin, either in thought or
deed, exercise thy self in this act of Faith;

I verily believe, that my God is present here and every where else a Beholder
and Searcher, and a severe Judge, not only of my actions, but even of my very
thoughts. I see not Thee indeed, O my God! yet thou beholdest me; And shall I
be so impudent, as to do this wickedness before thy face? oh rather let me die
a thousand deaths.

6 Thou shall pray often, and by good works strive to obtain of God the
conversion of Heretics and infidels, either by thy own means, (if so God has
enabled thee) or by the means of others who can and ought to further the
propagation of the Gospel.

7 And lastly, as often as time and occasion require, with a cheerful heart and
countenance thou shall make profession of thy Christian Religion and Devotion.

But if the Devil go about to shake thy faith, the foundation of thy ghostly
building, (which chiefly he strives to do at the hour of Death) answer him: I
defy thee, O thou deceiver! whatever shadows of arguments thou pretend, I
shun and detest; and verily believe whatever God by his Prophets, Evangelists
and Apostles has revealed to his Church. I place all my confidence in the
merits of Christ, and in the mercies of my heavenly Father in Christ, which for
his sake he has promised unto me and all that believe in him; In this faith I
will live and die. God is my witness. Wherefore if any idle word has fallen
from me, I utterly renounce it. Increase O Lord this my faith; and undertake
for me, for I am oppressed.

CHAP. II. The Exercise of Hope.
IN the morning amidst thy other devotions pray thus: O God infinite in power
and mercy! I, a weak and wretched man, who of my self neither have nor am any
thing, come unto thee, O thou wellspring of all goodness! and trusting in thy
immense goodness, through the merits of thy dear Son and my Redeemer, hope
assuredly to obtain of thee grace and power and aid and all other goods of body
and mind, which are needful to the attaining of heavenly happiness. O WHEN
WILL THAT TIME BE, WHEN I SHALL COME AND APPEAR BEFORE THE PRESENCE OF GOD?
Grant me so to run that I may obtain. Then shall thou say the Lords Prayer with
all vehemency of mind. Our Father which art, etc.

2 In a fair day or a starrie night, when heaven and earth smile together, or
any other pleasing, beautiful, or glorious object presents it self unto thy
eyes, then cry out with Saint Augustine; O my God, If thou show so glorious
works to us here in prison, what will thou show us there, when we enter into
thy Courts! If thou bestowest thus many and various benefits on thy enemies as
well as friends, how great and pleasant things have thou reserved for thy
friends alone! If such comforts for this time of tears what will our Bridegroom
bring us on that wedding day!

3 When thou feel thy mind moved at trifles, chide and rebuke thy self for
shame. Alas, poor soul! why do thou admire these toys, and heap up riches
with so much peril of thy salvation! God is All, and this world is nothing.
do thou love pleasures, God has laid up for thee eternal ones in heaven;
do thou seek honors? pursue those true honors there, why do thou catch
at shadows, and fumes and follies? And why feedest thou thy mind with phancies,
husks for swine, who art invited to the Kings table? sigh and look up to
Heaven, for which thou were created: There be treasured the true and eternal
goods; these below are beneath thee, therefore tread and trample them under thy
foot.

4 When thou suffer pain and anguish in thy body, being afflicted with
diseases or other miseries, then stir up thy tired ass with this spur: It
will not be thus ever, nor long neither. It is but momentanie what ever has an
end. But I know that my Redeemer lives, and that at the last day I shall rise
out of the earth, and be clothed with my skin again; and in my flesh shall
behold God my Savior, whom I shall see my self with these eyes, and not
another. Job 19.25. In his bosom will I repose my hope.

5 When crosses contrary to flesh and blood are to be undergone for God and
heavens sake, sweeten the bitter Cup with this sugar and honey: O my soul, The
sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us. These light and short afflictious which are but
for a moment, work in us a far more exceeding weight of glory, while we look
not at the things which are seen, but the things which are not seen, for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal; Romans 8.18. With this handkerchief that excellent wrastler S. Paul
wiped away all the sweat of his most hard labors; by the proposal of this
prize the other most valiant soldiers of Christ fought with beasts, with
flames, with gibbets, nay with death it self, and overcame.

6 If through strong temptations thou feel thy self falling into the pit of
despair, especially on thy deathbed, cast forth this Anchor of hope, and say,
Why do thou make shipwreck of thy self, O my soul! Put thy trust in God, for
I will yet give him thanks who is the help of my countenance, and my God, Psalm.
43.5. Cast thy burden upon him, he will not suffer thee to fall: for he is
infinitely good, more ready to give then we to ask or hope. He is thy Father
who made thee, and made so much of thee that he gave his only begotten Son
to redeem thee a bondslave And for three and thirty years together how much did
he do and suffer for thy sake! And now thou have this same Jesus an Advocate
for thee with the Father, who is the propitiation for thy sins, and his blood
shall cleanse thee from all sin, 1. Joh. 2.1. O be thou with me my dear Jesus,
help thy humble supplicant lest thy blood be shed in vain for me: by thy help I
shall hope as long as I live; and though war rise up against me, yet shall
not my heart be afraid.

CHAP. III. The Exercise of Love to God, and zeal of his glory.
THou shall use these ejaculations to inflame thy mind to the love of God: It
is written, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy
mind, and all thy strength. He that loves not abides in death, Matthew. 22.37.
He who loves not his brother, 1. Joh. 3.19. how much more he that loves not
God? Thou therefore command me to love, O good God, and threatnest death,
eternal death, if I love thee not. Is it not torment enough not to love thee,
or need we be tied by laws and threats to love thee? Am I so blind as not to
know thy manifold blessings and graces, and immense perfections? or rather am I
so stupid and senseless, that I have no heart to love thee, O thou infinite
goodness: Thou bottomless sea of goodness! Thou immense goodness it self!
And now if love ought to be requited with loving again, what love is that which
can equallize thy love? Thou lovedst me from eternity, before I was, or could
gainsay thy love. Thou createdst soul and body and all things else, which were
nothing to thee, for my sake; and conservest them for me to this day. Thou have
given thy Angels charge over me, to keep me in my ways, even then (ah wretch)
when I am sinning against thee. Thou have prepared for me an exceeding great
reward, and have called me into thy grace that I might inherit it. And when I
fell away so often and lost thy love, yet did thou call me back again unto
repentance. The cogitation of this is pleasant to my soul: But, O far more
sweet (O sweetest Savior) that thou should daigne to become Man, to suffer
so bitter and horrid things, and at last to die upon the Cross for me; O
cruel me! who crucified thee. But that which lies sweetest of all upon my
soul, is, That when thou were about to die, thou ordainest the Sacrament of thy
precious Body and Blood, a wonderful token of thy love toward me. And now to
make amends for so great benefits, thou requirest only that I love thee again,
O Love! exstasie of love! How do thou deserve, O thou infinite goodness! to
be loved of all and above all created things! So let me love thee therefore, O
Jesus! Thou Savior of lovers, and only love of all that are saved. Let the
fire of thy love consume me quite, that so I may live and die for love of thy
love, as thou vouchsafedst to die for love of mine.

When thou have thus blown this fire of Divine Love, then let it break forth
into these flames: O my God! my infinite goodness! I do love thee above all
created beings: I love thee with all my heart, with all my mind, and with all
my strength, and am steadfastly purposed to keep all thy righteous commandments,
and to conform my self to thy most holy will. And why do I love thee thus? but
because thou art infinitely more lovely then it is possible thou can be loved
of me: for thy unmeasurable perfections sake, thy incomprehensible power, most
unsearchable wisdom, for thy unbounded Holiness and goodness sake, viz. For
thine own sake, O Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three persons and one God! I
will love thee above all things, who art become all things to me.

2 Frequent this duty often, chiefly when any tentations befall thee; for it
helps much thy perseverance in grace.

3 Often looking up toward heaven, thou shall crave this excellent gift of
love toward God, with this short prayer: O Thou love, which art always flaming
and never exstinct, my God Love inflame me with the fire of thy love. Ah! too
late do I love thee. O Beauty so ancient and so fresh! too too late have I
loved thee. Make me to know my self and to know thee, that so I may despise my
self, and love thee.

4 Be glad whatsoever happens to thee, if thou find that Gods providence would
have it so. Rejoice though adversity and afflictions befall thee, and let
righteous Jobs song be thine, As the Lord pleased, so is it, Blessed be the
Name of the Lord, Job 1.21.

5 Be sorry if any thing happen repugnant to the will of God; if any man sin
and offend God, let this trouble thee. And do thy endeavor to prevent such
deeds, and remove the offense when it is committed, if thou can

6 If the devil tempt thee with any grievous temptation, pray thus: Thou
permittest me to be tempted, O Lord, to try me whether I love thee or not; yet
thou will not suffer me to be tempted above what I am able; I know that without
thy grace, I should contemn thee, O thou universal goodness! and to please
that enemy of Mankind, incur eternal death for a momentany pleasure. But I
have sworn and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments. Be thou
my helper, O forsake me not, neither despise me.

7 When upon any occasion thou runnest into any danger of a mortal sin, O
let me be torn into a thousand pieces, and rent asunder (shall thou say) rather
then prefer any thing before the love of God: often objecting to the devil
that Christians sentence, I had rather die then be defiled.

8 But if thou chance to fall (wretch that thou art) make all haste to rise
again; and by renewing thy first love, eschewing evil and doing good, defer
not to reconcile thy self to God, through the merits of Jesus.

9 Be sure thou commit not the least fault wittingly or willingly for the
dearest friends sake: O rather let all friendship fall to the dust, then thy
friendship with God should be endangered.

10 Thou shall pray for all men, and strive to obtain of God truly to know him,
love him, worship him, and thou shall endeavor by all means truly to bring all
to the knowledge of him, to love him, and to worship him.

11 Fail not to be a frequent partaker of his holy Communion, that so thou
may cleave nearer to him by faith, and more sweetly converse and delight thy
self with him in one Spirit.

12 In every creature thou shall contemplate God, who in the least things is
most great. Thou shall love him in them, and them for his sake. See thou the
Sun? It is God (say) that sends forth these beauteous beams, who is the
Fountain of all beauty himself, and ten thousand times brighter then the Sun.
Is meat set before thee? say, God has prepared a table for me. And so forth of
the rest.

CHAP. IIII. The Exercise of Religion toward God.
IN all distresses and afflictions make Prayer thy refuge.

2 And upon all occasions, at any time or place when thou prayest, pray not
only in spirit, but also exhibit a lowly reverence by the outward gesture of
thy body: especially in thy private devotions, where God alone is witness of
thy actions: and in public so far forth as thou seem not unto men to affect
hypocrisy, or vain ostentation with the Pharisee, Matt. 6.5. But in private
ejaculations which are the arrows of the soul shot to heaven, every outward
gesture is not so needful to be expressed.

3 The Common Prayer, and Sermons, and other duties of devotion neglect not;
but say with David, I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the
House of the Lord, Psalm. 122.

4 Be careful that Divine Service be performed aright, and delight thy self in
the beauty of Gods House.

5 If God has given thee riches, adorn Churches therewith, buy Books,
Chalices, Vestments, and other ornaments for them at thine own cost; especially
in such places where Divine Service is not altogether so devoutly and purely
administered.

6 Set aside appointed times for thy private devotions, and observe them not
only out of custom, but of fervency to increase thy piety.

7 Use not thy self to swearing, yet if thou swear, perform thy oaths.

8 Vow nothing rashly, but upon great deliberation; and when thou have vowed,
pay.

9 Imitate the life of Jesus Christ, and follow the steps of his Saints in all
things, wherein they may or ought to be imitated.

10 The pious rites and Ceremonies of the Church esteem highly of, which are
not repugnant to Gods word; and on the other side, fly superstition.

CHAP. V. The Exercise of Charity toward our Neighbor.
IF thou see men flourishing and in prosperity, think that thou beholdest
God in them, who is the wellspring of all good: If on the contrary thou see
any poor and despised, Christ and him crucified. By these considerations thou will nourish and show love to both sorts. In love make no difference between
thy friends and enemies, Charity embraces these as well as them; them indeed
with more tenderness, these with more nobleness.

2 Thou shall strive by all wishes and prayers, all pains and endeavors, that
all may have sufficiency of the gifts of Nature and prosperity, but
especially of divine Grace, that so they may be truly happy: And if thou see
any to abound in these with affluence, show thy self glad of it, with all
cheerfulness of countenance; but if thou find any to want them, or be in
any distress or peril, thou shall be sad and endeavor by all means to rid
him from his calamity.

3 Thou shall interpret all things from others in the better sense, thou shall
scorn none, nor detract from any; nor provoke them by opprobrious terms. Honor
all with due respect. If any detract or rail against other thou shall
interpose, and maintain his credit with what buckler thou can Thou shall
further all thou can in the fear and worship of God; and to good works thou
shall persuade by word but much rather by example, they indeed move, but these
draw.

4 Deny not to succor, to lend when thou art asked, nay do such courtesies
without asking; Feed the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, entertain the
stranger, clothe the naked, and visit the sick, redeem the prisoners, and bury
the dead: This Charity belongs to the body.

5 As for the soul, Instruct the ignorant, correct the sinner, counsel the
doubtful, comfort the afflicted, endure injuries, forgive wrongs, pray for
others, yea for thy enemies.

6 Observe friendship with constancy, fasten that knot, and if it be loosed,
tie it again: Reconcile those who are fallen out; strifes and contentions which
are the bane of Charity extinguish and wipe away: these and all other deeds of
mercy and goodness perform with all cheerfulness.

CHAP. VI. The Exercise of Zeal for the salvation of Souls.
Use constantly the appointed prayers for the Church, by name, For the Kings
Majesty, his Royal Consort, and their princely Progeny; for all the
Magistrates and Clergy. It much concerns the public good, to have special
care of public Persons.

2 Thou shall promote the good of others by setting forth books, catechismes,
exhortations, sermons, lections, either by thy self or others; by thy
munificence toward the Universitie and Schools, etc. or by any other ways
thou can.

3 If any offends or has incurred any fault, do thy endeavor to forbid it, or
take it away; and be as diligent as if thou thy self had been wounded thereby.

4 And if it shall please God hereafter to make thee a Father of a family, and
bless thee with wife and children, thou shall have a singular care of them,
they are more near to thee. Discipline thy children betimes, provide a good
nurse, good guides for them: Here lies the main business, if thy children or
servants offend grievously, correct and chastise them severely; rule thy wife
with prudence, and provoke her to good works. Be vigilant and careful night
and day for the chastity of thy daughters: thou have no treasure so much
exposed as these.

5 Lastly, govern all thy family piously and religiously, let all resort to
Prayer morning and evening, privately or publicly if it may be. Let all that
can assemble in Common Prayers at Church; let this be a law to thy Family;
Whosoever comes within this house let him be sober, chaste, just, religious
honest in all things. Lie not, forswear not, blaspheme not; detract not from
others: mind not cups and revells: offend not anybodies eyes or ears or mind,
either by words or deeds, Who so does otherwise, let him depart hence.

CHAP. VII. The Exercise of Repentance and Contrition.
INto the bottom of thy penitent soul shoot these fiery darts: Ah me! What
thoughts have I had! what have I said? what have I done? mad man that I am! I
have transgressed contrary to all reason and conscience: and oh me! against
whom? and who am I that have done it? I a vile and contemptible wretch, a base
clod of earth, more foul and more unworthy then all Creatures, have dared (and
with what face!) in the presence of my God himself, to defy him who is my
Maker, who formed me out of nothing: who is my Redeemer, and ransomed me with
his blood, when I had made my self worse then nothing: Who is my God, my only
God. Yet the wages of sin is death. Oh what a terrible thing is it to fall
into the hands of the living God!

2 And for a momentanie pleasure (ah shameful Merchant that I am!) in contempt
of heaven I have purchased to my self the everlasting torments of hell fire. I
am confounded and ashamed; for though none be privy to my sin besides my
self, yet what will become of me when my uncleannes shall be unfolded before,
all Saints and Angels. And how great is my ungratitude to offend him thus who
has done so much for me? to have despised all his mercies and loving
kindnesses? O unthankful I! who have trampled his blood under my feet: O
cruel and thrice wicked me! who have thus often crucified thee, O sweet Jesu!
And yet thou art patient, nay stretchest forth thy nailed arms to embrace me,
and hangest down thy blessed head to kiss me! O infinite Goodness! I am
sorry sorry for my sins, and lament now, not so much that I have lost heaven
and purchased hell, as that I have offended thee O merciful Father, who now
do not only not strike me dead, but also knockest, that I may come to thee
and beg for mercy; which thing surely thou would not do, unless thou
intendedst to have mercy upon me. And now fallen flat on my face I come to thee
like the Prodigal son that had spent all, and cry, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son,
Luke 15. But pardon me, O my Father.

3 Then when thou feel thy soul to grow warm with a heavenly fire, break
forth into these Flames of lively sorrow:

O my most Gracious God! O my most sweet Jesus! I repent from the bottom of my
heart, that by my foul transgressions I have offended thy Majesty and most
infinite Goodness, which I ought and will now love above all created things;
and this, cause thou art the God Almighty, wise, holy, and good, to whom all
sin is more odious and detestable then can be possibly imagined. Wherefore
for this thy Love sake I firmly resolve never to offend thee any more, to shun
all occasions of evil, and perform all that thou have commanded me: Forgive I
beseech thee, as I forgive all trespasses against me: and as I humbly crave
pardon of my offenses so I hope by thy merits of thy precious blood, O Jesus! I
shall obtain what I ask for, and by thy Grace shall amend the remainder of my
life and persevere in thy service unto my death. Amen.

4 Let this be thy constant duty, morning and evening, and as often as thou
shall fall into any sin, that so thou may recover Gods favor to thee
again.

5 And to prove thy repentance to be sincere, chastise and mortify thy flesh,
by abating thy flesh of all pleasant food, by sobriety and temperance in thy
diet, by prayers labors and fastings; that thy flesh may be subdued to the
spirit, and yet think not that thou deservest or may challenge pardon at
Gods hands for all these.

CHAP VIII. The Exercise of Humility.
THou art a sinful and a wretched man, and art mad if thou arrogate any thing
to thy self: Wherefore if thou be commended at any time by others or highly
esteemed of ascribe all the praise to God who is the Fountain of all Goodness,
from whence whatever good is in thee first flowed.

2 If in all thy life thou have committed any sin against God or thy
Neighbor, either by will or deed, thou have deserved hell fire; if therefore
by Gods providence thou suffer any afflictions or injuries or reproaches from
thine enemies think thus with thy self, I have deserved to be punished in hell,
how small then are these troubles in comparison of those torments!

3 Fly riot in clothes or feasting, and all vain pomp and gaudinesse in
family or housholdstuff.

4 If the spirit of pride move thee at any time, say with that humble and
humbled Saint, I have said to rottenness thou art my father, and to the worm
thou art my mother and my sister. Job 17. And add, Wherefore art thou proud, O
dust and ashes!

5 Make no open of thy good works, yet let them think that so God may be
glorified thereby and the Church edified.

6 Scorn not to put thy hand to the lowest and meanest offices for thine own
good or the good of others.

7 Give good heed to wholesome counsel and correction, and be not thou forward
to make excuses.

8 Think often and often upon thy death, judgment and hell; let these be always
written in the tables of thy mind. Especially when thou go to bed, think
that thy bed is thy voluntary grave, and sleep but the image of thy death.

9 Repeat not what may make for thy own commendation, brag not, nor vaunt of
great matters; of thy natural endowments, thy virtues, learning, nor thy
ancient stock. What have thou which thou did not receive? and if thou
receivedst it, why do thou brag as if they were thine own? 1. Cor. 4.7. O
most vain man! cover thy self with thy dust, for dust thou art and to dust
shall thou return. Genesis 3.19. Nothing is properly thine own but sin, which
may justly make thee ashamed but not proud.

10 Carry thine eyes lowly, behold the earth sometimes, and judge thy self an
unprofitable burden thereof.

11 When thou passest through a Churchyard, say, This is our home, appointed
for all men, hither we all tend, and are we proud?

12 Cast not angry looks upon any out of hate, nor offend them by word or
gesture. Gentleness is daughter or the sister of Humility.

13 Yield to other men's judgments if they agree with right reason, Be not high
minded nor wise in thine own conceit, Romans 12. Give the place which is more
honorable and fit for others: Converse willingly with the poor and lowly:
Visit Prisons, Hospitalls and Almshouses to do good to them.

14 Moreover account not only thy self the meanest and lowest of all, but
profess it openly to others; and if others esteem so of thee, be not sad but
rather rejoice, Jam. 1.10.

15 Lastly, if thou find thy mind at any time prone unto pride, keep down its
swelling with this thought, What was I once, O Lord! what am I now, and what
shall I be hereafter? I was nothing once, I am nothing, and perhaps shall be
worse then nothing. I was conceived in sin and have heaped up actual
transgressions, and now unless I repent and obey the Gospel, I shall be damned
for ever, Mar. 1.15 ibid. 16.16. Luke 13.5. I was once unclean seed, and am now
but a mass of corruption and shall be food for worms. If I had remained as
thou at the first created us, I could not have been damned, and now by reason
of my sins I cannot be saved but through thy merits, and I shall be at last
either eternally damned for my own faults, or eternally saved for thy mercies
sake. I know what once I was; I know not what I am now, except thou illuminate
me; and what I shall be hereafter I am ignorant unles thy Spirit confirm me.
Pardon O Lord what I have been rectify what I am now, and guide me in thy
paths hereafter, that I may ever meditate these things and think humbly of my
self

CHAP. IX. The Exercise of Modesty.
MOdesty, the sister or daughter of Humility, regards the decency and fit
carriage of the whole body.

2 Let thy garments be neither too gay, nor yet beggarly.

3 Let thy gesture be without affectation, yet not fantastical; but as
becomes thee.

4 Let thy countenance be free, but not lofty: cheerful, not lowering. Thine
eyes neither frowning, nor yet wanton; fixed upon no bad object. Carry thy
mouth seemly. Let thy voice be manlike, and yet not loud. Thy speech pure,
simple, harmless; and express no stage player in thy gesture, without
mimicall actions. Consider whether thou art faulty in these, and take to thee a
faithful counselor, because we cannot so well behold our selves.

5 Use Modesty even then when thou art alone, else thou may easily slip in
public, and behave thy self in thy private closet as if the eyes of all looked
upon thee.

CHAP. X. The Exercise of Patience.
TAke it not grudgingly if unseasonable weathers, cold, and heat, and rain, and
other inconveniences of nature; nay, though drought and famine happen to thee;
because thy manifold offenses which thou have committed, have deserved a
thousand-times more heavy plagues then these be. If thou considerest those,
these will seem lighter to thee.

2 Diseases also be they never so grievous and continual, thou ought to
kiss these rods as love tokens received from the Almighty. What thou think
to be strokes are strokings. That holy man knew this to be true, who once
cried, Burn me here, O Lord! cut me, and lance me here, so thou spare me
hereafter.

3 If through tedious and heavy sickness thou break into impatience, cheer up
thy troubled soul thus; Be strong, O my heart, be strong. He who now chastises
thee is thy most indulgent Father. He who cauterizeth thee and launceth thee
now, remember, is thy most wise and skillful Physician. It will be better with
thee ere long, and he that torments thee a little now, will spare thee for ever
hereafter. This fiery trial does but purge away thy dross, and make thy gold
show brighter. Meditate moreover upon Christ dying on the Cross, and so many
Martyrs dying for him: If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him.

4 And if revilements, reproaches, or other injuries be thrown upon thee,
strengthen thy soul and undergo them not only valiantly, but also constantly.

5 In all these (whatever the causes may be) be silent, for it is impatiency to
complain. Beware thou accuse not heaven, or the elements, or men. None is more
injurious to thee then thou to thy self, if thou be impatient: Righteous is the
Lord, and true are his judgments.

6 If thou find no comfort all this while, nor thy soul any dew of heaven, but
only gall to drink, yet drink even that, and say, Why, It is not fit to take
the childrens bread, and throw it unto dogs. It is enough that the dogs gather
up the crumbs under their Masters table, but my sinful life has not deserved
the least crumbe.

7 But here take heed lest in these worldly troubles, forgetting thy Creator,
thou seek redress by vile means and desire to thrive by unlawful courses; for
it may often happen when thou would hold fast and retain thy innocence,
diverse occasions and men may dissuade thee, objecting thy poverty and crosses,
but do not thou therefore let go, nor depart from thy righteousness.

8 Thy wrongs tell not unto others, neither reckon them, up to thy self. If thy
friends, thy father and mother forsake thee, yet say, I will leave all and
follow my Jesus. Then say with greater fervency, Our Father which art in
heaven, etc. and with David, When my father and my mother forsake me, the Lord
takes me up, Psalm. 27. and Know this, that in the last times troublesome days
shall come, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution, 2. Tim. 3.12.

9 If the times compel thee to suffer for Religion and righteousness sake, be
not afraid of imprisonment, nor death it self: but rather rejoice with the
Apostles, that thou art accounted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Jesus,
Acts 5.41. and with S. Paul be ready to lay down thy life, if need require.

CHAP. XI. The Exercise of leaving all for Christ's sake.
UPon urgent necessity part with thy wealth, as when the general poverty of
thy brethren requires it, when heat of persecution rages, or lastly, when
temptations from thence increase so upon thee, that either thou must forsake
all, or lose Christ, Act. 4.32, 34, 35. Hebr. 10.34. Matthew. 19.21. And yet if
thou leave all, pride not thy self in any desert. The Apostle S. Paul said,
Those things which were gain to me I accounted loss for Christ; yea, and I
account all but dung, that I may gain Christ, and be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness which is by the Law, but the righteousness which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil.
3.7. etc.

2 Throw away all vain desire of riches; despise this world, yea, all solace of
acquaintance and worldly goods, if they hinder thee from Christ, or a godly
life.

3 If our Profession require not to forsake all, and give all to the poor; yet
thou shall cast off all superfluous cares and anxieties of this life: Hate and
fly covetousness which the Apostle calls worshipping of idols, Col. 3.5.

4 Avarice is the root of all evils, which some following have erred from the
faith, and pierced themselves thorough with many sorrows. But thou, fly these
things and follow righteousness, holiness, faith, charity, patience, meekness,
1. Tim. 6.10.

5 If riches increase set not thy mind upon them, said that Kingly Prophet,
Psalm. 62.10. Be thou lord over thy wealth, but let not that be over thee.

6 Settle thy self rather to endure poverty and death it self, then to increase
wealth by fraud or any sin. Nay, be ready to forsake Crowns and Scepters if
thou have them, if the Crown and Kingdom of heaven call thee away.

7 At any feasting, if thou prepare a wedding or a funeral feast, or the like,
set aside a portion for the poor and sick, whom the prison or bed detains.

8 If thou have wherewithal, give something daily to the poor; He that has
pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17. Wherefore to him that
asks thee an alms, give without delay: to those chiefly whom necessity may
urge to take evil courses, or modesty will not permit to beg. And if thou have
nothing to give give them good words at least. For remember that it is the Lord
who of all he has given thee, requires a penny back again, a morsel of bread, a
cup of drink, by the hands of the poor. And teach thy children or servants to
say, Father, or Master, Christ stands at the door desiring an alms. Let thy
children carry it, that they likewise may learn to have mercy. Out of thy daily
gains sever one part to give to the poor. This is true piety. Some do so; and
happy art thou if thou do likewise.

9 This same duty to the poor forget not on thy dying bed, and in thy Will
make Christ heir of some of thy estate at least. So shall thou purchase a
reward in heaven.

CHAP. XII. The Exercise of Justice.
DO Justice, and speak the truth from thy heart detract not with thy tongue,
and do no evil to thy neighbor. If thou swear to thy neighbor disappoint him
not, though it be to thine own hinderance.

2 Render to every man his due, hurt no body, do as you would be done by: As ye
would that men should do unto you, so do unto them, Matthew. 7.12.

3 Pay that thou owe, restore what is not thine own: Beware that thou keep
not the hire of the poor by thee, it is an abomination unto the Lord, Lev.
19.13.

4 Thou shall not have diverse weights in thy bag, a greater and a less;
neither shall thou have measures, a greater and a less in thine house; but thy
weight shall be just and true, and thy measure even and true, that thou may
live long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee: For the Lord thy God
hates him who does so, and turns away himself from all unrighteousness,
Deuteronomy. 25.13. etc

5 Be not unthankful, but acknowledge and profess from whom and how great
benefits thou have received, and show thy self willing and ready to return all
possible and honest thanks to thy benefactours.

6 Thou shall not justify the wicked, neither shall thou pervert judgment, nor
shall thou judge with respect of persons. Thou shall not take a gift; because
gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and alter the sentence of the just, Deu. 16

7 Preserve peace and quietness, and prefer the public good before thy private.

CHAP. XIII. The Exercise of Obedience.
HEarken unto the commands of thy Fathers, especially of Gods Ministers, as
unto the Oracles of God.

2 Obey Rulers and thy Parents, and do what they bid thee. Thou shall perform
all their commands whom God has set over thee, Deuteronomy. 17.10.

3 Observe truly and constantly the laws of the Commonwealth or society
wherein thou live. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers. Romans
13.1.

4 If thou be a son or a servant attend the will of thy Superiors, and do
what they command thee.

5 If their commands distaste thee, yet be thou obedient, unless they command
a thing apparently evil: for when any thing is commanded against God, then obey
God rather then men, Acts 5. 29.

6 But if their commands be just, perform them though they be adverse to thy
inclination; and do them heartily without delay.

CHAP. XIIII. The Exercise of Chastity.
THou shall stir up in thee an exceeding love of Chastity, and a vehement
hatred of all wantonness.

2 By all means shun all occasions of luxury; Turn away thine eyes from
alluring beauties, and look not after women, fix them not there.

3 Keep with a double lock thy ears and tongue from obscenitie and
scurrilitie. Abstain from impudent jests and gestures; from shameless
companions and evil conversation fly as from a serpent.

4 When thou art alone, incline not to lust, sin not; for God sees.

5 Pamper not thy flesh; soft raiment, drinking, and dainty meats effeminate
both mind and body. Go not to suspicious places; use not idleness, wanton
Books, lascivious Pictures, nor immodest dances: It is a true saying, Who flies
wantonness, puts it to flight.

6 When thou go to sleep, close up thy eyes with heavenly thoughts. When
thou awakest shake off all foul imaginations. Call on thy Jesus, and set thy
mind on divine objects.

7 If in the day time foul imaginations and suggestions arise, repel them by
Prayer and strengthen thy mind against them. Meditate of the presence of God
and his holy Angels, of the Cross of Christ, thy own death, judgment, and
hell. Such golden nails will soon drive out the other.

8 Wash and cleanse thy soul full often; if thou have polluted thy self with
sins of the flesh, confess with David thy transgressions unto the Lord,
Psalm. 32.5. Take to thee some wise and faithful Nathan who may comfort thee in
thy Repentance, and say, The Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not
die, 2. Sam. 12.13.

9 Go, and sin no more. Confession is the sinners physic: But resist by all
means temptations in the beginning. When first therefore thou feel thy
sensitive appetite to rebel against reason, and the devil at hand; resist him
presently or thou art undone. If the old serpent gets but in his head, he will
soon draw in his whole body: therefore be ready to crush that cockatrice in
the shell; think of some other matter. Call upon God, for his aid, set thy self
to some hard labor, honest and profitable, lest the devil find thee idle.

10 I beseech thee by the mercy of God, to present thy body a lively
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, Romans 12. Make not the members of Jesus
Christ the members of an harlot. Thy body ought to be the temple of the H.
Ghost; Thou art bought with a price, therefore glorify God in thy body and in
thy spirit which are Gods: S. Paul speaks excellently of this, 1. Cor. 6.

CHAP. XV. The Exercise of Temperance.
EAt such aquantitie of food as may stand with the health of thy body, and not
the destruction of thy soul. In feeding fly all greediness and voracity. Take
thy food but as Physic.

2 Be sober and vigilant, because your adversary the devil goes about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8. Take heed lest at any
time thy heart be burdened with surffeting and drunkenness and cares of this
life, and the day of the Lord come upon thee unawares, Luke 21.34. Woe to thee
if thou risest early to follow strong drink, and continue till night. Woe to
thee if thou be strong to mingle strong drink. Isa. 5. 11, 22.

Wherefore I command thee and adjure thee by that terrible day of judgment, to
fly drunkenness with all thy power, and Gods help. Drunkards together with
fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, lascivious, abusers of themselves with
mankind thieves, covetous, railers, extortieners, are utterly excluded from the
kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6.9, 10.

3 Give not strong drink to another to make him drunk. Woe be to thee if thou
do. We may here apply that of the Prophet, speaking, of the judgment of the
Chaldeans, Hab. 2. 15, 16. Drink thou also -- The cup of the Lords right hand
shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.

4 Though thou be adjur'd by great and dear names to drink off whole ones,
consent not.

5 Thou ought to abstain not only from imitating, but also from the company
of drunkards; according to that of the Apostle; If any who is called a brother,
be a drunkard, with such an one do not eat, 1. Cor. 5.11. And if the Church
neglect to excommunicate such a notorious unrepentant sinner; if the Magistrate
punish him not, yet let every man in particular shun his company, lest they
appear to comply with other men's sins, or to partake with them This is to be
done then at least, when there is no hope of his repentance.

6 Let it suffice thee for the time past to have lived as the heathens live;
walking in lasciviousness, lusts, drinkings, revellings, and abominable
idolatries -- The end of all is at hand, be thou therefore sober, and watch
unto prayer, 1. Pet. 4.3.

I charge thee by Christ to consider what I say, and the Lord grant thee
understanding in all things.

God sanctify thee throughout, that thou may be blameless in soul and body,
and may be found so at his coming, when he shall come to judgment to render
unto all according to their works.

The Lord preserve thee unto his heavenly Kingdom: To whom be glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table.
CHAP. I. The Exercise of Faith. page 1. CHAP. II. The Exercise of Hope 10
CHAP. III. The Exercise of Charity toward God, and zeal for his glory 22
CHAP. IIII. The Exercise of Religion to Godward 39 CHAP. V. The Exercise of
charity toward our Neighbor 44 CHAP. VI. The Exercise of zeal for the
salvation of souls 50 CHAP. VII. The Exercise of repentance and remorse for
sins 55 CHAP. VIII. The Exercise of Humility 65 CHAP. IX. The Exercise of
Modesty 76 CHAP. X. The Exercise of Patience 79 CHAP. XI. The Exercise of
forsaking all for Christ's sake 88 CHAP. XII. The Exercise of Justice 96 CHAP.
XIII. The Exercise of Obedience 100 CHAP. XIIII. The Exercise of Chastity 103
CHAP. XV. The Exercise of Temperance 110
FINIS.

