THE HISTORY. OF THE Sacred and Royal Majesty OF CHRISTINA ALESSANDRA QUEEN OF
SWEDLAND With the Reasons of her late Conversion to the Roman Catholic
Religion. As also a Relation of the several entertainments given her by diverse
Princes in her Journey to Rome, with her magnificent Reception into that City.

LONDON, Printed for T. W. and are to be sold at the Sign of the Bell in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To the glory of the Age, and Compendium of Honor and Nobility, her Grace the
Duchess of RICHMOND and LENOX.
May it please your Grace,
THE golden-Apple, on which was this Inscription, be it given to the fairest,
Paris presented to Venus, as surpassing the others in beauty. The same
condition is annexed to this History, which belonging of right to the fairest,
most justly is presented to your Grace, as surpassing all others in the beauty
of the body, and mind. And whom should a Queen so renowned for her virtues, and
eminent qualities, make her addresses to, if not to your Grace, who like the
glorious Sun among the lesser lights, out-shines all other Ladies with the
rays of your Graces rare virtues, and admirable parts. These reflections
(Madam) invited this great Princess to recurre to your Grace, who like the
River Nilus, disdains to mix the waters she brings from a Paradise, with any
other stream. Since the offering then (Madam) is no ways unworthy of your
Graces noble Altar, where Hecatombs are only to be sacrificed, be pleased not
to lessen it in your Graces esteem, because presented by,

Madam Your Graces most humble and most devoted Servant, JOHN BURBERY.

TO THE READER.
IN the Catastrophe of the accidents, which still are reducing this Age, into a
large abridgment of all that are past, the resolutions and talents of Christina
Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, have an eminent place.

That a Queen by birth, of a spirit so sublime, and the Epilogue of all
virtues, should depose her Scepter voluntarily, and fall at the feet of the
Vicar of Christ, to receive there in his blessings -- a crown of Paradise, in
such a resolution, as too much surpasses the capacity of man, and not only
custom. The World peradventure has not seen any other, that to purchase the
true Faith, has abandoned his own Kingdoms, and to be enriched with the Jewels
of Heaven, has divested himself of the treasures of the earth.

I therefore have begun to compose a particular History of it, and hitherto
have gone on with delight, for it contains not only a great Princesses rare
qualities, and Prerogatives, but likewise the entertainments, she has till now
received of the greatest Princes, and Monarchs of Christendom, so as it may
truly be said, Christina the great in her resolutions, and receptions, could
meet with nothing equal to her great desert, but the mind, and piety of a
Philip, and an Alexander.

Some perhaps may think, I have employed my Pen in certain little things not
suitable to the Majesty of the History, but let them remember, the knowledge of
individuums, and the memories of particular men, provided they deserved well of
fame, increase still in credit, and delight with Posterity. In case they
persist in the rigor of their scruples, they will easily be satisfied, if they
read alone that part, which pleases them most, Farewell.

WE, the Reformers of the study at Padoua, having seen by the testimony of our
Secretary, that in the book entitled the History of the sacred Majesty of
Christina Alessandra Queen of Swedland, by Count Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato,
printed in quarto in Rome, there is nothing repugnant to good manners, nor the
interests of Princes, grant license to Francis Baba to print it, he observing
the Laws in this case, and presenting a Copy for the public Library of Venice,
and another for that of Padoua. In Witness whereof, etc. Anno Domini the 24. of
May, 1656.

John Donado Reformer.
Andrew Pisani Procurator and Reformer.
FRANCIS VERDIZZOTTI SECRETARY.

AN INDEX Of the most remarkable things contained in this present HISTORY.
A
DOn Antonio Pimentell goes into Swedland by order of his Catholic Majesty.
Advertisments given by the Queen to the new King of Swedland. The affliction of
the people for the Queens renouncing her Kingdoms. The arrival of the Queen of
Swedland in Hambourg. The arrival of the Queen of Swedland in Antwerp. The
applauses, with which she is received in Flandres. The Arch Duke sends to
complement the Queen, and goes afterward thither in Person. Don Antonio
Pimentel extraordinary Ambassador of his Catholic Majesty with the Queen of
Swedland. The assumption of Cardinal Fabius Chigi to the Papacy, and the
general applauses for his exaltation. The Marquis of Anspach visits her
Majesty. Auspurge, and its description. The absolution given her Majesty by my
Lord Holstenius. The Marquis Andreasi complements the Queen in the name of the
Duke of Mantoua. The arrival of the Queen in Rome, who went presently to k^ss
his Holinesses feet. The affability of the Queen. Academies instituted by her
Majesty in her own Palace. The answer of Don Antonio Pimentel to the Queen.
B.
THe Briefs of his Holiness consigned to my Lord Holstenius. The Briefs for the
Prince of Trent. The Brief for the Archduke of Inspruch. The Brief of his
Holiness to the Queen of Swedland. The Brief of his Holiness to the Queen
presented to her by the Nuntii at her entrance into the Churches Dominions. The
Brief of his Holiness to the Cardinal Legates a Latere. Count Bucquoy
complements the Queen in the name of his Catholic Majesty.
C.
CHristina succeeds in the Kingdom of Swedland. Her education, and admirable
wit. She learns diverse Languages, makes great progress in learning, begins to
assist at the Council, and afterward takes upon her the Government. She
herself administers the affairs, and is beloved and feared. She is a great
lover of virtue, despises all delicacie. She makes War, and then Peace with the
King of Denmark. She is respected by all the Princes of the World. She has
diverse inspirations. She discovers the errors of the Lutherans. The reasons
which move her to the knowledge of the truth. With her own virtue she makes
herself capable of the truth. She examins the life and condition of Luther. She
perceives the falsitie and lies spread by him. She fortifies herself with some
important examples. She abhors heresy. She thinks to turn Catholic. She
imparts her design to Don Antonio Pimentel. She trusts wholly in God. She
resolves to quit her Kingdoms. Her generous Act. She goes privately to see
Bruxels. The ceremonies in receiving the Queen in the Church. The Cavaliers of
Verona which met her Majesty. The Cavalcata of the Cardinal Legates in their
going to Olgiata. The complements of several Gentlemen to the Queen at the
Vineyard of Pope Julius. The Castle of St. Angelo is seen by the Queen. The
College of Sapienza. The Church of the Greeks. The Roman College. The rare
things in the said Roman College. The Comedy entitled the Triumph of piety
acted in the Palace of the Prince of Pellestrina. The College of the English.
The noble Church of Minerva. The great Conquests of Gustavus King of Swedland.
D.
THe Queens discourse with Father Macedo the Jesuits. Her Majesty's demand of
the General of the Jesuits. The deliberation of the States of Swedland in
substituting Count Charles Gustavus Palatine, King, after the Queen of
Swedland. Politic discourses. The King of Denmark endeavors to meet, and
receive the Queen of Swedland. The differences between the Crown of Swedland,
and the City of Bremen. The description of Munster. The discourse of the Queen
of Swedland with my Lord Holstenius. Donavert, and the quality of the Place.
The description of some Towns in Tirole. The discourse of the Queen at a
public dinner in Ferrara. The description of Ferrara. The description of
Bologna. The description of Faenza. The description of Rimini. The description
of Pesaro. The description of Fano. The description of Ancona. The devotion of
her Majesty at Loretto. The description of Loretto. The description of
Recanati. The description of Macerata. The description of Tolentino. The
description of Camerino. The description of Foligno. The description of Assisi.
The description of Spoleto. The description of Terni. The description of
Gallese. The Duke of Terranuova Ambassador of Spain in Rome, goes to
complement the Queen in Caprarola. The description of Caprarola. The
description of Bracciano. The dispatching of the Nuntii, and Baldocchi.
E.
THe education of the Queen of Swedland. The entrance of the Queen of Swedland
into Bruxels. The Elector Palatine waits on her Majesty, and invites her to
Heydelberg. Her entrance into Inspruch. The weighty examples, with which the
Queen of Swedland gives nourishment to her good inclinations. Her Majesty's
entrance into Tyrole. Her Majesty's public entrance into Rome with a solemn
Cavalcata. Her Majesty's entrance into the Ecclesiastical state. The great
esteem all the Princes of Europe have of the Queen of Swedland.
F.
FRanckfort, and its description. The form of the subscription of the public
Act of the profession of the Faith made by the Queen of Swedland. Figarolo, and
the quality of the place. S. Francis of Assisi visited by the Queen. The
sumptuous Fountain in Piazza Navona.
G.
THe General of the Jesuits sends two Fathers of the Society into Swedland.
Father Francis John Baptist Guemes a Dominican. arrives in Swedland. The Queen
imparts to him her motives to be a Catholic, and sends him to the Court of
Spain. The Duke of Gloucester visits her Majesty. Baron Ghirardi chief Minister
of the Archduke of Inspruch visited by my Lord Holstenius. The wonderful
generosity of the Queen of Swedland. The generosity of the Prince of Trent. The
Prince of St. Gregory. complements the Queen.
H
HAmbourg, and its description. The Honors done to the Queen by the Landgrave
of Hessen. The Honors done her Majesty by the Duke of Bavaria. The Honors
done her Majesty by the Archdukes of Inspruch. My Lord Holstenius goes to
Mantoua and Trent. The Honors done her Majesty by the Bishop of Bressanon. The
Honors done her Majesty by the Duke of Mantoua in his state. The Honors done
her Majesty in Bologna. The Honors done her Majesty in Pesaro. The Honors
done her Majesty in Ancona. The Honors done her Majesty by the Pope. The
Honors done her Majesty as she passed by the Castle of St. Angelo.
I.
THe holy inspirations of her Majesty of Swedland. The instances made by the
States of Swedland to the Queen. The Island of Oland, and the quality of the
place. Inspruch the residence of the Archdukes of Austria. The invitation made
the Queen by the Baron of Fermiano in the name of the Prince of Trent. The
invitation made her Majesty by the Duke of Mantoua. The joy in Inspruch for the
profession made by the Queen of Swedland. The death of Pope Innocent the tenth.
K.
THe King of Spain writes to the Pope. The King of Spain hears with great joy,
the pious resolutions of the Queen of Swedland, and furthers them
affectionately. The King of Scotland visits the Queen. The life and qualities
of King Gustavus of Swedland, his stature, his remarkable sayings and
conquests.
L.
HEr Majesty's letter to Pope Alexander the seventh. Limbourg and its
description. Her Majesty's letter to the Archduke of Inspruch. Landsperg and
its Sc^tuation. My Lord Luke Holstenius dispatched from his Holiness to
Inspruch. My Lord Luke Holstenius communicates to the Ambassador Pimentel the
intention of his Holiness. Her Majesty's letter written from Inspruch to the
King of Swedland. Her Majesty's Letter to the Prince of Trent. Cardinal
Barberines letter to Cardinal Rossetti. The Legates a Latere dispatched from the
Pope to receive her Majesty. The famous Library in the Roman College.
M.
HEr Majesty of Swedland is met by the Officers of the Duke of Bavaria. Her
Majesty is met by the Prince of Trent. Her Majesty is met by the Duke of
Mantoua. Her Majesty is met by Cardinal Donghi. Her Majesty is met by Cardinal
Rossetti. Her Majesty is met by Cardinal Acquaviva Legate of Romagna. Her
Majesty is met, and royally received by Cardinal Homo^ei Legate of Urbin. Her
Majesty is met by my Lord Visconte Governor of Patrimony. Her Majesty is met
by the Duke of Bracciano. Her Majesty is met at Porta del Popolo by the sacred
College of the Cardinals. Her Majesty is met solemnly at Bruxels. Father
Macedo the Jesuit is dispatched by her Majesty to Rome. Father Malines dispatched
by her Majesty to the Court of Spain. The marriage of the Queen of Swedland
with the Princess of Holstein. The manner observed by her Majesty in her
government. Minden, and its description. Count Montecuccoli dispatched from the
Emperor into Flandres to complement her Majesty. The death of Maria Eleonora
Queen of Swedland. Count Montecuccoli dispatched from her Majesty to Rome.
Father Malines the Jesuit dispatched to discover the inclination of the Queen.
Madam della Cueva remains sick in Ussulengo. Count Montecuccoli returns from
Rome to the Queen. The manner of the Queens sitting at table with the
Cardinals. The Monastery of St. Catharine of Siena. The musical Plays acted
before her Majesty in Inspruch. The musical Play acted in the German College.
N
NOrdlinghen, and its description. The Nuntii elected by the Pope to receive
the Queeen of Swedland on the Confines of the Churches Dominions. The names of
the Cavaliers, that were the tilters in Bologna. The names of the Cavaliers in
the Cavalcata of the Queen. The names of the Gentlemen of the Queens Academy in
Rome.
O
OBservations of importance. The order of the Cavalcata of the Cardinal
Legates. The order of the Cavalcata of the Governor of Rome. The order of the
Cavalcata from the Capitol to the Bridge Molle. The Order of her Majesty's
Cavalcata from the Vatican to the Bridge Molle. The order of her Majesty's
Cavalcata from the Bridge Molle to the Vineyard of Pope Julius. The Order of
the Queens solemn Cavalcata from the Bridge Molle to the Vatican.
P
THe progress of the Queen in learning. The great piety of his Catholic
Majesty. The Princes of Germany, which visit her Majesty in Hambourg. The
pretenses of the Prince of Conde to the Queen of Swedland, who visits her
Majesty. The Princes and Cavaliers who waited on her Majesty in Antwerp. Count
Pontus della Garda waits on her Majesty. The profession of the Catholic Faith
made secretly by the Queen of Swedland'n Bruxels. Ponte del lac, and its
description. The passage of the Queen of Swedland through Cullen. The passage
of her Majesty through Franckfort. The passage of her Majesty through Auspurge.
The Palace of Ambre, and ^ts S^^tuation. The profession of the Catholic Faith
made publicly by the Queen of Swedland in Inspruch. The passage of the Queen
through the state of Veni^e. The passage at Ponte Felice. The preparations made
for the solemn Cavalcata of the Queen. The Palace Farnese the lodging of her
Majesty, when she went from the Vatican. The Persons which depart with the
Queen from Flandres toward Italy. The Persons appointed to wait on the Queen
in her lodg^ngs at the Vatican. The parley of her Majesty with the Prince of
Holstein. The public Act of Profession made by the Queen of Swedland in
Inspruch. The sumptuous Preparation in the Church of Giesu, with what store of
people King Gustavus past into Germany. The presents made by her Majesty to the
Archduke and others in Bruxels. The presents of a Coach, Litter, Chair, and an
ambling Nag made by the Pope to the Queen. The presents made to her Majesty by
his Holiness in the Palace Farnese. The presents made to the Queen by Prince
Panfilio.
Q
THe qualities of Cardinal Pio Bishop of Ferrara. The qualities of Cardinal
John Baptist Spada Legate of Ferrara. The qualities of Cardinal Donghi. The
qualities of Cardinal Rossetti. The qualities of Cardinal Acquaviva. The
quality of the Family Martinozzi of Fano. The qualities of Cardinal Homodei
Legate of Urbin. The qualities of Cardinal Rondinino. The rare qualities of the
Queen of Swedland. The eminent qualities of the Princess of Rossano. The Queen
goes to the public Consistory to kiss the Popes feet. The Queens admirable
wit. The revenues reserved to herself by the Queen of Swedland. The Queen
writes to the General of the Jesuits. The Queen dispatches to Rome Father
Casati. The Queens departure toward Flandres. The Queens sudden departure from
Hambourg. The Queens departure from Bruxels. The Queens departure from
Inspruch. The Queens departure from Bologna. The Queens readiness to comply
with the Popes desires. The Queen dines publicly with the Archduke of
Inspruch. The Queen treats with the Jesuits. The Queen is visited by Count
Todt. The Queens royal entertainment at Landsperg by the Ministers of the Duke
of Bavaria. The Queens entertainment in Inspruch. The Queens entertainment by
the Prince of Trent. The Queens entertainment by Cardinal Spada Legate of
Ferrara. The Queens entertainment in Imola by Cardinal Donghi the Bishop of the
Place. The Queens entertainment in Forli. The Queens entertainment in Cesena.
The Queens entertainment in Rimini. The Queens entertainment in Sinigaglia. The
Queens entertainment in Ancona. The Queens entertainment in Loretto. The Queens
entertainment in Macerata. The Queens entertainment in Tolentino. The Queens
entertainment in Camerino. The Queens entertainment in Foligno. The Queens
entertainment in Assisi by Cardinal Rondinini. The Queens entertainment in
Terni. The Queens entertainment in Gallese. The Queens entertainment in
C^prarola. The Queens satisfaction in Pesaro. The Queen presents her Scepter
and Crown at Loretto. The Queen visits her Mother. The Queens journey through
Denmark. The Queens journey from Hambourg into Flandres. The Queens Aparel. The
Queens eminent virtues. The Queens visits the Church of St. Peter. The Queen
goes to the Church of St. James of the Spaniards. The Queen goes to the Church
of Giesu. The Queen visits the Monastery of Torre de Specchi. The Queen goes to
St. John Lateran. The Queen sees the famous relics of S. Peter's. The Queen
visits the Nuns of Campus Martius. The Queens answer to the States of Swedland.
R
THe Reasons and motives which incline the Queen of Swedland to change her
Religion. The resolutions of the Queen of Swedland to turn Catholic. The
resolution of the Queen of Swedland to support her resolutions by the Catholic
King. The renouncing made by the Queen of Swedland. The return of the Queen
from Upsalia to Stockholme. The return of the Archduke to Antwerp to
complement the Queen, and invite her to Bruxels. The reception of the Queen of
Swedland in Rutemond. Prince Robert Palatine visits her Majesty. The noble
reception of the Queen in Rotembourg. The return of Count Montecuccoli to the
Queen. The recreations of her Majesty in Inspruch. The recreations of her
Majesty in Ferrara. The reception of her Majesty by Cardinal Lomellino Legate
of Bologna. The return of her Majesty from Assisi to Foligno. The reception of
the Queen in Spoleto by Cardinal Fachenetti. The recreations of her Majesty in
Spoleto. The reception of the Queen at the Gate of St. Peter's. The recreations
of her Majesty in the Palace of Prince Panfilio. The royal lodgings in Revere.
S
THe straight of the Sound, and its description. Count Stemberg sent into
Swedland by the Queen. The sumptuous Bridge ore the Po. The noble Scaffold
erected in the Palace of the Prince Panfilio.
T.
The noble Tilting in Bologna.
V.
THe voyage of Father Malines, and Casati Jesuits into Swedland. The noble
Vineyard of Prince Panfilio.
W
WIrtzbourge, and the quality of the place. The Wars made by the Crown of
Swedland under Queen Christina.
Z.
Zibbery and its description.
FINIS.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The First Book.
The Argument.
IN this Book ^^e described the qualities of Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Swedland; The education of the Princess Christina his only Daughter. Her
Assumption to the Crowns The form of her Government. The motives and true
Causes of her conversion to the Roman Catholic religion, and what has
occurred in her Majesty's renouncing of her Kingdm.

I Write in my History, the end of the life of Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Swedland, who died in the height of his fortunes, in the bloody battle of
Lutzen, a Prince, who with the fame of his valor, had chained the affections
of his subjects; drawn after him the attendance of strangers, and purchased
veneration and respect, among his enemies themselves.

The life and qualities of Gustavus Adolphus of Swedland.
Never any Prince was beloved so well, nor so faithfully served. They, who could
not see him, desired at least his Picture, to reverence it, as the Idea of
Military valor.

His stature.
He was tall of stature, and of a Majestique aspect, which induced in all
admiration and reverence, love and fear together. The hue of his flesh was
white, and well colored, and his hair and yellow beard, rendered him so
resplendent, he was styled by many the King of Gold, but he hardly arrived to
the thirty eighth year of his age.

His first inclination to Arms was promoted by a Genius, as noble as generous,
which made him desirous of glory, and ambitious of greatness.

Prudence was still his companion, eloquence and sagacity accompanying his
discourses, vivacity and affability his treaties, and resolution, and courage
his enterprises. In great affairs he wanted not Providence, readiness, and
Constancy, and the force of his wit, and strength of his mind, was still most
resplendent in difficulties; he nobly contemning the Lawrells, and Palms, which
were not augmented by labors, and watered with pains.

Before the Battle, he appeared not so terrible, and dreadful, as gentle,
mild, and merciful, when he had obtained the victory, being undaunted in
dangers, vigilant in occasions, and wife in each affair. A Prince, in fine of
great understanding, and knowledge in all things.

He was followed with a greater affection, and applause, than any Commander
before him. He gave satisfaction to all, with his praises, hopes, or mildness,
and especially his sincerity, actions of virtue being written by him with
indeleble Characters. He never forgot services, whether little, or great, but
rewarded, and valued them. He was very witty in his sayings, and most affable
in company, still treating, and speaking to all without pride, and frequently
asking when he passed by his People, and Soldiers, how they did, what they
would, and desired. To his Table and Court, while he was in the field, he
admitted all Gentlemen, and private Commanders, he usually saying, a table is
the torment of a secret, and a net to catch friendship, and affection. He could
not abide ceremonies, and complements affected, and to those unacquainted with
his Genius, he said, or caused others to say, they should reserve their
Courtship for the Queens minds of honor, for he was in the field, to teach how
to fight, and not to lead a dance.

He was most severe in punishing the Soldiers offenses, and exact in providing
for the peoples security.

He, like a true soldier, to give an essay of the greatness of his mind,
undertook not any enterprise, which was without danger, he that exhorted him,
to a care of his life, acquiring his displeasure. It seemed to him undecent,
for a Prince of a warlike constitution, to have the thoughts of death, he
thinking the counsel proceeded from fear, which advised him to take heed of
himself. He called him happy, that died in his trade, the volunteer death
taking pay under him, that fears him not. His designs were always great, but
greater after the battle of Lipswick, he aspiring to the Empire of Germany.

Even the Ottoman power began to reflect on the fortune and valor of this
King, who used to say, The Turk was jealous of his fortune.
he wondered the Ancients so easily obtained their victories, His remarkable
sayings.
and those of his time with such difficulty, to whom when represented, it
proceeded from the difference in w^aring, and now the expugnations of Cities,
and fortresses are harder, he replied, he did not value the difference of arms,
nor of times, but that of the courage. That the world was the same, each age
had it is Mines, and Countermines, offenses and defenses, and that he could war
like Alexander, be victorious with Hanibal, and equal Caesar's Progresses, who
had the mind of Alexander, the skilfulnesse of Hanibal, and Caesar's
undauntednesse.

In the space of two years, he drew to his party, either by the force of arms,
or the motives of his power and reputation, of Fortresses, Cities, and walled
Town, to the number of a hundred and ninety. He won many battles in the field,
but crowned with that of Lipswick, His Conquests.
his triumph having conquered the most experienced, and most fortunate
Commander of his age, and an Army old in battles.

With what Army he passed the Sea.
He passed the Seas, and entered into Germany, with a very little Army, but as a
small snowball rolling down a high Mountain, becomes a great globe, so he
passing from one enterprise to another, could number at his death, above 100000
foot, and 80000 horse, which made up ten Armies, together with other bodies,
all under his colors.

Nothing but the heresy of Luther eclipsed his high qualities, who, if he had
followed the steps of his Ancestors, not swerving from the path of the true
faith, would have been the Hero of Kings.

He left no other Progeny, Christina his only daughter succeeds in the Kingdom.
than Christina his only Daughter, born on the 16. of December, in the year
1626, a Princess of so noble enendowments, and so elevated a spirit, that it is
not any wonder, if she representing in part, the living image of her great
Fathers virtues, give cause to believe; Gustavus yet remains to the world in
his specie, although not in his individuo.

Now as their good education, The education of this Princess.
who are to have succession in Kingdoms, and principalities, is the chiefest
foundation of the peoples felicity, this Princess used a diligent manuring of
her mind, bequeathing her self to the exercises of virtue, to be afterward
able, to outstrip with her years, the duty of age. 'Twas therefore observed,
that from the first moments, as it were, of her life, and understanding, she
began, though a child, to procure the enlightening of her intellect, a command
ore her reason, limits to her will, a curb to her affections, a rule to her
actions, and strength ^o her body.

Her wonderful wit.
She was not seven years old, when instructed in the elements of the Latin
tongue, and letters, and having now discovered, what promise she could make to
her self, in the Progresses of her studies, by the quickness of her spirit,
and most singular judgment, she fell to the cultivating her mind, with the
most sublime sciences, as those, which administer the true lights, not to err
in the Pilgrimage of the world, and the gaining of Heaven.

In her minority, five Ministers and Officers of the Crown, which were the most
conspicuous, had the government of the Kingdom, to wit, On whom the Government
of the Kingdom depended on her minority.
the great Admiral, bastar'd Brother co Gustavus her Father, the great
Chancellor Axellius Oxestern, the great President Gabriel Oxestern, the great
Constable James of the Guard, and the great Treasurer, another Gabriel Oxestern.

In the mean time, to her other applications aforesaid, she added the
instructing of her self, in the knowledge of different tongues, to make her
self the fitter, and more capaple, for the management of the Kingdom, She
learnt diverse tongues.
in which she made most eminent Progresses. And as the best books are incorrupt
Counselors, and Oracles, which, without the least request, even answer to our
thoughts, so she in reading there, employing her best hours, endeavored to
learn there, the way to govern well.

This Princess advancing with her years, in Virtues and Sciences, She makes
great Progress in learning.
measured every ones ability so well, with the subtlety of her judgment, that
though a girl, she penetrated the hidden designs of her principal Ministers,
of whom she made use, to draw to her self, the total direction of the affairs
of the Kingdom, so as she gained great veneration, freed her self from the
subjection, in which some pretended to hold her, and beginning to rule, showed
she had not any need, to lay the Kingdoms weight on any others head, than her
own, She begins to assist at the Council of State, and afterward takes the
Government upon her.
insomuch that she began, when seventeen years old, to assist at the Council of
the State, and in the eighteenth year, being out of her minority, took upon her
the Government, on the very same day, the War against Denmark, was hy the Crown
of Swedland declared, notwithstanding that against the Emperor, together with
his confederates, was most vigorously prosecuted.

She always made use of knowing and able persons, and when any one assumed to
himself, more authority, than was fitting; she found out a way to moderate his
animosity. She alone did administer all the public affairs, and determined
them with much ease, and satisfaction: She alone would treat with Ambassadors,
and the Ministers of Princes, She administers her self the greatest affairs.
giving audience without the Secretaries of State, or any of her Councillors,
she her self giving answer, to the propositions made her, as well by her
subjects, as foreign Princes.

This Queen, though young, knew at the same time, how to make her self feared,
and beloved, by her people, and strangers. She secretly sounding the genius,
and thoughts of every one, so used them to the bridle of obedience, and
respect, that she saw her most formidable Commanders, though accustomed at the
head of their Armies, She makes her self beloved and feared.
to make the world afraid, to conserve still in her presence, a reverence
accompanied with a fearful obsequiouness.

On the other side, with the nobleness of her mind, she still so obliged them,
with offices of such love and affability, that she animating their affections,
increased still toward her self their respect and obedience, the true props of
a Kingdom.

She beheld every writing presented her, and quickly, and with a clear voice,
recited it in it is language, and with her own hand wrote usually the Orders of
importance, being as shy and heedy, in imparting the secrets of her mind, as
curious and cunning in penetrating those of others.

She generally affected all Natitions, virtue alone being only the object of
her love. She sought to mend the bad with severity, and make the good better
with favors and rewards; so as it is no wonder, that honor, and the rarest
conditions that suit with worthy men, were seen to flourish more in her Palace,
than in any other Court.

No Prince ever favored more lovers of virtue, than this Queen; her Majesty
taking very great delight, to discourse with knowing Persons, and endeavoring
to have near her, the learned of each Nation, whom she highly rewarded.

She had her maids of honor in the Court for decorum, and her own
entertainment; but they never withdrew her from her studies, and exercises of
virtue.

No extremity of weather, nor heat of the Sun, nor Snow, Wind, Tempests, and
Rains, nor any other injuries of the season, or accidents, could induce her to
that care of her self, which was due to her royal condition. She supposed great
actions walked not well with delights, and the Soul had no greater impediment,
in the gaining of virtues, She contemns all delicacy.
than the body bred up and fostered in them, labor, exercise, sobriety, and
vigilance, she counting as parts, of her strong and vigorous mind.

The glorious enterprises, which seconded the felicity of her Majesty's
invincible arms, are already eternal in Histories. She makes war, and then
peace with Denmark to her advantage.
After eight months cruel War, and the famous success of her arms; she
concluded a peace with his Majesty of Denmark, to her great gain, and honor,
and afterward established that of Germany, not without great advantages to
Swedland, and then too; when she thought it convenient for the ends, which she
aimed at in her mind.

She has made renoun'd and famous, the City of Stockholm, with the rule of her
directions, and the happy remembrance of her government; she having nothing
more in her thoughts, than the causing her Kingdom to abound with arts, and
wealth.

Her Throne was the Theater of Glory, and Justice; no Princess being ever
beheld of so free a mind, and a courage so undaunted. But she thought in the
mean time, of her great retreat toward Heaven, that she might not repent, she
had been in the World. As her great and noble parts did charm the hearts of
all, that treated with her, to the fame of them flying with speed, to the most
remote Nations; produced soon the usual effects of curiosity, calling many of
the curious, and most knowing, out of Italy and France, to admire her. It Is
impossible to express the Civility, and Courtesy, with which she received
every one, and particularly, her great liberality, in gratifying, caressing,
and rewarding the virtuous.

All the Princes in Europe amazed at her famous prerogatives, She is honored
by all the Princes of the world.
either in their own Persons, or else by their Agents, endeavored to
reverence, and serve her.

To her great and conspicuous endowments, nothing was wanting, but the light of
true Religion; but Heaven not suffering so beautiful a soul, and so good a
mind, to wander in the darkness of falsehood, Heavens is propitious to her.
was so kind to her in his influence, to cause great and wonderful effects.

Divine grace awakened her searching understanding, and Heavenly inspirations
began to alarm in her mind, the Survay of the dissonancies, falsehoods, and
untru^hs, of the Sect she professed. But the business was nice, and she thought
it not good, to trust her motives to those Ministers credit, whose knowledge
she had formerly measured, with more accurateness, and wariness: She considered
with her self, that as God was still the same, so his faith was the same, and
the foundation of all truth: insomuch, that with reason, he could not suffer
any thing to be altered, and dissonant in the knowledge of that Individuum,
which should be only one, and still uniform to it self. She therefore began, to
discover the weakness of the reasons, which Luther, and others sustained their
new opinions, and fallacy with, and began to discern that the sacred Scripture
understood, and respected, with that Purity and Candor, with which it is
received and taught in the Catholic Church; furnished her with clearest
arguments, to convince their untruths. She perceived some sacred books were
refused by the followers of Luther, for no other cause, but their own mere
capticiousness, and only for condemning their errors. That of those they
retain, and have in such esteem, the greatest part they alter, adulterate, and
falsify, and so variously interpret, that it is not any wonder, amongst such
dissentions and confusions, resembling so many Hydra's head, innumerable Sects
are multiplied and produced; yet all disagreeing, and contrary to one another.
Nay, that now the word of God was so vilify'd, that each foolish tradesman, or
ignorant woman, durst shamelesly interpret the highest mysteries of the faith,
which hardly the most knowing, and most sublime wits understand. That the Sects
did increase, or decrease, as assisted, and fomented here on earth; yet faith
is a rare gift of Heaven, insomuch as the followers of novelties, having
nothing of assurance; nor probably the true sense; it was surer to rely on the
uniform, and agreeing interpretation of so many Saints, the Catholic Church
has had in all ages, for doctrine and integrity of life, so renowned and
eminent. 'Twas therefore too evident a madness, to depart from their common
consent, and adhere unto those, who, without the reputation of goodness, and
virtue, have for their own passion, and private advantage, endeavored to
darken the world, to confound it, and vizard it, with many chimeras, and
malignities.

The reasons which give motives to the true knowledge.
To these her reflections, the wise Queen added diverse other weighty
considerations; and amongst them, this seemed to have force, that by the
continued succession of Popes, and uniformity in Rights, and Doctrine, the
Church of Rome, though tossed by fierce tempests, invaded by her enemies arms,
and molested with contrary Doctrines, had allwaies like the Palmtree, grown
higher, and been still more resplendent, and glorious.

Her Majesty observed, that the very same Nations, and particularly the
Septentrional, which now do live out of the lap of the Roman Church, Important
observations
have more than any others, for many ages past, had the Catholic faith in
veneration, and produced many men; who, with their holy lives, have enobled the
world, and with their souls beautified Heaven. That the writings esteemed the
most learned, the famousest actions, the conspicuousest virtues, and most
refined wits, have been the perseveres in the Catholic faith, insomuch that
as examples more forcibly persuade us, than precepts; it seemed to her
impossible, so many good men, so intelligent, and so learned, should have been
blind, to follow so tenaciously, and so long, the opinions and doctrines, which
heretical Ministers represent to the simple and Idiot, for falsities, and
errors.

Besides she considered, the very same Protestants confessed, the Spaniards,
the French, and Italians were of a more elevated spirit, and more composed
mind; of more profound Knowledge, and a civiller, and soberer behavior, than
all other people of the world; and that amongst these of the Northern
Inhabitants themselves; he was most valued, that was best acquainted with the
customs, and dictates of the Nations aforesaid, insomuch that though Arius had
in Spain spread the poison of his heresy; and France had both opened her
bosom, and arms, to the errors of the neighboring Countries; yet those great
Kings, and most of the Nobility, without ever changing their opinions, among,
so many accidents, had continued in the obedience of the Catholic Church, and
the Vicar of Christ, which afforded a strong argument, for the goodness and
truth of his faith.

Her own virtue makes her see the truth.
Her Majesty received an additional force in her mind, that the Authors of
heresies could never yet show; when, how, or why, the Catholic Church did
prevaricate in her faith nor where, and in whom perpetuated, and conserved, it
being very necessary, the true Church should always have endured in some part.

But, the consideration of the qualities, of the Authors of heresies, made a
very strong breach in this Princesses heart; her Majesty being now well
informed, that interest alone, and the pleasures of the flesh, not the benefit
of the public, nor integrity of the mind, were the Councillors and Promoters
of these novelties. She examined Martin Luthers condition^, She examines the
life, and conditions of Martin Luther.
and the other opposers of the Catholic Church, and found they were men of an
ill life, sensual, and extremely ambitious; whereupon like seditious persons,
who in a State-Government, do cloak their pretenses with the zeal of the
public good, and the service of the Prince, against whom they fight, they
never had other design, than the ruin of the State, and Monarchy of the
Church, in revenge of the wrong, they pretended to receive in their minds; in
that the Popes of Rome complied not with their boundless desires; so as she
foresaw in the end, that when Luther began to impugn the value of indulgences,
by depressing the authority of the Pope, he did it out of envy and anger, that
the care of delivering them in Sermons, was committed to others, and not to
himself, as he had desired. That when Purgatory was condemned by him, he being
unwilling to admit any pain did remain to the souls, which died in the state of
grace; 'twas merely his invention, either to discredit more the said
indulgences, or let loose the reins to sensuality, since the contumacy is the
greater, She perceives the falsities, and untruths spread by him.
when the punishment is represented the less. That when he denied fastings,
Penance, Confession, the single life of Priests, the intercession of Saints,
the Mass, the Ornaments, and Images of the Church, and the like; it only
proceeded from his inward design, to make the people follow him, who are apt to
believe, what allureth the senses, and furthers the appetite of nature; as
likewise his principal motives for promoting his wickedness, had their rise
from his unplacable hatred of the Pope, as one that condemned his errors.

To this pious Queen, the resolution of Henry the eigth King of England, seemed
too sacrilegious and wicked; who withdrew from the obedience of the holy
Church, a Catholic, and well composed Kingdom, and only for the pleasing of
his humors, and abandoning, and debasing himself in the loves of Anne Bullen.
She fortifies them with some important examples.
She disliked the unworthy actions of those Princes of Germany, who spoiling
the Churches, had seized the revenues of so many Orders of Religious, who in
honor of our Savior, and the Heavenly Court, had employed them in sacred
Temples, to glorify, and exalt him. But more than all the rest, she came to
the Knowledge of the truth, by considering, how unseemly it was to believe, the
Holy Ghost would use such men, that were vicious, and unworthy, for reforming
of his Church, while there were so many others, renowned for their Doctrine and
sanctity.

With these speculations, and the guide of the holy Fathers, exactly perpended
by her; she saw a great light before her eyes, whereupon as in the way long
chosen by her, she discovered great stumblings, and disturbances; so among
these new lights, she walking in the best, and readiest paths, began to examine
particularly the substance and foundation of the truest religion. With great
rewards she invited to her, the famousest men in the Lutheran profession, and
under the color of learning what they knew, extracted with admirable
dexterity, the sum of their belief and understanding: Truth, the only
Catholic, She detests heresy.
and Roman religion, among the black darkness of so many opinions, and contrary
doctrines, began to show her cleanness, and beget in her mind, a great loathing
of the manifest falsities, and immoderate absurdities, which usually by the
malice of heretical Ministers, with great industry are instilled into the
minds, of unwary and simple people.

She resolves to turn Catholic.
In the mean time, Don Joseph Pinto Parera, the Portugal Ambassador arrived in
Swedland, making his entrance into Stockholm about the end of July, with whom
as his confessor, was Father Anthony Macedo a Portugess, together with his
Companion, Father John Ardrada, both Jesuits. The Queen informed of all, was
glad of that encounter, by her so desired, insomuch as concealing in her mind,
a resolute inclination to the Catholic faith, she began in her discourses,
and treaties, to show some esteem and affection to Father Macedo. He on the
contrary side, observing the Queen, when she spoke of the Pope, to show much
respect and veneration, discovered, her Majesty had a good disposition toward
Catholics, and therefore with dexterity, by opening, and enlarging the way,
so wrought, that every day her satisfaction and confidence of him, received
augmentation.

When the Ambassy was finished, She sends a Jesuit to Rome.
and Parera prepared to be gone in September, 1651. het Majesty more frequently
than before, began to send for the Father aforesaid; In the end, on the 12th of
August, retyring with him into her inwardest lodgings, and saying, she would
tell him a business of consequence; said thus in his ear, Father Macedo, you
are the first Jesuit I knew, and as by the practice, and relation I have of
your virtue, I s^ppose I may be confident of your faithfulness, and prudence;
so now since you are to depart, I desire by all means, you will procure me sent
hither two Italians of your Society, expert in all Knowledge, who under the
color of Gentlemen, than desire to see the world, may stay in my Court, that I
without suspicion, may make use of them, to which effect I Will write too by you
to your General. In her letter to the Father General of the Society.
The Father complied wi^h her Majesty, with expressions, and a sense peculiar
to news of that consequence, and giving her due thanks for her confidence of
him, and offering to serve her with fidelity, he swore to be secret.

Macedo come home full of joy, and consolation, and beginning to consider of
the manner, how to execute diligently her Majesty's desire, resolved to ask
leave, as he did, of the Ambassador, to go see, for his own curiosity, the
fair and great City of Hamburg, but could not obtain it; so as he returned to
the Queen, and told her of the difficulties he hid met with. Her Majesty
hearing him of a settled resolution to serve her, replied, you may go, and say
nothing. The Father informed, that the Vessel, She desires two Fathers of the
Society may be sent to her.
which should carry him was then in the Haven of Balen, 35 miles distant, and
ready to set sail toward Lubeck; went to take his last leave of the Queen, who
gave him a letter of credence, written, and subscribed with her own hand, and
directed to the General of the company of Jesus, who then was Father Francis
Piccolomini.

Father Macedo concluded his expressions, with humbly beseeching her, to
consummate her holy inspirations, to which she replied, that if she had known,
the Roman religion, had been best, she would have embraced it, and that he
should cause the two Fathers, she desired to be sent, with whom she might
freely discourse, and without all suspicion, having nothing else to say, but
entreat him again, to be secret and quick.

The Father being licensed to depart, went out of the gate behind the Court,
which looks toward the Sea, and passed in a Feluca to a Rock, where he
remained that night, since he could not reach the Vessel by day. The day after
he arrived at Balem, whether one was now come, dispatched by the Queen, at the
instance of the foresaid Ambassador, to arrest him, and carry him to prison;
but as he had secret order from her Majesty, to let him escape, if he found
him, he feigned he could not find him, and took horse and returned to Stockholm,
and the Father embarked himself, and sailed towa^ds Lubeck on the 2d. of
September, where twelve days after he arrived.

The Ambassador soon gave out, the Father was a Knave, by his flying away in
that manner, and others divulged, he was become a Lutheran, and married. From
thence he arriving in Hamburg, steered his course toward Nurenberg, and
finally having run many dangers, came to Rome on the 18. of October, 1651.

Father Piccolomini the General of the Society, dyed a little before, so as he
delivered the letter to Father Goswin Nikel, who was then Vicar-Generall, and
afterward General; a man of great parts, and born in the City of Cullen. The
Father General receives her letters* very gladly.
He embraced with great zeal, a business of that consequence, and as it is the
particular profession of the Society aforesaid, to search all the parts of the
world, to convert to the holy faith, both Heretics and Infidells, in which
they employ very freely whatsoever is given them in charity, and quickly made
choice of Father Francis Malines, He sends two Fathers into Swedland.
a Reader of Divinity in Turin his Country, and Father Paul Casate of Piacenza,
a professor of Mathematics in' the Roman College at Rome; men, besides
integrity of life, of most exquisite understanding, and great knowledge, that
as persons desirous to travel, and see the world, they might without delay,
take their journey for Swedland.

They arrived in Venice on the second of December. 1651, the one coming out of
Piemont, and the other from Rome. On the twelfth of the said month, they
departed, and prosecuted their journey; Their journey.
notwithstnnding the extremity of the weather, and only in the beginning of
March got to Stockholm, being hindered on the way, by reason that Father
Malines hurt his foot, by the fall of his horse, which made him keep his bed
many days.

In the mean time, Father Godfrey Franchenius, a Jesuit, and a man, that was
truly Apostolical, and of excellent parts, was brought by a Tempest from
Denmark into Swedland, who had frequently treated with the Queen, and not
without profit, but not being able to stay there without being known, he before
was departed, and gone into Flanders.

These two Fathers, arriving in Stockholm, were presently conducted to the
Queen, Their arrival.
as Italian Gentlemen, and Passengers. And albeit her Majesty dissembled in
the beginnning, they so soon perceived her good disposition, and admired too in
her, then 25. years old, a soul undeceived, and exempt from vanity, and the
greatness of the world, and filled with so equal a Knowledge of all things,
that she seemed only nourisht with the marrow of moral Philosophy. Not long
after, They are courteously received.
she declared her self, resolved by a holy inspiration, to embrace the
Catholic faith, and renounce for it her Kingdoms, and all humane greatness,
though there she was not only esteemed, but adored with a fuller, and more
absolute authority, than any of her time.

There Is no doubt, but she would very gladly have resetled in Swedland the
Catholic faith, if she could have overcome the great, and many difficulties,
that lay in the way. Too evident was the danger of spoiling the consort of her
resolutions, if they had smelt the least in that kind. Besides too, the
uncertainty of the end, much time was required, and hazard of her conscience,
in which she was impatient to continue, without the profession of the
Catholic religion, and she could by no means profess it occultly.

She treats secretly with them, and determines to inform the Pope of her
resolution.
When she had with the said Fathers, long discussed the means, that were
fittest, for the compassing of her Majesty's intentions; she determined to let
the Pope know her resolution, and to send unto him with her letters; the said
Father Casati, who was to inform himself particularly, of all that was
necessary for her future stay in Rome, which then was her design; she supposing
the said City most fit for her abode, not so much for the honor of her person,
as because she being there independent, of any other Potentate whatsoever in
Christendom, might employ the endowments of her mind, in the service of God,
and his Church, by her Majesty's interposing in many affairs of Christendom,
for the which without doubt, there was no want at all of ability in her
Majesty.

She sent then the Father to Rome, in the Month of May of the year aforesaid,
but omitted at that time, to make any motion to the Pope, because she was not
able to renounce so soon her Kingdom, and in the mean time, they had no
suspicion at all, of those resolutions, with which Pope Innocent was assistent
to the business. But Father Malines remained in Swedland, well treated by the
Queen, while her Majesty disposed, and so ordered her affairs, that by the
States of Swedland, Charles Prince Palatine (deputed before to the Crown after
her) was after her renouncing it, admitted to the Kingdom, which done, she
might securely depart.

In fine, when she was to discover her mind, and complete her resolutions, she
began then, by declaring her intentions to Monsieur Bordolot, a French man, and
now Abbot of Massay, her trusty Physician, to the end, he repayring to the
Court of France, and making no mention at all of the business of religion,
might only treat there, if, after her renouncing the Kingdom, she might
sojourn in France, as likewise she had thoughts of dispatching Father Malines
to Rome, with her letters to the Pope.

Don Antonio Pimentel is in Swedland for his Catholic Majesty.
While Bordolot and Malines prepared to be gone, the Queen having made a
discovery of the exquisite judgment, and great prudence of Don Antonio
Pimentel; who, with the Title of Gentleman, sent from the Catholic King, to
complement the Queen, and procure between their Majesty's a good
correspondence, had been some Months before in that Court, where he had with
his rare parts, purchased very great credit, and fame, resolved to trust him
with her thoughts, and make use of his assistance and counsel, in a business
of that consequence. This Gentleman heard attentitively the Queen, and was as
much comforted, as astonished, The Queen imparts to him her thoughts.
at the strangeness of the news. And when he had considered, how meritorious in
Heaven, how famous in the world, and beneficial to Christianity, so glorious
an action would be, he represented to the Queen, the necessity of supporting
it, by a Prince no less powerful, than pious, that he accompanying with her
dispatches, the letter she sent to the Pope, might make authentic the credit
of so great, and so heroique an act, for the compassing of which, the
Catholic King seemed fit to her Majesty. The Queen therefore consigned to
Father Malines, And resolves to rely on the Catholic King.
letters for his Holiness, Cardinal Chigi, then Secretary of State to the
Pope, and for Father Nikei the General of the Jesuits, and likewise gave him
order, that as secretly as he could, he should go into Spain, to procure the
dispatches of his Catholic Majesty to the Pope, in order to which, she gave
the said Father, letters for the Catholic King, and Don Jews de Aro,
supposing besides, besides, that Don Antonio Pimentel being come to Madrid,
whither he was called, might add credit to her letters, and solicit the
effecting their Contents. And as the greatest thing, that troubled her
Majesty, consisted in secresy, to remove every shadow of suspicion; Father
Malines the Jesuit is dispatched to the Court of Spain for that effect.
she desired, that the Father might go another way, and not embarque himself
with Pimentel. For the very same reason, it seemed not good to the Queen, that
Father Casati returned to Hamburg from Rome; should repass into Swedland, to
avoid the renewing of the jealousies, and suspicions had formerly of them;
especially she knowing, some letters had been intercepted, which Casati had
written to Malines, by which they understood, that they were both engaged, in
the very same business, and had common interests. Father Malines departed from
Stockholm, on the 3d. of May, 1653. having stayed there something more than a
year and two months. The length of his voyage from Swedland to Lubeck,
occasioned by the contrary winds, and his not finding suddenly shipping in
England, whither he went for that purpose out of Flanders, were the cause he
arrived not at Madrid till the second of August, where he stayed certain months,
without having any news of Pimentel, or negotiating any thing, since his order
was not to begin, till he had first received her Majesty's letters, which were
to be sent after. Don Antonio aforesaid, departed from Stockholm in the
following August, and embarquing at Gottembourg, advanced not far, when the
Ship, that sprang a leak, constrained him back thither; while the Vessel was
repairing, he went to the Court, which then was removed to Vesten, where he
received order from Spain, to stay there yet a while.

The Queen hindered by that accident, to make use of Pimentel, Father Guemes a
Dominican, arrives in Swedland, and her Majesty makes use of him.
substituted in his place, Father John Baptist Guemes a Dominican, who was in
Denmark with the Earl of Rebogliedo the Spanish Ambassador to that King, and
being to negotiate some business appertaining unto the said Earl, in the Court
of Madrid, was to have, and expect the convenience of embarquing himself with
Pimentel, to which end, in the month of July, 1653, he arrived at Gottembourg;
but the Ship, as aforesaid, coming back, and he being commanded by Pimentel to
continue with him; went thence with him to Vesten. The Queen knowing, he was a
man of great prudence, and other rare qualities; and considering she could give
no suspicion by his going into Spain, since they knew long before, he went for
the affairs of Rebogliedo, she lost not the conjuncture of making use of him;
for the treating of that in Madrid, which she had designed should be done by
Pimentel. She informs him of the business, and sends him into Spain.
She therefore informed him of the matter, and wrote to Father Malines, whom
before she had ordered, to make no attempt of any thing, without new advice,
which he was to expect, before he promoted any bus^ness.

Father Guemes departed with her Majesty's dispatches, and Pimentel's, on the
ninth of October, and after many troubles, and impediments, arriving in the
Catholic Court, in the month of March, 1654, very earnestly solicited there,
the Kings letters to the Pope, to accompany the Queens, and so honorably, and
so faithfully proceeded in this business of consequence, that her Majesty
afterward declaring, she was infinitely satisfied; was most confident of him,
by making him her Confessor, and using him in her hardest, and most scrupulous
resolutions. Though not only by the mouths of the foresaid two Fathers
Malines, and Casati, together with the Dominican, Her negotiations.
and the letters of Pimentel himself, his Majesty was fully informed, and
assured of all things; yet he could do no less, than remain surpised a while,
at the news of so great, and so strange a resolution; it seeming to him a
difficult thing, The King of Spains sense of the news.
that a Princess of that spirit, and of so sublime a judgment, could abandon
her Kingdoms, her Country, and subjects, whom she loved so tenderly, and
protected, to lead a private life, without that great Command; for this only
reason, to live quietly in the Catholic religion; his Majesty discoursing
with himself, that though the said Queen was not able in public, at least she
could have exercised in private, the true faith in her own Kingdom, and perhaps
with more advantages to the Catholic religion, especially since surrendering
the Scepter unto a new King, who might be of a turbulent, and warlike
disposition, was to open peradventure the way, to some of those enterprises,
which in the afflictions of Christianity, might cause greater damages to the
interests of Catholics than among the applauses of the world, get glory, and
repose to the Queen. He considered too wisely, that the things of the world,
have nothing that is constant but inconstancy, and that women particularly,
notwithstanding they have courage, and spirit, are subject to change, so as he
was not able with his solid Intellect, The King of Spain's perplexity.
to judge securely of a single appearance; nor thought he it agreeable to his
gravity and decorum, to engage himself in any thing, without sounding more
fully the business, and reaching the bottom of the motives, from which a
resolution so great, and so little in use, was derived. But afterward assured,
that many heroical virtues, and eminent parts abounded in the Queen, with the
motive of which, she knew, the world was one of those enemies, that is
conquered by flying, and albeit a woman had strength to trample under her feet,
its forces, allurements, and charms, and conquer her self. The King was so
taken with her Majesty's magnanimous action, that out of his most pious zeal to
the honor of God, With great piety he undertakes the business, and writes to
the Pope.
and the Catholic Church, he not only with great fervor accompanied her
Majesty's letter to the Pope; but exhibited all his protection, for the
journey, and entire satisfaction of so noble, and so virtuous a Princess.

After the peace of Germany, the States of Swedland, having soon bent their
thoughts for the settlement of the Kingdom; had likewise found it necessary to
provide, that the Masculine succession failing in the blood Royal, some one
might ascend the Throne quietly and peaceably, and the rather, since the
recalling the suffrages of the ancient elections, did not seem good to them,
they knowing by experience, that kind of dominion, as not very durable, and
unsafe, had often been replenisht with tumults and calamities; whereupon they
unanimously agreed, that her Majesty pleasing her self with a husband, that was
not of a different religion, nor suspected by the States, should establish in
her Progeny the security of succession. The States of Swedland make instance to
the Queen.
They therefore made several instances to the Queen, and often solicited the
effect of their desires.

The Queen, who in her mind had greater designs, making use of the pretense of
being unwilling by marriage, to subject her own liberty to any, declared, that
as she had been born free, Her Majesty's answer.
so she likewise would live, and die free. She boastingly said, all the
Kingdoms of the world were a price below the value of liberty, which only was
the pretiousest Gem in her Crown. That she knew, the chaste wits were still the
most vigilant, most lively, and the fittest for all things, which require
understanding, spirit, and prudence.

The States seeing her firm in resolving not to marry; pretended at least to
appoint her a Successor, to the end, that she failing, there might be no
difficulty in a new Kings election. And because whatsoever we can most of all
wish for in a Prince, consists in his valor, his prudence, and goodness, in
the meeting of all the four Orders of the Kingdom, the qualities and parts of
the most conspicuous personage being maturely examined, all gave their votes
and applauses, to the foresaid Prince Charles Gustavus, Palalatine, as one, who
descending by Birth from Emperors and Kings, and having till that time
commanded the Swedish Amies, had given in all occasions great experiments of
his valor and prudence. Besides he being passionately beloved by the people
and soldiers; could desire no clearer arguments of his merit, Charles Gstavus
Palatine is declared, and substituted in the Kingdom after the death of the
Queen.
for his exaltation to the Crown, established in his Person, by his substitution
in the Kingdom, if Christina should fail.

Some Politicians divulged (to meddle in their discourses with so great an
affair) the Queen was not pleased, the gate of dominion should be opend to this
Princes desire, since this being the most sensible of humane affections, and
that which soonest touches the quick, they might see again acted on the Stage,
the offenses of those times, in which many men, thinking nothing to be
villainous, and wicked; have trampled under foot, to compass soon their ends,
all respects, obligations, honor and conscience. But the said Politicians have
failed in the conceit, which perhaps they imagined their discourses would have
raised, while that they measured her Majesty's thoughts, and resolutions, with
their own ordinary rule of the interest of State. The Queen's designs had
solider motives, and deeper foundations. She sought to gain a Kingdom, where
Angels inhabit, and therefore lost that willingly where men have their
residence. She trusts wholly in God.
The Queen could not err in the reason of State, who secured to her self that
of God. She labored to know God in true greatness, and felicity; and God made
himself known to her, by giving her judgment, and vigor, to seek what few did
desire, and to despise that which all covet after. For what concerned humane
reputation, and glory, she had learnt; she could not better make happy and
prolong the short periods of her life, than with the report of one of the most
glorious resolutions, that had ever been heard. She therefore very charitably
and freely, agreeing to surrender her Scepter to the foresaid Prince Palatine,
contrived a way with which, without discovering her thoughts, she frankly might
renounce the possession of those States, which were no longer hers, because by
her Majesty exchanged for those of Heaven. She thought, that she had not the
luster of any virtue, while she sat on that Throne, which was not illustrated
with the splendor of true faith. The Queen loved God, and therefore could no
longer love the world. To mount to the greatness of Heaven, 'twas necessary
she should fall from the height of terrestrial felicity.

This her Majesty's resolution discovered to some she most trusted, it seemed
strange to them, she would abandon voluntarily the dominion of a Kingdom, than
which there is not any thing more desired on the earth: and as in the change of
a Prince, both the Cities, and Inhabitants, are oftentimes subject to hurtful
alterations, so with the apprehension of future events, and the want of the
happiness they enjoyed, She resolves to forgo her Kingdoms.
they particularly were troubled, and discontented, and labored to remove her
from that her opinion, with very strong reasons, and resembling the quality of
the matter, of which they discoursed. They knew the new Kings ^enius, and the
martial inclinations of his Captains, so as they were ^ffraid, it might prove
one of those punishments, which with the appearance of a blessing, is cast upon
them, whom God will chastise. They doubted, She is dissuaded, but without
effect.
though the Queen loved peace, and a good correspondence with the neighboring
Princes, that the Genius and Interest of her Majesty's Successor, would not be
the same, who probably at his entrance into his principality, would have the
ambition, to make ostentation of his valor, and foment his Commanders desires.

To convince her understanding, and divert her from so great a resolution, many
of the knowing'st and zealousest Ministers, whom her Majesty did the honor,
to trust with her design of renouncing her Kingdom, but not with her change of
religion, advanced so far, to presage unto her unlucky events, but nothing
could retain her in her motion, which she urged with all speed.

Now all things appertaining to that renunciation were in readiness; and
nothing was wanting, but to solemnize it, The renouncing follows.
with those public functions, required in such Cases. Many Feasts being
therefore now made, together with tiltings, for a happy prediction of the new
Kings Coronation, in the end on the 17th of January 1654, they brought it to a
period. The Prince Palatine would have had it deferred, till the following
July, while his clothes, and other things becoming the magnificence of this
unusual spectacle, were prepared. But the Queen admitting no delay; prevented
these demurs with all diligence, while each little minute seemed too long to
her, for the the finishing her secret intentions.

She therefore came out of her lodgings that day, about nine of the clock in
the morning, and appeared in the great open gallery of the Court, accompanied
by the Senate, and the Grandees of the Palace. She wore a stately robe
embroidered with Crowns of gold, and with a comely gravity walking up and down
among a great company of Gentlemen, and other, who out of curiosity, came to
see so renowned, and unusual a function, The ceremonies of this action.
sat down in a chair, under a Canopy of Silver nobly wrought, and adorned.
Here the Lord Zchering Rosem^hain a Senator of the Kingdom, read with a loud
voice the instrument of donation, which her Majesty made to the said Prince
Charles Gustavus Palatine, and a Patent; in which the new King engaged to the
said Queen, three Islands, and diverse revenues issuing out of Pomerania, with
other, regalities, to the yearly value of two hundred thousand crowns. Her
Majesty accepting the writings, rose up, and taking the Crown from her head,
delivered it to the Earl, Peter Bracch great Prefect, and principal Senator
of the Kingdom. The Scepter, Sword, Globe of gold, and a Key, she consigned to
four great Personages, and Ministers of the Kingdom: to wit, to Count Gustavus
Horn General of the Militia, to Count Gabriel Oxerstern, to Count Oxerstern
great Chancellor, and Count Magnus Gabriel de la Gardie great Treasurer. The
Queen had nothing left to put off, but the royal Robe, and she seeing that
those, to whom it belonged, deferred to unty it, untied it her self, and in
throwing it down, sported with her maids of Honor, and was pleasant with them,
while there was not any one, in so great a number of persons, A generous act of
her Majesty.
that could forbear weeping, to see this so generous action of the Queen, to
whom the hearts of all paid the tribute of duty and affection. The royal robe
being deposed, she was begirt with a very white garment, and here with a
majestique affability, turning toward the Nobility and people, with a loud,
and clear voice, and great freeness of mind, prayed a quartern of an hour with
such efficacy and sweetness, that all remaining equally dazzled, with the
splendor of so much virtue, and softened with the pleasantness of the manner,
had such an affection, as admits not of comfort, nor receives moderation.

After this, with a long and most prudent discourse, She gives some
advertisements to the King her Successor.
she advertised the new King of many things appertaining to the Kingdoms good
Government, and affectionately recommended to him the Queen her Mother, her
Friends, and all her Subjects, whom she loved so firmly; and so she returned to
the very same room whence she came, leaving all the people, in the darkness of
confusion, and bitterness of sorrow, for the loss of that Sun, which so long
had governed them, with the influence of his rays.

The Prince Palatine is anointed King of Swedland.
The Prince Palatine two hours after, was conducted to the Cathedral, by the
Archbishop of Upsalia, where he was anointed King, and received the royal
ensigns, and the next day after, the solemn oath was given him by all the four
Orders of the Kingdom.

In these solemnities, several sorts of money, of gold and silver, ^ere
scattered up and down, as well by the Queen, as the King. Those by the King had
his Picture on the one side, and the words Carolus Gustavus, and on the other,
a regal-Crown, with these words, a Deo and Christina. Those by the Queen had
her Picture on the one side, and on the other a Crown, with these words, Et
sine Te.

The day after the usual Oath of loyalty being performed to the King by the
States, the Queen visited, and honored by all; The Queens return to Stockholm,
and her departure.
departed from Upsalia toward Stockholm. The King accompanied her to the
Manor of Merstad, which is half the way, and all the Senators, Gentlemen,
and chief Ladies of the Court, waited on her to Stokholm, where she stayed
three days. Here all desired to see her, and to be seen by her, who received
them with such courtesy and kindness, that they there made discovery, of the
pleasure she took, to leave them all mindful of her virtues, and government.

She had made them believe, She makes them believe she will go into the Island
of Holland
she would go live in the Island of Holland, fifty leagues distant from
Stockholm, in the fair Castle there, with a great Park of Dear, where the
Kings were accustomed to retire for their pleasure.

With this report she departed from Stockholm, three hours after the setting of
the Sun. She would depart by night, not to see their affections, and tears, who
apprehended the want of so great a Queen, and so good a Mother.

Yet from the royal Palace to the gate of the City, The affliction of the
people for her departure.
the concourse of the people was great, but the affliction much greater, which
oppressed their senses; every one, as immovable and mute, with their eyes cast
down on the earth, giving to understand a weighty sorrow has neither tears,
nor sighs sufficient to express it.

The King had sent the greatest part of the Court to accompany, and attend her;
among whom were the Lord Charles Soop, a person of great quality, with the
charge of high Steward, the Lord Tersen Gentleman of the Chamber, and of much
desert and virtue with six other Gentlemen of his Majesty, all of noble
families and merit; the Lord Vlifeldt great Master of Denmark, retired long
since into Swedland, under his Majesty's protection, the Senators Earl Todt,
and Baron Lind, with Eal Donoau, Lieutenant Colonel, all three personages of
high worth, and eminent parts, with several others.

In her going out of the City, she was saluted with the Artillery from the
walls, and the ships, and as she past along, the Governors of Forts, and
Provinces waited on her with their Soldiers. Her Majesty's journey.
She travailed all night, and the next day in the evening arrived at Nikopin,
the residence of Queen Mary Eleanora her Mother, a Princess of most admirable
qualities, where she only stayed so long to embrace her, and give her the last
farewell, She visits the Queen her Mother.
the separation from whom, was as sensible peradventure to her, as that of her
Kingdom. In this she went voluntarily far off, from the fruition of a very
great happiness, and in that went from her; who had bequeathed to her, her own
blood.

The same night, without taking any other repose, she continued her journey
toward Norkopin, a City, and Port of the Sea, eight leagues distant from
Nicopin, which was one of the Forts, her Majesty had reserved to her self;
Here she stayed a day to repose, she having not yet slept since her departure
from Stockholm. The next day she went to Linkopin, five leagues farther, where
she stayed a day; and from thence to Junkopin, a fortress fourteen leagues
off, where she rested that night. The day following she advanced to a house, of
a Swedish Gentleman, called Giornornotte, eight leagues off, and here taken
with a Plurisy, She gives out she will change her journey.
or stitch in her breast, she was forced to stay eight days. As soon as she
was well, she gave out, she would go another way, and instead of advancing
toward the foresaid Island of Holland, she went toward Alstat, a Town
situated in Aland, a Province which ten years before the Sweeds had taken from
the King of Denmark.

This City is indifferently handsome, encompast with strong walls, and from the
said house some fifteen leagues distant. She dimisses div^rse of the Court.
Here she stayed two days, and dismissed not only the officers of the King,
who were to wait upon her to the foresaid Castle of Holland, but Brodin too the
Lutheran Minister, who had accompanied her from Stockholm, retaining with her
the Senator Soop, and the Earl of Donoau.

Arriving at Laolin, a Castle in the said Province, five miles from Almstat,
she caused the same night her hair to be cut, She puts on man's clothes, to pass
unknown.
and putting on man's clothes, took the way the next morning, toward Ingilholm,
a little Town of the Province of Blekingem belonging to the King of Denmark,
taking no body with her, but the foresaid Lords, Soop and Donoau, the Earl of
Stemberg, a Swedish Gentleman of eminent esteem, and her great Master of the
horse, the Lord Wolf, Gentleman of her Chamber, and Mr. Apelman her Secretary,
with three Grooms of the Chamber, about nine in all, giving out she was the
Earl of Donoau a Swede, who went to see the world, which she did to pass
through Denmark, without being subject to invitations, and entertainment. From
Ingelhom she came the same night to Helsingbourg a Port of the Sound, which is
an arm of the Sea about a league in breadth, She passes the straight of the
Sound.
through which pass all the Ships, which from the Baltique Sea, do sail
toward the West, where the Danes search usually the Vessels, and receive a
certain tole, She passed it in little boats, and arriving at Helsenor on th 7th
of July, when she had refresht her self a little while, continued her journey
with diligence; yet omitted not to visit the noble Castle at Federichbaug,,
seated in a very fine prospect, three leagues only distant from Helsenor;
which, as the place of the delights of the Kings of Denmark, was sumptuously
adorned. She came at three hours in the night to Rotschilt a little City seated
on the side of a Lake, and from thence went to Korsor a Port on the Baltique
Sea, and the same night passed the Bect, a branch of the Sea about four leagues
broad, which divides the Province of Zeland from Funen, which belong all to
Denmark. On the 9th of July at the rising of the Sun, she arrived at Nibork,
which was over against Korsor, a Port of the Sea. Here she entertained her
self, till the Wagons were prepared for travailing, which are all covered, and
very commodious, like the Caroches in France, and the Coaches in Italy. She
went then to Obensee, the Metropolitan City of the said Province of Funen, a
walled Town, and full of old Turrets, indifferently handsome and civil, where
the Court of Denmark resides a certain month of the year, two leagues near the
said Port. She stayed there that night, and passing the next day through
Kolding, a Tower on an narrow arm of the Sea, which serves for a Haven, though
it be between the land, where the King uses sometimes to sojourn; she arrived at
Hadversleve a little place, and encompast with old walls.

She continued thence her journey, and the following night came to Flensbourg,
the chief City, and a Port of the Sea, of the Province of Jutland, renowned for
the great traffic it holds with the North, and the West.

On the tenth, she passed through, Rensbourg a walled Town, and lay that night
at Jetzcho an open place. By break of day the next morning, she advanced
toward Altennau, a City belonging to the Earl of Oldembourg, between whom and
the City of Hambourg there is an ancient quarrel; She comes to Hambourg.
that Earl pretending to greater jurisdiction over a bridge of Hambourg, where
he receives a little tribute from Altennan, near two little leagues, the Queen
came to Hambourg, on the very same day a good while before the setting of the
Sun; yet she entered the Town, and remained there unknown till the following
day, and then putting on woman's apparel, she was seen and known by all.

She speaks with the Prince of Holsteria, and concludes the marriage of his
daughter with the King of Sweden.
Having stayed there a day, she went to Neummunster, a City remote a days
journey, to see Prince Frederick of Holstein, with whom she remained a day,
treating and concluding the marriage of the King of Swedland, with the
Princess Hedvyck Eleonora his Daughter.

The King of Swedland had discovered to the Queen, his inclination to this
match, and entreated her favor in the business, provided her Majesty's
consent went with his. The Queen, who could not chose but be glad, after giving
him a Kingdom, to give him too a wife, concluded it quickly to the equal
obligation of both parties to her. She afterward returning to Hambourg, stayed
there till the 30th of July.

Five days after her Majesty's arrival, the Court which stayed behind, as
aforesaid, overtook her at Hambourg, It consisted of about fifty persons,
besides the Coaches, diverse horses and the baggage, with whom were sigre
Gustavus di Liliecron a Gentleman of eminent worth, and most excellent parts,
the wife of the foresaid Earl of Stemberg, with three of her women, Sigre John
Wrangell, Sigre Silvekron her Steward, Doctor Wenleu her Physician, and some
Musicians, all which took the very same way through Denmark.

This King, having had private notice, of her Majesty's passage through his
Country, and ambitious to express his devotions to her, went presently with
his wife, and all the Court to Kolding, and under the pretense of going a
hunting, met on purpose her retinue, and hearing that her Majesty was there,
came out of his Coach, to look into those of the Swedes; but for all his
solicitude, and earnestness, not finding the Queen and assured she was gone
by, he was much displeased, he had been prevented by her Majesty's great
diligence; it troubling him extremely, he could not comply with his duty
toward a Princess, of so great desert and condition, and so cordially
respected by him.

The end of the first BOOK.
The History of the sacred and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The Second Book.
The Argument.
THe Queen goes into Flanders, and comes to Antwerp. There she stays. The
Archduke and others send to complement her. The Earl of Buquoy goes thither in
the name of his Catholic Majesty. After the retreat of the Spanish Camp from
the Siege of Arras, the Archduke comes to Antwerp to visit her, the Prince of
Conde does the same, the Duke of Lorraine, the Earl of Fuensaldagna, and the
Grandees of the Court, and Army, together with other Princes. Earl Raymund
monte Cuccoli dispatched from the Emperor, comes for the same Purpose. Don
Anthony Pimentel is sent unto her by the Cathol^que King with the title of
extraordinary Ambassador, and stays with her Majesty. The Archduke invites
the Queen to Bruxells, where she is royally received; she makes secret
profession of the Catholic religion. She received advice of the death of the
Queen her mother. Pope Innocent the tenth dies: Alexander the seventh is
assured to the Papacy with an universal applause. The Queen soon imparts unto
him her resolutions and designs. She departs from Bruxells, Her Majesty's
journey to Inspruch.

While her Majesty stayed at Hambourg diverse Princes and great Lords of the
Countries thereabouts came thither to visit her, and with others, She is
Visited in Hambourg by diverse Princes of Germany.
Prince Christian of Mechelbourg, the Duke of Brunswick, the three Brothers,
the Dukes of Lunebourg, whose Sister is Queen of Denmark, Frederick Landgrave
of Hessen, with the Princess his Wife, sister to Charles the now King of
Swedland, together with the two Princes Francis Albert, and Gregory John of
Saxony Lavenbourg. The Queen received them all with great courtesy, yet
privately treated with them as concealed. Earl Benedict Oxensterne came
likewise from Wismar, the place of his government, to wait upon her Majesty,
and General Koningsmark from Staden, in the Bishopric of Bremen, where he was
Commander in chief.

The Landgrave of Hessen, She is feasted abroad by the Landgrace of Hessen.
on the thirtieth of July, gave the Queen a stately feast without the City, in
a Villa called Vanspek. All the Princes then in Hambourge, were invited thither
likewise, where they were very merry, after supper the Queen returned to
Hambourg, the gate being opened for her, by order of the senate, for the
guarding of which till her Majesty was entered, the principal Citizens stood
in arms, and there finding all things convenient for her journey, without
taking leave of any one, she desiring to go more concealed than ever, she
departed after midnight, accompanied by the Earl of Stemberg, She departs on
the sudden from Hambourg.
Signior Wolf Gentleman of the Chamber, and three Grooms, reapparalling
herself in man's clothes.

She remanded into Swedland the senator Soop, and Earl of Donoau, the
Countess of Shemberg, and the rest remained in the City, with order to follow
her the next day after, and to be at a set time in Amsterdam, every one having
liberty to take what way he found most convenient; for the passages at that
time were unsafe, by reason of the war between the City of Bremen, and the
Swedes, whom they of the said City endeavored to expel out of the lands, they
had seized, and possessed in these parts.

That senate pretended the said holds, as members of their juridiction, were
unjustly detained by the Crown of Swedland. The Swedes refused to quitt them,
alleging they were in the province of Bremen, but not of the Diocese of that
City. In the mean time the Citizens of Bremen being armed on the sudden, and
assailing the said lands, obliged the Swedes to retreat, Differences between
the Crown of Swedland and the City of Bremen.
but the King of Sweden afterward sending thither with his forces, the
Generally Strangel, and Stemboth, they not only recovered the said holds, but
reduced those of Bremen to surrender them free to Swedland, and repair their
losses with a great sum of money.

On the first day of August at night, her Majesty departed from Hambourg, and
lodged in a Village called Bardwick in Westphalia, in the jurisdiction of the
Duke of Lunebourg. She took this unfrequented way, though there were two other
more commodious, and more beaten, to pass the more secure, and unknown.

Her Majesty's journey from Hambourg to Antwerp.
On the second she lay in Rodembourg, a little Town of the said Duke of
Lunebourg, on the third at the Village of Barembourg, and on the fourth at
Mindem, a strong and considerable City, seated on the river Wesser the chief
of that Province. The day after she went to Osnabruck, a great and famous City
for the meeting there lately of the plenipotentiaryes, and ministers of the
Protestant Princes, for the treatyes of the general peace of Germany,
belonging to the Bishop, the sovereign Prince of that place. On the sixth she
Came to Munster, a City renowned for the conference, and peace aforesaid,
established there by the mediators, and plenipotentiaryes of all the Christian
Princes.

The next morning her Majesty before she departed, desired to see the College
of the Jesuits esteemed and loved by her, as persons of great virtue and
learning, and here while her Majesty went veiwing the things of greatest
Curiosity, although she was known by one of that Company, who had her picture
by him, She is known in Munster.
which was not ill done, and resembled her, he observing too in her, the
countersignes given him by a Brother of the Society, yet he made no matter of
it, not to hinder the pleasure she took in not being discovered.

Her Majesty departing from Munster on the seventh day, lay that night in the
village of Ensened, and on the eighth at Deventer, a principal fortress of the
dominion of the Republique of Holland, where she saw, as she passed by, one Mr.
Granovius, a man for his great learning, much esteemed by her. On the ninth she
went to Amesfort, where arrived too the same day, the train of her Majesty,
to whom she gave order, by one of the Grooms of her Chamber, that without
making show of knowing her Majesty, they should keep on their journey, and
instead of bending toward Amsterdam, according to the first order, go directly
to Antwerp.

The States of Holland receiving advice, that the Queen gone from Swedland,
came toward the low Countries, gave order throughout all their Dominions, they
should stand on their guardes, and be ready to receive her with due honors.
Bun her Majesty passed through Deventer, Amesfort, Vtrecht, and other places;
without being known, though, she was expected every where there.

On the tenth at night she lay in a Village near Gorcum, and passing the next
day through the town, indifferently strong, on the river Wahal, she came to
Breda, a fortress as famous in Brabant, as renowned in the wars past, on the
twelfth of August she ended her journey in Antwerp, entering there privately,
and lodging in the house of Don Garzia Doyliano, a Portugese, one of the
richest and chiefest of that famous, City.

She arrives in Antwerp.
The day after overtaken by her train, she put on women's clothes, and received
the visit of Don Balthazar Marcadero, the Commander of the Citadell, a person
of clear fame, and great valor, afterward in order by the Magistrates of the
City, and the rest or the principal Gentlemen of that noble Country.

All flocked to see her with equal Curiosity and respect, The applauses, with
which she is seen in that City.
and dazzled with the splendor of her rare endowments and prerogatives, were
not able to veiw her with greater applause, than that of an affectionate, and
reverent admiration. The throngs of the Cityzens were for some days so great,
that they could hardly pass up and down in the streets, that were near to
her Court.

In the mean time the Archduke, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Lorraine,
and the Earl of Fuensaledagna, with the rest of the Princes, and Grandees,
designed for the direction and Command of the Army in Flanders, were all in the
field, beseiging the most important City of Arres, very valiantly defended by
the French, and invaded by the Spaniards with great earnestness and vigor. The
Archduke sends to complement her.
And though Cardinal Mazarine was most diligent and intent to supply it with
all necessaryes, yet so great was the confidence of the Spanish Commanders,
that they verily believed, to welcome this great Queen, with so glorious a
victory.

With thoughts of this kind, continuing that seige, all the said three Princes,
sent persons expressly to assure her, that they within few days, disengaged
from that fortress would come and waire upon her with their presence, as they
did then with their hearts, replenisht with joy for the happy arrival of her
Majesty.

The Earl of Ruquoy, a Grandee of Spain and a Gentleman of much worth,
designed by his Catholic Majesty, extraordinary Ambassador to complement
the Queen, eight days after her arrival in Antwerp, gave a very good account
to her Majesty of his Commission, and was received by her, with many
demonstrations of esteem proportionable to his merit, and the greatness of the
sender,

But in the mean time, the Cardinal having gathered together the French Army,
and disposed the orders, where no less his refined understanding, and conduct,
than good fortune appeared, the circumvallation being broken, and gained, which
by all was thought impenetrable, freed the tottering City, to the very great
glory, and benefit of the Crown of France. His imperial Highness retur'd then
to Bruxelles, on the eighth of September, and the next day went to Antwerp, to
complement her Majesty in his person, as he had done before with his letters.
The Queen received him, at the foot of the stairs, conducted him to her
lodgings, made him sit down o^ against her, in such another chair, gave him
always the title of Highness, and accompanied him to the bottom of the same
stairs, with reciprocal satisfaction, still speaking in Italian. The Archduke
stayed in Antwerp one day, and returned the next to Bruxells.

When the Army was retired into the garrisons, the Prince of Conde, likewise
went to wait on her Majesty, The Prince of Condes pretenses not admited.
who, as the first Prince of the royal blood of France, pretended the Queen
should receive, and treat him, with the forms and prerogatives, she had used
with the Archduke. He therefore sent before, the President Viola, one of the
chief slingers of the Parliament of Paris, and the constantest follower of his
party, to visit her, and discover her intention about his reception, who
related her Majesty would treat him, He visits the Queen as a private
Gentlemen.
in the form due to Princes of his quality. Viola was not satisfied with these
general words, but would sound her farther, insisting to pretend the same
honors done to the Archduke. Whereupon the Queen offended, perhaps at the
diffidence, he seemed to have of her wary, and generous discreetness, resolved
to hold her own, refusing the Prince those acts of Civility, of which, as she
afterward declared, she would have been liberal, if he had not pretended to
them, as his due. Viola then unable to compass the business, in the manner
pretended by the Prince, found at last this expedient, that his Highness should
go visit her privately, as he did, being treated like a private Cavalier.

Francis Duke of Lorraine came afterward (received too privately by her
Majesty) the Earl of Fuensaldagna, Many Iricys and great Lods come to ^isit
the Queen.
and diverse other Grandees of Spain, who had their reception, in the form
used to them by the Catholic King, causing them to be covered. The tamburet,
which is a less seat, granted usually by Queens to Princesses of great
quality, was given to the Dutchesses of Ascot, of Auray, and the Princess of
Ligni, all Ladies of Flanders, who went to wait upon her, being married to
Grandees of Spain.

The King of Scots sent likewise the Earl of Norwich, to congratulate her
arrival, and the Elector of Brandembourg, Count Maurice, of Nassau, and
others. The Princess too of Conde sent her Gentleman, to pass all due
complements with her Majesty.

While the Queen stayed in Antwerp, she still employed her self in noble
entertainements, sometimes passing her time in seeing some moral
representations, and chiefly in taking notice of many virtuous persons, who
flockt from all parts, to wait upon her Majesty, and be known to her.

From the Hague came concealed the Queen of Bohemia, married heretofore to the
Prince Elector Palatine, and sister to Charles the first King of England, with
Princess Elizabeth her daughter, and the princess of Orange, and only to see
her, as they did, at a Comedy, they being unwilling to be known, not to be
obliged perhaps, to give her a visit, without a return of the reception, they
pretended. Her Majesty went often to see the house of the, Professed, and the
College of the Jesuits, where she saw represented Thyestes in Seneca, as she
had desired, and another play entitled Manasses.

During her stay in Antwerp, the Emperor sent to complement her, The Emperor
sends Earl Montecucoli to complement her Majesty
Earl Raymund Montecucoli, his General of the Horse, a person of rare parts,
and eminent fame. The said Earl had been in Swedland, a little before, with
the title of Gentleman sent thither by the Emperor, to ratisfy the good
correspondence of his Imperial Majesty with that Crown, as likewise the
freedom of a reciprocal commerce. She received Montecucoli kindly, declaring
her self much obliged to the goodness of Caesar, for the honuor he did her,
whose letters she answered with all due respect, remanding this Gentleman to
Vienna, with all satisfaction.

On the seventeenth of August her Majesty went concealed to Bruxells, She goes
concealed to Bruxells.
and lay in the house of Madame Pimentel. She not only saw the palace, but
twice too the College of the Jesuits, and thei' fair and great library, where
she shew^d her great learning, and the very great knowledge she had of rare
books, and grave sciences. She stayed four days in Bruxells, and visited
there the Monastery, of the Carmelite discalceat Nunns, of the order of St.
Teresa, the Ladies, or religious of Berlaymont, the principal Monastery of
Flanders, and the most noble College of the Canonesses of Nivelles. When she
was returned to Antwerp, Mounsieur De Chenut, the then French Ambassador to
the States of Holland, came thence to wait upon her. He had been before, as we
said Ambassador of the most Christian King to her Majesty in Swedland, so as
he was treated by her; with the greatest demonstrations of affection, and
esteem being known by her Majesty to be of great abilityes, and experience,
in affairs of greatest moment.

The Catholic King now informed, the Queen was gone toward Flanders, with
the thoughts of staying there some little time, The King of Spain sends Don
Antony Pimentel extraordinary Ambassador to the Queen.
remanded into the low Countries, Don Antony Pimentel Diprado, master of the
camp of the Spanish foot, and Governor of Newport, with the title of
extraordinary Ambassador to this Princess to assist her in all things, as
likewise to honor, with such a demonstration, her heroique resolutions

Don Antony, departed from Bruxells for Spain, on the eighth of June. 1654.
going thither to give an account of his negotiations in Swedland, and passed
with a passeport through France, being met, defrayed, lodged, and all his
charges borne, by order of Cardinal Mazarine, not so much in regard of his
merits, though he was much esteemed in France, as in token of the said
Cardinals gratitude, who in his retreat out of France into Germany, was
honorably treated in the Spanish Dominions. The care of accompanying him, was
committed to Mounsieur De Touchanpre,

The said Pimentel, embarquing at Biscaglia, arrived at Mardick on the twenty
ninth of October, and from thence went toward Antwerp, whither he came on the
fourth of December. He went to his first audience with a most noble train,
being a Gentleman very splendid and generous, and naturally affable and
courteous. Here the Queen stayed* till all things were prepared for her
reception in Bruxells, which was to be sumptuous, according to the orders the
Catholic King had given expressly unto the Archduke, and the rest of his
minsters, who fayl'd not of punctually fulfilling the generous mind of his
Majesty.

While the Queen remained in Antwerp, Earl Todt passed by there, sent by the
King of Swedland to the Court of France, who by order of his King, was to
complement her Majesty, which he did with expressions, corresponding with the
gratitude, that was due from his master, for so great, and extraordinary a
benefit.

In the mean time Count Pontus Della Garda arrived too from Paris in Antwerp,
and going to wait on her Majesty, was detained awhile by her, as likewise
Monsieur Palpitzky, who resident in France for the Crown of Swedland, had order
from his King, to assist her and serve her; she remanded into Swedland the
Earl of Shemberg, to return the Kings complement, and come to some agreement
about the lands appointed for her maintenance.

When all things in fine were in readiness for her Majesty's reception in
Bruxells on the 13. of December, The A^ch-Duke returns to Antwerp, to invite
the Queen to Bruxells.
the Archduke came to Antwerp, to invite her to Bruxells, in the name of the
King of Spain, he himself returning thither the day after, where 'twas
appointed, the Queen leaving Antwerp on the 23. should arrive the same Evening,
as she did.

Her Majesty departed that day very privately by Coach, being attended and
accompanied by the foresaid Earl Pontus, and Palpitzky by Messieurs di
Lillicerou, Wolf and Wrangel, Gentlemen of her Chamber, Monsieur Silvekron her
Steward, Baron Carock Messieurs d' Eberling, Bukoven, Varenne, and other
Gentlemen, with six Pages, eight Grooms, and others of her Court.

Being come half way she was welcomed by all the Canons and Musketts in
Wi^brouch, a Castle indifferently strong, seated on the Channel that runs to
Bruxells, where the Archduke met her, who came with his Guards, and a Noble
and numerous attendance, as well of his Court, as the principal Gentlemen of
the Country.

He represented to her Majesty, with much Courtesy and respect, the great
satisfaction he received for her arrival, conducting her into a house, where a
very sumptuous dinner was provided, and they sat down to the Table, the Queen
at the upper end under a cloth of state, the Archduke on her right hand; a
little below on the other side of the Table, but under the same Cloth of state,
the Marquest Mattei being her Cup Bearer, and the Marquess of Beralau a
Flemming her Carver.

Some two hours after her Majesty continued her journey, on the Channel
toward Bruxells in a Bucentoro most richly adorned, and gilded within and
without, which carried twelve pieces of Canon, and was drawn by twelve horses,
of which was the Captain the Admiral of Antwerp.

In this ship there went none but the Queen, the Archduke, and the chief of
their Courts, the remainder being carried in other Barques, which staying now
and then in the sluices, which keep up the water, did satisfy in part the
Curiosity of the people, which flockt in h^ge throngs for beholding this
Princess, all the banks of the Channel, all the houses and the neighboring
fields abounding with Persons of all kinds.

From Wilbrouch they advancing to the bridge called Lac, which was a league
forward, here the City of Bruxells began to appear in a very fine prospect, for
the Country being open, they so freely saw the Towers, that the air now being
dusky by the absence of the Sun, and they full of great lights, it seemed a new
Sun was risen again in the night, and really the light was so great, which with
artificial mixtures, illuminated all the barks of the Channel, that they saw
as in the day. All along the said banks stood the Soldiers in arms, who now
and anon, with reiterated volleys saluted her Majesty.

Being come near the City, about three hours in the Night, all the Canon,
Mortarpeices and Muskets, saluted her Majesty with a tuneable noise; and when
she arrived at the gate, Her Majesty's, entrance into Bruxells
she saw it adorned with a fine artificial fire-work, representing two Angels,
which held the name of Christina, crowned with laurel, with diverse
inscriptions above and below. On the bridge, where her Majesty was to land,
stood the Earl of Fuensaldagna, a Gentleman of most eminent quality, as high
Steward to his Catholic Majesty, accompanied by the senators of the City and
all the Nobility, and Officers of that Court, with above 200. Coaches, and an
incredible multitude of people.

Her Majesty being entered her Coach, took in the Archduke, The rejoycings
with which she is publicly received in Bruxells.
and she sitting in the end, and his Imperial Highness in the boot, they
went toward the Townhouse, which was proudly adorned with various Arms,
Mottos, and Inscriptions, in praise of her Majesty, and illuminated with above
three thousand lights, and likewise the streets, through which they passed,
were all full of lights, and hung with tapistry, with so great a concourse of
Ladies, Gentlemen, Citizens, and People, that Bruxells never saw such a number
drawn by curiousity to see a Princess of so great same; and such virtuous and
eminent parts.

All the City contributed to her happy arrival, with the sensiblest
expressions, a real and reverent heart is capable of; with Bonefires,
discharging of Canons, Mortarpeices, and ringing of the Bells, which being in
that Country well tuned, use to make a grateful harmony.

Her Majesty lighting at the Palace, the Archduke accompanied her, to the
lodgings assigned her, which she found hung with the most excellent, and
pretiousest Tapestries, that are made in that Country. And because 'twas
somewhat late, the Archduke soon dismissed himself, leaving her to her repose;
and so they all did.

The rest of the night, and the two other following, many Bonefires were made,
with discharging of the Ordinance, and ringing of the Bells.

The same Evening the Prince of Conde, Francis Duke of Lorraine, and the
greatest of the Court came to wait upon her privately, and because, it was
Christmas Eve, they suspended other Ceremonies, to give no disturbance to
devotion. She makes secretly profession of the Catholic faith.
On the said 24. of December toward the Evening, the Queen accompanied by his
imperial Highness went into the Archdukes farthest Chamber, and there in the
presence of him, of Earl Fuensaldagna, the Ambassador Pimentel, the Earl of
Montecuccol^, and Don Agostino Boreno Navarra, the Secretary of State, made
secretly profession of the Roman Catholic Faith, before Father Guemes a
Dominican.

This Religious man came from Spain into Flanders, with the Ambassador
Pimentel in the quality of his Secretary, and as he before had been privy to
the business, so was chosen for this function, to keep it the more secret,
since occasion so required. In the foresaid action a thing of some reflection
succeeded which was, as the Queen had made an end of professing her Faith,
while Father Guemes said the word, I absolve, etc. all the Ordinance of the
City were discharged, to the wonder of all that assisted at the Function,
without notice given to the Magistrates, who only had order, to have them shot
off indeterminately near the time.

On Christmas day the Queen accompanied by the Archduke, and all the Grandees
of the Court went to the Chapel, where there was most rare Music, and an
excellent Sermon. Her Majesty past afterward into a great hall, where she
dined in Public, together with the Archduke, where the order held at
Wilbrouch was observed in sitting. The Earl of Castelmendo a Portugese, and
Gentleman of the Chamber to his imperial Highness, was Cup Bearer to the
Queen, and Count Atemis a Dutchman Sewer. The ambassador Pimentel, and the
Grandees of Spain assisted standing at the Table, but with their hats on. All
the rest, which were many, and the chief of the City, stood uncovered.

She eats in public.
On St. Stephens day the Queen likewise dined in public, and afterward went in
Coach to the Court, where the Princesses and Ladies of quality were proudly
adorned for the purpose. In her Majesty's return to the Palace, all the Coaches
waited on her one by one in a row, and the greatest part alighted to attend
her, who received them with courtesy, and singular affability, to answer the
esteem very highly deserved by those Ladies, who usually intermeddle with
Masculine spirits, in the management of the greatest affairs.

That evening an extraordinary fireworke being to play, She is alwaeis inclined
to Noble and worthy entertainments.
the Queen went to see it, invited thither by the Archduke, Seven weeks
together she remained in the Palace, treated with all magnificence by his
Highness, nor was there any want of entertainments of various exercises, and
virtuous and noble Passetimes; among which, in the last days of Carneval, a
Play was recited in Music, which was the noblest thing could be seen.

On the Tenth of February she went from the Archdukes Palace, to lodge in the
Duke of Egmonts, at her Majesty's own charge, where she was some time employed
in receiving the visits, not only of the Princes, Princesses, Ladies and
Gentlemen, but of many learned Persons, which came from all parts, either as
lines to the center, or as rivers to the Sea.

Here her Majesty twice a week used some virtuous exercises, for the
entertainment of her noble and elevated mind, which she did continue till the
death of Queen Mary Eleonora her Mother, The Queen her Mother dies.
which happened on the twelfth of March 1655. in Stockholm. This so sad news
she received by the Baron of Spaur, a Gentleman formerly of her Chamber and
Resident in France, dispatched to her by the King of Swedland.

At this sorrowful advice she quickly retired to a house without Bruxells
called Tervoren, and remained there three weeks, to divert her afflictions,
returning thence afterward to the City, where all did condole with her
Majesty; she likewise put on Mourning in her mind, depriving it of all
recreation and Passetime.

Now Father Malines was returned from Spain to Rome, with the Letters of the
Catholic King, to Pope Innocent; to accompany the Queens, but it being thought
afterward, the conjunctures then were not altogether proportionable to the
quality, and convenience of so weighty and important a business, they deferred
the presenting them; for the reasons we shall register more diffusely in its
place in the universal History.

Things passed in this manner for some months, the Queen entertaining still her
self in Flanders; in the mean time Innocent the tenth, having reigned ten
years, three months and twenty two days, gave up his soul to God in the age of
eighty and one year, on the 7. of January 1655. The death of Pope Innocent.
The sacred College after the obsequies, and usual congregations, went into
the Conclave on the 18th. of the foresaid Month, and at last came out
gloriously on the 7. of the following April, Cardinal Chigi is assumed to the
Papacy.
with having assumed to the Papaly Cardina^l Fabius Chigi of Sienna, who with
the name he took, renewed the immortal, and still more happy memory of Pope
Alexander the third his Countreyman and Kinsman.

I cannot express the joy, With the applause of all Christianity.
and applause; with which by all Christianity his election was received, as
made with quietness, liberty, and an exact balance of his merits. The
Heretics themselves, who by reason of the length of the Conclave occasioned
by the power, ana discord of the factions were not wanting to murmur, when they
heard of so worthy an election, commended it with opinions of esteem, respect
and reverence, and all was but due to the merit of a Person and name, so
plausible and Majestic, who with the fame of great, presaged a Principality
full of Zeal and Christian edification, and therefore most suitable to the
necessities of Christianity,

The Queen was glad of this so happy news, justly hoping to find in the new
shepherd of Christ's flock, that charity and resolution, her necessities could
promise themselves, from a heart removed from all private interest, and wholly
intent to the honor alone of God, the exaltatation of his Church, and the
happiness, security and repose of all Christendom.

The Queen gives an account to the Pope of her desire to come to Rome.
The Queen then determining to give an account out of hand to his Holiness, of
all that had succeeded, as well of the profession she had made, as the reasons
that had moved her to conceal it, of her desire to go to Rome, to give him
all obedience, and kiss his Holinesses foot, quickly wrote to the foresaid
Father Malines, now remaining in Rome, and sent him the fresh Letters for his
Holiness, to the end he should present them, as he did on the first day of
July. The Pope at that advice, representing in his countenance, and testifying
in his words the joy and content, news so good and so great did deserve; called
happy his Papacy for bringing a Queen to his feet, with motives and resolutions
so worthy and unparalleled; whereupon he replied, it was necessary her Majesty,
ere she came into Italy, or at least ere she entered the dominions of the
Church, should publicly make Profession of the Catholic Faith, she before had
made privately; for if at her entrance into the said dominions it appeared not
she was now a Catholic, she could not there be received with those
demonstrations of honor, his Holiness had designed her,

All things were easily reconciled, and in the mean time, fresh Letters came
likewise out of Spain from that King to the Pope, Letters from the King of
Spain to his Holiness.
to whom they were presented by the Duke of Terranova Ambassador for his
Catholic Majesty in Rome. The Queen having caused all things to be p^ovided
for her journey, with expressions of Kindness and gratitude, gave all thanks to
the Archduke and the Mini^ters of the Catholic King, for her noble
entertainment; Presents made by her Majesty to the Archduke in Flanders and
others.
and here, as in each other place she had done, she made her unexpressible
magnificence, and splendor appear by presenting his imperial Highness, with
a proud and generous Swedish horse, with a Sadle, Bridle, and Pistols, enricht
all with Diamonds, to the value of above thirty thousand Crowns, the Earl of
Fuensaldagna with a horse like the other, and Furniture worth above Ten
thousand Crowns, and all the other Officers and Servants with Donatives, to the
value of above ten thousand Pistolls to their admiration: who conceived this
Princess as provident, as generous, had cause to reflect on the future
necessities, into which she might easily fall, but they were deceived, for the
same generosity and freedom, with which she had parted with her Kingdoms, made
her more liberal than ever.

On the 22. of September in the year 1655. she departed from Bruxels, Her
departure from Bruxells.
accompanied by the Archduke and all the Nobility, as well the Gentlemen as
Ladies, two leagues without the City, and at her going out was saluted by all
the Canon on the walls, and the Musketeers placed in order every where as she
passed. Her Majesty departed highly satisfied with the honors received from
his imperial Highness, a Prince indeed of so Noble a spirit, and so great a
mind, that he shows, he conserves in his heart, the ancient and still stronger
impressions of the valor and virtue peculiar to his most royal House, being
worthy in fine of the love, veneration applauses, and obsequiousness of all.

That night she lay in Lorrain, some seven leagues distant, a great City
encompassed with strong and ancient walls, filled up with earth and famous for
the Military successes, of which it has been the Theater in our time. Those
Senators had offered and prepared her a lodging, but her Majesty refusing it,
was content to be received by the Magistrates at the gate, with the inhabitants
in Arms, and the discharging of the Canon, and a Present of 24. great bottles
of wine, presented to her in the name of the City, according to the custom in
that Country.

The quality of her Majesty's Train.
The Queen had with her of her own domestics, about fifty Persons, among whom
was Monsieur Liliecron, Gentleman of her Chamber, Monsieur Apelgren her Taster,
four Grooms of the Chamber, two maids of Honor, the one a Swede, the other a
Fleming, Sigre Retius a Spaniard her Treasurer, Monsieur Gillbert a Frenchman,
her Secretary, three Italians Musicians, Father Guemes the Dominican, who went
in a secular habit, to serve there the better and more easily the Queen, in
saying Mass privately, six Pages, six Grooms, and diverse other servants,
together with thirty soldiers of her Guard, three Coaches, and four Wagons
of baggage.

To these was joined Don Anthony della Cuera di Silva, a Spanish Gentleman of
eminent quality, of a very great spirit, and most courteous and affable,
Lieutenant General of the Cavalry of Flanders, and Sergeant major General of
the battle. He waited on the Queen with the title of her Majesty's great Master
of the Horse, accompanied with the Lady his wife, Madam de Broy, of a very
Noble family in Flanders, and the chief Maid of Honor to the Queen, a Lady of
much virtue, and noble deportment, who carried with them eighteen servants of
their own.

Don Anthony Pimentel followed likewise the Queen, as extraordinary Ambassador
of his Catholic Majesty to her, to assist her, and serve her in the journey,
with a train of twenty men for the purpose.

Diverse other persons afterward of quality accompanied her, among whom was
Don Francis Dessa of Portugal, a Gentleman nobly born, and of very great
valor, in recompense of his merits, designed to the command of General of the
Artillery of the Kingdom of Naples, who had ten persons with him. The young
Earl of Buquoy formerly Page to the Archduke, The persons of quality that
accompanied the Queen.
who went to Rome with the Eearl of Trassigny his camrade, both Gentlemen of
Flanders. Don Romano Montero a Spanish Serjant Major, no less famous in war
with his sword, than renowned in peace for his pen. Don Bernardino di Liepa of
Sivill, a youth of much spirit, and great expectation. Messieurs de Gans
brothers, and Monsieur Pos Hollanders, Monsieur Levit a Fleming, with many
other persons of Honor and Civility, so as the Queens Court was grown very
numerous, being about two hundred persons in all, who were all at the Queens
charge, except the retinue of the Ambassador Pimentel, who traveled by
himself, and at his own cost.

On the 23 of September her Majesty dined at Louvaine, a chief town in
Brabant, and one of the greatest in the low Countries, being renowned for the
wars past. When the University had waited upon her, she went that evening to
Montaga, some five leagues remote, where she visited a miraculous Image of our
Lady. The next day she passing through Bering, dined there, and came that night
to Becht, a village eight leagues distant. In the morning betimes she dined in
Steinbruch a village three leagues farther. The Earl of Isenghien Prince of
Mamines, Her reception in Ruremond.
a Spanish Gentleman of a very noble family, and Most eminent parts, Governor
of Gelders, and the town of Rurmond overtook the Queen here with a regiment of
foot, and a regiment of horse, to invite her to this City, where her Majesty
was received by the soldiers in arms, and discharging all the Canon, being
royally treated and defrayed by the said Prince. Here she saw a rare firework,
and her Majesty dined publicly alone waited on at table by the foresaid
Prince and the most conspicuous Officers of war. As soon as her Majesty arrived
in Ruremond, the Bishop, the supreme Senate of of that Province, and the
chamber of accounts came to wait upon her. All the night they made fireworks in
the place, and the Queen went to see them in the house of Counselor
Blitterwich, where her Majesty saw diverse curiosities, collected by that
virtuous and well qualified Gentleman.

Ruremond is distant seven leagues from the said village of Steinbruch, seated
on the banks of the river Mose, strong in modern bulwarks, large ditches, and
exterior fortifications and regular, with a very good Garrison, it standing on
the confines of the Holland dominion, very famous in times past, and
particularly for the mutiny there of a part of the Spanish Army, in the
beginning of those wars.

The Princess of Mamines went beyond the river Mose, and met her Majesty with
a numerous train. Before she departed, she was complemented by the Magistrates,
and presented with the usual wine. That evening she went to Arquellens, a
little City with an old fashion wall, some six leagues remote, belonging to the
said Princes Government, who waited on her thither, and lo^g'd her. He
afterward dismissing himself on the confines of his jurisdiction, the Queen
with all her train, advanced toward the Abbey of Castre, a country of the
Duke of Giuliers, where albeit the Abbot, the Lord of the place, was not
present. she had the conveniencie of lodging in his Palace, six leagues distant
from Arquellens, where a Gentleman of the Duke of Newbourg arrived to
complement her Majesty in his name, who received the civility, with her usual
kindness and courtesy.

On the 28 she removed from Castre to Cullen, distant five leagues, She passes
through Cullen.
a City renowun'd, as well for its greatness, as for its great commerce, being
one of the chiefest of Germany, seated on the Rhyne, and encompassed with a
large circuit of walls, and old fashion Towers. Here, although she was
expected by the Senate, and the Citizens in arms, and with sumptuous
preparation, yet refusing all invitation, except the commodity and pleasure of
passage, she made with expedition through the City, she passed the river, and
went and dined in the Borough of Hof which is over against the City, lodging in
an Inn. At her entrance into Cullen, she was welcomed by all the Canon on the
walls, and in her said passage, found the streets full of soldiers in arms.
The Magistrates sent afterward to complement her Majesty, and gave her the
accustomed present of 25 greeat bottles of wine, which the Queen caused to be
given to the Carmelite discalceat Nuns, together with other alms, the effects
of her generous piety.

After dinner she departed from Hof, and went and lay that night, some four
leagues farther, The continuation of her journey.
in a very fine Castle called Siebourg, or Zibery, very strong, and well
fortified, seated on an arm of the Rhine. The said Castle belongs to an Abbot,
who is a Dutch Prince, and came out to meet her, and treated her splendidly,
not only that night, but the other two following days, she stayed there for
her repose.

Departing from thence on the first of October, the Abbot accompanied her to
the confines with two companies of foot, and as well at her departure, as
arrival, all the Canon, in the fortress saluted her. That night, 4 leagues
off, she lay in a poor village called Virembous, where all her attendance
endured as much as they had been feasted the foregoing days.

From Virembous she went, and dined in Aldem Kircken, and lay that night in
Hackbourgh a town five leagues distant. The next morning her Majesty arriving
in Valmerode a village three leagues farther, with intention alone to dine
there, was surprised with a little fever, which made her stay there the
remainder of that day, and the following night, but having let blood, and taken
some rest, she the next day continued her journey, advancing six leagues, and
arriving on the fourth in the evening at Lembourgh, a little walled town of the
Elector of Triers, in a manner wholly ruined by the former wars, as all the
rest were in the country thereabouts, in having been more than any other
infested by soldiers, now of this, now that party, or perhaps for its
unfortunate situation, or because peradventure that territory is one of the
fruitfulest and pleasantest of Germany, the fields, and the hills abounding
with fruit, and the plains watered every where with great quantity of brooks.

She breakfasted in Lambourg, and when she was advanced toward Koningstein, a
little City with a very strong Castle, belonging to the Elector of Mentz she
arrived there a good while before the setting of the sun, being received with
discharging all the Ordinance, and invited by the Governor, who complemented
her Majesty in the name of the Elector his Master, but her Majesty refusing
his offer, would needs lodge in the Inn, and defray too her self, staying
there all the sixth of Oct^ber. The Resident of Charles the second King of
Scotland, She is visited by the King of Scotland.
came hither from Franckfort to visit her, and desire audience in the behalf of
his Master, who arrived there after dinner, and was, though privately, received
with all courtesy, they remaining and discoursing together above two hours.

With the King was the Duke of Gloucester his Brother, a youth full of spirit,
together with other Gentlemen who waited on the Queen, and were received by her
with great demonstrations of esteem and affection. Her Majesty met the King on
the top of the stairs, accompanying him from thence. Being come into the
chamber, they sat down, and 'twas observed, the King being covered at first,
took off his hat presently after, and always stood bare, showing very much
respect, who taking his leave the same day, returned thence to Franckfort.

And by the Elector Palatine.
After the King Scotland, came Charles the Prince Elector Palatine, who likewise
was privately received, but with all terms of love and esteem. His Electoral
Highness had intention to receive and treat her Majesty in Heydelberg, the
City of his residence, and therefore invited her thither, but she excused it,
that way being out of the line of her journey.

Prince Robert the said Electors brother came afterward, Afterward by Prince
Robert.
who complemented the Queen, and the like did a Gentleman, sent expressly by the
Princess Electresse Palatine, sister to the Prince of Taranto, a french woman,
of the ancient and noble house of Tremoglia. This great Lady being a little
indisposed in Frankfort, whither she came to see the Fair, which is usually
four times the year with a very great concours of Merchants, and merchandise,
sent to excuse her self, she could not wait upon her in person, to express the
devotions and affections of her heart. The Queen received them all with great
kindness, and remanded them well satisfied.

The day after on the seventh of October she passed through the City of
Franckfort, three leagues only distant from Koningstien, and without making
any stay there, went and lay three leagues farther, at a little walled Town
called Steinhain, where her Majesty was received, and met by the Brother of the
Elector of Mentz, dispatched expressly by his Electoral Eminence, with a troup
of horse, to the end they might attend her through his jurisdiction. Here
likewise Monsieur Wambolt, Coronel of a Regiment to the foresaid Elector,
arrived, to invite her Majesty into Asschaffemburg.

The Queen would perhaps have been willing to have staid a little while in
Franckfort, a free City, great and renowned. seated on the banks of the river
Main, and among other things, very full of copious Libraries, and abounding
with the curiousest volumes, that have been yet printed, but she thought it
better to continue her journey, as she did, to avoid incommoding that Senate,
with those entertainments, with which more than others, they would have
endeavored to manifest their gratitude toward the glorious name of King
Gustavus Adolphus, her Majesty's Father, who was the particular Protector of
that City, and who, entering there with his Army, preserved it from the anger
and severity, with which it was threatened by the Imperial troops. She therefore
was saluted by all the Artillery, and the peoples acclamations, who flockt in
extraordinary throngs to behold her, with the greatest curiosity, and
veneration.

From Steinhaim she went to Asschaffemburg, She goes from Steinhaim.
a City washed by the said river Main, and belonging to the dominion of the
foresaid Elector of Mentz, whose Castle is strong, beautiful, of a modern
structure, and one of the magnificentest fabriques of Europe. This City
renowned for the accidents of the former wars, is seven leagues distant from
Steinhaim. There she was received with great joy by all the Citizens, who as
mindful of the chances, that were past, gave clear demonstrations of their well
affected minds, by discharging all the Canon, the Muskets, and an infinite
number of Mortarpieces. She was lodged and defrayed by the Elector, not only
that evening of the eighth, but all the ninth day she staid there, to let her
horses rest.

Departing from that place on the 10th. of October, she went and lay at
Mitelmbourg, a little City with an old fashion wall, which likewise belonged to
the Elector of Mentz, where her Majesty had the same entertainments, and the
said Electors confines here ending, his Eminences Officers dismissed themselves
with the horse, that had accompanied, and served her; on the said tenth day her
Majesty advancing five leagues further to a village of Franconia called
Kulsai, and thence the next day to Simmering, whither came the Prince Palatine,
with his Princess, and two Sisters, to wait on her Majesty, who arrived the
same day at Aub, a little City on the frontires of the Bishopric of
Wirtzburgh, called commonly Herbipolis, four leagues farther from Mitelmbourg,
where her Majesty was received, and splendidly treated, by order of the said
Elector of Mentz, as Bishop of that City. That Country is good and fruitful,
but very much spoiled by the former wars, in which Herbipolis has occasioned
much matter for History, for the various successes, that happened near it,

Her Majesty staid in Aub all the thirteenth of October, and lay the night
following in Rottemburg, distant five leagues, She arrives in Rotemburg.
an Imperial Town, encompassed with strong and old walls, and washed by the
river Nechar, famous likewise for the wars past. The Magistrates of the place
presented the Queen with fish, wine, and oats, presents usually made to all
Princes and great persons, by the Imperial Cities of Germany. She was welcomed
by the Canon, and received by all the Citizens in arms.

The Marquis of Anspach of the house of Brandemburg, came thither that day to
wait on her Majesty, who having been received with the show of much respect,
took his leave the same night, but returned the next morning before the Queen
departed, and brought with him the Countess of Olac his Kinswoman, who would
needs wait on her Majesty, as one much devoted and obsequious to the Crown of
Swedland, the Earl of Olac her husband having the said Crown, as Governor of
Auspurge, when that City was taken, and held by the Swedes.

From Rottembourg she went to the village of Waitvang, three leagues farther,
and of the jurisdiction of the Marquis aforesaid, where she was received, and
sumptuously treated by a Gentleman sent thither by the Marquis. But this noble
entertainment was the next day disgested in Donhausen, a poor Mannor-house,
where there being no other houses fit for lodging, but the Curates, they were
much incommoded and distressed.

On the seventeenth, she went to Nordlinguen an Imperial City, She comes to
Nordlinguen.
and renowned for the two famous battles fought heretofore in those ample
plains, the one glorious to the Spaniards, who with a full and memorable
victory, preserved the Empire, and the other unfortunate to Bavaria, since by
losing the day, all that flourishing country was made in a manner a prey to
the fury of the French, and anger of the Swedes. There she was received with
all obsequiousness, and respect, the people arming themselves, and the walls,
which are strong and bituminous, and abound with ancient towers. They stood all
in ranks in the streets, and every where as well with the noise of of the
Artillery, the Mortar-pieces, and Muskets, as the light of the Bonefires, her
Majesty's arrival was sollemnized. The Magistrates would have splendidly
entertained her, and her train, if she would have accepted their kindness, but
she having refused it, as she had done before in the other imperial Cities,
through which she had past, the usual presents were made her of fish, wine, and
oats.

The day following having dined in the village of Arbourg, To Donavert.
she went five leagues farther that evening, to the City of Donavert,
appertaining to the Elector of Bavaria, with a bridge over the Danube, renowned
in our History for the accidents past. All the Canon were discharged at her
arrival.

The Governor of the Castle went quickly to visit her Majesty, excusing
himself, that she found not all things ready for her entertainment, he not
knowing of her coming, insomuch as she lay in an Inn. The same evening the
Duke of Neuburgs chief Gentleman of the Chamber came thither, and informed the
Queen, his Master was coming to visit her, who arriving the next morning was
received by her Majesty with all kindness and courtesy.

She departing after dinner from Donavert, went that night to the village of
Visemdorp, distant three leagues, and as, the day following, she was traveling
toward Oberhausen, a village on the river Veder, of the jurisdiction of the
City Auspurge, Earl Montecuccoli returns dispatched again to the Queen from
the Emperor.
Earl Raymund Montecuccoli arrived, sent again by the Emperor to her Majesty to
accompany, and wait on her to Rome. The Queen received him with extraordinary
satisfaction and courtesy, took him into her Coach, and went and lay that
night in the foresaid village of Oberhausen, distant only a league from
Auspurge, where she staid all the following day, being the 21 of October, and a
person of quality arrived from the Duke of Bavaria, with a letter from his
Highness, to complement, and invite her to Monaco. Here likewise her Majesty
was presented by the Magistrates of Auspurge with fish, wine and oats, sent
expressly to her by their Deputies, who complemented her Majesty in the name of
the public, inviting her to their City with particular ambition, to give her
all due honor. Her Majesty dispatched from this place the foresaid Don Romano
Montero di Spinosa to Inspruch, The Queens letter to the Archduke of Inspruch.
to complement his Highness the Archduke Charles Ferdinand, and inform him of
her motion toward that place. Don Antony Pimentel sent likewise the Captain
Don Emanuel de Benavides, a Gentleman his Camrade, to pass the same office in
his name with his Highness, which was punctually performed by them, they
bringing back expressions of much content and joy, for her Majesty's approach,
so as for the honor of so great a Princesses arrival in his Country, he
commanded the preparations should be hastened, begun before on the hopes of
that happy success, his Highness having sent for from Venice, and other
parts, Musicians and artificers for that purpose.

The Letter the Queen wrote to the Archduke was as follows.

Dear Cosen,
I approaching to your Highnesses Dominion, have thought it becoming me to
advise you of my arrival, and entreat you to take in good part, that I pass
through your Country to go finish the rest of my journey toward Rome. I send
you a Gentleman, the Bearer of this, to tell more particularly my mind to your
Highness, and beseech you to believe him, when he shall inform you, that I am
more than any other person,

Dear Cosen, Your most affectionate Cosen and Friend CHRISTINA.
Auspurge, October. 20. 1655.

The same day the Queen went privately to see the most remarkable things of
that most noble City, She goes privately to Auspurge to see the most remarkable
things
but it being then late, she deferred it till the following day, and albeit her
Majesty was private, she was carried every where by the chief of the
Magistrates, and being returned afterward to the village aforesaid, dined
before she departed, passing through Auspurge without staying there, being
received by the Citizens in arms, and discharging of the Canon from the walls,
which are very strong, and filled up with earth, with great Towers, Curtins,
and old fashion Bulwarks.

Auspurge is one of the fairest, most noble and famous Cities of Germany,
seated in a very pleasant plain, abundantly watered with streams which make the
ground most fertile. The structures are great and magnificent, the streets
large and long, and the traffic very great, It Is replenisht with Merchants,
and opulent Citizens, the Townhouse is one of the beautifullest Fabriques of
Germany, and and the rest are noble and majestic. She advanced thence toward
Landsperg, a City six leagues farther, belonging to the Elector of Bavaria,
encompassed with strong and old walls, seated on the river Loch, and in my last
History much mentioned. On the confines of this territory, and that of
Auspurge, The Queen is met by the Officers of the Elector of Bavaria.
at a Church called Kircle, two troops of Horse of the Electors stood to meet
and accompany her to the City, where her Majesty was received by Baron
Hasstang, Marshal of the Court, and a Counselor, and by Baron Leinlig
Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to his Highness, persons of great quality, sent
expressly from Monaco to wait upon her Majesty; with these two Lords were nine
Gentlemen of his Highness, and the Count of Maischbraun Cupbearer, the Baron
of Gersheim Carver, Monsieur Welser Sewer, and Doctor Vidman Steward, with
other officers, six Pages, and as many Grooms, all in good order. Her Majesty
with all her retinue was treated most nobly, and with extraordinary
magnificence and sumptuousness, and in the Electors name, lay in Monsieur
Maxdels Palace.

Here she staid two days, She is treated sumptuously in Landsperg:
expecting Coaches from Monaco fit to pass the straight ways of the mountains
of Tyrole, where she could not possibly pass with her own, and they quickly
arriving, carried her on the 25 to the village of Welaim distant four leagues,
the next day to Morna, which was as far again, and on the 27 to Parkircken,
being always attended by the horse aforesaid, and Officers of Bavaria.

As she went to Landsperg, the Baron of Spaur, Gentleman of the Chamber to the
Archduke, arrived with a letter from his Highness in answer of that her
Majesty had sent by the foresaid Don Romano Montero, returning with equal
courtesy her Majesty's civility.

On St. Simon and Judes day, being gone a league farther than Parkircken, where
Bavaria ends its confines on that side, with the Bishopric of Freissing, the
Officers aforesaid and Cavalry took their leaves of her Majesty, who omitted
not to show her regal liberality toward them, as she always had abundantly
done, in the places she passed through. She went thence that evening to
Mittewal, a place at the foot of the mountains, remote five leagues more from
Parkircken. The day following she entering the Archdukes dominions, She enters
Tyrole.
was met and received on the confines at the Castle of Scernitz, by the Baron
of Freiberg, Gentleman of the Chamber, and Captain of the Guard, sent thither
as Commissary by his Highness, accompanied with the Baron of Ostein Cupbearer,
Count Belognim Carver, four Gentlemen, eight Pages, eight Footmen, and forty
Archers of the Archdukes Guard. The foresaid Castle of Scernitz is seated on a
mountain, at the foot of which runs the river Inn, which falling from the top
of the mountain called Odelberg, made navigable below Inspruch, with a swift
and copious stream, joins at Passau with the famous river Danube, which on the
other side does run between Suevia and Bavaria, and crossing below Austria and
Hungary, and afterward diverse Provinces of the Turkish Domions, pays the
tribute of his waters to the Sea, near Ardrinopolis.

That night she lay at Seefelt, a very famous Monastery, and went the next
morning to Zi^rle, a little City seated on Inn, two leagues distant from
Inspurch. The Archdukes of Inspruch go to visit the Queen privately in Seefelt.
Hither the Archduke with his brother came privately to visit her, and after
some complements had passed with reciprocal demonstration of affection and
esteem, his Highness returned thence to Inspruch, in the mean time causing all
things to be ready, for the solemn reception of her Majesty, which the next day
was to be, as it happened.

The Queen was met by both the Brothers the Archdukes, the Arch-Dutchesse, and
all the chief Lords and Gentlemen of the Court, and the Country, and with the
following order entered stately into Inspruch.

Five trumpets went before, and a tabour, Her Majesty's entrance into Inspruch.
with eight other trumpets, all clad in rich Cassocks of red velvet trimmed
with gold, behind whom went his Highnesses Pages, and afterward all the
Ministers, and chiefest Cavaliers of that Court on fine horses most gorgeously
apparrelled. Afterward came the Queen in a very stately litter in the middle
of the Archdukes, who rode the one on her right hand, the other on the left,
and the Arch-Dutchess in a chair; on the side of her Majesty went thirty of the
Soldiers of his Highnesses Guard by themselves, The honors done her by their
Highnesses the Archdukes.
her Majesty's retinue following after, with her Guard all on horseback, with
red Cassokcs trimmed with gold. Behind these were led eighteen horses of value.
Five other trumpets with a tabour followed after, at the head of sixty
firelocks of the Guard, with gay and well trimmed Cassocks of the Archdukes
livery, 9 Coaches with six horses a piece, shutting up the horsemen, full of
chief Ladies, and the rest of the Queens Court.

At the entrance into the City she was welcomed with the discharging of fifty
pieces of Ordinance, many Mortarpieces, and thick Squadrons of Musketeers, who
wi^h many other Soldiers stood in ranks in the streets, the houses being
adorned wi^h rich furniture, and the concourse of people very great.

Her Majesty was lodged in the Archdukes Palace, his Highness accompanying
her to the lodgings designed her, where he presently left her to her rest. But
the Citizens in the darkness of the night, made every where resplendent with
bonefires, the joy and content of their hearts for having with them a Princess
of so high a condition.

The End of the Second Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The Third Book.
The Argument.
THe Pope receiving advice of the Queens departure from Bruxells toward Italy,
declares four Nuntii to receive her on the confines of the Churches Dominions.
His Beatitude dispatches to her my Lord Luke Holstenius. She continues her
journey through Germany. Holstenius arrives in Inspruch, where her Majesty is
royally received. There she makes public profession of the Catholic faith,
performed with great solemnity. She departs from Inspruch with great
satisfaction. She arrives at Trent, and is magnificently served by the Prince
the Bishop. She passes through the State of Venice, and is regally received in
the Territory of the Duke of Manrova. She departs thence, and enters the
Churches dominions.

His Holiness resolves to dispatch to Inspruch my Lord Luke Holstenius.
AS soon as the Pope had advice of the Queens departure from Bruxells, his
Holiness on the sixth of October, sent for my Lord Luke Holstenius, principal
Apostolical Notary, Canon of St. Peter's Church; and Keeper of the Vatican
Library, a person very famous for his learning, and erudition, and a Gentleman
of the City of Hembourg. To him he imparted the purpose he had of sending him
to be assistant at the profession of Faith, his Holiness understood should be
made by the Queen, ere she came into Italy, or at least into the Churches
Dominions. He therefore gave him order to prepare with all diligence for his
journey, and when his Beatitude had declared four extraordinary Nuntii, to
receive her on the confines of the Ecclesiastical State, to wit, He elects four
Nuntii to receive the Queen on the Confines of the State Ecclesiastical.
my Lord Hanibal Bentivogli Archbishop of Thebes, my Lord Torreggiani
Archbishop of Ravenna, my Lord Carraccioli Dean of the Clark of the Chamber,
and my Lord Cesarini Clark of the Chamber, persons of great virtue and
nobility, he consigned them their instructions, and two briefs, each of which
was to them of the following tenor.

To the Reverend Brethren Hanibal of Thebes, and Luke of Ravenna,
Archbishops, as also to our beloved Sons Mr. Innico Carraccioli, and Philip
Cesarini, Clerks of our Apostolical Chamber. Alexander the VIIth. Pope.
REverend Brethren, and beloved Sons, Greeting and Apostolical benediction:
Your approved wisdom in acting affairs, and singular faithfulness and
devotion to us, and the Apostolical Sea, with other deserving virtues,
accompanied with the nobleness of your Families, with which we know you
manifoldly adorned by the Lord, are the cause, we use gladly your help in a
business of great weight, firmly hoping in the Lord, that in the execution
thereof, you abundantly will satisfy our expectation: Wherefore through our
Apostolical authority, by virtue of these presents, we create, constitute, and
depute you extraordinary Nuntii of us, and the Sea Apostol^call aforesaid, to
receive in the name both of us and the same Apostolical Sea, our most dear
Daughter in Christ Christina the Illustrious Queen of Swedland, in her journey
to this our renowned City, any thing to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Dated at Rome at St. Mary's the greater, under the ring of the fisher, on the
XXIXth. day of October 1655. In the first year of our Papacy. G. Gualterius.


On the 10th of October. Breifes consign^d to my Lord Holstenius
in the evening, the Breifs with the letters and instructions were consignd'd
to my Lord Luke Holstenius by my Lord Julius Rospigliosi, Archbishop of
Tarsus, Secretary of state to his Holiness. One of the Breifs was for the
Queens Majesty, which by us shall be registered in it is place, the other for
their Highnesses the Archduke Charles Ferdinand, the Arch-Duchess, Charles the
second Duke of Mantoua, the Prince the Bishop of Trent, and the Bishop of
B^essanon.

On the 10th then of October the foresaid Holstenius departed from Rome with
all secresy, Father Malines the Jusuit goes with the said Holstenius to Inspruch
accompanied by order of the Pope, with Father M^lines the Jusuit, a man of
great ability, and withal well informed of the Genius, as well of the Queen,
as her Court, he having been in Swedland, as aforesaid, for a while, with
particular satisfaction to her Majesty.

He arriving in Bologna on the 19th of October, had advice that the Queen was
at Franckfort on the 6th, so as fearing she might get to Inspruch before him,
he resolved to send before him by post, as he did, the said Father Malines, to
the end at all adventures, he might beseech the Queen, to be pleased to stay in
Inspruch till he came.

The Breife to his Eminence Lomellino Cardinal Legate of Bologna.
Conferring in Bologna with Cardinal Lomellino the Legate, he consigned to him
the Popes Brief of the following tenor.

To our beloved Son Cardinal Lomellino of the holy Church of Rome, Legate of
Bologna.
OUr beloved Son greeting, and Apostolical benediction,
Our beloved Son Luke Holstenius of our household, principal Apostolical
Notary, Canon of the Church of St. Peter, and Keeper of our Vatican Library, is
going into Germany, to act by our command, affairs of high concern appertaining
to this holy Sea; whom, as famous for his piety, as his various, and solid
learning, and esteemed by us for his faithfulness, if you shall with all
courtesy receive, you will do a thing worthy of our love toward you, and
becoming your own inclination to such men. And we impart to you our
Apostolical benediction.

Given at Rome at Saint Mary's the greater, under the ring of the fisher on the
10th. of October, 1655. in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondininus.


He went afterward to Mantoua on the 21th. My Lord Holstenius arrives at
Mantoua.
but found not there his Highness, who was gone to Casal, The same evening he
visited her Highness the Duchess Mary in the Monastery of S. Vrsula, but told
her not the business, that carried him into Germany, for her Highness having
many Nunns about her, and being thick of hearing, he could not tell her of it
without speaking loud, and discovering it to many other persons there present.
Here the Marquis Octavius Gonzaga gave him a particular relation, of what had
past in Franckfort about the Queens journey, and her train, and he quickly
sent the news of it to Rome, and to the Cardinal Legates. He going thence to
Trent, arrived on the 24th. and waited on the Prince, the Bishop, presenting to
him the Apostolical Breife, the contents of which were.

To our Reverend Brother the Bishop of Trent, Alexander the VIIth. Pope.
REverend Brother greeting and Apostolical benediction.
The Popes Breif^ to the Prince of Trent.
There are many rare things in our beloved Son Luke Holstenius, of our
household, principal Apostolical Notary, Canon of the Church of Saint Peter,
and Keeper of our Vatican Library, to wet, excellent virtue, singular learning,
and accomplished behavior; for which, though of your own accord, you will show
him all civility, and respect; yet this is to be added, that we send him into
Germany, to negotiate high affairs, and of greatest concern, in which regard,
whatsoever shall be done by you for him, by you will be conferred on this holy
Sea, and on the whole Church, whose cause he now acts. It Is only your part, to
acquit your self so, in receiving him, that neither your piety, nor civility
toward so excellent a man, be required of us. You shall know more by him of
our affection to you, who will too in our name impart unto you our Apostolical
benediction.

Given at Rome the 10th of October, 1655. in the first year of our Papacy.
Natalis Rondininus.


He afterward arriving on the 28th. in Inspruch, did treat the next morning
with Court Piccolomini, principal Gentleman in his Highnesses Court, and
father Christopher Mendler a Jusuit his Confessor, to have audience of the
Archduke, which he had the same evening, to whom he presented the Popes Brief
of the following tenor.

To our beloved Son the noble Charles Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, Alexander
VII. Pope.
BEloved Son, and noble Prince, Greeting and Apostolical benediction.
The Breife to the Archduke Charles Ferdinand
The pastor all care, the burden imposed on us lately requires, has forced us
to send into Germany, for the compassing of a difficult, and most weighty
affair, our beloved Son Luke Holstenius of our household, principal
Apostonicall Notary, Canon of the Church of Saint Peter, and Keeper of our
Vatican Library, a man, in whom, besides his great learning, which has very
well deserved of the dignity of the Roman Church, this age admires a singular
faith, and honesty, together with a like conduct, in the management of
business. It would in a manner be an injury to your nobleness, if we should
use many words, to desire you, to receive him with courtesy and kindness,
while he greets you in our name, since you daily teach posterity, in the
Patrimony of your Ancestors glory; you have nothing dearer to you, than the
praise of defending, whom both their own virtue and pontifical affection, the
honourablest testimony of virtue, does commend. But how we are affected to your
nobleness, and how earnestly desire the prosperity of your affairs, you will
clearly know of him. And we send you very lovingly our Apostolical benediction.

Given at Rome at Saint Mary's the greater, under the Ring of the fisher, on
the 10th day of October 1655. and in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis
Rondininus.


That Prince received the Brief with great humility, My Lord Holstenius is
received by the Archduke with much Courtesy.
and treated my Lord Holstenius very courteously, hearing him with much
attention. When he heard of the motive of his coming, and the function, he was
to perform in that place, for the sollemn profession of the Queen, he remained
full of wonder, and unspeakable joy, that the City of his residence, by order
of the Pope should be honored with so glorious and conspicuous an action.
Holstenius then enlarged himself in assuring his Highness of his Holinesses
fatherly affection, and the confidence he had in his generous piety, telling
him 'twas needless, he should acquaint him with his Holinesses desire and
satisfaction, in order to the honoring of that action, with some public
demonstration of joy, while he at his arrival, found so splendid a preparation,
for the entrance, and reception of her Majesty.

The honors done to my Lord Holstenius
Holstenius was carried from the Inn, where he lighted, and conducted to a
lodging appointed for him within another house, being attended by the Baron of
Waitmanstorf, one of the four Chaplains of his Highness, and Commissary General
of the Mines in Tysole, who with other attendance, had the care to provide him
two Grooms, and a Coach of the Court, he treating him very splendidly, and
failing in nothing that became a punctual Minister. Father Malines is sent to
discover the will of the Queen.
The day after Halstenius thought it good to send Father Malines to meet the
Queen, to discover her sense about the manner, and form of the Profession of
the Catholic religion, which she was to make publicly, since neither she, nor
any one else till that time, knew such was the pleasure of the Pope.

The Father departed, saw the Queen, and Don Anthony Pimentel, and brought word
she was absolutely disposed to perform very punctually his Holinesses Orders.

On the 31 of October in the morning, Holstenius received express order from
Rome, by a Courier sent to him, to procure, that her Majesty should retard* as
much as she could, her journey, to give time for providing all things fit for
her reception, the Popes great and generous mind desiring it should be in the
most Majestique form, and most honorable, that could be desired, and that
above all, the four Nuntii elected to receive her, and serve her in the
Churches dominions, should prepare for their journey, and be ready on the
confines with that train, and decorum, which the quality of their charge, and
condition required.

After dinner my Lord Holstenius had audience of the Arch-Dutches Anne of
Medices, and the Archduke Sigismond Francis, to whom he presented the
Pontifical Breifes of the following tenor.

To our beloved Daughter in Christ, the noble Arch-Dutchesse of Austria,
Alexander VII. Pope.
BEloved Daughter in Christ, and noble Princess, Greeting and Apostolical
benediction;
The Popes Breife to the Arch-Dutchness of Inspruch
with other commands given to our beloved Son Luke Holstenius of our household,
principal Apostolical Notary, Canon of the Church of St. Peter, and Keeper of
our Vatican Library, by the occasion of great affairs to be managed by him in
Germany; it is given him in charge in a principal manner to visit your
nobleness in our name, and clearly inform you of our affection to you. That
this our advertisement is valued by you; we both constantly believe and your
nobleness will abundantly make good, if you graciously entertain the Bearer
hereof, and with your authority, and favors, where need shall require, defend
and assist him; he being a person of singular faith and honesty, and polished
exactly with all good arts. Which that you will do, we again and again request
of your nobleness, to whom we very lovingly impart our Apostolical
benediction.

Given at Rome, at St. Mary's the greater, under the seal of the fisher, on the
10th of October, 1655, and in the first year of our Papacy.

And he was received by them, with all the most affectionate expressions of a
reverend obsequiousness to the holy Sea, and particular respect.

On the 30th. in the evening, my Lord Holstenius having preunderstood, that the
Baron Ghirargi, chief Counselor and minister to his Highness, had thoughts of
conferring with her, My Lord Holstenius visits the Baron Ghirardi.
deemed it good to prevent him, by going to visit him in his lodgings at the
Palace, who received him with civilitie peculiar to the nobleness of his
birth, assuring him of his Highnesses great joy, and content for his arrival.
He afterward heard most gladly, and with due attention, the perfect relation
Holstenius gave him, in order to the conduct of this most weighty business, of
which till that time, he had had no notice, telling him in reality, that all
things were prepared in that state, for the honor alone of her Majesty's
passage, The expressions of the said Baron.
and therefore it displeased much his Highness, than he had not had some
knowledge of the business of her Profession, since the subject of the Comedies
and entertainments, should not have been profane, but sacred, and agreeable to
the quality of the function.

On the first of November divine Office was celebrated in the Archdukes church
by a mitered Abbot, where their Highnesses were present, together with all the
Court, and excellent music was sweetly accompanied with so tunable a consort
and harmony of trumpets, tabours and drums, that as a new thing, and unheard of
before, it pleased their curiosity extremely, The Queen was to hear it at an
open and public window, and was very well satisfied and delighted.

After dinner Holstenius went to visit Don Antony Pimentel Ambassador of Spain
and discoursed long with him on the points of his Commission. My Lord
Holstenius visits the Ambassador Pimentel.
The Ambassador replied with the Courtesy and prudence of a very able
minister, and Complete Cavalier, that there would be no difficulty, in order to
the public profession, which troubled him most, nor concerning the rest.
Holstenius showed him a Copy of the said profession which was printed on
purpose in Inspruch with great characters, that the Queen might have no trouble
to read it, as also he communicated to him the form of the absolution, which
was printed, and the necessary interlocutions for this act. He imparts to him
his Holinesses intention.
The Ambassador read all the writeings, and carried them speedily to the
Queen, to consult them with her Majesty. And he to the Queen who submits to
the Popes pleasure.
He returned soon after, and told him, the Queen found not any opposition in
them, but was rather ready, to perform whatsoever should be pleasing to his
Holiness, as likewise she acknowled'd it for a singular favor, that his
Highness had sent him for this function, whom she wished to see and hear,
offering him audience at that very instant.

My Lord Holstenius was clothed then in black, and down to his heels, to
distinguish this visit from that to the Archdukes, which he made to them
clothed in purple, so as he desired the convenience of a quarter of an hour,
to go back to his lodging, and change, as he did, his clothes: So quickly
returning, My Lord Holstenius has audience of her Majesty.
he was soon introduced to her Majesty, who at the second reverence, Holstenius
made to her in the middle of the room, between the door, and a little table,
on which the Queen stood leaning, her Majesty went toward him some two or
three paces, receiving him with a smile, and a cheerful and pleasing
countenance.

My Lord Holstenius spoke to her in order to his instructions, and when she had
replied to the congratulation, and expression of his Holinesses fatherly
affection, she said, about the principal business of her profession, the
Ambassador without doubt had assured him before of her readiness to do all
things, which by order of his Holiness, were commanded him, and seeming
impatient to perform them out of hand, she resolved of her self, the said
function should be on the following Wednesday the third of November.

When her Majesty had answered to the heads proposed to her by Holstenius, Her
Majesty discourse with my Lord Holstenius.
he confirmed the pleasure she took, in seeing he was sent unto her for this
purpose by his Holiness. She discoursed with him with much affability, showing
she was particularly informed of his qualities, his eminent learning, and
singular erudition in the Sciences. She spoke with much praise, and great
esteem of his virtuous labors, as well sacred as profane. She curiously
inquired of the rare books that are kept in the Vatican, of the learned men in
Rome, and particularly of the Cardinals and Prelates, showing, she was very
well informed, as well in the general, as particularly of the Court of Rome,
and going on in telling him, she thought it her good fortune, to be able to
make use of a person of his quality at Rome, for the seeing of the Libraries,
Antiquities, and other curious things.

Holstenius presented her his Holinesses Brief of the following tenor.

To our most dear Daughter in Christ, Christina the illustrious Queen of
Swedland, Alexander VII Pope.
Our most dear Daughter in Christ, Greeting and Apostolical benedection.
His Holineses Brief to the Queen
As soon as we heard your Majesty embracing in Bruxels, though not openly, the
integrity of the Roman, to wit, the Catholic faith, had risen out of the
filth of old err^rs, and that the holy Ghost had created new wisdom in you;
what joy over flowed our soul, no force, or strength of words can express.
This our greatnest gladness, to which hardly any thing could be added in
appearance, was in a high manner increased by your journey, begun toward this
place, to the end you might reverence the Trophyes of the Apostles the faith,
which was commended by the Apostles own mouth, and us, whom though unworthy,
Christ would have, in Peter's stead, and his own, to bear rule over his Church
upon Earth. In doing of which, you not only will equal the never dying
praises of the famousest Princes, who thought it a glory to them, to depose
their triumphall Ornaments and Laurells, at the feet of the Fisher, and the
Bishops of Rome; but likewise from the City it self, the Mistress of rightly
believing, and teaching, draw the precepts of true and heavenly learning. Yet
because, not without some hurt unto them, who assume to themselves a vain
opinion of knowledge, and only are wise among themselves, so much light lies
yet hidden under the bushel, at ought at length to shine out to all from an
eminent place, that they by these examples and foot steps may likewise come in.
We send to your Majesty, our beloved son Luke Holstenius of our Household,
principal Apostolical Notary, Canon of the Church of St. Peter, and Keeper of
our Vatican Library, a man for his knowledge in all learning and singular
piety, very dear unto us, who may be assistant to you in your public
profession of the Catholic faith, according to the ancient and accustomed
manner of the Roman Church, and by whom our great love to you, and the joy we
have received, may more fully be declared. But we firmly hope in him, who has
wrought in you so mercifully salvation, your Majesty will be wanting in nothing
that may show you not unworthy of this most ample benefit, and that by your
ready obsequiousness, and hearty obedience, you will testify to all, you have
earnestly sought, and most ardently received the Catholic faith. By the sad
Luke, our fatherly and most loving benediction, and more to this purpose, your
Majesty will receive, for whom we most earnestly beg all happiness of God,
and that he would strengthen the power, his right hand has wrought
marvellously in you.

Given at Rome at St. Mary's the greater, under the ring of the Fisher, on the
10th day of October 1655. in the First year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondinnius.


And the Queen very reverently received it, and read it all presently. She with
a modest blush showed the evident signs of the joy in her heart, for the
fatherly and loving expressions of his Holiness, her Majesty apprehending the
forcible sense of the Vicar of Christ, to whom she had given long since, the
liberty of her thoughts and affections, and concluded, she would by her
letters, as soon as the could, thank his Holiness for it.

Her Majesty supt privately on the first of November, but was waited on by some
Ladies, who desired that honor for their own satisfaction. Among whom was the
Princess Mary Cla^d^a Hundbissin of Schaumbourg, who presented the water for
her hands, and the Countess Piccolomini, the little Arch-Dutchesses, Lady of
Honor, the Napkin. Princess Catherine Countess of Spaur, was the Cupbearer and
Sewer. There were too besides Princess Mary Fuggerin Countess of Weisenhorth,
the Princess of Trocbenpach, the Princess Mary Brigit Countess of Artzh, the
Princess Malaspina, and the Princess Anne Teresa of Stoplar.

Her Majesty was publicly feasted on Tuesday by their Highnesses the Arch
Dukes, with regal magnificence, and sumptuousness. The Queen sat alone at the
upper end of the Table under a cloth of Stare, with a very great carpet on the
ground. The Archdukes were on her right side, a little way off from her
Majesty, but under the same Canopy, The Queen dines publicly with their
Highn^sses the Archdukes
the Arch-Dutchess alone on her left side over against the Archduke, and
Pimentel the Spanish Ambassador below the Archdukes. The Marquis Lonati, and
the Lord George Olstein gave the water for her Majesty's hands, and the
Archduke himself presented her the Napkin, taking it from the Lord W^itkunight
chief Gentleman of his chamber. Baron Sig^smond of Welsberg, G^ntleman of the
Chamber to his Highness, was her Cupbearer, and the Baron of Stakel-bourg,
likewise Gentleman of his chamber, was Sewer.

Her Majesty accompanied by their Highnesses, Her Majesty visits the Palace of
Ambre.
together with all the Court, w^nt after dinner to a Palace called D' Ambre
without Inspruch, where she saw with much delight, a great quantity of ancient
medalls of gold and silver, together with other metalls, collected long since
by Archduke Ferdinand, as likewise many very ancient manuscripts, and other
fine curiosities conserved in that place.

In the mean time my Lord Holstenius attended to the ordering of the necessary
things, for the function of the following day, He instructed the Notary, the
Master of the ceremonies, the Priests, and other Clerks, which were to be
assistent, as well at the act of Profession, as at the solemn Mass,
Holstenius was to sing, to the end that each doing his part, the function might
go on with order, quietness, and decorum, as it happily succeeded.

She goes into the Church publicly.
The Queen desired, this action might be as p^blick as could be, and conspicuous
to the World, and therefore instead of going into the Church, by the gallery
within, she resolved to go thither through the public street, which goes
between the one and the other, to which purpose in the morning, the said street
was covered over with boards, as well for honor as conveniencie.

The Queen clothed in a gown of black silk, very plain, and without any
ornament but a cross of five fair and rich diamonds at her breast, lead by
the Archduke, was met at the gate of the Church with a solemn Procession of
all the Priests, and Clerks of the Court, and by the two Benedictin Abbots of
that Province, the one of Tegernsee, and the other of Marieberg, both with the
Miter, Rochet, and Crosier staff. The one gave her holy water, and the other
presented her to kiss a very fine Cross of Crystal of the Mountain.

My Lord Holstenius followed after the Abbots, who after a low congee to her
Majesty, and their Highnesses the Archdukes, caused one of the Abbots to
begin, Come O Holy Ghost, etc. which was sung with most excellent Music. The
Order of the Church for performing the function of the Catholic profession.
The Queen following the Procession went into the Quire of the Church, where a
chair was prepared with a kneeling place before it, covered with cloth of
gold. A cushion of the same cloth of gold was laid too upon the last step of
the Altar below, and a chair of velvet for Holstenius, over against the place
of the Epistle.

Here then Holstenius stood up before the chair, expecting when the Queen, the
Arch-D^kes, and all the Cavaliers would sit down in their places. Then he,
beheld by all with silence and attention, began with a loud voice to declare
his Commission by the Pop^s express Brief of the following tenor.

To our beloved son Luke Holstenius, Priest of Hambu^g, Canon of St. Peter's in
Rome, one of our family and continual attendance at our table. Alexander the
VIIth Pope,
BEloved son, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction,
The contents of the Popes Brief to my Lord Holstenius
whereas we have received, not without the spiritual joy of our mind, that
Christina the noble Queen of Swedland, born of heretical parents, and bred up,
and instructed in heresies, illuminated by heavenly light, and knowing the way
of truth, desires to renounce the same heresies, and return, by the blessing
of God, into the bosom of the holy Roman Church, we, who by our Pastoral
function, are chiefly obliged to attend unto this, that if any Sheep wander
from the path of the truth, they may be brought back into the way of salvation,
being very much confident in our Lord, of your singular piety, prudence, zeal
of the Catholic religion, and the honor of Gods house, of our own free
motion, sure knowledge, mature del^beration, and out of the fullness of our
Apostolical power, by virtue of these presents, do grant and impart to you, the
free and full power of absolving by our authority in both Courts, the said
Queen Christina from these heresies, all excommunication, suspension,
interdict, and other ecclesiastical sentences, censures, and punishments
howsoever incurred by her for the same, whether any juridical, or
extra-juridical abjuration, or any at all pre^^d^, but in place of abjuration,
her Profession of the Catholic Faith, according to the Articles long
propounded by the Apostolical Sea, some healthful penance being enjoined her,
and other things you shall know to be expedient for the good of her soul, and
we grant and impart the same power of reconciling and receiving the said Queen
into the bosom of the holy Roman Church, some public Notary being used about
the Acts aforesaid, we willing, to your sole attestation, without any any
witnesses, your subscription only added, full and absolute belief should be
given. Notwithstanding the Apostolical, universal, or special constitutions,
published in general, provincial, or other Councills, the decrees, use, and
style of the Office of the holy and general inquisition and all other things to
the contrary.

Given at Rome at St. Mary's the greater, under the Ring of the Fisher on the
tenth of October, 1655. in the first year of our Pa^pacie. G. Gualterius.


After this he gave the Original Brief to the Master of the ceremonies of his
Highness, The Act of the Catholic Profession made by the Queen.
who was Signior Carlo Pompeati Canon of the Cathedral Church of Trent, a
person famous for his birth and education, who read it with a loud and clear
voice, and then gave it into the hand of the Notary there present. My Lord
Ho^sterius added some latin words, which began, Though this thing in open
view, etc. He sat down and was covered according to instruction. And here then
the cushion being brought before him, which as we said before, was laid on the
last step of the Altar, the Queen conducted thither by the Archdukes, quickly
and freely kneeled down upon it. Holstenius presented her the printed form of
the Profession, saying to her the following words.

This is the solemn and usual form of Professing the Catholic faith, the holy
Church of Rome uses, and her Majesty is to read before me and the witnesses
here present, with a clear and distinct voice, and afterward with her own hand
subscribe. And both the Archdukes standing about the Queen, together with Don
Antonio Pimentel, as witnesses desired; her Majesty with a clear, distinct, and
loud voice, read the following Profession.

I Christina believe with a firm faith, and profess all and every thing
contained in the Creed of Faith, the holy Roman Church us^th, namely, I believe
in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, of all things
visible, and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of
God, and borne of his Father before all times: God of God, Light of Light, true
God of true God: begotten, not made, consubstantial to the Father, by whom all
things are made, who for us men, and our salvation descended from the Heavens,
and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, and made man:
crucifi^d also for us, and suffered under Pontius Pilate, and was buried. And
arose the third day according to the Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven, sits
at the right hand of his father, and is to come again with glory, to judge the
quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. And I believe in
the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son, who together with the Father and the Son, is adored and glorified, who
spoke by the Prophets: and in one holy Catholic and Apostolical Church. I
confess one Baptism in the remission of sins, and expect the resurrection
of the dead, and the life to come, Amen. I firmly admit, and embrace the
Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the other observances and
constitutions of the same Church. I likewise admit the sacred Scripture
according to the sense our holy Mother the Church has held, and holds, to whom
it belongs to judge of the sense, and interpretation of the holy Scriptures:
neither will I ever receive and interpret it, but according to the unanimous
consent of the Fathers. I likewise profess seven true and proper Sacraments of
the new Law, instituted by Christ Jesus our Lord, and to the salvation of
mankind, though al to every one are not necessary, namely Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony, and
these to confer grace; and of these, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order cannot
be reiterated without Sacrilege.

I receive and admit the received and approved rites of the Catholic Church in
the solemn administration of these Sacraments. I embrace and receive all and
every thing, which have been designed and declared in the holy Council of
Trent, concerning Original sin and justification. I also profess that in the
Mass, there is offered up to God, a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice
for the living and the dead, and that in the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, there are truly, really, and substantially, the body and blood, with
the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a conversion made of the
whole substance of the bread into the body, and of the whole substance of the
wine into the blood of Christ, which conversion the Catholic Church calls
Transubstantiation. I likewise confess that under each kind, Christ is whole
and entire, and a true Sacrament to be received. I constantly hold there is
Purgatory, and the souls there detained, are helped by the suffrages of the
faithful. And that in like manner the Saints reigning together with Christ,
are to be honored, and invocated, and that they offer up to God prayers for
us, and their relics to be held in veneration. I firmly assert, the images
of Christ, and of the blessed Virgin, as also of other Saints, are to be had
and retained, and due honor and reverence to be given to them. I likewise
affirm the power of indulgences is left by Christ in his Church, and their use
very healthful to Christian people. I acknowledge the holy Catholic, and
Apostolical Roman Church to be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; And I
promise and swear true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Saint
Peter the chief of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. And all other
things delivered, defined and declared by the sacred Canons, general Councils,
and especially by the holy Council of Trent, I undoubtedly receive and
profess, and the contrary, and all heresies whatsoever condemned, rejected,
and anathematized by the Church, I also condemn, reject, and anathematize:
This true Catholic faith, without which none can be saved, which I here
profess willingly, and do truly hold the same entire and inviolable, I will by
Gods assistance most constantly retain and confess, and as much as in me lies
endeavor that the same may be held, taught and preached by my subjects and
those under my command. I the said Christina do promise, vow, and swear, so
help me God, and these holy Evangelists,

CHRISTINA.

The Queens great generosity.
Her Majesty read the said Profession with such forcible expression, that all
remained no less astonished, than touched with compunction, at such an heroic
resolution, and here 'twas observed, that at every new period, or parcel of
the Scripture aforesaid, her Majesty lifting up her head, and fixing her eyes
in the countenance of Holstenius, with the freedom of her sight, showed, what
resolution, and affection her heart labored with, so as this generous action
so softened the minds of the assistants, that from the eyes of many, the tears
out of tenderness, trickel'd down in abundance. The said Holstenius was not
able to suppress them, without difficulty and violence, while he thought with
what melting affection, the mind of his Beatitude would have been moved, if he
had seen that action, the noblest, and most memorable of all, to be seen in the
world.

Her profession being ended, and the oath, contained in it, taken, Holstenius
stood up, and recited the following Verses and Prayers.

O Lord God of virtues, convert us; and show thy face, and we shall be safe.
Arise O Christ, and help us, and deliver us for thy name sake. Let thy mercy, O
Lord, be upon us, as we have hoped in thee. O Lord hear my Prayer, and let my
cry come unto thee. Our Lord be with you. And with thy spirit. Let us Pray. O
God, who show the light of thy truth to the erring, to the end they may
return into the way of justice, grant to all of the Christian profession, to
reject those things that are contrary to this name, and correctest those, and
dispersed, gatherest them together, and gathered together preservest them: We
beseech thee mercifully to pour on Chr^stian people the grace of thy union,
that all division rejected, uniting themselves to the true pastor of thy
Church, they may be able worthily to serve thee. OMnipotent eternal God,
receive this thy sheep with thy fatherly piety, withdrawn by thy power from the
jaws of the wolf, and renew her to thy flock by thy merciful ben^gnity, that
the enemy rejoice not at the damage of thy family, but that in her conversion,
and delivery, thy Church, as a pious mother, may congratulate a daughter that
is found. O ^od, who man wonderfully created according to thy image, do
mercifully repair, propitiously behold this thy servant, and what is stolen
from her by the hostile blindness of ignorance, and deceit of the Devil,
pardon and absolve through the clemency of thy piety, that received by the
communion of thy truth, she may be united to thy holy Church, through our Lord
Jesus Christ thy son, who lives and raig^eth God with thee, in the Unity of
the holy Ghost world without end, Amen. He afterward sat down, The absolution
given to the Queen by my Lord Holstenius
and was covered, giving her absolution in the following form.

God forgive thee, and absolve thee from all thy sins, and bring thee to life
everlasting. And I by Apostolical authority, wherewith I am empowered to this
purpose, by the special Commission of our holy Lord the Pope Alexander the
Seventh, absolve thee from all tie of excommunication, and interdict, and other
ecclesiastical sentences, censures, and punishments howsoever incurred, and
receive thee into the bosom of our holy mother the Roman Church, and restore
thee to the holy Sacraments of the same, and to the Communion and unity of the
faithful, in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, Amen.
After this he arose up again, and gave her the benediction in the following
words. Confirm, O God, that thou have wrought in us. From thy holy Temple
which is in Jerusalem. Behold thus shall the man be blessed, that fears the
Lord. Our Lord bless thee from Sion. Who has made Heaven and Earth. The
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, and Son, and holy Ghost descend upon
thee, and remain always with thee Amen.

Then the Queen stood up and was by their Highnesses conducted to her first
place, whither Holstenius repairing, in a very low posture congratulated her
Majesty, and incontinently caused the Psalm to be sung. Make ye jubilation
to God all the earth. etc. with music of exquisite voices, of Organs,
Trumpets, Tabours, and Drums. And while the said Prelate going into the
sacristy prepared himself to sing the solomne Mass, father Staudacter a Jesuit,
Preacher to the Archduke, made a Sermon in Dutch, so elegant, learned, and so
fit for that action, that it ravished the affections, and applauses of all.

After Mass, The joy for this profession.
which was celebrated with the greatest sollemnity, Holstenius stayed on the
last step of the Altar, and began the Te Deum, which was sung with the same
harmony, accompanied by the roaring of above 50. Pieces of artillary, many
Mortar-peices, and an infinite number of muskets, as likewise with the ringing
of the bells. The Mass was said after the Roman fashion, as they do in Saint
Peter's, and all were well satisfied with it. The day after my Lord Holstenius
sent to Rome an account of all that had succeeded.

The Queen wrote to the Pope, and consigned the letter to Holstenius, in which
giving his Holiness information of that she had done, she declared her self his
most obedient daughter, with expressions of much duty, and very great respect.

These letters, with others written by the said Holstenius to the Legates and
Nuntii, with the advice of all, and with the Calculation, that the Queen would
arrive in Ferrara on the 22. of November, on the fifth of the said month, were
sent by an extraordinary Courier, who coming out of Poland, past in have
toward Rome.

In the discourses Holstenius had with the Queen, in order to her
reconciliation to the Catholic Church, he giving a hint, that after the
profession of faith, she should receive the Sacrament of Confirmation, and then
the most holy Eucharist, her Majesty said, her desire was to communicate the
first time in public, by the hands of his Holiness himself, and asking him
diverse particulars about confirmation, said she heard, in that function she
might change her name, or add another to it, and therefore would gladly to the
name of Chr^st^na add that of Alessandra in honor of his Holiness. Holstenius
replied the Pope himself at her coming to Rome, would much better counsel her
than any one else.

The Evening of the day, in which the Queen made her profession, was solemnized
with diverse Bonfires of joy, the ringing of the bells, and roaring of the
Canon, and with a most noble, and most excellent play represented in music,
with very sumptuous machins, and scenes, which succeeded extremely delightful.

The subsequent night they likewise represented in music, The Recreations and
plays recited before her Majesty.
a play called Argia, a musical tragicomedy with admirable prospects of
scenes, and of greatest curiosity. The clothes of the Actors were most noble,
and most splendid, and the music very exquisite, his Highness having neither
spared pains, nor charges, to get the best musicians of Jtaly. It lasted six
whole hours, and her Majesty with the rest of the assistants, beheld it with
great pleasure, and attention.

The other three days her Majesty stayed in Inspruch, she was always
entertained with virtuous recreations, and both the said Plays were reacted,
since, the taste being never orecharg'd, while the appetite lasts, they saw the
Queen and the rest, not yet cloyed with that pleasure.

The day before their departure, appointed on the 8th. of December, my Lord
Holstenius visited Count Raymond Montecuccoli, dispatched from the Emperor, not
only to assist at the possession, but to wait on her Majesty to Rome, and he
was by this courteous Cavalier, received with geat demonstrations of esteem.

On the 8th. of December in the morning, the Archdukes, and Don Antonio
Pimentel the Spanish Ambassador, together with Holstenius, subscribed 4 Copies
of the original of the foresaid Profession, confirmed before by her Majesty's
own hand, to the end that one of them should remain with the Queen, one in
Inspruch in the place of Records, one in the Records of the Vatican Library,
and the other be sent to the Pope.

The Signature and Subscriptions under the over-written Profession, The form
of the subscription of the act of profession.
were these, Christina. I Ferdinand Charles Archduke of Austria, have been a
witness and subscribed. I S^g^smond Francis Archduke of Austria, Bishop of
Auspurge, etc. have been a witness and subscribed. I Don Antonio Pimentel de
Prado Ambassador of the Catholic King, have been a witness and subscribed. I
Luke Holstenius Canon of Saint Peter's in Rome, have received this Profession
and s^bscribed.


Which were likewise afterward authenticated with the Act of a public Notary,
and with the legality of the Arch Dukes Records in the following form.

In the name of Christ Amen. In the year of our Lord 1655. and the eighth
indiction, on the third of November, in the first year of the Papac^e of our
most holy Father in Christ, Alexander the seventh, at Inspruch in the Dioces of
Brixia, about noone, in the Archdukes Church of the holy Cross, before the
high Altar, the most noble Lady Christina Queen of Swedland personally there
present, freely and del^berately on her knees, with a clear voice, before the
above-written witnesses required thereunto in the face of the Church and
touching the holy Gospells, pronounced this subscribed profession of the
Catholic faith. Which Profession of faith being ended, the most illustrious
Queen, and Right Honorable and most reverend Lord Luke Holsienius, Canon of
Saint Peter's in Rome? and one of the household and continual attendance at the
table of our most holy Father in Christ, very favorably required of me the
Notary underwritten, that in order to this business, I would make one, or
more public instruments, in perpetual remembrance of the thing. And because I
undernamed public Notary, was present with the witnesses, at the public
profession of the Catholic faith, made by the most illustrious Queen
Christina, etc. and received by the most Reverend Lord Holstenius, in the name
and stead of the Roman Apostolical Sea, according to the order appointed by the
holy Council of Trent, by virtue of his Apostolical delegation, both it and the
subscriptions to set d^wn, I have both seen and heard. In testimony therefore
of this, I have made this present public instrument, have written it with my
own hand, subscribed and published it, and with the usual seal of my Office of
Notary, being thereunto required, have confirmed it. Dated as above. Nicholas
Zerzer the Archdukes Counselor, Secretary, and public Notary, by Papal and
Imperial authority.

We N. N. President, Chancellor, Regents, and Counselors of the Provinces of
the upper Austria, belonging to the most Illustrious Prince Ferdidinand Charles
Archduke of Austria, etc. do witness, the above named Nicholas Zerzer, the
Archdukes Counselor, and also Secretary of the Provinces of the higher
Austria, is a legal and authentical Notary, as abovesaid, and therefore to his
writings, and public instruments, in judgments, and out, here, and every
where, a full and undoubted faith may and ought to be given. In testimony
whereof, we here present have confirmed it with the Archdukes Seal.

Dated at Inspruch the 8th day of November, 1655. John Christopher Castner of
Castenstein, Counselor to the Archduke, and President of the Arches.

Her Majesty remaining in Inspruch, thought it good to write this following
letter to the King of Swedland, the contents of which were,

Dear Brother,
I Am happily arrived here, where I found the Permission and Order of his
Holiness, to declare my self what I am, and have been long ago. I think my
self fortunate in obeying him, and have preferred this glory before that of
reigning over the potent Dominions you possess. You should like my resolut^on,
though you thought it not good, since to you it is so profitable and so
glorious. However I protest unto you, I have not at all changed the sense of
the friendship I have ever had for you, nor the love I owe Swedland, which I
will preserve as long as I live, and eternally be

Dear Brother, Your most affectionate Sister and Friend CHRISTINA.
Inspruch, November. 4. 1655.

Two hours after dinner the Queen went from Inspruch with all her attendance,
accompanied by their Highnesses some part of the way, and waited on by the
Baron of Freyberg, together with all the Officers, and the same train, that
went to meet her, being always very generously defrayed by that Prince, to the
very last confines of his state.

Her Majesty's departure from Inspruch.
The same evening the Queen went from Inspruch, Holstenius dispatched a Courier
to the Cardinal Legate of Ferrara, advising him of her Majesty's advance toward
that place, and that he might be sure she would be in the Churches dominions on
the two and twentieth following. In the mean time he continued in Inspruch, to
perfect the public instrument of the act of Profession in the Notaries acts,
and here on that account, he being necessitated to expect till the next day
after noone, he departed then likewise, and overtook the Queen just as she was
going out of Stersen after dinner on the tenth.

On the eighth at night, her Majesty lay at Motera, a little town of Tyrole,
between Insp^uch and the mountain Prainer, and the following morning arrived
there from Inspruch, The Archduke sends a Gentleman to visit the Queen.
the Baron John George Clinig Gentleman of the Chamber to his Highness, and
Count Francis di Lodrone Gentleman of the Chamber to Prince Sigismond, to visit
her Majesty in the name of their Masters, to enquire of her health, to wish her
a good journey, and see if she wanted any thing, Complements used by Princes
among one another in like cases. Her Majesty returns the Archdukes Complement.
The Queen dispatched presently the Lord Lilliecron Gentleman of her Chamber to
Inspruch, to return their Highnesses complement, and thence pursued her
journey, going that night to Stersen, a little town seated not far from the
foresaid mountain of Prainer, in a large space of a very fertile plain, shut up
on all sides by high mountains.

From Stersen her Majesty went to Bressanon, The honors done her Majesty by the
Bishop of Bressanon.
whom the Bishop and Prince of the City, my Lord Anthony Crolino, met with a
noble train, and lodged with all magnificence that night. The day after, on
the eleventh, having dined at Colmar, a place that was halfway, her Majesty
arrived that evening at Bolgiano, a very great Town between the mountains, in
the spatiousest place of the plain, where the clear river Adice made navigable,
carries with a rapid current all the Merchandise sent into Italy, from those
noble Faires, which are usually kept four times a year.

A little before they arrived at Bolgiano, a Courier came to Holstenius,
dispatched from the Legate of Ferrara, and the Nuntii, to have an assurance of
the way, by which her Majesty would come into the Country of Ferrara, to wit,
if through the state of Venice, or of Mantoua, but he being unable to give them
any answer of that, the Venetians having then not declared by what place they
would give her leave to pass, he detained the Courier till he knew their
resolution.

The four Nuntii were departed now from Rome, with Signior Fulvie Servanzii,
one of the Masters of the Ceremonies, and Signior Nuntiato Baldocci, one of the
Computists of the Apostolical Chamber, and with a great retinue and baggage,
answerable to the greatness of their charge, who going easy journeys through
Umbria, Marca, and Romagna, were come to Ferrara.

His Holiness made choice of this Officer of the Chamber, that he by his
conduct and integrity, might look to the charges of the lodgings, which were to
be defrayed by the Chamber, and see that all things were in very good order, as
indeed they were always, when directed by him. And because his Beatitude was
extremely concerned that every thing should be done very splendidly and
punctually, his Holiness with a Note of his hand directed to my Lord Franzoni,
Treasurer general, gave order on the 23 of October of the year 1655 that to the
said Baldocci he should cause to be paid without any limitation, what money he
should use, and to the said Baldocci, he likewise gave authority to make the
reckonings even of himself, without the accustomed Congregation of accounts.

And because the charge of Computist of the Chamber, is an Office of great
weight; in the absence of Signior Nuntiato Baldocci aforesaid, Signiore
Giovanni his Brother had the place, who had given many honorable and very
worthy proofs of his experience in the employment of Computist of his
Holinesses Soldiers in the siege of Castro, and likewise in Dalmatia in that
of Collateral for the soldiers, which warred for the Republic of Venice
against the Turk, where he was four years exercising, besides for two years
together the Paymasters place, in the absence of the other.

The said Baldocci, as a Minister very zealous for his Holinesses good service,
arriving at Civita Castallana, took Post, and rode in great haste to speak with
all the Legates, and Governors of the places appointed for her Majesty's
lodgings, presenting to them the Popes note aforesaid, as likewise the letters
of the Secretary of State, and the Lord Treasurer general, with leaving money
every where, according to their need, and adding by word of mouth, what seemed
to him fit for a business of that nature, and wholly agreeable to his
Holinesses intention, and thus he did all along to Ferrara, whither he came six
days before the arrival of the Nuntii, and just in a time, when they had not
the least information that the Queen was departed from Inspruch, insomuch as
the time was commodious for preparing of all things for her Majesty's
reception. To Ferrara came likewise opportunely the Coach sent by his
Holiness, the Litter, and Chair, with the Quartermasters, and Harbenger, for
ordering of the lodgings, with two noble beds, both alike, with Chaires of the
same, to the end that her Majesty should lie all the journey in her usual
beds, and one might go before unto the other lodging. The cloth of state, the
carpet, and many other things were sent from Rome, even the table to eat on,
the gilt furniture of the Cup-board, with diverse other Officers, all under the
command of Baldocci.

The Baron of Fermiano comes to Inspruch to complement the Queen in the name of
the Prince of Trent.
While the Queen staid in Inspruch, there arrived the Baron Giovanni Georgio di
Fermiano, a Gentleman of great spirit and parts, dispatched from the Prince
Charles Emanuel Madruzzi, the Bishop of Trent, and Count of Chiullant, to
invite her to that City, with expressions of obsequiousness and respect. Her
Majesty seeming to like the invitation, replied with her accustomed civility,
that her passage was granted her by the Republic of Venice, with this express
condition, that she should not stay in Trent, nor Roveredo, and therefore she
could not have the honor of his invitation.

The Baron soon informed the Prince of all, who very desirous to serve her in
his state, He invites her Majesty to Trent.
sent back without delay a Courier, with letters to the Ambassador Pimentel,
to Don Antonio della Cueva, to Count Montecuccoli, and my Lord Holstenius,
entreating them to use their authority with her Majesty for obtaining his
desire in order to her lodging in Trent, since the supposition of the plague
was most false, they enjoying perfect health in that City.

These Gentlemen employed themselves jointly to comply with the said Princes
desire, and the Baron of Fermiano had a very courteous audience of the Queen in
Bolgiano, where he reinvited her, receiving this answer from her Majesty, The
Queens answer to the Baron of Fermiano.
that out of the confidence she promised her self she could have in the
kindness of the Prince, though she had not been invited by him, she would have
invited her self, but that the forementioned oppositions, to her great
displeasure, were her hinderance, yet that howsoever she was much obliged to
the courtesy of the Prince. The Baron advised him of all, and he with greater
vigor persisting in his courteous earnestness, the shortness of the time not
permitting him to write unto Venice, wrote incontinently to the Governors of
Verona, to have leave to lodge her Majesty in Trent; But doubting in the mean
time he should not have a favorable answer, or if it were favorable, it would
come too late, he gave order again to the Baron aforesaid, if he could not have
the honor of receiving her Majesty in Trent, to procure she would be pleased
at least to accept of some refreshing in the town of Lavis, the last of the
Dioces of Trent, and which divides the confines of Italy, from those of
Germany. The Baron performed every thing with his powerful endeavors, and the
Queen was contented to accept the oblation. The invitation made her in the name
of the Duke of Mantoua.


The Queen departing from Bolgiano on the thirteenth of the month, lay at Egna
that night, a town not long before, with another place called Salorno, bought
by Signior Zenobi di Verona a Nobleman of Venice. Here arrived a Courier from
the Duke of Mantoua, with letters to her Majesty to invite her to that City.
His Highness had sent to that end the Marquess Andreasi Captain of his guard,
but because the passages were shut, he had been constrained to stay at
Volargna, a village belonging to Verona, a little way distant from Chiusa,
which is a narrow passage, and strong, where there is a constant Garrison of
soldiers, and albeit the Queen refused his invitation, excusing her self, that
she could not go out of the way, she going directly to Rome, and was not then
certain where she should have leave to pass by the Venetians, yet she reserved
her self to accept of his favor, in case she should pass through his
Highnesses dominions.

On the fourteenth her Majesty came to Lavis before fifteen hours, She is
splendidly treated at Trent
and there in the name of the said Prince of Trent, she was again invited to
stay, at least, and dine in that City, since they had gotten leave from Verona
to receive her.

The Queen then resolved to accept the invitation, She resolve to dine at Trent.
and went the next morning to Mass in the Cathedral Church, and dined in the
Palace Madruzzo, a very pleasant place called Belvedere, which was a Musket
shot without the town. At four hours in the night she resolved to dine there
the next day, so as they immediately sent the Prince notice of it, who, to his
great content, understanding the good news, caused all things to be presently
prepared for the splendid reception of so noble a Princess.

In the mean time her Majesty was presented at Lavis with a noble and most
plentiful treatment, which consisted of great store of excelent sweetmeats,
pasts of Genoua, wild foul, all sorts of venison, and poultry, seafish, and
fresh water fish of extraordinary greatness, and in fine, most rare fruits,
and sallads of all kinds.

The generosity of the Prince of Trent.
All that were there, not only extolled, but wondered at this splendid and
magnificent entertainment: The Queen was much pleased and observed it with
particular satisfaction, expressing her self much obliged to this generous
Prince, and admiring as much the punctuality and good order, with which its
perfection and exquisitnesse appeared.

Lavis is a little open town, The description of Lavis.
situated in the plain, between the entrance of those most high Mountains, and
washed by the river Lavis, from which it takes the name, which falling from the
Alps, into a narrow valley on the left hand, with a very rapid current joins
it self to the river Adige, which dividing all the length of the plain, is a
little below Bolgiano, still navigable to the sea, on which they traffic
greatly out of Germany into Italy. On this river Lavis, there is a great bridge
somewhat long, and covered over, where usually stands a guard, to collect some
little tribute of the passengers, which is called passage-money. This town
appertains to the principality of Trent, and here end the confines of Italy
with Germany, for not far from thence, they begin to speak Dutch. It Is distant
three Dutch leagues from the City of Trent, and for the continual concourse of
people and merchandise, passing through it, is full of inhabitants, and very
commodious houses, with many rich families, made very advantageous by their
industry, as they are almost every where in the Country of Tyrole, where though
the situation be narrow and barren, yet all things that are necessary for man's
life, as flesh, and wild game, are there in great abundance and perfection,
with very noble hunting, fit and proper for their pleasure, who are delighted
with it.

The End of the Third Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The Fourth Book.
The Argument.
THe Queen continues her journey through Tyrole toward Italy, and is invited,
and royally treated by the Prince the Bishop of Trent. From Tyrole she passes
concealed through the State of Venice. She enters into the Territory of
Mantoua, and is courteously received by that Duke. She is received on the
Confines of the Churches Dominions by the Nuntii of his Holiness, where she is
splendidly entertained. She receives the same entertainments in Bologna, Imola,
and Faenza, by the Cardinals Lomellino, Donghi, and Rossetti.

The Prince of Trent meets the Queen.
THe next morning her Majesty advanced toward Trent, whence the Prince came and
met her on horseback, accompanied by above two hundred and fifty Gentlemen, all
persons of quality, among whom, besides the Baron of Fermiano aforesaid, the
hereditary Marshal of the Principality of Trent, and Lord Chamberlain of the
golden Key, to his Highness the Archduke, there was the Vicar General
Alberti, Dean Guelfi, the Archdeacon, Count John Baptist di Lodrone, Bernard
Malanotte, and Charles Pompeati Canons of Trent. The Counts Philip di Lodrone,
Paris di Lodrone, Colico di Arco. The Signiori Walsperghieri, Gaudentio de
Wolchestain, Christopher Mattirli, and others well born, and of ancient and
conspicuous Nobility.

At the village of Gardolo, three miles distant from Trent, the Prince
alighting, and approaching to her Majesty's Litter, gave her a short
Complement, inviting her to dinner at his house, which her Majesty accepting
with a very pleasant countenance, he complemented likewise the Ambassador
Pimentel, Don Antonio della Cueva, Count Montecuccoli, and my Lord Holstenius.

After this they went toward the City, the Prince riding on the right hand of
Count Montecuccoli, before the Queens Litter. Her Majesty alighted at the gate
of the Dome, She alights at the Church.
and was there received by all the Clergy, the Canons intervening and
assisting, under a Canopy carried by the Gentlemen of the College of Trent.
She kneeled on a cushion of cloth of gold, kissed the Cross, and received holy
water from my Lord Joseph Guelfi Dean of the Cathedral, going into the Church,
where they sung the Hymn, She is beautiful, etc. and kneeling at the Altar of
the Crucifix, before which were published long since the decrees of the holy
Council of Trent. Here on a royal Carpet raised from the ground, covered
likewise with a cloth of state, she heard with particular devotion the holy
Mass, celebrated by the Vicar, after which, under the same Canopy, carried as
before, she went on foot to the Church of Saint Mary the greater, attended by
many Ladies, and there hearing the famous Organ of that Church, renowned for
the Council aforesaid held there, having likewise viewed the picture of the
Sessions of the Council aforesaid, she went into her litter, giving order to be
carried to the Church of Saint Peter, where she saw the uncorrupted and famous
body of the glorious Martyr, and Child, Simon of Trents going aftervards to
dinner, to the Palace of Madruzzo. The table was royally furnished with every
thing the season would yield, She observes the most remarkable things
as well wild game as tame, with all other sorts of rare meats, fish of all
kinds, sweetmeats, and fruits, and in fine, with each thing that was
excellent and noble, where the magnificence and punctuality of that generous
and valorous Prince, most abundantly appeared. The Queen dined alone attended
by the principal Cavaliers.

At the same time, at another table with the Prince dined the Ambassador
Pimentel, Don Antonio della Cueva, Count Montecuccoli, my Lord Holstenius, and
others of the chiefest of her Majesty's Court, being exquisitly treated, as
were all the Officers and Gentlemen of her train.

Afer dinner the Queen retired a little while into her Chamber, The Prince
Complements the Queen
and presently after the Prince waited on her, and after a short, but very
cordial Complement, her Majesty began again her journey, accompanied in the
very same manner by the Prince and his train to the plain of Lidorno, which is
distant three miles, where the said Prince alighting from his horse, paid again
his respects to the Queen, and took his leave of her, whose hand the Cavaliers
and Gentlemen of Trent kissed all one by one, she extending it courteously to
them, and declaring her self much obliged for the honors and civilities
received of them.

So her Majesty continued her journey, arriving that evening at Calliano, where
the Barons Troppi, Lords of the place, and Gentlemen of very high esteem, made
a most splendid feast, and the Castle of Besen, a little way distant from
thence, seated on a craggy mountain, which renders it inexpugnable, seconded it
with discharging many Canon and Muskets. She departed thence the following
morning, being the sixteenth of November, and passing through Roveredo, was
saluted by that Castle, with the noise of the Artillery, the Mortar-pieces, and
Muskets, going thence to Hall, a little town, but full of traffic, where she
wrote to the Prince of Trent the following letter.

Dear Cosen,
YOur civilities and the noble entertainment you gave me, The Queen her letter
to the Prince of Trent.
have obliged me in that manner, that I would not let the Archdukes men return
without again thanking you for them, and assuring you how much I desire the
occasion to be able to acknowledge my gratitude to you, and give you some
testimony of the sincerity, with which I am

Dear Cosen, Your most affectionate Cosen and Friend, Christina.
From Hall the 17th of November 1655.

The day after, she passing through Borghetto, came out of the Archdukes
dominions, whose Officers and Train, which always had attended and defrayed
her through that State, took their leaves of her Majesty.

She enters into the state of Venice.
At the news of her Majesty's advance toward the State of Venice, the Counts
Giovanni Battista Allegri, and Marc Antonio Chiodo, both Officers to take care
for the health of the City of Verona, and Gentlemen of great quality, and
eminent birth, stood ready on the confines, to know of Don Antonio Pimentel
what company he had in his train, to the end none but they might be suffered to
pass, since every thing was done in his name, the Queen not desiring to be
known, nor to be met by any, as 'twas punctually observed.

Her Majesty next to Hall, was to lie in the Village of Dolce above Chiusa,
whereupon by his Excellencies order, Signior Paolo Contarini the then Captain
of Verona and a Senator of great quality, her lodgings were prepared as well
as the narrowness and littleness of the incommodious place would permit for
receiving so numerous a train, where they wanted not any thing, the season and
occasion would afford, the charge of the reception being committed to the
Marquis Sagramoso Sagramosi, and Count Giovanni Paolo Pompei, principal
Cavaliers of Verona, well acquainted, and versed in the business.

They went with a noble retinue of Gentlemen their Camrades, with servants, and
coaches with six horses apiece, to receive Pimentel aforesaid at the bars of
the passage, which were ih the village of Peri, The Cavaliers of Verona
complement Don Antonio Pimentel.
and here they presented a letter from the Senator Contareno to the Ambassador
Pimentel, accompanying it with excuses, and expressions of good will which are
usually observed in occurrences of that nature. The Ambassador accepted their
relation with terms of much courtesy, and affectionate thanks. When they
arrived at Dolce, they did all they could to accomodate them in their lodgings,
where the treatment consisted of fish of the lake of Garda, of wild game,
shellfish, sweet meats, and most excellent wines, as well of that Country to
wit, Muskadine, and Garganicho esteemed the best, as of other Greek wines, and
others brought from Venice, and was very splendid and agreeable to the Venetian
greatness.

In Dolce they resolve; to go thorough the Country of Mantoua.
In Dolce the way was resolved on, which her Majesty should hold through
Ussulengo, and the Island of Scala, toward the Country of Mantoua. On the
eighteenth in the morning having passed the river Adige on a great bridge
brought thither for the purpose, she went to Ussulengo that evening, being
always, though under the color of the Ambassador Pimentel served by
Sagramoso and Pompei aforesaid, with the same entertainments.

My Lord Holstenius gives information to the Legate of Ferrara.
From Ussulengo at four hours in the night, my Lord Holstenius sent back the
Courier, dispatched to him before by the Legate of Ferrara, and the Nuntii,
giving them advice of the way resolved on through the Countries of Verona and
Mantoua to come into that of Ferrara. On the nineteenth in the morning the
Queen went from thence, and lay that night in the Island of Scala, a place
belonging to the territory of Verona, where she had the same lodging and
treatment. In Ussulengo Madam de Cueva was surprised with a gentle fever,
occasioned by a defluxion of rhume, so as she and the Signior della Cueva her
husband were forced to remain there some days, but she was soon after well,
and they pursued their journey, overtaking her Majesty at Loretto.

In the mean time the Marquis Andreasi a complete Cavalier appeared, The
Marquess Andreasi complementeth the Queen in the name of the Duke of Montoua
and complemented personally her Majesty, inviting her in the name of the Duke
of Mantoua, a little before returned from Casal to lodge in Reuere, a place
beyond the Po, over against Ostia a Town of the territory of Mantoua, which her
Majesty accordingly accepted. His Highness so informed by Couriers sent
expressly to him, gave order the lodgings should with all celerity be prepared,
calling together in all haste the Militia, as well the foot as horse of the
Mantouan state, to attend her Majesty with the magnificence, the place and the
time would afford. He then with her Highness his wife came to Revere, whence
he caused to advance to the confines of his Country, all the troops of horse,
putting into Ponte Molino an ancient Castle, where they pass from the Country
of Verona into that of Mantoua, a good guard of foot. The day the Queen moved
from the Island of Scala, the Marquis Andreasi, who after the ceremony of
inviting her Majesty in Dolce, as we said before, was returned to Mantoua, was
sent by his Highness with a numerous and noble retinue to the confines, to
receive there her Majesty, representing to her, the Duke would be presently
there to wait upon her: nor omitted he to express his Highnesses discontent,
The Duke goes to meet the Queen.
for her Majesty's incommodity occasioned by the rain, which falling then
abundantly, continued all the following day, insomuch as the ways were very
ill, and the show in the meeting was hindered extremely, since the Duke, who
had designed to appear a horseback, accompanied by the Nobility, which attended
him very splendidly apparrelled, was constrained by that accident, to make use
of his Coaches.

Sending therefore before him his guards of light Horsemen, and Launciers in a
very good livery, all appointed for the service of her Majesty; his Highness
passed the Po with very many principal Cavaliers, and went in his coach to
Ponte Molino, causing likewise to be led along with him, the horses richly
fadled and adorned, with intention to use them in waiting on the Queen, but the
rain spoiled all his designs.

When the Duke had discovered her Majesty's Coach, He wait^ on her Majesty.
he quickly alighted out of his to wait upon her, whereupon she informed the
Duke was in the company, causing her Coach to be stopped in an instant, leapt out
of it hastily, not regarding the rain nor the dirt, whom his Highness
approaching, did complement in a way as obsequious, as sprightly and gracious.

Who received him with great courtesy.
The Queen received him as completely, and entreated him often to be covered,
but he refused to do it, seeming very much troubled, her Majesty had incommoded
her self, to come out of her coach in that so soul weather to do him that
honor, who was with such devotion her servant. Their complements ended, the
Duke went again into his coach, and passed before to Ostia, to expect the
Queen, and attend her passage over the Po.

When the Duke was gone, her Highness the Arch-Dutchess arrived, accompanied
by many coaches, The Arch-Dutchesse complementeth the Queen.
and attended by great store of Ladies, all sumptuously adorned. Her Highness
alighted in a convenient place to pay her respects to the Queen, who would use
her Highness in the very same fashion, she had done the Duke, coming out of
her Coach, though in the dirt, and receiving her with a sweetness full of
Majesty, and the greatestaffability. After their reciprocal Complements, the
Queen (...) her into the Coach, advanced to the Po, whose banks on both sides
were all beset, as far as they could see, with soldiers on foot and a
horseback, the harmony of Trumpets and Drums, which were seconded with the
noise of the Canon, and Muskets, and because now the night did approach, many
fires were lighted along the banks of the river, and divided into very fit
spaces, which made in the dark, with their well ordered splendor, the prospect
delightful to their great admiration, and curiosity.

Here her Majesty passed the Po to the opposite bank of Revere, She passes the
Po, and is royalty received in Revere.
on three ferry-boates joined together, which by reason the river was low,
served instead of a bridge, three others remaining apart, for the greater
convenience of their train. The Port was illuminated with 24 great torches
carried by 24 Pages of his Highness, with very rich liveris. In their
alighting out of the coach, and entering into the Port, the Duke led the Queen,
who was carried from the banks to the water side in a sumptuous chair, being
followed by the Arch-Dutches, who leaned on the arm of the Ambassador
Pimentel. In this manner all the Ladies passed over one after another, as
likewise the Cavaliers of the Court, with the rest of both trains.

The town of Revere has one long street among the rest, extended along the Po,
with houses on both sides. Through this, which was beautified with lights, the
Queen was carried in her chair to the Palace of the Duke, the 24 Pages
aforesaid preceding with torches in their hands, and a company of the Guard,
another company like that, following the Arch-Dutchesse, and the Ladies in the
coach; The Duke with his Cavaliers, went through a shorter way to the Palace,
which besides being furnished most richly, was kept by the foot-guards of his
Highness in their live^y, and adorned with a most noble and most beautiful
row of Ladies, who with the luster of the jewels and gold, with which they
were docked, augmented the splendor of the infinite number of lights, which
were burning every where.

Her Majesty alighted out of her chair in the great hall of the Palace, The
entertainments, given to her Majesty by the Duke of Mantoua.
being led by the Duke, who carried her to her lodgings. Her Highness the
Arch-Dutchesse followed her, and the Ladies staying in the antichamber a
little while after introducted to wait on her Majesty, who received them all
with her usual civility. They returning into the antichamber, her Majesty
remained alone with the Duke and Arch-Dutchesse, discoursing with them for some
time. His Highnesses Musicians being afterward brought into that room,
entertained them most nobly at the portalls rolled up, with several songs, now
with one, now more voices, intermingling diverse harmonies of Instruments, with
which her Majesty was very highly pleased.

In the mean time they made ready the table in the same antichamber abounding
with Nobility, which fill^d too the great Hall, that was per^it, many Gentlemen
of the neighboring Cities, besides the Cavaliers of the Country, flocking
thither in great numbers, attracted not only by a laudable curiosity, but out
of their own inclination to wait on that Prince, who with the atraction of his
most sweet carriage, commanded the obsequiousness of the most remote persons,
not only of his neighbors.

Her Majesty sat at table under a cloth of state in perspective, on a carpet
raised four fingers from the ground, and over against her the Duke and
Arch-Dutchesse. Don Antonio Pimentel, though invited, was not there, he finding
himself not very well. The table was adorned so artificially, that the eye was
not satisfied with seeing, nor the mind in admiring that natural beauty. The
quantity and delicacy of the meats, showed the greatest imaginable magnificence
and generosity. Yet all was observed without wonder, for every one that knows
what a mind that Prince has, which even in little things, is still great, to
be answerable to the greatness of the house of Gonzaga, admired it not at all.

Her Majesty's Cupbearer was Count Luigi Canossa, She eats in public.
brother to the Marquis Horatio, both Cavaliers of high quality, and of
greatest esteem, but this Cavalier had no great trouble given him in choosing
the wines, which there were very precious and exquisite, since this virtuous
Princess was so temperate, that she drank only two draughts of wine, to drink
to his Highnesses health, she afterward quenching her thirst with pure water.

The Music continued as long as the supper, and every thing was most pleasing
to her Majesty, who afterward retired to her lodgings, as the Princess and all
the rest did,

On the following day, She departs from Revere with great satisfaction.
which was the 21, when her Majesty had dined, in the very same order and
magnificence, she passed again the Po, and went into her Coach, and the
Arch-Dutchess with her, who would wait upon her to the confines. The Duke went
a horseback with all his Cavaliers, notwithstanding the ill weather, the troops
of the Mantouan horse, and the Guards of his Highness, preceding and following
her Majesty's Coach. In this manner they marched very near to Melara, where
alighting, after some courteous complements, they dispersed themselves, those
Princes returning thence toward Mantoua, and the Queen continuing her journey
toward Figarolo.

The Nuntii of his Holiness go to meet the ^ Queen.
The four Nun^ii, with the Master of the Ceremonies, and Don Innocentio Conti de
Duchi de Poli a Roman. Campmaster general of the soldiers of the
Ecclesiastical state, and Commander in Ferrara, departed on the twentieth in
the morning betimes with same troops of horse, one of which of the Guard was
commanded by the Marquis Carlo Theodoli, a person of eminent quality, with the
Coach, Litter, and chair, which his Holiness had sent for the meeting of her
Majesty, on the confines, but by reason of the shortness of the time, and the
ill way, they could only advance two miles farther than Calto, where
discovering her Majesty's Coach, they alighted, and the Queen did the same,
when she was near to them. The Nuntii here complemented her in the name of his
Holiness, and presented her the Brief, which her Majesty with great reverence
received, kissing it, and opened it in the open fields, though it rained, which
was of the following tenor.

To our dearest Daughter in Christ, Christina, the illustrious Queen of
Swedland. Alexander the VIIth Pope.
OUr most dear Daughter in Christ, Greeting and Apostolical benediction.
In what great expectation we are of your Majesty's arrival, our venerable
Brothers, Hannibal of Thebes, and Luke of Ravenna, Archbishops, and our
beloved sons Mr. Inico Caraccioli, Dean of the Apostolical Chamber, and Philip
Cesarini Clerk of the same, our extraordinary Nuntii to your Majesty will
evidently declare. For in this excess of joy we could scarce contain our
selves, that the interpreters of it might be kept within the limit of the
Churches Dominions, and express at your entrance the sum of our gladness
and great charity toward you. But because we suppose you as sensible of this
joy and content, we doubt not but this intimation of our paternal love, and
earnest good will, will likewise be most grateful to you. In the mean time
it is a sweet thing to us, to think of the No small or light portion of the
pleasure of that day, when Rome shall receive you with the glad congratulations
of all. and you find the true fountains of wisdom, which you formerly have
learned, not from the doctrine of Christ, But in the school of Philosophers,
amongst the foolish things of this world, and the interdicted, and ignoble, and
behold at the shrines of the Apostles, the monuments of Princes and Kings, the
Disciples of the Cross triumphing, as it were 'ore the pride and pomp of the
World. For the rest, so well are they descended whom we send to your Majesty,
and such praises have they purchased, besides, a noble family, that it will be
a hard thing for you to determine what you in each of them shall most like. Now
God, whose Word the winds, and the tempests obey, be with you in your journey,
and confer on your Majesty the blessings we most lovingly impart.

Given at Rome at Saint Mary's, the greater, under the Ring of the Fisher the
24 of October 1655, in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondininus.


Going afterward into his Holinesses Coach, She arrives at Figarolo,
and the Nuntii following her with all the retinue, she arrived at F^garolo at
half an hour in the night, where after a little repose, she was visited by the
Nuntii, whom she met in the midst of the room, and accompanied to the door.

Figarolo is a Town built scatteringly on the banks of the Po. 'ore against
Stellata, another place resembling it, seated in an angle, which is made by the
river Panaro in discharging it self into the said Po. Every thing convenient
for the lodging of so great a train could not be had in time, for computing
that the Queen, by reason of the ill weather, could not arrive there until the
21 as Holstenius had written, things were not observed with that punctuality
and necessary solicitude, to which may be added, that the river grown
tempestuous with the wind, suffered not to pass, till the twentieth at
evening, certain Officers and goods designed for the lodging. However the
things were well ordered, for though there were that night in that little place
about eight hundred horse of her Majesty's train, and the soldiers of the
Militia, and albeit the great rains were a hindrance to every thing, the well
ordered commands of Don Innocentio Conti facilitated the endeavors of the
Ministers subordinate to Baldocchi, who had sent them thither from Ferrara, he
by his assiduous applications in this, and that place, more deserving still the
name of an accurate and diligent Officer.

On the 22 of November her Majesty dined in Figarolo, She advanced toward
Ferrara.
and afterward taking coach, advanced toward Ferrara, which is fifteen miles
off, all along on the banks of the river Po, which there are very strong, as a
fence against its dangerous inundations. A great number of soldiers were
distributed in all the ways, for Don Innocentio Conti, a Gentleman of great
valor and conduct, having commanded five thousand foot, and a thousand horse,
had divided them with that order on those banks, that he made them seem more
numerous to the wonder of all.

My Lord B^ssi, a nobleman of Viterbo, and a Prelate of great parts, the
Vice-Legate of Ferrara, with a very great attendance of Gentlemen of Ferrara a
horseback, came near Figarolo to complement the Queen, informing her the
Cardinal Legate would presently be there to wait on her Majesty. His Eminence
issuing out of the City, advanced to Occhiobello distant six miles, to meet her
with a very good train of Coaches, with six horses apiece, full of principal
Cavaliers of that country. His Eminence discovering the Queen 25 paces off,
who was alone in his Holinesses Coach, alighted and met her. The Queen causing
her Coach to be stopped ten paces from the Cardinal, did likewise alight, and
here began the Complement, in which still her Majesty gave the title of
Eminence. Then the Queen went again into her Coach, helped thither by the
Cardinal, who likewise went into his own, and followed her Majesty, who had on
a man's Hungerlin of plain black velvet, with a band, and an upper safeguard for
women of a dark gray color, without which she would have looked like a man.

A splendid bridge over the Po.
She arriving at the bridge of the black lake three miles distant from Ferrara,
a place much renowned for the Fort, which built some years before by the Pope,
on the opposite bank, was assaulted by the forces of Venice, found built a very
fine and commodious bridge, designed by the admirable architecture of the
Marquis Girolamo Ressetti, Cavalier of Ferrara, of very great spirit, and
eminent parts.

It was made of 46 great and thick barques, with a floor so broad, four
coaches could go over it in a breast. It reached from one side to the other, not
simply from the brink of the water, to the opposite part, but from the bank it
self, on which it stood. The construction of the bridge was most rare, and the
finest, peradventure, that has been seen in Europe. The Queen would needs go
over it, though for her there was prepared a most splendid Bucintoro, adorned
with the Popes and her Majesty's arms, and another noble barque somewhat less.
When her Majesty was passed, though the bridge was so full of Coaches, horses,
and soldiers, that it could hold no more, yet it stood always firm, and very
strong without the least disjoynting.

She is met at the gate of Ferrara.
At the gate of the City her Majesty was met by the Marquis Francesso Calcagnini
the chief Cavalier of the place, and a person endued with extraordinary parts.
He was President of the Council, and afterward with the Magistrates, the
College of Doctors, and his guard of halbardiers in the usual livery of the
City, and great strore of servants advanced to complement the Queen, who
received him with her accustomed affability.

When his complement was ended, he waited on the Queen riding before her with
his train, among which were 24 Pages nobly born, and clothed in plain black
velvet, designed for the attendance on her Majesty. The City spared no cost,
nor application, for Count Julius Caesar Nigrelli, Ambassador in Rome for that
Town, a charge he had exercised with great praise and attention, had in order
thereunto, advertised the Magistrates of his Holinesses mind. At the first she
was welcomed with six great Cannons with bullets, all discharged at the same
time, and afterward by the artillery from the walls, with an infinite number
of mortar-pieces intermingled. All the gates, streets, and breast-works were
manned with soldiers, with lights in the streets, and torches at the Palaces
of the Cardinals, the Legate and Bishop, the Townhouse, the Vice-Legates, and
other particular Cavaliers.

She came in her Litter to the Pillars before the Cathedral, She alights at the
Cathedral, being received by the Cardinal Bishop.
and there did alight. His Eminence Cardinal Pio the Bishop, adorned with his
Amice, his Rochet, and rich Mitre, in the midst of two Canons in their Coaps,
going before the Cross, the Clergy, and Chapter met her, and she kneeling on
the even ground within the chains, on a cushion of cloth of gold, laid on a
great carpet, kissed devoutly the Cross presented to her by the Cardinal
Bishop, and then going before the said Cross, the Clergy and Chapter following
her, and last of all the Cardinal in the midst of the Canons aforesaid, her
Majesty went under a Canopy of silver, and conducted to the gate of the Church
by the secular Magistrates, at what time they sang the Anthem, She is
beautiful, etc. The Cardinal Legate coming out of his coach, and making a low
reverence to the Queen, went into the Sacristy to put off his traveling
clothes, and put on his long under-garment, his Rotchet, etc. expecting there
the Cardinal Bishop.

At the entrance into the Church, the Cardinal Bishop with the Mitre on his
head, taking the sprinkling brush from the Dean, besprinkled the Queeen, and
the other there present, then made a reverence to the Queen, and took off the
Mitre, while in the mean time the Musicians began to sing the Hymn, Te Deum.
When the first was ended, the Bishop put on again his Mitre, and going before
the cross in like manner, and the Chapter went toward the high Altar, on
which was exposed the most holy Sacrament. Then his Eminence went to the
Epistle side, and laying aside his Mitre, and kneeling at the verse, We
threfore beseech thee, etc. stood up again, and turning to the Queen, as soon
as Te Deum was ended, recited the verses and prayers, Save thy Handmaid, etc.
Lord God, by whose providence, etc. and finally standing in the middle of the
Altar, gave the solemn benediction, and bowing to the Queen, went thence into
the Sacristy to put off his Ornaments, and clothing himself like the Cardinal
Legate, they came out of the Sacristy together, and went both to the Queen, who
went alone into her coach, and the two Cardinals, the Nuntii, and the
Ambassador Pimentel in another, who waited on her Majesty to the Castle, and
to her own lodgings.

The Church had the frontispiece all resplendent with torches, and within was
hung richly with tapestries, with a kneeling place for the Queen, and cushions
for the Nuntii, who always attended on her Majesty.

From the Church she goes to the Castle.
At the gate of the hall of the Castle, they found very many noble Ladies of the
City most splendidly apparrelled, who paid their respects, and complemented the
Queen, who affectionately received them, and afterward retired into her
lodgings, where she was accompanied by the two Cardinals, the Nuntii, and all
the retinue. That night little else was effected, but that all the Officers
designed to look after the lodgings, were not idle, being employed in
distributing, without the least confusion, to every one his chamber, they whom
the Castle could not hold, being quartered in Palaces and particular houses in
the town. That night the Queen supped privately, and was entertained with most
excellent music. Couriers were then dispatched to Rome, to inform the Pope
of all, as they did from time to time, in all other places where she staid, not
only in obedience to his Holinesses commands, who would know what they did,
but likewise to receive from his Beatitude, opportune informations, in order to
what they should do, for a complete and regal reception.

Her Majesty staid two days in Ferrara, where she visited diverse Monasteries
of Nuns, and the remarkablest things of the City, being always accompanied by
the two Cardinals in her Coach, their Eminences sitting before, and the Queen
alone behind. The four Nuntii followed after, as they always had done, in
another coach, and all the other Gentlemen's coaches of the train, continued in
a row, one after another. She desired to see the fortress so famed, and was
much pleased with it, and here she her self was assistent in discharging some
pieces of artillery. During these two days, the City only feasted and
rejoiced, every one endeavoring to demonstrate their gladness, fine maskings
being seen, and other rare shows, for the pleasing of the eyes, and
divertisement of the senses.

The Queen at her entrance into the Church-dominions, sent by Post from Ferrara
to Rome, Count Montecuccoli sent by the Queen to Rome.
Count Raymund Montecuccoli, to complement his Holiness in her name, and thanks
him for all the honors, his beatitude had been pleased to do her, and
particularly for them she had begun to receive in the state Ecclesiastical, to
whom she consigned affectionate letters for his Holiness. This Cavalier with
the usual vivacity of his noble and eminent parts, gave a very good account of
his employment, and leaving the Pope highly satisfied with his function,
returned from thence within a few days, to find out the Queen in her journey,
and go back with her to Rome.

The day after her Majesty being willing to dine in public, a table was
prepared with a single covering, under the cloth of state, but because she
would honor the Cardinal Legate and Bishop, by taking them to dinner with her,
two other coverings were brought, one at the right hand, and the other at the
left of the table, a little way distant from the upper end, where the Queen was
to sit, each of them being under a little of the Canopy. All the three
coverings were in gilt baskets, the Cardinal Legate sitting on the right hand,
the Bishop on the left, and the Legate saying grace.

Don Luigi Pio of Savoy, Prince of St. Gregory, Brother to the Cardinal Bishop,
gave the water for her Majesty's hands, and assisted at the table, changing the
dishes after the manner of Germany. Don Innocentio Conti presented her the
napkin, and the Marquis Hippolitus Bentivoglio was her Cupbearer and Sewer.

The said Prince of St. Gregory came by post from Rome to Ferrara, to wait on
the Queen, as one who being curious of seeing the world, when he had been at
the Courts of Spain, France, Flanders, Holland and Denmark, passing likewise
into Swedland, had received there many honors of her Majesty, and among other
things was accompanied to Danzich by a Swedish man of war, and besides had her
Majesty's picture set with a hundred fair diamonds, a favor that generous
Princess was accustomed to show to Ambassadors of Kings, and Cavaliers of
eminent condition. He therefore had waited upon her on the confines of Ferrara,
and had been received with all courtesy, so as having paid her his respects,
The qualities of the Prince of St. Gregory.
he took his leave of her, and returned by post to Rome, to serve there her
Majesty. The said Prince, as he is endued with a vivacity of spirit, a mind
truly splendid, and abounding especially with the virtues and qualities; which
become a Cavalier of great birth, so in all things, and even in his younger
years, followed worthily the glory of his Eminence the Cardinal his Brother,
And of Cardinal Pio.
who to the integrity of his exempalr life, has joined the greatest prudence,
and an exquisite knowledge of all things, deserving the nobleness of his
thoughts, he showing to all the highest generosity and courtesy.

But returning to what was observed at the table, the bibbs were presented to
the Queen and the Cardinals. Their Eminences were in their rotchets, and
forbear very strictly to touch any meat, till they saw what her Majesty liked,
and had eaten first of it.

The first discourse began here by the Queen was of the Painters at Rome, The
Queens discourse at the Table.
she concluding in favor of Peter di Cortona, and Cavalier Bernino. She then
spoke of the Musicians, and seemed well informed of all the treble voices, or
Eunuchs, saying, Bonaventura was the best at that time, and that Cavalier
Loreto of Spoleti had taught to sing handsomely, continuing a while in the
praises of music, and calling it the ornament of Princes, and delight of the
chambers. At the first draught the Queen drank, three great pieces of artillery
were discharged. She discoursed then of the Temples of Europe, and said three
were great, to wit, St. Peter in Rome, St. Paul in London, and the Dome in
Millan, but that St. Peter's was the fairest and greatest, adding likewise, as
it were with a sigh, St. Paul's Church in London was now become a stable, and
here she discoursed awhile of the English affairs. Then feeling it grew hot,
she caused the glass of the windows to be opened from the top to the botome,
and the people which stood about the table, retired then a little. When her
Majesty had drank the second time, she said she had never drank so much wine as
in Italy, where it was very excellent. The Cardinal Bishop replied, your
Majesty has drank little of it, for you put much water to it, and we see you
carry with you the virtue of the North, which the Queen was pleased with. In
fine, new dishes of meat still appearing, her Majesty praised Italy, as having
every thing within it self except druggs, the Cardinal Legate replied, what,
sugars? Her Majesty answered, you have them in Sicily. And with these, and such
like discourses, which use to be the pastimes of great persons, in their
recreations at table and feasts, the meat was taken off, and the Queen in the
midst of the two Cardinals aforesaid, retired to her chamber, where their
Eminences stayed with her, entertaining themselves with several discourses. Her
Majesty in her speeches showed a great esteem, of France, and to be well
informed of all the affairs of the world, and especially of the Court of Rome,
and of the last Conclave.

That night they saw a Comedy at the charge of the Marquis Cornelius
Bentivoglio, a Cavalier of one of the chiefest families in Italy, and who may
deservingly be called a true lover of the virtuous. This play, where the
honors of Boreas with Orithia were represented, succeeded very well,
especially for the admirable beauty and finenesse of the machins. Her Majesty
very worthily esteeming so conspicuous a family, honored with the title of
Gentleman of her Chamber, and her Cupbearer the Marquis Hippolitus aforesaid,
who together with the Marquis Cornelus his father, waited afterward upon her
to Rome; as Donna Constanza Sforza likewise did, a Lady of rare parts, and
great quality, and wife to the said Marquis Cornelius, who instead of Madam
Cueva, who staid behind sick, as we said, supplied with equal spirit and
decorum, the charge of chief Lady of the chamber to the Queen, attending on her
all the rest of the journey to Rome. The remainder of the night was solemnized
with variety of artificial fireworks, and all the demonstrations of gladness
and rejoicing, which could proceed from hearts ambitious of conforming
themselves to the generous and noble inclination of their Prince. While the
Queen staid in Ferrara, the Count St. Vitale came thither, a Cavalier of great
quality, sent by the Duke of Parma, with the title of extraordinary Ambassador
to complement her Majesty.

The description of Ferrara.
Ferrara is a great and spacious City, adorned with splendid and beautiful
structures, and many piazze inhabited by diverse great families, and washed on
the East and South side with a branch of the river Po. It lies in a plain, low,
and humid soil, and therefore the air is supposed a little unwholesome. It Is
fortified with strong walls, bastions, and well flankt with very large and deep
ditches, being guarded by a citadel of great strength, and very regular, in
some parts inaccessible to the approaches, by reason of the marish situation
on one side. The Castle, the habitation of the Cardinal Legate, is magnificent
and sumptuous, and was the royal residence of the Dukes of Este, the splendor
of Italy for the greatness of their minds, and eminent valor.

The Cardinal John Baptist Spada a Noble man of Lucca, The noble qualities of
the Cardinal John Baptist Spada.
a person of great worth and rare parts, preferred for his long services to the
holy Sea of Rome, to the purple on the second of March, 1654. with the title of
holy Susanna, performed this legation to his very great glory, and in this
conjuncture acted nobly and abundantly his part.

On the 25. her Majesty departed from Ferrara, She departs from Ferrara.
being saluted by the Canon from the walls, and the fortress, as at her coming
thither, and they saw all the streets full of soldiers. The two Cardinals, the
Legate and Bishop accompanied her Majesty to the confines of their Legation,
which end at the river Reno, a little way off from the Villa of Poggio,
appertaining to the Marquis Lambertini, an ancient and noble family of Bologna.
Here at the entrance into the territory of Bologna, She is received on the
confines by the Vice-Legate of Bologna.
she was met by my Lord Ranuccio Ricci the Vice-Legate, with the train of many
Gentlemen all on horseback, who complemented her Majesty in the name of his
Eminence Cardinal John Jerome Lomellino the Legate, and returned to Bologna,
leaving the troop of horse that had accompanied him thither, to wait on the
Queen. Her Majesty lay that night in the Villa of St. Benedict, in the Palace
of the Senator, the Marquis John Nicholas Tanara, then President of the
Justice, and a person highly qualified, her train with the four Nuntii being
lodged in the Palaces and neighboring houses, where they were treated
splendidly.

The day after she continued her journey toward Bologna, Cardinal Lomellino
goes out to meet the Queen
whence the Cardinal Legate issuing forth with above 40 coaches with six horses
a piece, which were filled with the Nobility, and three troops of Horse went to
meet her at the Villa of Funo distant five miles, all the ways being lined
with soldiers, and a numerous concourse of people to see this great Princess.
She arriving ten paces near his Eminence, who allighting before, expected her
in the midst of the way, came out of her coach, and received very affably and
courteously the complement the Cardinal made her. His Eminence after this, was
constrained to go back with all speed, to get before her Majesty, and receive
her at the Dome in the absence of Boncompagno the Archbishop.

When she was near the City, they began to hear the noise of the Artillery,
which continued till she got to the Palace. At the gate she was received by all
the Magistrates on horseback, who were in their solemn robes. After the like
complements she had had in Ferrara, she went to the Church of St. Peter, which
is the Cathedral, and there alighting, was received with the same ceremonies
used to her in the Church of Ferrara, Her reception at her entrance into
Bologna.
after which she was carried in a chair to the Palace, accompanied by all the
retinue. The Cardinal Legate, who made such haste thither, received her at the
foot of the stairs, and in passing through the Hall of Farnese, they found
there in ranks on both sides, above an hundred Ladies, most splendidly adorned,
who all made low reverences to her. Arriving at her lodging, she a little while
after saw the fires, which were opposite to her chamber, on a long and fine
stand which was made for that purpose with Pyramids, and a great figure
signifying Faith, with the Arms of the Pope, of her Majesty, and his Eminence,
among which were distributed several images of Lions, the Arms of Bologna. The
fires were extraordinarily fine, and at the same time six thousand squibs of
wilde-fire were seen flying from the summit of two towers.

After this the Queen went into the Hall of Hercules, where sitting under the
cloth of state on a throne prepared for her, she saw the dancing, where there
were above a hundred fair Ladies most nobly apparreled.

The day following she went to see the Church of St. Dominique, She visits the
Church and fine Convent of St. Dominique
and there reverenced his body, expressing a particular devotion to him, and an
equal esteem to this ancient and very noble Order. Here at the Altar of the
relics, she beheld the five books of Moses, written in Hebrew in thin leather
by the Prophet Esdras, and her Majesty read some of the words. She desired then
to see the public Schools, in which she heard an eloquent Oration in her
honor, by the Abbot Certani, a person of great learning and virtue.

The Duke of Modena hearing the Queen was arrived in Bologna, sent the Marqis
Silvio Molza, a Cavalier of great spirit, and extraordinary parts, in the
quality of his Ambassador to wait on the Queen, but it had no effect, they
could not agree of the pretensions he had.

The honors her Majesty received in Bologna.
Her Majesty staid two days in Bologna, as she had done in Ferrara, and the
second day went to Mass to St. Michael in the wood, without the gate of Saint
Mamolo, the famous convent of the Fathers of mount Olivet, where her Majesty
was much pleased in seeing that Cloister painted by the most renowned Painters
of Bologna, Caracci and Reno, and in the Sacristy the Saint Michael of Brass,
the excellent workmanship of Albargi. She visited likewise at her entrance into
the Church, the body of blessed Katherine of Bologna, which is kept still by
those all entire, palpable, and sitting without any help to hold it up.

Her Majesty being returned to the Palace, the College of Bologna presented
her with the works in ten Volumes of Doctor Aldrovandi which she very much
esteemed.

The same day the Queen dined in public with the Cardinal, She dines in
public.
they observing the same order, as was held in Ferrara. Many Ladies came masked
to see the feast, which was as sumptuous as can be imagined, for the Legates
noble mind omitted not any thing, that was great and majestique. The chief
Standard Bearer gave the napkin to her Majesty, and Count Francis Charles
Caprara, nephew to Duke Piccolomini the General, was both Carver and
Cup Bearer, both persons of high worth.

After dinner she visited the great College of Spain, founded long since by
the famous Cardinal Gyles Albernozzi, and about three hours in the night, she
went to the lodgings of the College, and thence to the Theater.

This was built for that purpose, in the form of a great ship, the extremities
of which arrived to the frontispiece over the fish-market, and over part of the
Palace, through a great window of which, her Majesty accompanied by the
Cardinal, passed over a bridge very splendidly adorned, where there were above
140 Ladies, all equally resplend^nt with the luster of their beauty, and a rich
mine of pearls, and of jewels, of inestimable value.

The Theater, which was covered, had certain great lights on the top, and above
300 torches were regularly distributed here and there round about it, together
with other lesser lights, which made it most resplendent. The battlements of
the Palace were decked with several Carpets, some of arras, and others of silk
of diverse colors.

After the appearance of the Masters of the Camp, which were the Marquis
Angelelli, and Count Edward Pepoli both Senators, they beheld a great gilded
Chariot come forth, with 24 grooms apparrelled in cloth of silver with
torches in their hands, drawn by twelve horses most splendidly set out, on
which sat clothed like Pallas, Felsina representing Bologna, for so it was
called long since, when it was the royal City of Toscany. Somewhat lower stood
Peace, Fame, and War, which interlaced the song of Felsina, who when she had
walked up and down in the field, stood still before the Queen, to introduce the
tilting. She singing then, said, to applaud so great a Majesty the Triumviri
who divided the World on the river Lavino, The manner of the said Tilting.
not far from Bologna, brought three squadrons of Cavaliers, which running at
the Ring, and one against another, might show their respects to so deserving a
Queen.

Then Felsina was silent, and departing with her train, by the Masters of the
Camp, three squadrons were brought in, the one lead by Octavus Augustus, the
second by Lepidus, and the third by Marcus Antonius, each being composed of six
Cavaliers, Trumpets, Pages, and Groom^s going before with lighted torches in
their hands: every one of them extravagantly attired, walked softly over the
field, accompanied by two sticklers, and two Cavaliers all in armor for the
tilting to follow of one against another. Their plumes, and the crests of their
helmets were high, made of several precious feathers, which augmented the
beauty and pomp of the show.

The first squadron contained besides the two sticklers aforesaid, the Counts
Luigi Bentivoglio, Marc' Antonio Sampieri, Hercules Malvezzi, Philip Maria
Bentivoglio, the Marquis Hippolitus Bevilaqua, the Marquis Caesar Tanara, the
Counts Lodovick Albergati, Anthony Orsi, and Alexander Fava, all Cavaliers of
great valor and birth.

In the second were the Counts Francis Charles Caprara, Constance Maria
Zambeccari, Alphonsus, Ercolani, Jerome Caprara, Hercules Isolani, Anthony
Gabrielli, Anthony Joseph Zambeccari, Felix Montecuccoli, and Rinald Bovio,
whose sticklers were the Counts John Baptist Alberti, and Hannibal Ranucci,
persons of great merit and virtue.

In the third were the Marquisses Andrew Paleotti and Guido Anthoni Lambertoni,
the Counts Henry, Hercolani, and Francis Maria, Ghislieri, and the Gentlemen
Octavius Casoli, John Baptist Sampieri, Alexander R^ffeni, Jerome Pini and
Tabus Guidotti, whose sticklers were the Counts Vincent Marescotti, and Caesar
Hanibal, Marsilli, and which Cavaliers were of the most noble and most eminent
Families of that City.

These three Spectators having severally reverenc't the Queen, ran at the ring,
breaking above 130. lances with a general acclamation of the people.

This operation being ended, they began the encounter of two Cavaliers of each
squadron; of the first were the Counts Lewis Bentivoglio and Marcus Antonius
Sapieri, of the second the Counts Francis Charles Caprara, and Constance Maria
Zambeccari, and of the third signior Octavius Casalo and Sigre Giollanni
Battista Sampieri, every one of which ran five lances a piece with such courage
and sprightlinesse, that all the spectators commended them extremely. After
this all the the Squadrons reduced themselves into a semicircle, made low
reverences to her Majesty, and gave her many thanks, for the honor she had
done them with her presence, who seemed to be highly contented. In her
Majesty's return to her lodgings, she passing that night through the public
rooms of the Magistrates of the City, who are called the Regiment, saw ^he
picture of Pollio done by the famous Painter Guido Reni of Bologna, with the
picture of the Protectors of the City, which pleased her so much, she desired
to see them again.

The honors done her Majesty by the Legate, and all those Cavaliers, were very
remarkable, as well for the order, as magnificence. The best wits of the City,
omitted not to contribute abundantly to that entertainment. The Cardinal Legate
discoursed very seriously with her Majesty, who seemed highly satisfied with
him, and among other things represented to her, that in Rome, as a great City,
and abounding with all Nations, she might see different persons, and given as
well to virtue, as to vice, for as the first are apt to make use of the means,
which they think will most advance their pretensions, so on the other side, the
number is so great of the good, and exemplary in their holy operations, that
her Majesty might have her mind disposed both for pity and edification.

Bologna lies at the bottoms of the mountain Appenninus, The description of
Bologna.
in the midst of the Emilian way, being of a form somewhat long, and almost
like a ship. It has twelve gates, which show how big it is. The river Savena
runs on the side of it, and through the middle, a branch of Reno, navigable to
Malalbergo about twenty miles distant from Ferrara, where afterward it falls
into the valley of St. Martina, which leads to Ferrara. The buildings are
ample, commodious, and within more majestique then without. All the streets
have spacious Portices, so as you may go through the City without being touched
by the rain or the sun. It Is full of a virtuous, splendid, and courteous
Nobility, and abounds with all things, being rich and populus, with a territory
as pleasant and fruitful, as any is in Italy: There is a most noble
University, in which flourish eminent Persons in all kind of learning. The
worthy qualities of the Bolognesi.
The Bolognesi are fit for any exercise, arms, letters, and commerce being
there in great perfection. The gentry in particular is active, and continually
gets renown in the exexcises of glory and honor. This so rich, so fine and so
fortunate Country, The eminent condition of Cardinal Lomellino.
is governed at present by the foresaid Cardinal John Jerome Lomellino of the
title of S. Onofrius, a gentleman of the noblest and most eminent Families of
Genoua, who having performed the Offices of Referendarius, of Clerk of the
Chamber, Treasurer General, Governor of Rome, etc. was preferred to the
purple on the 19. of February, 1652. a person expert in the mannagement of
affairs, quick in the execution, and exemplary in justice and equity, loving
greatly the virtuous, and hating extremely the vicious, insomuch as his just
government has providently been prorogued for three years more in that his
Legation.

On the 29. after Mass, She departs from Bologna.
and a sumptuous Collation, her Majesty departed from Bologna, accompanied and
attended by the Cardinal Legate with the train of the Nobility and Soldiers
to the confines of that Territory. Her Majesty continued her journey toward
Imola, passing the rivers Indice and Savena, between Bologna and St. Nicholas,
and between this and Imola, the Giano, Solerino, and Senio, by reason of the
torrents which fall from Appenninus, and often want water, as they did that dry
year. Near D^zza a Town appertaining to the Marquis Campeggi which is on the
Confines of Imola, and consequently the beginning of the Province of Romagna,
the Cardinal Acquaviva the Legate should have met her, She is met on the
Confines by the Vice Legate Romagna.
but did not, he reserving himself to meet her at Forli the following evening,
and the rather to fulfill his Holynesses mind, who would not defraud the
Cardinals Donghi and Rossetti, of the honor of receiving her. He only sent
thither my Lord Francis Cennini the Vice-Legate, a Prelate of great spirit and
civility; Nephew to Cardinal Connini of happy memory, who complemented her
Majesty in his name, and caused the Troop of Curiassers of his guard to be
there, which served for her guide through the Province. He caused there
likewise to be ready a squadron of four thousand Soldiers, commanded by the
Campmaster Capelletti, a Gentleman of courage, who in all the state of the
Province observed the orders given him by the Cardinal aforesaid, causing each
City to send two thousand men, which he formed into great squadrons, consisting
of two thousand Soldiers, one after the other so the Confines of the Province.
Besides that, the Vice-Legate was accompanied by many Gentlemen of Romagna, and
300. chosen Horse, all in good order, as well for their clothes, as furniture
and Arms. As soon as he had complemented the Queen in the name of the said
Cardinal Acquaviva, the Legate of Romagna, he returned thence to Imola,
leaving the care of her reception, to Cardinal John Stephen Donghi the Bishop
of that City, who according to his instructions from Rome, She is met by
Cardinal Donghi the Bishop of Imola.
went in Coach to meet her Majesty without the Town at our Lady's of Pradello,
accompanied by many Gentlemen of the City: They came out of their Coaches, and
complemented each other, in the manner observed by the Cardinals of Ferrara
and Bologna. As soon as her Majesty was returned into her Coach, his Eminence
went before to the City, to be ready to receive her: In the Plain without Imola
were diverse squadrons of foot, who continually with volleys of shot saluted her
Majesty as she passed along. At the Gate she was received by the Magistrates,
the chief of which were Count Francis Maria Sassatelli, Signior Thadeus Dalla
Volpe, Signior Giouanni Battista Borghesi, and Captain Thomas Mazzi, who
accompanied by many Gentlemen with fine Liveries, did their duties to her
Majesty. The gates and streets abounded with Soldiers standing in ranks, but
the old fashioned walls were incapable of Artillery, and could not be armed:
She alighted not at the Cathedral, as she had done in Ferrara and Bologna,
because it was dark, so as she went directly to the Palace of the Bishop, her
lodgings, the Frontispice of which had abundance of Torches. The Cardinal
received and accompanied her to her lodgings, Her reception in Imola.
as all the chief Lady's of the Country likewise did, who stood in ranks at
the bottom of the stairs. The Furniture for the Chambers as well as the
preparation for the Tables was sumptuous and rich, for the natural generosity
of the Cardinal omitted not any thing becoming a regal entertainment. Her
Majesty supped in public with the Cardinal, the same order in sitting, and
ceremony at the table being observed, as at Ferrara, and Bologna. Count
Alexander Sassatelli was her Majesty's Cupbearer, and Signior Thadius Dalla
Volpe her Sewer. Besides, a great number of Persons well qualified, twelve
Pages, the sons of the chief Gentlemen of the City, assisted at the table. The
figures adorning the table, were so finely contrived, and with such mysterious
Hieroglyphics, that the Queen looking earnestly upon them, nourish't more her
mind than her body. The eminent qualityes of Cardinal Donghi.


Cardinal Donghi was Clerk of the Chamber, and had other vacant Offices, on
the track of which he had a large field, to show his great parts, which with
his deserts increased by his intense applications toward the service of the
Apostolical Sea, in the stirrs of the wars of Castro, preferred him to the
purple. He is a Gentleman of great integrity and freeness, which he vigorously
showed in the Legations of Ferrara and Romagna, administered by him with much
praise and advantage to the good, and exemplary punishment of the bad. His mind
is generous and free, and his intellect capable of the mannagement of the
greatest affairs.

She departs from Imola.
On St. Andrews day after Mass, the Queen went from Imola, attended and
accompanied by the Cardinal aforesaid to the confines of the territory Faenza,
And is met by the Governor of Faenza.
where she met with my Lord Castelli a horseback, a Gentleman of much worth,
and Governor of the City, accompanied by many Gentlemen, and two troops of
Horse. As soon as he had ended his complement with the Queen, he rode forward,
insomuch as the Queen continuing diligently her journey in those ways which
are plain and good, some miles without the City was met by Cardinal Charles
Rossetti the Bishop of the Place, And afterward by Cardinal Ross^tt^ the
Bishop of the place.
who with a fine livery of thirty groom's, and a train of many travailing
Coaches, full of Gentry, alighting, as the Queen likewise did, made the usual
complement, being received with equal kindness and courtesy.

Her Majesty approaching to the City, saw the neighboring plain all covered
with people, flock't thither to behold this great Princess, and with Soldiers
in squadrons to honor her arrival; some Pieces of Artillery placed on the
Walls, though slight, and without rampards, were discharged, and their roaring
was seconded by the noise of the Drums, Trumpets, Mortar-pieces, and Muskets.
All the streets of the City abounded with people in arms, and gay ornaments
hanging from the window's and balcone. The honors d^ne her Majesty in Faenza.
At her entrance into the gate, she was reverenc't by the public Magistrates,
who on horseback, and with their robes of Velvet attended her Majesty to the
Palace of the Bishop, designed for her lodging, and very richly furnished, with
a double guard of Soldiers.

The Queen alighting out of her Coach, in which she came alone, and received by
the Cardinal; who hastened before her, ascended the stairs of the Palace, on
the top of which she met the chief Ladies of the City, who after a short
complement waited on her to the lodgings prepared for her with all splendor
and magnificence.

While her Majesty reposed a little, with very good order, the quarters were
assigned to all of her numerous train, by Gentlemen appointed for that
function, who contended to show their punctuality. She afterward coming forth
of her lodgings, went thence to dinner very splendidly prepared, with such
admirable, workmanship of Statues, representing Rome, the four parts of the
world, the wordly Monarchy, and other carved things, gilt and colored so to
the life, that they only wanted motion. Her Majesty sat at the table with the
Cardinal, in the manner observed before.

She dines in public.
The Marquis Francis Rosseti, nephew to his Eminence, gave the water for her
Majesty's hands, and the Marquis G^rolamo his Brorher presented the Napkin, and
was Cupbearer. Count Laderchi, and Cavalier Pasi, both Knights of St. Stephen,
were Sewers, receiving the meat from the hands of twelve Gentlemen that
assisted at the table. At dinner her Majesty had continual discourse with the
Cardinal, which was mixed with such a Carriage and gravity, that she swerving
not at all from the State of a Queen, showed evidently, how much she was
pleased with his Eminences behavior, an Academy in the mean time being
prepared, to entertain her Majesty in the exercises, which as more peculiar to
her most refined understanding, might with a more relishing change, make her
pass from the food of her body to the aliment of her mind.

In this Academy, The virtuous preparations designed for her Majesty in Faenza.
besides the chief discourse made in praise of the Church of Rome, by father
Zenobi the Domcan, a Person of great virtue, and parts, above 30. Compositions
were to be recited by others, as well Ecclesiastical, as Secular, eminent in
several languages, Latin, Spanish, Greek, low Dutch, and Italian, and
amongst these, one in music, the fruit of the invention of the said Marquis
Francis Rossetti, who with a rare fancy introducing music, silence, and
poesy, to sing the Queens glories, was no less harmonious to the ear, than
delightful to the intellect, but it was not effected, for instead of abiding
there that night, the Queen would continue her journey, so as she rising from
the table, after a short stay in her Chamber, went to visit the Cathedral with
a singular example of piety, which, thowgh it might well appear naked, even in
the fight of so great a Princess, in being the design of the famous Architect
Bramante, yet was all adorned with silk, with such a rare mixture of colors,
that it clearly showed its joy, in receiving within the compass of its walls,
whom the vastness of a Kingdom was not able to contain.

The Description of Faenza,
Faenza is an ancient and noble City, fortified with walls, and towers, and
seated in the middle of most fertile Plains, famous for the art, peculiar to it
self, of making most white, and light vases of earth. It Is divided by the
river Lamone, which passing through the suburbs, and the town, leaves them
afterward united with a fair bridge of stone, and two towers on the Emilian
way. The air is very healthful, the inhabitants industrious, civil, and lovers
of their Country, and the Gentry Courteous, punctual, and very generous.

The Queen coming out of the Cathedral, went again into his Holinesses Coach,
carrying with her the Cardinal to the confines of that Territory, toward
which she advanced in pursuance of her journey, about two hours before night,
having left imprinted in the minds of each one, high conceits of her most
excellent qualities.

The Queen seemed highly pleased with this Cardinal, who had, besides his
learning, and knowledge, in the affairs of the world, all the prerogatives
peculiar to a Gentleman well bred. He is of Ferrara, The qualities of Cardinal
Rossetti.
of the ancient and noble family of the Counts Rossetti, now Marquisses, who
abounding more in virtue, than years, by the glorious Pope Urban the eighth,
the lover of the learned, and virtuous, was sent as an Apostolical Minister
into the Kingdom of England to that Queen. There he did all he could for the
advantage, and good of the Catholic Religion, and ran there great dangers in
those persecutions, as more plainly may appear by a letter to him of the 13th.
of July, 1643. from his Eminence Cardinal Francis Barberino, nephew to Urban,
in order to his preferment, of the following tenor.

The troubles of our Country, and of Christendom will have a short truce,
that I among so many disgusts, may have some time to breath, seeing your
Eminences great labors reward^d with the Purple, God be pleased with the
tranquillity of Italy, to open to the way, that by your continual pains, he
may grant the same to all of the Catholic Religion, and that by your
endeavors, your toylings, and dangers, not unknown to the world, it may again
flourish in the land of great Britain, to the end this d^gnity deserved so
well by you, may not be deprived of the happy effects your Eminence has
desired, and cooperated on your part for the public good. And I humbly Kiss
your hands, etc.

Your Eminences most humble and most affectionate Servant. Cardinal Barberino.


The end of the fourth Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The Fifth Book.
The Argument.
THE Queen advances from Faenza to Forli, Cesena, and Rimini, accompanied by
the foresaid Cardinal Legate of Romagna. On the confines of the state of Urbin,
She is met by that Vice-Legate, and Cardinal Legate, and enters Pesaro, where
she is treated, and royally entertained. She passes from Fano, and Ancona. She
arrives at the holy house of Loretto, and consecrates devoutly her Scepter, and
Crown to that glorious Virgin. She goes to Macerata, thence to Tolentino, and
afterward to Camerino. She comes to Foligno, goes to Assisi, there visits the
famous temple of Saint Francis, and is splendidly entertained by Cardinal
Rondinino, then returns to Foligno.

THe foresaid Cardinal Rossettti taking leave of the Queen, Signior Fulvius
Petrocci da Arieti, Governor of Forli, appeared with a numerous retinue of
Gentlemen of Romagna, come expressly with excessive rich clothes, and fine
liveries, to honor their Legate, and augment the splendor of this Princesses
reception. The foresaid Prelate, when he had humbly waited on her Majesty,
being very well satisfied with the courteous correspondence he found in the
Queen, The meeting she had in Forli.
went before to Forli, whence advancing some miles, the said Legate with the
train, not only of six Coaches of his own full of Gentlemen of his family,
with which he waited on her in all his Legation, but likewise came with 25 more
with 6 horses apeice, set forth by the Gentlemen of the Province, who flockt to
attend him in her first reception.

The gate without and within, as likewise the walls, though weak in that City,
were garnished with soldiers, partly divided into squadrons, and partly ranked
in files.

The Magistrate, there called il numero, met her at the entrance with a troop
of the City, and having presented her with their dutiful respects, waited on
her to the place, very regularly beautified with lights. The Ornament of the
fire, with which was represented the Majesty of so great a Princess, by so much
the more spread its light with greater splendor, by how much the more the
night was the darker.

Hieroglyphics disposed in various manners, were seen there to flame, The
honors done her in Forli.
alluding to the joy of the people for her fortunate arrival. The Queen being
enterd her lodgings, and breathing there a little, was invited to honor an
Academy with her presence, in which several compositions in Italian and Latin
were recited, among which took greatly a discourse, made by Signior Ridolfus
his Eminences Nephew, and an Ode of Pindarus by Signior Lodovick Tingoli, a
Person as conspicuous for his birth, as famous for the virtuous, and rare
qualities of his mind, and who is indeed the chief ornament of Rimini his
Country, with other Compositions of the most esteemed Poets of the Province.
Her Majesty supped privately, and having the next morning heard Mass in the
Dome, dined in public with the said Cardinal Legate, with the order observed
in other places. The foresaid Signior Ridolphus was her Cupbearer, and the
Governors brother the Sewer, twelve principal Gentlemen of the City, assisting
at the service of the table. The Town is seated in an open Country very
fertile and pleasant, and inhabited by people of Courage and Spirit, who retain
the martial nature of their first founders.

After dinner her Majesty departed from Forli, She depart, from Forli
carrying with her in his Holinesses Coach, the Cardinal Legate, being attended
by all the train. She passed the famous Rubicon, but with greater glory than
Caesar, since he advanced thither, to seize on the liberty of his Country, and
she after the renouncing of her paternall Kingdom, came thither to arrive to
the Empire of Christ.

Her Majesty continued her journey toward Cesena, passing through
Forlimpopoli, a little Town, where her Majesty was welcomed by the squadrons of
foot, being received between the soldiers standing in rows through all the
Country as she went.

In approaching to Cesena she found set in array diverse Batalions of foot, Her
reception in Cesena.
and was met by Signior Richard Hanniball Romano the Governor, accompanied
with many Gentlemen a horseback, who alighting did complement the Queen, and
congratulate her arrival. The same thing was done by the chief
Standard Bearer, Count Joseph Fantaguzzi, with the Magistrate, who all rode
together before her to her lodging, prepared in the palace of Count Lelius
Roverelli, a noble, ancient family, and chief of that City, where some
Gentlemen in armor tilted one against another in the place. Here her Majesty
supp't priv^tely, and because it was late, went to her repose without other
entertainment.

The description of Cesena.
Cesena is one of the chiefest Cities in Romagna, of very great commerce, and
populous enough in regard of its bigness. It lies at the foot of a mountain,
the lower part of which is washed by the river Savius. It has a Castle on the
hill, with some fair and strong old fashion towers* built long ago by the
Emperor Frederick the Second.

Her departure from Cesena.
On the 2. of December the Queen went out of Cesena on horseback, accompanied by
the Legate, who was likewise mounted on a Neopolitan courser of an Ermine
color, which being observed by the Queen for his goodness, and she seeming to
like him extremely, was presented her by him. He had likewise given her in
Forli two globes of silver, the one representing the earth, and the other the
sphaere, most diligently engraven, and supported by two statues of silver, done
by Algarbi, of great value. My Lord Joseph Bologna, a Neopolitan Cavalier, and
the generous Governor of Rimini, She is met by the Governor of Rimini.
came out with a numerous Company of Gentlemen very richly apparrelled, and
well mounted, before whom went 400. Soldiers on horseback, and presented his
respects on the confines. She entering the City on horseback, was met with the
Magistrate at the gate, accompanied by many Gentlemen with fine liveries.
Doctor Hannibal Nanni the Principal Person, did Complement her Majesty, and in
every place about them, they saw squadrons and ranks of Soldiers, with whom
all the walls did abound, as likewise the streets, through which she passed,
werehung with rich tapestries.

The Queen traversed the City on horseback, She enters Rimini on horseback.
and alighted at the public Palace prepared for her in the great Piazza, which
was beautified and illuminated with fine artificial fire-workes, succeeding
with great wonder and praise. At the gate of the Palace stood twelve Pages
nobly clothed, and with Torches in their hands. Her Majesty ascended the
stairs, accompanied by the Legate to her lodgings. A numerous company of fair
and sprightly Ladies very finely adorned, complemented her Majesty at the top
of the stairs, and a little while after made a very solemn music, with
regular and fine dances. The virtuous entertainments she had in Rimini.
A fine Academy was held likewise there, and among the variety of compositions,
Signior Philip Marchesselli, and Signior Lodowick Tingoli aforesaid, made their
fruitful wit appear. The Queen with Majestic gravity, and sweet affability,
was highly pleased with every thing. Her Majesty sup't privately, and retiring
to her rest, left the night to enjoy the splendor of the lights, and the
bone-fires that beautiful City had kindled in Testimony of their joy.

This City is ancient, The description of Rimini.
though now not very great. Toward the Sea some remains of a great Theater may
be seen, which was there long ago. Toward the gate that goes to Pesaro, stands
an arch of marble erected in honor of Augustus Caesar, and without the said
gate is the river Arimino now called the Marecchia, ore which is a Bridge 200.
paces long, and fifteen broad, with five arches, the sides of which are of
thick marble-stones of Dorick work, which joined the City to the Borough, built
in honor of Octavian Augustus. There are likewise some marks of the old Port,
now only of use for little Boats, the greatest part thereof being filled up
with earth. The said City is adorned with commodious Fabrics, among which
appear nobly some Palaces built by the family of Malatista, who swayed there
many years, and the Church of St. Francis, all of marble within and without
with noble statues, embossed works, and infinite cuts of Greek marble, built
by Sigismond Pandolphus of the said Family of Malatista, many other noble
Families do likewise there conserve their ancient splendor.

The place of this City is remarkable now, with a very fair remembrance of her
Majesty's passage, erected in marble, with the Arms of Pope Alexander the 7.
and the Queens, by Doctor Angelino Angel^ni of the following tenor. In the
reign of Pope Alexander the seventh, Christina Queen of Swedland, embracing the
Catholic Religion of her own accord, and devesting herself of her Kingdoms,
in her journey to Rome, to yield obedience to the Pope, passed through Rimini,
in the year of our Lord, 1655 in the month of December, in perpetual memory of
the thing, Angelinus de Angelinis I. C. Arim.

Her departure from Rimini.
The next morning, though it rained, her Majesty departed from Rimini,
accompanied, as she always had been, by the Cardinal Legate to Cattolica, a
place on the confines, between Romagna, and the Dukedom of Vrbin, where she
staid, and here the said Cardinal gave her Majesty a collation of sweet meats,
and took leave of her, who left him highly satisfied of her courteous
acceptance.

Cardinal Acquaviva is of very noble birth, and one of the chief families in
Naples, who as he is composed of honor, and a sweet disposition, so abounds
with all courtesy, The worthy qualities of Cardinal Acquaviva Legate of
Romagna.
and generosity. After several Prelaticall dignities, and Governments
performed with much praise, he was worthily advanced to the purple on the 2. of
March. 1654.

The Queen was met at Cattolica by my Lord Gaspan Lascari, She was met by my
Lord the vice-Legal of Pesaro.
a Gentleman of Nizza, full of honor and courtesy, nephew to the great Master
of Malta, and vice-Legat of Urbin. He appeared attended by a Company of
Curiassers, commanded by Count Alphonsus Santinelli, the Principal Cavalier of
the City of Pesaro, who afterward waited on her through all that state. Here a
good body of soldiers reduced into order, gave her Majesty many voleys of shot
in her passage.

From hence she advancing to Salicata, And afterward by Cardinal Homodei.
was met by his Eminence Cardinal Lewis Homodei of Millan, the Legate of Urbin,
with 12. Coaches with 6. Horses a piece, full of principal Gentlemen, fifty
Switzers afoot of his guard, and above a hundred eminent Gentlemen a horseback,
with rich and splendid clothes, and fine liveries. Among these were Count
Hanibal Thiene a Cavalier of Vienna, Count Hippolitus Santinelli Cosen to the
said Count Alphonsus, the Counts Francis Maria, and Lodovick Santinelli,
brothers, and in fine the Counts Bernardino Ubard^ni, Francis Maria Lunardi,
and Luti^, as likewise Signior Francis Maria Bonamini, all persons very nobly
descended, sprightly, generous, and lively.

The Cardinal alighting out of his Coach, did complement her Majesty, who
likewise coming out of her own, received him with great courtesy, and
affection. Every one returning to their Coaches, they continued their journey
toward the City.

At the gate they found Signior Giulius Caesar Vattielli, Her reception in
Pesaro.
and John Andrew Olivieri Gentlemen of good grace, and both chief
Standard-bearers, with six other Seniors of the Magistrates, who came on
horseback in their usual long robes of black velvet like Consuls, accompanied
by twenty Gentlemen clothed likewise very honorably in black, with 4 trumpets,
and 24. Grooms with very fine liveries of Carnation Cloth, trimmed with great
gards of white velvet. When the Queen approached, they alighted from their
horses, advanced to the Coach, and complemented her Majesty, who stood up, and
answered them very courteously. The Queen entered into Pesaro about the
evening, and welcomed with many vollies of Ordnance and Muskets, alighted at
the Dome, where the Legate expected her, who in have went the shortest way
before her.

She descended at the chains before the Church, and Kneeling on a cushion
prepared for her, Kissed reverently the Cross presented to her by the Bishop,
and thence went into the Church, under a Canopy carried by the principal
Gentlemen of the City, while the clergy, that went before, began the usual
Anthem, She is beautiful etc. Which ended, the Musicians sang Te Deum with a
very rare consort of voices and instruments, which her Majesty heard kneeling,
near whom on a great Cushion the Cardinal Legate was kneeling, and a little
more distant from him, the four Nuntij and Spanish Ambassador. When the Te
Deum was ended, the Cardinal descended the steps of the Altar, and gave the
sollemn blessing, after which the Legate putting off his cope waited on the
Queen, leading her by the arm to her chair, in which she was carried to the
Palace, his Eminence with the Nuntij aforesaid going before her in his Coach.

At the stairs stood eight Pages with lighted torches, and on the top at the
entrance into the hall, a very fair Company of the principal Ladies met, and
paid their respects to her Majesty who encompassing her, did reverence, and
attend her to her lodgings, whither the Cardinal conducted them, who taking
his leave, she was left to her repose.

In the mean time the artificial fireworkes began to Play in the Piazza, which
with admirable order, was light all the night, and the streets too abounded
with lights.

The same evening the Gentlemen and Ladies had a ball in the Queens Chamber,
where the foresaid Counts Francis Maria, and Lodowick Santinelli Brothers,
danced a galliard with the Lady Mary Camilla Disploratatii, but because they
danced with their Cloakes, and their swords, the Queen desired them, for her
greater satisfaction, to lay them aside, to the end she might the better
observe them, which accordingly they did, and danced a galliard, which so
pleased her Majesty, that she seemed desirous to see them Dance the Canaries,
so as they with the Lady Emilia Vrbani, performed it smoothly, and with
admirable grace.

Before they began the said ball, the Cardinal Legate presented to the Queen
(to whom it was dedicated) a Printed book of several verses composed by Count
Francis Maria Santinelli, the greatest part of which were in praise of her
Majesty, who was much taken with it, and kindly accepted it, commending it as
the birth of a great spirit, and eminent wit, as it generally was held:

Her Majesty sup't afterward privately in her Chamber, where she heard most
rare consorts of instruments, among which was a violin, and arch-lute, which
delighted her extremely, whereupon she received one of them into her service,
called Anthony Maria Ciacchi of Sienna.

The next Morning she went to the Monastery of St. Catharine, and heard Mass in
that Church, where she heard the rare Music of those Nunns, two of which are
reputed very exquisite. The went afterward into the Monastery, to the great
consolation, and extraordinary content of the Nuns, who could not praise enough
her Majestyes affability and courtesy.

That day she dined in public with the Cardinal, She dines in public.
sitting under a cloth of State, and in the same manner they had used in other
places, Count Francis Maria Santinelli was her Sewer of honor, after the
fashion of Germany, as the Prince of St. Gregory had been in Ferrara, and Count
Bernardin Ubaldini her Cupbearer. Count Hanibal Thiene presented her the
napkin, and Signior Francesco Maria Bonamini changed her plates.

After dinner her Majesty took pleasure in beholding a Spanish Ciaeona, which
was danced with a grace, agility, and incomparable dexterity, by Count Lodowick
Santinelli, and she was likewise pleased to like certain Plays, called the
forces of Hercules, performed by some persons most nimbly and handsomely.
Having afterward been abroad to see some other Churches, and Monasteryes of
Nuns, in her return to the Palace, she was introduced to behold some Academical
and Comicall representations, the extravagancy and novelty of which pleased
wonderfully the Genius and gust of her Majesty, Her Majesty is highly satisfied
with the demonstrations she received in Pesaro.
so as it is no wonder, this Princess said afterward in public at Rome, that
of all the great honors she received in the places where she passed, none
arrived to the excess of her satisfaction, but those that were done her in
Pesaro,

All the compositions were the fruits of the wit, and the Pen of the foresaid
Count Francesco Maria Santinelli, a Cavalier, as conspicuous for his ancient
Nobility, as esteemed for the vivacity of his spirit and rare parts.

These actions were ended about seven hours in the night, at what time her
Majesty supped privately, and went to her rest. On the following morning the
fifth of the month, the Queen, with her accustomed civility, honored the Nuns
of St. Mary Magdalen with her presence, hearing Mass in their Church, and the
excellent Music they made her. She departs from Pesaro highly satisfied with
the honors she received.
After dinner she departed to Sinigaglia, attended by the Cardinal in Coach,
with the same train of Coaches, Gentlemen on horseback, and guards of the
Switzers, the foot Soldiers standing within, and without the City in squadrons
and files, and discharging from the walls many Canon, Morter-pieces, and
Muskets, as they had done at her Majesty's entrance.

Pesaro is a noble City, populous, The description of Pesaro.
full of Traffic, and abounding with Gentlemen of great worth and civility.
It Is seated on the Sea in a cheerful Situation, and very pleasant Prospect,
all in a plain, and for many miles severed from the Hills and the Mountains.
The walls are good, with rampards and strong Bullwarks, besides a fine rock
built by Giouanni Sforza long since, who at other times was Master of the
Place. The Port though decayed, is of use to little Boats carrying Merchandise
to Venice and other parts. This City was last of all possessed by the noble
Family of Rovere, but it failing in our days of male issue, returned to the
Church, as feudatory to it. Here for 9. months in the year the Dukes used to
dwell, who had for that purpose built a Palace truly royal.

The Queen took the way of Fano, on the Confines of which she found my Lord
Bargellini of Bologna, a Person of great worth, and Governor of the City,
accompanied by Signior Luigi Rixadducci, and Count Hanibal Montevecchio the
principal Gentlemen. The other stayed behind to wait on the Magistrates, of
which Signior Scipio Forastieri was chief, and the Prior Alexander Castracani,
and Cavalier Peter Soldati.

To receive her with more honor, a Gate walled up, was opened, and beautified
with several Ornaments, and among other things, they saw under his Holynesses
arms, the following inscription.

D. T. V. His Holiness Alexander the seventh ruling. P. O. M. Peter Bargellinus
the Governor in the year 1655. that Chr^stina Queen of Swedland in her passage
through the City, might have a nobler entrance, caused the Gate to be opened
for her Majesty's reception.

Here she was received by the Magistrates, accompanied by a noble and numerous
train, and attended to the Palace of the Governor, where the Coaches standing
round in the Court, her Majesty not alighting, rare sweet meats were presented
her in many silver Basins, of which she tasting some, gave two Basins to Count
Hanibal Thiene, giving order the rest should be distributed among the Cavaliers
that accompanied her.

Fano is a little City encompassed with strong walls, partly antique, The
description of Fano.
and partly modern toward the Seas, with a Bulwark erected by Pope Julius the
third in a plain Situation on the shore, famous for the Temple of Fortune, who
there was adored, and for the remains of the Arch of Augustus. Not far off runs
the river Metaurus, and there are yet the relics of some memorable places for
the accidents occurred in times past.

There Asdruball the brother of Hanibal of Carthage was killed, and Totila King
of the Goths overcome, and wounded by Narsetes, dying afterward in the
Mountains of Appenninus near the Fountains, where the noble river Tyber has
its source. This City abounds with a sprightly Nobility, and very fair
structures, and here the two Countesses Martinozzi, were borne, neeces to his
Eminence Cardinal Mazarine, Ann and Mary the wife of his Highness Prince
Armand of Conty of the royal blood of France, and Laura married to the Prince
of Este eldest Son to the Duke of Modena. The Family of Mart^nozzi is ancient
and noble, having formerly been one of the four noble Families of Sienna,
renowned in history, as it has likewise been for the space of 300. years
esteemed the principal in Fano. It Is evident in writings, and public
inscriptions in marble seen by me, that in the year 1364. Julius Martonozzi as
chief of his Country, accompanied in the name of the public to Rimini, the
Nephew of the Emperor of Constantinople, as it likewise more particularly
appears in the proofs of nobility made by Vincent Rinalducci of that City, a
Cavalier of Malta, allied to the said Family of Martinozzi in the person of
Laura, sister to Count Vincent Martonozzi, Grandfather on the Fathers side to
the said Princesses, and Grandmother to the said Cavalier.

The Queen leaving Fano, and saluted by the Canon, Mortar-pieces, and Muskets,
and reveren^*t by all the Militia, continued her journey toward Sinigaglia,
where she arrived after the setting of the Sun, in such rainy and windy
weather, that in hindered the volley's of Shot for her welcome to the City.
whose Gates, Walls and Streets abounded with arms. She went directly to the
Palace of the Signior Bavieri, the principal Gentlemen there prepared for her
lodgings, the train being quartered in other neighboring houses. Here she was
met by the Ladies of the City, among whom was a Niece of his Eminence Cardinal
Chembini, who being unable to wait on her Majesty, by reason he was sick in
Montalbotto his Country, gave seasonable orders for accommodating that
lodging. Here besides the bonfires and lights, which that evening were seen for
her Majesty's entertainment, a ridiculous short Comedy was acted in her Chamber
by the Count Francis Maria Santinelli and Lodowick his Brother, which was
ordered in one night by Count Francis Maria, for the pleasure of her Majesty
who seemed desirous of it.

After the Comedy she likewise desired to see the agility of these two
Cavaliers, which they showed in vaulting, and their skilfulness in fencing
insomuch that as virtue accompanied with nobility, not only disposes, but
forces the minds of great Personages to affection, so this Princess with her
generosity, and refined understanding, reflected on these Gentlemen's qualityes,
and abilityes to serve her. Having therefore had full information by the
Cardinal, of the ancient nobility of their Family, in which in each age, they
have had men of eminent valor, as Count Sforza Santinelli, Knight. of Michael
under Charles the 8. King of France, which was then the first order, and Count
Julius Caesar Santinelli great Prior of M^ssi^a for the noble Knights of Malta:
she first by Holstenius and afterward by the Ambassador Pimentel, desired
them to serve her, whereupon they glorying in the honor of her Majesty's
service, showed a readiness to obey her, and a little while after overtook her
in her journey.

Sinigaglia is a City of small compass, but fortified with strong Bulwarks,
ditches and breast-works on the side toward Fano having a chanel which divides
it, and serves for a haven to little barks. It has likewise an old rock
toward the Sea, fortified with thick and strong Towers for its greater
security.

The Queen departing hence in her Coach with the Cardinal Legate, and attended
by all the foresaid train, arrived at the Confines of the legation, where she
found Signior Giorgi of Fano, master of the Camp of Pesaro, with a very good
body of foot in array, who welcomed her Majesty with a very fair volley of
shot, where she thanked the said Legate for her noble entertainment, declareing
herself highly satisfied with him.

The remarkable qualities of Cardinal Homodei.
We may truly say, this Cardinal is the Idea of valor and goodness it self. He
is of a joviall presence, of a noble behavior, most courteous and sincere, and
justly reputed for his wisdom, prudence and experience in business, very
capable of any great employment. He is called by the title of St. Alexius, was
Clerk, and Deane of the Chamber, had many offices under Pope Urbane, and in
that of Commissary General of the Army in the Ecclesiastical state, gave
great testimony of his zeal and his valor. In the Reign of Pope Innocent, he
exercised his qualityes with that virtue and freeness, that compassing the ends
of his great undertakings; without suffering a sword to be drawn, he
deservedly was preferred to the purple oh the 19. of February, 1652. This
eminent dignity has illustrated his Person, but he with his candid behavior,
has very well answered its greatness. In his Legation of Urbin, he acted
entirely the parts of a good Prince. He every where has scattered the
treasures of his generosity, and being Protector of the Church of St. Charles
in the place called the Course, has been at great charge in beautifying and
adorning it most splendidly.

Between the burnt houses, and Flumicino, the Confines of the marches with the
state of Urbin, they met with the Marquis Tassoni, Governor of that Province,
a Cavalier of Ferrara of tried valor, who had with him many Officers of War,
and Gentlemen his friends richly clothed, together with a troop of horse for
his guard, whose soldiers, besides being very well armed and mounted, had
Cassocks with four wings of fine blue cloth, with four white Crosses hemmed
with Gold-lace.

Here likewise they found my Lord Francis Lucini of Millan, Her Majesty's
reception by the Governor of Ancona.
the Governor of Ancona, with a train of many Gentlemen a horseback, with
suitable rich clothes. Both the one and the other alighting with the Gentlemen
their Camrades did their duties to the Queen, Lucini was received into the
Coach of the Nuntii, and the Marquis rode before toward the City. As the Queen
passed along, she was welcomed by a body of four thousand foot, set in array by
the Marquis aforesaid, with five troops of horse flancking them in a fine and
martial manner. The rock of Flumicino saluted her Majesty with many tires of
Mortar-pieces, Captain Anthony Fasat with a troop of horse of the City of
Ancona, and Captain Magagnini with the troop of Jest preceding all the train.

The Queen arriving at the Gate, the artillery of the fortress, and the walls
of the City began to be discharged, which continued till her Majesty was
alighted at the Palace.

The Magistrates on horseback met her at the Gate, and complemented her Majesty
in their black Velvet Gowns, and with their foot clothes of the same richly
trimmed with Gold, being followed by a train of many Gentlemen on horseback,
with twelve Pages all Gentlemen of Ancona very finely adorned, and 24. Grooms
in the livery of the City, and twelve other Footmen in several liveries of the
Magistrates, and three Trumpets.

The Magistrates at that time were Count John Baptist Ferretti, Her reception
in Ancona.
Signior Tomaso Tomasi, Bela^dino Galli Knight of James, Signior Flamineo
Scalamonte, Captain Jerome Bompiari, and Signior Vincent Balestrieri both
Commenders of the order of St. Stephen. All these alighting from their horses,
in the name of the City did complement her Majesty, the said Count Feretti
speaking to her as their Prior. The Queen standing up received their
complement, with her usual and Majestique Civility.

The twelve Pages were left with her Majesty's Coach to attend her, the
Magistrates remounting, and continuing their journey toward the Apostolical
Palace. The soldiers stood in ranks along the streets, and the houses were
adorned with fine tapistries.

Being come to the Palace, she found in the first hall near the gate, the
Principal Ladies of the City, standing in a stately circle, who handsomely paid
her their respects, waiting on her to the door of her Chamber, whom her Majesty
received, and treated with all Kindness, and affability.

Having stayed a little while in her Chamber, it wanting then an hour to
night, she resolved to go see the famous Arch of Trajan the Emperor, all
wrought with fine Marble. The Senate and People of Rome erected it in honor of
him, of Plotina his wife, and Martiana his Sister, who were held in veneration
as Deities in that time, as by the inscriptions read there, may be gathered.

Her Majesty went thither in a Chair, attended by the Nuntii, and the
Governor in Coach, with others of quality. She was welcomed with many tires of
artillery from Rivellino, which is in the mouth of the Haven, from the Ships
and other Parts toward the Sea. In her Majesty's return she observed two
Arches of the Apostolical Palace, to wit, the first toward the place
repolisht of late, and with an old inscription which said.

It Is made Celestial, while the Princely Sun beholdes the Arche. And two great
Arms, one of the Pope now reigning, and the other of the Queen with the Motto
in the midst of them.

The Starr's and Wind favoring. In the second they read.

The immortal virtue of Christina Queen of Swedland raises me to a veneration
of her Majesty.

This Arch of stone reduced into the form of marble of Verona, was on the
superficies of the Pillars, Bases, Chapiters, and great medalls wrought in
Gold, and upon it were erected the arms of her Majesty between two great
statues, one representing the heroical virtue, and the other liberality, and
under that was written. By yielding she o'recomes, by flying quells her
enemies. And under the other, By parting with her Kingdom, she her Empire has
extended. And over the arms in a great thick Pastboard, By going it increases.

That evening about an hour in the night, all the Piazze, and streets being
resplendent with the fires and the lights, her Majesty went from her lodgings,
to those that looked into the Piazza. There near the stairs stood a painted
machine of wood 36. hands breadths high, which with six Mountains, a star,
and two Oaks, represented the arms of his Holiness. At the foot of these
Mountains was the Tyber, which under one hand held a great arms, out of which
instead of water, it actually cast wine, with the other supporting the arms of
the Queen, on which a Lion leaned. On the one side there was a Virgin, which
had recourse to the Tyber, and on the other a statue, which sustaining in her
hand Trajans Arch, represented the City of Ancona, this Motto being at the foot
of the Virgin, I return safe. This machine was full of fireworkes, which took
very handsomely.

The compositions made in Ancona. in honor of her Majesty.
Many compositions were made in honor of her Majesty, among which were certain
verses of Count Paul Ferretti a Cavalier of much virtue, and of an an^ient
Family and Noble, he descending from Ulderick Ferretti Lord of the County of
Ferretta, above Basil toward the County of Burgundy, who had a daughter
married to Albert the second Duke of Austria.

The Queen afterward supped in public in the room before the Chapel, with
the Nuntii and Spanish Ambassador, they taking place of him. Signior Stefano
Renincasa presented the water for her hands, and the Marquis Francis Tassoni
the napkin. The Commender Alexander Fanelli was Sewer, and Cavalier Caesar
Nappi her Cupbearer, and every time her Majesty drank, the signs being given
before, the Canon of the Fortress were discharged.

My Lord Lewis Gallo Bishop of Ancona, the principal Cavalier of Osimo a
person of tried prudence in the charges and mannagement of affairs, sustained
by him for the holy Sea, supposing the Queen, in order to his instructions from
Rome, should quickly have come to his Cathedral, which is the Church of St.
Ciriack, seated on one of those Promontoryes, caused it to be hung with rich
Tapistrye, and caused too the Altars to be decked with the pretiousest
Ornaments. But he could not have that honor, for the said Church being far off
from the Palace, and on a craggy Mountain, the Queen went not thither, but
instead of going thither, the day following, when she had heard Mass in the
Chapel of the Palace, she seeming desirous to see the famous Relics kept
there, the Nuntii by the Popes authority, gave order that to the said Chapel
of the Palace, two Canons should bring them with assistance of other Gentlemen,
and one was the tip of the iron of the lance, which opened the side of our Lord
Jesus Christ, left in Ancona by the Ambassador of Bajazet the Emperor of the
Turks in the year 1492, when he passed through that place toward Rome, where
he gave to Innocent the eighth the head of the spear of the same iron, the
other the right foot of St. Anne the Mother of the most glorious Virgin Mary,
with the flesh and the bones, given likewise to the said City by the Patriarch
of Constantinople Paul Paleolgus in the year 1380. the Queen kneeled before
them, and kissed them with great devotion. My lord Holstenius, who as Canon of
the Church of St. Peter had many times handled the relic of the said head of
the spear, not only assured her Majesty 'twas true, but likewise affirmed the
color of the rust was the same, as also Pope Clement the eighth passing
through Ancona toward Ferrara, had that of Ancona confronted with the other of
Rome.

The Bishop of Ancona visits her Majesty.
This function being ended, the Bishop went to wait on her Majesty, who received
him most courteously. After breakfast she continued her journey toward
Loretto, accompanied by the said Governor with all the retinue to the bridge
of Arciato the Confines of Ancona. The Magistrates waited not upon her, as at
her arrival, because the Master of the Ceremonies told them 'twas not
necessary.

At her going away she was saluted by all the Artillery, and departed highly
satisfied with her reception, and the honors done her by that noble City.

Ancona is seated on the side of a Mountain which extending it self into the
Sea, The description of Ancona.
makes a kind of Amphitheater. It has a great Haven, and defended as well from
the South-east-winds, as exposed to the Northern, at the head of which is a
Ravelin founded in the Sea, within which there is the space of above a thousand
feet, and the way thither is under the said Arch of Trajan

This City is fortified with strong walls, which are very well flank't, and a
Castle well built, which seated on the Mountain, commands the haven. The houses
and streets are somewhat narrow, but of very good architecture, and
industriously ordered, which make it fine and beautiful. The Citizens are
courteous and kind, particularly to Strangers, the commodity of the Sea
bringing thither good traffic, and all sorts of merchandise.

The Queen was met on the confines by my Lord Gentile the Governor of Loretto,
My Lord Gentile Governor of Loretto meets the Queen.
who when he had complemented the Queen in his Holynesses name, returned thence
diligently, to receive her at the gate of the City: As soon as the Queen had
discovered the top of the holy house, she alighting out of her litter, and
kneeling, with very great devotion, kissed often the ground, then returned into
her litter, The devotion of her Majesty toward the holy house
going on to the bending of the Mountain, where afterward she alighted again,
and walked to the Church.

The Queen arriving at the Gate of the City, was received by the said Governor
and the Magistrates, all the Artillery being discharged from the walls, and the
Muskets which were all in rows in the streets. At the gate of the Church she
was after the usual manner received by the Chapter, the Clergy and Bishop, Her
arrival at Loretto.
where her Majesty remained about half an hour, praying with great humility,
and afterward went to the Palace, where having supped privately, she retired
to her repose.

On the 8. of December in the morning she arising betimes went to Confession,
and heard Mass, being afterward present at high Mass, sung at the high Altar
with exquisite music. As soon as it was ended, The Queen makes a present of
her Scepter and Crown at Loretto.
she presented at the feet of the holy Image a Crown and royal Scepter empailed
with Jewels of great value.

This Princess could not perform the vows of her Christian generosity, with
more proper, and more significant representations. 'Twas fit, that if she, be
sure of the true and weighty Kingdom of Heaven, had renounced those on Earth,
should leave a rare remembrance of it in those tokens of royalty, of which she
had divested her self. And since she had done all for Christ's sake, it was
likewise necessary, she should leave to his mother, a dear and precious memory
of it.

After this she returned to her lodgings, and dined in public, to satisfy the
curiosity of the people, flock't thither in great throngs out of the Mark, and
the neighboring Countries. Count Ferretti of Ancona presented the water for
her hands, and the Lord Bernard Spada, Cardinal Spadas nephew, the napkin.
Count Bonarelli of Ancona was her Sewer, and Signior Urbane Rocci, Nephew to
Cardinal Rocci deceased, her Cupbearer.

Don Antonia della Cueva arrived at Loretto.
After dinner Don Antonia della Cueva, with the Lady his wife, arrived there,
who as we said before stayed behind in Ussulengo, by reason of her sickness,
being seen by the Queen with a joy, and content, correspondent to the love she
bare them Her Majesty went afterward to the Sacristy, where she admired the
treasure kept there of the rich Presents made to that house by the religious
Piety of several Princes, and Gentlemen. As she passed by the great cupboord,
in which were the Scepter and Crown presented by her, it was opened for her to
behold them, but with her usual generous modesty, she desired it might be
shut, she saying those trifles were unworthy to be seen. When she had seen the
treasure, and the rest of the curious things there, she returned thence to her
lodgings, where she was entertained with Music, and the Conversation of the
Nuntij, supping privately afterward.

The content, joy and tenderness, which her Majesty felt in that Sanctuary, are
incapable of expression. These are gifts reserved by Heaven, to let us
understand, that God alone with his gracious mercies can give us in this world,
a taste, though it be little, of the sweetness, he instills into a soul
enamoured of him. In the mean time his Holiness had received the letter, she
had written from Inspruch, as was said before, so as it being afterward
seconded, with the news of the Acts of Piety, performed in that place by the
Queen, his Beatitude was very much edified with those demonstrations. The said
letter was as follows.

Most Blessed Father,
Being arrived in the end, to what I desired so much, my reception into the lap
of our holy mother, The Queens letter from Inspruch to his Holiness.
the Roman Catholic Church, I would not be wanting to impart it to your
Holiness, humbly thanking you for the honor I received of your loving
Commands, which are observed by me, with all due respect to your Holiness,

I have manifested to the world, that to obey your Holiness, I have left with
great gladness that Kingdom, where to honor you, is held an irremissible sin,
and have laid by all humane respect, to make it appear, I value more the glory
of obeying your Holiness, than that of the most deserving throne. I beseech
your Holiness to receive me thus divested as I am of all greatness, with the
fatherly and accustomed Kindness, you have hitherto been pleased to show me. I
have here nothing else, to sacrifice to the holy feet of your Holiness, but my
self, together with my blood, and my life, which I offer to your Holiness with
that blind obedience, that is due, beseeching you to be pleased to dispose so
of me, as you shall judge best for the Public good of our holy Church, to
which and to your Holiness, as the only and true head of the same, I have
dedicated the remainder of my life, with a most ardent desire to employ, and
spend it wholly to Gods greater glory. To this end I wish your Holiness many
fortunate years, which are so necessary for the good, and Common repose of
Christianity, beseeching our Lord to conserve in your Holiness, the great gifts
he has given you, and to make me so happy, I may see the longed for day, in
which I may fall at the holy feet of your Holiness, which I humbly do Kiss,
entreating you to impart unto me your holy, and paternall benediction etc.

Your Holynesses most obedient Daughter, CHRISTINA.
Inspruch the 5. of November, 1655.

The description of Loretto.
The City of Loretto reduced into the Compass of a little Borough, on the edge
of a mountain, is fruitful. It Is form is somewhat long, at the head of which
toward the Sea, is the Church nobly painted, and in the midst of it the holy
house of the Virgin Mary, the most glorious Mother of Christ the redeemer of
the world. Before the gate of the said Temple is a handsome Piazza, and in the
middle of it a fountain, which throws up store of water. On the right hand are
the Governors Palace, and their habitations, who officiat in the Church. It Is
three miles from the Sea, and cheerfully seated, being fortified with regular
walls, and strong rampards, and flankt with great towers and bulwarks. Without
the gate is a little Borough, full of Inns and Chambers to be hired, for the
lodging of great store of people, who flock to this devotion continually, the
most venerable and miraculous of all Christendom.

From the top of this holy Mountain, the Queen was delighted in beholding, in a
very fine prospect, the Sea, many Castles, and Towns built here and there on
those Mountains and hills. She was pleased too in seeing toward Ancona, the
Promontory Camero, under which lies Sirolo, a place much renowned for the
famous Crucifix. She observed too the scituations of Osimo, and Urbin, and the
Castle of Cincolo built by Titus Labienus, of whom Cicero speaks bitingly.

On the 11th. in the Morning having break-fasted a little, She departs from
Loretto.
she departed from Loretto about 16 hours, being saluted by the Artillery, and
Muskets, and accompanied by the Governor to the confines of Recanati, where
she found some Coaches with six horses, full of the Gentry, my Lord Gallio
Son to the Duke of Alvito of Mollan, Governor of the Mark, a Person of high
quality, who when he had complemented the Queen, went into his Coach, and
returned to Macerata the Metropolis of that Province, and his residence, to
wait upon her there.

The description of Recanati.
The Queen passed through Recanati, a little City three miles distant from
Loretto, and seated on the ridge of a high Mountain, encompassed with hills and
little Mountains very pleasant, and fruitful, and begirt with old walls with
some ancient towers.

She was received at the gate by Signior Luigi Bighi the Governor, and the
Magistrates, the chief of which were Signior Marius Massucci Bonfrancesco
Vulpiani, and James Angelelli the principal Gentlemen. The streets not only
abounded with Soldiers standing in ranks, but were finely hung with
tapistries, though it rained very hard, and in that manner her Majesty was
accompanied to the other gate. She would have staid a little in this place, to
see in the great Church the Sepulcher of Pope Gregory the 12th. who in the
Council of Constance renounced the Papacy, but the weather being ill she
continued her journey.

Four miles farther in a very spacious field they saw by the order of the
Marquess Tassoni aforesaid, above 8000. Soldiers of horse and foot reduced
into squadrons, who with frequent volleys saluted her Majesty. She passing the
river Potenza, which divides and waters a fine and pleasant valley, bordering
on Mountains, and fruitful hills, arrived in the end at the Arch of Pio near
the gate of the City. The Arch Pio.
The foresaid Arch is so called as long since erected by the Cardinal Charles
Emanuel Pio of happy memory, who for his glorious Government of that Province,
was generally applauded and commended by the People.

By the said Governor Gallio, She is met at Macerata.
and the Magistrates, her Majesty was met with many Gentlemen on horseback, and
the said Magistrates complemented her with all due respect.

The Arch was beautified with Pictures, Figures, Mottos, Hieroglyphics, and
Inscriptions, in the praise and honor of her Majesty's arrival, the streets
being richly adorned, and the Soldiers standing in ranks. Twelve Pages of the
principal families were nobly attired to attend on her Majesty.

She is complemented by the Ladies.
The Queen went in her litter to the Palace her lodging, where many handsome
Ladies, most splendidly apparrelled, waited on her, on of them called Sigra
Girolama Ciccelini complementing her Majesty in the name of the rest, which the
Queen very courteously returning, they went to their houses, and her Majesty
supped privately.

On the 12th. in the Morning she arose betimes, and according to her custom,
went to the Church of St. Julian, which is the Cathedral, where the Bishop my
Lord Silvestri had erected a fine Arch with various Figures, Mottos, and
Inscriptions in praise of her Majesty. At her entrance into the Church, she was
received at the gate with the usual ceremony of the Chapter and Clergy, and Te
Deum was Sung with most excellent music. Afterward she heard Mass, and
returned to the Palace, where when she had breakfasted, Her departure from
Macerata.
she advanced toward Tolentino ten miles remote. At her going away, she was
accompanied by the said Governor to the confines of that Dioces, and saluted
by the Soldiers with Morter-peices and Muskets, her Majesty being very well
satisfied with the honors that City had done her, the most noble and most
famous of the Marck, which is indifferently big, and seated on a Mountain, but
not steepy, and large, where the Governor of the Province resides.

From Macerata her Majesty advanced toward Tolentino, She advances to
Tolentino.
on the confines of which they found three thousand Soldiers by order of the
Marquess Tassoni, reduced into squadrons by the Sergant Major Mutius Campani.

Being arrived at the gate of the City, my Lord Francis Maria Monaldi the
Governor waited on her, as likewise the chief standard bearer, Doctor Nicholas
Rotilini, and the Priors Signior Joseph Gualtieri, Signior Anthony Capiccioni,
and Bartholmew Martini, with the rest of the Magistrates, and the principal
Persons of the Town. Her Majesty passing afterward through the streets, which
abounded with Soldiers, and were hung with tapistries, alighted at the Church
of St. Nicholas, where she was received with the accustomed ceremonies, and saw
both the arms and the hands of the said Saint, She visits the Church of St.
Nicholas.
the Porrenger he used to eat in, and his miraculous blood, which as it is
affirmed, has often been seen to melt, and to move, when some sinister
accident befell Christianity, as it happened, when the Turk got the Kingdom of
Cyprus, and lately Canea in the Kingdom of Candia. This relic is held in
great veneration, and kep't in the Altar of the Chapel of the Saint aforesaid,
and when it is showed, the Magistrates are by, who keep the keys of it. Her
Majesty went from the Church to her lodging in the Palace of Duke Sanesio,
which was splendidly furnished, where she did eat privately, and was
entertained by the Nuntii till supper was ready.

On the 11. of December when her Majesty had heard Mass, The description of
Tolentino.
and breakfasted, she departed from Tolentino with the train of my Lord Gallio
the Governor of the Province. This City encompassed with old fashion Walls and
slight Towers, is seated in the bottom of the said valley, watered by the River
Chianti, whose Bishop is likewise the Bishop of Macerata, the two Bishoprics
being united together.

The Queen advancing toward Camerino, went the way of Valcimarra, and
Saravalle, and arriving at Belforte a walled Town on a Mountain three miles
distant from Tolentino, found my Lord Casanatta the Governor of the City, a
horseback, accompanied by many Gentlemen and Cavaliers, and a troop of horse in
good equipage, who came to the Confines of his Government to receive her.

As soon as her Majesty appeared, he alighted and complemented her, waiting
on her all the way. Her reception in Camerino.
At Valc^marra they found 300. foot, and as, many more near the City, where she
was received at the gate by the Magistrates, the chief of which was Signior
Fulvius Magalotti, and by the College of the Doctors and Counselors, all very
well apparrelled, and attended with the principal Gentlemen of the City, with
Trumpets, Drumms, and many Soldiers standing in ranks in the streets, which
were hung with Tapistries, though it was rainy weather. Being arrived at the
gate of the Cathedral, she was by my Lord Emilius Altieri the Bishop, the
Chapter, and Clergy, received with the accustomed Ceremonies, and excellent
music, she went afterward to the Bishops Palace, her lodging, and after a
little repose sent for the Musicians, whose singing entertained her till supper
time, which was private.

All the streets and windows abounded with bon-fires and lights, but the
weather being ill, cold, snowy and rainy, her Majesty her self prohibited the
discharging of the Canon.

In the Hall of the Palace were fifteen of the principal Ladies, Count
Montecuccoli returns from Rome to her Majesty.
Sigra Margherita Morelli complementing her Majesty in the name of all the
others. That evening Count Montecuccoli returned from Rome to her Majesty, who
as we said before, had dispatched him from Ferrara to the Pope. In the Piazza
was erected an Arch triumphall with two great Pillars, over which appeared a
rainbow. The said Arch was adorned with various Figures and many Inscriptions,
and Mottos. The Queen lay in Camerino with part of her train, the rest going by
the valley to Valcimarra, to avoid that uneasy ascent. On Sunday the 14. of
December her Majesty arose before day, and went to hear Mass, then returning
to her lodging, and breakfasting, she departed accompanied, and always
attended by my Lord the Governor, She departs from Camerino.
and the Soldiers a horseback to the Confines, 300. foot being reduced into
squadrons at Muccia, as she passed along.

The description of Camerino,
The City of Camerino is seated on a hill in the amidst of Appenninus, being
encompassed with old walls, and almost wholly ruinous. Toward the South it is
guarded by an ancient rock, the then Commander of which was Signior Giouanni
Maria Benigni of that City, in the room of the Cavalier his Brother, the
Artillery of which was taken away by Pope Urbane the eighth of happy memory in
the time of the War. The Palace, where the Governor and Treasurer reside, is
somewhat ancient, but that of the Bishop modern and handsome. This City in times
past was governed perpetually by the Family of Varani, and in the year 1518.
erected into a Duchy, and given to Giouanni Maria Varani the last of this
Family, who left but one daughter called Julia, borne of Catherine Cibo neice
to Innocent the eighth, and married to the Duke of Urbin, who being master of
it, resigned it to the Apostolical Sea, by exchange for Sin gaglia. Afterward
another of the Family of Varani pretending to it by inheritance, as included in
the former Concession, it was granted by Pope Paul the 3. to Pier Luigi Farnese
his kinsman, who was invested Duke of the Place, and finally in the year 1344.
changed it for the states of Parma and Piacenza.

My Lord Marazzani the Governor of Umbria, coming from Perugia, the place of
his residence, to those Confines, appeared at Collefiorito, accompanied by a
very noble train of Cavaliers, and attendance, and complemented her Majesty
who was saluted by 300. foot Soldiers, and dined at the new houses, where by
the good order of Signior Baldocci, she was royally entertained, She arrives at
Foligno.
and arrived about an hour in the night at Foligno.

At the Gate of the City she was met by my Lord Cucc^ni Romano the Governor,
and the Magistrates who received, and waited on her, being accompanied by
twelve Pages very splendidly apparrell'd, with lighted Torches in their hands,
appointed for her Majesty's service.

She lay in the Palace of the Venturini, but at the charges of the Apostolical
Chamber, and by order of my Lord Marazzani aforesaid. Before the gate of the
Palace was an Arch supported by four Pillars with several Figures, Mottos and
Hieroglyphics explained in intilligible inscriptions. That City had prepared
several bon-fires, and things of that kind, to make their respects to her
Majesty more splendidly appear, and the like too the said Cities of Macerata
and Camerino had done, but the very ill weather, which continued still rainy,
hindered their effects.

The Queen at her entrance into the Hall, was received by many Ladies, one of
which complemented her in the name of the rest, all of them afterward waiting
on her Majesty to her lodgings, where she courteously dismissed them. The
content and concourse of the neighboring Cities was great, and particularly of
Perugia, for having the convenience of seeing so worthy and so virtuous a
Queen, where she supped betimes and privately.

Foligno is a City of little compass, with old fashion walls, The situation of
Foligno.
being pleasant, full of traffic, and very much frequented, especially in the
times of the Fair, which is very famous. Here they see that renowned gate, out
of which the Citizens expelled the Lumbards. It Is cheerfully seated in the
plain of a valley, which is one of the fruitfullest, and best cultivated of
any, it bordering on both sides on hills abounding with olive trees, vines,
fruits, and habitations, insomuch as it looks like a beautiful scene.

Her Majesty determining to go see the City of Assisi, She goes to Assisi.
to honor there the Temple of the seraphi^all Father Saint Francis, on the
13th. in the Morning after Mass, departed from Foligno, accompanied by the
Governor aforesaid, and all the attendance: At Spello she was met by two
troops of Launciers, She is met by Cardinal Rondinino.
and two others of light horsemen, and on the confines by Cardinal Paul
Emilius Rondinino the Bishop of that City, with several Coaches full of
Gentry, and many Pages, and Grooms in rich liveries of velvet, where they met
two other troops of horse, one of Launciers, and the other of Cuiraciers of the
City of Assisi, with others of the Province. The said Cardinal alighting out
of his Coach, when her Majesty was in sight, advanced toward her, but she
discovering him, caused suddenly her litter to stop, and alighting on a carpet
brought thither, and spread on the ground by the order of the Cardinal,
received his complement with signs of great esteem and affection. His Eminence
returning to his Coach another way, advanced to the City, to be ready to
receive her at the Church.

The Queen continued her journey, being saluted from time to time by the
Musketeers, reduced into squadrons in the most conspicuous places, and
particularly at St. Mary of the Angels. Thence approaching to the City, where
there were two other Companies like them, she was received at the gate by
Signior Granella Granella da Gualdo the Governor, and the Magistrates, who
complemented her. She advanced to the Church of Saint Francis, She visits the
Church of Saint Francis.
at her entrance into which, the Cardinal and Clergy performing the accustomed
ceremonies, she past to the high Altar, and having heard Mass, which was
solemnly Sung by my Lord Forreggiani, one of the four Nuntij, with exquisite
Music, went into the secret sacristy to reverence the holy veil of our
Savior, and the other famous relics, which are kept over the Altar of the
said Chapel.

Her Majesty saw likewise the famousest records of that most holy Church, and
being afterward saluted again, with discharging of the Canon and
Mortar-peices, she went in her litter to the Palace of the Signior Giacobilli,
appointed for her lodging, where with her great, and royal affability, she
kindly received the dutiful tribute paid devoutly to her by the Ladies, She is
royally entertained.
who there were very numerous, and splendidly attired, and waited on her
Majesty to her Chamber. The said palace was furnished with fine and rich
tapistries, and on the top of the stairs was erected a fair lodge with a
prospect enrich't with many Figures, Mottos, and Inscriptions. In the mean time
the table was furnished with transparent works of jellys, and statues of
Sugar, which were so well designed, so mysterious, and remarkable, that they
gave both pleasant nourishment to the body and mind.

Her Majesty dined in public with the Cardinal, Signior Marcello Rondinini,
the Cardinals Brother being her Cupbearer, and Count Francis de gli Odoli,
Count Angelos Son the noble Cavalier of Perug^a, her Sewer, and Count Sforza
Fiumi of Assisi, presenting the napkin. To express the dainty meats, and
exquisite feast, it may suffice to say, they had what the earth, the air, and
the waters could afford, that was excellent good, and precious. While her
Majesty was at table, the Nuntij, the Spanish Ambassador, with the rest of the
great Cavaliers, and eminent Courtiers, were splendidly feasted in the Convent
of Saint Francis, where ten appartaments richly furnished were prepared.

When dinner was ended, her Majesty retired into her Chamber, and calling for
my Lord Holstenius, who was then returned from Saint Francis his convent, told
him, she desired to see once again one by one the triumphs, or statues of
Sugar, with which they had adorned the table, which were brought in all have to
her Majesty, who admired the workmans invention and wit. And since they were so
liked by her, who with her refined understanding, can discern in each thing
what is beautiful and good, it will not peradventure be displeasing to the
reader, to have a short description of it, without prejudicing other feasts,
where tables set out in this manner, we omitted to describe, as a thing too
long, and tedious peradventure.

The quality of some statues which set out, and adorned the table.
In one were represented the four Cardinal virtues, which supported in the
right hand on a Pillar adorned with embossed works a royal Crown, at the
corners of which Pillar sat four boys each holding up a Crown, and a Scepter,
and before the said Pillar were four meddalls adorned with embossed works, with
Chaplets of gold.

In another on a round Pillar the Goddess Pallas, who giving her spear and
helmet to a boy, stood presenting with her right hand in a reverent posture, a
Crown to the Queen, seeming to yield to her the superiority in the Sciences.
The said Pillar was adorned with embossed works covered with gold, among which
were distributed four Harpies of counterfeit brass.

They saw afterward a square pedestall adorned with gilt medalls in embossed
works, and Time lying along, on which in a little Pillar stood Fame, who
holding in her left hand a trumpet, held with the right over her head, a
meddall representing the Queen. She held Time bound with a chain of gold, who
covered with his robe many meddalls of Heroes, and being so bound, seemed
subject to the fame of her Majesty. At the corners of the pedestall four
flowers sprowted up in the form of a Pinetree, which budded our of feillage
work of gold, whose artificial posture showed art had emulated nature. In the
midst of the front of the pillar was a meddal of the color of a rose limn'd
with gold, with ornaments about it of several flowers distributed with
proportionable simmetry.

Then a clow'd was discovered in another, all resplendent with gold, on which
was extended the Chariot of the Sun, which drawn by four horses, was guided
by Apollo, who carried in his right hand a bundle of gilt ears of corn, over
which a little Angel supported a Crown of gold, and with the left hand held
the reyns of the horses finely barded with ribbands of gold and silver, a
little boy going before them in the air with a torch in his hand denoting the
dawning of the day.

There was besides another round Pillar, on which a silver cliffe squezed his
locks wreathed with laurel, the extremity of the Figure ending in a rock, on
which grew a palm tree dilating it is boughs over it, and was with the left hand
embraced by the same, the right hand pointing to the herbs it produces for the
service of Kings. About the Pillar were carved four little ones, where were as
many little boys with Coronets of Cedar, within which they discovered the
leaves of the flowers sustained by the round Pillar, four Harpies of brass with
gilt Spanish olives, and a Chaplet of gold in their hands, presenting each a
dish of Pomegranates, which afterward was intermixed with Pineapple kernells
in a little gilded Chaplet joined to the feillage work of other fruits the
earth does produce, with carvings adorned with gold.

When her Majesty had seen and attentively gazed on the said triumphs, she said
one of them was wanting, which the Cardinal had sent to my Lord Sarvantij one
of the Masters of the ceremonies to his Holiness, who lodged without the
palace, but her Majesty desiring to see it, it was quickly brought to her.

This represented Immortality, which on a square Pillar adorned with antique
faces of gold, held up with her hands over her head a gilt circle, within which
was a meddall with the Picture of her Majesty, as one that had no confines, but
what were assigned her by eternity. Three boys stood distributed on the brims
of the dish, one of which representing painting on a table of gold, made her
Picture with the pensill, the other signifying sculpture carved her in marble,
and the third denoting history with the pen, made characters on a book, all
three showing jointly, they were busy in perpetuating the name of her Majesty.
Among them were three little vases, adorned with antique faces covered over
with gold, which held gilt ears of corn, and in the space between the boys,
and the vases, flowers of Sugar budded forth of admirable workmanship, all
resting on candid Sugar, which ended in a very fine Chaplet.

The Queen took great pleasure in beholding these rare pieces, not because they
contained her praises, whose modesty and generosity contemnes all applause and
Commendation, but only for the invention, and excellency of the workmanship.

She visits the Church of the Angels.
These things being ended, her Majesty accompanied by the Cardinal went to
visit the Church of the Angels, and permitting not his Eminence to go farther,
it being then late, went into her litter, and advanced toward Foligno, being
very well satisfied in having beheld that famous devotion, and known the
civility, and eminent qualities of the Cardinal, The qualities of Cardinal
Rondinino.
a Person abounding with the virtues, suitable to an Ecclesiastical
magnanimous, and accomplished Prince.

This Gentleman nephew to Cardinal Lodowick Zacchia of happy memory, was born
in Rome, and finished there his studies in humanity, and philosophy in the
Roman College, under the fortunate discipline of the Jesuits, accomplishing
those of the law in Perugia, where he was in the mean time made Clerk of the
Chamber by Pope Vrbane the eight. When he had administered many offices of that
Tribunal, he likewise performed with Cardinal Raggi, the charge of Treasurer
in the place of Cardinal Rapaccioli, who was Commissary of the Soldiers,
after which on the 12th. of July, 1643. he was preferred to the Purple with the
title of Saint George, and Pope Innocent the tenth conferred on him the
Bishopprick of Assisi.

This City is seated on the side of the Mountain Asius, The description of
Assisi.
which in a bending line by the side of a high hill, derived from the said
Mountain Asius, extends it self a mile long from the East to the West, lying
wholly toward the South, and though at the head, and the shoulders, it is
environned with Mountains not uneasy, and rich in fruitful Pastures, it has
fertile hills at the slanke, and finely arrayed and a most pleasant plain at the
feet, which no less for it is greatness, than fertility, is one of the most
beautiful, and best parts of Jtaly.

She returns to Foligno.
Her Majesty returned to Foligno about three hours in the night, being met by
the Governor, the Magistrates, and part of her own train, which staid there,
the night being resplendent with many fireworks, and her Majesty Supping
privately. The Morning after the 14th. of the month* she went to the Dome, at
the gate of which she was received in the usual form by my Lord Montecatini
the Bishop of that City. That Church was very splendidly adorned, where her
Majesty heard Mass, then visiting the said Church of the Nunns, where she heard
a little Music, she returned to the Palace, and dined there in public, for
their satisfaction, who desired to see her at dinner.

The end of the Fifth Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The Sixth Book.
The Argument.
FRom Foligno the Queen goes to Spoleto, where she is royally treated, by
Cardinal Fachenetti. She goes to Terni where she is waited on by my Lord
Bonfiglioli the Governor of that City, she passes to Gallese, and is met by my
Lord Visconte Governor of the Patrimony, she advances to Caprarola, where she
receives the complements of the Spanish Ambassador, and thence goes to
Bracciano, and finally to Olgiata, whither the Cardinal Legates a latere come
to complement her Majesty, and conduct her to Rome, where she makes her
private entrance, and is received by the Pope with all courtesy. She makes her
solemn entrance into Rome.

AFter dinner her Majesty departed from Foligno to the Confines, being
accompanied by my Lord Marazzani, She departs toward Spoleto.
and all his retinue, and waited on to the gate by the Magistrates of the City,
and saluted by the Canon, Mortar-pieces and Muskets, the Soldiers standing in
squadrons and ranks in several places. Then continuing her journey through
that fruitful Valley, she dismissed on the Confines the Prelate aforesaid,
seeming very highly satisfied with him. And here she was met by my Lord
Capecelatro a Neopolitan, brother to the Duke of Sejano, Governor of Spoleto,
who having with him a great train of Gentlemen, and two troops of horse,
complemented her Majesty.

Three miles without Spoleto, Cardinal Caesar Fachenetti the Bishop of the
City, Cardinal Fachenetti meets her.
came out to meet the Queen, accompanied by my Lord Faustus Poli of Spleto the
Bishop of Amelia, the Governor of Orvieto, the Prince of Gallicano, and many
Gentlemen. The two Prelates aforesaid were there expressly to assist in this
service the Cardinal. The Prince came from Rome on the 11. in the evening, on
purpose to wait on her Majesty, and being himself lodged in the Palace of the
Bishop, gave place to her Majesty's train, and retiring into the house of a
Gentleman his friend met with the opportunity of paying his respects to the
Queen, who received him very courteously, having known long before his
deserving, and eminent qualities.

The Cardinal having complemented her Majesty returned into his Coach, and
went before, to be ready to receive her in his Bishopric, who before she
arrived at the gate, found many thousand Soldiers in squadrons, who saluted
her with volleys of shot. The Magistrates appearing with the Pomp peculiar to
the sprightly inhabitants of Spoleto, presented her Majesty with their humble
respects at the gate of the City, who caused the Coach to be stopped, and kindly
received them. Diverse Arch triumphalls were erected in the streets, which were
all adorned with Figures, Inscriptions, and other sprightly Mottos. Among all
the foresaid Arches, the remarkablest was that, which was repaired over an
ancient gate of the City, where besides the Inscription set there, in honor of
the Queen, there was another alluding to the place where Haniball of Carthage
after the battle won at Thrasymenus, desiring to advance toward Rome, was put
to flight, whereupon the same gate retains to this day the name of the gate of
the flight.

The Queen passed through the Piazza reduced into the form of a Theater. The
circuit of the laterall Portici was enclosed with two great gates, in each of
which were Inscriptions, Mottos, and fine Figures. This Theater was made at the
charge of the Gentlemen of the City, incited by the generous example of the
Cardinal, who first of all contributed to the work. They did it supposing the
Queen would have come thither by night, the better to see the fireworkes, which
were placed upon it, and played the same evening. On the great gates of the
Theater were the Arms of the Queen, with several Mottos of the Kingdom of
Swedland, on the one side her Majesty, and on the other the King her Father,
both on horseback.

The Queen being entered the Palace of the Bishop, She is waited on by the
Ladies of the City.
met a very noble company of Ladies, who having had before of the Cardinal, a
splendid collation of sweetmeats, were assembled together to wait on her
Majesty. At her entrance into the Hall, they all kissed her hands, and were
received by her with the greatest affability, her Majesty being pleased they
should be present, and sit at a musical consort, which was in her own Chamber,
and served for her Majesty's entertainment that night.

The subject represented Faith triumphing, which having sent three Persons to
Sing the Queens Praises, appeared at last inviting her to enter into the little
ship of St. Peter.

The Queen with some of her Domestiques, lay in the Bishops Palace, the Nuntij,
the Ambassador Pimentel, Count Montecuccoli, and the other chief Gentlemen,
being distributed in several private houses, in every one of which were
Gentlemen of the City deputed to their service. The direction of these lodgings
was committed to the care of Signior Joseph Pallettonio, a Gentleman of much
spirit and active, with the assistance of whom, and the Signior Vincent
Pianciani Treasurer of Perugia, and Nicholas Benedetti Treasurer of Spoleto,
all things were performed with good order, and punctuality.

On the 15th. in the Morning her Majesty attended by the Cardinal, the Nuntij,
the Ambassadors, Prelates, Princes, and all the Nobility, went to the
Cathedral to hear Mass, She goes to the Cathedral.
the Soldiers standing in ranks all along in the streets. The porch of the
Church was beautified with Figures, Inscriptions, Mottos, and other ornaments,
done by the Cardinal in the name of the clergy of Spoleto.

When Mass was ended, she returned to the Palace, and dined in public with
the Cardinal Signior Maffeo Rosari Master of the Camp of the Province, and
Gentleman of the City, presented her the napkin, She dines in public.
and the ancientest Magistrate in his habit, the water for her hands. The
Nuntij, the Spanish Ambassador, Count Montecuccoli, and the other chief
persons of the Court, dined at the same time in Gentlemen's houses, where they
were well attended, and had every thing in order.

Her Majesty resolved to go after dinner to the Church of the Dominicans, to
see many relics, and particularly the holy nail of our Savior, but the
great snow hindered all. On Wednesday in the evening her Majesty was pleased to
go to the Townhouse and hear there a play Sung in music by some young
Gentlemen of the City, with several machines and changes of Scenes.

She departs from Spoleto.
On the 16th. after dinner her Majesty departed from Spoleto, being attended by
the Cardinal some miles without the City, and the Governor to the confines of
the Dioces of Terni. When the Cardinal took his leave of the Queen, he told
him, she not only was highly satisfied With the honors he had done her, but
extremely well edified with the very great knowledge, she discovered in his
discourses with her.

The eminent qualities of Cardinal Fachenetti
This Cardinal is of Bologna, and of the noble family of the Marquisses
Fachenetti, being Pope Innocent the ninth's nephew's son. He was first
Referendarius, then Nuntio in Spain, where he gave a great testimony of his
understanding, and capacity. At his return to Rome, he was for his eminent
goodness and worth a little while after preferred to the purple on the 13th. of
July, 1643. He is one of those Cardinals, which hold up the glory of the
Sacred College, and the honor of the Church. He has a quick intellect, a
solid discourse, a settled judgment, and a refined prudence in the management of
great affairs. He has a grace and sweetness in all his entertainments, with
which he attracts the encomiums, and praises of all those that know him, he
having especially the generous mind of an Emperor.

The Citizens of Spoleto endeavored to welcome this great Queen, with all the
expressions of gladness and joy, and though to comply with the genius of the
Prince, the subjects sometimes use to turn the sincerest, and purest affection
into flattery, yet in this occasion, the people of Spoleto very fully
corresponded with their natural ingenuity, as well with a dutiful respect, to
second the good intention of his Holiness, as to show the partiality of their
ancient inclinations toward this Princesses great name. Those of Spoleto, as
the histories of greatest credit, report, are nobly descended, and happily
propagated of the relics of the Goths, who after the fall of their Kingdom
in Italy remained in Spoleto, as a City very nobly adorned, and augmented by
Theodorick their King. And albeit the hostility of Totilas may diminish, much
less renew afterward, the least sense of gratitude, yet the piety, and other
sublime qualities of this Queen, are advantagiously sufficient to repair very
fully whatsoever, the deadly remembrance of the cruelties of that King, had
demolished, and restore with ample recompense the memory of the benefits, this
Country so glories to have had from the North.

The description of Spoleto.
Spoleto is a famous City, and abounds with all things, being seated at the
head of a Plain toward the East, partly at the foot of the Mountains, and for
the greatest part on the Mountains themselves. It was in former times the
residence of the Princes of Lumbardy, and is now esteemed among the most
conspicuous provinces of Vmbria. Here they see the vast Palace of Theodorick
the King of the Goths, as likewise the foundation of a very fair Theater, and
of the Temple of concord, and without the City high and strong forms of
aqueducts, partly cut from the sides of Apenninus, and partly raised from the
bottom of the valley with arches of brick. The high roofes of the Cathedral
are remarkable there, the walls of marble the rock built in the Amphitheater,
and likewise the stone-bridg, which supported with great art, by 24. great
pillars, joined the highest part of the City to the rock, or to the
Amphitheater seated on another hill. Here her Majesty was entertained with
music, and particularly being pleased with the skill of Francis Joseph
Tomasini, who played on the Violin, received him into her service.

On the confines of Terni her Majesty was received by my Lord Bonfiglioli of
Bologna, Her reception at Terni.
the Governor of the City, who came thither accompanied by forty Gentlemen on
horseback, with many Servants a foot in fine liveries, he having with him many
troops of horse, and Companies of foot. The Queen being come to the gate called
Spoletana, was met by the Nobility, and among the rest by six Gentlemen, who
representing the Magistrates, complemented her in the name of the public, and
waited on her through the City, all along as she passed the streets, and
windows being beautified with ornaments and lights. At her arrival at the
Dome, she saw erected before that Piazza a triumphall Arch, with very fine
Inscriptions, and Figures in her praise. The Frontispiece of the Church annexed
to the Seminary, and the Palace of the Bishop, resembles a Theater, and is
beautified with thirty windows, which were splendidly adorned, and most of
them had two torches apiece with other lights.

At the gate of the said Cathedral her Majesty was received as usually by the
chief of the Clergy in the absence of the Cardinal Bishop, the Church being
richly set forth, and illuminated with great store of torches and candles, with
quires of rare music, and a young man of the house of Sciamanna reciting a
Sermon very handsomely.

The Functions of the Church being ended, the Queen by the foresaid my Lord
Bonfiglioli the Governor, was conducted to the Palace of the Bishop, very
sumptuously furnished by the Officers of the Cardinal Bishop, her Majesty
being pleased to hear in that fine Oratory a spiritual play recited to her
with excellent music.

Don Antonio della Cueva with the Lady his wife, and their train, were lodged
too in that Palace. The Nuntii with their retinue were accommodated in the
Palace of Signior or Ferdinand Sciamanna, the Spanish Ambassador Pimentel in
my Lord Ferentillis, Count Montecuccoli in Count Jerome Spadas, and the Marquis
Bentivogli in Signior Antonio Manasseis: Besides diverse Gentlemen were
distributed in the houses of the Marquisses Castelli, and so from hand to hand;
all the rest of the meaner sort were orderly lodged after 3. hours in the
night, the Nuntii informed the Governor of the necessity of her Majesty's
dining on the following Friday in Otricoli, a Town remote 15. miles, and though
the place was very incommodious, and wanted all sorts of Provision; the
Governor sent presently thither eight loaded mules, with Cooks Sewers, Cup
boord-keepers, Butlers, and all other necessary Servants, who travailling all
the night, arrived there betimes in the morning, to get all things ready that
were needful.

The honors done her in Terni.
The Queen supped privately in Terni, that night being attended by her own
Domestics. However the entertainment was regal, and abounded with exquisite
meats. The table was decked with several statues, and triumphs, which showed
in the beauty of the work and design, the excellency of the Roman spirit, and
gust. The Soldiers stood in ranks, all along, and gave her frequent volleys
with their muskets and mortal-pieces, all the City being resplendent with the
bon-fires and lights.

This City is little, but handsome, The description of Terni.
The circuit of which is not modern. The Territory is narrow, but fruitful, by
reason of the goodness of the soil, and abundance of waters, and being exposed
to the south, produces store of fruit, and excellent foul. The medows are
curthrice and four times a year, and afterward serve for Pasture. Here are
seen many Inscriptions in marble, which show it was a free City of the Romans,
and retains still some remains of the septentrional Nations. Cardinal
Rapaccioli is Bishop of the place, Who though confined Rome by his
indisposition, was not wanting though far off, to demonstrate large heart, his
great spirit, and natural generosity, in the fruits of his happy invention and
expressions of obsequious respects to her Majesty.

The Queen departed from Terni Her departure.
on the 17. in the morning, attended by my Lord Bonfiglioli, with some
Soldiers, and the train of the Gentlemen. But he went before to provide all
things fitting at Otricoli, so as because the straightness of the place was not
capable of so great a retinue, he with an ingenious shift, caused the people to
dine quickly by course, as they came, and sent them immediately away, to make
room for the rest, and avoid confusion. About twenty hours her Majesty
arrived, being received by the said Prelate, and many Soldiers, who standing
in their ranks, She dines in Otricoli
gave her volleys of shot, her Majesty alighting at the Inn, the narrowness
of which place afforded not that plenty and delicacie of meats, a noble
entertainment required.

The quality of this Place.
Otricoli at this time is a little Borough composed of several houses built
together on a Mountain a little above a mile distant from Tybur, which flowing
from those Mountains, dilates it self afterward here, in a spacious and open
Country.

After dinner her Majesty removed from Otricoli, and descending into the plain,
still keeping along the river, at six miles end, arrived at a bridge called
Filice, The Bridge Filice.
over which she passing the Tybur, came to a little Town named Borghetto,
appertaining to the Duchy of Ronciglione.

Here my Lord Bonfiglioli took his leave, She is met by my Lord Visconte.
and my Lord Vitellianus Viscont, the Governor of Patrimony met her Majesty
accompanied by a noble troop of Gentlemen, and many Soldiers a foot, and on
horseback reduced into squadrons, who when he had complemented her Majesty,
advanced to the foresaid bridge Filice, to receive her afterward at Bracciano,
a Town appointed for her lodging that night, Colonel Tofano the Governor of
the arms of Patrimony, ranking the Soldiers in the places he thought fittest
for a nobler reception.

Part of the Court remained in Borghetto, where they were very orderly and
commodiously treated. From the walls, and the Castle of this place, she was
welcomed with many volleys of shot, and some mortar-pieces.

The said bridge Filice is very finely built, large and long, in order to the
breadth of the Tybur, being made by Pope Sixtus the fifth, who from his first
name called it Filice.

She arrives at Gallese.
The Queen arrived late at Gallese, and alighted at the beautiful Palace of the
Duke of Altemps, the Lord of that Town, who royally received her. The
Frontispiece was resplendent with lights, as likewise all the streets, where
the Soldiers stood in ranks, and welcomed her with volleys of shot, which
were seconded with many mortar-pieces. Her Majesty supped privately, yet was
seen and admired by diverse Persons of quality, Her reception in Gallese.
who came from Rome thither to satisfy their impatient curiosity, where her
Majesty was served as nobly, as in any other place.

The description of Gallese.
Gallese is encompassed with old walls, and on the one side built on high,
where there is a deep ditch, with a rock on the other side, likewise walld, and
great Towers, and Ditches. The Tybur runs near it, some two miles only
distant, where there is a Port to carry Goods and Victuals to Rome. This City
by Pope Sixtus the fifth was erected into a Duchy, where there formerly was a
Bishop, but now it is united to Civita Castellana. She lodges in Caprarola.
The next morning after Mass she went to Caprarola appointed for her lodging on
the 18. of December, where she was received in the sumptuous Palace of the Duke
of Parma, the pleasure and curiosity of all, being wonderfully entertained, as
well with the strange architecture of the famous Vignola, as the Pictures and
rich Furniture.

In the Piazza before the Palace, was erected on a great pedestall, a high arch
supported by eight Pillars, which rested on another pedestall somewhat less
than the first. In the middle was a great statue with a bundle of ears of Corn
in its hand, the arms of her Majesty, and on the other side a crowned Lion,
under whom were diverse Mottos and Inscriptions in Italian verses, but nothing
succeeded very well, the continual rain, which fell in great abundance all
that day, and that night interrupting many other demonstrations of honor and
joy, which were prepared there.

The Spanish Ambassador goes to Caprarola to visit the Queen.
The Duke of Terranuova the Ambassador in ordinary in Rome for his Catholic
Majesty came hither expressly to wait on her Majesty, who received him with her
usual affability and kindness, after which he taking his leave, returned the
next morning to Rome. Her Majesty supped privately, being attended by her
Domestic Cavaliers, but exquisitely well treated, my Lord Visconte using all
diligence and means, peculiar to his singular ability. The foresaid Count
Santinelli arrived here, who received by her Majesty with her usual kindness
and courtesy, were declared Gentlemen of her Chamber.

Caprarola is an open Town, well built, and handsome, at the head of which is
the Palace of the Duke of Parma in an eminent Situation, of admirable
architecture and beauty. It has five fronts, and yet all the Chambers are
completely square, of which there is one very great, and contrived in that
manner, that one standing in one of the four corners, hears what another speaks
in all the other, though he speak very softly. It Is enricht with delicious
Gardens, and noble Fountains, and in fine is as sumptuous as any whatsoever in
Italy.

The same day her Majesty departed from Caprarola accompanied and attended by
all the retinue. She is met by the Duke of Bracciano.
Don Parlo Giord ino Orsino the Duke of Bracciano, and the Duchess his wife,
with 4. Coaches with six horses apiece full of Gentry, and 200. Cuirassiers
came to wait on her Majesty, as they had done at Oriolo a Town appertaining to
their jurisdiction, and after their complement advanced toward Bracciano, to
be ready to attend her in that beautiful Palace. The Queen at her arrival,
found the Soldiers in their ranks, who welcomed her with volleys of shot, as
she likewise was saluted with some pieces of Canon, and several mortar-pieces.
A little way off from the City were 18. Archers, and 18. Dutch men of the Dukes
guard, which accompanied her Majesty to the Castle, and always attended her.
At the Gate of the Palace, the nobleness of which was augmented with the riches
of the most sumptuous Furniture, stood the Duke, who covered, lead her Majesty
as she walked.

Her Majesty was entertained that evening, with a very grateful harmony of
Musicians, with which she was extremely delighted, as being very pleasing to
her Genius. She supped afterward in private, and retired.

The morning after, as she went from her lodgings to the Chapel to hear Mass,
she was lead by the Duke, and afterward carried in the Dutchesses chair to the
Piazza, where her Majesty taking Coach, went directly to Casale in Polzetta,
called Olgiata, a V^lla of Signior Filippo Franceschi a Florentine, where her
Majesty was to dine.

Bracciano is encompassed with Ditches, Walls, and Bulwarks, the greatest part
of which were made by Bartholmew d' Alviano when the City opposed the Army of
Alexander the.6. commanded by Duke Valentino. The fortress bearing the name of
the Castle of St. James, has regular Fortifications, but is of an old form,
being furnished with all necessary artillery and arms, with a Garrison of Dutch
men, two royal Appartaments, Gardens and other delights. The Situation is
pleasant on a Hill, and the Castle stands on a flinty Cliffe, which is hard to
be mined: On the one side it is washed with the lake Sebeto, on the banks of
which there are other Towns of the Duchy aforesaid.

The Duke and the Duchess by the way of Anguillara, advanced before the Queen
a quarter of a mile from Olgiata, where alighting, they gain paid their respect
to the Queen, who causing her coach to be stopped, received their complement, and
seeming to be highly pleased with it, told the Duke, they should meet again at
Rome.

His Holiness on the 29. of November declared in the Consistory two Legates a
latere to meet, and receive her Majesty, who were the Cardinal John Charles de
Medici, Brother to the great Duke of Toscany, and the Cardinal of Hessen, who
to the royal splendor of their births, have joined great and eminent
qualities, in the luster of their purple, representing the endowments, which
Heaven has so liberally given them. They were both appointed for that function
with his Holinesses Brief of the following tenor.

[ Alexander the 7. Pope. Beloved Sons, greeting, and Apostolical benediction.
Since the day is near, that that our beloved daughter in Christ Christina Queen
of Swedland, by the blessing of God, is approaching to Rome, we out of the
singular affection of our fatherly love and charity to the said Queen
Christina, desiring she may be received with greater solemnity, do with the
mature deliberation of our venerable brothers the Cardinals of the holy Roman
Church, and by their Counsel, and consent, with our Apostolical authority by
virtue of these presents, make, constitute, and depute you (whom the splendor
of your Families, and the approved qualities of your minds in diverse sorts
adorn) our Legates de latere, and of the Apostolical Sea, to go meet the said
Queen Christina, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Given at Rome at
Saint Peter's under the ring of the fisher the 29th. of November, 1655. in the
first year of our Papacy. The endorsement was: To our beloved Sons etc.]

When the Legates had advice the Queen was arrived at Bracciano, and would be
at Olgiata on the 19th. of December, they hastened their departure from Rome,
to execute their office, whereupon at the Palace of the Medici in the Piazza
Madama, all the train of both the Legates being assembled together, the
Cardinal of Toscani gave them so splendid a collation, and abounding with such
exquisite meats, that it might have been compared to a sumptuous and royal
dinner. He kep't open house, and profusely distributed bread, wine, flesh, and
sweet meats, to all that were there, though they were not of the train.

After that, the Civalcata of the Legates advanced, which for the great
quality, and condition of the Persons there present, and the rich clothes, and
liveries, with which they appeared, was extremely remarkable, and commendable.
It reached from the Palace of the Medici aforesaid, 200. paces without the gate
of the people, where they leaving, their horses took Coach.

Three trumpets, and a tabour preceded, with the led horses of Captain
Corradino, at the head of a hundred Cuirassiers well mounted and armed, with
his sword in his hand.

Five trumpets followed after, and a tabour of the Cardinal Landgrave, with
Cassocks of Scarlet fringed with thick broad lists of azure velvet bordered on
both sides with rich trimming of silver, which in that mixture of the red and
sky color made the show very handsome, especially by the waving of the thick
plumes on their heads, which enriched their hair, and their shoulders.

After these came the trumpets of the Cardinal de Medici, who had likewise
Cassocks of fine cloth of Cinnamon color, all trimmed with thick twists of
gold, which about twilight cast a mervellous luster.

The eyes of the spectators were greatly allured, with the appearance of a
numerous, and noble Company of Pages on high metalled coursers, trapped with
rich furniture of gold and silver, and suitable valizes. The pages, besides
their cloths trimmed all over with gold, had either their doublets of cloth of
gold, or embroidered with rich branched work.

Four trumpets of his Holiness followed after, with red Casocks listed with
gold, and about seventy Knights of the train of the Cardinal Legates, who with
their sumptuous clothes, and noble aspects, gave luster to all the retinue.
Among these were confusedly mingled, without any order of precedence, the Dukes
Salviati, Lanti, and Mattei, the Marquisses Nari, Corsini, Tarquinius Santa
Croce, and Patricii. The Lords Paul Francis Falconteri, Baron Mattei, the
Counts Prainer, Slavata, Sciaffcutz, and Tilli, and Cavalier Passionei, these
particular camerads of the Cardinal Legates, with many servants richly
apparrelled.

Near these, on two generous steeds came the Legates, with their usual
Cardinals habits, of Purple waved tabby, and red hats on their heads, who
graceful, and most affable, with a seriousness and sweetness in their faces,
made their Majestique gravity resplendent, which induced every one to a
reverence, and obsequiousness.

The Marquess Rinuncini, and Cavalier Baldeschi the masters of their Chambers,
with Sgnior Carlo Carcarasio the Second master of the ceremonies to the Pope,
went before them, in the midst of whom was Cavalier Bellarmini the Captain of
the guard to his Holiness. After the Legates came the troop of light horsemen
of his Holiness, armed with cuirasses, but without lances, with Cassocks of red
cloth fringed with gold.

The Legates coming out of the gate of the people, took Coach, as the Cavaliers
likewise did that were with them, the Pages, and footmen, and pursued their
journey.

Each of the Cardinals had five sumptuous Coaches with six horses apeice, the
Coachmen and grooms which were many, having liveries like the Pages, and
trumpetters. Before the Legates Coach, went a Coach with the masters of the
Chambers, and another came after them full of noble Prelates, being followed by
thirty others with six horses a piece, all rich and splendid, belonging to the
Princes, Cavaliers, Prelates, and Gentlemen with forty others with 4 horses a
piece.

At the Inn called la Storta eight mile off, they found Don Antonio della
Cueva, her Majesty's great Master of the horse, accompanied by many Gentlemen,
with the Coaches of the Queen. He complemented the Legates, who went into her
Majesty's Coach made after the Dutch fashion, covered with crimson velvet
fringed with gold, in which they arrived at Olgiata, a mile beyond the said
Inn. The Queen at the entrance into the gate, came down to the foot of the
stairs, with wonderful courtesy and kindness, receiving the Legates, and with
so much honor, than it may well be said, this was a true argument of her
piety, and veneration toward the Vicar of Christ, the holy Sea, and the Sacred
Apostolical College. In the midst of the said Legates she ascended to her
lodgings, where they complemented her in the name of his Holiness, in order to
their instructions. Her Majesty accepted the favor, with all the terms of
reverence and esteem toward his Holiness, by declaring herself most highly
obliged to the Pope, for the many great honors he had done her.

It was somewhat late, and therefore without further stay, the Queen, and the
Legates descended, and went all three into his Holinesses Coach, sent thither
for that purpose, her Majesty sitting alone, and the Legates together.

The Queen was clad plainly in gray, with a hongerlin, and black scarf on her
shoulders, instead of a band, without any ornament of Gold, Silver, Jewels,
Ribbonds, or Flowers which she always had abhorred, as a vain and idle thing,
one little Ring on her Finger, being all the adorning she had. But with her
sprightly carriage, and masculine and majestic aspect, she discovered the
greatness of her birth, and the qualities of her rare and virtuous
Prerogatives. She has a very quick and nimble body, and is in her gestures and
motion most comely and gracious, of a proportionable stature, a fresh color,
and royal features. And since her cheeks are careless of the deckings of
roses and lilies, her most comely face darts lightning from her eyes, as which,
never nature made any so lively and resplendent. She has a high forehead, and
spacious, with a fine and pleasing mouth, her hair seeming curled and brown.
Her Majesty is supported with modesty, and her sprightliness and smiling with
gravity, she having above all things a grace so attractive, which together with
the heart, forces praises, and applauses. She eats not much, drinks little,
and almost continually water. She sleeps but five hours, and studies for the
most part, the books of Plato, ancient Histories, good Latin Poets, and the
sacred Scriptures being the Soul of her Majesty's entertainments.

She hates mortally idleness, and is adorned with so many virtues, that every
Queen may easily envy her, but very hardly imitate her. She is of a great and
generous mind, but her solid goodness has nothing else to equal it, but the
glory of her great thoughts, and incomparable resolutions.

She arrived in Rome after two hours in the night, accompanied by the light of
an infinite number of Torches. She came in at the gate Pertusa, where she was
met by the Captain of the Dutchmen, with many of the Switzers of his
Holinesses Guard, who attended on her afterward. She alighted at the Vatican
on the side of the Garden of Belvedere, where by my Lord Farnese the Popes
Steward, and his Holinesses domestic Prelates, she was met and received at the
foot of the stairs in the plain of the Garden, whence her Majesty was conducted
to her appartament, which was most richly furnished with all things.

The people flockt thither in such throngs, that they filled the very rooms
that were above, and the Queen beholding such a multitude, said pleasantly
jesting, Use they thus, to enter privately into Rome,

She no sooner had rested a little, but she sent Don Antonio della Cueva to
desire audience of his Holiness, who speedily dispatched to her my Lord Bonvili
the Master of his Chamber, a Prelate of great quality, attended by all of the
Privy Chamber, and several other Gentlemen. At the head of the Gregorian
Gallery he met the Queen, who was coming in have between the two Cardinal
Legates, where he complemented her Majesty in the name of the Pope, who
returning the civility with all due respect, went on toward his Holinesses
lodgings, many of the Popes train going before.

As she passed along through so many Lodgings, Chambers and Galleries, all
illuminated with Torches, she admiring the vastness of that great habitation,
said, that short delay was more troublesome to her, than all the journey she
had gone, since her Majesty desired nothing more, than the time to see his
Holiness.

When she came to the Popes Antichamber, the door was set wide open, and stood
in that manner, all the while she remained with his Holiness. At the entrance
into the Chamber, where his Holiness expected her (my Lord Fibei the chief
Master of the Ceremonies instructing her so to do) She kneeled the first time,
then the second, and the third time with her hands acrosse on her breast, and
her eyes on the ground, kissed first the foot, and afterward the hand of his
Holiness, who intimating with a smile an act of the kindest reception, becken'd
quickly to her with his hand she should rise, which no sooner she had done, but
she sat down on a royal Chair, the Cushion and Leaner being of Crimson
Velvet, and sumptuously adorned with Gold.

They discoursed but little, for his Holiness supposing she was weary with her
journey, cut off the entertainment, and her Majesty returned to her appartament.

His Holiness afterward to show her the greater respect, assigned her four
Cavaliers, all his Chamberlains of honor, to the end they might continually be
assistant in her Majesty's anti Chamber, which were Signior Dominick Jacovacci
a Gentleman of Rome of known prudence, and excellent behavior, Horatius
Marquis Spada the deserving nephew of Cardinal Bernard Spada Bishop of Altano,
James Mignanelli a Gentleman likewise of Rome, and the Marquis Bevilacqua of
Ferrara, whose nobility is equal to the qualities of his mind. Besides these
his Holiness likewise ordered, that five of his demy-lance men should every
day wait by turns on her Majesty, to wit, Captain John Leo of Piperno, Guido
Baldo Ponti of Perugia, the Sergeant Major Andrew Paolini of V^terbo, and the
Captains Anthony Fracassi of Cesena, and Marcus Chi^fa of Candia, all Persons
of worth and valor, who executed their places very well.

The following morning the Queen arose betimes, as she used to do, and went
into the Garden, where she walked with my Lord Acarigi his Holinesses
Cupbearer, still speaking French to him. She desired to see the Coach, the
litter, and chair the Pope had given her, which were soon brought to her, and
with them came Cavalier Bernino the inventour of the design of the figures
adorning them. Count Raymund Montecuccoli there present, desired the Queen to
take notice of the Figures which supported the Coach-box, adding that they were
the design of Cavalier Bernino. The Queen turned about to contemplate them,
and the Cavalier very modestly told her Majesty, if there was any thing that
was amiss, 'twas his doing. The Queen at these words turning about, very
gracefully replied, then you have done nothing there. Then causing the horse to
be brought, which his Holiness had given her, she rode him with a foot-cloth,
and without, and turning and winding him here and there, made every one admire
her dexterity and comeliness, she making all good, which fame had delivered
before, that there was none in Swedland could manage a Steed better than her,
nor sit him better in his full Carrieer, of which the King of Spain being
curious, desired to see her painted in that action. And indeed she is so
franck, and dexterous in this, that if she had another Bucephalus, she would
tame him as well as an Alexander. Her Majesty went afterward with my Lord
Holstenius to see the Vatican Library, and likewise his own, which was fine
and rare, and gave her great content.

The day after about 23. hours she went again in a chair to the Pope, with
whom she remained (the doors standing open) above an hour. On Wednesday in the
morning, the solemn Cavalcata should have been, but it was deferred till the
following day, all the things not being in order. In the mean time his Holiness
went in a chair, to see her in her appartament, who no sooner heard of it, but
ran a great pace through some Chambers to meet him, at whose feet she soon
fell down with great humility, but he causing her to rise, and they going into
the Chamber, they walked up and down discoursing together, the Portalls being
up. When his Holiness departed, her Majesty accompanied him to his chair, into
which he being entered, the Queen with her own hands endeavored to shut it,
as she did other acts of humility, and obsequiousness, though his Holiness had
often dismissed her with his blessing, she freely confessing, she never had
felt herself awakened to more reverence, than in seeing the Majesty of the
Pope. The two days they spent in music, singing, and other royal
entertainments, in which no cost was spared by the magnanimous Pope.

The said solemn Cavalcata was ordered on Thursday after dinner, of which the
Masters of the Ceremonies had the direction. The shops were shut that day, and
the Tradesmen commanded not to work, which every one obeyed very willingly,
veneration and curiosity calling all to so noble a spectacle. And as a Princes
actions should still be great, and elevated, so the Pope omitted nothing, that
might make this Function remarkable.

Count David Vidman, a Nobleman of Venice, brother to the Cardinal of this
name, and Sergeant Major General of the battle, had the charge to give the
orders, which he thought in his prudence most convenient, to honor this
reception, with disposing of his Holinesses Soldiers.

On the day aforesaid at 17. hours her Majesty took Coach in the Court of
Belvedere, and went out of the Gate Angelica toward the bridge Molle, The
Courtiers of the Cardinal Legates, and of the Queen went before, with the
Trumpetters of the Cardinals, and the 26. horses of her Majesty's guard, being
followed by the led-horses, the Pages, Camerades, and Prelates of the train, of
the Legates, the led-horses of the Queen, her Pages, the Trumpetters,
Cavaliers, Princes, and Gentlemen of the Company of the Legates, the Gentlemen
of the Queen, the Master of the Ceremonies, her Majesty in his Holinesses
Coach, with the two Cardinal Legates, behind the Prelates of the Legation, the
Queens Coaches, the said troop of Cuirassiers, the led-horses, the Coaches of
the Legates, and others of several Princes, Prelates, and Cavaliers, which
Cavalcata marching along the river advanced toward the bridge called Molle.

An hour before departed from his Palace my Lord Bonelli the Governor of Rome,
and Vice-Chamberlain, Pope Pius Quintus Nephews Son, the troop of light
horsemen preceding, and his Page with the Batton and his Hat. He himself came
afterward a horseback on a very fine Nag, attended by eighty Halbardiers of
his guard with red Cassocks, and great store of grooms, and followed by the
Officers of his Tribunal. In this order going to the foot of the Cordon of the
Capitol, he joined with the Signior Faustus Gallucci Senator of Rome,
Honofrius Margani, Giacinthus del Buffalo, Caesar Colonna, Achilles Maffei, and
many other Roman Cavaliers, which waited on the Magistrates, and with the
following order they marched all together toward the Bridge Molle, this
function belonging to Signior Christopher Faccialveta, another Master of the
Ceremonies.

All the Trumpetters and light horsemen marched before, then the Trumpetters of
the people, and the Noblemen of Rome, part accompanying the Senate by order of
the Pope, which were those, who in the year 1655. had some Office in the
Capitol, and part voluntarily coming thither for the greater decorum of their
Country. They went all without order of Precedence, and confusedly, as the
Marshall of the Camp, and the forty Gentlemen elected before by the Council
to attend the new Pope in the Cavalcata of his Possession, and the presidents
of Justice, and Overseers of the ways. I would gladly here register the names
of each one, as honoring the Senators of a City, the head of the World, but
because they were not all known to me at that time, and would be a hard thing
how to do it; and perhaps I might miss of the truth, I will only name them (I
first of all declaring, I intend not to lessen the worth of the rest, who were
then most known unto me, which are John R^nald Monaldeschi of the Signiory of
Montecalvello. Vicino Orsino, the Marquis Marcellus Crescentii, Bartholmew
Capranica, Cavalier Antonio Griffoni, Francis Pallombara, Count Musius
Carpegna, Marius Millino, Fabius Celsi, the Marquis John Peter del Drago, the
Marquis Jews Massemi, Serafino Cenci, Francis Gottifredo, Charles Rapaccioli,
Cavalier Stephen Alli, Joseph Degli Annibali, the Marquis Angelo Pallucci,
Cavalier Jerome Muti. The Pages of the Governor followed after, and the
Senators, with the Batton, a short Sword, and Hat. The Governor on the right
hand, and the Senator on the left, and the Conservers, and Prior in the same
rank in their Gowns of cloth of Gold, and then behind came the gown Officers
of the Governor and Capitol, on the side the Governors Halbardiers, his two
grooms preceding a foot among those of the Magistrates of Rome, called Fedeli.

Before her Majesty arrived at the bridge Molle, she was met in the meadows
without the Gate Angelica by a company of Carabines commanded by Captain
Grassi. The foresaid Count Vidman came over against the bridge, who had caused
Rochetta to be armed, and the bridge on both sides with choice foot, and in the
plain beyond the River in a very fine prospect, had reduced into squadrons a
great body of a thousand foot, at the head of which was the Sergeant Major
Molinari, with six pieces of Artillery, and other Soldiers, which counting the
guard of the bridge, were two thousand, who when the Queen was past, gave her
very handsome volleys of shot, which were seconded by the discharging of the
Canon.

Her Majesty's Coach stopped, and the Governor, the Senator, Conservers, and
Prior, complemented her in the name of the people of Rome, representing the joy
of the City for her Majesty's arrival. The complement was short, for it rained
very hard, and the Queens answer short in returning them thanks, after which
they continued the Cavalcata marching together in the following manner.

The Couriers of the Legates and the Queen, a troop of light horsemen with
their Captain, and the Trumpetters, and Carabines of her Majesty's guard, the
Trumpetters of the people of Rome, the led-horses of the Legates the drummers
of the Capitol, the Pages of their Camerades, of the Prelates, the Senator,
Governor, and of the Cardinals. The Drummers of the Governor, the led-horses
of the Queen, her Pages, the Trumpets of the Legates, the Officers of the
Governor, and of the Capitol, the Cavaliers, or Camerades of the Cardinal
Legates, the Gentlemen and Knights of the Queen mixed together, the Conservers,
the Senator, Governor, and Master of the Ceremonies, his Holinesses Coach,
with the Queen in it, riding forward alone, and the two Cardinals backward,
the Prelates of the Legation a horseback, the Coaches of her Majesty, a Troop
of Cuirassiers with their Captain the Trumpets and led-horses, the Coaches of
the Legates, and others of the Dukes and Cavaliers of the train, and the
Halbardiers of the Governor, with a great number of Grooms.

Being come to the Vineyard of Pope Julius, which is a Palace with a Vineyard,
Garden, Courts, Fountains, Walks, and Allies, situate between the Gate of the
people, and the foresaid Bridge Molle, the Governor, the Senator, Conservers,
and Marshalls of the Camp, with the rest of the people of Rome, there
complemented her Majesty again, who received them graciously, the serenity of
her countenance, and civility to all, especially to Signior Bonelli the
Governor, bearing witness of her esteem of the virtue and integrity of this
Prelate.

'Twas past 18. hours when her Majesty arrived at this Vineyard, where
alighting out of the Popes sumptuous Coach, which was all of rich Velvet and
Gold, she went into the higher rooms of the Palace, where a Table was nobly
furnished with variety of meats, wines, waters, and store of sweetmeats, her
Majesty staying there above an hour and a half, till the rain might be over,
which hindered the Function very much. But as they were consulting to defer
it till a more propitious season, the Heaven, as if ashamed not to give place
to so splendid a Triumph, dispersed the clouds in a moment, chased away the
darkness, and brought back the Sun, that he might be likewise assistant to the
train of so rare, and so renowned a show.

With the Queen came four of her Coaches of the German fashion, driven by
Coach-men in a livery of fine Scarlet, trimmed with great Gardes of black
Velvet bordered with Gold-lace, with many servants and attendance in the same.
On the Gate of the Palace were three Inscriptions with the arms of her Majesty,
which are a sheafe of Wheat traversed by two white Bars in an azure Field,
since the three Crowns, and the rest of the empress, which are the proper arms
of the Kingdom of Swedland, were voluntarily deposed by her with the said
Kingdom, she only retaining the ancient and glorious Ensign of her Majesty's
Progenitors.

In the Court before the Palace, on the left hand toward the City, were
squadron'd 300. Foot of the free Company of the foresaid Count Vidman, all in
good order, with red and yellow Colors, by whom at her entrance she was
welcomed with a volley of shot.

Many persons of quality came to wait on her Majesty, who sweetning the
gravity of her Majestic aspect, with her courteous entertainment, received
them with all terms of civility.

All said, they were obliged to the courtesy of this so great Princess, who
scattering like the Sun, the light of her favors, makes all that behold her,
pay tribute to her affability.

In the mean time the present, given her by his Holiness, was brought, to wit,
a Coach, a Litter, a Chair, and an ambling Nagge; the Coach was all of silver,
with statues, little figures, cut-works, and mysterious devises of the
invention of Cavalier Bernino. The lining, and covering were of azure Velvet,
and the fringes of the broad Gardes inter-woven with suitable twists, and
buttons and loops of Silver, empailed with large, and rich massy studs.

'Twas drawn by six dapple Coursers, with Furniture of Velvet of the same
color twisted with Silver, with buckles, bridles, and head-strains of the same
metal, and Coach-men in the same Livery. The Litter and Chair were suitable to
the Coach, the Mules covered with the same, and had the same furniture, and the
dapple ambling nagge with a woman's riding foot-cloth of the same Velvet, all
bespread with little figures finely wrought.

This Present was given the Queen in the name of the Pope, by my Lord Farnese
his Holinesses steward. All the train of the Princes, Prelates, Cavaliers, and
others, meeting after 20. hours in this place, by the diligence and good order
of the Masters of the Ceremonies, the Cavalcata began to march without any
order of precedence, but carelessly rather in the following form.

Before all went the troop of Cuirassiers of the foresaid Captain Corradino,
in the very same manner, as he met the Queen before at Olgiata. The light
horsemen of the Guard of the Queen followed after, with Cassocks of Scarlet,
each having four great Crosses of black velvet, bordered with large twists of
gold. The led horses of the Cardinal Legates with furniture of the livery
aforesaid. The Couriers of the Legates, and the Queen. Twelve Mules with
Carriages of Crimson velvet, with lace and fringes of gold, studs, and bosses
of massy Silver, and bridles of silk and gold. The Grooms of the Chamber of the
Legates with coats embroidered with gold. The others rode after them without
the least observance of Precedence, which they did to avoid the disturbance,
that might happen, disorder being thought the best order in this case. The
Prince of Gallicano followed after the Prince of Carbognano, both of the family
of Colonna, behind whom diverse Gentlemen marched, being attended by their
Grooms. The Duke of Onano of the house of Sforza, the Prince of Nerula, and Don
Lelio his Brother of the house of Orsini, the Duke of Bassanello, Duke Savelli,
Duke Altemps, Duke Caffarelli, Signior Mutius Mareri with several Gentlemen
confusedly together. Duke Salviato, Duke Strozzi, Duke Lante, Duke Cesi, the
two Sons of the Duke Salviati, the Marquess Corsino, the Marquess Patritij,
the Prince of Saint Gregory, Duke Muti, Duke Matte^, the Baron Matte^, the
Marquess Neri, the Marquess Spada, the Marquess Pallucci, the Marquess del
Drago, the Marquess Astalli, the Marquess Tassi, each one with his Grooms,
among which there were diverse that had fair and splendid liveries. Signior
Antonio Gozi a noble man of Venice, Count Medici of Verona, Signior Bonmartini
a Gentleman of Padoua, with diverse other Gentlemen. The Cavalier of Saint
James Don John Baptist Jacquetti des Brunes, eight tabours of the people of
Rom^, and of the Governor, the Pages of the Cardinal Legates, 24 wardrobe
keepers of the Cardinals, who met the Queen, each one with a valose
embroydered with sumptuous embossed work in gold, 24. Barbers of the said
Cardinals with Silver gilt Maces in their hands, 24. trainbearers of the same
in purple apparel, the Prior Lomellino, the Senator Charles Imperiale of
Genoua, the Prince Don Camillus Panfilio, who appeared in a black suit of
satin most admirably embroydered with Silver, shadowed with another thin
embroydery of black silk, all bespread and empailed vere richly with diamonds,
valued above a hundred thousand Crowns. Besides these he had in his hat three
other great pieces of inestimable value at the foot of a rare heron. His
Excellence was accompanied by many Cavaliers his Camerades, twelve Pages
encompassing him in liveries of black velvet, trimmed all over with gold, and
their cloakes and sleeves of rich cloth of gold, with chains adorned with
jewels about their necks. He was likewise attended by six demi lance men all
Officers reformed, and in very good equipage, and in fine by thirty Grooms, and
four footmen in the said velvet livery, and with the pomp and riches of the
same trimming.

All these clothes, and liveries were wrought in the space of six days, the
Masters of the ceremonies not resolving before, if it were convenient, the said
Prince should be present at this function, in respect of the mourning he then
wore for the death of Pope Innocent his Uncle. The Marquess Bevilacqua came
afterward, diverse Gentlemen, ten sheild-bearors, and ten Grooms of the
Chamber, in the midst of which came the Litter, and Coach presented by the Pope
to the Queen, with the little ladder of Silver to get up, which was carried by
a servant. The Trumpets, and tabours of the Cardinal Legates, four Advocates
of the Consistory, 24 of the Chamber belonging to the Chancery, the Gentlemen
of the train of the Legates in riding clothes richly trimmed, the Marquess del
Monte, the Marquess Valerius Santa Croce, the Marquess Malvezzi, Signior
Marianus Vecchiarelli, with diverse other noblemen among them, Signior Paul
Francis Falconiere, the Marquess Cesi, Count Ripa, Count Manescotti, the Count
of Fistemberg, Cavalier Passionei, the Marquess Targuinius Santa Croce,
Cavalier Baldeschi, fifty Gentlemen confusedly together of several Nations, of
the train of the Cardinals and the Ministers of Princes, Count Raymuud
Montecuccoli, Count Francis Maria, and Count Lodovick Santinelli, Signior
Lilliecron, all three Gentlemen of the Chamber to her Majesty, with other
Gentlemen of the retinue of the Queen; Don Nicholas Barberino Prior of Rome,
the Prince of Pallestina with clothes extravagantly embroydered with bugles,
with button-holes, with diamonds of great worth, and a hatband of great
diamonds, with eight Pages all clad with black velvet trimted with gold, whose
Cloakes were lined with cloth of gold, and the sleeves of their doublets
embroidered with gold, twenty Grooms in the same livery, with Cloakes of black
cloth, with broad gardes of velvet twisted with gold, and the sleeves of
cloth of gold, four footmen, a dog-keeper, a wardrobe-keeper, and another, all
clothed like the rest, eight trumpets of his Holiness, four of the Popes
Mace-bearers, the Masters of the Ceremonies, 24 Cardinals in purple habits on
mules richly barded, at the head of which were their Eminences Francis
Cardinal Barberino, and Julius Cardinal Sacchetti, the others following
after, in order to their seniority, the Cardinals Palota, Franciotti,
Lodovisio, Cibo, Savelli, Astalli, Retz, Corrado, Imperiale Borromeo, Santa
Croce, Aldobrandino Charles Barberino, Azzolino, Odescalch^, Vidman, Sforza,
Orsino, and Cossaguti.

These Cardinals met the Queen a little way out of the gate of the people, and
Cardinal Barberino the Sub-dean, Cardinal Charles di Medici the Dean being
absent, complemented the Queen as chief, in the name of all the Sacred College,
who was afterward reverenced by the rest of the Cardinals, who went two
together in order in the Cavalcata.

The two Cardinal Legates (their Legation being ended, which extended not
within the walls of Rome) consigned the Queen to the two Cardinal Deacons, who
as first in this order, were the Cardinals Orsino, and Costaguti, the said
Legates advancing with the rest of the Cardinals, in the places belonging to
them.

Her Majesty was clad in gray cloth called the love of France, embroydered
with gold round the bottom, with a stomacher embroidered all over, and a black
Scarf on her shoulders tied behind, a black hat on her head with a little gold
hatband, without any other ornament of jewels, or flowers, a true mark of the
masculine mind of this Princess, who as she does not captivate it to the
flatteries of effeminate vanities, so makes it appear, great Princes are not
famous for the luster of their bravery, but the splendor of their actions.

This great Queen went in the midst of her guard of Swissers all covered with
white arms, with such a grace, and daringnes, that like a victorious General
of Armies, and conquered Provinces, she seemed, among so great a multitude of
people, to go to a glorious and magnificent triumph.

A great troop of Grooms of her train, and the Cardinals, preceded. The
Marquess Hippol^tus Bentivogli, Gentleman of her Chamber, went by her stirrup a
foot, and uncovered, being honored now and then to discourse with her Majesty,
who with her grace in speaking, and her gesture subdued the minds of all that
beheld, her.

The chair given her by his Holiness came after, and my Lord Farnese the
Steward, then the Bishops that assisted, the Apostolical chief Notaries, the
Auditors d^ Ruota, the Master of the Sacred Palace, the Clerks of the
Chamber, and other Prelates, all clothed in purple, in whom appeared the
Majesty and decorum of the Court of Rome.

The light horsemen of his Holinesses guard, armed with breastplates, and
having red Casocks trimed with gold twist, and lances in their hands, with
colors at the points, shut up the Cavalcata.

Behind the horses, which shut up this royal Cavalcata, came the travailing
Coaches, and the Coaches of the City of all the great Persons, which were all
noble, sumptuous, and enricht with rare furniture, and most sprightly Coursers.
After her Majesty's Coaches, came three of Prince Panfilio, which were very
splendid, and one among the rest as noble and Majestique, as could be devised,
it being all of gold, and embroydery, with admirable metals, and the arms of
his family. Two likewise appeared of the Prince of Pallestrina, one of which
was rich, and stately, of black velvet with golden fringe, and lined with cloth
of gold, the Carvings, Figures, Nayle-work, Iron-work, and furniture of the
horses, being gilt most splendid and magnificent.

The gate of the people, by order of the Pope, was finished before by Cavalier
Bernino, on the ancient design of Michael Angelo Bonaruota, with some
embellishments of the said Cavaliers own invention, and an Inscription
representing the happy and fortunate entrance of this Queen into Rome: on the
top of the gate aforesaid, they saw appear in a great embossed work, six
Mountains, and a star on the top, the Arms of his Holiness.

The order of the Cavalcata
At all the ends of the streets of the course, St. Mark, Giesu, della Valle,
Mount Jordan, di Banchi, the bridge of St. Angelo, and the Suburb, through
which the Cavalcata was to pass, stood Soldiers in ranks, and all Coaches
were forbidden to stir up and down, and stand in those streets after 18.
hours. All the windows were hung with rich tapestries, and full of Ladies and
Cavaliers, all the way being covered with a very great number of people. At her
Majesty's entrance through the gate of the People, she was welcomed by many
Mortar-peices, and Canon brought into the Garden of that convent, the roaring
of which was answered by all* with an Echo of Praises, and blessings.

As she passed through, so many peopl who were more desirous to see her, than
curious to contemplate the pomp of the Cavalcata, she saluted every one with
so cheerful a countenance, and a carriage so tempered with decorum, and
courtesy, that she made it appear, she could not stir a foot, but 'twas
measured with the compass of her virtue. She often turned her self to speak
with their Eminences, Orsini, and Costaguti, and all her words breathed a
gravity and sweetness.

As her Majesty passed the bridge of St. Angelo, The honors done her at the
Castle of St. Angelo.
Count Jerome Gabrielli the Vice Governor of the Castle, stood at the door of
the grate of the fortress, at the head of a hundred Musketeers in array, who
took up all the drawbridges to the gate of the Castle, Captain Decius
Laurentini armed with a corselet and pike, standing a little behind him toward
the left hand, and on the right Captain Rutilius Ferraccioli the Adjutant of
the Fortress. The Soldiers of the Garrison displayed their colors from the
walls, and as the Queen passed along, she heard first from the Castle a
pleasing harmony of fifes and Sackbuts, which was afterward seconded by a
volley of Muskets, accompanied immediately by the roaring of a hundred and
fifty Mortar-peices, and sixty pieces of artillery.

On the top of the great Tower hung the arms of his Holiness, and the Queen,
where likewise were prepared many squibs, and great store of fireworkes, which
in the beginning of the night had admirable success, the Mottos, and Arms being
handsomely seen and illuminated.

On the Piazza of St. Peter on this, and that side of the Guglia, two
battalions of a thousand foot apeice, stood in ranks with two other squadrons
of cuirassiers. 'Ore against the same Piazza near the fountain was squadroned
the free Company of Dutchmen of Count Vidman aforesaid, in the midst of two
squadrons of Carabines.

The said Count Vidman was likewise a horseback with several his Camerades, at
the head of the said Soldiers, by whose good order, and experienced
understanding, every thing was regular.

This Cavalier was assisted by Sergeant Major Molinati, Captain Corradino, and
Grassi, Count Baschi, Buonfanti, Captain Alphonsus Bartoi with the Militia of
Frascati, Castle Gandolfo, and Rocca Priora, Captain Anthony Torazzi with the
Soldiers of Velletri, and others, commanders of that people, who, the Queen
being alighted at the stairs of St. Peter, gave their last volley of shot,
which was seconded by twelve pieces of Artillery brought to the said Piazza.

The end of the Sixth Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majesty of Christina Alessandra, Queen
of Swedland, etc. The Seventh Book.
The Argument.
THe Queen after the Cavalcata, is received in St. Peter's Church by that
Clergy, and afterward in the Consistory by the Pope. She visits the Church of
St. Mary the greater. She dines with the Pope. From the Vatican she goes to the
Palace Farnese, and is there visited by the sacred College, and the Grandees of
the City. She visits the Churches of Saint John Lateran, St. James of the
Spaniards, Giesu, and the Monasteries di Torre de Specchi, and St. Sixtus; she
sees the Castle of St. Angelo, la Sapienza, the Monastery of St. Catharine of
Siena, the Greeks Church, the Roman College, and that of Urban, for the
propagation of the Faith. She is present at Academies, and entertained with
several Musical Comedies.

She arrives at St. Peter's.
THE Queen come to St. Peter's, while the Cardinals were dismo^nted before, to
go, and assist the Pope in the public Consistory, did likewise alight, and
their Eminences Orsini and Costaguti committed her to the Cardinals Medici and
Sforza, they themselves going thence, as the first Deacons, to vest and serve
his Holiness.

Her reception in the Church of St. Peter.
Being ascended the first steps, and come through all that space, to the last
which arrive at the Portico of the Church, she saw on the last step my Lord
Scanarola the Bishop of Sidoma, V^car to his Eminence, Cardinal Barberino the
Arch Priest of St. Peter, together with all the Chapter of the said Church,
which stood attending her. The said Scanarola presented her the Cross to be
kissed, and she kissed it kneeling on a cushion of cloth of gold, under which
was spread a great carpet of the same. In the mean time, while a great quire of
Musicians Sang the Anthem, she is beautiful etc. The Queen entered into the
Church in the midst of the said Cardinals, Medici and Sforza. The said Bishop
gave her holy water, and by all the quires of the Musicians was begun the hymn
of Te Deum.

This sumptuous Temple was all hung with tapistries out of the wardrobe of
Cardinal Barberino, The Majestique ornaments in St. Peter's.
among which were fifty eight hangings for doors very splendidly embroydered
with gold, with the Arms of her Majesty in the middle, ten of which were
embellished with several Mottos, alluding to the glories of this renowned
Princess.

So being preceded by the Clergy, with the Cross, and the foresaid Bishop the
Vicar, she was conducted in the midst of the said Cardinals, before the most
holy Sacrament, exposed on the high Altar under the great Cupola, where her
Majesty prayed kneeling on a Cushion of cloth of gold, with a carpet, and the
two Cardinals on Cushions of crimson Velvet.

Having ended her Prayers, she was carried to the Chapel of the most holy
Sacrament, and thence by the secret stairs, she went up, being met at the foot
of the stairs of the royal hall by the two said Cardinals the first Deacons,
to wit Orsini, and Costaguti, and eigh^ Bishops assistents, as likewise by the
Duke of Poli of the family of Conti, Master of the Sacred lodgings, and
conducted to the consistory in the said royal hall.

She goes in to the Concistory, and k^sses the feet of his Holiness.
Her Majesty advancing in the said royal hall, and entering the consistory,
after kneeling three times, kissed the foot, and then the hand of the Pope, his
Holiness receiving her in a very courteous manner. Her Majesty's words
expressed her joy, for her conversion to the Catholic Faith, as likewise to
see her self honored with such demonstrations of his Holiness. The Pope
replied, her conversion was of that great importance, that in Heaven they
feasted and rejoiced at it, and expressed more joy, than that she saw on earth,
after which the function being ended, the Pope went to his appartament, through
the Ducal hall, attended by all the Cardinals, the six Deacons excepted which
staid to accompany the Queen, who entering into the chapel of Sixtus, and
passing through the old appartament, went to her own lodgings. The Cardinals
were Med^ci, Sforza, Odescalchi, Raggi, the Landgrave, and Charles Barberini.

On Friday in the evening, the Vigil of our Saviors Nativity, her Majesty went
privately in her Chair, to see the Collation, the Pope uses yearly to give at
that time to the Cardinals, and she thought too that night to go down into
the Chapel, to observe the functions of the Mattins celebrated by the Pope,
but being a little ill, she forbear going out of her lodgings.

She is present at his Holinesses Mass.
The following Morning she was publicly present at the Mass Sung likewise by
his Holiness. Her Majesty's place was without the circuit, where his Holiness
sits with the Sacred College, on the right hand a little way off from the steps
of the high Altar, within a kind of closet adorned without with crimson velvet,
with trimming of buttons and sloops of gold, and within with cloth of gold,
with a chair on a carpet three steps high from the ground.

The Pope with the Cardinals, and Prelates, being come into the Church, and
ascending his throne behind the high Altar, which was covered with a great
pavillion of several tapistries of silk and gold, first prayed, and then
vesting himself, went to the Altar, and there sat down in a Chair. In the
mean time the Queen left her place, and was brought by the Cardinals Medici
and Sforza, with four Bishops their assistents, before his Beatitude, where she
kneeling on a Cushion of cloth of gold, She receives the Sacrament of
confirmation.
received by the hands of his Beatitude the Sacrament of holy confirmation. The
Cardinal of Medici was her Godfather in the name of the King of Spain, and
added to the name of Christina, that likewise of Alessandra. From thence she
returned to her place, accompanied by the Cardinals aforesaid, and the Bishops
the assistents, and the Pope began the Mass. After the Communion of the
Ministers of the Sacrifice, She communicates.
the Queen did communicate before the Cardinal Deacons, being brought to the
feet of his Holiness by the foresaid Cardinals Medici and Sforza, with the
four Bishops their assistents, who carried her back.

After dinner her Majesty went in her Chair to the Church St. Mary the
greater, She visits the Church of St. Mary the greater.
attended by the guards of the Switzers, the curiassiers, and launciers of his
Holiness, with a numerous train of Princes, Cavaliers, and other Gentlemen,
among whom Don Anthonio della Cueva, as her Majesty's chief Gentleman of her
horse, waited on her a foot near the Chair. She was received at the door by
Cardinal Bragadino, in the place of Cardinal Anthony Barberino the
Archpriest of the said Church, where when she had adored the most holy
Sacrament, she was conducted to the Chapel of Sixtus Quintus to see the holy
Cradle of the redeemer of the world, which was with much devotion observed, and
honored by her Majesty. Thence after she had seen the other splendid Chapel
of Paulus Quintus, the Altar of which was richly adorned, she returned to the
Vatican,

She dines with his Holiness.
The following Sunday she dined with his Holiness, and the order there observed,
was as follows. Two tables stood, the one from the other about two hands
breadth, that for the Pope being four fingers higher than the Queens. The Pope
sat in the midst in a Chair of red velvet, with a great footstool half a
span high. The Queen had a royal seat made on purpose, on the right side
under the cloth of state, on the even floor on a Carpet. Don Antonio della
Cueva presented her Majesty the Napkin, the Marquess Hippolitus Bentivogli was
her Cup Bearer, and Count Francis Maria Santinelli her taster. The dinner was
suitable to the greatness of so great a Prince, toward a Princess so great.

Father Oliva a Jesuit made a Sermon peculiar to his spirit and parts. Her
Majesty with her usual erudition, having observed that the Father could have
brought in a certain place, a passage of St Paul, motioned it to his Holiness,
who was extremely edified with the readiness, and learned vivacity of so great
a woman, and the Father was likewise astonished when he heard it, who highly
commended this virtuous Queens wonderful understanding.

After dinner her Majesty was diverted with a play represented in most
excellent Music, and being the day following entertained a great while by the
Pope, she took her leave of him, returning in the evening from the Vatican, to
her own habitation in the Palace Farnese, and being highly satisfied, and
astonished at the royal, and well ordered entertainment she had there, where
she was well attended, by the very good conduct of the officers, with the
direction of Signior Horatius Magalotti a Cavalier of Florence, and Cosen to
the deceased Cardinal Magalotti Bishop of Ferrara, Brother to Donna Costanza,
Barberina Sister in Law to Pope Vrbane the eighth. He had in this occasion the
superintendency of all the said house, by the orders of my Lord Farnese his
Holinesses Steward, under whom was the Abbot Alexander Magalotti Son to the
said Signior Horat^o, appointed to attend Don Antonio Pimentel the Spanish
Ambassador, Captain John Baptist Massi, who waited on Don Antonio della Cueva,
and Signior Giovanni Battista Minetti, who attended Count Montecuccoli, with
many other Gentlemen deputed to the service of the other Cavaliers of her
Majesty's train. At her arrival there, she was pleased to look on the front of
the said Palace, which abounded with torches, was adorned, and gilt, with the
Arms of her Majesty in the midst, those of the Kingdom of Swedland on the
right hand, and the others of the Queen on the left with several Mottos,
Hieroglyphics, and Inscriptions.

All the charges of this Frontispice amounting to three thousand Crowns, as
likewise the royal furniture of the Palace, belonged to the magnificent, and
generous Duke of Parma, whose order the Marquess of Maria his Highnesses
Resident, observed very punctually and exactly.

Her Majesty was attended from the Vatican to the Palace aforesaid, From the
Vatican she goes to the Palace Farnese.
with a numerous Cavalcata of Princes, Prelates, and Gentlemen, the windows,
and streets, through which they passed, being hung with rich tapistries, and
resplendent with an infinite number of lights; and the concourse of people so
great, that they could hardly pass with the said Cavalcata.

The presents given her by the Pope.
His Holiness, in the honors he did this great Princess, made his courtesy, and
civility very evidently appear to her Majesty, which he seconded with
expressions of his generosity and greatness, in the Presents before mentioned
of eight noble coursers, a Coch, Saddle, and furniture, a Chair, and a Litter,
valued about two and twenty thousand Crowns. In fine, before her Majesty went
to the said Palace of Farnese, his Holiness commanded his officers should make
her an abundant provision of all sorts of meats, for the maintenance of her
Majesty and train for many days.

A little before the Queen arrived in Rome, the four Nuntii, sent to meet, and
wait on her through the Churches Dominions, came thither, and incontinently
fell at his Holinesses feet, to inform him of their journey, and functions,
whom the Pope with great kindness received, and expressions of much
satisfaction for what they had done. The foresaid Baldocchi repaired likewise
thither a little while after, to give him an account of the moneys disburst
according to the orders he received, which the Pope liking well, declared he
was fully content with his faithful employment.

The Queen highly pleased with her commodious and royal habitation, began to
receive there the visits of the Cardinals, the Residents of Princes, of the
Prelates, and other Grandees of the Court, still giving to all clearer proofs
of her rare, and virtuous endowments. She likewise omitted not, to give
abundant testimonies of her Piety, by visiting the Principal Churches, The
Queen visits St. Peter's.
of which she went first to St. Peter's, though vately, doing there her
devotions. She went afterward to St. John Lateran, and went in at the great
gate, where his Eminence Cardinal Colonna the Arch Priest, and all the Chapter
in their habits, received her, her Majesty kneeling down before the most holy
Sacrament, and hearing there Mass, which was said by my Lord Serlupi, after
which she went to see the heads of St. Peter and St. Paul. Her Majesty coming
out of the sacristy, went into San Giovanni in Font, where Constantine the
Emperor was baptized, and thence went away, accompanied and attended by the
Cardinal aforesaid.

Afterward St. James of the Spaniards.
The Morning before, her Majesty had been at the Church of St. James of the
Spaniards in Piazza Navona, where the feast was kept of the said Saints
translation. At the stairs of the Church they found the two Spanish
Abassadours, the Duke of Terranuova and Don Antonio Pimentell, who received and
accompanied her to the high Altar, which was richly adorned. Don Francesco de
Vides, and Don Diego di Caravachal Overseers of the said Church, and Persons of
great quality, met her Majesty at the gate, which was decked with cloth of gold
of great value. In the great chapel was erected a Pavilion in the form of a
little Chamber, which served for a cloth of state, where her Majesty heard
Mass, which was celebrated by my Lord Sersale, the Bishop of Bari, a Neopolitan
Gentleman, after which she went round the Church, observing the remarkablest
things. She taking Coach afterward with Don Antonio Pimentel, and Don Antonio
della Cueva, being followed by the Duke of Terranuova, and the train, went
round the Piazza Navona, to see the fine fountain built there by Pope Innocent
the tenth of happy memory. The greatness and beauty of this structure exceeds
all in Rome of this kind. It represents a very craggy rock, on the summit of
which is erected a fair pyramid. At the four corners sit four Colossusses
representing the principal rivers of the four parts of the world. From these
cliffes flow diverse streams of water, which fall into a great marble cisterne,
in the midst of which all the Machine is seated. The design of the work is of
the renowned Cavalier Sir Laurence Bernini, whose Carving Iron gives life to
the marbles themselves, which return him the eternal applauses of glory. The
water brought thither, is part of that which comes from the great fountain of
Trevi, the most wholesome of Rome, which emulating the happiness of this, sighs
one day to see finished the designs begun by the artificer himself. Her Majesty
saw likewise the beautiful Palace with the Church in the form of the Rotonda,
erected by the foresaid Pope Innocent the tenth.

Her Majesty visits the Church of Giesu.
Her Majesty then continuing to make still her virtue more conspicuous with
devotion, the true ornament of great minds, desired on new-yeares-day to visit
the Church of Giesu, and to do it with the greater solemnity, went thither
after dinner with a noble Cavalcata, being accompanied by many Cavaliers, and
Gentlemen of Rome. She thought to have entered at the Principal gate of the
Church, but the concourse of the people, flockt thither to see her, was so
great, that she missed of her design, so as she went in at the door of the
house where she met with some difficulty for the multitude of the people. She
was received by the father General Gosviri Nickel, who was accompanied by the
fathers the Assistents, and all the gravest fathers, not only of the house of
the professed, but of the other places, which they have in Rome. Being entered
the house, she first of all went up into the Domestique Chapel of St.
Ignatius, which is the same room, where he lived, and died, where she honored
the remembrance of that Saint, and saw the riches, and beautiful ornaments
answearable to that place.

From thence she was conducted to the closet, toward the high Altar, whence
she might see all the Church, and the very great multitude of people, that were
there, but because from that place she could not hear very well the Music,
with which they then sollemnly Sung the Vespers, she went to another place,
more commodious and capacious, which had been adorned before with rich Damasks
and Velvets, and accommodated in that manner, that before the place, where the
Queen stood with some few, there was a little quire somewhat bigger, which
served for an antichamber. The Queen remained here till Vespers were done,
feeding both her eyes, with the noble and splendid furniture, with which the
high Altar was adorned, and her ears with the excellent Music, which was
made in several quires, composed by Signior Bonifacio Graziani the Master of
the Chapel of that Church, and a Person renowned for his works which are in
print.

When Vespers were ended, her Majesty having highly been pleased with the
dutiful attendance of those Fathers, and tasted of the feast, went away, and
repaired some days after to the Monastery of Torre de Specchi, where her
Majesty arriving, was received at the gate of the Monastery by the Marquess
Valerius Santa Croce, Signior Agostino Maffei, and Signior Paola Maccarani the
Deputies of the place, and Mother Donna Maria Giacinta Cesi the President, with
many other of the eldest Gentlewomen of that Monastery. Her Majesty went up
into the Church, where while she was at Prayer, was Sung a Moletto made on
purpose, with a sweet and pleasing melody, with the Queeen were the
Archbishops Colonna and Torregiani, Don Antonio della Cueva with the Lady his
wife, the Prince of St. Gregory, the Marquess Bentivogli, the Counts
Santinelli, the Pages, and other Gentlemen of her Majesty's train.

Being come out of the Church, she went to see, and reverence the habitation of
St. Frances of Rome, and diverse bodies of the Saints kept there with other
relics. Before she arrived at this place, she went into a room, in which was
prepared a noble collation of sweetmeats, those Ladies use to make, which much
pleased the Queen. Having afterward seen the rest of the remarkablest things,
she departed highly satisfied with the honors done her by those Gentlewomen,
who presented her the next Morning with many pretty devises, and particularly
with most rare flowers of silk, surpassing as it were, the natural flowers
themselves. This Monastery of Torre de Specchi, has a singular privilege
conferred on it by the Popes, that the Ladies may go out when they please, and
receive others in, a favor not granted to any other Nunns.

On the Vigill of the Epiphany her Majesty returned after dinner to the Church
of St. John Lateran aforesaid, accompanied by my Lord Farnese his Holinesses
Steward, and attended by her own retinue, where she was present at Vespers,
after which being followed by the Chapter to the holy stairs, she went up them
on her knees. When she was at the top, having leave for herself, and Madame de
Cueva, by his Holinesses Brief, to go into the Sancta Sanctorum, she was
conducted thither, and saw our Saviors face, and other innumerable relics.
Going thence she went into St. John's at the great gate, and past into the
Sacristy, where on a fair Altar, stood exposed many relics within many
tabernacles, which were showed to her, one after the other, by two Canons, to
wit my Lord Antaldi, and Angelo Peracciano with others their assistents. She
saw the Cross of Constantine the Emperor, and that of St. Silvester the Pope,
as likewise the Coape which he used, when he consecrated that Church.

When her Majesty came out of the Sacristy, they showed her the rod of Moses,
the pastoral of Aaron, Arca Foederis, and an Altar, where St. John Evangelist
preached, which within is full of relics; the table, where our Savior made
his last Supper, and instituted the most holy Sacrament. She saw too the Altar
where St. Peter did celebrate, on which none can celebrate but the Pope. Going
thence she was accompanied by the said Chapter to the gate, and returned to the
Palace of Farnese.

On the 7th. of January, She goes to see the Castle es St. Angelo.
she passing along the great gallery, which uniteth the Vatican to the Castle
of St. Angelo, went to see the said Castle, accompanied by the Spanish
Ambassadors, the Duke of Serranuova and Don Antonio Pimentel, my Lord Farnese,
and Paluzzi Clerk of the Chamber, and superintendent general of the Arms and
Fortresses in the Churches Dominions, Don Antonio della Cueva her chief Master
of the horse, and Cavalier Jacquetti, the Marquess Hippolitus Bentivogli,
Signior di Lilliecron, the Counts Francis Maria, and Lodovick Santinelli
Gentlemen of her Chamber, and other Gentlemen of her Court. At the last grate,
which does divide the Fortress, she was met by the Vice-Governour Count Jerome
Gabrielli, accompanied by his Principal officers, who waited on her all along.

As soon as she came within sight of the place of Arms, where the Soldiers of
the Garrison stood in ranks, she was welcomed by a volley of shot, which was
seconded with two hundred tire of Mortar-peices, and a hundred of Canon. When
her Majesty had seen the most curious and remarkable things, she was pleased to
go into the Vice-Governours appartament, where she had a collation of fifty
basins of most exquisite sweetmeats of all sorts, each one containing
threescore pounds, which immediately after her Majesty had tasted a little of
the past of pistachos, were plundered in a Moment. There were most rare wines,
with lemmon, and cinnamon waters, of which when her Majesty drank, the
Marquess Rentivogli was her Cup Bearer, and the Duke of Terranuova presented
her the Napkin. This Collation, for the plenty and daintines, was suitable to
the Counts generosity, who to his noble birth has joined the true experience
of military valor. Her Majesty was well pleased with this Cavaliers
entertainment, and highly contended she had seen such a beautiful, and regular
Fortress, returned from thence to her Palace, being saluted at her going away,
first by the Muskets of the squadron aforesaid, and afterward by all the
Mortar-peices, and Artillery, at her entrance into the Castle.

The first Court of this Castle is quadrangular, and built with much industry,
in the midst of which is a machine, or round mole of great height and
largeness. This Fabric is very ancient, being built by Elius Adrianus the
Emperor, and therefore it was always called Adrians mole, till it was changed
into the title of St. Angelo, by reason the Arck-Angell Michaell was seen on
the top of it, to put his bloody sword into the scabberd, just as St. Gregory,
accompanied by the Clergy and people of Rome, passed by there to go to St.
Peter's. Pope Urbane the eighth of glorious memory, fortified it with several
regular bulwarks, ditches, and rampards, and diverse commodious Fabrics for the
Soldiers of the Garrison, having besides erected there a storehouse for Arms,
and Artillery. In the Tower of this Castle is the old treasury, in which Pope
Sixtus Quintus kept his treasure, and is never opened, being sealed with the
Popes Seal. Above there is another treasury, in which the triple Crown of his
Holiness is kept, which is seen in solemn processions, being richly empail'd
with Jewels of inestimable value. The^e is too the treasury of monuments,
where the writings of the holy Church, of greatest consequence, are kept, of
which at present Signior Carlo Cartari advocate of the Consistory, has the
keeping. There is a covered walk from the Vatican to this Castle, built by
Pope Alexander the sixth, and now for the quality of the Situation and VValls,
may be said to be one of the best Fortresses of Italy.

The rest of the time was spent by her Majesty in receiving of visits, and
other noble entertainments, becoming her virtuous prerogatives, and especially
her great talents in literature. This learned Princess had therefore a
particular desire to go see the Sapienza, She sees the College of Sapienza.
which is a noble Palace, or Lyceum designed for public studies. She was met
at the Gate, and attended by Cardinal Rapaccioli the Vice-Chamberlain in the
place of Cardinal Anthony Barberino, who as Chamberlain is the head of that
University, being accompanied by my Lord Richi Auditor di Rota, as Lieutenant
of the Cardinal Chamberlain, and all the Advocates of the Consistory. The
great Hall, and the less, the antecedent* were very richly furnished; over the
door of the first stood her Majesty's picture at length, and in the said Hall
was erected a cloth of state, in the midst of which sat the Queen, and the
Cardinal on her left hand. The Advocates stood on one side, and at the bottom
of the royal seat all the Professors in a ring, and the Bedells with maces of
Silver in their hands. On the right hand was prepared a chair for the
Professors, whom her Majesty would hear speak. First she desired to hear a
Divine, which place was performed by Doctor Peter Maria Passarino of Modena,
Procurator General of the Order of St Dominique, who made his rare parts, and
deep learning appear, after whom a Physician was desired by her Majesty, so as
Signior Giouanni Benedetto Sinibaldi, most learnedly, and to his great praise,
discharged his part. Then Signior Henrico Chifellio a Humanist was called, who
though a long time blind, showed he had seen much in the knowledge of Humanity.
Her Majesty seemed afterward desirous to hear a Philosopher, and Dr. John
Baptist di Lezana a Carmelite, was not wanting to give laudable testimonies of
his knowledge, whom Signior Giacomo Cincio a Canonist succeeded, who rarely
performed his part, and gave the Queen great satisfaction. The Mathematician
Don Antonio Santini did the like, who in his demonstration on paper, came down
from the chair to satisfy her Majesty's curiosity, who desired to see it
nearer her.

The Queen was asked afterward, if she pleased to hear the Professors of
tongues, and she seeming content, several of them went into the chair one
after the other, fully satisfying the genius of her Majesty. The first was
Signior Giouanni Battista Giona Galileo, who in the Hebrew tongue, explained a
passage in Genesis, the second Signior Gulielmo Artio, who discoursed in Greek
of Philosophy, the third Signior Abramo Ecchlensio, who in the Syriaq^e tongue,
displayed some points relating to the knowledge of it, and the fourth Don
Philippo Gua^agnolo, who in the Arabic and Chaldean tongue, disputed against
some points of the Alcoran of Mahomet.

This royal entertainment being ended, the Advocates of the Consistory
presented her Majesty in a hundred and twelve volumes, the works in print of
the Professors of that study, as well of those now living, as the others lately
dead, which volumes were all bound richly in Gold, with the Arms of her
Majesty, she had too a Catalogue in print of the works aforesaid, with an
elogie composed by Count Charles Emanuel Vizzani, one of the Advocates of the
Consistory, and a person of great fame. Thus ended the visit with extraordinary
satisfaction to her Majesty for the nourishment, which with her rare
understanding, she had found in the qualities of such eminent Persons, this
Princess being likewise astonished, as well at the various, and solid
literature, and learning, as the other great parts, which with her refined
judgment, she discovered in the said Cardinal Rapaccioli.

Her Majesty had likewise a desire to see the noble Monastery of the Nuns of
St. Catharine of Sienna, She visits the Monastery of St. Catharine of Sienna.
of the order of St. Dominick, seated on the Mountain Magnanapoli, in which
they receive only Ladies of great quality. At the Gate of the said Monastery,
she was received by the Prioress, sister Emilia Cenci, with other Nuns, which
stood in ranks on both sides, with the Queen went in the Father General of
the Dominicans of the Family of the Marquisses Marini of Genova, a person much
esteemed for the nobleness of his birth, his good life, and great learning;
Father Guemes her Majesty's Confessor, the Archbishop Forregiani, and four
others of the most eminent Fathers of the Order of St. Dominique. She went
presently into the Quire, where she was welcomed with a consort of several
musical instruments, and heard with much pleasure a Moletto sung most
exquisitely. From thence she was conducted under a Canopie to the Hall, where
two tables were furnished with a noble collation. Here staying a little, she
afterward went up into the Tower, from which she discovering not only all
Rome, but much of the Country there abouts, was so pleased with the prospect,
that she staid there two hours with great satisfaction, coming afterward down
into the Church, and hearing there Mass, she returned from thence to her
Palace, whither the Nuns sent her Majesty many pretty devises, with a little
Cofer of Carnation satin embroydered with Gold, in which was a relic of St.
Catharine, and another of San Romano, with a relic of St. Nicholas da Bari in
crystal, and six viols of Manna of the said Saint, all embroydered with
Silver, with several flowers of ambre, and silk, which her Majesty most
kindly accepted, as a testimony of the generous respect of those Ladies toward
her person.

She was pleased too to visit the Convent of the Nuns of St. Sixtus, of the
most noble order of St. Dominick, seated in Quirinale on the Mountain
Magnanapoli, for nobleness and beauty equal to the other there contiguous, of
St. Catharine of Sienna of the same order. Her Majesty went in, accompanied by
my Lord Forregiani, the Father General, the Father Procurator, and her
Majesty's Confessor, all Dominicans. The Prioress sister Raimonda Colonna,
assisted by the rest of the Nuns, received her at the Gate, and waited on her,
throughout all the Monastery and Garden, the fineness and neatness of which
buildings, together with the beauty of the seat, pleased highly her Majesty,
who had there a noble Collation.

On the 16. of January her Majesty going into the Coach, And the Church of the
Grecians.
which his Holiness gave her, accompanied by the Princes, Prelates, and other
Cavaliers, went to the Greeks Church, which was adorned with very rich
Hangings, especially the Cloister called Sancta Sanctorum, as also the door of
the Sacristy, where a throne was erected for her Majesty, to the end she might
see the better the Ceremonies they did within the Sancta Sanctorum. She was
received in the Church by Father John Rho, Provincial of the Society of Jesus,
and Father Octavius Massa Rector of the Greek College. At her Majesty's
arrival they began the Greek Mass, which was sung by my Lord Laurence
Constantino Archbishop of Cassandra, with three Priests, a Deacon and
Subdeacon, they using the same ceremonies the Greek Church is accustomed to do,
when the Bishop does solemnly celebrate, the said Prelate vesting himself in a
pontifical habit, in the midst of the Quire on a little throne.

Her Majesty was much pleased with this ceremony, and showing, she understood
well those rites, discoursed of them with Signior Allatio of the City of Scio,
a person of great learning, who was expressly there to satisfy her Majesty's
demands. The Queen saw their communion, and when the Mass was done, a Priest,
bringing to her the bread that was blessed, she tasted some of it. The said
ceremonies being ended, she arose up very gladly, having satisfied in that her
curiosity, which desired to understand, and know all things, and was
accompanied out of the Church, by the Fathers aforesaid, and other Cavaliers.

As she was never idle, so to exercise continually her mind, and entertain it
in noble and virtuous habits, besides musical Consorts, which from time to
time she had in the evenings, in her lodgings, She desires to hold an Academy
in her own Palace.
at which great Personages were present, she gave order to Count Francis Maria
Santinelli Gentleman of her Chamber, to bring her a list of the persons famed
for learning, and experienced in the Academies of Rome, and acquaint them with
her Majesty's desire, to have them hold their Academies in her Palace. And as
every one justly sought, to show her a dutiful respect, not only with the
tribute of reverence, but with their parts, and talents, so they were most
ready to comply with her desires, which no sooner were made known unto them,
but many fruitful wits, with which the Court of Rome still abounds, were
employed in her praises.

The Fathers of the Society, who justly may be called the Oracles of the
Sciences, not permitting their sublime wits to sleep, nor their fortunate Pens
to be idle, as they knew, that the Queen, so great a lover of learning, She
sees the Roman College.
would see their Roman College, the most happy schools of the Sciences, and
piety, so they put those compositions together, which they thought not so much
to be suitable to the ornament of the place, as meet for the reception of a
woman, who exceeded the capacity of men in the knowledge of the most profound
literature. And indeed in the rich mine of their sublime wits, they found so
much matter, that all that beheld it, were astonished and amazed at the
numerous, and proper applications of so many images, Mottos, Hieroglyphics,
and Emblems, all alluding to the Person alone of this renowned Princess.

On the 18th. of January after dinner her Majesty came to the said College with
her usual attendance, accompanied by so many Persons, that she could hardly
get in her self, though the gate was well looked to by the Guards of the
Switzers, set expressly there to hinder the disorders, which usually occur in
the like crowds and throngs.

At the entrance into the said College was a great quadrangle, with walks
round about supported by Pillars, under which in three parts the Schools are
extended. All the Pillars were adorned with the pictures of women remarkable in
learning, with their medalls of embossed work colored like brass, and under
two thick pastboords of the like embossed work. In the first they read the
elogy of each one, which was still applied to the qualities of the Queen, and
in the second they saw a Motto on the same subject. In the semicircles of the
Arches, the Universities and Colleges, in which those Fathers teach, were
painted with their Inscriptions. Between the Pillars, and each door of the
Schools were represented the particular donatives of each City offered to the
Queen, and displaied underneath with an Epigram written within a wreath
supported by an Angel.

The description of the Roman College which was adorned to receive her.
The second place was the room of the gate, through which they go into the
College. In this they represented the statues of the Queens renowned for their
reigns, expressed in darkish colors, and standing on their bases, under which
in several pastboords hung their Elogies, all applied to her Majesty. Between
one statue and another on a great gilt pastboord were the Emblems relating to
the virtues required in Princes, and under the Epigrams of the Emblem. All
these rooms seemed adorned with red damask with twisted gold, being so
naturally painted, that they cozened the eyes, in case they were not touched.
The leaf-workes had interchangeably on them the Arms of her Majesty, and the
Mottos alluded to the virtues aforesaid.

In the third place were extended the little walks, which are behind this
room, in the which as contiguous to the garden, was painted most excellently a
beautiful garden, with a prospect of various Pillars, in which were written
elogies and odes on the Empresses and Queens renowned for their virtues and
piety, on the doors four Emblems with their Epigrams being delineated. The
fourth and last place was the space between the sacristy and the Church, and
there they saw painted the Empresses and Queens come to Rome, to honor there
the Vicars of Christ. The painting represented a plain, in which were erected
great Pyramides, in every one of which was imprinted an Elogie in praise of
that picture, which still had relation to her Majesty, between the one Pyramide
and the other, was a fained bound of brass, which held up an ode on the same
subject, and on the other between these, hung a paper with an Epigramme.

The honors done her Majesty.
The Church of the said College, dedicated to St, Ignatius the founder of the
Society of Jesus, albeit not yet finished, was most beautifully adorned. As her
Majesty went in at the great gate, she saw on the first arch within, an
inscription containing the argument of all the preparation, and in the space
between the great gate, and the walks of the Court on the right hand was
painted the heavenly wisdom desired by Solomon, and preferred before riches,
and Kingdoms, on the left hand Pallas, the wisdom of the ancient Gentiles, who
with her spear made an Olive Tree grow up in opposition to Neptune, who caused
a horse to appear. All this was displayed in 4. odes, written on thick
past-boards, supported by the bounds in four pillars, and in four others the
Sybills and Muses, who with their predictions, and verses alluded to her
Majesty. She went afterward up into the room over the Gate, where a throne
being prepared, she was complemented by Father Lodowick Bompiani the Rector of
the said University, with a Latin oration.

Being come without the Court, she went up and down all the Schools, in every
one of which, she was welcomed by one of the most eminent Scholars, with a
short Epigramme. Being afterward returned into the said room, over the gate,
she was by Father Rho the Provincial, informed of the contents of that noble
preparation, and heard him read the names of those renowned Princesses. Thence
she went into the Church, where she heard a motetto with most exquisite music,
and afterward departed.

This virtuous preparation was most curious, and noble, and therefore the
concourse of the people, to see, and admire it, was great.

She goes to the College of Urbane for the propagation of the Faith.
On the first of February her Majesty went to see the College of Urbane for the
propagation of the Faith, where Cardinal Capponi, as Vice-prefect of that
Congregation, in the absence of Cardinal Anthony Barberino the Prefect, was
ready to receive her. She was first conducted into the printing house, where
they print two and twenty several tongues, and she saw in an instant some
sheets printed in eight languages, in which were the following words, May
Christina live for ever. The languages were Latin, Greek, Syriaque, Arabic,
Hebrew, Caldean, Coptick, and Armenian. She went afterward into the great
Hall, which was hung with crimson damask with twisted Gold, where her Majesty
sat under a cloth of state, in a chair raised two steps from the ground, the
Cardinal sitting on her left hand in a lower chair. On the four corners of the
said Hall, were fastened four Epigramms on the four parts of the World. At her
entrance she was welcomed by the Scholars in two and twenty languages, none of
them exceeding two periods, which were afterward presented her in print in a
book with this title. The curiosities seen in the said College.
The agreement of tongues in celebrating the praises of Christina Queen of
Swedland. This action ended with an invitation of one of the Scholars to the
rest, to contract in the Latin tongue alone, what could be expressed in the
rest by all the College, to wit the said words, that were printed; may
Christina live for ever, which were seconded, not only by the Scholars, but all
the standers by to her Majesty's great content. She then accompanied by the
said Cardinal, went into the Library, in which all the printed books are kept,
and here they found six Scholars, with six great basins of Silver, in which, in
stead of sweetmeats, seventy two volumes of several works, in two and twenty
languages, were presented to her, which pleased her extremely.

At her Majesty's going out of the Library, she had some compositions presented
her likewise in print in several tongues in her praise, to whom they also
showed a great storehouse full of volumes printed for the service of the
apostolical missionaries, all in several languages, her Majesty confessing,
that in no other part of the World, there was the like printing house for
variety of tongues.

All the order aforesaid was by the direction of my Lord Dionysius Massari the
Secretary of the said Congregation.

She goes again to the Roman College.
Her Majesty unable, for the great throngs of people, to see at her ease, and as
she desired, the many Compositions, Pictures, Mottos, and Inscriptions set out
in the said Roman College, resolved to go thither again, and privately entered
there at the back door, being received by the General, Father Rho the
Provincial, and Father Lodovick Bompiani the Rector, and many others of the
Society.

She quickly went into the Library, which besides a vast number of choice
volumes, is beautifully adorned with the Pictures of all the Cardinals of the
Society, and others, that are famous for their writings, as likewise of their
noble benefactors, among which was more remarkable than the rest, The splendid
Library of the deceased my Lord Coccino:
the Picture of the deceased my Lord John Baptist Coccino a Venetian, who
thought he could not better establish the memory of his glories, his immortal
pains, and incomparable deserts, as well toward the service of the
apostolical Sea, as all learned men, than by leaving to the said Roman
College his most precious and copious Library, with all his choice Manuscripts.

Here her Majesty entertaining her self for some time, The remarkable things
she saw in the Roman College.
in viewing the many volumes, took pleasure too in looking on the Model and
Platform of the City of Jerusalem, which was left by Father Villal-pando, with
the description of the streets, and holy places, consecrated by the journeys
and passions of our Lord Jesus Christ. She then going about the other sides,
discovered some Greek and Latin Manuscripts lying open on a Table, and could
judge of the Authors, showing very great learning. She went thence into the
gallery, that was near, where Father Athanasius Nircherius the great
Mathematician had prepared many curious and remarkable things, as well in
nature, as art, which were in so great a number, that her Majesty said, more
time was required, and less company to consider them with due attention.

However she stayed some time to consider the herb called Phoenix, which
resembling the Phoenix grew up in the waters perpetually out of its own ashes.
She saw the fountains, and clocks, which by virtue of the load stone turn about
with secret force. Then passing through the Hall, where she looked on some
Pictures well done, she went through the walks and the garden, into the
Apothecaries shop, where she saw the preparation of the ingredients of herbs,
plants, metalls, gemms, and other rare things, for the making of treacle, and
balsome of life. She saw them distill with the fire of the same furnace sixty
five sorts of herbs in as many distinct limbecks. She saw the philosophical
calcination of ivorie, and the like. She saw extracted the spirits of Vitriol,
Salt, and Aquafortis, as likewise a jarre of pure water, which with two single
drops of the quintessence of milk, was turned into true milk, the only
medicine for the shortness of the breath, and affections of the breast. In fine
being presented with treacle, and precious oils, she went into the sacristy,
where they opened all the presses, where they keep the Plate, and relics of
the Church, with the great candlesticks, and vases given them by the deceased
Cardinal Lodowick Lodovisio the founder of the Church. She honored
particularly the blood of St. Esuperantia a Virgin and Martyr, which, after a
thousand and three hundred years, is as liquid as if newly shed. Then going
into the Church she heard Mass, and at her departure, gave testimonies to the
Fathers of her great satisfaction and content.

She institutes an Academy in her own Palace.
Among these entertainments, whither sacred, or curious, the Queen forgot not
those of her mind, in the recreations of learning. Some principal Gentlemen of
the Academy of Rome invited to comply with her Majesty's desire, very willingly
concurred with their virtuous attendance, and talents to obey her, The names of
the Academians.
holding once a week an Academy before her. They were Don Pompeo Colonna Prince
of Gallicano, the Prince of St. Gregory, Marquis Scipio Santa Croce, the
Marquis Frederick Miroli, Count Lodowick Santinelli, Count Vlderick Fiumi,
Count Francis Maria Santinelli, Signior Carlo Rapaccioli, Signior Ottavio
Falconieri, the Marquis Francis Ricci, the Abbot Francis Cesis, Signior
Giouanni Lotti, Signior Sebastiano Baldini, Signior Gio. Francesco Melosio,
Signior Antonio Abbati, Signior Camillo Rubiera, Signior Tiberio Cevoli, the
Abbot Vincenzo Maculani, Cavalier Mark Antonio Meniconi, Don Caesare Colonna,
and Signior Gio. Francesco Sinibaldi.

The first Academy began in the evening on the 24. of January, in which the
Prince of Gallicano made appear his solid learning, and wit, with a lecture in
honor of the Pope, Alexander the 7th. the other Academians seconding with their
compositions, the applauses due to him, who for the fair union of piety and
learning, makes the Vatican throne resplendent. The contents of diverse
Academies held before her Majesty.
In the second Academy the Prince of St. Gregory discoursed, sprightly proving,
that the rigor and discourtesies of Ladies, are sometimes the arguments, and
subtilties of love.

In the third the Marquis Frederick Miroli made the problem, who gave abundant
testimonies, he was no less conspicuous in the knowledge of the sciences, than
in valor, and arms. He argued whither the day, or the night were more proper
for a poetical fury, and on the same subject, Signior Gio. Francesco Sinibaldi
spoke learnedly, who made his virtuous qualities appear. The conclusion was in
favor of the night, which appeared with the twelve hours before her, who were
persons most beautifully adorned, with lighted torches in their hands, and
followed by four stars artificially, dressed, which were the two Brothers,
the Counts Santinelli, and two others, their friends. The Night sang some
verses in thanks to the Academians, for the honor done her in making her the
theater of their wits, and the four stars danced the Ganaryes most
gracefully. This was the invention of Count Francis Maria Santinelli, who being
to make the problem in the fourth Academie, made his virtuous parts appear in
an Academical lotterye, in which every one recited something on his chance.

The last problem, which ended the Academie, was concluded by the Abbot,
Francis Cesis, and Signior Francesco Melosi, and 'twas, whither the love was
more durable, and powerful, that comes on a sudden, or that which is bred by
conversation.

'Twas fit that some martial entertainments should second those of learning,
and therefore the Prince of Palestrina with a company of Cavaliers, 24. in
number, to show his respects to her Majesty (he imagining, to her eyes,
accustomed to the harshness, and wars of the North, martial objects might
likewise be grateful and pleasing, but much more the sweeter, and calmer of
Italy) resolved, di fare una festa de Carosselli.

To these recreations, the great and generous Barberines added three musical
Plays, most splendidly recited in their Palace at the four Fountains.

On the last of January in the evening they recited first a musical Play
entitled the triumph of piety, or the life of man. The matter was all moral,
and becoming the beauty of the scenes, The Comedy entitled the triumph of piety
recited to her Majesty in the Palace of the Prince of Pallestrina.
which were very handsome, as well for the learned composition, as the sweet
and most exquisite music. The composition represented the arts and deceits,
with which pleasure, and guilt seek still to overvvhelme the understanding and
innocence; the remorse of conscience in pursuing them, constancy in rejecting
them, and frailty in complying with them.

A curtain being drawn, the Night appeared in a shady scene. The davvning of
the day began to be seen, and afterward a little by little the sum, which
with wonderful art made the Theater all resplendent. The mornning from her
silver Chariot, strewing many sweet flowers, and awaking the Shepherds to their
business, was the prologue, after which in a very fine prospect, was a City
with two opposite rocks, the one of the understanding, and the other of
pleasure, who disputed very earnestly together, each one endeavoring to beat
down the reasons of the other.

Humane life coming afterward forth betvveen innocence and guilt, The moral
contents of the Comedy.
each of them endeavored to vanquish the senses, pleasure and guilt
insinuating delight, the most fit machine for the moving of the will, and with
this they provoked her, sometimes to lasciviousness, which is an excess of
desire without reason, sometimes to idleness the Father of all vice, now to
gourmandizing the mother of luxury, now to avarice, which destroys faith and
goodness, sometimes to pride, the ruin of all virtue, sometimes to anger the
beginning of madness, and sometimes to envye, which spoils all friendship, and
defiles another glory.

The understanding, and innocence on the other side represented to life, in
opposition to lasciviousness, the beauty of temperance, which is the foundation
of a man's happy life. Idleness they opposed with exercise and study, the
Fathers of virtues and glory, and gourmandizing with abstinence, the true arms
to vanquish the sensual temptations. Against avarice they set liberality, the
soul of reputation, and guide to Paradise. Against pride humility, which makes
us worthy of compassion with men, and of mercy with God. Against anger
patience, which o'recomes and conquers all difficulties, and in fine against
envy the contempt of earthly things, one of the greatest parts of generosity.

Life invaded by goods, and provocations, now yielded to the allurements of
pleasure and guilt, now recollected it self, and adhered to the admonitions of
the understanding and innocence, and contending thus with moral discourses,
very learned, and most excellently sung, they ended several acts, and changed
the scene the se^ond time which with admirable beauty represented a delitious,
and well severed Garden, adorned with statues, and such rare partitions, that
with the addition of the fountains, and a most strange fall of water, made it
one of the most beautiful prospects, that could possibly be seen. In fine in
the third scene, in which they saw a most pleasant meadow full of trees, fruit,
and flowers, and a distance of place, where the Vatican appeared, the
Frontispiece and Cupola of St. Peter's, the new Suburbs, and Castle of St
Angelo, guile and pleasure disguised like the understanding and innocence,
endeavor to cosen life, with the provocations and artifices proper to malice,
and the cunning of the wicked, but the understanding and innocence, coming
forth in their own true appearance, and finding life in those ambuscados,
discovering to her the deceits, with which pleasure and guilt seek to lull her
asleep, and betray her, make her see her own error and frailty, and to
fortify and defend her from all other surprises and ambushes, give her a ring
of Gold, with a deaths-head in stead of a Jewel, admonishing her, that if she
shall still think of death, after which the greatest thing is reduced to
nothing, she shall find whosoever thinks of death, never ceases to live well.
In this manner they ended the Play, in which followed several intermediums of
dances, and musical consorts, with instruments suitable to the pleasure of so
virtuous a recreation, they afterward concluding with a dance admirably
performed by two excellent dancers, and with the appearance of a squib full of
fireworks, accompanied with the noise of many mortar pieces.

When the Queen had taken pleasure in beholding the noble appartaments, and
rich furniture of that royal Palace, which was adorned with excellent
Pictures, she went down the private stairs to the Theater, in the middle of
which within a partition, and under a cloth of state, she heard with such
attention and content, the morality of that action, that judging it very
suitable to her rare understanding she desired to be present twice there, she
praising much the subject, The Author of the Composition.
and composition, the fruit of the rare wit of the Abbot Rospigliosi, a person
as eminent in learning, as remarkable for his noble condition, it being enough
to say, he is the deserving Nephew of my Lord Rospigliosi Secretary of state to
his Holiness, whose capacity of the greatest affairs, is accompanied with
goodness, and literature in the highest degree. The music was ordered by
Signior Marco Marazzoli the famous Musician of his Holinesses Chapel, and the
Actors were Signior Bonaventura Argenti, who acted man's life, Signior Domenico
Rodomonte who represented innocence, Signior Domenico del Pane the Actor of
guilt, Signior Lodowick Lenzi of the understanding, Signior Francesco de Rossi
of pleasure, and Signior Gioseppe Sorilli of the prologue, all exquisite
Musicians, and very fine Actors.

In the mean time the Queen on the 18. of February visited the Church of St.
Peter, all the Clergy receiving her at the Gate. She visits the famous
relics kept in St. Peter's.
Thirty Canons in their rotchets, coaps and white skins, with 38. Priests, and
26. beneficed Clerks, waited on her Majesty, who when she had adored the most
holy Sacrament, went down into the grots below the Church, where her Majesty
heard Mass in a Chapel near the bodies of St. Peter and St. Paul; she saw
afterward the records that are there of the shrines of the ancient Popes, and
in her return was conducted by my Lord Farnese, my Lord Fibei, and my Lord
Marescotti, all three Canons of St. Peter, to see the famous relics of the
lance which pierced the side of Christ, a part of the Cross, on which he was
crucified, and the print of our Saviors face on a handkerchief, the Volto
Santo, relics so highly esteemed, and kept with such care, that they cannot
be seen near at hand by any one, albeit he were a Cardinal, unless he be a
Canon of the said Church, without the special leave of the Pope, who issues
forth a Brief in such cases, as he did to the Queen with this clause, let her
alone see them. Her Majesty admired the said relics with particular
devotion, and went thence to see all the rest of the things, kept there for
the greater decorum within a Chapel of the Sacristy.

Two days after her Majesty went to the Church of the Conventualls of St.
Francis dedicated to the holy Apostles, where she was met and attended by
Father Fel^x d' Ascoli the General of that Order, and the most qualifyed
Fathers of the Convent. At her Majesty's entrance into the Church, they gave
signs of joy with ringing the Bells, and playing on the Organs, and Music,
and the Father aforesaid gave her the holy water when she had adored the
blessed Sacrament, and visited the two Altars of St. Francis and St. Anthony of
Padoua, in the arch-confraternity of which she desired to be registered, she
heard Mass and departed.

On the following Sunday her Majesty went the second time to the Benedictine
Nuns of the conception of St. Mary in Campo Martio, She goes to the Church of
the Nuns in Campo Martio.
and as the first time she saw only the Church, she now would see the
monastery, into which she entered accompanied by the Deputy, and received and
attended at the Gate by Dame Tecla Rotolante the Abbess, Dame Deodata Baccini
the Prioress, and the rest of the Nuns. Her Majesty was conducted into the
quire, and heard Mass, a motetto being sung by the angelical voice of Dame
Maria Alessandro Galvani, she went afterward into a great room, furnished with
crimson damask fringed with Gold, with her state, chair, and footstool of the
same, where she heard, without offense to her modesty, a very fine motetto,
which was sung in her praise, though she was better pleased, when she heard
diverse others, the sweetness of which diminished the bitterness instilled into
her by the first. After this they gave her Majes^^ a noble collation, which was
seconded with a present of seven basins full of several fine devises, sent her
to her lodging, which her Majesty most kindly accepted.

On the fifteenth of February, her Majesty extremely desirous, She goes to the
Vineyard of Prince Panfilio.
to see the most remarkable things of the great City of Rome, went to view the
Vineyard of the Prince Don Camillo Panfilio, called Belrespiro near San
Pancratio, where she found the said Prince accompanied by my Lord Torreggiani,
and many Cavaliers the Camrades of his Excellence, who waited on her all about
the Garden, and the appartaments of the Palace, putting into her hand a stick
all gilt, and beset with precious stones.

When her Majesty accompanied by the Prince, whom she would never suffer to be
uncovered, had with great content, walked all about the Garden, which is one of
the fairest, and most lovely of Rome, and the Prince had caused to be made with
design and vast charge, she went into the Palace adorned with the pretiousest
furniture, giving luster and magnificence to a house, where she found prepared
a royal collation of most exquisite sweetmeats, The presents made by the said
Prince to her Majesty.
and remained some time, the Prince presenting her the Cup, and the Duke of
Ceri the napkin. Then observing the pictures, which are there in great
abundance, and most excellent, she liked, amongst others, a Danae done by
Hanibal Caracci, which the Prince perceiving, without speaking any thing caused
to be presented to her, with another of his best Pieces, just as she returned
to her Palace, having at her departure from the Vineyard given her the said
stick beset with Jewels. The Prince some days before, having heard she would
make a little Coach for her own use, sent her one of crimson Velvet, and
Silver, wrought majestickly and artificially in the gallery of the great Duke
of Florence.

The Carneval afterward approaching, which in Rome begins only ten days
before Lent, the Queen some few days before had intimated to the Prince, she
would come to his house, to see the maskings and horseraces used at that time.
His Excellency very glad of the honor, the night before the Saturday, on which
they begin, caused a handsome long scaffold to be reared before his Palace in
all have.

It represented a long pulpet supported by Pillars, and on the sides had two
arms bending inwards a little, the one for the Cavaliers of her Majesty's
train, and the other for the Ladies. In the middle with a fine row of pillars,
and little chapters of Gold, and cornishes of metal, the history of Alexander
the great was epitomized in fine and noble painting. The box appointed for her
Majesty, had gilt parapets of iron with the arms of Swedland, and was defended
from the air with long windows of fine glass wrought with gold, with the arms
of her Majesty.

Within it was hung with embroydery in Gold on blew Velvet, with a throne, and
royal state, and the arms of her Majesty, and her Kingdoms, in the richest
purled twist. This as each thing else, that was done in such an occasion, was
by the design and architecture of his Excellence himself, a Prince of a
sprightly and admirable understanding in all things.

Every time her Majesty repaired to the Palace of this Prince, she, with her
train, had a noble collation of sweetmeats, and he kept open house. Every
evening the boxes abounded with Torches of white wax, and the first three
nights they made very fine bon-fires.

The entertainment the Queen had the first evening was a musical Play, The
honors done her Majesty by Prince Panfilio.
acted by three waiting women of the Princess of Rossano his Excellences wife,
which pleased so her Majesty, she desired to see it again the next night,
though the Princess had prepared another divertisment like it, which was
deferred till the third evening, and liked by her Majesty, with the same good
fortune to be acted several times. The composition of the words was by Signior
Giouanni Lotti, and the music by Tenalia, both persons very famous.

With such recreations the Prince entertained her Majesty till the last night
of Carneval, in which he made wonderfully appear his own wit and generosity,
for after a royal collation, and abounding with all the new fruits they could
get in despite of the harshness of the season, he conducted the Queen into a
great room, adorned with most splendid, and inestimable furniture, where she
saw, sitting under a state, the furniture in a moment vanish out of the
Chamber, a fair Sea there appearing in a beautiful prospect, and ingeniously
contrived within that narrow place: The Queens recreations in the house of the
said Prince.
she saw then immediately Venus and Cupid descend from above, in a Chariot
drawn by two Pigeons, without seeing what supported it in the air, insomuch as
the Queen, and all that were there, were amazed and astonished.

Venus being come to the earth with her Son, heard Cupids complaints, who
accused the Ladies of Tybur for being too rigid, and the authority of his
Mother not appeasing his anger, he shot some arrows toward the Ladies, and
together with Venus returned to the Chariot, both of them singing jointly the
praises of her Majesty.

As they vanished they sang a little song, inviting some Ladies, who formerly
were followers of Cupid, to give with a dance some refreshment to them he had
subdued. The machine vanishing away, from the sides of the maritime scene
issued forth eight Ladies of the Princess aforesaid, most splendidly
apparrel'd, with lighted Torches in their hands, and danced a rare dance,
establishing love with those unstable motions, and securing the motions of the
will with the measure of short distances.

After this the room was refurnisht as before, and her Majesty was so highly
contented, that she publicly declared, she had not seen any thing in Rome, to
her greater satisfaction.

The words were composed by the said Prince Don Camillo, who presented her
Majesty with a song made by him on her renouncing of her Kingdoms, which was
much commended by her, she celebrating the Prince for a very virtuous person,
and deserving all praise and applause.

Still in all these actions, the Princess of Rossano was accompanied by many
Princesses and Ladies, and several Princes and Cavaliers were with the Prince,
who had every day rich clothes, with strange and new inventions. The same did
the Princess, who had Jewels of inestimable value. This Princess with her
prudence, and most noble carriage, The eminent qualities of the Princess of
Rossano.
made it evidently appear, her mind is as illustrious and generous, as her
family is great, she being the Niece of many Popes, and allied to many
Potentates in Italy.

The Abbot Caesar Malvicino, and Signior Carlo Centosiorini, the former the
Secretary, and the latter the chief Gentleman of the horse to the Prince
aforesaid, still assisted at these functions, as likewise Signior Mario Raviera
his Excellences domestic Gentleman, who applied himself to it very earnestly.

In Carneval-time notwithstanding these virtuous entertainments, her Majesty
showed her piety in visiting several Churches, and particularly that of Giesu,
where with a most splendid preparation, the forty hours were exposed.

On a scaffold in fine order appeared six mountains the arms of his Holiness,
The noble preparation in the Church of Giesu.
on the top of which, according to the prophecy of Isaiah they saw the Church
sitting in a beautiful manner, who, while with her left hand she supported the
cross, with the other pointed at the sublime throne of glory, on which they
discovered the Savior of the World. On the two contiguous mountains were
erected two figures representing Religion, and contemplation, while the
theological virtues placed on the three mountains below, did court and attend
her.

At the feet of the mountains they saw come from all parts throngs of people to
do homage to that great Monarchess, and captivate their understandings
convinced in obedience to the Catholic Faith. Those personages afterward
appeared, who thought it a thing of glory, and desert to prefer the reproach
of the cross before worldly greatness. They represented too the Princes, Kings,
and Emperors, who showed they regarded not their titles, but to have some
worthy argument, to make known to the World their esteem of the true Religion,
while for the love of it, they despised those dignities. There were likewise
Princesses and Queens, whose piety was as generous; and as the famous Painters
had given life and eloquence with their pensills, to the Pictures, so they were
all contented with their state, but in a certain manner confessed, they were
conquered with the modern miracle of a courageous and masculine woman, who
remarkable in the midst of the rest, with a countenance breathing majestic, as
well as devotion, the more she endeavored to obscure the titles of a Queen,
acquired them the more.

The three Crowns and Scepters, the victimes offered up by her to the Catholic
Faith, she did not now behold, but every one admired them, and it seemed she
would plant them in that mountain, she judging it worthy to have Scepters for
trees, and Diadems for flowers, where Monarchs, and Princes excited by her
singular example, might, instead of birds, build their nests.

To this great Lady, the supreme Commandress of the mountain bowed her face, as
if she had said, many daughters have heaped up riches, and thou exceedest them
all; You would have thought, in so pleasing a sight, the holy Church sucking
consolations with her eyes, and milk as it were from so many breasts, as there
were triumphant souls, increased to the eyes of the beholders, and with those
mountains quickened with some invisible breath, was raised much higher.

Behind the Mountains and Personages, they discovered several fine distances,
which was all in the low region.

But the eye looking upwards, entered into a Paradise, which being wide open,
while it would be a Spectator of what was done on earth, became a delitious,
and fortunate spectacle to wayfaring men. It extended it self in many circles
proportionably still greater, and abounding with beautiful figures of knots,
Seraphins, Cherubins, Angels, and Saints, even to the top of the Arch, and
profundity of the royal Court, the receptacle of glory, which could not be
bounded with limits, fine knots, appearing without the Arch. The most holy
Sacrament the Ascendent, and Horoscope of the holy Church, was in the midst of
Heaven as it were, nor could they discern how, or where it reposed, and yet it
stood fast. The blessed souls adoring it, as they showed, they enjoyed its
glories, so likewise presaged, by virtue of its influences, greater happiness
to the Catholic World, and it seemed they heard them say to those mountains,
enjoy peace O Mountains, at which tidings, they shall skip for joy like Ramms,
for the hope, they saw they had.

The Father eternal was Spectator of all, whom we there represent, as when he
had finished the World, and said all was good; so there he appeared supported
in himself, and joining together the high with the low, the Earth with the
Heaven made one single Region, as it were.

How then that noble machine was illuminated, we may guess by the stars, that
are still resplendent, though the Sun, the Fountain of light, be not seen in
the scene of Heaven. The machine was every where bright, but they could not
discover from whence the light came, nor tell if it was in the Pictures, or
borrowed from some Sun, assembled by art; so with many very pleasing deceits of
near distances, and distant nearness, fixed flights, and endings without end,
they sweetly lost their curiosity, and had their devotion free, so as they
might employ themselves wholly in those holy exercises.

The noble Comedies acted in the Palace of the Prince of Pellestrina.
At that time on the Theater aforesaid of the Signior Barberini, two other fine
musical Plays were represented, with rare changes of scenes, intermediums of
dances, and most exquisite music, the subject of both being handsomely
translated out of Spanish. The one was entitled Arms and Love, containing the
many amorous and warlike events, which usually accompany by turns the fortunes
of the followers of Mars and Venus. The other called, the good of evil,
contained too a knot of various amorous accidents, in which virtue, and love
intermixing by chance, made appear oftentimes, out of evil comes good, and
frequently from disasters better fortune proceeds, allowing the saying, we
should have been in danger, if we had not been in danger. The Queen was still
present at these actions, entertaining and delighting her mind, which was
given, and applied to virtuous and noble things.

The German College desired too the occasion of paying their dutiful respects
to the Queen in a musical Play called the sacrifice of Isaac, The Play acted
in the German College.
the contents of which were, that God the supreme King of victories, and
fountain of all power, loves above all victimes the rational, and above all
sacrifices the unbloody of obedience, where there is a contrition of the heart,
a captivating of a faithful understanding, and a pious will subjected to his
pleasure. The intermedium was the valorous, and fortunate act of Judith, and
all did allude to the glories of the Queen, for renouncing her Kingdoms, and
professing the Catholic Faith. A Father of the Society composed the words,
and the music was done by Signior Carissimi, master formerly of the Chapel
of that Church of Apoll^nare.

On the 28. of February in the evening, in the foresaid Palace of the Signior
Barberini at the four fountains.

Si fece la festa d' Carroselli.
Which as for the appearances, and machines deserved an universal applause, so
obliges me to relate it succinctly, I leaving the several particulars to be
published by a learneder pen, and more happy.

The great Court of the said Palace, which is long and spacious, was designed
for the Theater. These Gentlemen by demolishing some houses of their own, that
were contiguous, caused two large, and commodious ascents of degrees, to be
erected on the left side capable of about 3000. Persons, in the midst of which,
a magnificent great gate was built over against the Queens place, adorned with
various figures, which being about the Queens arms, made a very fine prospect.
On the top of the said great Gate in four great windows with lettises before
them, was the Quire for the Musicians, who with various instruments, made most
exquisite music.

In the side of the Palace, two rows of scaffolds were erected, the one over
the other, covered with rich tapistries, and so with proportionable symmetrie,
from both the sides two other ranges answerable, were extended, so as by an
ingenious industry, that Court was reduced into the form of a beautiful
Theater.

To give light to the field, besides the thick Torches of white wax, and
artificial materials, which burnt on several rows of the Pillars, on the
ascents of the degrees, and at the head of the lists, there were sixteen great
stars artificially composed of iron wire, each of which being set up very
high in the air, with a new invention not seen before in the middle of the
field held sixteen great Torches, so as by commutation, the lights alone cost
above a thousand Crowns.

In the midst of the side aforesaid, on the first floor of the appartaments, a
very capacious box was erected for her Majesty, adorned within and without with
most rich cloth of Gold, with her state of crimson velvet, bordered and fringed
with Gold. All those royal appartaments were very richly furnished, and
altogether answerable to the greatness, and generosity of the minds of the
Barberini.

Near her Majesty were four Cardinals, to wit Retz, Imperiale, Borromeo, and
Azzolino, and all the Gentlemen of her Court. The other Cardinals had their
places somewhat higher than the Queens, and likewise all the windows were
nobly adorned, and abounded with other eminent Persons. On the second scaffolds
were the Princesses and Ladies, most finely attired, and resplendent, to
augment with the splendor of their beauty and ornaments, the luster, and
Jewels of so handsome a spectacle.

The pomp and majesty of this show, made all Rome curious to behold it,
together with the neighboring Countries, so as though the concourse of the
people to get in, was very great, yet all civil persons were let in without
confusion, by the excellent order of Cardinal Barberin, with whose good
direction all things were regulated.

After 3. hours in the night, they began. The 24. Cavaliers, each one of which
was most splendidly set out, were divided into two squadrons. In the first
appearance were Signior Lorenzo Roberti, the Marquess Tarquinius Santa Croce,
Captain Giuseppe Marino Rasponi, Baron Augustine del Nero, Signior Fabio de
Massimi, Colonel Lodovick Casale, Signior Carlo Rapaccioli, the Marquis John
Peter del Drago, Signior Guido Rasponi, Signior Mar. Antonio Verospi, Signior
Ferdinando Vecchiarelli a Knight of Malta, and Signior Paola Francesco
Falconieri, all which were on generous steeds barded with blew furniture
embroydered with Silver, to which their suits were answerable, and cloakes of
the same color with very rich embroyderies, representing shining Pearls, with
plumes of feathers* so large and stately, that it is hard to say, how they could
with the waving of the air, support on their heads so spacious and heavy a
machine, the feathers costing each of them above two hundred Crowns.

Eight Trumpetters went before, and a hundred and twenty grooms, all clothed
in a Livery embroidered with Silver on blew, and great blew and white feathers
on their heads, each of them carrying a great lighted Torch in their hands,
which greatly augmented the luster and splendor, all marching very orderly.

After the twelve Cavaliers came at last a most beautiful Chariot most rarely
designed, which was of blew and silver adorned with figures, and admirable
devises of embossed work. It was so high, it reached to the box of the Queen,
and was drawn by three Musicians habited like Goddesses, and representing the
three Graces, one concealed within it, moving it secretly, and with great
agility. In it sat joyful Rome in a most majestic manner, who desirous to
discover her joy for the arrival of a Princess so great, seemed to look like
love, which being the Soul of the World, elected her heart for his unchangeable
throne, as a City the head of the World. The Chariot come before the Queen
stood still, and the three Graces, who seemed to draw it, seconded singing
sweetly the musical sense of love, ending all in the praises of her Majesty.

After this from the opposite side, came forth the other twelve Cavaliers, who
fained themselves to be Amazons, and they were Don Maffeo Barberini Prince of
Pellestrina, Signior Urbano Rocci, the Marquis Ferdinand Torres, Signior
Gasparo Alveri, Ferrante Count of Massa in the room of the Marquis Patritii,
who fell sick, Signior Stefano Pignatelli, the Marquis Fabritius Mari, the
Marquis Cintius Silvestri, Signior Giouanni Battista Costaguti, Count Marc.
Antonio Monte Mart della Corbara, Signior Paola Mignanelli, and Signior Angelo
Leonini, all clothed in red, and Gold, with high plumes of feathers, very rich
cloaks, noble trappings, and sprightly horses, eight Trumpetters, and a hundred
and twenty grooms going before them, all clothed in red, embroydered with
Gold, with great and thick feathers on their heads, and lighted Torches in
their hands, who were all, like the first, Soldiers of fortune chosen out of
good companies, that their marching, and ranks might be regular, as they were,
they being conducted by a very expert Officer who supplied that place.

Another Chariot like the first, followed after, disagreeing in nothing but the
colors, this being of red and Gold, and varied with not inferior ornaments,
drawn likewise by three Musicians in the likeness of three furies. In it with a
dreadful aspect, and menacing posture sat another Musician representing
Disdain.

This after a handsome, and orderly motion, his Champions preceding, stood
opposite to the other of the God of love, who stopped before the Queen. There
between the Graces, and the Furyes, was a pleasant and curious dialogue in
music, each of the parties calling in the end their own warriers to arms, for
the decision of the business. The same contention had Love and Disdain, each
one concluding for the battle.

The Amazons with much courage and generosity, moved from the other side of the
field, and stood in array at the head of the Theater toward the Garden. The
Cavaliers, as fierce and hardy, did the same, and went to the opposite side in
their ranks.

Each of these squadrons was followed by their own Chariot, which moved in good
order. The Cavaliers putting off their high plumes of feathers, and long
Cloakes for the show, were more fit for the fight, and putting on their
Helmets, that were easy and light, were armed on the bre^st and the back, with
brachals and gauntlets. The Chariots retired aside, to give no impediment to
the field, and the Grooms attending there, filled all the circumference of the
Theater, making a very fine prospect, which from the light of the Torches, and
the glittering of their clothes, received much beauty.

The Quire of the Musicians on the arch aforesaid, just against her Majesty, as
it did from time to time make most exquisite music, so gave place to the sound
of the Trumpets, with which they were awaked to the battle, so as three of the
Cavaliers with pistolls in their hands rode a gallop toward the Amazons. The
said pistolls were charged by Colonel Vaini, who being a person nobly borne,
and very valorous, was honored with that charge, much esteemed and used in
Germany.

At the motion of the foresaid Cavaliers, three of the Amazons rode against
them, and meeting them in the midst of the Careere of the Theater
enterchangeably discharged their pistolls, turning twice quickly about to meet
the second time, which succeeded very well, they afterward retiring in good
order. Four afterward on a side issued forth, and did the same thing, then
five, afterward six, and lastly all twelve, they mingling themselves the one
with the other in order, so as between the smoke, the fire, and the noise of
their arms, they saw a seeming fray, and pleasant contention.

This no sooner was ended, but a curtain being drawn, from the arch, or great
Gate aforesaid, came a great machine representing a monstrous Dragon, which
vomited flames of fire, and like a great Chariot, carried on his back another
Musician, who seemed the famous Hercules.

He with a shrill, and grave voice, suspending the fight, offered, instead of
it, two golden apples, taken violently by him out of the orchard of the
Hesperides, the renowned acquisition of his glorious labors. At those words
three of the said Hesperides very finely attired, issued forth, and bewailing
with lamentable accents the prodigal concession of that treasure, obtained the
favors they themselves might distribute those apples, which they gave to the
Cavaliers, and to the Amazons.

This act being ended, which was boldly performed, and with excellent music,
the Dragon walked by course o'e the field, and returned to his first station in
the great Gate. In the mean time two Cavaliers brake from their troop,
brandishing their shields in their left hands, and carrying the apples in their
right, and riding a gallop toward the front of the Amazons, assailed them
fiercely, and endeavored to seize on their apples, turning swiftly on the
right hand, but two Amazons pursued them closely, and charging them home,
followed them to their own squadron. Then three Cavaliers issuing forth, put
the Amazons to flight, and returned to their own party, of which sometimes
four in a Company coming forth, then five, and six, and at last, all together,
made so handsome a mixture, so well led, and so dexterous, that the eyes of the
Spectators could not see it enough.

This skirmish being ended, which was no less strange, than delightful, they
came all in ranks, with their swords in their hands before the Queen. Then
from the left side came forth another great Charior, all gilded, and adorned
with various ornaments, representing that of the Sun, on which sat glittering
a Musician in the habit of Phoebus, who was attended by the four seasons of the
year, with 24. Virgins waiting on him, which related to the hours. The said
Chariot was drawn by four horses, of a right murrey color very well matched,
and barded with Gold.

This, stopping before the Queen, reconciled the hostile troops, and having
sung some verses, to express the love of Rome toward her honored Majesty, the
Cavaliers and Amazons united themselves together three by three, and preceded
by all their train, and followed by the m^chins, they passing before the Queen,
retired into their quarters, the show ending in this manner, after which the
Prince gave a splendid collation of most excellent sweetmeats to the Ladies.

The Queen ended afterward the recreations of Carneval, with hearing in the
Palace Mazarino at Quirinale a French Play, entitled Heraclius, done by
Cornelius the famous Poet of France, whither her Majesty was invited by Signior
di Lionne the French Ambassador to the Princess of Italy, who then was at Rome
for the affairs of his Master. This Minister in all his great employments for
the service of that Crown, as well within, as without the Kingdom, has
sufficiently made known the vivacity of his Spirit, the readiness of his wit,
and constant fidelity. He is of a most affable behavior, a vigorous judgment,
great foresight, and rare capacity in every affair. His wit is refined with
experience, his mind very sprightly, and his thoughts aim only at glory, and
an excellent report. He is full of solidity in his discourses, of wariness, and
dexterity in affairs, and sincerity, and sweetness in his carriage, being
especially a friend unto virtue, with which he deservedly attracts to himself,
the encomiums and praises of every one that know; him.

Besides the said Comedy, he presented her Majesty with a stately collation, of
most excellent sweetmeats, and in extraordinary abundance, and gave her a fine
Ball, danced after the French fashion, by some nimble and agile Savoyards, with
which the Queen was very highly satisfied.

On the first day of Lent her Majesty went to the house of the Prince of St.
Gregory, The Cavalcata of his Holiness to St. Sabina.
to behold the sollemne Cavalcata, with which the Pope accompanied by the
sacred College, and the rest of the Court, went from the Vatican to Aventino,
to visit there St. Sabina, the Church of the Dominicans. This Convent is famous
for several memorialls of the residence there, of the glorious St. Dominick.
After dinner she went likewise to that station, where the Father General
received and attended her, as likewise the chief Fathers of that order, which
met there that day.

On the second of March, her Majesty went to the Church of Madonna della Scala
the discalceate Carinelites, an order she loved well. At the Gate of the Church
the was received by Father Joachim di Giesu Maria the General, accompanied by
the most eminent Friars of that order. While she prayed before the most holy
Sacrament, a very fine Motetto was sung. Thence passing into the Convent, she
went into the Oratory, which she found richly hung, and adorned with Pictures,
Mottos, and Emblems. Here she heard Mass, at which the devotion of her mind was
augmented with exquisite Music. She then honored a precious relic of a foot
of St. Teresia, the foundress of that order, and heard a Latin oration recited
by one of those Fathers.

The day after, which was the first Friday in March, she visited St. Peter's, as
she did all the Fridayes of the month aforesaid, for the gaining the treasures
of that famous indulgence.

She was pleased afterward to visit the College of the English, She visits
the English College.
where the good and generous zeal of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, erected
under the instruction of the Jesuits, a place of refuge for the English youth,
who retaining the true seeds of the Catholic Religion, should recurre to this
City, the common Country of all, to be the better settled in their Faith, with
the Sciences, and Piety, they learn there.

This College had desired, ever since her arrival in Rome, to testify to her
their dutiful respects, and Father Edward Courtney the Rector, employed soon
his parts in composing a book, in which are contained the Elogies of above
fifty Saint, the Queens, or daughters of the Kings of England, he adding to
each Elogie some verses very handsomely applied to this Princesses rare
qualities. She came thither accompanied by diverse Princes and Cavaliers, and
particularly by my Lord Torregg^ani, who had invited thither her Majesty, she
going into the Church, dedicated to the glorious English Martyr St. Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, found it finely adorned, and abounding with the
Pictures of Saints the Kings of England, lent them by my Lord Somerset,
Chamberlain of Honor to the Pope, and a Gentleman nobly borne, who was
likewise there. Her Majesty's prayers were accompanied with most admirable
music, and a harmony of Viols, in which the English excel. She sitting down
afterward under a state, had recited to her a short Latin oration, with some
verses by two of those young Scholars, they presenting to her the said book of
printed Elogies, which her Majesty most courteously accepted.

On the day of St. Thomas of Aquin, the solemn Feast of the order of St.
Dominick, her Majesty went to the Church of Minerva, of the Fathers aforesaid,
one of the chiefest of Rome, as well for the service of the Church, as the
sacred Congregation of the Cardinals, held in that Convent every Wednesday in
the morning, of the holy office of the greatest importance in Rome. The rooms
where they hold the said Congregation, were seen by the Queen, as likewise all
the Convent, her Majesty remaining highly pleased with the magnificence both of
the one and the other. She was received and attended by the Father General,
and Father Raymund Capisucchi Master of the Sacred Palace, and one of the
examiners of the Bishops, a Prelate of much virtue, and rare parts, which are
the more remarkable by the ancient Family of the Capisucchi, which as appears
by authentic writings, and is gathered from the very same arms, is a branch
sprowted out of the most noble stock of the Counts of Tunn in Germany, the head
of which now, is the Prince Archbishop of Saltzbourgh, a Gentleman of most
eminent qualities.

Her Majesty had likewise some thoughts of seeing the curious study of the
Knight of St. Stephen Sir Francis Gualdo of Rimini, a Gentleman well deserving
of the learnedest of the ancients, which he gave to his most Christian Majesty,
but the ill weather, and the greater affairs of this Princess, have not yet
permitted her to behold it. I therefore forbear to speak of the said study,
till a fitter opportunity be presented me.

The Queen then continuing her virtuous entertainments, at the beginning of
Lent, introduced the spiritual exercise of a devout oratory in her Palace
every Wednesday, which was ordered by the Prince of Gallicano. They began the
second Wednesday in March, and the history of Daniell was recited in music, a
composition well becoming the said Prince. In the second Oratory Father Rho,
the famous Preacher, made a Sermon, in the third Father Spinola, in the fourth
Father Nicholas Zucchi all Jesuits, in the fifth Father Spinelli a Celestine,
and in the sixth Father Don Carlo di Palma a Theatine, all Persons of great
learning, and worth.

But behold us at the end of these our relations. The sincerity of my Pen,
which cannot deliver truly to Posterity, the glorious name of Christina great
without the true Characters of a perpetual Panegirique, concludes, that as
it is doubtless, this great Princess deserves for a thousand respects, the
greatest obsequiousness, and compliance in order to her eminent qualities, and
parts, so it is to be hoped, the fortunate Climate of Rome, the Epilogue of
Celestial, and humane felicities, will deserve the good fortune to enjoy, and
serve her long. It Is certain, as this Queen, with the incomparable endowments
of her mind, and the frank resolutions of her heart, like the Sun among the
Stars, may justly pretend to be singular in the World, so Rome the sacred, the
great and majestic Phoenix, among the Metropolitan Cities of Christianity, may
best of all others, give a happy, long, and fit entertainment to her Majesty's
glorious fortunes.

FINIS.

