The Grounds OF SOVEREIGNTY AND GREATNESS.

Romans 13.7. Reddite ergo omnibus debita: cui tributum, tributum: cui vectigal,
vectigal; cui timorem, timorem: cui HONOREM HONOREM.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. and are to be sold by Anthony Lawrence,
Bookseller in Ordinary to Her Majesty, in Exeter-stret, and James Thompson in
Eagle Court near the Strand, 1675.

Reader,
THis Piece is Foreign, and as hastily put into English, as usually Men are
into new Clothes against some sudden Solemnity; or a Traveller into the dress
of the Country where he arrives. The haste, I hope, will excuse the faults;
and the near approach of this Session of Parliament, to the undertaking, may
excuse the haste: Being it was a Stranger, I was loath it should lose the
opportunity of most Authentic Naturalization; And being Loyal, it could not
hope for greater applause, than from those, who have so signalized themselves
in that Virtue, as in a manner to repair the ghastly Ruins of the late
Rebellion; At home, by inspiring comfort to the Sufferers, and Repentance to
the Guilty: And abroad, by freeing us from Reproach, and defacing the Marks of
our Disgrace, even where the Emulation of our Neighbors added to the depth of
their native Die.

If Any one shall think this Paper too small for so great a Subject, as it
carries in the Front, Let him consider, that the nakedness of Truth renders
it less bulkie, and that what is Solid, is likewise Compact: but rather instead
of an Apology, Let him peruse the Treatise it self; Wherein, I hope, the
Majesty of the sense will shine through, and thereby illustrate, the meanness
of my Expression, and whilst it gathers praise for my Author, will at least
obtain pardon for me.

October. 11. 1675.
THE GROUNDS OF SOVEREIGNTY AND GREATNESS.
MEN have for Greatness most contrary Instincts, which notwithstanding proceed
alike from the general Corruption of their Nature. They love it; and they hate
it; They admire it, and they despise it. They love it, because they see therein
whatsoever they desire, viz. Wealth, Pleasure, Honor and Power. They hate it,
because it depresseth and abaseth them, making them sensible of their want of
those things which they love. They admire it, because they are dazz'led with
its brightness. They despise it likewise sometimes, or at least pretend to do
so, that they may seem in their own fancies to be raised above their
Superiors, and build to themselves an imaginary Greatness, by undervaluing
those who are highly esteemed by the Multitude.

II.
And though such differing Motions of the Mind are all Humane, yet nevertheless
must it be acknowledged, that those, which incline us to Honor and Esteem the
Great, are the most strong and active, because they concern the most Natural
Objects of Concupiscence; Whereas the hatred, which Men bear to Greatness, is
much weakened by their Dependence on the Great, and the continual need they
have of them, which does insensibly warp and bend their Soul toward a respect
and veneration for that Condition. Men despair of raising themselves to an
equal height with them, and therefore are willing to participate of their
enjoyments by submitting to them.

III.
For which reason Humane Contempt of Greatness is not commonly found but among
those, who desguise their Pride with the name of Philosophy, such as not being
able to satisfy their Ambition by becoming Great, endeavor to satisfy their
Malice by vilifying those who are so. Since we cannot arrive to Greatness, let
us revenge our selves by railing at it, said Montaigne; and thereby aptly
enough expressed this Natural sentiment of Pride.

And if there were some Philosophers, who having reason to be contented with
the rank they held in the world, did notwithstanding in appearance contemn and
decrie Greatness by their Writings and Discourses, this was the effect of more
subtle and artificial Vanity. These Men took sufficient care not to forsake
their Riches in good earnest. Seneca made it his business to defend himself by
Maxims against such an effective Renunciation. Infirmi est animi pati non
posse Divitias. It is (says he) the mark of a weak mind not to be able to
endure Riches. Wherefore then are so many fine Discourses made against the
Great, and against Riches? It is because they would join together, both the
worldly Glory of Greatness, and the Philosophical Glory of the Contempt of
Greatness, that they might be prized not only by the Commonalty, but also by
Scholars and Philosophers.

IV.
Now we ought not to follow our Concupiscence in such Sentiments, as That
inspireth either for, or against the Great: Nay, herein we must even distrust
our Reason, in regard of the near union it has with the Passions, which
ordinarily corrupt the same, when it judges of their Objects. We must search
for Light more sure and less suspected: And this is no where to be found, but
in Christian Religion, since it is she alone, that thoroughly understands the
nature of Concupiscence, and is able to separate from Greatness those false
advantages, which our Ambition gives it; and to restore those true ones, which
our Malice takes from it.

V.
Nothing of real value is in the World, but what has been placed there by God,
according to that Maxim of the Ghospel. Non potest homo accipere quicquam,
nisi fuerit ei datum de Coelo. Whatsoever comes from God is good and worthy of
esteem: but the productions of Self-love can deserve only contempt and hatred.
We ought then to esteem that in the Great, which is given them by God, as we
ought to despise that, which is attributed to them by Concupiscence. And it
belongs to Religion to distinguish both the one and the other, and to
discover to us what the Great have truly received from God, and what they hold
through the error and delusion of Men.

VI.
This Principle once established will easily evince, that the Common Idea,
which Men frame of Greatness, is altogether false and deceitful, being founded
on nothing else, but their own erroneous Judgments and vain Conceits. For,
Behold after what manner they compose this Idea. They love Power, Wealth and
Pleasure. They see these possessed by the Great. For this reason they account
them happy. They prefer their Condition before that of those, who are destitute
of such enjoyments, and by this Preference they raise them above others. But
this Apprehension is very false. Because Pleasure, Riches and Power are not
true Goods; they appear not so, but only to Concupiscence: On the contrary they
are and appear great Evils to Reason enlightened by Faith, because they are
great Impediments to Piety and Salvation. But Men do not stop there. Whereas
they perceive that the Opinion, they have of Greatness, is not peculiar to them
alone, but is likewise the Sentiment of the most part of the world, who
together with them respect and admire the Great: on this consideration they lay
a new Basis both in themselves and others for enhancing their value for
Greatness, setting before the eyes of their Imagination the Great, encompassed
by vast Troops of Admirers, who look on them as Personages infinitely
Superior to the rest.

Such is the Idea, which Concupiscence creates in us of this Condition. But a
very little Light will serve to detect the Delusion. For, All these Opinions
which lift the Great above others, being only vain fancies, and such as arise
from the corruption of Man's heart, it is evident that the Greatness founded
thereon is merely a Phantome and without solidity.

VII.
Thus far Philosophy is able to conduct us; But if we have no other Light, but
what is borrowed thence, we shall no sooner be delivered from one error, than
cast into another, by being made believe that the Great are not indeed worthy
of any Honor or Respect. And in effect such a Conclusion would necessarily
deduce it self, should it once be granted, that Greatness has no other
foundation, but this heap of false Opinions and Deceitful Goods: ^t being
certain that I am not bound to honor a Man, because he is more miserable then
my self: And that Delusion, which should make the Great to think their
Condition happy, only because it seems so to a Multitude of silly and abused
People, would deserve Pity, instead of Esteem and Veneration.

VIII.
But the Holy Scriptures assure us, that Honor is due unto the Great, and the
payment thereof an Obligation, wherewith Christian Piety ought to comply. Now
Piety, being inseparable from Verity, cannot honor that, which is not truly
worthy of Honor. It must then be said, that there is Something of God in
Greatness, since the Scriptures on the one side commanding us to honor the
Great, and on the other teaching, that Honor is due to God alone, Soli Deo
Honor and Gloria, It follows, that we honor God by honoring the Great, and
consequently that something of God is in them, whereunto the Respect, which is
paid them, does relate. But for the knowing what this is, we must look back to
the first Establishment and Origin of Greatness.

IX.
Concupiscence, Reason and Religion unite themselves, though diversely, toward
the composure of this Condition, which is called Greatness. Concupiscence
desires it through Pride; Reason approves it for its necessariness among Men;
And Religion confirms it by the Authority of God himself. But for the
understanding after what manner this comes to pass, we must consider, That if
Men had continued in the state of Innocence, there had not been any Great
amongst them, but being born alike, they would have remained always in the
same equality of Nature. Man was not made properly to command Men, as S.
Gregory says, because one Man's will is not the Rule of another; but all have
for their only Rule the Law of God, which before their Transgression they
understood with such perspicuity, as not to stand in need of being taught it by
others.

X.
Wherefore though Greatness cannot be said to be an Irregularity in it self,
yet it is at least an effect of the Irregularity and Disorder of Nature, and a
necessary Consequent of the first Sin. Because as the state of Innocence could
not admit Difference and Distinction, so That of Sin could not suffer Equality.
Every Man would be a Master and Tyrant over the rest, but being impossible that
every one should succeed in this Design, it was necessary either that Reason
should induce Men to Order, or Force compel them: And so the Strong obtain the
Mastery, and the Weaker remain in subjection.

XI.
Reason knows, that this Subjection among Men to one another, is not only
inevitable, but also most requisite and useful. It perceives that the Light of
Man's understanding, since his Sin, is too feeble to direct him even in Matters
regarding only the Civil life, and that the Corruption of his Will is such, as
renders him incapable of behaving himself quietly in a regular Condition. It
sees it therefore to be necessary, that there should be some more gross and
exterior Law, which might oblige him to the performance of his Duty, and such
is That of Empire and Dominion. It judges convenient, that Laws and Policies
should be established, and that some Persons should have Authority to make them
observed. It approves that Humane Affairs should be regulated, and for the
avoiding of Contests, that Preference should be given to some above others. In
fine, It does not only consent to the constitution of Greatness, but looks on
this Order as the Masterpiece of Humane Wit, and the most useful thing in the
World.

XII.
But although Concupiscence desires Greatness, and Reason approves the
establishment thereof, yet neither the one nor the other are sufficient to
render it Lawful. Men are not in their own Power, and therefore cannot dispose
of themselves, much less of others. God alone is their Sovereign Master,
neither can They, unless by his Command, set up or acknowledge any other,
without committing Treason against Him. Should a Company of Slaves, assembled
in a Prison, confer on some amongst them the Power of Life and Death over the
rest, it is not to be doubted, but their Master would not only laugh at so bold
and rash an Establishment, but also punish him, that should make use thereof,
as an Usurper and Tyrant, since such Authority appertained to Him alone; and
therefore it was only He, that could communicate and transfer the same to
another. This is our Case in respect of God: We are all his Slaves, and cannot
dispose of our selves, but by his Order. It would therefore be in vain, that
Men gave to some amongst them the Right and Power of governing others, did not
God join his Authority to their Choice. And for this Reason (according to the
Doctrine of St. Augustine) all Capital Punishments and Executions of Justice
would be so many Homicides and Murders, if God, who is the sole Master of the
Life and Death of Men, had not given them the Power of inflicting Death on
Those, who should violate the Laws of Nature, and trouble their Society. We
learn from the Scriptures, that God has done it, That He has ratifyed by his
Authority these Humane Establishments, That He approves the binding and
uniting Men together by Laws and Constitutions, That He authoriseth them to
make Choice of some, for the procuring their Observance, And lastly,
communicates his Power to the Persons chosen, for the Government of those that
are under them.

XIII.
These are not vain Speculations, but Truths defined by the Holy Scriptures.
It is the Apostle S. Paul, who teaches us, that all Power comes from God. Non
est Potestas nisi a Deo. That Authorities are established by God. Quae autem
sunt, a Deo ordinatae sunt. That whosoever resists them, does resist the
Order and Appointment of God. Qui resistit Potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit.
That those who govern the People are the Ministers of God, for the rewarding
the Good and punishing the Evil. Dei Minister est tibi in Bonum, Dei Minister
est vindex in Iram. And he gives to Princes the same Title, which he takes
himself as an Apostle. Sic nos existimet Homo ut Ministros Christi.

By this it appears, that Greatness is a Participation of the Power of God to
Men, which he communicates to Some for the good of Others: That it is a
Ministry or Office wherewith he entrusteth them: In so much as there being
nothing more real, or more just then the Authority and Power of God; so there
can be nothing more real, or more just then Greatness, in those to whom he
truly imparteth the same, and who are not Usurpers.

XIV.
It may easily be comprehended by this Doctrine, that although Monarchy, and
the other Forms of Government may proceed originally from the Choice and
Consent of the People, yet the Authority of Monarchs is not derived from the
People, but from God alone. He indeed has given the People Power to Choose
their Government: But as the Election of those who Choose the Bishop is not that
which renders him a Bishop, but only the Pastoral Authority of Jesus Christ
imparted to him in his Consecration; so likewise the sole Consent of the People
makes not Kings, but the communication of God's Royalty and Power, by which
they become Lawful, and receive a real and solid Right over their Subjects. And
it is for this reason, that the Apostle calls not Princes the Ministers of
the People, but the Ministers of God; because they hold their Power from none
but God.

XV.
From what has been said may be drawn a Consequence most advantageous for
successive Monarchies, which is, that although this Form of Government might
originally depend on the People, through the Choice they made of a certain
Family, and the Order they appointed for the succession; Nevertheless this
Order being once settled, it is not in the People's Power to change the same.
Because the Authority of making such Constitutions does not reside any longer
in the People, who have deprived themselves thereof, and had good reason so to
do, there being nothing more profitable for them: But it resideth now in the
King, to whom God communicates his Power, for the Government of the People.
Wherefore as in successive Monarchies, the Kings can never die, nor the People
ever be without a King; so for this cause can they never be in a Condition of
Making any n^w Law toward the Changing the Order of the Succession, nor have
any just Authority for the same: In regard that this Authority resideth always
in the King, being imparted to him by God, according to that Constitution and
Order, whereunto the People did voluntarily subject themselves.

XVI.
And hence it is likewise clear, that it can be never lawful for any One to
rise or take Arms against his Sovereign, and engage in a Civil War. Since War
cannot be made without Authority, and that Sovereign too, viz. such as has a
Power of Life and Death, and may justify the several Slaughters of the War. Now
in a Monarchical State this Right over the Lives of Men appertains not to
any, but to the King alone, and those who exercise the same by his Authority.
So that Rebels being destitute of this Right, commit as many Homicides, as they
slay Men, in a Civil War, because they take away their Lives without a
competent Authority, and against the Order and Appointment of God. It is in
vain also, that they allege for their justification the Disorders of the
State, whereunto they pretend to bring a remedy; in regard that no disorder can
give Subjects a liberty to draw the Sword, neither can they have any Authority
to make use thereof, but by his alone, who has received it from God.

XVII.
This Regal Power and Right of Governing People, which belongs essentially to
God, but is communicated by him to Men, for the benefit and good of Men, as we
have already said, does indeed eminently reside in Kings, but passes also and
extends it self to their Ministers, and all those who are employed under them
for the exercise of their Government and preservation of Order, in such manner
as it compriseth all that Authority, which actuateth and regulateth the whole
State, and is variously distributed according to the several Charges and
Ministries of the Realm; and whosoever possesses any Portion thereof, is a
Minister of God, by reason of the part he holds of His Authority.

XVIII.
It may be said, that there are in States certain Greatnesses, which consist
more in the rank of those who possess them, then in any Authority. Such is the
quality of Princes of the Blood, which gives them a Pre-eminence, but
includes no Jurisdiction, unless joined to some Office or Charge. But this
Rank it self is a kind of Authority, and proceeds likewise from the Order of
God. Because Humane Affairs not being able to subsist without due Order and
Regulation, it was necessary that such Preheminences should be constituted, and
that Some should have Right of being Preferred before Others. And this
Preference has been most justly accorded to the Princes of the Blood, and
necessarily flows from the nature and genius of successive Monarchies.
Because this Form of Government consisting essentially in the Election of a
certain Family, the People choosing such as shall be of it for their Sovereigns,
according to the order of their Birth, it is manifest, that all those of that
Family have right to the Regal Power, and may hereafter happen to arrive
thereat, and therefore it is requisite, that the People should be accustomed
before hand to look on them with greater Respect then the rest, for as much as
otherwise, when they should in effect obtain the Scepter, Men would hardly be
able to have those sentiments of Submission for them, which ought to be had
toward Kings.

XIX.
By these Principles may be resolved the Question touching That, which renders
Great Men worthy of Respect. It is neither their Riches, nor their Pleasure,
nor their Pomp; but it is the part they have of the Sovereignty of God, which
ought to be Honored in their Persons, according to the measure, which they
possess thereof. It is the Order, wherein God has placed them by the
Disposition of his Providence; In so much as this Submission having for its
Object, That which is truly worthy of Respect, it ought not only to be
exterior and a bare Ceremony, but must be likewise interior; that is, must
include the acknowledgment of a real Superiority and Greatness, in Those who
are honored after this manner. And it is for this Cause, that the Apostle
commands Christians to be subject to Powers, not only for fear of punishment,
but also through a motive of Conscience. Non solum propter Iram, sed etiam
propter Conscientiam.

XX.
The Pomp and Splendor, accompanying the State of Great Men, is not that which
causes them to deserve Honor, but it is nevertheless that, which does make
them actually to be honored by the greatest part of the world. And because it
is just that they should be honored, it is also fit, that in order thereunto
their Greatness should be attended by some exterior Magnificence. For Men are
not spiritual enough, to acknowledge and honor in them the Authority of God,
should they behold them in such an Equipage, as is the ordinary object of their
scorn and aversion. Wherefore that Greatness may make the impression it ought
on their minds, there is a necessity that it be first made on their senses. It
is for this reason that Wealth becomes necessary to the Great, in proportion
to the degree wherein they are, since that without it they would not be able to
maintain the Decency required by their Condition, and consequently be
disrespected and rendered useless among Men. What therefore Tertullian teaches
De Idol. Cap. 18. is a palpable mistake, viz. That all outward marks of Dignity
and Power, and all Ornaments belonging to Great Offices, are not allowed to
Christians, and that Christ reckoned all those things among the Pomps of the
Devil, by appearing so meanly himself, and in a state far enough from all
Splendor and Magnificence. For, Christian Religion is never contrary to right
Reason: And though Christ did not assume this outward Pomp, it was not because
he absolutely disapproved the same, but because it was not proper for his
Function and Ministry, which was to show, even in his exterior Deportment,
what Disposition all his Disciples ought inwardly to have. The Great ought then
to learn from the Example of Christ not to love indeed this Pomp, but must not
cast it off, unless God should inspire them, absolutely to quit the World. But
we need not wonder at this mistake of Tertullian, since he affirms in the
same Book, That Christians are forbidden to judge in Matters concerning the
Lives or Honor of Men; which is contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church.

XXI.
In like manner the outward signs of Respect, which Inferiors pay to the Gre
at, are most justly due unto them, and the necessary attendants of their
Condition and Degree. For although perhaps originally they were nothing else,
but the Inventions of Humane Pride, which delights to behold others abased
through its Greatness, yet must it be acknowledged, that these Ceremonies and
Respects are in themselves Useful and Reasonable, and therefore though Pride
had not introduced them, Reason would have done it. Because it is convenient
and just, that the Great should be honored by a sincere and true
acknowledgment of God's Order and Appointment, which has raised them above the
rest; But Men have so great an Opposition to humble themselves and own the
Superiority of others, that to induce their Minds thereunto, it is necessary
first to exercise and accustom their Bodies, whereof the Soul insensibly
admitting the Bent and Posture, will easily pass from Ceremony to Truth. And
for this reason it was fit, that these outward demonstrations of Respect should
be somewhat incommodious and uneasy, otherwise they would not be so manifestly
discerned, to be Expressions of Honor toward the Great, but might be looked
on, as things done merely out of pleasure or convenience, and by that means be
indifferently shown to all; which could not have had an efficacy, toward the
imprinting on the Mind any sentiments of Reverence, for those that are Honored
in this manner.

XXII.
Some have said that, there being two sorts of Greatness, the one Natural, and
the other Established, we ought to render to the Natural only, those Natural
Respects, which consist in the esteem and inward Submission; and give to the
Greatness of Establishment, those Honors only, that are established, viz.
certain Ceremonies, invented by Men, for the honoring such Dignities, as they
themselves constitute. But to render this Notion altogether solid, it must be
added, that these exterior Ceremonies ought to proceed from an inward
Sentiment, whereby a real Superiority is acknowledged in the Great. For, their
Degree including, as we have said, a participation of the Authority of God, it
meriteth a true and interior Respect. Neither is there as much reason to say,
That the Great have right to exact none other from us, but such kind of outward
Ceremonies, without any Correspondence thereunto in the Mind; as there is, that
they have no right to require these Ceremonies, but only in order to the
stamping on the Mind a just sense and reverence for their State. In so much as
when they are well assured, touching some Persons, that they have such inward
Dispositions toward them as they ought, these outward Duties may be dispensed
with, being of no farther use.

XXIII.
It is true, that the Respect due unto the Great, ought not to corrupt our
Judgment concerning them, nor make us esteem in them, what is not worthy
thereof. This Respect is compatible with the knowledge of their faults, neither
does it forbid us, interiourly to prefer those, who have more real Goods and
Natural Greatness. But because Honor is their due, and it is useful to
mankind, that it should be paid them, but the Common People have not enough,
either of Discretion or Equity, to condemn faults, without despising those, in
whom they observe them; Every one is obliged, to take an extreme care, in
speaking of the Great, and all those, to whom Honor is necessary; That
Sentence of Holy Scripture, Speak not evil of the Prince of thy People, being
understood of all Superiors, as well Secular as Ecclesiastic, viz.
Universally of all such, as any ways participate of the Power of God.
Wherefore the liberty, which the Commons take, of decrying the Conduct of their
Governors, is a thing most repugnant to Piety: For besides that very often
they speak rashly, and without Truth, for want of sufficient Information, they
can hardly ever do it, without sin and injustice; in regard that, by such
Discourses, they produce in others a disposition contrary to that which God
requires from them, toward those whom he employeth to govern them.

XXIV.
There are some, who would at least, that this Authority, which is to be
respected, should always be joined to Merit, accusing such Laws of injustice,
as have fastened the same to exterior quality. How triumphantly do they attack
those Constitutions, which make Greatness to depend on Birth? In the choice of
a Pilot (say they) it is not regarded, who amongst the Pretenders is of the
better Family: Wherefore is the same done in the greater Governments of
Kingdoms and Empires? But this is, because they know not the true extent of the
weakness and corruption of our Nature. Their reasoning would be good, were Men
Just and Reasonable; but since they neither are nor will be so, it is frivolous
and inconclusive. The Natural and indeleble Injustice of Man's heart, renders
the present choice, not only Reasonable, but the Masterpiece of Reason. For,
Whom shall we choose? The most Virtuous, the most Wise, the most Valiant.
Behold! every one cries, that He is this most Virtuous, most Valiant, and most
Wise. Let us therefore fix our Choice to something exterior, manifest, and
incontestable. He is the Kings Eldest Son. This is clear, and without room for
Dispute. Reason cannot do better: Since that Civil War which most commonly
springs from the other Method, is the greatest of Evils, and therefore most
to be avoided.

XXV.
As this is true of the Regal Power, so is it likewise of the chief Dignities,
and first Ranks of the State. Were it not good (say some) that there should be
Princes and Nobles of Merit, and not of Birth, and that Men should arrive at
this Height by Virtue, and not by a vain Quality? Is it not unjust, that the
General of an Army, after the Conquest of many Provinces, should be forced to
give place to a Prince of the Blood without prudence or experience? No, it is
not unjust, but rather the most excellent Stratageme, which Reason has
invented, for tempering the haughty Nature of Greatness, and freeing that State
from the hatred and envy of Inferiors. Should none be Great but through
Merit, the Elevation of Persons to that degree, would continually advertise
Men, of the preference given to others before them, whom they imagining to
deserve less then themselves, would fill the Kingdom with clamours, and
complain of the Injustice and Partiality of such Promotions. But by uniting
Greatness to Birth, we calm the Pride of Inferiors, and render Greatness less
piquant and incommodious to them: Men are not ashamed to give place, when they
can say, I owe this to his Birth: This reason convinces the mind, without
wounding it by spite or jealousy: Hereunto it is accustomed, and will not
resist an establishment no ways injurious to its own credit.

XXVI.
Another advantage arising from this establishment, is, that our Princes and
Great Men will be rendered hereby more humble and free from haughtiness. It is
not arrogance for us to remain in that order and degree, wherein the Providence
of God has placed us, if we use the same for those ends, which we ought. We
may, notwithstanding our High Degree, retain sentiments of humility within our
hearts, and may be able to perceive and acknowledge our failings and miseries,
looking on our Dignity as extrinsick, and not properly belonging to us, but
proceeding merely from the appointment of God. But it would be very difficult
for us, to preserve humility, should we look on our Promotion, as the fruit of
our own labor and merits. Having prepossessed it by our Desires, and procured
it by our Industry, we should easily be brought to imagine, that it was our
due, and that we surpassed others in Deserts, as far as we excelled them in
Dignity.

XXVII.
Where Merit is the passage to Greatness, seldom any enter, but through the
Gate of Ambition. And by substituting the Favorite and the Bribe, in the place
of substantial qualities, Men often arrive thereat without Merit; but almost
ever without Vocation, being only Called thereunto by their own Ambition:
Whereas those, who are Great by Birth, may truly say, That they were called to
their State by God, and that He made them Great. So that faithfully practicing
the Duties belonging to their Condition, they are, without doubt, in much
greater assurance of obtaining the Blessing and Grace of God, then those, who
having raised themselves through motives altogether carnal and vicious, ought
rather to leave, then retain their Dignities; since they cannot say in their
consciences, that God has lifted them to that height, whither only their own
Pride has carried them.

XXVIII.
This manner of honoring the Great, by considering in them the part, which
they hold of God's Authority, is the more useful to public Society, in regard
that being independent of Personal qualities; it is so likewise of all Opinions
and Caprichoes concerning them: and by this means becomes fixed and invariable.

Behold another Cause of the reasonableness of this Honor.

It is most certain, that Superiors are Ministers employed by God, for the
procuring to Men the greatest and most essential Goods of this World; since
that, without the establishment of this Politic order, Men could not enjoy
their Estates, inhabit quietly, travel in safety, receive any benefit from
Commerce, or advantage from the Industry of others, and from humane Society.
Were this Order destroyed, none could say, that he possessed any thing; Men
would become enemies to one another, and stir up a general Civil war, not to be
decided but by force.

XXIX.
But for the better understanding, how much we are obliged to the Politic
Constitution, we must consider, that Men by reason of their first
transgression, becoming void of Charity, yet still remained full of wants and
necessities, and depending of one another, in a great number of things. In
order to the supplying these necessities, Cupidity has taken the place of
Charity, and effects it after a manner, which we cannot enough admire, and
whereunto the ordinary Charity could not arrive. For example; You see spread
all over the Country Persons, who are ready to assist you, when you travel:
They prepare your lodgings, and other accommodation: You command them what you
please; and they not only obey, but acknowledge for a favor, that you
vouchsafe to accept their services: They excuse not themselves from any
attendance you require. What could be more admirable, then these Persons, were
they animated by Charity? But it is Cupidity, which makes them act, and that
with so good a grace and excess of duty, that (I say) they look on it as a
boon, to have been employed in serving you.

Where is that Charity, which is contented to build an House for you, replenish
it with movables, adorn it with Tapestry, and put the key thereof into your
hands? Cupidity will do it, and cheerfully too. What Charity will run to the
Indies for Medicines, stoop to the meanest Employments, and not refuse the
basest and most painful Offices? Cupidity will perform all this, without
grudging.

There is nothing then, whereby greater services are done to Men, than by their
Cupidity it self. But that this Cupidity may be fitly disposed to render them,
it must be limited by something, since of it self, it has neither bound nor
measure; and instead of being subservient to human Society, would ruin and
destroy it. There is no excess, whereof it is not capable, being left alone and
without check or tie, it is Inclination and natural bent tending toward
Injustice, Rapine, Murder, and the greatest Disorders.

It was necessary therefore, that some Art should be found out, for the
regulating Cupidity; and this Art is the Politic Order, or State-Government;
which restrains Cupidity by the fear of punishment, and applies it to the
uses of Civil Society. This Order gives us Merchants, Physicians, Artists, and
generally whatever conduces to the pleasures, or satisfyeth the necessities of
Life. For which reason we have a great obligation to the Preservers thereof,
viz. such as hold that Authority, which regulateth and maintains the State.

XXX.
People would admire a Man that should tame Lions, Bears, Tigers and other
savage Beasts, and make them fit for Service. This wonder is done by
State-Government; since that Men filled with Cupidity, are worse then Tigers,
Bears or Lions; each one would devour the rest, but yet by means of the Laws
and Policy, they are tamed after such sort, that Services as useful, are
performed by them, as could proceed from the purest Charity.

XXXI.
State Government is the most excellent Invention found out by Men, whereby
each particular amongst them, obtains more convenience, than the greatest and
richest King could do, were this Order discomposed. How were it possible
without this Invention, that any one Man (whatever wealth he possessed, or how
many servants soever attended him) should enjoy those advantages, which now a
Citizen of London does, with the Rent of one thousand pounds per annum? What
would it cost him, to send Ships all over the World, that some might bring him
Medicines, others Clothes, others Curiosities, and the works of distant
Nations? What number of Servants would suffice toward the procuring News, duly
every week, from all parts of Europe? What Riches would be enough to entertain
so many Couriers, so many Horses for their Riding, and so many Inns for their
Lodging, as were necessary? How many Soldiers were requisite to secure the
ways, and defend them from Thieves? What a Troop of Artisans and Mechanics to
provide him Dwelling, Food, and Raiment? All Arts being joined and linked
together, and having need one of another, a necessity would be found of them
all: neither would it be sufficient, to get all these things for himself; since
they must be procured likewise, for all those who are his Officers and work for
him; which proceeds to an infinity. One single Alderman has all this;
without labor, care, or trouble. Whatsoever, not only necessity, but his fancy
craveth, is fetched for him from China, Peru, Egypt, Persia, or any other part
of the World. He is exempted from the pains of providing Ships; he is not
exposed to the hazard and ill success of Voyages. The ways are free and open
to him throughout Europe: Posts are established, that he may neither want the
usefulness of Advice, nor the entertainment of News. There are those, who spend
their Lives in the study of Nature, for the remedying his Diseases, and are as
ready to serve him, as if he kept them at constant wages. It may be said with
truth, that there are a million of Men, who labor for him. He may reckon in
the number of his Servants, all the Artisans of England, and even those of
neighbor Countries; since they are all disposed to do him service, and he may
command them when he pleases, in laying down a small recompense, according to
establishment; which is the least wages, that could be given to Servants.
These, who work for him, are not burthensom or incommodious to him in the
least. He is neither obliged to provide for their necessities, nor to make
their Fortunes. There is no need of Superior Officers to govern, or inferior
to serve them; or if there be, he is not troubled therewith. Who is able to
extol these advantages enough, which render the condition of private Persons,
equal to that of Kings; and dispensing with the Anxieties that attend great
Riches, afford them all sorts of Convenience?

XXXII.
That, which makes the most part of the World insensible of all this, is a
principle of Vanity and Ingratitude: They reap the same benefit from those, who
labor for the Public, wherein they themselves are comprised, as if they
wrought for them alone. Their Letters are as well carried to the furthermost
parts of the World, by a Courier, that carries ten thousand, as if he carried
but one only. They are as well looked after, by a Physician, who visits many
others, as if he waited on none but them; nay, rather better, since by
observing others, he gains experience, and becomes more capable of assisting
them; nevertheless because they are not the only Persons, who enjoy these
goods, they are neither touched nor concerned. Their necessities are as well
supplied, but their vanity is not as well satisfied. Because they have no right
to monopolize and arrogate to themselves in particular all those Men, who do
them any service; they account for nothing whatsoever is done.

And although the utility, which accrueth to others, does not diminish theirs,
it takes away how ever the sense, they ought to have of this benefit; and they
think themselves obliged to no body, because an infinity of others share with
them, in both the Advantage and Obligation.

XXXIII.
Men do not ordinarily take notice of these real Goods, which they receive from
Kings, and from the Great; because they never reflect on the common favors of
God Almighty, how considerable soever they are. We never consider with one of
the Ancients, that we have an high obligation to the Earth, for sustaining us,
and should be sufficiently perplexed, did it sink from our feet. This oblivion
is the proof, but cannot be the excuse of our Ingratitude. For since these are
benefits, and great ones too, which we receive from God, by the ministry of
Men, we ought to be thankful for them to God, and include in our
acknowledgement those, whom he appoints to confer them on us, and makes the
Stewards of his Authority here in the World.

XXXIV.
Human Obligations, when they are just, become the Duties of Religion; because
Christian Religion has for its Rule the Supreme Justice, and consists in an
exact following the same; for which reason the Apostle commands Christians,
to pray for Kings, and those, who govern, under them, the Temporal State: And
these prayers are due unto them, were it only for the Charge they have, of
preserving the Public Peace and Tranquillity. Therefore it is certainly a great
fault and negligence, not to offer up our prayers for Kings; and we do hereby
render our selves unworthy of those Goods, which God bestows on Men by their
means. Few Persons make sufficient reflection hereon. Men are taken up in
complaining of the disorders of the Government, which many times they are
ignorant of, but never think of paying that just acknowledgement, which is due
unto God, for the Benefits, that accrue to them, from all Regular Governments.
And yet these Benefits are infinitely more considerable, then those Disorders,
true or false, which are the continual subject of their Complaint and
Murmuration.

Reddite ergo quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari. Matthew. 22.22.
FINIS.

