DIVRNALL OCCVRRENCES, Truly Relating The most Remarkable Passages which have
happened in both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and other parts of this KINGDOM, and
elsewhere.

From Monday the 28 of November, to Monday the fifth of December. 1642.

By H. G.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Herne.

Monday, November. 28.
THis day there was bickering at Manchester by some of the Earl of Dareyes
followers, and the Townes-men; but the Malignants were repulsed with loss, the
Parliament also having set forth a very gracious Order for the relief of that
good Town and those parts against the attempts of Papists.

Upon occasion of the former Letter intercepted as aforesaid was raised a rumor
that the Prince of Orange and the King of Denmark in person would put to Sea
this Winter, but there was no such matter.

It was also reported that the said Prince of Orange with ten thousand
soldiers intended to have surprised and plundered Amsterdam; but that when the
soldiers perceived his purpose, none of them could be drawn against that Town.

This day also came out an Order for the Lord Generals speedy falling down
toward Oxford.

There was committed to close prison this day Doctor Heywood the Rector of
Saint Giles in the fields for preaching and printing seditious Sermons: he
being an Arminian, and sometimes Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Tuesday, November. 29.
FRom Westchester this day arrived a Post here with tidings of the proceedings
of the Earl of Darby, who has levied all the Papists and Malignants in those
parts. As also relating that there has lately been a victory in Ireland
obtained against the Rebels.

Abington in Barkeshire was this day cruelly plundered by the Cavaliers. As
also, a Town of good note in Surrey called Ockingham, which they rifled
without mercy: the poor Inhabitants being enforced to forsake their dwellings.

An Aviso from Calice testifies that Master larmin is very busy in making
provision in France of ammunition and the like.

The money lent upon the last Contribution was this day brought in to the Lord
Mayor, who does study daily for the advancement of the cause of the
Commonwealth.

To day were brought to Town some ten Cavaliers taken about Reading side by
some of the garrison at Windsor.

An Order came forth also that all soldiers in and about the City of London
should repair to their Colors, the Lord General being instantly to advance
toward His Majesty's Army.

Wednesday, November. 30.
THis day from Excester we understood Sir Ralph Hopton and the Malignants in
those parts are in much distress, haaving so lamentably plundered the Country,
that it is unable any longer to sustain them. Some parties of the Earl of
New Castle, as Convoyes to some wagons of ammunition sent from thence toward
His Majesty, were valiantly set upon by Master Hothams forces, and put into
rout; the wagons with the ammunition being surprised to a very considerable
value.

This day both Houses celebrated their Fast very devoutly at Saint Margats
Westminster.

There were also some Barques taken from the coast of Norfolk coming from
Dunkirke toward the North, their lading was men and ammunition.

The King this day returned from Reading toward Oxford to provide for my Lord
Generals approach, who this day set forward with a lawful and courageous army,
having order from the Parliament to pursue and apprehend the Cavaliers.

This day also happened to our side a very memorable victory. Colonel Brown
with his Dragoneers beating the Cavaliers out of Farnham-Castle in Surrey which
they had fortified, taking fourscore of them prisoners, which he sent to
Windfor Castle, thence to be conveyed to London.

Thursday, December. 1.
TO day came forth an Order from the High Court of Parliament concerning the
sequestring to the use of the Commonwealth the Earl of New-Castles estate. As
also, all Rents and profits belonging to all Deanes, Prebends, and the like.

An Order also came forth for the fessing of those who had not yet contributed
to the Commonwealth according to their estates; they being little better then
Malignants, who in so great danger refuse to part with something out of their
fortunes to serve the safety of the kingdom.

Some of the Cavaliers taken at Farneham-Castle by Colonel Brown, this
afternoon were brought up to the Town to the number of forty persons, and
disposed of to several prisons.

It is reported the King has with him fifty and odd good brass Ordnance. Lord
turn his heart from his ungracious Counselors.

To day also came forth a Proclamation from His Majesty, forbidding his
Cavaliers the plundring of any persons whatsoever under the pain of his
displeasure, but it is conceived only a scar-crow, it being impossible to alter
their inhumane dispositions.

Friday, December. 2.
A Post from my Lord Fairefax this day verified that the Earl of Cumberland
would deliver up the City of York upon the conditions which he had within
enclosed, whether it will be received or no, is not yet known.

The City of London still persists in their determination of maintaining the
Regiments for pursuit of the Cavaliers, men being taken on in Moore-fields in
great numbers.

This day toward Evening a ^up was sent up the River laden with ammunition, and
taken at Sea by the Earl of Warwickes ships.

The kings Majesty has fortified Oxford, intending as it is credibly informed,
to remain there all this Winter, though the Country cries out of his
Cavaliers.

This day also came forth a new Declaration from His Majesty, and the
Parliaments answer thereunto, and Sir Poter K^lligrewes return from the King
caused much and deep agitations in both Houses, It is hoped about accommodation.
Drums beat up in the City and Suburbs for more supply for his Excellence the
Earl of Essex, who is advanced as far as Windsor, the garrison there being in
very good plight.

Saturday, December. 4.
THis day came out an order from the high Court of Parliament, commanding all
those who were interested in the collection of money, plate, and the like, to
return in upon Monday next the account ot the said money and plate, with their
names who refuse to contribute according to their abilities, that the truth of
the said accounts be presented to the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Brook,
Lord Wharton, Lord Edward Howard, and some members of the lower house.

This day was a great hnbub in Holbourne at the Globe Tavern, the soldiers
wanting their pay, as they pretended, would have pillaged the said Tavern, but
the approches of the trained band made them desist that enterpize; and then
flocking about the Lord Brooks door, and some mutinous words being spoken,
one of the soldiers was apprehended by Captain Harvie, who was there with his
troop, but the rest promising to demean themselves more orderly, he was
discharged, and the money was paid them by the right honorable, the Lord
Brook his officers.

This day was treaties in agitation about his Majesty's Answer to the Petition
of both the houses, printed at Oxford, they being well inclined to peace, if it
would please his Majesty in any indifferent way to confide in them and their
Council.

This day clandestinely was reprinted a Declaraion from Prince Rupert, wherein
he strives to extenuate the foulenes of his former cruelties, with many false
calumnies on the right honorable Philip, Lord Wharton, but those Rodomantades
cannot excuse the confirmed truth of his proceedings. It was likewise rumoured
for certain in Westminster Hall, that York was yesterday surrendered to the
General, the Lord Fairfax.

There was some seven-score poor fellows, whom they term Cavaliers, brought
up to town, bound in Carts, if the King have no better soldiers, we shall be
sure of sudden victory.

At Plymouth came in, at it was to day certified, three days since, a small
vessel from Saint Molos, which being searched, in a Sailers habit was found a
servant of Master Iarmines, directed with Letters to Sir Ralph Hopton, which
Letters, with the said mssenger, are coming up to the Parliament.

This day also came our a new Order from the right honorable, the high Court
of Parliament, expressly commanding all their soldiers, to restrain from
plundring; as also an Order for restitution of all such moneys and goods as had
been formerly taken away from any man by plunder or pillage, with a strict
command to all Majors and other Officers, to see the said Order put in practice.

Sunday, December. 5.
THis day was a most excellent Sermon preached in Christ Church London, in the
forenoone, the Minister much, and with many efficatious reasons, persuading the
people to a liberal contribution toward the defense of the Commonwealth,
which was very well approved of by the audience.

A flying rumor was spread in the City, that Colonel Brown, who had taken
Farnham Castle, was himself taken prisoner, but it was only raised by some
malignants, to the dishonor of that valiant Gentleman.

A Letter this day from Newcastle testifies, that the Earl and his Cavaliers
are almost quite disheartened by their late ill successes, and in much fear,
left the Scots on the one side, and my Lord Fairfax with the Yorshire forces on
the other side should invade him, and so ruin his forces.

It was likewise this day reported, that Sir Ralph Hopton is either dead, or
dangerously sick, and that Sir Bevil Greenvill and the rest of the malignants
in Cornwall, are determined to break up their army, being no longer able to
continue them together for want of money and other provision.

It was also reported this day by a Dutch Merchant of much credit, who arrived
yesterday from Holland, that the Prince of Orange, with the best part of his
forces, is withdrawn to Breda, which being his own town, and Barony by
inheritance, he is resolved there to stand upon his guard, which has given
much distaste to the Lords, the States of the united Provinces. The cause of
his discontent, as it is supposed, being deprived of his place of high Admiral
of Holland which was done by the States, left he should, aid the malignants
here against the high Court of Parliament.

It was also informed that Richelen the great French Cardinal is for certain
deceased at Fontanblean this week.

FINIS.

