Ortholatrea: OR, A BRIEF DISCOURSE CONCERNING Bodily Worship: Proving it to be
GODS DUE; To be given unto him with acceptance on his part, and not to be
denied him without Sin, on ours. A thing worthy to be taken into Consideration
in these days, wherein Profaneness and Irreverence toward the sacred Majesty of
God has so much corrupted our Religious Assemblies, that men are regardless of
their being before God, or of Gods being amongst them in his own House. By [S.
G.] late Preacher of the Word of God in the Cathedral Church of PETERBURGH.

PSALM. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to
be had in reverence of all them that are about him. 95.6. O come, let us
worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. 99.5. Exalt ye
the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy. 132.7. We will
go into his Tabernacles, we will worship at his footstool. MICAH 6.6 Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God. MATTHEW. 22.
21. Render unto God the things that are Gods. London, Printed for Gabriel
Bedell, M. M. and T. C. and are to be sold at their shop at the Middle Temple
gate in Fleetstreet, 1650.

PREFACE.
WHen a Kingdom or People stand in need of Reformation, (as none ever were in
more need then we) it is undoubtedly a good way to observe the same Method that
God himself did, in his proceeding to judgment against the house of Judah,
Ezekiel. 9.6, beginning at his Sanctuary: The things that are amiss there, let
them be rectified and amended, as deserving it in the first place, and then
(like lines extended from the Center to the Circumference) Reformation will the
more happily diffuse it self into other places: For, the Sanctuary being the
fountain whence help and divine protection issue, Psalm. 20.2. the treasury,
where all blessings are to be obtained by the people of God, when they make
their holy, humble, and devout addresses to him; cleanse That, and the things
there, and then the Streams will flow more fairly into such places as want
watering.

For this purpose, here is a Besom to sweep away an horrid abuse, wherewith the
adversary to God and Man, Religion and Decency, has much and long corrupted
our Public Assemblies before God in his Sanctuary; and that is, Profaness and
Irreverence toward the sacred Majesty of God, before whom the appearance is,
which is after so rude a manner, as if God were equal, nay inferior to the
meanest of us.

Though contrarily, the expulsion of Corporal adoration and reverence out of
our Public Assemblies, be now accounted an act of Reformation, 't is no
wonder, when in all corrupt Ages and Places, Evil has been called Good, Isai.
5.20.
and Good Evil: Vices have been called Virtues, and so embraced; and Virtues
Vices, and so detested: Piety having been branded with Nicknames, and
Irreligion assuming specious appellations: That has gotten Spittle from the
mouth; This, kisses from the lips.

Now for this poor Treatise creeping forth into public view, if it may, to
reform what is amiss, and to advance the honor of God in this particular. I am
not ignorant, how that in many respects it may receive such a Terrifying
Advertisement, as Moses did from Pharaoh, Exodus 10.10, Look to it, for evil is
before you. Some, because they see not the name of some learned Worthy (which
commonly is a great advantage to a Book) prefixed, may say in scorn, Ecclus
13.22.
with those in Siracides, What fellow's this? Some again, apprehending by the
Title Page the general Subject, or galloping the Treatise it self over, with an
hasty eye, may say, as the Jews did against S. Paul; Acts 18.13.
This fellow persuades men to worship God contrary to the Law. A Third sort
may accuse the Work of Unseasonableness, That it came not forth into the world
(like the Shunemite-woman into the Kings presence) just when the thing was in
the words, 2 Kings 8.5.
when the business was in agitation, but long after the Question is ceased; and
the general inclination has since been to the Negative. But, (as the Apostle
said in another case) None of these things move me: Acts 20.24.
Let these, and greater Evils then these, arise against this poor Treatise, I
pass not, so I have Truth and Religion on my side: for which, upon my best
(though I confess but weak) examination) 1 find nothing, why I should decline
any ludge whatsoever, whether it be God himself, whose Cause this is, and whose
Mind, in this case, is to be seen in his written Word; or any inferior under
him, either Ancient or Modern, Christian or Heathen, the Atheist only
excepted, and (amongst Christians) him, who has so firmly betrothed himself to
a Prejudicate Opinion, that he will not be divorced from it.

And for thee, Reader, whoever thou art; If knowing, and have concerning this
Subject greater illuminations in thine Heart, then these in thine Hand, impart
them; if not, accept of these. If ignorant, (thy thoughts having not as yet
been conversant in these things) Do not think that I have any design to abuse
or deceive thee, as if I would convey a mote into thine eye, by presenting this
Treatise to the view of it: No; God is witness, my aim is, to elevate thy
Devotion to that just height, as that thou may fully and completely
acknowledge God, by worshipping him with thy Soul and Body; not
superstitiously, hypocritically, affectedly, or any other irregular way; but
humbly, and sincerely, according to thy duty in thy appearances before him,
when his own eye, and the eyes of his holy Angels are upon thee, observing thy
behavior in those approaches; which if it be not answerable to his Divine
presence, thou can have no cause to think, but that God will dislike thee, as
Achish did David, 1 Samuel 21.
when he counterfeited Madness before him, letting the spittle fall upon his
beard:

Take heed then, lest thou go out of Gods presence guilty of Jacob's
oversight; Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware: Gen.28.16.
and so, though thy coming in might be in hope of a blessing, yet thou go
away without it, having by thy profane rudeness provoked God so, as neither to
accept thy Person, nor thy Prayer, nor any Duty which thou have performed, but,
Luke 1.53.
with the rich in the Gospel, to send thee empty away: And perhaps, more then
so, have provoked him to wrath, that he should execute positively some
vengeance upon thee, making a breach upon thee, as upon Uzzah,, for that thou
have not sought him after the due order, 1 Chro.15.13"
in such an humble and reverent way, as befitteth so great and glorious a
Majesty. If thou have a desire to prevent these things, and to excite Gods
henevolence toward thee, beware of rude irruptions into, and dissolute
continuance in Gods presence.

I shall say no more, but (commending thee to the race of God, and this poor
Treatise to thy discreet Perusal) bid thee

Farewell.
PTHOLATPEA.
MATTHEW. 4. 10. LUKE 4. 8. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.
IT appears by the example of Moses and Aaron, that it is not safe for a man to
hold his peace, when there is occasion to vindi cate Gods honor lying at
stake, or called in question: for we read in the Twentieth Chapter of the book
of Numbers, how that the Israelites came to the wilderness of Zin, and murmured
there, because there was no water, and because Moses and Aaron did not believe
the Lord, to sanctify him in the eyes of the children of Israel, by declaring
his Power and Providence, that God both could and would provide things
necessary for them; for this Omission God was so angry with them, that he would
not suffer them to enter into the promised Land, as appears plainly at the
twelfth Verse of the same Chapter: And at the eight and twentieth Verse is
recorded, how that this sentence was executed upon Aaron; for God sent him up
into mount Hor, and there he died. And in the twenty seventh Chapter of the
same book of Numbers, verse. 12, 13, 14, and likewise Deuteronomy. 32. 49, 50, 51.
mention is made of the death of Moses in mount Nebo, for the same fault of not
sanctifying the Lord in the midst of the children of Israel.

We cannot conceive of this, otherwise, then that it was set for a president,
and an exemplary Caveat to the Magistracy and Priesthood in all succeeding
Generations to the worlds end, that they be careful to vindicate and maintain
Gods honor, with his Divine privileges and prerogatives, in the sight of the
people, lest God stop the passage against them, and deny them entrance into the
heavenly Canaan.

The consideration of which, is necessary for these days of ours, wherein there
is great murmuring, that Corporal Reverence and Worship should be given unto
God; and it is not only neglected and opposed, but branded with ignominy,
slander, and reproach; which, whether they be just, or injurious, I shall (God
willing) according to my ability, endeavor to make appear, in this ensuing
Discourse upon a portion of Scripture which alludeth to that Subject: Adorabis
Dominum Deum tuum: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.

It cannot be objected, with any show of reason, that the Spiritual Worship of
God (I mean that of the Soul only) should be here precisely understood: the
occasion will lead us to the sense, which may be deduced from the Verse going
before, where we see what a large proffer the devil made unto our Savior, that
he would give him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, if he
would fall down, and worship him: And surely, it was Corporal worship that the
devil would have had. Vol.2.page.84.
The devil (says Mr Perkins) desired of Christ no more then the prostrating of
his body: col. 2.C.
and the word (...), in the devils proposition, which is for falling down,
plainly demonstrates as much, being taken in the common course of Scripture for
no other then a Bodily act. Besides, if our Saviors reply to the devils
temptation should not be taken in the same sense of Corporal adoration, as the
devil propounded it, then did not our Savior give a pertinent and satisfactory
answer to the devils motion; which were vile to think. The devil was a subtle
Sophister; and if he should have seen our Savior to lie open in that ward, as
to intend Spiritual worship, when h spoke of Corporal, he would soon have
replied, Worship the Lord thy God with thy spirit, according to thine own
meaning; and worship me with thy body, according to my meaning. Therefore it
cannot be, but that our Savior consuted the devil in his own sense of Bodily
worship by laying the Law before him, whereby he showed him, how that all men
(and himself amongst the rest) were bound to give their Worship unto God, and
not to alienate it from him, as the devil would have had him done.

It was the most presumptuous motion that ever the devil made, to have had
Christ worship him. Never was such a thing heard of before, that the foul
fiend, Heb. 1.6.
the cursed angel, should seek to be worshipped of Him, whom all the blessed
Angels worship and adore. How durst he attempt to rob God of his Royal
privilege of Corporal adoration, and require it even from the Son of God? But
we see the devils pride, and what his aim is, To exalt himself into Gods Chair
of State, and (if he can) to deprive him of his incommunicable prerogatives.
Nothing will serve his turn, but the things that pertain to God: to despoil God
of these, is his desire and glory.

And this may give us occasion to apprehend a fair probability, that Religious
Bodily worship is Gods propriety and due, that the devil was so eager upon it,
and for this, bethought himself to assail our Savior with the strongest
temptation that possibly he could; to wit, the Wealth, Honor, and Glory of
this world; thinking, that if any thing would prevail, it must be that. Because
with this bait he had taken many great ones in preceding Ages of the world, he
thought he might, at this time, take our Savior also. But the great Deceiver
found himself greatly deceived: And as he was deceived in himself, so I wish he
may no longer deceive those that oppose themselves against Bodily worship,
denying that it should be given to God: For, to this the devils policy works,
that, if he cannot get Corporal adoration to himself, amongst Christians (as he
has of some poor Heathenish people in some places of the world) then he will
do what he can to hinder God, that he shall not have it neither; Nec mei, nec
Dei, cries the devil then; Let it be neither mine, nor Gods: Put we have a
contrary voice in this Scripture; Adorabis, etc. Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God.

We see then in what sense these words are to be understood; of Outward, not
only Inward; of Corporal, not only Spiritual adoration. Here (says Mr
Perkins) we must understand our Savior Christ, Vol.3. p.403.
to mean Outward Divine Worship; Col. 2.
as if he should say, Thou shall religiously submit, bow, or prostrate thy body
unto God, in Prayer and Thanksgiving. And the word which our Savior uses
here, (and is also commonly used in other places serving to this purpose) may
import as much. (...)(says Zanchie) is derived from (...), Tom.4. Col. 269.
which signifies a Dog, as if Man was sent (...) to school to this dumb
creature, to observe how he croucheth, and humbles himself at the foot of his
master, being of all creatures most familiarly docible this way; that from
thence Man might learn to prostrate himself in all humility, before God.
Proceed we now to the examination of this business, observing this Order: 1. To
examine what is commonly objected against it, on the negative part. 2. What
evidence or authority may be produced, to defend or require it, on the
affirmative part; that, if it shall appear Corporal adoration to be Gods due,
the opposers and detainers of it may be left without excuse, for not giving uno
God the things that are Gods.

But I desire (by the way) to be rightly understood, and to avoid the
misprision of the Reader: for I would not, that this treating of Outward
worship should be any prejudice, or occasion the least damage to the Inward,
(as if a man should offer unto God the husk of an outward Ceremony, without the
concomitancy of the hearts inward affection.) God forbid, that I should think,
or be thought to excuse any such hypocrisy. But this is the thing, Whether, in
worshipping God with the heart and soul, it be lawful, decent, and expedient,
to join the Body with it, and so to exercise and employ the whole man, both
soul and body together in the Worship of God. It is granted on both sides, that
God is to be worshipped with the Soul: but whether he is to be worshipped with
the body also, this is the thing in question.

1 Object.
And first, on the Negative part it is objected, That Corporal adoration to
God, is Idolatry.

Answ.
If this be true, then, both It and the Practisers deserve to be expelled with
rigor out of the Church, Joh. 2.15.
as our Savior drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. But this is
only a foul scandal, without fair proof: For, What is Idolatry? It is (says
Zanchie) Cultus Religiosus, Tom. 4. Col. 502.
quo Idolum tanquam numen colitur: A Religious Worship, whereby an Idol is
worshipped as the Deity. But, when Religious Worship is given to God, who
himself is the true and only Deity, Is this Idolatry? Idolatry is, when
Religious Worship is taken from the Creator, and given to the Creature: But,
when it is given to the Creator, as his right and due, Is this Idolatry? Why
was not Corporal Worship accounted Idolatry, before, and under the Law, as well
as now? That which is I dolatry in these days, was so, from the beginning of
the world, by a coequal principle. But we are sure, that Corporal Worship unto
God was not accounted Idolatry, neither before, or under the Law, when Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, David, and many other devout persons practiced it; therefore
it cannot be Idolatry now. Or, who dare say, that our Savior stopped the
devils mouth with sin, or, gave liberty unto men to be Idolaters, when he
alleged this place of Scripture against the devil?

Yet, for further answer, I would they knew and considered, what fear there is
of their running themselves against a very dangerous rock, who make this
Objection; the sin of Blasphemy, and that in a very high degree, in regard,
whosoever shall say, that Bodily Worship unto God is Idolatry, will seem in
effect to say, that God himself is an Idol. The Argument may be framed as
follows, to impeach chem of it.

Whosoever shall say, that God is an Idol, blasphemeth.
But he who says, that Bodily worship unto God is Idolatry, says that God is
an Idol.
Ergo, he who says that Bodily worship unto God is Idolatry, blasphemeth.
If the makers of this Objection would weigh this, it might be hoped they would
take heed of blaspheming God in the use of such an Objection.

2 Object.
Bodily worship of God is Superstition.

2 Answer.
Peter Martyr is against this Objection: for Attamengestus illi quid Scripturis
commemorantur, and sanctis viris usui sueruns, publicis precibus admodum
congruuns, neque superstitiosis actibus debent annumerari. Loc.com. clas. 3
cap. 13. 12. page 671.
he would not have those gestures of body, which agree with Scripture-examples,
to be accounted acts of Superstition.

This word Superstition is that great Scar-crow in Religion, so common in most
men's mouths, that what religious action soever does not relish upon their
palate, they cry out against it, Superstition, Superstition; whereby they think
to render it so odious, as that it should be abhorred. To whom (as concerning
this duty of Corporal adoration to God) I will not stick to apply that of the
Apostle, These speak evil of those things which they understand not: Jude verse.
10.
For, as another Apostle speaks in another case, Had they known it, 1 Cor. 2.8.
, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory: Even so, did these know what
Reverend adoring God with the Body is, they would not persecute it with such
opprobrious and scandalous terms.

But let us examine the Objection: Is Corporal adoration of God, Superstition?
That Is neither true, nor safe to say: For, consider Superstition in the
abstract, and it will appear that Corporal worship is no more Superstition,
then Truth is Falsehood. But perhaps their meaning is, that Bodily worship is
superstitiously performed: men are grown superstitious in the doing of it: And
Bodily worship being grown to this pass, it is to be abolished, and taken away,
as unlawful, and not to be practiced any longer.

I answer again, That, in case Bodily worship be performed after a
superstitious manner; yet this is but a weak Argument to conclude the abolition
of the thing it self. For our proceeding then in this business, I see no reason
but it ought to be regulated like those in our other businesses. If a man be
sick, Must he therefore be knocked of the head, rather then be recovered with
Physic? If he has a sore on his thigh, as Hezekiah had, 2 King. 20.7.
Will he rather do by his very Flesh, 2 Samuel 10.4.
as Hanun did by the Garments of David's messengers, cut it away by the
buttocks, then apply a bunch of figs, or some other plaster, to heal it? If he
has a Tree in his Garden taken with a Worm, will he rather dig up the Tree by
the root, then seek to kill the Worm? If a Thief come into a True-man's
company, must the Trueman suffer with the Thief? Why then cannot the
Superstition (with which Gods Bodily worship is infected and depraved) be
purged, and taken away, without quite taking away the thing it self? If it were
good to conclude the utter abolishing of a thing, from the abuse of it, the
whole Frame of Religion would quickly be dissolved, and nothing left: For, what
have we in Religion, which by some or other is not abused? Gods House, his Day,
his Word, are abused; and if they should not therefore be used, we should have
neither Place, nor Time, nor Rule for his Service. The duties of Praying,
Preaching, and Administering the Sacraments, are abused; and God forbid but they
should still be used, for all that. If any religious act should be deserted
because it is abused by others, then, a Papist, a Jew, a Turk, in case he could
not dissuade us from our Religion, neither by fair means, nor foul; it were a
ready way, to embrace the same Religion with us, for a time, and to stuff it
with gross abuses, and so drive us from our Religion that way.

A great care would be had, lest we run from one Extreme to another, Hor.
as Fools do; Dum vitant stulti vitia, etc. Whilst they shun one vice, they run
into the other contrary; and so are as far from the golden Mean, as they were
before. If whilst we flee from Superstition, we suffer our selves to slide into
an irreverent Profaneness in Gods presence, the Remedy is as bad as (if not
worse then) the Disease.

Not to stand now to vindicate those, who out of a pious sincerity worship God
with their bodies, from this slander of Superstition, (which were a worthy
task:) If (concurring with the censorious humor of the Objectors) it be
supposed that some men, in worshipping God with their bodies, are
superstitious, (of which whosoever be guilty, I could wish they would amend
it;) What if they who refuse to worship God with their Bodies, be superstitious
also, even in refusing? For ought I know, they may be so: For, though they
refuse out of a fear to displease God, yet, if that fear be causless, needless,
and superfluous, it may (not unfitly) be termed Superstitious: which name Saint
Austin gives it Superstitiosa rimiditos. Aug. Epist. 118.
.

Corporal adoration, or Bodily worship, is a Ceremony; 3 Objection.
and all Ceremonies were abolished by the death of Christ: Therefore Bodily
worship, although it was given to God under the Law, yet being by Christ taken
away, it is not to be given to God under the Gospel.

Admit Corporal adoration, Answer.
or Bodily worship to be a Ceremony, yet was it never any part of that
Ceremonial Law which was abolished by the death of Christ: It was in use and
practice, long before the Ceremonial Law was given; Lex naturalis tres habet
pavies, cujus prima hetc esst, ut agnitus honoretur Creator. Ambros. in Romans 5.
Nature it self having imprinted in the hearts of men a secret character of
bodily reverence to be given unto God: As may appear by many examples: that of
Abraham falling on his face, Genesis 17.3. that of Abraham's servant bowing down
his head, and worshipping the Lord for his good success in his journey, Genesis
24.26. and that which was done by the people of Israel, when they heard the
tidings of their deliverance from their heavy bondage in Egypt, Exodus 12.27.
with many other of this kind. So that Bodily worship was in use and practice,
many years before any tittle of the Ceremonial Law was prescribed. And as it
was long before, so likewise (as longer lifed) is it continued long after: for
whereas the Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law were wholly abolished by Christ's
death, (the termination of which may seem to be implied in his Consummatum est
upon the Cross) Corporal adoration is authorized (as shall and will appear) by
sufficient precept and practice, Joh. 19.30.
since our Saviors Death, Resurrection, and Ascension. And the reason of it is
satisfying enough to the flexible considerer, that Corporal adoration is
included, not in the Ceremonial, but in the Moral Law, in the Second
Commandment: And who knows not, that the Moral Law was not abolished by the
death of Christ, but is, and shall be in force to the end of the world?

Perhaps some Antisomatist may conceive from Job. 4.23. (which place will come
by and by to be examined) that worshipping God with the body was so abolished,
as that, to worship him with the heart, soul, and spirit, succeeded in its
stead. But this cannot be: for worshipping God with the heart and soul, was in
the world long before Bodily worship was (as is conceived) abolished; and the
Inward Worship is fully as ancient as the Outward: For, did not Abraham, David,
and the rest of Gods devout servants, worship God in heart, soul and spirit, as
well as with their bodies? Were they not inwardly touched with an awful
reverence toward the great Majesty of God, and so adored him? Surely yes:
else we might think they played the hypocrites, in making outward shows, and
not doing any thing within, relating unto God and his Worship. If then Cordial
worship was not brought in, Corporal worship was not for it done away by the
death of Christ. Indeed our Savior did bring in a Spiritual worship; but what
that is, shall appear, when I have dispatched another Objection.

Corporal Adoration, or Bodily Worship, is offensive, 4 Objection.
and scandalous; it gives offense to the weak: Therefore they who practice it,
ought to forbear it, else they offend; which they must not as, Romans 14.21. and
I Cor. 10.32.

That thing should not offend the weak, Answer.
by which others are made strong. And I could appeal to clouds of witnesses,
who, out of an honest care to worship God devoutly with their bodies, have felt
themselves much strengthened in their souls. But, if they who are offended at
Corporal adoration be weak indeed, then the parties offending ought to inform
and satisfy the parties offended; and the parties offended are to seek after
information and satisfaction, by their own studies, or consultation with
others; by which means they may receive strength to remove the offense from
their apprehension, and then (without doubt) they will, not only approve
Bodily worship in others, but practice it themselves. But if, pretending
weakness, they be obstinate, stubborn, and perverse, (which humor, our Savior
Christ himself was not so happy, or rather unhappie, as to please) then
Corporal adoration ought not to be forborne, in fear to offend such people: but
let the practisers of it go on, Calv. in Mat. 15.14. Aquin. 22ae, qu. 43. art.
7. and in Romans 14 21.
Per medias offensiones, through the midst of offenses, not having any care to
the perverse, who take offense where there is none given. I may ask that
Question, which our late Solomon has put into my mouth, K. James confer. at
Hapt. Court. page 66.
How long will they be weak? for, if they resolve still to be what they are,
Gods worshippers must resolve to do what they do. I find a devout man very
high in his expression in this case: Joh. Valdesso, Consid. 76.
Let the Saints of the world stumble, and fall, and break their necks, rather
then the truth of the Gospel suffer any detriment in the Saints of God.

5 Object.
Scripture is produced to prove that Bodily Worship is not to be given unto
God. ('It Is strange that men should fight against God with the sword of his own
Spirit; but this they do.) The places commonly alleged, are, Prove 23.26. My
son, give me thy heart. God requires the heart, and with it he is to be
worshipped, but not with any more, for that is superfluous and unnecessary.

Answ.
Although Worship, or Adoration, be not there expressly mentioned in the letter,
yet, no doubt but it is implicitly included; and that God says to every one,
in every religious action, (and so of Worship or Adoration in particular) Give
me thy heart: For indeed, God requires the heart, and has respect unto it,
principally, first, and before the body: Quid prodest, si genua corpor is mei
adorationem veniens slectam Deo, and genua cordis mei slectam diabolo? Orig
hom. 2. in Judic.
All our Service and Worship being neither accepted nor respected with him, if
our heart go not along with our body in the performance of it. But it is not
said in that place of Solomon, that God requires the heart alone, saying, Give
me only thy heart: There Is no such exclusive particle adjoined, whereby,
lifting up the eyes, holding up the hands, speaking with the mouth, bowing,
kneeling, and other devout bodily expressions, should be excluded; therefore
this place of Solomon does not make against Bodily worship.

The words of our Savior are likewise produced, to beat down Corporal
adoration, Job. 4 23, 24. Very adoratores, etc. The true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth. Here it is required that
we worship God in spirit; therefore Bodily worship is not to be given unto him.

For the right understanding of this place of Scripture, we must know, that
Spirit there (for the strength of the Objection lies in this word) is not to
be understood of the soul, in opposition to the body; and so Outward bodily
worship to be done away, and the Inward worship of the soul to come in stead of
it: but it is to be understood in opposition to the Sacrifices and other
Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law, where with the Samaritanes did then worship
God, in that mountain, by themselves, in a Temple of their own; and the Jews by
themselves, in their Temple at Jerusalem. In loc.
Notanda est antithesis inter spiritum and externas figuras, says Mr Calvin:
the opposition is to be noted betwixt spirit and the outward sigures. For we
know, that the Worship or Service which the Samaritanes and Jews did then
generally use, consisted in External Rites, and Visible Sacrifices of beasts,
and other Oblations; which manner of Worship being shortly to be abolished, a
Spiritual or Evangelical Worship should be introduced into the place of it,
wherein no Typical nor Figurative Sacrifices should be offered. And if it be
rightly considered, it will appear, that those out ward Sacrifices of the Law
had little or no affinity with that which our Savior intends in this
Scripture, ( Matthew. 4.10.) and which we call Corporal adoration, or Bodily
worship, which (in its furthest extent) is but personal.

Our Savior, then, in that place of S. John, does no way thwart the
worshipping of God with the body.

I conceive I have enough for it from Beza, who, in his Annotation upon the
place, is driven to make his defense against some of the Papists, accusing him,
(in some of their Writings, Conferences, or other ways) that, seeking to
establish the Spiritual worship of God, he should deny that God was to be
worshipped with the External worship of the body: But of this he clears
himself; Imo utrunque Deo semper debitum fuisle, and deberi, absit, ut
insiciemur: Yes (says he) both the Inward and Outward worship have ever been,
and shall be due unto God: God forbid that we should deny this.

Yet, if this be not sufficient, I can raise my authority higher, to the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, who, although he speaks in the very words of our
Savior, Phil. 3. 3. We are the circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit,
etc. yet this did not detain him from worshipping God with his body; as may
appear, Act. 20.36. and 21.5. Ephesians. 3.14. I rehearse not the words, because I
would have the Reader peruse, and judge. But would it not seem strange, if I
should say, that Corporal worship unto God, under the Gospel, is Spiritual? If
I should so affirm, there are (and those of no mean credit) that would confirm
it. Not to trouble my self with setting down what Aquinas speaks, 22ae qu, 84.
art. 2.3m.
(or others in this case) I shall content my self with what Zanchie writes.
Totum vero hunc cultum, tam externum, quam internum, ideo spiritualem sacrae
literae vocant, quia a spiritu nostro per Spiritum sanctum (quo fideles
aguntur) renovato totus proficis^itur, etc. Ep. ante Miscellan.
The Scripture (says he) calls External worship, as well as Internal,
spiritual, because it proceeds from our spirit, renewed by Gods Spirit, and is
done in faith, and tends to the honor and glory of God. And he cites this very
place of S. John for it. To which let me add the, etc. Whence we conclude,
that, notwithstanding this place of S. John, Bodily worship stands firmly due
unto God, and is to be performed to wards him, by virtue of the present
Scripture which we have in hand: Adorabis, etc. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God.

These are the common Objections on the negative part, which buz into the ears
of men, that Bodily worship is not to be given unto God: to which, I hope I
have given satisfactory Answers.

I come now to examine what evidence may be produced, to defend and require it,
on the affirmative part. In pursuance whereof, I shall first produce such
Arguments, as, from solid Grounds, may be drawn to prove it: and afterward,
such Testimonies from authentic Authors, as may further confirm it.

The first Argument may be drawn from the consideration of our bodies
themselves. I Argum.
Here are three things to be taken notice of, which might afford so many
several Arguments; but I shall comprise them all in one.

1. The Creation, 2. The Redemption, 3. The Glorification of these our bodies.
There is no Corporeal substance (what ever it be) that is so much ennobled and
honored by the bounty, grace, and mercy of the great Creator, as these lumps
of Flesh, I.
our bodies, are: First, in respect of their Creation, though not for
Substance, yet for Privilege, above other bodily Creatures; all other
Creatures being made for the use and sustentation of these bodies: Some
creatures bring their Flesh to feed them; some, their Wool and Skins to clothe
them: some, their Medicinal virtues, to heal them: The Sun affords them light
and refreshment; the Fire warms them; the Water purifies them; the Air affords
them a breathing place; the Earth, accommodations for adwelling place: All the
Creatures, in their several squadrons, present them with their serviceable
respects, from the meanest, even to the highest order of Creatures, the holy
and blessed Angels, who have from God the tutelary charge over these our
Bodies. And shall these our Bodies receive these benefits, and acknowledge no
Homage nor Worship unto God, whose goodness has vouchsafed them? Has God
created our Bodies for Themselves, and no way for Himself, but left them at
liberty, nay secluded them from this service, that they should not worship
Psalm. 95.6.
, nor bow, nor kneel before the Lord their Maker? If our Bodies be not bound to
this duty and service, What difference then is there betwixt the bodies of
Reasonable men, and the bodies of Bruit beasts, toward God?

Secondly, for the blessing of Redemption: 2.
In this no bodily substance has any interess, but the bodies of men alone.
Christ sprinkled not his blood upon the Sun, nor upon the Moon, nor upon the
Stars, nor upon the Heavens, nor upon the Terrestrial creatures; but only upon
the Bodies of Men is the effusion of that inestimable Blood: And still must our
bodies be ungrateful? Are we not bought with a price, 1 Cot. 6.20.
and must we not therefore glorify God in our bodies, and in our spirits,
because they are Gods?

Look yet further to the Third 3.
, the Glorification of our Bodies, which are designed to such glory and
immortality in the highest heavens, as that no Corporeal creature besides, has
the like happiness prepared for it. And shall our bodies still remain stiff,
stubborn, and inflexible? Let us take heed, lest this benumming stupidity
endanger us not, both souls and bodies. Let us consider, that our Souls and
Bodies are twins, and that God has united them together, as in one man, so in
one participation of his benefits of Creation, Redemption, and Glorification;
and from hence, debate and enquire in our selves, Whether, or no, there be not
cause for them to be united, in setting forth the honor and worship of God:
for seeing God has not disjoined them in these his Benefits, there can be no
color, that we should disjoyn them in his Worship.

A second Argument may be drawn from the definition of Idolatry. 2 Argum.
, out of Zanchie, that it is a Religious worship, whereby an Idol is worshipped
as the Deity. A Religious worship.] What Is that, but such as Religion binds to
give unto God himself? The question then may be asked, Whether Bodily worship
given to an Idol, in a religious way, be Idolatry, or no? Surely, 't is plain
Idolatry. And what makes it Idolatry, but the giving that Bodily worship unto
it, which is Religious, and belongs only to God? Do we not see then, in the
nature of Idolatry, that Bodily worship is Gods due, and therefore he must have
it, and that, if it were not due unto God, it would thence follow, that, to
worship an Image with the body were no Idolatry, because the worship given unto
it belongs not unto God?

A third Argument may be drawn from the Second Commandment, 3 Argum.
which in form of words is a Negative Commandment; and the Rule of the Negative
Commandments, is, that they command the contrary to that which they forbid. As
for example: That Commandment which says, Thou shall not commit adultery, does,
on the contrary, command us to keep our selves chaste and undefiled. That
Commandment which says, Thou shall do no murder, does, on the contrary,
command us, that we be careful (as much as in us lies) of preserving life. That
Commandment which says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain does, on the contrary, command a holy and reverend usage of Gods Name:
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. And shall swear by his Name. In like manner, the Second
Commandment is a strict prohibition against Idolatry, and worshipping of
Images, any Creature, or the Figure of any thing whatsoever: Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth: thou
shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, etc. We see here what way Bodily
worship must not go; it must not be given to Images, nor to any Creature: Now,
does this Negative precept so restrain Bodily worship, that it should go no way
at all, but suffer it to be altogether omitted? Is there none, or nothing that
requires it? Surely, God himself requires and commands it, in that prohibition.
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, is as much, as if God had
said, Thou shall bow down to Me, and worship Me. If any doubt of this
construction of the Negative Commandments, that they command the contrary to
what they restrain from, inquisition into the judgment of Divines will settle
him, that so it is, and particularly in this Second Commandment: For which, I
will only cite the words of that Mirror of Piety and Learning, Archbishop
Usher, and leave it to the A, juin. 22.ae, qu. 122 40. Zanch. Tom. 4. col. 363.
Pisicator in Matthew 4 8.
margin to point at more. In his Sum and Substance of Christian Religion, page
226. he says thus: The gestures of religious adorations being here forbidden
to be given unto Images, are therein commanded to be given unto the God of
heaven. D Hammond in his Apped, to his Proct. Cat. page 303.


But perhaps some will say, These are Humane constructions, the glosses of men:
If they could see it thus in the written Word of God, Perkin^ Refor. Cath.
point 14
that would strike a greater stroke in their conviction. Let them take then
what is set down, 2 King. 17.35, 36. Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow your
selves to them, nor sacrifice to them: But the Lord, who brought you up out of
the land of Egypt, with great power, and a stretched out arm, him shall ye
fear, and him shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice. The Negative
is in the 35 verse; and the Affirmative answering to it, (as face to face) in
the 36. And this sense of the Second Commandment may further appear, by the
words following: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. What is God jealous
of, but of his Glory, of his Honor, of his Worship, as well Corporal as
Spiritual? He will not have them taken from him, and given to another. As he
will not have them given to Another, so he will not have them taken from
Himself. The assertion then, that Bodily worship to God is Idolatry, unlawful,
and unnecessary, must be brought to this Second Commandment, as the proper
Touchstone by which it is to be tried. Bring it hither, and let it be judged,
whether Bodily worship unto God be not rather confirmed, then condemned;
commanded, then forbidden; and so the denial of it to be a sin against this
Commandment.

4 Argum.
A fourth Argument may be drawn from the Civil worship. A Father will look for
due honor from his Child. Dod and Clevor on the 5 Com.
And for the childs part, bowing is a duty which he is bound to render to his
parents by virtue of the Fifth Commandment. A Master will expect due obeisance
from his Servant; and that as well Outward, as Inward. Superiors also accept
the same, and Inferiors discharge it, without contradiction. Why then should
not God, our heavenly Father and Lord receive from us religious Bodily worship,
in honor and obeisance, as a good Father, and as a great Lord; and besides,
when we profess our selves his Children and Servants, and also acknowledge him,
not only our Superior, but Supreme of all? Why should not religious worship
to God extend it self to as large and as ample an act, as the Civil worship
unto men? No man dares deny God to be the greater object, and infinitely more
deserving then any mortal man can be. If we honor earthly Kings so much with
our bodies; if we bow, and kneel, when come into the places of great and
honorable presence, Why should we not do the same, (and more, if it were
possible) unto God? Certainly, we Christians may blush, and be ashamed, that
the very Turks should go beyond us in prizing this argument: for hence they
conclude, (and with more reason then we can gainsay) that, if they give such
worship and reverence to their great men, much more ought they to do it unto
God. Let him speak, Busbequius Ep. 3. mihip. 267.
who, living among those Unchristened people (yet more respective of the Divine
Majesty then we) heard them justify their practice of Corporal adotion unto
God, after this manner: Sicum Bassis tibi sermo habendus sit non aliter facias,
quam toto corpore ad reverentism composito, Quanto aequius est idem servare
erga Deum, omne humanum fastigium tantopore excedentem? If (say they) thou were
to have speech with the Bashaws, thou would not do it otherwise then with thy
whole body composed to reverence; How much more just is it, that the same
should be observed toward God, who so infinitely exceeds all Humane
excellence?

Ovid. de Ponto. lib. 3. eleg. 2.
Quid facere Ausonia geniti debetis in urbe,
Cum tangant diros talia facta Getas?
If such religious actions, such devout adorations, be found amongst Heathenish
Turks, What ought to be done amongst us Christians, who say, We are the only
Church of God?

Is it sufficient (think we) to say, The Heart is most proper for God,
therefore the Body may be exempted? Look then again into the Civil worship, and
see how the Heart and the Body are both required even unto it. If a Son should
honor his Father, a Servant his Master, an Inferior his Superior, Non
sufficit exteri^ obtemp^rare majoribus nostris, nisi ex intimo cordis affectu
sublimiter sentiamus de eis. Bern. Sermon. 3. de Adven.
in Body only, and not in Heart, Is he not an Hypocrite? Or, if he should say,
Sir, I honor and reverence you in my Heart, and so show him no Outward
reverence nor respect, Would it be well taken? Offer it now unto thy governor,
will he be pleased with thee? Why then should Man have more then God? Mal. 1.8.
or, Why should the Civil Bands be longer then the Religious, binding us in
more Obligations toward Men, then we are bound in toward God? If Men have
both Heart and Body their way, Why should not God have Both his way?

Epist. 3.
For mine own part, I shall say with S. Ambrose; Si amico suo aliquis, si
parenti, aut proximo deferendum existimat, recte ego, and deferendum Deo, and
cum praeferendum omnibus judicavi. Though (I confess) the words be there spoken
indefinitely, yet, I may (without prejudice either to them, or their author)
apply them to Bodily worship in particular (it being as true of this, as of any
other service) and explain them thus: If any man think any Outward worship is
to be exhibited to his Friend, Father, or Neighbor, I account it to be
exhibited unto God, and Him to be preferred before All. Whoever shall deny God
this Service of bodily worship, be they Fathers, Masters, Kings, or Great men;
I wonder with what face they can expect it from their Children, Servants, and
Vaslals. And should I go about, on the one side, to absolve Inferiors from any
dutiful obeisance toward their Superiors, be they Masters, Fathers, Lords, or
Kings; and on the other side, charge Superiors, not to expect nor accept such
observance from their Inferiors; What a bold, absurd transgressor against the
general way of Courtship, Civility, and Good Manners, should I be accounted?
Yet notwithstanding, in so doing, I should do no more then what is right and
just, upon this consequence so highly rational, that, if Religious Corporal
worship may not be given to God, no Civil worship may be given to Men; but if
That be, then much more ought This to be abolished: which nevertheless will not
serve our turn, nor be any pleasing satisfaction to God, who ought to have his
due, whatever Men have.

This distinction of Corporal adoration into Religious and Civil, with their
several proprieties, the one belonging to God, the other to Man, was handsomely
canvased betwixt two Heathen Philosophers, Arrianus de Expedit. Alex.
lib.4.page.86.
Anaxarchus, and Callisthenes, upon occasion of Alexander the Great, how far he
was to be honored: Anaxarchus (who seemed to comply with Alexander in the vain
opinion of his deity) spoke, as if Alexander was to be honored after the
manner of the gods, with divine honor: But Callisthenes soberly replied;
Equidem, Anaxarche, Alexandrum nullo plane honor qui quidem homimbus
conveniat, indignum esse censco 3 Caterum statuts sunt inter homines divini and
humani honoris discrimina, etc. Truly, Anaxarchus, I do not think Alexander
unworthy of any honor that is fit to be given unto men; but there are amongst
men determined differences betwixt divine and humane honor. And so, showing
how the gods are differenced from men in many particulars, (amongst which, this
of Adoration is one) Callisthenes concludes; Non est igitar consentaneum hac
omuis inter se confundere, neque hominem nimiis honoribus supra humanum modum
extollere, and deos adstatum abillorum dignitate alienum redigere at nimirum
eodem quo homines cultu colantur: Therefore it is not fit to confound these
things; Not with too great honors to exalt men above the degree of men, nor to
straiten the gods to a state unbeseeming their dignity, that they should be
worshipped with the same worship that men are.

See here the devotion of an Heathen, to uphold the reputation of his gods: He
would not have men exalted to an equal worship with the gods, nor the gods
debased to an equal worship with men, no not with Alexander, as great a King as
he was. Surely then, he abhorred to think, that the gods should be made lower
then men, in having no worship, no adoration at all exhibited unto them, which
(in a Civil way) men have. Tell me, Christian, Did an Heathen, who saw less of
the true God then thou, see more in Religion then thou?

But, as the Levite would rather pass on to Glbeah, Judge. 9.12.
that was of the children of Israel, then turn aside to Jebus the city of a
stranger; so had I rather, to confirm Gods propriety in Religious Corporal
adoration by the Civil, consult with a learned Christian, then an Heathen. Let
me therefore sharpen the point of this Argument (if it be not sharp enough
already) with the testimony of a late learned Divine, Ludvicus Capellus in
Spicilegio, ad 1 Cor. 11. 4. mihi page 87.
who was Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of Salmure. He,
discoursing largely of the External practices of several Nations in the duty of
Prayer, upon occasion of the Apostles words, 1 Cor.11.4. concludes Religious
demeanor toward God to be conformable to the Civil practices of Nations
toward Men. The Turks (says he) pray with their heads covered, because they
uncover not their heads to one another, no not to their great men, and
Monarchs; only they bow their bodies, etc. But, coming to speak of us European
Christians, he says thus: Occidentales pane omnes Europai Christiani Deum
aperto capite, and genu flexe orant, eique supplicant, quiatum humilitatem and
reverentiam nostram erga Deum oportet nos testari: Itaque id cogestu and habitu
fieri debet, and decet, quo in Civili consuetudine solemus cultum and
reverentiam nostram erga superiores testari, quodsane jam inter Europaos fieri
solet, capit is apertione, and genuflexione. Almost all the Western European
Christians pray unto God with an uncovered head, and a bended knee, because so
it behooves us to testify our humility and reverence toward God: Therefore is
it necessary and comely to be done with the same gesture and habit, with which
in the Civil custom we are wont to testify our reverence toward superiors,
which amongst us Europeans is wont to be done by uncovering the head, and
bowing the knee. Thus he. Now although we and the Turks differ in that point of
Civil worship which concerns the head, (they uncovering not the head, which we
do) yet we agree in that which concerns the knee, and other reverent gestures
of the body; which is verily the most general and universal Custom that is in
the world; there being scarce any Nation, where Superiors receive not this
homage and civility from their Inferiors, and upon this ground account their
god (whatever it be that they account their god) worthy of such Bodily
reverence in a Religious way.

But we Christians in the West, are now so far declined from all due reverence
and respect toward Gods Divine Majesty, that our bodies must not acknowledge
him by kneelings and bowings, gestures of reverence, which (in the Civil way)
we plentifully exhibit unto men our superiors, when we meet with them, or make
our addresses to them. Now, if we did but rightly consider Gods transcendency
above men, and our own obligations to his Divine Majesty and Goodness, above
whatever we do or can owe to all the men in the world, we should surely see,
that Corporal adoration is more due to God, in a Religious way, then unto Men,
in a Civil.

Though perhaps for all this, if the primaevity or fundamental constitution of
Corporal adoration, Civil and Religious, be considered, it may seem a
disputable Question, Which of the two is the Mother, and which the Daughter:
Whether the Civil adoration be derived from the Religious, That, because God
himself is to have Religious adoration, therefore Men, our Superiors, are to
have a Civil, as having some analogy and resemblance with God, Psalm. 86. 2.
or, Whether the Religious adoration be derived from the Civil, That, because we
worship Men with our Bodies, therefore we ought also to worship God. Which way
soever it be determined, the Civil worship to Men, will infer and strongly
establish Religious Bodily worship toward God; which is the scope of the
Argument.

A Fifth Argument may be drawn from the silence of the holy Scriptures. 5 Argum.
If the Scriptures be not against it, they are for it: Mar. 9.40.
He that is not against us, is on our part. Where does the Scripture forbid
that Bodily worship should be given unto God? or, Where is it said, that God
condemned any for doing it? or, that Himself refused to be worshipped with the
body? Many devout and humble suppliants have bowed, kneeled, and prostrated
themselves unto God; and, Where is it written, that God rejected them, as if he
would not have been worshipped after that manner? This must be plainly shown;
else it cannot be made good, that Bodily worship unto God is unlawful. But,
sinco the Word of God is altogether for it, and has not one syllable against
it, neither in the Old Testament, nor in the New; it must needs be, not only
lawful, but convenient and necessary.

Where are then the odious aspersions that are cast upon it, in calling it
Idolatry, Superstition, and I know not by what other scandalous names? Would
the Word of God, the lantern, light, and oracle of Truth, be silent, or connive
at a sin worthy of so heinous appellations, and neither countenance the
opposers, nor condemn the practisers of it? Would that Light want a ray to
enlighten us in the knowledge of this, which by some is accounted so great an
offense? Who will say that the Scripture is imperfect and deficient in a thing
of such consequence? But rather on the contrary; Have we not many, both
Examples and Precepts, in the Old Testament, and in the New, for giving of
Bodily worship unto God? Are not the words of this present Scripture, (first
given by Moses, and now ratisied by our Savior) strong enough to enjoin Bodily
worship, that they may satisfy any, but the wilfully obstinate? Sure we are,
that these words put the devil to silence: for when our Savior urged them, the
devil was forced to yield, having nothing to reply against them: And let not
the opposers of Gods Bodily worship show themselves more stubborn then the
devil was, lest even he accuse them before God, for the neglect of that duty,
with the truth whereof himself was so clearly convinced by Scripture-evidence.

But I will put the case: Suppose one who is an opposer of Gods Bodily worship,
and withal, an hater of Idols, should be tempted, as our Savior was, to fall
down, and worship the devil, or an Idol, which the Levit. 17.7. Psalm.106.37. 1
Cor. 10.20.
Scriptures call a devil: Our Savior having taught him to be furnished with
Scripture, whereby to resist temptations, Would he not think this place, which
our Savior made use of, a fit answer for himself? and would he not allege
it, to put the tempter to silence? I trow he would allege, either this, or
some other equivalent place: And, Would he not then be driven upon necessity
(against former mislikings) to acknowledge Corporal adoration to be Gods due,
and so even condemn himself, if he does not yield it unto him? Let him consider
this.

A Sixth Argument may be drawn from the practice of Corporal adoration in
heaven, 8 Argum.
Rev. 5.14. And the four and twenty elders fell down, Rev. 4.10.
and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever. 7.11.
Earth ought to conform it self to Heaven; 11.16.
the Church Militant to the Church Triumphant, 19.4.
in setting forth the honor and worship of God. Now, if it were unlawful (or
so great an offense as it is here made) to worship God with the body, S. John
with his illuminated eagles eyes, would scarce have seen such a thing in heaven.

It it shall be objected, that there were no such bodies in heaven; when S.
John saw this, he only saw it represented in a Vision: This is nothing; for
the vision of the thing in heaven, is sufficient to approve the lawfulness, and
authorize the practice of it here on earth. And let any gainsayer ask himself:
When he comes into heaven bodily, Does he think he shall not (with those four
and twenty elders) fall down before God, Quis andeat affir mare Dersubstanriam
corporaliter videri, cum eam noluerit corporaliter adorari? Aug Ep. 6.
and bodily worship him? If so; Shall it be Honor then, and Dishonor now?
Shall it be Glory there, and Shame here? Shall it be an high Happiness in Gods
Heavenly house, and Sin in his Earthly? Me thinks Reason it self should
persuade us, that Corporal reverence and worship should be given unto God,
here, as a necessary preparation for the doing of it hereafter.

7 Argum.
A Seventh Argument may be drawn from the Majesty of God: If nothing else will
prevail, one would think this should. Is not he the Almighty God, infinite in
Power, Greatness, Majesty, Holiness, and Glory? Does not he dwell in that
light which no man can approach unto; the least ray of which light is ten
thousand times brighter then the Sun? Are all the Kings in the world half so
glorious as he? or their Thrones to be compared to his Footstool? Does not he
sit upon a Throne of incomprehensible glory, attended upon with thousands of
glorious and mighty Angels, that stand before him, admiring, worshipping,
blessing, praising, and crying continually, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
hosts? And although he has his dwelling so high, yet, Does he not humble
himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth? Does he not
vouchsafe to admit these poor bodies of ours into his presence, and permit them
to appear before him, whereas he might justly debar them of this happiness, by
reason of the infinite Disparity betwixt Himself and them? Shall these Bodies
then appear before this presence, without expression of reverence and worship?
Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this. Jer. 2.12.
Certainly, if any man may be ranked in the number of those whom holy Job
taxes for rebelling against the light, Job 24.13.
it is he that is persuaded he may rush into; and be in Gods presence, without
reverence and worship. I say, Against the light: for it need not be doubted,
but that even Nature, and Grace, do both of them project their light this way,
teaching Bodily reverence and worship unto God. Naaman will bow in the house of
Rimmon: 2 Kings 5.18.
so propense is Nature it self to present Bodily adoration to that deity which
the Fancy has conceived. The Muscovites (not many years since) when they
entered into one another houses, Liber Baro de ^^bus Muscoviticis, mihi page 55.
they first looked about them, to see what Images there were; which, when once
they espied, they worshipped, and then saluted their friends. If we must salute
men in the house of God, (of which, for my part, Luke 10.4. Salute no man by
the way.
I see no necessity, or not so Great necessity, as of that which respects God
himself) it were good, if we would take notice of God first. But we can rush
into Gods house, and there, diligently spend our salutations and obeysances
upon this and that body; and God, because he has no Body, (to appear visibly
honorable) must be accounted No body: Either he shall have no worship at all,
or a very slight one. For a man to come before so glorious a God, to hear, to
pray, to sing, and to do it with no more (nay perhaps less) reverence, then if
he were coming into some Trades man's shop, What is it to sacrifice a lamb, Isa.
66.3.
as if be cut off a dogs neck, if this be not?

But what occasion does this administer unto Heathenish Idolaters, to triumph
over us Christians, that they should be ruled by Nature, in giving reverence
and worship to their gods (though false ones;) whereas we, who pretend much to
Grace, will not be taught by it to adore and worship the true God, from whom
our grace comes? Would any Idolater in the world, (though blind, yet devout in
his way) be so irreverently loose and profane before his Devil, as we before
the great God of heaven and earth? Although such Idolaters shall themselves be
condemned for their Idolatry, yet certainly they shall rise up in judgment
against us Christians, and condemn us for our profaneness. As God urged the
Heathens holding them to their gods, Jer. 2. 11, against the levity and
inconstancy of his own people, in changing him: so will he produce their
reverence and worship to their gods, against our slackness, in not giving him
that Bodily worship which is due unto him. Amongst those many sins which
threaten the ruin of this our sinful Nation, and call on us for amendment, we
may justly fear that this is not the least.

Let us then, in the Name of God, consider the Majesty of God, before whom we
appear; our own unworthiness to appear before him; the infinite distance and
disproportion that is betwixt him and us; that his own eyes, and the eyes of
his holy Angels, are upon us, observing our behavior in coming into, and
abiding in his presence: that we are called upon to yield him due reverence and
worship, not only with our Souls, but our Bodies likewise. And, if our hearts
be not obstinately bent to resist the Truth, (which God forbid) we shall see
what pressing engagements lie upon us to worship the Lord our God.

These Arguments I conceive, both for number, and weight, sufficient to
establish this Truth. Yet I shall make request in the words of Elihu, Job 36.2.
Suffer me a little, and I will show thee, that I have jet to speak on Gods
behalf. I shall produce two Arguments more, and those shall be from the very
words themselves; Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.

The first of them shall be from the manner of our Saviors alleging these
words. 8 Argum.
Our Savior immediately before, says, Scriptumest, It is written. Now we know
that Bodily worship to be given unto God, is written in many places of the Old
Testament. But what particular place is it, which our Savior may be thought to
have had respect unto, that this his allegation may be referred to it, and
compared with it? I think it not amiss to follow the margin in our Bibles,
which directs us to Dent. 6.13. and Dent. 10.20. Examine either of the places,
and compare them with our Saviors allegation, and see some difference in the
terms. Moses says, Timebis, Thou shall fear; and our Savior says, Adorabis,
Thou shall worship. And what may be the reason of this difference? I answer:
The Feat of God may have a twofold consideration. First, to be taken strictly,
for an awful dread, 1.
terror, or trembling at God: Which Fear, is properly belonging to that
passion or affection that is in the soul: and is, either upon a sad
apprehension of Gods Justice, as was in David, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh
trembles for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments: or, upon the
sense of Gods Presence, as was in Moses, Heb.12.21.
who exceedingly feared and quaked, at that fearful manifestation of God upon
mount Sinai. This Fear should be in us all, at all times. Though we see not so
much of God as Moses did, yet we are in his presence, and more especially, when
we come into his House, there to present our selves before him. And this Fear
should beget in us Humility, Reverence and Worship toward so Nehem.1.5.
great and terrible a God: Whence (as Piscator observes) that which is Fear in
that place of Moses, is rendered Worship by our Savior in this place, by a
Metonymie, the Effect being put for the Cause, worship for Fear.

They then who deny that Bodily worship is to be given unto God, and refuse to
yield it unto him, when they come before him, (though I will not judge them,
yet) themselves make it manifest by their rude carriage and demeanor, that
they have not this fear in them: for, if they had, they would surely come into
Gods presence, worshipping in the lowliest manner that possibly they could.

2.
Or secondly, Fear may be taken generally, for the whole duty and service that
Man owes unto God: Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole
duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. Now Verbum (...) quando ad Deum resertur, generale
est, complectens omnem reverenitam, qua cum veneratione and religione Deo
exhibetur: Cumque ejus pars sit Adoratio, and diabolus se adorari postulaverit,
ideo Christus verbum generale timoris, seu reverentia, inutaz it in verbum
adorandi. Chemnit. Harm. Evangel. cap.19. mihi Col. 275.
Fear being as the tree, comprehending (as branches) all the several duties
that we owe unto God; Bodily worship (urged at this time by our Savior) may be
comprehended in Moses his Fear, as the Species in the Genus, a Particular in
the General. So that they who deny Gods Bodily worship, deny likewise his Fear,
in its general latitude and capacity, depriving the Genus of a Species, the
Tree of a main Branch, the Fear of God, of its Bodily morship belonging unto
it, as included in it.

The other Argument shall be from these words, 9 Argum.
The Lord thy God. Because he is so, therefore thou shall worship him.

This is a glorious and fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Mercy and Majesty, Goodness
and Greatness meet together in it. The due consideration of it, may affect a
man with high admiration, that a God of such Majesty and Greatness, should not
be ashamed to be called, The God of his people; Heb.11.16.
Their God, and, in them, Thy God: Every particular person in the number of
those that serve him, having this interess and propriety in God, as well as the
general, that he may say with David, Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God. And, O
Christian, whoever thou art, if thou will say that God is thy God, Do thou
not mean thy Whole self, that he is the God of thy Body, as well as of thy
Soul; and that thy Body challenges an interess in God, with thy Soul? If so,
Art not thou bound to worship him with the one as well as with the other? This
Argument is framed, Psalm 45.11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him: And more
fully, Psalm. 95.6. O come, let us worship and how down, let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker: the reason whereof follows in the next verse; For be is our
God. Our relation to him, our propriety in him, should make us, the people of
God, resolve to worship him. Suppose then, that a Congregation of people, in
the presence of God, be divided in their practice, some worshipping God with
their Bodies, others not: If the refrainers shall ask the other why they bow,
or kneel. etc. The other have a ready answer; He is the Lord our God, therefore
we do and will worship him: so long as we bear these our bodies about with us,
they shall acknowledge an homage and reverence to our God. And if these retort
the Question upon the other, and ask, Wherefore do not you bow, nor kneel? What
answer will these refusers of Corporal adoration, return, that may relate to
this Scripture? Will they say, We will not worship, nor how down, nor kneel,
negatively in the duty, and yet hold the affirmative in the rest; For he is ear
God? This cannot hang together: They rather disclaim God, and deny him to be
their God, in refusing to give him his due worship. I think they would be loath
to have this laid to their charge; yet they will have an hard task to discharge
themselves: for, if they deny the duty, they go very far in denying the ground
upon which the duty is founded.

Thus I end the Arguments for Gods Bodily worship, and pass to the second way
of proving it to be Gods due, which shall be by Testimony.

Although I might say of Bodily worship, approved and urged by our Savior in
this Scripture, the same that the High Priest said, when the Jews accused him
of blasphemy; Matthew. 26.56.
What need we any further witness? For, there needs not any to avouch that
which Christ himself has so clearly ratified: Yet I shall add some few
Testimonies, which (though they can add nothing to Christ's authority) may give
further satisfaction and light, concerning the thing in question.

And first, I shall produce Angelical testimony, or Mandate rather, (which is
more:) for it does not only testify, but commands, as necessary. It is, Rev.
19.10. and 22.9. where we read, that twice S. John fell down at the feet of the
Angel to worship him; but the Angel forbad him, See thou do it not; giving a
reason of his prohibition; I am, (...) thy fellow servants; Therefore S. John
should not have proffered the Angel such worship, neither would the Angel
accept it, being tendered unto him; but he charged S. John thus; Adora Deum,
Worship God. Now who can think, that one of the blessed Angels, who are ever
studious to advance the honor of their great Creaton, would persuade S. John
to the practice of an unlawful and unnecessary service, in bidding him to give
that worship unto God, which he would have given unto him? This were to cast a
foul aspersion upon those glorious spirits, and to accuse them of error. If
that very same Angel should appear to one of us, after the same manner, and
should have the same occasion now, which he had then, I doubt not, but he would
give the same word of command, Adorare Doum, to worship God.

Judge. 13.8.
But we need not, with Samsons parents, make request for the Angel to come
again unto us, that he might settle us in this truth: for, in speaking to S.
John, he has spoken likewise to us; And one would think, we should sooner
adhere and give credence to the testimony of an incorrupt, unerring Angel, then
to the testimony of ten thousand gainsayers, Men, who are always sinful, and
commonly rash, unconstant, and partial in their judgments. And who among the
sons of men dares make himself wiser then that Angel, by giving contrary
counsel? As if Angels and Men derived not their wisdom from one and the same
fountain. Aug. de vera Relig. cap. 55. tom.1. mihi page 517.
Non aliunde sapiens Angelus, aliunde Home, aliunde ille verax, aliunde homo,
sed ab una incommutabili sapientia, and veritate. The Angel deriveth not his
wisdom from one fountain, and Man from another; nor is he true one way, and man
another, but from one unchangeable wisdom and truth; says S. Austin in this
case of Adoration. Now, if that Angel in the Apocalypse did wisely and truly
in telling S. John he must worship God; whosoever is wise will concur with him;
elso he is not wise. Now for Humane testimony. Acts 17.23.
The Altar at Athens, which had written on it this Inscription, To the unknown
God, Martinus Polonus in vita S. Petri, mihi page 122.
(if we may give credit to Martinus Polonus) was erected presently upon the
time of our Saviors suffering: for those great Athenian Philosophers seeing
the great darkness that then was, and not knowing the true cause, they fell
upon this; Quia Deus Nature patitur; The darkness is, because the God of Nature
now suffers: And the Athenians said, Let us build an Altar to him. So they
set up the Altar, and wrote thereon, To the unknown God: And when they would
have offered Sacrifices, the Philosphers said, God has no need of your goods,
sed facietis genuflexiones ante ipsius aram: but ye shall make bowings and
adorations before his altar. I have nothing to do here with the Altar,
therefore let none hence catch at any thing for an accusation against me
concerning that: My purpose is only to demonstrate, how that men, who saw by
no other light then that of Nature, improved by humane industry, acknowledged
Corporal adoration to be due unto that unknown God, whoever he was, and
accordingly advised the Athenians to yield it unto him. This, among many
thousands of Heathen Testimonies, shall suffice. In producing Christian
Testimonies, I shall endeavor a resemblance with that good housolder, which
brings forth out of his treasure things new and old, by citing the
testimonies both of ancient and modern Divines; which I shall do but sparingly,
lest I should be endless.

Tertullian gives his verdict for adoration joined with prayer thus: In
Orat.Dom.
Cum modestia and humilitate adorantes, mag is commendamus Deo preces nostras:
Worshipping with modesty and humility, we commend or approve our prayers the
more unto God. As if the common saying were true (as no question but it is) in
this particular; Vis unita fortior, Force united is the stronger: the worship
of the Body, joined with the devotion of the Soul, in prayer to God,
strengthens it to prevail the more forcibly with him. Com. in Ephesians. lib 2.
Unto which, S. Hierome also gives his consent; Fixo in terram poplite magis
quod a Deo poseimus, In Ephesians. 3.14.
impetramus: With a knee fixed upon the earth, we obtain the more of God the
thing which we ask. With this Origin also concurs in his vote, Tract. 25 in
Matthew. mihi page 142.
though he expresses it after another manner, that genuflexiones adorations,
and bowings of the knee unto God, are condimenta, as if they were Sauces to our
Services, suaviores cos facientia, giving them a better relish, Genesis 27.4.
and making them, like Isaac's meat, more savoury, and acceptable unto God. In
the judgment of S. Austin, Lib. de cura promortuis, cap. 5 tom. 4.
(and no doubt but he speaks by his own experience) acts of Corporal adoration
do much increase the inward devotion and worship of the soul. His words are
these: Cumbi motus corporis fierl nisi motu animi pracedente non possint,
eisdem rursus exterius visibiliter factis, ille interior invisibilis, qui cos
fecit, augetur. Whereas these gestures of the body cannot be performed without
the precedent motion of the mind, the same gestures being outwardly and
visibly performed, the inward in visible, which caused them, is much augmented
thereby. He then, that out of a pious devotion shall bow or kneel unto God, at
his coming and being before him, to improve his devotion thereby, is not to be
condemned for it, but rather he that does it not: Otherwise, De Gubern. lib. 3.
Salvianus would not have complained of that irreverence which profane persons
practiced in his time, in coming into their Temples, which were houses of
prayer, sine ulla penitus reverentia sacri bonor is, without any respective
reverence at all to the sacred honor of God. A complaint fit for these times.
Damascen is also plain for this Corporal adoration, reasoning it from our
composition, Quia ex duplici natura compositi sumus, etc. Orthod fid.
lib.4.cap.13.
Because (says he) we are composed of a twofold nature, to wit, an
Intellectual, and Sensible, therefore we offer unto God a twofold adoration; a
Spiritual, which consists in the inward devotion of the Mind; and a
Gorporal, consisting in the outward humiliation of the Body. I could recite a
considerable reason out of Aquinas, 22ae, qu.84. art.2. corp.
(which may please any honest mind:) but lest any should except against him,
as one of the Romish party, I shall let him alone. And indeed I can well spare
him, having enough beside, of our own, whose authority may, among our domestic
opposers, be more convincing. This will make me take a large leap over many
centuries of pious and learned Authors, to insist upon the suffrages of some in
these last days, of whom the first shall be Mr Calvin: He, upon Psalm. 95.7,
has these words: Hoc quoque notandumest, non tantum de cordis gratitudine hic
agl, sed simul requiri professionem externa^ pietatis: Hoc enim tribus verbis
exprimitur, officio suo non defungi fideles, nisi palam, and genuflexione, and
aliis signis, Deo se in sacrificiu offerunt. This also (says he) is to be
noted, that the thankful acknowledgment of the heart is not here only
understood, but the outward profession of piety is together with it required:
For this is expressed in three words (meaning worship, bowing, and kneeling,
which the Psalmist there mentions) that the faithful cannot be said to
discharge their duty, unless openly, by bowing the knee, and other signs, they
offer themselves in sacrifice unto God. In like manner, upon Psalm. 96. 9. (O
worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, fear before him all the earth) he
comments thus: Pulchritudinis nomine templo reverentiam conciliat Propheta, ne
temere prosiliant homines in conspictum Dei, sed metum and humilitatem
afferant: Eo pertinet clausula ver sus, Contremiscite a facie ejus: ut
reputantes quanta sit Dei Majestas, simpliciter coram co incurvent. By the
beauty of holiness, the Prophet counsels reverence in the temple, that men rush
not inconsiderately into Gods presence, but should bring along with them fear
and humility: For, to this the clause of the verse tends, Fear before him; that
men considering how great the Majesty of God is, might humbly bow themselves
before him. Nor may I omit the testimony of the same Author upon this place of
Scripture which we now handle. Sicuti religio proprie spiritualis est, In Harm.
Evang mihi page.61.
, externa autem ejus confessio pertinet ad corpus; ita, non interior modo
cultus debetur soli Deo, sed externum quoque ejus testimonium. As Religion is
properly spiritual, but the outward profession of it pertains to the Body;
so, inward worship is not only due unto God, but also the outward testimony of
it. By which triple testimony, it may appear, (if Mr Calvin does not deceive
us) that the Candle must not be kept under a bushel, Matthew. 5.15.
, but set on a candlestick, that others may see the light: That Adoration of
God is not to be shrouded Inwardly, in our Hearts alone, but Outwardly
professed: for, from that precept of our Savior, wherein he commands, that our
light should so shine before men, Matthew.5.16.
that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in beaven,
I know no reason that adoration should be excluded.

Next comes the testimony of Beza, out of whose garden we have plucked one
flower already: His words in his Annotation upon this place, Supra.page.16.
are these: The word (...) is used for that religious worship, which is due
only to God, conjoined with peculiar reverence, Quo, et corpus, et animus, Deo
uni, sesetotum, ut (...) consecrat, tum interiore, tum externo cultu: In which
worship, the body, and soul, do wholly consecrate themselves unto one God, as
the only Creator, with outward, and inward worship.

Heminglus, speaking of these two kinds of Worship, the outward of the Body,
and the inward of the Soul, In Opusc.
will not have either of them exempted from God, but Uterque Deo just debetur:
Col. 742.
Both of them (says he) are justly due unto God: For, as concerning the Soul,
God has created man after his own image, an the Body has he formed of the
dust of the earth, and has endowed it with natural power, and does also
conserve it: thus Hemingius.

Bishop Cowper, a pious, orthodox, In his Works in folio.page.57, 58.
and learned man, having said upon Rom.8.9. That the Spirit of God is within
us: He explains himself thus: Which I do not speak, as if I did condemn the
outward service done in Body to the Lord, provided, it flow from the heart: ye
are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your
Spirit, for they are Gods: And this also is to be marked for the amendment of
two sorts of men among us, which are in two extremities: We have some who are
become scorners of the grace of God in others, Like the Dog in the manger.
neither can they be humbled themselves in the Public Assemblies of the
Saints, nor be content to see others express their inward motion, by outward
humiliation: they sit down in the Throne of God, and condemn others for
hypocrisy, not remembering, that the sin of hypocrisy is to be reserved to the
judgment of God, who only knows the heart; and those same things which they
mislike in their brethren, the Lord has allowed in others.

Vol.1. p 707. Col.1. A.
Mr Perkins (whose words have already been of considerable use) speaking of
Corporal adoration, uses these words: The subjection which is due to God, is
absolute, and for himself; First, in regard he is Sovereign Lord of our Bodies,
and Souls, and Consciences. Secondly, in regard of the infinite excellency of
his Divine Attributes, especially that he is the author and giver of all good
things; that he hears and helps men every where calling upon him in the secrets
of their hearts. And the adoration that is done even for the acknowledgement
and signification of these things, is the adoration that is proper to God, and
is therefore called Divine or Religious adoration; And of it Christ says, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

And if they who refrain from Corporal adoration of God, merely out of scruple
of Conscience, will give heed to Mr Perkins his declaration of this Case, he
may be satisfied. He thus defines Religious adoration, differing but little
from himself before: It is that Worship of God, in which, Cases of Conscience,
Book 2. Chap.11. Vol.2.page.84.
Religion and Godliness is exercised, expressed, and signified: In it there be
two things always joined together, and yet distinctly to be considered. The
first and principal, being the foundation of all the rest, is, The intention of
the Mind, whereby God is conceived, as an Absolute and Omnipotent Lord,
knowing all things, yea the heart of man; hearing the prayers of all men, in
all places, at all times; the author, preserver, and giver of all good things.
The second, depending upon the former, is, the Outward prostrating of the body;
as the bowing of the knee, and such like, for this end, to testify our
subjection unto God, as our Absolute Lord.

They then who deny to worship God with their bodies, What do they else, but
impair and diminish (what lies on their part) Gods Absolute Sovereignty, in
withdrawing their bodies from under his subjection, so, as they shall not
acknowledge any homage or worship to be due unto him?

But, as if the tendering of Corporal adoration unto God were not only an
acknowledgement of his Universal Sovereignty which he has over all his
creatures, and whence, in a relative sense, he is called LORD, but also an
acknowledgement of his Divinity, and Absolute Being in himself, whence he is
called GOD; the same Author has likewise these words: By Outward Divine
worship, Vol.3. page 403. Col.2.
we acknowledge Divinity to be in the thing whereto we bow or prostrate our
selves. Now, is it not necessary that all ways of acknowledging God for God
should be put in practice? And if any man's devotion shall secretly prompt him
to make this recognition, What reason is there that any should condemn him for
it? Seeing the action of adoring God speaks but the same which every man is
bound to confess with his mouth, That God is the only true God, and alone has
true Divinity in himself: According to that acknowledgement of the people of
Israel, when they were so fairly convicted by Elijah's sacrifice, 1 Kings
18.39. They fell on their faces, and said, The Lord he is the God, the Lord he
is the God. So that they who shall condemn any for worshipping God with their
bodies, may as well condemn them for testifying with their mouths the Divinity
of God: And also themselves, by reason of their own refusing to worship God
after this manner, be condemned for not acknowledging Gods Divinity, as they
ought, with those Bodies which God has given them; and, amongst other
purposes, for this principal one of adoration.

Sermon.7. p 72.
Doctor John Done, a glorious Star but newly set, shines still in his Works,
and sparkleth forth his light in these words: I must say that there come some
persons to this Church, and persons of example to many that come with them, of
whom, (excepting some few, who must therefore have their praise from us, as no
doubt they have their thanks and bleslings from God) I never saw Master nor
servant kneel at his coming into this Church, or at any part of Divine Service.
And a little after: As our coming to Church is a testification, a profession of
our Religion; to testify our fall in Adam, the Church appoints us to fall upon
our knees: And to testify our resurrection in Christ Jesus, the Church has
appointed certain times to stand: but no man is left to his liberty, as never
to kneel: Genuflexio est peccatorum, Just. Mart.
Kneeling is the sinners posture: if thou come hither in the quality of a
sinner, (and if thou do not so, what do thou here? the whole need not the
physician) put thy self into the posture of a sinner, kneel.

Mr Hildershaus, a Divine of no mean repute: Page.182, 183.
no favourer of any practice accounted Popish: In his Lectures upon Joh. 4.
says, It is but the speech of a profane Hypocrite to say thus: Though I make
not that show as others do, though I use not to kneel and say my Prayers,
either with my Family, or apart, though I go not so much to Church, as others
do, yet I serve God, as well as they: I serve him in my heart, I lift up my
heart unto him, I serve him in my calling, I get my living by my earnest
labor, I deal justly with all men: And God is a Spirit, and will be wotshiped
in spirit: It is the service of the heart that he looks for, he cares not for
these hypocritical shows: It is no matter though I serve him not outwardly, so
long as I have a good heart.

And there be three Reasons, why men may not content themselves to serve God in
Spirit only, but must do him outward and bodily service also. In respect of
God: for he having created, 1.
redeemed, and sanctified our bodies, as well as our souls, is, of right, to
have homage, and service done him by both. 1 Cor.6. 19, 20. What? know ye not?
etc. In respect of our selves: 2.
for the service we do to God in our Bodies, is a great, and necessary help to
our Spirit. 3.
Romans 10.17. In respect of others: for ur light should so shine before men,
that they may see our good works (see that we worship, and serve God) and
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Matthew. 5. 16. Thus Mr Hildersham: And
let me set a good bush at his back, who comes with his three Reasons also, not
much different: The Reverend Archbishop of Armagh, in the Page of his Book
which is cited before, To this question, Is there any use of our bodily
behavior before God since he is a Spirit, and looks to the heart? He
answers thus: Yes verily: For, 1.
The whole man, and consequently the body it self, owes duty unto God. 2.
It is a glass wherein the affections of the mind are beheld. 3.
The mind is the better holden in the thing affected, and the better helped,
and furthered in the inward worship, when both body, and mind, are joined
together.

Since these Authors, (and I doubt not but many more, if they were sought into)
of unquestionable repute, have, like so many streams, bent their courses to the
Ocean of this Truth: Our late Archbishop of Canterbury is not to be condemned
for his pious resolution, without the rejection and disproof of all the rest.
For my own part (says he) I take my self bound to worship with body, In
hisspeech in Star Chamber, page.46.
as well as in soul, when ever I come where God is worshipped: And were this
Kingdom such as would allow no holy Table standing in its proper place, (and
such places some are) yet I would worship God, when I came into his house: And
were the times such as should beat down Churches, and all the curious carved
works thereof with Axes, and Hammers, as in Psalm. 74. (and such times have
been) yet I would worship in what place so ever I came to pray, though there
were not so much as a stone laid for Bethel. My last authority shall be more
general.

When in the dawning of this Churches reformation in King Edwards days, the
night of idolatrous worship began to wear away; Our blessed reformers,
Spiritual and Temporal, in their endeavors to establish an orderly method for
the true worship of God, they ordered kneeling, at several times, in the
performance of Gods Service: Nor did they intend any other object of their
outward bodily worship, but only God. And our Brethren in Scotland were not
disagrecing from the same practice, and injunction: for Mr Knox (having been no
otherwise taught in this by his great Master) composing a Liturgy for the
public Use of that Church, this was one principal thing joined, That the
Minister, and People should prostrate themselves in the Celebration of their
solemn Fasts: So far, was he, or they in those days, from denying corporal
reverence, and adoration to be Gods due, and just Prerogative. This consent of
a multitude, proceeding, not from any heady inconsiderate rashness, but from
good advice, and deliberation, is a good confirmation of Gods propriety in our
bodily worship.

And though it be much spoken against no adays, by the ignorant, who cry it
down at all adventure; and by the careless profane not a whit practiced in the
public Assemblies: yet it might easily be hoped, the one would not condemn it,
nor the other neglect it, but both would join with the profession of this
Service, if well and advisedly they would but look into it: Numb. 22.27, 28,
29, 30, 31.
As when Balaams Ass saw the Angel of the Lord, she fell down under Balaam, for
which his anger was kindled, that he smote her with a staff, and wished that
there were a Sword in his hand, for then would he kill her: yet afterward,
when his own eyes were opened, he did the same thing, He bowed down his head,
and fell flat on his face: Even so, if men, who are angry with the profession
of corporal Reverence unto God, and could find in their hearts to smite, and to
kill such as they observe to do it, would apply themselves to a serious, and
upright scrutiny of the thing, using those helps whereby their eyes might be
opened, and their understandings enlightened (their Will not sitting as Judge in
the place of Reason) they would surely worship God, with their bodies, as
others do: And withal, if they would consider, how little they can have from
the Writings of Divines to countenance their Opposition of Gods bodily worship.
Pens are commonly more deliberate then tongues: and though some men's tongues
walk at liberty, and prate much against it, yet I have not seen, or heard, that
any pen has dropped so much as a letter in contradiction of this, That God is
to be worshipped with the body: Nor do I think there can be a face so bold, as
to do it. I know they may break forth into exclamations against the
corruptions, and abuses of bodily worship, which for mine own part, I am as
desirous may be reformed, as any gain-sayer of corporal adoration can be: And
therefore for conclusion of this poor Treatise, I shall level a Caveat against
two main evils, from which I desire every good Christian may be careful to keep
himself, in his acts of corporal adoration: And these are Idolatry, and
Hypocrisy: both which are high provocations unto God.

For Idolatry: This is a gross abuse, and misemployment of our bodies: which
God (having made them only for himself) will not that they should do any
religious homage to any, but to him alone, having, by his own express Edict
often reiterated, excluded all things else whatsoever from having any part, or
fellowship with himself in this service. Though there be Angels, and Saints in
Heaven, yet corporal adoration is not theirs, the Angels have refused it, and I
doubt not but the glorified Saints (if they could signify so much unto us) are
of the same mind, and would likewise show that they do refuse it. If St. Peter
could be talked withal, he would surely diswade from corporal adoration (if it
should be tendered unto him, as, (being alive) he diswaded Cornelius. Act.
10.25, 26. Though the Acne quis hoc derivet ad Mariam Virginem, Maria erat
Templum Dei non Deus templi: and ideo itle solus adorandus, qui operabatur in
templo. Ambr. de Sp.Sa.lib.3. cap. 12. Sit in honor Maria, Pater, and Filius,
and Spiritus sanclus adoretur. Epiphan.haer.79.
Blessed Virgin be with Christ her Son, yet she is not to share with him in our
adoration: But if we will be wise, let us do like wise men, who, when they came
where Christ and his Mother were, they fell down, and worshipped only him, Mat.
2.11. moved (questionless) thereunto by the secret instinct of the same Spirit,
which conducted them thither. Nor shall I fear to say, That the Bread in the
holy Eucharist (his nearest, and most lawful representative in the world) is
not to have any corporal worship done unto it: 3a patte 25.4. See Bishop White
against Fisher, p.244. Dr Fearley in his Cla. Mist. page 157.
much less his Image, Picture, or Cross, whatever Aquinas and the Papists are
pleased to say, That it is to be worshipped with the same worship as Christ
himself is.

As for Images of Gold, or Silver, Wood, or Stone, we are not only straightly
charged by God himself to withold our adoration from them: but we may be
diswaded even by their own impotency, vileness, and unworthiness; they being of
our own making, inferior to us, and regardless of us: In time of need they
require more help from us then we can have from them: Jer.10.5.
And they must needs be born, because they cannot go: They have no ability to
accept, nor to make any retribution for what ever service is done unto them:
therefore adoration is miserably misspent upon them: which should settle this
resolution in the heart of every man, Seeing we can have nothing from them,
they should not have the least thing from us:not a knee, 1 Kings 19.18. not an
eye, Ezekiel. 18.6. not an hand, Psalm. 44.21. But, as Moses said to Israel in
another case, Deuteronomy. 12.4. so say I in this of adoration, Ye shall not do so
unto the Lord your God: ye shall not withold from him your knees, nor your
eyes, nor your hands; but all your members shall express their part in the
worship of God: your bodies shall prostrate themselves before him alone,
without any oblique reference to any created nature.

And for Hypocrisy, Let us take heed of that likewise: that in adoreing, and
worshipping God, our bodies may not go alone, but our souls and spirits may
join with them in the action: Else, if we make fair outward professions, in
seemingly religious bowings, and kneelings, and act not the same part within,
we shall expose our selves, as laughing stocks, and marks of vengeance in the
sight of God, and his holy Angels, and be as the Swan, which though it has
fair white feathers, yet having but black flesh underneath, Levit. 11, 18.
Causinus.
was therefore adjudged an unclean Bird. Let then our care be, not only to do
the thing, but to do it aright, in sincerity, and truth, by associating our
souls with our bodies, when ever any occasion be for us to give unto God the
tribute of his worship. If we shall be careful of this, I dare promise these
Consequents: We shall nourish, and continue in our hearts an awe-ful reverence
toward the most Sacred Majesty of God himself: We shall make our selves
through the mediation of Jesus Christ, acceptable in his sight, when we present
our selves before him: We shall give proof and testimony, that we acknowledge
God for our God: We shall conform our selves to the judgment of judicious men
who have approved it, to the examples of devout Saints who have practiced it,
to the Precepts in the holy Scripture, which requires it: We shall (and that in
an excellent way) acknowledge our thankfulness unto God for his blessing of
food and raiment, protection, and preservation, and for those (his principal
ones) of Creation, and Redemption upon these our bodies: And we shall (amongst
other acts of our obedience) send up our Religious adorations to stand as
memorials before God, that (for the time to come) he may in all our straits and
necessities be mindful of us, in this present world, and (this being ended)
bring us both souls and bodies into his everlasting glory.

Soli Deo honor and adoratio; nunc, and in secula. AMEN.
FINIS.

