MASTER GRIMSTON HIS SPEECH IN THE House of Commons, Concerning the distempers
between the King and both Houses of Parliament. 1642.

London, Printed July 5. for M. T. 1642.

MASTER GRIMSTON HIS SPEECH IN THE HOUSE of Commons, Concerning the distempers
between the King and both Houses of Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
I Would feign bring one stone to our building now in hand, and it is but a
caveat to the Master builders, to beware, of those who hinder the work, And
pull down by night, what is built up by day.

Master Speaker Multa videntur quae non sunt, these would make us believe,
that our redressing of some greiveances, is the pulling out of some flovvers
from the Crown, and hereby they cast maine and Intricating Doubts, where
with to retard and perplex our proceedings, and to lay an il-favoured
imputation upon us, as if we were Regardlesse of our Gracious Sovereign, and
these good men, the only Battresses of his Royalty: by this they endeavor to
endeare themselves to the King, for their own advancement, to have him guided
by their own Counsels, and to take off his affection from his best, and most
Loyal Subjects, Assembled in Parliament.

Master Speaker, The King and his Subjects are Relatives, and we know that in
Logic, ne lato sublato tollaitur Correlatum, they that disioynt the King and
his People, do neither better nor worse, but do their utmost (to un-King him.

Master Speaker, the King is the Parent, the Husband solemparely espoused at
his Coronation, the head of the Republique, as it is with the natural parent,
Husband and head: So it is with the public, The natural parent bestows on
his child, protection and love, with all his fruits: the Child returns him
filial reverence with all due respects: And he that labors to break this
intercourse, by possessing the parent with an evil opinion of the Child, is
equally an enemy to both.

There is a sweet echo of conjugal affections between the Married, and be
that shall go about to interupt it, is a hater of them both, and a subverter
of their Family.

In the natural body, such is the connection between it and the Head, that a
separation is distructive to both, whereas otherwise, the head in the body,
being the seat of the vitalls, and the brain in the head, of the Animal
Spirits, reciprocally communicating preserve the whole: Our gracious Sovereign
is the common Parent, husband, and head, si Calumniemus frangimur: If therefore
there shall be any found to be as undermining Pyoners envying to disaffect our
parent to us, to divorce us from this our husband, to divide us from our Head.

My just motion is, that upon a watchful discovery, whereon I would have
every good man's intent, they may receive the extremity of severety as they will
deserve, and if any of them shall prove member of this house, that the furnace
may be heated, ten times hotter, for betraying the trust reposed in them, by
their County that sent them hither.

FJNJS.

