A DEMONSTRATION OF THE RESURRECTION Of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; And
therein of the Christian RELIGION.

Very useful For the further satisfaction and confirmation of all good
Christians; AS LIKEWISE For the confutation and conviction of those that have a
Jewish or Atheistical spirit in them.

WRITTEN By RICHARD GARBUTT, Bachelour in Divinity, sometimes fellow of Sydney
College in Cambridge, and afterward Preacher of the Gospel at Leeds in
Yorshire.

London, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard. 165^

Rev. and Clar. Viro, DOMINO, RICHARDO MINSHULL S. S. Theologiae Doctori, and
Collegii Sydn. apud Cantabrigienses Rectori vigilantissimo, nec non Sociis,
atque adeo universae ejusdem Collegii Societati. S.P.D. harum lucubrationum
Editor.
DEmonstratio haec (Reverende Doctor, Ornatissimi Socii, and laetae indolis
Adolescentuli) vos insalutatos praeterire non debuit. Collegium vestrum binos
aluit Garbuttos, non minus dispares, quam Rebeccae Gemelli. Senior quidem eorum
haec scripsit, ut and alia multa prelo satis digna, digna quae and perlegantur,
and relegantur; quorum nonnulla saltem nostra opella obstetricante brevi for as
emittentur. Praeterquam enim quod dolendum est, ea publico tamdiu caruisse,
adeo mihi sapiunt, ut memet tenere non queam, quin ederem. Quod eo alacrius and
confidentius sum facturus, modo vos, aliique docti piique mibi fueritis
incitamento.

Agite, gaudeamus invicem in Garbutto nostro et vestro. Nostrum dico, quia
Nostras fuit, and in publica Schola Vulgo Cuckold alias. Coxwoll.
Coxvoldiae informatus, ad tempus usque quo Academia Cantabrigiensis eum in
gremium suum exciperet; admissus autem vestrae Societatis parietibus, per totos
viginti annos adhaesit; Quibus quantam multiplicis literaturae, cum gratia Dei
been conditae, molem congessit; testari possunt provectioris aetatis Theologi,
attestatur and hoc opusculum, and quae supersunt alia, eximia certe monumenta
rationis, ingenii, judicii, industriae, and pietatis non vulgarium.

Quicquid Garbutti est, olet Lampada, olit S. Spiritum. Quare merito pro vestro
vendicare possitis. Ast secunda vice Noster fit, postquam enim vos reliquit,
agrum Eboracensem repetiit, and in Municipio Vulgo Leeds.
Leedensi, nostrae Paroeciae Barviciensi contiguo (ipso gurgite Mercaturae in
tractu hujus Comitatus Occidentali) consedit, Vulgo Barwicke.
ibique in officio suo valde sedulus permansit usque dum -- superas evasit ad
auras Spiritus --

Quare duplici nomine Nostrum esse quis ibit inficias?

Tam clarum fuit Homeri nomen, ut multae Graeciae Urbes certatim sibi
vindicarent. Secundum distichon illud Graecum, quod ea de re apud A. Gellum
extat.

(...). Lib. 3. Cap. 11. Idem restatur Cicero pro Arch.

(...).
At quam amica nostra contentio; sic enim nostram requirimus partem, ut vobis
vestram libere relinquamus intactam, nec invidemus. Imo charitas (quae regulam
hanc, Bonum quo communius, eo melius, nobis subministrat) Garbuttum Nostrum and
Vestrum omnibus communem exhibgre nos jubet. Sic gratiam ineamus cum aliis, and
Magnam Manum Optimorum, idque sine minimo nostro dispendio, nobis demerebimur.
Et quid est quod mihi malim? Hoc idem, Sol Astrorum princeps, nos monet; nobis
enim non ideo minus gratus oritur, quia toti laetus illucescit Orbi. Impingit
forsan aliquis ad titulum Libelli, autumans principium hoc (Christum
Resurrexisse, etc.) credi oportere, demonstrari non posse: Hominibus, id genus,
refellendis (modo pertinaces non sint) nullis meis argumentis opus est,
sufficit unicus hic Codicu. lus, ubi non solum Resurrectionem Christi, sed and
S. Scripturae autoritatem, imo totius Christianae Religionis veritatem
inviolabiliter statuminat. Haec enim tria adeo indivulse cohaerent, ut
nullatenus sejungi queant.

Ante viginti and sex annos (...) nobis ereptus Garbuttus, horrendas opiniones,
hoc seculo (omnium Sectarum feraci) renascituras praesensisse videatur: si
autem ad summam aetatem pervixisset, quantus Malleus Haereticorum exstitisset,
quam commode fanaticorum Paralogismos evacuasset, et armatos eorum Gigantes
humi prostrasset, detrudendos demum In Gehennam secundum interpret. J. Mede in
Prove. 21.16.
in domum Rephaim, utcunque hoc ipsum,

Post sua mansurum fata superstes opus magno erit usui, Et sic per me ab alio
posteritati servitur.

Breve aliquod specimen vitae et mortis Authoris proferre delibero, quod,
instar speculi ejus, (viri vere insignis) imaginem quadantenus representet; et
sane nullam in re ulla praebuit impingendi causam, ne vituperetur Ministerium,
sed in omnibus se approbavit ut Dei Ministrum, etc.

Quam necessarii sunt hujusmodi tractatus, et cogentia argumenta hac Aetate
faeculenta, qua Anglia nostra (proh dolor) non solum in sentinam vitiorum, sed
et officinam erroru^m omnium conversa est indignissime, omnes, (iis solummodo,
quorum Religio, instar tabi, putruit, exceptis) satis vident et dolent.

Sed manum de Tabula, and vos solvo a me legendo, properate ad Authorem. Deus
Opt. Max. utramque Academiam omni benedictionum genere cumulet, and quam
diutissime salvas et florentes conservet, sic precatur,

Vestri studiosissimus and totius status Academici Cupientissimus, NATHANIEL
JACKSON.
Dat. Barviciae in Elmett, Septem. 12. A. D. 1656.

THese Sermons here ensuing speak the Author a man both of a solid head, and
of a sincere heart; both of great judgment, and of good affections. They mind
me of that of Cyprian, Lo here, that which is rather powerful, Accipe non
diserta, sed fortia. Cypr. ad Donat. Epis. 2. Fulmina erant linguae singula
verba tuae. Gerhard. loc. com. de Minist. Eccles. 5. 123. Aculeos in anim is
Auditorum reliquit.
then eloquent. And of Melanch: ons verse, which (as Gerhard relates) he made
upon the sight of Luthers picture, Every word of thine was a thunderbolt.
Surely the words of this Author have weight in them; they do not tickle the
ear, but they affect the heart: And (as it was said of Pericles the Athenian
Orator) they leave a sting behind them in those that hear or read them. Such
force of argument, such strength of reason, such convincing demonstration, I
have seldom seen. These are strong lines indeed, not as to the sound of
words, but as to the sense of matter. Pity it is, that any thing of this
Author (humane frailties excepted) should dye with him. So I judge both by
these, and other Sermons of his that I have seen.

CHR. CARTWRIGHT.

I have perused this ensuing Discourse, and though my approbation be not of
that weight and value as to add the least grain of allowance or acceptance to
this or any other the like performance, yet being requested to deliver my
opinion of it, I could not but say thus much, that the learned and pious Author
has herein (at least to my apprehension) approved himself (...). 2 Timothy 2 8
a workman that needed not be ashamed, yea Cor. 3.10.
a wise Masterbuilder in the Church of God, as having very solidly and
judiciously stated and asserted that grand fundamental article, the main
pillar indeed of our Christian faith, our Savior Christ's Resurrection; the
truth whereef he has undeniably proved and demonstrated, as well by invincible
arguments, and strength of reason, as also clear and evident testimonies and
texts of Scripture; and that both for the further confirmation of all true
Christians, and the fuller conviction of all gainsayers, whether Atheistical,
Jewish, or Heretical Spirits. And truly I do not remember to have seen so much
Scripture and reason, better improved in so narrow a compass, nor more
artificially interwoven and twisted together, and helping one another by a
mutual compliance, for the strengthening and support of so substantial a
truth. In a word, I look upon the Treatise, as verifying and performing
exactly, what it promises in the Title, if not more: It being a * most perfect
and complete Demonstration, Demonstratio potissima.
or rather, a twofold Demonstration, as Logicians distinguish, the one proving
the thing (...). and (...).
that it was so, the other the final cause or end (...). and (...).
why it was so; the one clearing the truth and reality of it as in it self, the
other declaring the fruit and benefit of it as to believers; the one in the
former, the other in the latter Point or Observation. And in both these the
Author shows himself to have been a man singularly well skilled both in the
Theory and Practice of true Christianity, of an able head and an honest heart,
of a strong brain, and a gracious spirit; The Doctrinall part of the Discourse
being not more solid and sinewy in confirming the truth, and settling and
informing the judgment, then the Practical, wholesome and savoury in speaking to
the conscience, and pressing holiness and purity of life, and the power of
godliness. In which regard I heartily recommend the perusal of it to all good
and sober Christians, especially in these wavering, warping, and backsliding
times, wherein so many have degenerated and Turned Apostate (...). 1 Timothy 4.1.
departed from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and 2 Pet. 3.17.
being led away with the error of the wicked, have fallen from their own
stedfastness: and (I conceive) for want of through conviction, and sound
instruction in these main fundamental truths of the Gospel.

JAMES DUPORT.

READER.
I Wondered not when I met with those expressions of holy triumphing in Gregory
Nyssen, (...). Greg. Nys. Orat. 5. de Resur. (...). Id Orat. 1. de Resur.
(...), Cyril. Hier. Catech. 14.
let us extol the Resurrection of the Conqueror, the joy of the world, the life
of all Nations, since (as he elegantly tells us) the Devil, our destroyer
gaping to devour the bait of Christ's flesh when he dyed, was struck through,
and caught with the hook of Christ's Divinity when he arose from the dead, and
(as Cyril expresses it) he who by suffering was free among the dead, by rising
again manifested, that he both could and would free the living. The asserting
of this blessed truth is the noble subject of this learned Treatise. I wish I
might have been allowed, the secret tasting of its Divine delicacies without
proclaiming to the world, how well I rellish'd them, and the rather because
this excellent discourse is as far from wanting, as are our slight pamphlets
from deserving Commendation. It Is too low an Expression to say this work
deserves my praises (worth of a middle size may be so commended) I rather judge
that my praises are not worthy of it, and may hope that my testimony will
rather find acceptance from it, than it from my Commendation. When first it
came to my hands, it found me in such a crowd of business, that I hardly could
find time to begin the reading thereof; but truly when I had once begun to
peruse it, I as hardly knew how to make an end of reading, till I came to the
end of the book, with such an honest delight did it rob me of the thoughts of
my other employments; and yet neither must I call it a robbery, it was but a
change, and that an advantageous one, for it brought me more benefit, by its
perusal, than I parted with by forbearing for a time my other reading; And
(reader,) I assure my self, if thou art a friend to Christ and thy self, thou
can not but with sweetest contentment, view the Exaltation of thy dearest
Lord and Master in his Resurrection, and thereby thine own from the grave both
of sin and earth, so clearly and fully demonstrated.

The Author of this Treatise I never knew, and he is now above the resentment
of earthly Commendations, and therefore tentation I had none, either by
receiving or expecting any friendship from him, to speak so freely of his book:
but might I (dear Christian) prevail with thee to read, love, and live the
truths thereof, all that good is succesfully obtained, which is (I trust)
sincerely endeavored by the testimony of thy servant for thy Souls good,

WILL. JENKYN, Pastor of Blackfriars London.
Nov. 27. 1656.
Christian Reader,
BEing desired to peruse this ensuing Treatise concerning the Resurrection of
Christ, and to express my thoughts of it, though my testimony can add nothing
to the worth of it, and very little to its acceptance in the world, yet the
excellent contexture of Scripture, and reason, which I have found in it,
requires me not only to approve it, but commend it. The subject treated on is
that of highest concernment, the great pillar of our faith and hope, as the
great Apostle argues 1 Cor. 15. and the manner of handling it is in good measure
answerable to the weight, and worth of its subject. Some may possibly think
that this great article of faith needs no Demonstration; And I have sometimes
been of that conceit, that some principles, were so clear, they needed no
confirming, and some opinions so absurd, they needed no confuting; but I find
my self deceived; for in these days wherein our lot is fallen, there is no
truth so clear and fundamental, but it meets with them that doubt it, and
deny it; and no error so ridiculous, and unreasonable, but finds them that
will embrace and maintain it. Therefore I cannot but judge the publishing of
this work very seasonable, both for confirming the faith of believers (for
faith despises not reason but makes much of it, so long as it keeps its place)
and also for convincing of Atheists, and unbelievers, with whom it deals upon
their own terms; viz: those of reason; and in this tottering age declining so
fast to Scepticisme, and Atheism, there is need of both. But I will not
deteine the reader from the work it self, which will best speak for it
self, wishing every Christian a rational and fiduciall knowledge of the
truth, and an experimental knowledge of Christ's Resurrection.

EDW. BOWLS.

A DEMONSTRATION OF THE Resurrection of Christ.
1 Cor. 15.20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, the first fruits of them
that slept.


CORINTH was a famous Church, if any other, planted by the Apostle himself,
residing among them a whole year and an half, for the preaching and settling
of the Gospel; Acts 18.24.
and afterward watered by Apollo an Eloquent man, and mighty in the
Scriptures: but though it were thus planted, thus watered, yet not many years
after there crept in many abuses into that Church, for the reforming whereof S.
Paul spends most of this Epistle; and the two chief abuses, a dangerous
schism, and a dangerous heresy. He picks out purposely one to be meddled with
first of all, and the other last of all; because things spoken first and last
take best impression; and nothing he desired to take deeper impression, then
dehortation from schism, and haeresy; the one breaking the bond of charity,
the other the bond of faith. Their schism, that one said he was of Paul,
another of Apollo, another of Cephas, another of Christ, is confuted thorowout
the four first chapters; Their heresy, that some among them denied the
resurrection, is with great vehemence and contention of reasoning confuted
thorowout his fifteeth Chapter: and good cause that the Apostle should so
bestirre himself in confirming the doctrine of the resurrection, it being the
very knot and tie of all Religion, and all Religion falling asunder without it;
deny the Resurrection, and the world would soon be as bad as hell it self; if
the dead rise not again, let us eat and drink for to morrow we dye; but
affirm the Resurrection, and believe it perfectly aright, and the world would
be almost as holy as Heaven it self. Acts 24.15.16.
My hope toward God is that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of
just and unjust, and herein do I exercise my self, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men; therefore good reason
that the Apostle should so bestirre himself about this point The Resurrection
of the dead is the Christians confidence. Fiducis Christianorum Resurrectio
mortuorum: Tertull.


Now he proves the Resurrection, first more directly by plain arguments unto
the 35. verse. Secondly, more indirectly and underhand by answering the surmised
doubts that might be against it.

But some will say, How are the dead raised up, etc? This how is not an how of
enquiry, (for then he should not have answered, thou fool; but thou curious
fellow:) but an how of objection against the very matter; How, how is it
possible that the dead putrified body should rise again, that every one should
have his own body; being eaten perhaps of the beasts, or the fish, or the
foul, and turned into their substance? how also is it convenient that these
vile bodies of ours that were nothing but clogs and troubles to us here, should
be restored to us? and this is the employed Objection; How are the dead raised
up? etc. which the Apostle answers in all the parts of it, showing it first,
not to be impossible, because we see the like daily in the seed sown, it dies
and quickens again; and also no fear of the impossibility because it is God
that does it: and cannot he restore the body, and the same body too? he can
tell how to sever the flesh of men from the flesh of beasts; etc. And secondly,
he shows it not to be inconvenient, because it shall be the same body for
substance, yet not for irksome conditions; but as celestial and terrestrial
bodies differ a great deal for glory and excellency, so it from it self, dying
and being raised up again; It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption; and in showing this glorious change, (thereby answering the
surmised objection of inconvenience) he spends most of the rest of this Chapter
from the fortyeth verse unto the end.

Now for the direct proof of the Resurrection in the former part of the
Chapter, it bears it self especially upon this argument. That Christ is
risen, and therefore we shall rise again too: and after that he has a long
time tossed and touzed and waved and argued it up and down with a great deal
of zeal, that Christ is undoubtedly risen, (for it is the thing that he is
long and earnest about, and troubles him most) the other, That we should
therefore undoubtedly rise, would easily follow, none would much gainsay it.
After therefore he has so belabored the point of Christ's Resurrection,
thereby to infer ours; in my text, he casts up the sum of all, showing what
all his former reasoning had amounted unto, namely to this to tall, But now is
Christ risen from the dead, etc.

There are two things, First, That Christ is risen. Secondly, Not so only, but
risen as The first fruits, to sanctify and hallow unto his father all the
faithful that sleep in Christ, assuring them by his Resurrection, of their
blessed Resurrection at last too. As the whole harvest was blessed and
sanctified and halloved in a little handful of the first fruits dedicated to
God, that blessed and hallowed the whole harvest; so Christ's Resurrection
blesses and warrants all ours.


And First, That Christ is risen; But what, you will say, needs any proving of
this point? There are no Painims here to deny the Resurrection, there are no
Thomasses here to doubt of it, we all believe the article of the Creed, The
third day he rose again from the dead?

Beloved, I would it were so; but let me tell you what our Savior says, Luke
18.8.
When the son of man comes shall he find faith on the earth? and what S. Paul
says, 2 These. 3.2. Non omnium est fides.
all man have not faith; to believe that Christ by his Resurrection is the
Resurrection and life to others, is a matter that may well have a, Beleevest
thou this? set upon the head of it; let me tell you, it is not for naught that
the Gospels every one of them are so large in the Demonstration of the truth of
Christ's Resurrection, by variety of circumstances, and variety of apparitions,
and that the Acts are written in effect for no other end, as Chrysostom well
observes, (Hom. 1.) then to prove Christ's Resurrection by his powerful sending
of the holy Holy Ghost, by his powerful endowing them with gifts of miracles,
with gifts of a more then man-like courage and fortitude, to preach stoutly the
Gospel notwithstanding all opposition, by the glorious success likewise in
their preaching, to convert so many of the Jews, Act. 6.7.
even a great company of priests themselves; and such numbers of the gentiles
unto the faith; these speak the Resurrection, these are not the works of one
that lies in the power of death.

Let me tell you, there is more in that of S. Paul then every one thinks, If
thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.9.
and shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved;

Let me tell you further, that the paucity of good livers shows plainly the
paucity of true believers for this point. If I did verily believe that Christ
were risen from the dead, and all power now given him in Heaven and in earth;
Matt. 28.18.
would I so slovenly serve him as I do? my service to him is such as if he were
rotting in the grave, and not sitting at the right hand of the Father; why do I
therefore Cozen my self and others with a vain conceit that I believe the
Resurrection?

Lastly, let me tell you, that if we do in some measure believe Christ's
Resurrection, yet the more evidences and arguments to show it, the sweeter and
stronger grows our faith. The things indeed to be believed cannot be
demonstrated by reason; but yet this may be demonstrated by reason, that it is
very reasonable to believe them, or (to speak with S. Aug.) that they may be
demonstrated by reason: 1. Quod non sit stultum talia credere; deinde quod sit
stultum talia non credere.
first, that it is not a foolish thing to believe those things; and furthermore
that it is a foolish thing not to believe them. The more evidences and
arguments therefore to demonstrate the too too reasonablenes of Christ's
Resurrection, the sweeter and stronger grows our faith; Forasmuch as many have
taken in hand, Luke 1.1.
etc. that thou might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have
been instructed; (...).
Though at my first Catechizing in the principles of Religion, I should simply
believe the Articles of faith; yet to know the certainty of them much
establishes my faith. Hereunto tends that; Romans 1.11.
for I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the
end you may be established; and night and day praying exceedingly that we
might see your face and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith; 1
These. 3.
namely by further doctrine and proof of the Gospel, more and more evidence
the truth of it unto you. That therefore the Christian may know the certainty
of this thing wherein he has been Catechized, namely Christ's Resurrection from
the dead; the third day he rose again from the dead, these things may
sufficiently do it;

First, the prediction or testimony of the Old Testament.

Secondly, the testimony of so many eye witnesses, especially the Grand Jury of
the Apostles to whom he often appeared in the flesh after the Resurrection.

Thirdly, the testimony of the spirit, which after his Resurrection and
Ascension Christ sent down among his Apostles and Disciples to give them
extraordinary holiness of life, extraordinary power to work miracles,
extraordinary boldness and zeal to preach the Gospel, extraordinary success in
preaching it; these things could not be done by one that was in the power and
hands of death, but by one that was set down at the power and right hand of the
Father.

Codicem portat Judaeus undo credat Christianus, librarii nostri facti sunt
quomodo solent servi post dominos codices far, ut illi portando deficiant;
illi legendo proficiant. (Aug. Ps. 56.)
because he sees he is taught to believe no new thing, but that only which
has been so often, and so long ago foretold by those Scriptures which the
very Jew, the maine enemy to the Resurrection cannot deny, nay zealously
maintains. The Jews carry the books, by which the Christians may believe;
they are become our book-carriers; even as servants carry their masters books
after them, that whereas the one are weary with carrying, the other may profit
by reading.

But where are these predictions of the Old Testament? surely had we all those
places which our Savior alleged to the two Disciples, beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, Luke 24.37.
and expounding to them in all the Scriptures the things that concerned his
passion, and his glory, we should be marvellously furnished: or had we those
which it is likely S. Peter used in his Sermon: Act. 3.24.
All the Prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have
spoken have likewise foretold of these days; or those by which Apollo so
mightily convinced the Jews, Act. 19.
showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ: Act. 28.23
and those whereby Paul continued persuading the Jews concerning Jesus, from
morning till evening, both out of Moses and the Prophets; we should be richly
furnished, understood we all these; But howsoever let these express places
prove the Resurrection;

First, that of the sixteenth Psalm, urged by St. Peter Act. 2. My flesh shall
rest in hope, because thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy holy
one to see corruption.

Secondly, that of the second Psalm, urged by S. Paul Act. 13. Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee; manifestly declared thee to be my very son now
by my raising thee from the dead. Romans 1.4.


Thirdly, that of Esaias 52.14, 15. As many were astonished at thee, etc. so shall
he sprinkle many nations; the Kings shall shut their mouths at him, for that
which has not been told them shall they see, etc.

And that of Esaias 53.10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, etc.

Fourthly, not to name more particulars, all those places prove this, that show
he must conquer death: for how should he conquer death for others, that were
detained by it himself? Esaias 25.7.
he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the vail that is spread over all nations; Hos. 13.14.
And I will ransom them from the power of the grave. Fifthly, all those places
that speak of his everlasting Kingdom; Unto us a child is borne, Esaias 9.7.
and the government shall be upon his shoulders; of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end, etc. these and many other the like
places may assure us against Jew or Gentile, that for the Resurrection or any
other mystery about the Savior of the world, we believe no new thing, but that
only which often and long ago has been foretold by those Scriptures that
were highly magnified, not only by the Jew, but also by the Gentile; when
Ptolomy that famous King of Egypt caused them a long time before our Saviors
coming in the flesh to be translated out of hebrew into greek, a tongue more
known to the nations, that those Holy Scriptures also might be better known to
the nations: our comfort and stay of faith therefore may be, that with S. Paul
we say and believe none other things then those which the Prophets and
Moses-did say should come, Act. 26.23.
that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise
from the dead* etc.

Mary Magdalene: 2. to the women by the way going from the sepulcher to the
Disciples, to acquaint them with that which had befalne there: 3. to Peter
alone: 4. to the two Disciples traveling to Emaus, whose eyes were a while
holden that they knew him not; 5. to the Disciples gathered together, and the
doors shut upon them when Thomas was away, and all these five apparitions were
the first day. 6. to the Disciples eight days after, when Thomas also was
among them; 7. to seven of the Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias, when they had
that extraordinary draught of fishes, at his command bidding then cast on the
right hand, though all night they had fished, and catched nothing. 8. In a
mountain of Galilee as himself being alive had foretold them; and this most
think to be that famous apparition understood here by S. Paul, when he tells
us of one of his appearings to be to more then 500 brethren at once. 9 Upon
Mount Olivet, from whence he ascended up to Heaven; And these apparitions are
recorded in the Gospels; whereunto S. Paul mentioning some of these, adds also
some other apparitions besides; as this of his appearing to more then 500
brethren at once, if it be not the same with that apparition in Galilee; also a
distinct apparition to James, also another distinct one when he says, To all
the Apostles; and lastly an apparition to himself, as one borne out of time:
and these are the witnesses chosen before of God (as Peter speaks) to whom he
showed himself openly; he showed himself openly not to all the people, but to
witnesses chosen before of God; Act. 10.
and therefore seeing we are compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses,
we have ground sure enough for our faith. Nothing can be objected against their
testimony, but that either they were deceivers, or were deceived; Deceivers, so
the Jews objected, that while the watch slept his Disciples came by night, and
stole his body away, and so spread abroad the error of his Resurrection, Matt.
28.13. but this is too too incredible; it is too too incredible that they could
do this, and it is more then too too incredible that they would do it. First,
too incredible that they could do it, for consider a text in St. Matt. 27.62.
etc. Now the next day that followed the preparation, etc. The High Priests said
to Pilate, command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure, etc. If they had
intended to steal away his body, why not the first-night before the Watch was
set? for all the circumstances here well considered, give it a thing too too
incredible, that they could do it after so vigilant, diligent, and abundant
Watch, that questionless was set, for why? they came about it even on the
Sabbath day, and that was an high day too. Secondly, the very words that our
Savior said, that within 3 days he would rise again, stuck in their stomachs
vilely; 3. They confessed that if it should so fall out, the last error would
be worse then the first. 4. they had full leave of Pilate to do whatsoever they
would for the making all sure, would they not think you therefore set a most
vigilant Watch, etc? and so it appears they did, Matt. 27.66.
They went and made the sepulcher sure, etc. they would not trust any other;
how should it therefore be a thing credible, that these should or durst be so
negligent as to fall a sleep, nay would be so negligent, for in all likelihood
in a thing that they had such special care of, they picked out for the Watch
some forward zealots, that the very zeal of the cause would keep them waking,
as well as the aw and dread of authority; especially it being but one night
they watched; how is it credible also that the poor sneaks, the Disciples, that
showed their heels so finely when their master was apprehended, should now when
he was in the grave, take heart of grace so courageously, to attempt the thing
against so strong a Watch? how further is it credible, that the rowing away of
the stone before the door of the sepulcher, the stone that was a very great
one, when the women that came to anoint him took great care how to get it
rolled away; how credible that this should not have waked some of the Watch
hard by? how further is it credible, if the Disciples had stolen him away, that
the winding sheet should have been left behind in the sepulcher, lying decently
in one place, and the napkin that was about his head wrapped up in another
place by it self; would they not rather, if they had stolen him, not have
stripped him but carried him away as he was in his grave-geare? common humanity
would not let them strip him, and carry him away in so horrid a manner as stark
naked; and common wit would not let them think, that they should have had so
much leisure without fear of waking any of the Watch, as to strip him,
especially being wound up in linen clothes, with Mirrhe and other spices of a
clammy and sticking nature like pitch; to strip him of this, and to have
leisure then to wrap up the linen clothes, and the napkin upon his head
severally by themselves, these are not signs of such as are in fear and have,
so that it is no marvel that hereat the Evangelist said, John 20.8.
that the Disciple saw and believed. How (lastly) is it credible, that the
Watch durst go home to the high Priests with such a fine tale in their mouths?
While we slept, his Disciples came by night and stole him away; what had this
been but to have pronounced sentence against their own Souls? when the Angel
had brought Peter miraculously out of prison, Act. 12.19.
the keepers were examined, and put to death, though innocently, for the
escape, what could they have looked for but the like sauce? the impunity of the
Watch is argument enough to any that has but half an eye in his head, that
there was dawbing in the matter, and casting heads about it: and lastly, that
Dilemma of Aug. against this fine tale of the Watch. Either it was false that
they slept, Aut falsum erat quod dormierant, and mendacibus credere non
debuerunt; aut verum erat quod dormierant, and quod factum est nescierunt. in
Ps. 55. Stulta insania! si vigilabas, quare permisisti? si dormiebas, unde
scisti? in Ps. 36.
and so liars are not to be believed; or it was true, and then how could they
tell what happened? foolish madness! if thou wast awake, why did thou suffer it?
if thou wast asleep, how did thou know it?

Secondly, it is more then too incredible they would do it: would they that
being Jews knew well what God and Religion meant, have dared to have fathered
such a gross forgery on God? it is the argument, one of them, which our
Apostle here instanceth in; If Christ be not risen, then are we found false
witnesses of God, which some might think, (irreligious and profane wretches
that they are) to be no such great argument, yet weigh it well in these persons
the Apostles, and a forcinger argument cannot be brought; for how can thou
imagine, that the Apostles, who being no such fools, as appears well enough by
putting the wise Jews so to it to call council upon council against them,
would of themselves, without Divine warrant, have attempted so foolish a thing
as the preaching of obedience up and down the world to a crucified man, no
otherwise risen from the dead then by stealing his body out of the grave? what
hope could ever they have of any success? No hope from him whom they preached,
whose own consciences told them he was yet in the power of death; no hope from
God whom they so foully belyed, no hope from any thing in themselves, not from
eloquence and excellency of speech to persuade, they were but rude and
illiterate men; not from wealth and riches to corrupt, shoos on their feet and
a staff in their hand was most of that they had; not from authority and
greatness to awe and prejudice, they were but contemptible fishermen and the
like; not from number and multitude to overrun and subdue, they were but eleven
silly sneaks, that had all run away when their Master was apprehended, no hope
therefore from any thing in themselves: no hope further from any docibleness
and inclinabliness of the parties to be persuaded, not any inclineableness of
the Jew; Not him but Barrabas, and Crucify him, Crucify him was the loud and
joint cry of the Jew; the Jew was hardened therefore against any such Doctrine;
it had been as easy for these fisher men, the Apostles, to have spoken to the
fishes of the Sea, to have made them follow them on the dry land, as to have
spoken to the people of the Jews to have made them follow them in the Doctrine
and belief of Christ's Resurrection upon their own bare word; they that cared
not for all Christ's miracles when he was alive, but Crucified him, were they
likely to have believed the bare assertions of fishermen for his Resurrection?
Not any inclinableness again in the Gentile, Act. 17.32.
it was that they mocked at when they heard of the Resurrection; it was that
that Paul was glad to qualify with this argument of insinuation in the
beginning when he was to speak of it to the Gentile; Act. 26.8.
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise
the dead? be it a thing never so hard, why should it be thought above Gods
ability to do? It was that also that when Paul was in the earnestness of his
speech about the assertion of it, Act. 26.24.
made Festus break out with a loud voice and say; Paul thou art beside thy
self; was the Gentile therefore likely to be inclinable to this Doctrine,
especially Christ's suffering being public, and all seeing it, and his
Resurrection being private and underhand, and but a few supposed witnesses of
it? and those few opposed almost by all that nation, the nation of the Jews,
that if there had been any such thing should have brought the knowledge thereof
unto the Gentiles, would they therefore that were no stark fools, have gone
about a thing of so great folly, wherein they had no hope of success from him
that they preached, as not risen; no hope from God, as belyed by them; no hope
from any thing in themselves, as being without eloquence, without riches,
without authority, without multitude; no hope from any inclinableness in the
parties to be persuaded Jew or Gentile, as being utter enemies the one to the
mention of the name of Jesus of Nazereth, the other to the mention of the
Resurrection. Either therefore they were very Idiots and stark fools, and why
then were the wisest Jews so put to it by them, to lay heads together, and to
assemble council after council? or else they were wise enough; and why then
should any think they would attempt such a foolish thing without good ground
and reason?

But suppose they had been so overseene as not to have considered these things
at first, yet would they not when the storm once begun to fall on them, and
the world rise up in arms against them, seeing the impossibility every way of
making their Legend, their lying Legend take: would they not then have
desisted? would not fair nor foul means have made one of them at least, at last
have bewrayed the whole business? but that all their life long, in spite of what
the world could do, they should continue every one of them in most constant
asseveration of the Resurrection; certainly had they been nothing but
deceivers, it is not imaginable that the world could have a pack of such,
except they had been very incarnate Devils: but their writings and much more
their lives showed them to have been rather incarnate Angels. Again if they
would have done this they should either have taken our Savior for an impostor,
deceiving them of his promise, that he promised them he would rise again the
third day, and so they should rather have hated him as an Impostor, then
preached, him as Savior; or else should have taken him as the true Savior
indeed, though yet detained in the grave, and so they would never have gone
about to have preached him that was Truth; by mere lies and falsehood; they
could not think that the true Savior would think well of false Apostles; and
therefore it is too incredible they could, it is more then too too incredible
they would preach the Resurrection as Mere Deceivers.

Secondly, Not as deceived with any fantasme or apparition Diabolical;

For first, They were sure the body was not in the sepulcher, their own sense
and the sense of all the Jews viewing the empty sepulcher, confirmed them of
that.

Secondly, They were sure none had privately stolen the body away and laid it
elsewhere, because of the Watch that kept the sepulcher, and because of the
grave-cloaths left behind, and the napkin that was upon his head wrapped up
alone: none would have carried away a dead Ghastly body, and that so full of
wounds and gored blood and Ghastly visaged (for the Napkin of his head also was
taken off) none would have carried away a dead body in such an horrid manner.

Thirdly, They had a Vision of Angels that affirmed unto the women that he was
risen, and withal remembered them that it was but as he had told them before,
that he would rise again the third day, and therefore they need not distrust it.

Fourthly, They had (after) many corporal apparitions unto them of our Savior
himself; and still you may observe there goes always almost, with the
apparition, some notable circumstance, one or other, to be an argument to
confirm the verity of it, as:

First, for the apparition to Mary, you have this observable circumstance, that
though Jesus had talked with her a while, and she knew him not, but thought he
had been the Gardener, yet at the speaking of one bare word (Mary) she
presently knew him, and says Rabboni: this was either a plain effect of his
Divinity, so on the sudden to work on her heart; or else of his humanity to
speak just in that familiar form which he used when he was alive, so that she
knew him to be he by his voice; The Divil may sooner counterfeit a visage then
a voice.

Again, for the apparition to the two Disciples by the way, you have these two
circumstances, First, Their hearts extraordinarily burning within them while he
opened to them the Scriptures, which argues his Divinity. Secondly, A special
manifestation of himself unto them by breaking of bread, using the same form
of thanksgiving, or same form of action in breaking, or both, which he used
while he was alive, and that argued the same humanity.


Again, for the apparition to the Apostles when Thomas was absent, you have two
circumstances that are most demonstrative of a true living body. First this,
handle me, and see me, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have:
Then this; Luke 24.41.
Have ye here any meat, etc? Though the Devil can form a body of the Elements,
a body that may be felt, yet not true live body, that can eat and digest meat,
not a true live body that has flesh and bones, that has heat and pulse, and
all the temper of a true live body; If this were so, how should we be sure one
of another, that we are not fantasms? Nay, if handle me, and see me, were not
a good argument, how were the Jews sure that it was the true Jesus that was
Crucified, the true Jesus that was laid in the sepulcher? If they were sure
they Crucified and buried the true Jesus, the Disciples were as sure that it
was the true Jesus that rose again, and appeared unto them. And this is that
circumstance which afterward brought Thomas off from his infidelity, when
eight days after Christ appeared unto them, John 20.28.
Thomas being with them, and thrust his hand into his side, and said, my Lord
and my God. And this is so strong an argument that S. Peter cares for no more,
Act. 10.41. He showed himself openly not to all the people, but to chosen
witnesses, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the
dead: he did eat and drink with them most familiarly, and sensibly conversed
with them; even as familiarly, and sensibly as when he was alive; so that if we
were sure of him then, we are as sure of him now. And this is the argument S.
John beats so on, That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
etc. 1 John. 1.1. Consider now further, that this was forty days together that
he thus at several times conversed with them, that all his speech at those
times with them was not about such things as the speech of a deceiving Devil
would have been, but of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1.3.
of the things whereby the Apostles afterward destroyed every where the
Kingdom of the Devils, and their Idolatrous worship. Consider also that the
Disciples were so incredulous formerly of the Resurrection, that the words of
the women that told them he was risen, seemed to them idle tales; Luke 24.11.
(...).
that also our Savior upbraided them with unbelief and hardness of heart,
that they believed not them, (namely the women and the two Disciples and Peter)
which had seen him after he was risen; That Thomas also; for all that the
other Disciples averred it unto him, yet he would believe none of them all, he
would believe nothing but his own hands and fingers; would these men therefore
that were so hard of belief, would ever they have believed such a thing,
without most infallible proofs? as it is, Act. 1.3. To whom he should himself
alive after his passion, by most infallible proofs, etc. and therefore neither
were they deceived, but knew well enough what they said, when they answered the
High Priests, and rulers of the Jews (straightly charging them, to speak no
more of Jesus and the Resurrection) with a Non possumus, we cannot but speak
the things which we have seen, and hoard, Act. 4. 20. If therefore they could
neither be deceived, nor deceivers, there is weight enough in those words;
this Jesus has God raised up; whereof we are all witnesses; and again they
urge it, Act. 2.32. Act. 3. Act. 5. Act. 10. The testimony therefore of these
eyewitnesses, is in the second place assurance enough unto us of Christ's
Resurrection.

Thirdly, the testimony of the Spirit which Christ after his Resurrection and
ascension sent down from Heaven, to be a powerful witness unto the world of
his Resurrection; by giving unto his, extraordinary grace of holiness,
extraordinary grace of preaching the Gospel, extraordinary grace of confirming
it by miracles, extraordinary grace of a happy success in the business, to draw
in so short a time almost the world after them; these things show that Christ
was not in the power and hands of death, but sat down at the power and right
hand of his Father. It is plain, a King is not in hold by his enemies, when
every where he does such things that makes the world ring of him; as plain that
Christ was not detained in hold by that enemy death, when every where by the
Spirit which he sent, he did such things as made the whole world ring of him.

ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye
shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, etc. Hence had they their
extraordinary grace of promptness, grace of diligence, grace of sincerity,
grace of patience, grace of tenderest love and affection after the Salvation
(if they could) of every Soul.

First, The grace of boldness, whence could they have it, but from that power
of the Holy Ghost coming upon them? How timorous and white liver'd otherwise
they were, their running all away when their Master was apprehended, their
hardiest man's, I mean, Peter's denial of him at the speech of a silly maid,
their lurkings and underhand meetings, both before and a while after the
Resurrection, meeting but only, for fear of the Jews, in private places, and
in the night, and with the doors shut upon them; these show how timorous
otherwise they were. What transformed them therefore from such hares and hearts,
into such stout Lions as afterward they showed themselves, but only this
power of the Holy Ghost coming on them? This made them, that before ran away
and hid their heads in corners, to be bold afterward, to preach Jesus of
Nazereth to all the people, to all the priests and rulers, to all comers that
would hear them; in the public Temple, Act. 5.42.
teaching and preaching Jesus Christ. See what difference there is between
their former fearfulness, and their then boldness. Act. 2.14. But Peter
standing up with the eleven lift up his voice, etc. all things make purposely
for expressing their stoutness and boldness; The standing up, the lifting up the
voice, the form of words themselves, Ye men of Judaea; etc. words of mere
authority, words for emperors to speak, so verse 22. ye men of Israel, etc.
and 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly; See here their
boldness, and their former timorousness, and none would take them for the same
men, at most but other men in the same skins. Ay but this is but a flash before
the people, before that the rulers have meddled with them; dare they be so bold
also before them? See whether they dare or no. Chap. 4. v. 5. They are
apprehended, kept in hold a night, convented the next day before an assembly
that might have struck terror into them; And it came to pass on the morrow,
that their Rulers and elders, etc. were gathered together; Here was greatness
enough to have dashed them, but what says the Story? But Peter filled with the
Holy Ghost: Act. 4.8.
Not without good cause is this preface, otherwise such great looks had been
enough to have daunted such two poor sneakes; But Peter filled with the holy
Ghost, said, etc. Words of such stoutness and boldness, that those great ones
wondered such sneakes should be so bold: When they saw the boldness of Peter
and John they marvelled; verse 13.
boldness to say, Be it known unto you all, verse. 10, 11.
etc. whom ye Crucified, etc. set at naught by you builders, etc.

durst they do so the second time, and after they had smarted?

daily in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Grace of promptness of speech, whence had they it, but from this
power of the Holy Ghost coming upon them? it could be nothing but this that
loosed the tongue of those stammerers, that made those lispers speak so
plain, that made those poor fishermen, (as mute otherwise almost as the fish
they caught) to become on the sudden the worlds orators, to extemporize before
assemblies and congregations upon every occasion, to argue with Jew and
Gentile, with Pharisee and Philosopher, and so to argue as their adversaries
were driven to answer, as Stevens did him, to leave reasoning and go to
suborning. Act. 6.9.11.
Then there arose certain of the Synagogue, etc. and they suborned men, etc.
Act. 9.29.
Or as Paul's him, He spoke boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed
against the Graecians, but they went about to slay him. Whence could these mute
fishermen have had this promptness, and presentness, yea and wisdom of speech;
but only from the power of the Holy Ghost coming on them? Ps. 8.2.
But out of the mouth of Bades and sucklings have thou perfected praise. And I
will give you a mouth, and wisdom, Luke 21.15.
which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist. Job.
12.20.
These let you see what did the deed; He removes away the speech of the
trusty, etc. so he gives sometime the speech to the stammerer; Job. 32.8^.
but there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. Act. 4.13. (...).
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, etc. It was strange, that
they should speak so roundly, and profoundly, (...).
of whom it could not have been expected, as being unlearned and ignorant men,
that they could have gone on above five words together, without hacks and hawes
about matters so out of their element.

Thirdly, Grace of extraordinary diligence, whence had they it; but from this
power of the Holy Ghost? if you consider that they had neither profit to draw
them on to take that pains; for silver and gold have I none, (not so much as to
give a beggar his alms) said he that was the chief of them; And these hands
have ministered to my necessity, said he that was not his inferior; no profit
therefore to draw them on. No honor neither; for they were therefore counted
the filth of the world, and the offscowring of all things; If you consider
also, that their breeding was a private countrey-breeding, and a quiet retried
life, led upon lakes and rivers, not made to be the worlds posts, to trudge
from City to City, from nation to nation, from people to people, from Kingdom
to Kingdom, and there still to have no rest to their flesh, 2 Cor. 7.
but be troubled on every side, fightings without, fears within; besides their
assiduity in preaching, in season and out of season, privately and publicly;
If you consider withal, how well their successors now a days love their ease,
when they need not trudge up and down the world as they did to preach the
Gospel; it were well if they would but reside at their own cures and take a
little pains there; If you consider all these, whence can you say they had this
extraordinary diligence, but from the power of the Holy Ghost? it could be
nothing but this, that made them so diligent, that the rulers of the Jews could
say of them in a short time; Behold you have filled Jerusalem with your
doctrine: Act. 5.28.
so diligent, that as it is in the same Chapter, daily in the Temple and from
house to house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ; so diligent,
that Peter is made as is were an Ubiquitary, As Peter passed thorowout all
quarters, Act. 9.32.
etc. so diligent, that Demetrius could say of one of them, namely Paul, Sirs,
ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, Act. 19.26.
but almost thorowout all Asia this Paul has persuaded and turned away much
people; so diligent, that other enemies of theirs could say when they came to
Thessulonica, These that have turned the world up side down are come hither
also; Act. 17.6.
so diligent, that by their means in a small time, the sound of the Gospel went
into all the earth, Romans 10.18.
and their words unto the end of the world; and that leaven of the Kingdom
spoken of Mat. 13. had leavened the whole lump;

Fourthly, Grace of sincerity, to take all this pains for no sinister worldly
respect whatsoever, but merely for the Gospels sake, to plant it; whence could
they have this sincerity, but from the same power of the Holy Ghost? How
sincerely they preached the Gospel without seeking either praise or profit by
it, see a little;

Not praise; Act. 3.12.
for when upon the cure of the lame man, the people came flocking about them
and admiring them almost as half Gods, what says S. Peter? Ye men of Israel,
why look ye so earnestly on us, as if by our own power or holiness, we had
made this man to walk? And when upon the like occasion the men of Lystra would
have honored Paul and Barnabas for Gods, they were so far from seeking their
own praise, that they did all they could to hinder it, Act. 14.14. etc.
they ran in among the people, crying out and saying, Sirs, why do you these
things? we also are men of like passions with you, etc. And when some
magnifying Paul, and some Apollo, and some Cephas, calling themselves after
their great Masters, I am of Paul, etc. how does Paul take up all pride that
might arise thereupon? 1 Cor. 3.5.
who is Paul, and who is Apollo, but ministers by whom ye believed? And we
preach. not our selves, 2 Cor. 4.5.
but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Christ's suke. If
therefore that of our Saviors be true, John 7.18.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory; but he that seeks his
glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him; then
they seeking not their own glory, when it was offered them, but another that
sent them, it must needs be that they speak not of themselves, but acted by
his spirit that sent them.

So for profit, how sincerely they preached the Gospel without perverse aim
that way? Their hungry bellyes, oftentimes in hunger and thirst, (which was not
voluntary abstinence, for that is meant afterward, in fastings often; 2 Cor.
11.27.
) Their cold backs, in cold and nakedness; Their purse penniless, Act. 3.6.
silver and gold have I none: these show what a little gain they made of the
Gospel. Paul would never have writ for a cloak as far as from Rome to Troas,
four hundred miles, if, poor man, he had had that variety, or his converts had
been so frank unto him, as to have furnished him with money to have bought a
new one; he made but a little harvest of the Gospel, that was glad to write for
an old cloak 400 miles to hap him against winter. The cloak that I left at
Troas with Carpus, 2 Timothy 4.13.
bring with thee. And that it was for happing to his back against the cold
winter, you may gather from that which follows; do thy diligence to come
before winter; verse 21.
verily this argument if any other, that the Appostles should with that
sincerity preach the Gospel, all praise and all profit set aside, this helps to
confirm the truth of the Gospel, if any other, that they should take such
infinite pains in that harvest (send forth Laborers into thine harvest) and
aim at no harvest at all thereby for themselves in the world. Mat. 9.38.
And therefore not without good reason does St. Paul so often stand upon this
thing, Act. 20.33 1 Cor. 4.11. and 9.3. 2 Cor. 11.10. and 12.14. 1 These. 2.5.
to stablish his converts in the truth of the Gospel which he preached, Neither
at any time used we flattering words: Who is there even among you, that would
shut the door for naught? But what a deal of pains took they for naught? or
rather they knew well enough whom they trusted, and who it was that said, lift
up your eyes and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest, He
that reapeth, receives wages. John 4.36
They would never have sweat so in this harvest and so little wages here, but
that they knew of those other wages.

Fifthly, The grace of extraordinary patience, whence also could they have it,
but from the power of the Holy Ghost? who were they, and what were their
bodies? was their strength the strength of stones, and their flesh of brass,
Job. 6.12.
that they should be able to hold out against hunger and thirst, against cold
and nakedness, stripes and imprisonments, etc? was their Souls not like other
men's, but heavenly spirits sheathed in earthly bodies, that they should not be
overcome; no not much affected with all the opprobries, reproaches, ignominies
that the world could cast upon them; that all the pain, and all the shame the
world could put them to, they should still continue as strong, as steady as
anvills unstirred, unmoved for all the blows? What can this be but the power of
the Holy Ghost coming upon them? if so many strong men with Iron hammers should
let drive at a piece of glass, or earthen vessel, and not be able to break it,
all men would say, it were an enchanted glass or vessel; how many let drive at
those earthen vessels, the humane natures of the Apostles, with such bats and
blows as would almost have broken steel and adamant? That therefore these
earthen vessels were not broken with all these blows, what should be the
reason, but only that they were enchanted, enchanted with that power of the
Holy Ghost coming upon them, that made their frail natures hold out so against
dint of stroke of all persecutions? I will turn aside (says Moses) and see
this great sight, why the bush burns with fire and consumes not; Exo. 3.3.
that was a strange thing to his conceit; so a strange thing it must needs be
to any ones consideration, that the Apostles, who for their frail humane
natures were nothing but bushes, and brushwood, and combustiblest stuff that
could be, strange that they should continue in the fire, the fire of
tribulation, and consume not, burn not, yield not; but as though their bodies
were burnish't brass, shine only the brighter for the fire; surely what can
be the reason, but only because as the Lord was in the bush, and so it
consumed not, so the Lord was in these bushes, these weak Apostles, and they
consumed not?

In the third of Daniel, the Princes, Governors, Captains, and the Kings
Councillors, all flocked together, to see those men upon whose bodies the fire
had no power; they thought that a wonder; surely I know not whether it be a
greater wonder, that the bodies of the Apostles, flesh and blood like other
men, 1 Peter 1.4.
that fiery trial whereof St. Peter speaks should have no power upon them,
should not drive them to impatience, not to desist or desert their Evangelical
callings, but hold out 20, 30, 40 years together, unto the death, and in death:
Moses was a godly Saint, and yet driven to a little impatience, that he was
weary of his calling through the vexful behavior of the Jews; If thou deal
thus with me, Numb. 11.15.
kill me I pray thee out of hand. Elias was a godly Saint, yet driven to a
little impatience, when the storm fell so fierce upon him; It is enough, now,
O Lord, take away my life, 1 Kings 19.4.
for I am not better then my fathers: Job was a Saint, who like him? and yet
driven to a great deal of impatience; when he opened his mouth and cursed his
day, Let the day perish wherein I was borne, etc. Job. 3.
for a whole Chapter together. But where do we ever read that all the
afflictions the world could heap upon them, put the Apostles into any
impatience, or that their spirits were any whit broken, or their hearts
dejected with them? nay it broke their hearts when others pityed them, and
would have had them favored themselves in Christ's sufferings; What mean you
to weep and break my heart? Act. 21.13 Act. 20.22.24.
for I am ready not only to be bound, but also to dye, etc. And now behold I
go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem; But none of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto my self, etc. And I take pleasure in infirmites,
etc. 2 Cor. 12.10.
whence could they have this patience, nay this joy in all their tribulations,
but from the power of the Holy Ghost? And therefore I marvel not that St. Paul
should so often urge this for an evident proof of the truth of his ministry,
his Apostleship, his Gospel that he preached, namely his patience and
indefatigable enduring of all misery and all affliction for the Gospels sake; 2
Cor. 6.4. and 11.23 etc. Gal. 6.17. Col. 4.18. 2 Cor. 4.7. and 10.
In all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience,
etc. And from henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks
of the Lord Jesus; And Remember my bonds. Well, I will conclude this with his
reasoning, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power may be of God and not of us; always bearing about in the body the dying
of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our
body. That it may appear that Jesus Christ is alive indeed, by giving such
strength and power to such a frail creature as Paul otherwise of himself was;
for that it is not to be understood of the life of glory to be manifested
afterward in the body, but so as it is already expounded, the drift and
circumstances show. That the excellency of the power, etc. in our mortal body,
etc. and because in the fourteenth verse he proceeds there to that sense.

Sixthly, Grace of tenderest love and affection to the Salvation (if they
could) of the whole world, to the Salvation of those they never saw nor heard
of before; to the Salvation of those that it cost them many a long tedious
journey to come into them; to the Salvation of those, that when they came among
them, gave them but cold entertainment, even sought their death that came to
bring them the word of life; such love, whence could they have it, but from
this power of the Holy Ghost? Consider but how cold and back-ward men are in
this business, to build up one another, even neighbor his neighbor, and
friend his friend in their Salvations; and say if these men must not needs have
been acted and moved with something in them more then flesh and blood, that
made them so zealous and earnest for the Salvation of the whole world, of the
unknown world, the remote world, the injurious world, that sought their deaths
as much as they did their lives:

Take a scantling of this their earnest zeal and love to every Souls Salvation
in St. Paul;

First, In St. Paul's sollicitous care and fear; nothing so full of care and
fear for another good as love; None so loving therefore as St. Paul, that had
such cares, and fears, and jealousies in his heart as touching others
Salvations; 2 Cor. 7.5.
Without were fightings, within were fears: Within fears, namely, lest by some
means men should be tempted and drawn away again from the faith: Gal. 4.19. 2
Cor. 11.2. and 28. Col. 2.1.
And I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy; And besides those things
that are without, that which comes upon me daily, 1 These. 3.1.
the care of all the Churches. And I wish you knew what great conflict, namely
of fear and care, I have for you; And for this cause when I could no longer
forbear, namely for care and fear about you:

Secondly, See it in St. Paul's wise and studious diligence, by art and by
industry, 1 Col. 28.
striving if he could to win every Soul; Though I be free from all men, yet
have I made my self servant to all, 1 Cor. 9.19.
that I might gain the more; that we may present every man perfect. etc.
Nothing so painful and devicefull of any course to speed as love.

Thirdly, See it in St. Paul's earnest obtestations and entreaties that men
would regard themselves, and that which makes for their own Salvations; no so
humble a supplicant as true love: the tender mother would beg it on her knees
at her sons hand, that he would reclaim, and know his own good: so St. Paul
most humbly beseeches all, that they would know their own good, know the things
that belong unto their own peace; Now then we are Ambassadors in Christ; 2 Cor.
5.20. and 2.6.
we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God; And we then as workers
together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain. 2 Cor. 10.1.
And Now I Paul my self beseech you by the meekness, etc. and gentleness of
Christ, etc.

To name one place more for all; If there be therefore any Consolation in
Christ, Phil. 2.1.
if any comfort of love, etc. what would beg so hard for no other boon, but
only that men would know the things that belong to their own peace; but only
Love?

Fourthly, See it in St. Paul's abundant thanks and prayers for those whom God
has vouchsafed to call unto the participation of his heavenly truth: It is no
small measure of love that makes him so sensible of others eternal good:
others that what were they to him, but only that they were the Sons of Adam;
so sensible as to be so abundant in thanks to God for that blessing unto them,
and in prayers to God for the continuance of it. Most of his Epistles begin
with these thanks and prayers; First, Romans 1.8. 1 Cor. 1.4. Ephesians. 1.15. Phil.
1.3. Col. 1.3. 1 These. 1.2.
I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken
thorowout the world; And I thank my God always on your behalf for the grace
of God which is given by Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, See it in St. Paul's grieved spirit when at any time men declined and
went backward in the way of grace; Out of much affliction and anguish of heart
I wrote unto you with many tears; And who is weak, and I am not weak? 2 Cor.
2.4.
who is offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11.29.
And I fear lest when I come among you, my God shall humble me among you, and
that I shall bewail many that have sinned already. 2 Cor. 12.21.


Sixthly, See it in St. Paul's recomforted and revived spirit again at the good
news of the men's thriving and prospering in the way of grace; 2 Cor. 7.4.
I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation; And,
1 These. 3.7.
When Timotheus came from you, we were comforted over you in all our affliction
and distress by your faith. And so St. John, 3 John 4.
I have no greater joy then to hear that my children walk in truth.

Seventhly, See it in St. Paul's unmercenariness so far that he is willing, yea
glad, very glad to spend and to be spent for men's Salvations, yea, those that
the more abundantly he loves them, the less perhaps he may be beloved again; I
seek not yours but you; And, I will very gladly spend (my wordly means if I
had any) and be spent (quite exhaust forth strength and spirits in laborious
endeavors) for you. 2 Cor. 12.15.


Eighthly, See it in St. Paul's willingness, not thus to spend goods, and
strength, and spirits, but even life it self for men's Salvations, being
affectionately desirous of you; 1 These. 2.8.
and in the second to the Philippians, Phil. 2.17.
he raises this willingness to die for others Salvations into a joy to die for
them: Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I
joy and rejoice with you all.

Ninthly, See it in St. Paul's willingness not only to die for men's Salvations,
but to be withheld for a while from fellowship with Christ in his glory, for
the furtherance of others in their Salvations; Phil. 1.23. 24. and 25.
I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ
which is far better, nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for
you, etc. He must needs love much that having been in the third Heavens, and
having had so many revelations of Christ, yet makes it a strait and a hard
choice, whether to choose, whether to be with Christ in bliss, or with poor
lost men in misery for hope of his Salvation.

Tenthly, See it in St. Paul's willingness not only to be withheld a while from
the fellowship of Christ in his glory, but to be accursed for ever from this
fellowship of Christ in his glory; for that is his meaning, to be accursed from
the fruition of his glory, not of his love. I say the truth in Christ, Romans
9.^, 2, 3.
I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, That I
have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart. For I could wish that
my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the
flesh. How serious and unfeigned, how ponderous and weighty his wish is, that it
must needs be no less then his eternal perishing from Christ for their
Salvations, his so solemn and sacred attestations and protestations show, I
say the truth, I lie not, etc.

Whence now (think you) could St. Paul have this grace of tenderest love and
affection to others Salvation, discovering it self in his such sollicitous holy
care and fear about them, in his so studious diligence to edify (by all means
that he could devise) every Soul in the way of Salvation, etc? Whence but only
from the power of the holy Ghost?

And now by this time, if you consider all these; the grace of extraordinary
boldness, of extraordinary promptness of speech and wisdom, etc. that showed
themselves in the Apostles and first preachers of the Gospel, you may know why
the Apostle should say, I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for
you, Col. 2.1.
and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the
flesh; Why for as many as had not seen his face in the flesh? Why? because
they that by Paul's corporal presence among them, had but experience of his
holy boldness in the Lord, of his promtpness of speech and wisdom in the Lord,
of his unspeakeable pains and diligence in the Lord, etc. they that thus saw
his face in the flesh, knew all his heavenly carriage and consolation in the
Lord, and in the word of his truth; they could not but be exceedingly persuaded
of the certainty thereof; so full of arguments was St. Paul's face, his bodily
presence and conversation in the Lord, to persuade unto the certain belief of
the Gospel which he preached. And hereupon it is from these arguments in his
face especially that he says; If our Gospel be hid, 1 Cor. 4.3.
it is hid to them that perish; and that at his time of departure out of the
world, he remembers Timothy of these arguments especially in his face, But thou
have fully known my doctrine, manner of life; 2 Timothy 3.10.14.
But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, knowing of whom thou
have learned them; viz. of him that has made them good by so many good
arguments in his face. O that our people could but see thus arguments in our
faces to confirm them in the truth of the Gospel. But alas, our faces, our
faces are the confusion rather and confutation of the Gospel, then the
confirmation of it; rather enough to make infidels then converts; rather enough
to offend the strong, then to strengthen the weak. If the Gospel were now to be
planted again, all the miracles in the world (I think) would not make it take,
while our moralls are that they are. A miracle may strike a little wonderment
at first; but good morality it sinkes, it soakes to the heart; perverseness may
fay, a miracle is from the Devil; but who can say that good morality is from
the Devil? I mean, Universal good morality; for otherwise the Devil and his
doctrine may have a shred of morality, a little good morality near the list,
but he is never good thorowout the whole cloth as 'twere, the whole body of
morality; Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 3. and 6.
but feel him a little farther near the rig, and you shall see the Devil to
be the Devil for all his good morality near the list.

Ghost coming upon them? it is true indeed, that the Devil and his Disciple the
magician may go far in doing things that man's reason would wonder at, else
would not God have said; If there arise a Prophet, and give you a sign or a
wonder. Deuteronomy. 13.1.
Nor would our Savior have said of the false Christ's, and false Prophets; that
they should do such great signs and wonders, that if it were possible they
shall deceive the very elect. Matt. 24.24.
Nor St. Paul of Antichrist, that his coming should be with all powers, and
signs, and lying wonders. 2 These. 2.9.
Nor St. John of the same, that out of his mouth proceeded three unclean
spirits like frogs, which should be the spirits of Devils workings miracles.
Rev. 16.13, 14.
But yet though they may go far, yet they cannot possibly reach to the height
of miracles that our Savior and his Disciples did; else would not our Savior
have said, Go, and show John the things you see and hear; Act. 2.22.
the Blind reccive their sight, the lame walk, Mat. 11.5.
etc. And, I have a greater witness then that of John, the works which the
Father has given me to finish, the same bear witness of me; John 5.36.
And, If I do not the work of my Father believe me not. And, John 10.37.
believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; John 14.11,
or else believe me for the very works sake. And, If I had not done among them
the wirks which none other did, John 15.24.
they had not had sin, etc. Nor would the Evangelist have said of the miracles
of the Apostles, that they went forth and preached every where, the Lord,
working with them and confirming the word with signs following; In my name
shall they cast out Devils, Mark 16.17.
etc. Nor St. Luke, that with great power gave the Apostles witness of the
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Act. 4.33.
These things would not have been said of the miracles of our Savior and his
Disciples, if the Devil and his Disciple the Magician could have done as much;
it had been very vain, nay very dangerous too for our Savior, and his
Disciples to have proved their Doctrine by no other means then which a deceiver
by the help of a Devil might prove his false Doctrine by, and therefore some
specialness there was in the miracles which our Savior and his Disciples did,
over and above what the Magician or the greatest Beelzebub of all could do, as
it is well observed, God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul; Act.
19.11. (...).
not ordinary ones, such as Mount-Bank-Magicians or Mount-Bank Devils could do.

And that there was such specialness in them,

Consider, First, from the nature of the things, because all the Devils wonders
are but delusions and jugglements, making things appear which are not, by
corrupting sometimes the imagination, sometimes the sense, sometimes the air,
sometimes the object; or else if they be realities, true things such as they
seem, then they are not above the pitch of nature, but either the Devils
sleight of hand only, suddenly through the agility that is in him to bring or
remove off the stage a thing that had the being elsewhere before, as he might
do with the frogs and serpents before Pharaoh; or else they are done by the
secret qualities of nature, the Devil knowing better the secret qualities and
operations of all simples then man does, and being nimbler of the sudden to lay
the simples together then man can be, and so that which indeed nature works,
seems above nature to us, because we see not the plain and usual course of
nature effecting it; and thus the Devil may raise storms, and do some petty
cures, etc. But the right miracles, such as Christ and his Apostles wrought,
surpassed all created power of nature bodily or Ghostly, so that no creature
corporal or incorporall could have done them either simply not at all, as
raising of the dead, or curing some kind of incurable infirmities; or else not
in an instant so, as the curing of some kind of infirmities curable perhaps in
nature, with use of sovereign simples, but yet not in an instant, till the
simples have time to work; whereas our Savior and his Disciples cured with a
word in an instant. I will for example sake name two miracles, one of our
Saviors, another of his Apostles, that it shall be plain, that neither they
were any deceit but truly done, nor could be done by any art Magic of the
Devils.

That of our Saviors shall be the curing of the blind man, John 9.
which is plain, that it was no imposture or deceit, but a thing truly done,
by the accurate search of the Pharisees into it, who would not believe it, till
they examined it thoroughly, calling and conjuring the parents about him; Is
this your son whom ye say was borne blind? verse 19.20.
and they answered, we know that this is our son, and that he was borne blind:
it was no deceit therefore, neither could it be done by any art Magic, but God
must needs have a hand in it; This the very Pharisees confess; First, in their
division, how can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? Secondly, jointly,
when they say, Give God the praise, etc. Again, the man that was cured was bold
to say before them all, contradict him who could, Since the world began was it
not heard, John 10.20.21.
that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind Again, the Jews when
they were divided, some said that he had a Devil, but other replied, Can a
Devil open the eyes of the blind?

The example of the Apostles shall be that of their curing the lame man; And
first, Act. 3.
that it was not a deceit, but a thing truly done, therefore says the text,
verse 10.
They knew it was he that sat for Alms at the beautiful gate of the Temple;
Nay, he was laid daily, that the very bearers that brought him could witness
assuredly that it was he, and at a public place the gate of the Temple; nay
the beautiful gate, where most company came: no deceit therefore but a thing
truly done, nor nothing could do it but a power Divine, therefore does the
spirit of God set out all circumstances, of the lameness, of the cure, of the
peoples behavior upon the cure; Of the lameness, that he was lame from his
mothers womb, so lame that he could not so much as help himself a whit with
crutch, but he must even plainly be carried; so lame that his lameness
continued forty years together: Of the cure, that it was merely by a word, In
the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk; that it was
immediately, and immediately his feet and ancle bones received strength;
perfectly, and he leaping up, stood and walked, etc. Of the peoples behavior
after, that it was so great a miracle, that they were filled with wonder and
amazement, that they ran all together unto them, that as it is, Act. 4.21. all
men glorified God for that which was done; they could not imagine that it could
be any thing else but Gods own work; yea, so pregnant were all circumstances,
that it was a thing truly done, and supernaturally done; that the council
casting their heads together, could not cavil at these two points; Act. 4.16.
what shall we do to these men, for that indeed a notable miracle has been
done by them, etc? No question therefore our Saviors and his Disciples
miracles had some specialness in them, else having such enemies to pry and
enquire into them, they would easily have been cavill'd against and cried down,
either as nothing but fraud, or nothing but Magic; as they the miracle-mongers
now a days in Italy are not so busy to forge a miracle, as the Jew that lives
among them is to find out their forgery, that either it is nothing but fraud,
or nothing but Magic; I take it for granted therefore, that all the Devils in
Hell could not have done the miracles.

Secondly, Mat. 11.5. Act. 5.12. and 9.33. and 14.8. and 19.11.
that there was some specialness in them above all Magic, consider from the
prevailing with those that had been exceedingly bewitched with all Magic
before; surely they plainly saw some specialness in them above their former
Magic, else they would not by these miracles have left it and come off to the
Apostles. Samaria was a City exceedingly bewitched with the sorceryes of
Simon-Magus, and that a long time, and that from the least to the greatest of
them, and that in such a manner that they said of him; This man is the great
power of God; And yet this so bewitched a City at the hearing and seeing the
miracles that Philip did, so far were they beyond all the sorceryes of
Simon-Magus, were converted unto the faith; Nay the great wonder-worker
himself, Simon-Magus wondered (says the text) beholding the miracles and
signs which were done, Act. 8.18.
and himself became, or seemed to become a convert; he saw that Philips
miracles were far beyond all his Mount-bank trikes; his were marvells or
farlayes for fools, but Philips were miracles, miracles indeed.

Thirdly, that there was some specialness in them above Magic, consider from
the victory over the Magicians themselves; There was a famous Sorcerer called
Elymas, Act. 13.
i. e. a sorcerer for his notableness that way: Now this Elymas had tampered
with Sergius Paulus the Deputy of the Country, and when the Deputy sent for
Paul and Barnabas, this Sorcerer withstood them (namely as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses by his sorceryes) and sought to turn the Deputy from the faith;
2 Timot. 3.8.
but what says Paul? O full of all subtility and all mischeife, thou child of
the Devil, etc. cutting words, not fearing his sorceryes a whit, you see; and
now behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind, etc. a
strange effect following; Immediately he was blind, stark blind, so that be
sought for some to lead him by the hand. Paul's setting his eyes only on him
made the great sorcerer lose his eyes, all his sorcery could not withstand a
look of Paul's eyes, so strange was the foil of this sorcerer seeking to them,
that the Deputy when he saw what was done, believed. Was there not therefore
some specialness in the power that the Apostles had, above the power of the
Magician? when such an Arch-magician was so foiled, foiled to the striking of
himself stark blind; this was like the foil of Pharaoks Magicians by Moses;
striking the Magicians themselves with bolls; they could not save their own
skins, Exo. 9.11.
the boil was upon the Magicians, and upon all the Magicians; a thing
purposely noted.

Fourthly, That there was some specialness in them as not done by any Magic,
consider from the destroying every where by them the Kingdom of the Devils;
the Devil should not have helped to have over-throwne utterly his own kingdom
by his own wonders; Moreover how should they be done by Magic, that every
where where they came made all Magic be cast away; as they that were converted
by Paul's preaching and special miracles, Act. 19.19.
there spoken of, presently cashiered their Magic? They that used curious arts
(Magic and the like) they brought their books together, and burned, them
before all men.

Fifthly, For the Apostles miracles that there was some specialness in them,
and not done by Magic, Consider from the holiness of the doctrine not a
little; The Devil would never have confirmed such a pure and holy and heavenly
Doctrine with his wonders, his works; the impiety, filthiness, villainy which
Story shows they required in their very work proves this; their very work
being performed so much the more devoutly, Tanto devotius quanto turpius, Aug.
of Floras de Civitat. 2.27. and 4.
by how much the more filthily. And that also of Austin, shows, asking the
Gentiles why their Gods did not publicly persuade unto life and good manners,
inspiring and appointing Prophets, and teachers for the same, but wholly
neglected that? Ibidem. 2.6
or if they gave rules of good life, it was but to some few special ones in
their private (Adytis) Cabinets, but let all villainy be uncontrouled publicly;
They did the one, that the more honest who are but few might be ensnared;
Illud, ut honestiores qui pauci sunt, capiantur; hoc, ne plures qui sunt
turpissimi corrigiantur. Ibid. 2.26.
and the other, that the most, who are dishonest, might not be reformed. The
Apostles miracles therefore were not done in the Devils name, the holiness of
their Doctrine shows; when some said of our Savior that he had a Devil, it
was well answered, These are not the words of him that has a Devil. These,
such holy and heavenly words that he had spoken hard before, John 10. So if any
should say, that the Apostles had Devils, and did the miracles they did in
their names; read their words and their writings, and are these the words of
them that have Devils, words of such holiness, such heavenlyness, such
universal complete goodness? the Devil indeed and his Doctrine may have a
shred of goodness, a little good morality near the list, etc. but thorowout
from list to list, how good and just and holy is the Apostles Doctrine? Give me
but such a Saint as the Apostles require by their Doctrine, and let malice and
envy pick a hole if it can.

Sixthly, that the Apostles miracles had some specialness in them, and were not
magical; Consider from this, that they were not wonders only, but mercies; as
curing the sick, restoring sight to the blind etc. Whereas things done by
Magic commonely had nothing in them, but a little admiration, no mercy; as for
Attilius to cut a whet-stone a funder with a rasor; for a vestal virgin to draw
water in a sive; for another to pull a ship up Tyber with her girdle when with
Cables all the company besides could not make her stir; for Mahomet to make the
moon seem to come in at his sleeve, etc. Such wonderments, toyish wonderments
does the Devil ordinarely work; but where are his mercies, his curing the
sick, etc? indeed sometimes he cures some sick, Postquam definunt laedere, and
curasse creduntur; Tert. Apol.
but it is but una eademque manus, etc. but healing where he hurt; when they
cease to hurt, they are thought to heal: as if I should ease, by pulling away
the pin that I thrust into another sides; it is but thus healing where he hurt;
or else in some lesser diseases perhaps that are within his skill, healing
sometimes that he may hurt; wounding the Soul to the heart, through healing the
ripled skin of the body. And thus it appears that the miracles of the Apostles
had some specialness in them, and were done by no other Magic, then that of
our Saviors, Yet shall receive power of the holy Ghost, etc. And if so, then
that our Savior is not in the grave, but risen indeed, that could send this
power of the holy Ghost upon them.

I will end this point with St. Austin; If any say that these special miracles
were not indeed wrought by the Apostles to confirm Christ's Resurrection and
ascension; Hoc nobis unum grande miraculum sufficit, quod ea terrarum orbis
sine ullis miraculis credidit.
This one great miracle suffices us, that the world believed these things
without miracles; There are these incredible things says he; One, that Christ
is risen from the dead, and ascended bodily into heaven: Another, that the
world should have believed so incredible a thing; A third, incrediblest of all,
that a few silly obscure mean fellows should persuade the world to this
belief: either therefore they wrought some special miracles to persuade the
world thereunto, Et Eloquia persuadentium mira fuerunt facta non verba.
(and their persuasive arguments were wondrous works, not words) or else this
is the miracle of all miracles, that the world should believe those few silly
men without miracles. De civitat. 22.7. Quisquis ergo adhuc prodigia ut credat
inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium qui mundo credente non credit: 22.8. John
3.2. and 12.37; Aug. de Civit. Dei: 21.6. Vide quandam auream catenam apud
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 7.


Whosoever therefore does yet require miracles, that he may believe, he not
believing, when the world believes, is himself a great miracle.

happy success in their preaching, in so short a time to draw almost the world
after them, to bring all to their lure, to make all dance after their pipe,
whence but from this power of the holy Ghost coming on them, and making their
words to be very charms unto the people? verily, verily, says our Savior to
his Disciples; he that believes on me, John 14.
the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works then these; now what
are these greater works? Our Savior he cured all diseases, and cast out
Divils, he raised the dead; what greater works did the Apostles? yes, the
conversion of the world, and the subversion every where of his Kingdom that is
called the Prince of the world, were greater works; a far greater work to
raise up the dead world, then one dead Lazarus; Lazarus had been four days in
the grave, and was ready to stink, the world had stunke many and many years
together in the grave of all Idolatries, impieties, lusts, wickednesses, etc. a
far greater work to cast out Satan every where out of his Temples, out of his
worship, out of the hearts of men that every where he possessed, then out of
the bodies of a few Corporally possessed; whence therefore could the Apostles
do these greater works, but from the power of the holy Ghost, from the reason
rendered in that text, because I go unto my Futher. etc. because I cannot be
deteyned in the grave* but rise again to have all power given me both in Heaven
and in earth?

Now consider with me from some particulars, the greatness of his work; by
twelve men such as they were, to convert a World such as it was, to embrace a
Doctrine such as they preached; Consider the greatness of this work, and then
say my text is proved, But now is Christ-risen from the dead, else this work
could never have taken, that such a doctrine, to such a world, by such twelve
men should have been effectually preached.

Doctrine, a Doctrine that might have offended, as a new Doctrine, an
incredible Doctrine, a Doctrine too high for the world wallowing in flesh and
blood, a Doctrine bringing the cross and persecution after it, a Doctrine that
for the enduring the cross, and for the crucifying their flesh and blood gave
no present promises; but the promises to envite unto the Gospel, were future
and in another world; a Doctrine that might have offended thus many ways.

First, as a new Doctrine, that should have overturned all their old Religion:
no more the same rites, the same Ceremonies, the same Altars, the same Temples,
the same Gods that they and their predecessors had so long time worshipped, but
all must be cashierd, and a new upstart tother-day Religion about one Jesus of
Nazareth, never heard of before, forsooth, must come in the room; away with
such new Doctrine. Novelty, that in other things is pleasing to the nature of
man, is odious in Religion. The Devil knows what he does when he seeks to
cast upon us by our adversaryes the aspersion of novelty, of a new Gospel and
new Gospellers, new Bibles and new every thing; even the very old cobwebs in
the Temple are sacred, and superstition is loath to have them brushed down,
though they have venomous spiders in them, and webs of lawne might be hung in
their room; so odious is Novelty in Religion, and therefore first it might
have offended as a new Doctrine.

Secondly, as an incredible Doctrine; what credibleness that life and Salvation
should be preached in the name of a pretended God, borne but of a poor Jewish
woman, brought up like a poor Carpenters son, crucified like a wicked
malefactor, dead and buried like a weak man, and affirmed by almost the whole
nation of the Jews to be yet under the power of death, when as but two or three
obscure fishermen and the like talk of his Resurrection? What credibleness in
this Doctrine? Is it credible that he that was so borne, so bred, so crucified,
so dead and buried; and no talk but by a few obscure Galilaeans of his
Resurrection, that he should be the only God blessed for ever, principalities,
and powers, and thrones, and dominions, and all the renowned Gods up and down
the world, that our Fathers and our Priests and our Prophets have told us such
strange things of should be made subject to him? Nay, is it credible that he
that was this great God would be so borne, so bred, so crucified, would so dye
and be buried? that majesty would be clothed with such vileness, that power
and omnipotency would dwell with such weakness, that life and immortality would
embrace and shake hands with death and the grave? So incredible is this
Doctrine, that all the chief heresies of old were either against the true
Divinity of our Savior, as the Arians, Photinians, etc. or the true humanity,
as the Simonians, Manichees, Marcionites, etc. or the true union of Divinity
and humanity into one person, as the Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. so unworthy
thought they it was, that the great God in one and the same person should
become man; or so overworthy that mean man should in one and the same person
become God: so that you may know our Savior had good reason to say of Peter's
confession, Mat. 16.17.
whom do men say that I the son of man am? Quodcunque Deo indignum est, mihi
expedit, etc. Natus est, Dei Filius, non pudet quia pudendum est; and moriuus
est Dei Filius, prorsus credibile est quia ineptum est; and sepultus
resurrexit, certum est, quia impossible est. Tert. de Carne Christi.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God; This is such high Philosophy, that
he that was the son of man, he the same should be the son of the living God;
that our Savior might well say, Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee. And this, that Christ crucified should be the Savior of the world; that
Paul might well say, we preach Christ crucified unto the Jews a stumbling
block; and unto the Greeks foolishnes. Whatsoever seems unworthy of God, is
for me expedient, etc. the son of God is borne, I am not ashamed of it, because
it seems a thing not to be ashamed of; and the son of God dyed, this is
altogether credible, because it seems absurd; and after he was buried, he rose
again, this is certain, because it seems impossible.

And therefore, Secondly, it might have offended as an incredible Doctrine,
incredible that he that seemed to be but a poor weak crucified man, should be
the great God and Savior of all; or as incredible that he that was this great
God and Savior of all, would be a poor weak crucified man.

Thirdly, As a Doctrine too high for the world to embrace, wallowing in flesh
and blood; what high Doctrine was it to teach the proud world, the humility of
Christ Jesus? the uncharitable world the love of their very enemies? the
unchaste world the restraint even of an unchaste look? the revengefull world,
not to resist evil, but rather if one smite him on the right cheek, to turn
to him the left also? The sturdy stomackfull world to seek reconcilement with
ones brother? the gripple pinch-penny world to be liberal in alms? the
covetous carking world not to lay up treasures on earth, not to be thoughtfull
about to morrow, but let to morrow take thought for it self? in a word, the
profane dissolute world to tuck up their loins of their mind, and to be sober,
and walk unto a precise circumspect walking in all godliness and honesty? Say
any one now, even the best here that considers from the experience of the
relics of his own corruption yet in him, what a hard thing it is for the
proud spirit to be taught the humility of Christ Jesus, etc say if the doctrine
of the Gospel might not well have offended, as a Doctrine too high for the
world, etc.

Fourthly, As a Doctrine bringing still the cross and persecution with it. No
sooner was any converted to the Gospel, but presently blows flew thick about
his ears, and the Devil raised up a storm of persecution against him, even a
man's enemies proved they of his own household, the father betraying the son to
death, etc. so inseparable an attendant of the Gospel in the primitive times
was the cross and persecution, that the Apostles still where they preached the
Gospel, preached the Doctrine also of enduring tribulation; So Paul and
Barnabas went through Lystra, Icenium and Antioch. confirming the Souls of the
Disciples and exhorting them to continue in the faith. And that we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God: Act. 14.22.
So your selves know that we are appointed thereunto, to endure afflictions,
for verily when we were with you, we told you before, that we should suffer
tribulation, even as it came to pass; 1 These. 3.3, 4. 2 Timothy 3.12.
So all that will live godly in the world, shall suffer persecution: Say
therefore, they that consider what the wisdom of the flesh is, namely, to
think it good sleeping in a whole skin, good harkening to S. Peter's Counsel
to our Savior, telling how many things he should suffer at Jerusalem, and
there be killed, etc. Spare thy self, (...).
let not these and these things befall thee. Matt. 16.22.
Say if the Doctrine of the Gospel might not also have offended, as a Doctirne
bringing the cross with it.

Fifthly, As a Doctrine that invited to all that hard matter, and hard task of
the cross, by no other promises then future of another world; it should cost
them here, if they would be right Christians, the denying of themselves, the
mortifying of their pleasures, their plucking out their right eyes, their
cutting off their right hands and feet, etc. Moreover it would cost them the
enduring the cross, the suffering shame, the going still with their lives in
their hands; but reward here they should look for none, only believe if they
would, Matt. 5.12. Matt. 19.28. Luke 14.14. Act. 3.19.
great should be their reward in Heaven; great in that regeneration, great in
that Resurrection of the just, great in those days of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord; great in that coming of his to be glorified in his Saints
and admired of all them that believe; 2 These. 1.10. Col. 3.3.
your life is hid with Christ in God. But in the mean time they must possess
their Souls in patience, live by faith, work all things, and endure all things,
as seeing him that is invisible, and looking for that reward which is
invisible; what a snub and hinderance think you was this likely to have been
unto flesh and blood, hankering still after the present things, and loving to
believe no more then it sees? what a snub and hinderance from embracing that
doctrine that invited unto such high doings, and such deep sufferings, upon
promises only hereafter and in another world? whereof they had no other
assurance then that; Heb. 11.1.
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen; and therefore whence but from the power of the holy Ghost could such a
doctrine of theirs as this have taken? a doctrine that might have offended as a
new Doctrine, etc.

corrupted in manners, so rooted and habituate in former superstitious custom,
whence could such a world have been by the preaching of this doctrine, plucked
out of the hands of Satan, out of the corruption of their own manners, out of
the habituateness of superstitious custom, but by the power of him that was
risen from the dead?

First, A world so captived under Satan; how enthralled the world was to Satan
before the preaching of the Gospel, besides these texts of Scripture, Act.
26.18.
I send thee to the Gentiles to open their eyes and to turn them from the power
of Satan unto God; And wherein in times past ye walked according to the Prince
of the power of the air; Epes. 2.2. Ephesians. 6.12.
And we wrestle not against flesh and blood, 1 John 5.19. (...).
but against principalities, against the rulers of the darkness of this world,
etc. And we know that the whole world lies in wickedness. Besides these and the
like texts of Scripture, how enthralled to Satan the world was, common
experience showed; every where he had his Temples, his oracles, they were much
made of, his worship nothing was too dear for it; He eat the fatt of their
sacrifices, and drunk the wine of their drink offerings; Deuteronomy. 32.38.
nay even oftentimes he drunk the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they
sacrificed unto Devils; how think you now would he bestirre himself still to
hold possession, how loath would he be to let this embondaged world that had
been his old and good servant so long, go out of his clutches? Consider the
spiritual Pharaoh by the Egyptian Pharaoh; how loath was he to let the
embondaged Israel go? when their deliverance was once a foot* he tryes all his
wits and might to keep them still, he doubles their tasks, he sets over them
several taskmasters, and if they must needs go and sacrifice to their God,
let them do it in the land; or if out of the land, then let them not go far;
or if far, let only them that are men, but their little ones stay behind; or
if their little ones must needs go, yet their flocks and herds let them stay
behind; or if all must go not a hoof be left behind, then the Charets of Egypt
must be mustered up, and an army royal raised to pursue them at the red Sea,
and seek to bring them back again, so loath is Pharaoh to let imbondaged
Israel go. How loath think you then the sprituall Pharaoh would be to let the
imbondaged world go? and how would he try all his wit and his might to have
some little hold of the world still? or if they would needs go fully out of
his power, then he would raise up terrible persecution against such as were
escaped his hands, and seek by fire and sword to bring them back again into
their old bondage; a world therefore so captived under Satan, how could it have
been brought unto the obedience of the Gospel, Luke 10.18. and 11.22. 1 Cor.
12.3.
but by the power of him that was risen from the dead?

Secondly, A world so corrupted in manners; how grossly corrupted in manners
the world was before the gospel so sainted many of them, let these places show;
1 Cor. 6.11.
And such (namely fornicatours, etc.) were some of you; but ye are sanctified,
etc. And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians.
2.1.3. Col. 3.5.7.
Among whom we had our conversation in times past. Mortify therefore your
members which are upon the earth, fornication uncleannes, etc. in the which ye
also walked sometime when ye lived in them. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
For the time past of our life may suffice us to have Wrought the will of the
Gentiles, etc. wherein they think it strange that you run not with them into
the same excess of riot; A world thus corrupted in manners, whence could it on
the sudden for a great part of it have been so changed, so sainted, but from
the power of him that was risen from the dead? whence could such sinks and
filthy puddles have become on the sudden clear crystal waters? whence such
rotten stinking dunghils on the sudden become beds of spices and all sweet
fragrant flowers? whence such pezzled, leprous, loathsome creatures on the
sudden become so clean and such wonders of beauty? In the last place that I
cited, you have this, wherein they think it strange, etc. Strange indeed, that
you that were brothers of the same wicked crew, swine wallowing in the same
mire, beetles living and feeding among the same dung; strange that you should
be such altered creatures on the sudden! yesterday very swills in all brutish
drunkenness, to day very paterns of all sobriety; yesterday very brothellers
and stews-mates, to day very samples of chastity; yesterday very muck-wormes
for the world; to day very Angels for heavenlyness and contempt of the world!
There are some known swills in the world old in drunkenness, some known
brothellers old in whoring and adultery, some known muck-wormes old in very
very muck-mungring, and mere mere worldishness, Now if one by speaking but
two or three words to these in the name of God, should so alter one of these
known swills, brothellers, muck-wormes, that for ever after they should be
very samples of all sobriety, chastity, liberality, and Christian contempt of
the world; would not all say, that surely God had a hand in it* and it was done
by a Divine power? it is the argument which saint Aug. presses at large to
prove a Divine power in planting the Gospel; Si dicitur avaris, Nolite vobis
condere thesauros in terra, etc. Si dicitur luxuriosis qui seminant in Carne,
etc.
If it be said to the covetous, lay not up for your selves treasures on earth,
etc. if to the luxurious, they that sow to the flesh, etc. A world therefore so
corrupted in manners, whence could it have been reformed but from a Divine
power?

Thirdly, A world so rooted and habituate in superstitious custemes; they and
their Fathers, and their Forefathers had so many years together worshipped
these and these Gods they had prayed unto them in their distresses and
adversities, they had blessed them in their prosperities; they had deprecated
their anger, when any judgment was upon them, famine, sword sickness; they had
magnified their goodness when the judgment was removed, they had ascribed all
their good and all their ill fortune unto them; they had heard strange things
of their oracles and of their miracles; They had built them long ago, for the
credit and authority they gat in the world, stately Temples; Offered them rich
gifts, made them goodly images, etc. they saw the^r very Kings and great ones
bowed unto them, their very Concellours and wise men worshipped them, their very
Philosophers and learned Clarks adored them, their priests and and religious
votaries were exceedingly religious about them; and must they now cashiere all
these? must now twelve vagrant wandering sneakes cry down that which for so
many generations together has been held for good in the world? must they now
throw down those Temples, break down those images, destroy those Altars, ungod
those Gods that such antiquity has counted venerable? must a tent-maker tell
them now that their great Jupiter and Mercurius are but vanities? We preach
unto you that you should turn from these vanities unto the living God; Act.
14.15.
Must the tent-maker teach the very Athenians their fondness about these
things? Act. 17.22.
Ye men of Athens, I perceive that you are too superstitious? must the world
now be taught by him that an Idol is nothing in the world, 1 Cor. 8.6.
and that there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things? 1 Cor. 10.20.
and that that which they sacrifice to Idols, they sacrifice to Devils? How
strong and stiff prescription and custom is in matter of Religion? Genesis 31.34.
Rachels stealing away her Fathers images; Nay after that, Genesis 35.2.
Jacobs household having yet strange Gods among them; Nay after that, the
Israelites worshipping the Gods in Egypt; nay after that also, their
worshipping the same Gods when by Joshua they were brought into Canaan; (...)
24.14.
show how strong and stiff in matter of Religion Custom is; what was that the
Samaritan woman stood upon, but this? John. 4.20. Patres nostri in hoe monte,
etc.
our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain; What was it that they objected
against Steven, but this, That he had taught that Jesus of Nazareth should
change the Customs that Moses had delivered them? Act. 6.14.
What was it that they accused Paul for; Act. 16.21.
but this, that he taught Customs which were not lawful for them to receive
and observe being Romans, and so of another religion? Just as our adversaries
say against us; that we teach a religion that it is not lawful for them to
receive, etc. being Romans, Romish Catholics. What was it that the shout was
lifted up for the space of two hours together; but this, Act. 19.28.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians? What was it that Paul said he was so
exceedingly zealous about before his conversion; but this, Gal. 1.14.
about the tradition of his Fathers? What was it that St. Peter put the
converted in mind Pet. 1.18.
of; 1 Cor. 12.2.
But this, that they were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ from their
vain conversation, received by tradition from their Fathers. If it be so hard
a thing therefore to bring men out of an old Religion into a new one, and the
world was so rooted and habituated in their vain conversations received by
tradition from their Fathers; whence could a world so rooted and habituated
therein, have been brought unto the obedience of the Gospel; but by the power
of him that was raised from the dead? And so in the second place, a world so
captived under Satan.

Thirdly, whence not only such a world, but by such twelve men, for number so
few, but twelve men? whereas another whole world had been little enough to have
sent forth, to have subdued unto their Doctrine the present world; and for
condition twelve so seemingly weak and impotent, and utterly unable for such a
business whereas twelve Angels even of the highest order, great in authority,
mighty in power, charmfull and persuasive in speech, and not such twelve weak
men as the Apostles, had been little enough for the business. Verily, he that
wist not of him that was risen from the dead, and had all power given unto him
in Heaven and in earth, and so had sent forth these twelve men into the world;
with Ecce, ego vobiscum, Matt. 28.20.
I am with you to the end of the world; would have laughed at the conceit to
have seen twelve such silly men, so appointed as they were, With nothing but
staves in their hands and scrips by their sides, to go forth beginning at
Jerusalem, and so on into the whole world to subdue it unto themselves; as if
twelve the silliest here should have a conceit to go to Rome to persuade there
the Pope and all his Cardinals, and all the Colleges of Jesuits and Schools
of Doctors and Covens of so many orders to leave all of them that Religion
wherein they had been bred and brought up, and whereout they suck no small
advantage, and to return to their opinion: or as if twelve silly sheep should
have a conceit to go to the woods full of Wolves and Tigers and Bears and
Lions to persuade them to leave off their wildness and savageness, and become
tame and gentle and harmless as themselves; these twelve silly sheep, were they
not more likely to be snapt up themselves between the teeth of so many wild
beasts, then to do any good upon them? and these twelve silly men, were not
they likely sooner to be snapt up themselves of the Romish Inquisition, then to
do any good upon that confirmed obstinated company? That the Apostles
therefore, twelve silly men, like so many silly sheep, were not worried
presently of so many Wolves, and Tigers, and Bears, and Hell Hounds, that they
met with abroad in the world, but persuaded many of them to leave their wild
and wolvish natures, and drew the confirmed obstinated world out of all their
old Religion to embrace their Doctrine; whence could it be but from the power
of him that was risen from the dead, from the power of him that said, Lo, I am
with you, Ecce ego vobiscum.
etc? Who am I, said Moses, that I should go to Pharaoh, and that I should
bring forth the Children of Israel out of Egypt? Who I? Exo. 3.11.
I but one, I but slow of speech and slow of tongue, I that already have
offended Pharaoh, and yet more shall offend him now by this business, to make
him seek my life; who am I, etc? So, who were the Apostles? the Apostles but
twelve in number, but slow of speech and slow of tongue for any eloquence, and
that by that business should provoke and offend the whole world presently to
seek their lives; who were they, that they should go and persuade Kings and
Emperors, Orators and Philo^ophers, Scribes and Pharisees, Wise and Foolish,
Noble and Ignoble, bond and free Greek and Barbarian; in a word, Parthians,
Medes, Elamites and the inhabitants of all nations under Heaven? What were they
that they should go, and have any hope to persuade these (settled upon the Lees
of their own old superstitions) unto the obedience of the Gospel? if twelve men
(says Chrysostom) unskilful of war, naked of arms, Hom. 4 in 1 Cor.
weak in body, should set upon a huge army of tall soldiers well appointed,
and running with their naked bodies in the thick of them, should deal their
blows so fast, and so bestirre them, that they should kill some, wound others,
lead others away Captive, vanquish all, and themselves receive no harm, would
not all say that this were a work Divine? What were the twelve silly Apostles
but these twelve men unskilful of war, etc? what was the whole world but a
huge, huge army of tall soldiers well appointed against them? what was the
running of those twelve men with naked bodies into the midst of the army, but
the venturing of the Apostles upon the pikes point in the midst of the world up
in arms against them? what was the bestirring themselves so of those twelve
men, killing some, etc. but the bestirring themselves so of the twelve Apostles
in the world, as to subdue a great part of it upon the field, and to foil all
the rest, that they could not withstand them? what was the receiving no harm of
those twelve themselves in the midst of all that garboile, but the continuing
of the Apostles so long undestroyed amidst all the uproare and garboile of the
world against them? Having obtained help of God, I continue unto this day
(continue in spite of all the worlds being in an uproare against me) witnessing
both to small and great, etc. And, Act. 26.22.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.
that the excellency of the power may be of God and not of us. What was the
Apostles subduing the world and casting down every high thing that exalted it
self against the knowledge of God, but the silly Rams horns making the high
walls of Jericho fall down flat! Joshua. 6.20.
or Gideons silly Barley cake tumbling in the host of Midian and overturning
the tent? Judges 7.13.
And therefore to put all together, whence but from the power of him that was
risen from the dead, sending the power of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles and
their labors, could such a Doctrine, to such a world by such twelve (or
thirteen men, to add Paul to the dozen) have been effectually preached?
surely he that was set at the right hand of the Father had remembered what he
had said; John 15.16.
I have chosen you and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit,
and that your fruit should remain. And this, this was that did the deed; else
what hope that they should have gone and brought forth such fruit, in the
conversion of the Gentiles, such plentiful fruit, such lasting fruit. Not
without good cause, for one part of the mystery of Godliness, is this, 1 Timothy
3.16.
God believed on in the world; not without good cause that Paul calls the work
of the Gentiles-conversion the opening of a door, Act. 14.27. 1 Cor. 16.9. 2
Cor. 2.12. Act. 12. Chrysostom. Hom. 34. and 76. in Matt. Hom. 7. in 1 Cor.
if God had not miraculously opened this door, as he made the Iron gate to
open to Peter of its own accord, the Gentile had stood without for ever.

Fourthly, Whence had the primitive Christians and Converts such extraordinary
grace of holiness of life, but from the power of him that was risen from the
dead, sending the power of the holy sanctifying spirit upon them? Act. 2.
Consider those three thousand first converted. Act. 4.
And the five thousand; Consider their extraordinary piety, unity, community;
Their extraordinary piety 'towards God testified by their zeal in religious
exercises; They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, etc. Their
extraordinary Unity or agreement among themselves, And all that believed were
together, (...).
not so much in place (for three thousand one place would hardly receive them)
as in affection, they were of one heart and one Soul. Act. 4.32.
Lastly their extraordinary community; for communion of all things to the
mutual help one of another, and had all things common, etc. See but the
backwardness now adays in these Christian duties, and acknowledge their
forwardness in the same to have been the very finger and work of Gods spirit;
They continued steadfastly, or indefatigable in the Apostles Doctrine, etc, we
perhaps are but quarterly, or monthly, or fortnight men or women herein; or if
weekly, then forenone people only; or if so good as afternoon people too, yet
our yawnings, our nods, yea, and perhaps our Naps too, argue our sluggishness
in these duties; but they continued indefatigable, etc. Again, they, even the
multitude of them, that believed (which is signanter spoken) signanter, that a
multitude, and a multitude of raw converts should be so; were so united and
knit in one, that they had all as 'twere but one heart and one Soul; but one
heart and one Soul to act and move so many, many bodies; three thousand Chap.
2. nay five thousand Chap. 4. Whereas we run division, so that it were a very
wonder to see now but three or five men to be that which three, nay five
thousand men were then, even to have but one heart, and one Soul, laughing and
weeping all together, nilling and willing all the same things; nay rather for
five of us, our Saviors words, what if they proved true, that five should be
divided, three against two and two against three? but they, even the multitude
of them that believed, being about five thousand, were of one heart and of one
Soul; Again, for outward fortunes, they had all things common, They that had
goods and possessions sold them; and they sold them not to retain the money in
their own hands, to give a little as they listed; but they laid it down at the
Apostles feet, alienating away the right of it from themselves, to serve for
the common stock wholly; and this they did when they could look for no other
but present persecution: that money in their purses in their flight, when they
were persecuted, would have done well. This they did also without the Apostles
exhorting them thereto, as is intimated by the phrase, laid it down at the
Apostles feet; namely, the Apostles being unwilling to receive it, and
plainlier expressed by that of Peter to Ananias, While it remained, was it not
thine own, etc. This (Lastly) they did, having (no doubt) some of them wives
and children to take care for of their own: and were they think you without
affection to their own that had such affection to every Christian?

Let our own hearts now tell us, whether this that they did could well be any
thing else but the very finger and work of the spirit? this, that whereas the
world huncheth to give a little of that they have, they gave all: whereas the
world huncheth to give these little in time of peace, they gave their all when
nothing but persecution could be looked for; whereas the world not with all the
exhortations that can be used, they without exhortation at all; whereas the
world thinks wife and children enough to hinder from giving a little, they
thought it not enough to hinder from giving all, and yet had affections better
ordered indeed but as strong for the life as the world could to wife and
children. Perhaps thou may say, they had more zeal then wit; but take heed
thou have not more wit then grace; when their zeal shall be rewarded in
Heaven, take heed they wit be not punished in Hell: Consider therefore these
three thousand and five thousand Christians, and whence could they have this
extraordinary grace of holiness but from a Divine power, etc. so rare and
admirable was this their holy conversation, that it procured them grace with
all the people; nay great grace; Act. 2.47. and 4.33. and 5.13.
nay so great, that they magnified them; Consider again he writes in 1 These.
1.3. remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love, etc. so
that ye were ensamples to all that believe. Consider also what the very Pagans
witnessed concerning the old Christians extraordinary holiness; Pliny writes,
that some Renegadoes, counterfeit Christians, being examined about the secret
but sacred conventicles of Christians, could say no more then thus of them,
That they used at set days to meet before day, and there to sing praises to
Christ as God, and to bind themselves with a holy vow not to do any mischief;
Sed ne furta, ne Latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent; ne fidem fallerent, ne
depositum abnegarent; lib. 1o. Epis. 97.
that they should not commit any theft, or robbery, or adultery; nor break
their word, nor withhold that which was committed to them to keep.

And that very wretch Julian writes thus to a Paganish Bishop; namely to study
to promote the Paganish Religion as the Christian Religion was at first
promoted, to wit, by holiness of life, hospitality to strangers, liberality to
all, etc. Turpe namque est, etc. for it is a shame (says he) that those
impious Galilaeans should have enough for their own, and relieve the Jew, Tert.
6.29.
relieve the Pagan too, and we not relieve our own. Also, Bonus Vir Cajus
Sejus, sed tantum malus quod Christianus.
they used to say, such an one was a good man, but only bad in this, that he
was a Christian.

Consider lastly, that the old Christians in their very appeals to the
Gentiles, were confident to stand upon the Christians innocence; Quis illic
sicarius? quis manticularius? quis sacrilegus aut corruptor?
what privy murderer (or Assassinate) is there among Christians? what
Pick-purse? what Sacrilegious person (or Church-robber?) what corrupter?

And so much of the testimony of the Spirit; hereunto may be added the
testimony of Josephus a Jew, John 15.26.
bearing witness of his Resurrection the third day, Act. 5.32.
and appearing to his Disciples. Antiqu. 18.4.


Lastly, Whence had the primitive Martyrs and Confessors that extraordinary
grace of sufferings, but from the power of the holy Ghost? This we cannot but
acknowledge, if we consider the universality, invincibility, patience and joy
of their sufferings;

The universality, in that so many of all sorts and conditions; as well of
feeble women and tender children, as men; as well of the rich, and those that
were brought up in all tenderness, and delicacies, as of the poor, and those
that were used to more hardships; as well of the wise and understanding, that
would not have been cozened with a fable to have hazarded their lives, as of
the silly and ignorant; in that so many of all sorts are registered Martyrs and
Confessors; so many, that (by computation) the very Martyrs that were slain
for the name Christ, are thought to equalize for number, or exceed all the
sacrifices that were under the Law sacrificed as types of Christ; and yet there
was offered at once two and twenty thousand oxen, 3 Kings 1.63.
and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep;

Again, If we consider the invincibility of their sufferings; in that not all
the variety of torments, not all the extremity of torments, not all the
protractedness of torments, that the wit of man and the malice of man could
devise (and what more ingenious then wit and malice put together) not all could
overcome them, but invincibly they persisted against all; against such
torments, that it were enough to strike horror into the heart to hear them
related; how their joints were stretched upon the rack, drawn off one after
another, how their bowels were scrued and twined out of their bodies, by little
and little beginning at the Navill; how their flesh was nipped and pulled away
peece-meale with pincers, how their sides were scraped till the very bare ribbs
appeared with iron scallops or scrapers how under their nails (one of the
sensiblest places) they were peirced with sharp needles run into the root of
the nails, and the flesh of the nails pickd out with little hooky instruments;
how they were roasted, broiled on Gridirons, set in red hot iron chairs; and as
for their throwing them down hard steep rocks to break their necks, and their
casting them to wild beasts, and their burning them at stakes, these gentle
deaths were favors. If we consider their invincibleness in all these, what
shall we say but that it was the power of the holy Ghost upon them? the power
of the holy Ghost upon that Blandina, that invincibly endured all torments from
morning till night, and when her tormentors that successively one after another
were to inflict the torments, confessed at night they were quite tired, she
invincible, was fresher to endure new torments then they to inflict them.
Eusebius. 5.1.


Again, if we consider the patience of their sufferings, to take all those
torments not only so invincibly, but so patiently; so patiently, in that
(first) so willingly, when they might have been rid of their torment, with
thanks too, if they would but in two words have denied Christ; whereas perhaps
there may be some very wretches that may harden themselves in patience, but it
is when they see there is no remedy, as traitors, Ravilliacks, etc.

(Secondly) So patiently, in that so meekly, so uncomplainingly, not
complaining of the extremity, not crying out in that bitterness of their Soul,
unsufferable, unsufferable, as mere flesh and blood would have done; but so
meekly and uncomplainingly enduring all torments without any whining or
whimping, as if they had suffered in other men's bodies, or their bodies had
been bodies of marble, or their flesh of brass. This patience is above their
former invincibleness; invincible one may be through resolution, and yet a
little impatient when extremity is upon them through frailty; but to be not
only so invincible, but so patient too, whence this but from the power of the
holy Ghost upon them?

Lastly, if we consider the joy of their sufferings, not only so patiently,
but so joyfully to take their sufferings; ye became (says the Apostle,)
followers of us and of the Lord, 1 These. 1.6.
having received the word in much affliction with joy of the holy Ghost; And
St. Peter speaking of the sufferings of Christians, and fiery trial of their
faith, what testimony gives he them? scil. this; that through their faith,
though they saw not, yet believing they rejoiced with joy unspeakeable and full
of glory. 1 Pet. 1.8.
And they that read Ecclesiastical history, know that the Martyrs and
Confessors went so joyfully to their sufferings, that diverse considering it
were converted all wondered, their adversaries that tormented them fretted;
fretted and were full of grief to see them so full of joy, to see them go to
the stake, as if it had been but to a bonefire to be merry; also to see them
burn in the flames as if they had been but beaking in the sun; to see them
stretching on the rack, as if they had been stretching themselves on their beds
of Ivory; to see them that all the rest of their life through a Christian
gravity and modesty looked like mourners, see them now have such cheerful
countenances, as if nothing but mirth and joy sat in their faces, etc. whence
therefore had the primitive Confessors and Martyrs this extraordinary grace of
sufferings, to suffer so universally, so invincibly, so patiently, so joyfully,
but from the power of the holy Ghost?

necessity of Christian faith; how necessary it is to believe as we believe;
how can I but believe that which the sufferings of so many Martyrs and
Confessors, the lives of so many Saints, the powerful conversion of so many
Gentiles, the strangeness of so many miracles; the Apostolikeness for
extraordinary graces in the first preachers, the impossibleness of those
eyewitnesses their being either deceivers or deceived, the harmony also and
consent of the old Testament, the very record of the Jews; how can I but
believe that which is witnessed unto by all these? If I will needs yet let
infidelity lurk in my heart, how many things have I, may justly condemn me?
Moses and the Prophets that foretold these things shall condemn me; those
eyewitnesses that witnessed his Resurrection, which if wilfully I shut not
mine own eyes, must needs appear to me could neither be deceivers nor
deceived, shall condemn me; those first preachers that could not have their
extraordinary grace but from the power of him that was risen from the dead,
shall condemn me; those strange miracles, that strange conversion of the
Gentiles, that strange sanctity and holiness of converts, that strange
suffering of Martyrs, that could none of them have been but by the power of him
that was risen from the dead, shall all condemn me; if I believe not now the
Gospel, how justly am I condemned!

We are all ready in reading the story of the old Testament, to condemn the
Jew, that he should be in many things so stubborn, and unbelieving,
notwithstanding such manifest declaration of Gods presence among them: but if
all things were well cast up, we shall find that we have more reason ten to
one to believe under the Gospel, then they had under the Law; and if an
infidel-Jew may well go to Hell, an infidel-Christian deserves to sink far the
lower there; An infidel Jew, if he believed not, it was still a thing to come
that he believed not; the infidel Christian a thing past: Christ's
Resurrection, an infidel-Jew had no argument almost to confirm his belief,
but the consideration of a little strange miraculous working; the
infidell-Christan has arguments above all miracles, and moreover miracles
above all Moses his miracles; and therefore let us by the evidences of Christ's
Resurrection, and so consequently of the whole Gospel, for the Resurrection is
the seal, and warrant, and complement of all, therefore in their choice of a
twelfth, they name nothing thing but only to be a witness of the
Resurrection; Act. 1.22.
let us hereby charm and conjure out of our hearts all infidelity, and let us
establish our selves in our most holy faith; this, how necessary it is, not
only to believe but also to see the necessity of our belief, let two places
teach you; Luke 1.4. (...).
(scil) That thou may know the certainty of those things wherein thou have
been instructed; And, These things have I written to you that believe, 1 John
5.13.
that ye may know that ye have eternal life; If it had not been a necessary
thing, and of much use to labor to see the necessity of Christian faith, the
one would not have rendered it for a reason in the beginning of his Gospel, why
he writ his Gospel; and the other in the end of his Epistle why he writ his
Epistle; and therefore (first) if there be such evidences, consider the
necessity of Christian faith.

necessity of Christian life; if there be such compelling arguments to persuade
me to see the necessity of Christian faith then what remains but that in the
next place I should think of the necessity of Christian life? How dare I live
as an Atheist, if I cannot but profess and believe as a Christian? how dare I
cast away my commandments, if I cannot but embrace my creed? how dare I make
so little of the holiness of the Gospel, if I cannot but acknowledge the truth
of the Gospel? Verily, this is the condemnation of many: that Christian faith
being so clear, Christian life is so bad; This is the condemnation, that light
is come into the world (sc. not light hid under a cloud or under a bushel, John
3.19.
but light appearing to be light) yet men love darkness rather then light. John
15.24.
And If I had not done among them the works which none other did, they had not
had sin, etc. And, When the Spirit is come, he will reprove the world of sin,
John 1.7.
because they believe not on me; And, They shall receive the reward of
unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot in the daytime. 2 Pet.
2.13.
When the truth of the Gospel is so clear, that if indeed there were any cause
why thou might doubt of the truth of the Gospel, if the mouth of all
infidelity were not sufficiently stopped, if Gods truth and testimonies were not
very sure, Psalm. 93.3. Credibilia factanimis.
then some reason there might be of thy hankering and hovering and back-hanging
in the course of a godly life: but if the truth of the Gospel be so plain,
beware of hardening thy heart against the holiness of the Gospel; He whom the
truth of the Gospel convicts, the holiness of the Gospel being neglected shall
confound; The wrath of God (says the Apostle) is revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.20.
who hold the truth in unrighteousness; even the truth showing it self only in
the evidence of nature; much more in the evidence of the Gospel, must the wrath
of God needs be revealed, etc. Mark the connection of the Psalmist; Thy
testimonies are very sure; and what then? Holiness becomes thy house for ever.
Psalm. 93.5.


Well, I will wind up this with the grave speech of that good man Mirandula,
Magna profecto insania, etc.
It is (says he) a great madness not to believe the Gospel, the truth whereof
so many things evidently speak and proclaim, the sufferings of the Martyrs,
etc. but it is a far greater madness if any doubt not of the truth of the
Gospel, yet so to live as if he doubted not of the falseness of the Gospel;
what is this but to see Hell, and yet to leap into it? to see Heaven and yet
not to care for falling from it? what is it (in a word but to run full) butt
against God, with eyes wide open? and what is madness if this be not? surely
such sacred majesty will not be rubbed and jurred upon by profaneness that is
blind, but it shall bear the punishment; for profaneness, to run full butt
against God with eyes wide open, what punishment then may be looked for? this
is far worse then Balaams carriage, he would but have gone upon the Angel of
the Lord standing in his way, with a sword drawn in his hand, and not seeing
the Angel neither: But to see God-standing in the way to stop the sinner, and
the sinner to say, yonder he stands; yonder, that would stop me in my unlawful
gain, stop me in my unlawful pleasure, stop me in my profane course of life,
yonder he stands, but yet have at him; what madness is this! When the pitcher
flies against the wall and breaks not, when a man runs his head full butt
against a pillar and his brains dash not out, then shall he run thus full butt
against God and his known ordinances and shatter not, perish not, not utterly
be confounded body and soul for ever. And therefore this also may let us see
the great necessity of Christian life: consider those things that show the
necessity of Christian faith, and be an Atheist if thou can; consider the
necessity of Christian faith, and be a profane wretch if thou dare; see Hell
and leap into it, see Heaven and contemn it, see God in thy way and run full
butt upon him with eyes wide open; Heb. 2.3.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation?

hope that is in us; 1 Pet. 3.15.
Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of
the hope that is in you; not to every one that asks you a reason of any point
of Christian Doctrine, or Bible-bearing; that is too much for every Christian
to do: but every Christian should be able to give a reason of the Christian
hope that is in him; now the hope of a Christian is to be saved by Christ the
Savior risen from the dead, as you have it; 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us
again to a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead; he
therefore that can give a reason of Christ's Resurrection from the dead; gives
good reason of his Christian hope, he has good reason to trust him for a
Savior, that has saved himself, and to believe his Doctrine that God has
sealed the truth of it, with raising the Prophet that taught it from the dead.
Mark the Apostle how he touches upon these three very same reasons here for
the establishing us in our lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead: whereupon we have insisted for the proof of the Resurrection; verse
10.
First, upon the testimony of the old Testament, Of which Salvation the
Prophets have enquired, verse 12.
etc. Secondly, upon the testimony of the eyewitnesses; which are now reported
unto you, etc. Thirdly, by the testimony of the Spirit, which the holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, etc. and what now follows, but that therefore we have
good reason to stand firm in our hope? verse 13.
wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober and hope to the end; hope
unto the end, and let neither the fury of the unbelieving world persecuting
you, nor the fleeres and jeeres of the profane world flouting you, be able to
dash you in your hope; but hope to the end; for now that you know that Christ
must needs be risen from the dead, you know how to give an answer to any one
that shall ask a reason of the hope that is in you; Act. 26.
Paul in his Apology touches much upon the same reasons;

Messiah, for if he had been an impostor and false Prophet, neither could he
have raised up himself being but a mere man, nor would God have raised him up
being but a mere impostor; nor can it be said that the Devil might raise up
his false Prophet, for he that cannot give sight to one borne blind, John 9.
can much less give life to one stark dead; he cannot revive all the senses
and the whole man, that cannot so much as revive one sense, the sight: if the
Devil could raise up a dead man to life; he might as well make a man of dead
matter; It will be Gods sole privilege for ever to be a God that raises up
the dead; 2 Cor. 1.9.
if therefore there be such evidences of his Resurrection, this is thought
argument enough by our Savior and the Apostles to prove him to be the right
Messiah; this Resurrection from the dead: So when they called for a sign from
our Savior to prove him that he was the right Messiah, as he pretended, he
instanceth in his Resurrection, as sign enough alone to convince them that he
was the Messiah; Matt. 12.38.39.
Master, we would see a sign, etc. no sign but the sign of the Prophet
Jonas, as he was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the
son of man be three days, etc. So when the Jews (seeing him take upon himself
the office of the Messiah) asked him what sign he showed, the sign he
instanceth in was only this; Destroy this Temple, and I will raise it up in
three days; Joh. 2.19.
so when ye have lift up the son of man (sc. crucified him, John 8.28.
and he be raised again from the dead) then shall ye know that I am be. Act.
2.36.
So St. Peter Therefore (because he has raised him from the dead) let all the
house of Israel know that God has made that same Jesus both Lord and Christ;
so St. Paul, Romans 1.4.
Declared to be the son of God by the Resurrection from the dead; and so
undoubted an argument is this, that the Jews saw they must either deny the
Resurrection, or necessarily grant that he was the Messiah; and therefore they
took the best way they could for hindering any supposedness of it, confessing
that if the Resurrection was once probably blazed abroad, the last error would
be worse then the first. Matt. 27.64. and 42.
Come down now from the cross, and we will believe, said the chief Priests
and elders; Come up from the dead, and we will believe; they could not but
have confessed this to have been an argument much stronger, and therefore
Christ was the right Messiah.

the dead, then he will undoubtedly also come to judgment; for why rose he from
the dead but to receive all power in heaven and in earth, Matt. 28.18.
and to have every knee bow unto him? Phil. 2.10.
And why received he this power but to execute it, and make every knee bow unto
him? and where (as yet) appears this execution, when there are so many
stiffe-knees yet, that will not bow unto him, I mean disobedient ones, that
will not obey him? and therefore certainly he will come one day to judgment,
when he shall make all them that will not bend now, break; that will not bow
now under his mercy, bow then under his justice; that will not now kiss the
top of his golden Scepter reached out in grace and loving kindness, be crushed
by that Scepter-bruising them in displeasure; see the connection which Scripture
usually makes, usually joining or subjoyning judgment to the mention of the
Resurrection; him has God raised up the third day, Act. 10.40.42.
etc. and what then? and commanded us to preach unto the people, etc. so Act.
17.30.31. but now he commands all men every where to repent, because he has
appointed a day in which he will judge the world by him whom he has raised
from the dead: so 1 These. 1.10. and to wait for his Son from Heaven; and why?
what assurance for it? why the assurance of his Resurrection, whom he has
raised from the dead; there is the assurance; If therefore Christ be risen from
the dead, he will certainly also come to judgment, he will not suffer the world
always to run so upon wheels, to be so disorderly and full of confusion, man
rebelling against his maker, the godly trampled under foot by the wicked,
servants riding on horseback and Princes going a foot, the tail standing where
the head should be, etc. he will not always suffer this confusion, but those
times of the restitution of all things shall come, Act. 3.21.
when every thing shall be restored to its own place, when all gimmels shall be
right, when all disorder and confusion shall flee away, when all things that
offend shall be taken out of his Kingdom;

Adam, every son of Adam being obnoxious to death by virtue of morte morieris,
thou shall die the death, though he had no sin in him, actual or original,
but only the imputation of Adams disobedience; that Christ therefore, a son of
Adam rose victoriously from the dead, victoriously, never to return thither
again, Act. 13.34.
or death to have no more dominion over him; Romans 6.9.
(for otherwise Lazarus and others were raised from the dead, but it was to
return thither again;) it must needs be, that sin was conquered by him; See
the Scripture making this use of Christ's Resurrection, the foil and conquest of
sin; Act. 13.38.
so Paul after he had urged and proved Christ's Resurrection; what infers he
thereupon? Be it known unto you therefore, that through this man is preached
unto you forgiveness of sins; so, he was delivered for our sins, and was raised
again for our Justification; Romans 4.25.
our Justification from sin is especially given to his Resurrection, because by
his Resurrection he did Demonstrate and make it plain, that sin was conquered;
his death would have done us no good, if it had been possible that he could
have been holden by the power of death; so, Who is he that condemns? Romans
8.34.
it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again; what is the reason of
this correction, of this yea rather, etc? was not Christ's dying enough to free
us from any condemning by sin? yes; but it was, because it was the death of him
that had power also to rise again, etc. and therefore the redemption of us from
our sin, appeared especial in his powerful Resurrection. So in the present
Chapter, If Christ be not risen, 1 Cor. 15.17.
then are we yet in our sins; implying that his Resurrection is the conquest of
sin; we have therefore what to answer all the infernal powers of Hell,
challenging us of sin, even to answer them with the Apostle, Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again; etc.

heads from off your shoulders cannot take your crowns from of your heads;
they may tumble your bodies into the grave, they cannot seal the graves mouth
upon them. Well said St. Paul in comfort against all his enemies and all his
afflictions; 2 Timo. 1.10. and 12.
I know whom I have trusted (sc. him that being risen from the dead has
abolished death;) and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day; If Christ therefore be risen, ye know
whom ye trust, even him that being raised from the dead, has abolished death,
and is able to keep that which you commit unto him against that day:

Act. 2.36.37.
who no sooner by St. Peter's Sermon were they persuaded of the Resurrection,
and that God had made that same Jesus whom they crucified both Lord and Christ,
but presently they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the
rest, men and brethren, what shall we do? It made their hearts pant to think
they had offended him, that now being risen from the dead was made both Lord
and Christ, and so able to take what terrible revenge he would of them.
Consider what is written in Matt. 21.44. There our Savior bringing out the
118. Psalm. (a Psalm of the Resurrection) cites this text; The stone which the
builders refused, is become the head stone of the Corner; he adds, that
whosoever shall fall on this stone (through disobedience offend, and stumble
against it) shall be broken (it shall work commonly his rume and confusion for
this world) but on whom soever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder; on
whom soever Christ at his second coming shall with all the weight and might and
vehemence of indignation fall, he shall then make powder and mere mish-mash of
him: Comparate vos cum Judaeis; illi contempserunt pendentem in ligno; vos
contemnitis sedentem in coelo. Aug. de verbis Domini 45.
If therefore Christ be risen, you now speak not a word nor do a deed against
the son of man, but against him that is declared to be the Son of God. Compare
your felves with the Jews; they contemned him when he hung upon the cross, you
contemn him, when he sits in Heaven.

Observation, That Christ is not only risen, but risen as the first fruits to
sanctify and ascertiane our Resurrection; as the first fruits under the law
being offered to God, were for the sanctifying and procuring a blessing upon
the whole harvest: now this, that Christ is risen as the first fruits, by his
Resurrection to sanctify and warrant our Resurrections, diverse things confirm
it:

First, The example of those that he actually brought with him from the dead
when himself rose; Matt. 27.52.53.
And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose; this
little rast before hand shows what his Resurrection shall be powerful unto
hereafter, even unto the raising of the dead bodies of the Saints that sleep;
he set but two or three prisoners free, but the goaledelivery of all his he
will perform hereafter: as he is powerful to execute so he is wise not to
precipitate and hasten counsels; but stay the fullness of time.

Secondly, The virtue of his life and Resurrection to revive us, diverse
speeches of himself show; as that; As the living Father has sent me, John
6.57.
and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, even he shall live by me; live
by me, so that I will raise him up at the last day, as four times in that
Chapter he repeats that phrase. Again, that speech to Martha talking with him
about her brother Lazarus his death, I am the Resurrection and the life, etc.
Also that; Now is the bour come that the Son of man should be glorified; John
11.25.
verily verily, John 12.23.
except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and dye, it abides alone; but if
it dye, it brings forth much fruit.

Thirdly, The virtue of his life and Resurrection to revive us, two special
appellations of his in Sciripture show, namely the appellation of an Head, and
the appellation of a Captain; of a head, he being as a head unto his Church,
and the Church the very body and members of him their head; if the body and
members shall not be revived, there is no life in the very head it self: the
head would derive life unto the body: hence from this union between the head
and members, are we said to be already quickened together with him, raised
together with him, Ephesians. 2.5.
nay set down together with him in heavenly places; Col. 2.12.
The other appellation is of a Captain, (...).
in that he is called the Captain of life; ye killed the Captain of life
whom God had raised from the dead, Act. 3.15.
etc. It became him for whom are all things, Heb. 2.10.
to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through sufferings; if Jesus
therefore be a Captain of life, and Salvation, he is not only to save himself,
but his Companies also that follow his colors; he is not a Captain of life
and Salvation, but of death and dectruction, that lets his company perish in
the field, though himself come safe off without any hurt.

Fourthly, So enfolded one in the other, is Christ's Resurrection and our
Resurrection, that the one is made to imply the other; so when the Apostle
preached especially Christ's Resurrection, yet the Priests and Sadduces took it
so as preaching our Resurrection through him; As they spoke unto the people,
Act. 4.1.2.
the priests, etc. came in upon them, being greived that they preached through
Jesus the Resurrection of the dead; So St. Paul in his Apology before the
Pharisees and the Sadduces, instead of making his Apology for Christ's
Resurrection, turns it into the general, about our Resurrection, as indeed
the one enfolding the other, so he might set the Pharisee and Sadducee together
by the ears, that so while the Wolves fight the Lamb might escape; Act. 23.6.
Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, of the hope and Resurrection of the dead,
etc.

Lastly, To name no more authorities, consider the very next verse of my text,
and there you have Christ made the author of life and Resurrection, as Adam of
death; for since by man came death, by man came also the Resurrection of the
dead; And in the five and fortieth verse you have another comparison, that as
the first Adam was made a living Soul, sc. to become the fountain of natural
life to all his posterity; So the second Adam (Christ) was made a quickening
spirit; sc. to become the fountain of spiritual or Heavenly life to all his;
The first Adam was made a living Soul, the secend Adam was made a quickening
spirit.

Now before we come to the Uses, a question or two is not unseasonable to be
made and answered;

first fruits of all that slept; 1 King. 17.
seeing the widow of Sareptaes son was raised to life by Elias; 2 Kings 4.
and the Shunamites son, and a dead man by touch of Elisha'es bones; 2 Kings 13.
and three by our Savior himself in his life time, sc. Jairus his daughter in
the chamber uncarried out; the widows only son upon the biere carried out at
the gates of the City; and Lazarus having been four days in the grave, how
therefore was Christ the first fruits, seeing these, and those also, as it may
seem Matt. 27.52. were raised before him?

Matt. 27. there was no proper Resurrection, not such a Resurrection as we
profess in our Creeds, not such a Resurrection as that; Matt. 22.30.
In the Resurrection they neither marry not are given in marriage, but are as
the Argels in Heaven; not a Resurrection to a state of immortality, but only
to the state of their former natural life, subject to death again: But as for
our Saviors Resurrection, he rose so as now no more to return to corruption;
Act. 13.37.
and death now to have no more dominion over him; Romans 6.9.
and as himself says, Rev. 1.18. now to be alive for evermore; I am he that
lives and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore.

And the graves were opened, etc. sc. those there abouts in Mount-Calvary; or
else if they rose before his Resurrection, then they rose either upon
dispensation only for a time, to lay down their bodies again; or if to retain
their bodies for ever as glorious bodies, then Christ's Resurrection was in
order of nature, though not of time, before theirs, because through the power
and virtue of his Resurrection they were raised; seeing, as he is said in the
Council and foreknowledge of God, to be a Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world, and therefore nothing hinders but that Christ was the first fruits;
because all that rose before Christ, either rose only to a natural life; or
if not, yet only upon dispensation for a time, to lay down their bodies again;
or if to retain their bodies for ever, yet by the power and virtue of Christ's
Resurrection preconceived in Gods counsel, as the fountain and cause of their
life and Resurrection. And so we may see, Act. 26.23.
how Christ was to be the first that should rise from the dead; and here, the
first fruits of them that slept, and the first borne from the dead; Col. 1.18.
because he rose only by his own power; I have power to lay it down, etc. and
because never to return to corruption again.

1 Cor. 15.22.
in whom are all to be made alive?

That they shall rise, there is no question; John 5.28 29.
The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his
voice and shall come forth, etc. Act. 24.15.
and have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow that there shall
be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust.

How they shall be raised, whether in and by Christ's Resurrection or no? For
this we are to know, that Christ by his Resurrection was made Lord and only
Potentate of every creature, Act. 2.36.
and therefore received power over quick and dead, Phil. 2.11.
that he might be able to bring again from the dead all the wicked and
disobedient, as their judge to punish them; and all his own, as their Savior
to glorify them. Wherefore by Christ's Resurrection both the wicked and the
godly shall be raised; but the wicked, as the members of Satan only to be
damned, the godly, as members of his own body to be saved: The wicked by a
power upon them only from without; the godly by a power upon them from within,
inhaerent in them, as his own members; as the head by an inward influence
quickens the body: whereas the wicked shall be quickened by an outward influence
only upon them, as the sun by an outward influence upon putrified slimy
matter, animates and quickens frogs and toads; and therefore those that he
quickens by that inward influence, he shall make glorious like himself;
whereas those that he quickens by an outward influence only, shall not
participate of his glory: like as those creatures which the sun quickens,
though the sun be a glorious body, yet they are not so, but filthy, abominable,
wretched creatures, frogs, toads, etc.

Well then for the cause of our Resurrections, consider first a moral
judicial cause; sc. the justice of God, requiring that we should all receive
in our bodies, according to that which we have done in our bodies, and
therefore that we should be raised again. And secondly a physical effecting
cause, sc. the Lordly sovereign power of Christ risen from the dead, effecting
the Resurrection of the wicked as their judge, to make them comformable in
torments to the Devil their head; and effecting the Resurrection of the godly
as their Savior, to make them comformable in glory to himself their head; and
of these he is only said to be the first fruits, because he shall only hallow
and dedicate these unto God in a glorious Resurrection like unto his own,
bringing the whole harvest of them without losing one ear, into the same barn
and Heavenly repository; whereunto he the first fruits is already come. And
therefore where it is said here, that all shall be made alive in Christ; it is
meant only of his own members, that by an inward quickening influence upon them
from him their head, shall be revived to the same glorious kind of life with
himself, Matt. 25.46. Romans 6.23. and 8.13.
which indeed is only in Scripture phrase the proper life, and the other but
an eternal living death; And that these are only meant, the next verse
shows, where these all that are to be made alive in Christ, are called
Christ's; but for the wicked they are none of his, he owns them not, they are
the limbs of the Devil, and none of his members.

as the first fruits to ensure the glorious Resurrection of his, then let this
admonish every one of us, as we desire to be made partakers of this glorious
Resurrection, so to endeavor to belong unto these first fruits, sc. to Christ;
the first fruits do not bless the tares, and cockell and darnell, and all
filthy weeds that grow among the Corn, but only the good Corn; If we would
be blessed therefore in Christ, the first fruits, let us not be tares, etc. in
Gods field, the Church; but let us be good Corn; otherwise the parable will
read us our destinies; Gather together the tares, and bind them in bundles to
burn them; in bundles to burn them, there is the destiny of the tares; Matt.
13.30.
But gather the wheat into my barn; the wheat is blessed in the first fruits;
but the tares, their lot is to be burned, they are nothing belonging to the
first fruits to be blessed, and ensured in them; no man when he offered God his
first fruits, desired a blessing upon the tares and weeds that grew in his
field, but upon the good Corn: as therefore we desire to have a blessed
Resurrection, let us labor to belong to the first fruits. It is strange that
we should think, to continue nothing but very tares and stinking weeds in Gods
field, and think at harvest time to be carried home into his barn, as the
best Corn. Beloved, however it prove with us, that many a tare and filthy weed
may be brought home among the good Corn, and many a good ear of Corn left
behind in the field; yet at that harvest, the end of the world, not one tare in
Gods field shall be brought home into his barn, nor one ear of good Corn left
behind to rot in the field. Let us therefore strive to belong unto the first
fruits, if we look to be blessed in the first fruits;

Secondly, If Christ be risen as the first fruits, then let this confirm all
them that belong unto the first fruits, in the assured blessed hope of their
undoubted glorious Resurrection; if the poorest despised member of Christ's body
shall not rise again to glory, then Christ himself is yet in the power of
death, death gnawes upon him; It is the Apostle himself that is thus bold; But
if there be no Resurrection from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.13.
then is Christ not risen; the Head is not in Heaven, if any of the members
shall for ever rot in the earth. Observe how still the Scripture makes the
blessed hope that is in us of our Resurrections, to rest and build it self
upon Christ's Resurrection; Job. 19.25.26.
so Job, I know that my Redeemer lives (is one that death has no power over)
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and what then Job?
what if thou know that? why, I know then that I shall not always be worms
meat; but though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall
I see God; So the Apostle having prayed that God would give the Ephesians
enlightened minds, to know the excellency of the happiness that awaits them in
Heaven, in these words, That ye may know what is the hope of his calling, Ephesians.
1.18
and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints; Lest they
should think, But how should we ever attain this happiness, we poor
mortal corruptible creatures, that daily die, and rot and putrify in the grave,
and no sign of any such ensuing glory? therefore he prays withal, that they
may know the greatness of Gods power in raising up Christ from the dead, as an
assurance that he will also raise up them; And that ye may know what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the dead; verse 19.20.
because as it follows, he raised up Christ to be the Head over all things to
his Church which is his body, the fullness of him which fills all in all; and
therefore Christ is maimed and imperfect without his body; His body therefore
doubtless shall be assumed at last to him, body and head to make one perfect man,
and one full Christ; Till we all come in the unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4.13.
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, etc. what firmer
hope therefore of our Resurrections, then that we are thus to be the fullness
of Christ, who should otherwise be a maimed Christ, an imperfect Christ, a
half Christ, a head without a body? Further, for this point makes that, which
the Apostle has; Phil. 3.10.
That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection; and the power of his
Resurrection to me ward, to raise me up also by an influence of the head upon
the members; after all my fellowship with him in his sufferings; 1 Pet. 1.21.
Who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the dead, and gave him
glory, that your faith and hope might be in God, sc. nothing doubting, but that
he would also raise you up, having raised him up your first fruits; Rev. 1.18.
I am he that lives, and was dead, and have the keys of Hell and of death:
have the keys; he slipped not out only himself deceiving the keeper, but he
came out powerfully with keys in his hand, to let out also whomsoever of his
he would; he did not indeed as Samson did with the door of the gate of the City
Gaza, carry away the door and all, that whosoever would might go forth, but
only took away the keys of the door to let out and lock in still whom he
would:

Thirdly, If Christ be risen as the first fruits, then let this comfort us
against the fear of death, if we reckon of a day wherein he that dyed for us
and rose again, will for that which is sown in corruption, raise it again in
incorruption which is sown in dishonor, raise it in glory; sown in weakness,
raise it in power; which is sown a natural body, raise it a spiritual body;
Why should we much be afraid of death? death do^s but spoil us of our rags to
give us robes, does but pull down our old ruinous house, to rear up a new
one, and a stately one, in the room; We know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
we have a building of God, a house not made with hands; he that now fears
death much, has but either a little faith, or an ill conscience; and no
marvel if these two be afraid to dye; the one looking at death as an end of
all his hopes; and the other as the beginning of all his misery. But a good
faith and a good conscience will not fear that which it knows can neither hold
it, nor hurt it; it knows that Christ is risen as the first fruits, and it
knows that it belongs to those first fruits, it knows what that means; John
6.39.
This is the Fathers will that of all which he has given me, I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And that; and if Christ
be in you the body is dead because of sin, Romans 8.10.
but the spirit is life because of righteousness. And that; Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood; he also
himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy
him that had the power of death, the Devil; He knows, that that which was
spoken in a figure to the Jews, shall in the very letter be performed to him
and all Christ's members; Esaias 26.19.
Thy dead men shall live together, with my dead body shall they arise; awake
and sing ye that dwell in dust, etc. and that which was a parable to them
shall be a truth to the Saints; That the valley of dry bones that were very
dry, Ezekiel. 37.5.
the four winds shall blow upon them, and breath shall come into them, and they
shall live, and stand up upon their feet an exceeding great army: he knows
that that of Esdras though it be Apocryphal writing, yet it is Canonical
truth, 2 Esd. 4.40.42.43.
Go thy way to a woman with child, when she has fulfilled her nine months,
if her womb may keep the birth any longer within her. For as she that is
with child, hastes to escape the necessity of the travel, so do these
places haste to deliver those things that are committed unto them. That which
thou desire to see, shall be showed thee from the beginning. and therefore if
Christ be risen the first fruits; what need I fear that that can neither hold
me long, nor hurt me at all; that can neither end my hopes, nor can begin my
miseries?

Fourthly, If Christ be risen as the first fruits; then let this comfort us
against immoderate grief and sorrow for the death of friends; Why should we
immoderately grieve for the death of friends, whose death for their Souls is
their present gain; and for their bodies but only a casting of the seed into
the ground to rot and rest there for a while, that it may sprout and spring up
a far more glorious body, green and fresh, and a goodlier body then it fell
in, as is intimated here in verse 37? And that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body which shall be, etc. but God gives it a body as it pleases him;
a green* and fresh, a statelyer and goodlyer body by far then it was sown:
and so for their Soul, death is their present gain, if so be they can say with
Paul, to me to live is Christ; for then it will follow, Phil. 1.21.
to me to die is gain. Again, except it be no gain to be delivered out of a
sinful and miserable body; yea, a sinful and miserable world, and carried
into a holy and happy place, where sin and misery never peept in; It is our
weakness and error to think of our friends departed, as Jacob of Joseph;
Joseph was in great honor in Egypt, and Jacob when he saw his bloodied coat,
thought that surely an evil beast had devoured him, and Joseph was not; but
Joseph, what bids he his brethren tell their Father to comfort him? You shall
tell my Father of all my glory in Egypt. So we, when we see the bloodied
coats of our friends as 'twere, Genesis 45.9. 2 Cor. 5.4.
their dead bodies, I mean the garments of the Soul; we are ready to think
that death, that evil beast has made an end of them, and they are not; but
tell my Father, etc. So let us think of all the glory that they have in
Heaven, and be comforted. Why should we therefore immoderately grieve for our
friends; whose death (for their Souls) is their present gain, etc? We that do
so immoderately grieve for the death of our friends, do we not mind what is the
first thing used to be read at their burials; I am the Resurrection and the
life? and while the earth is cast upon the body; Forasmuch as it has pleased,
etc. do we not mind these things? If we mind these things, certainly we have
either little faith in us to believe the glorious Resurrection of them that die
in Christ, or little hope in us to persuade us that this our friend is dead in
Christ, or little patience in us under the good will and providence of God
wisely ordering all things. If it be impatience in us, let us consider Job, and
what he said, when among other things God had taken away his seven Sons and
three daughters at once; Job. 1.21.
The Lord gave and the Lord takes away; Blessed be the name of the Lord. If it
be because that we have little hope that our friends are dead in Christ; why do
we not then grieve for them, when we see that our friends do not live in
Christ? this grief would be profitable, it would make us seek their
amendment. If lastly, it be because we have little faith in us to believe the
glorious Resurrection of them that dye in Christ; Let us consider that if
Christ be risen the third day, then all that die in Christ shall as undoubtedly
rise the last day; If we believe (says the Apostle) that Jesus dyed and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Christ will God bring with him also; 1
These. 4.14.
If therefore Christ be risen, etc. their graves are but their beds to rest
their wearied bones in a while, till the day of the Lord dawne, and that great
trumpet sound to waken them out of their sleep; and who now that loves one
another dearlyest, mournes when he bids him Good night, to go lie down in his
bed till next morning?

Fifthly, If Christ be risen as the first fruits; Let this comfort us against
the present frailties and weaknesses and vileness of these bodies of ours;
bodies that are so soon puling and complaining for a little excess of cold or
heat, a little defect of meat or drink; bodies that are so soon wearied, and
tired out with a little labor and pains in the Course of ones calling; bodies
that are so often vexing us with cramps and aches and sundry sicknesses; bodies
that are soon withering and waxing old and mouldring away; bodies every way so
vile, that some have irked to have any pictures made of their bodies, as but
the picture of their shame; and indeed, were it not that they are our own
bodies, and that every one have bodies alike, they would soon be seen how
irksome they are; but if Christ be risen, etc. these corruptibles shall put on
incorruption, and these mortals shall put on immortality; and thus Job
comforted himself when he was so struck with sores and boils from the sole of
the foot to the crown of the head, and so spent and wasted in his body with
the heat and inflammation of those burning boils that he was even escaped with
the skin of his teeth; had no more left almost upon that poor carcass of his,
then on his very teeth, where is nothing at all; yet being in that case, he
thus comforted himself; I know that my Redeemer lives; and though after my
skin (as having almost nothing now on this back, but a little withered skin)
worms destroy this body (this poor torn, tattered, rent, spent carcass of
mine) yet in my flesh shall I see God. And thus St. Paul also intimates comfort
against the vileness and abjectness of these bodies of ours, by considering the
glory they shall have at the Resurrection; Phil. 3.21.
who shall change our vile bodies that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, etc.

Sixthly, If Christ be risen as the first fruits, etc. then what thanks owe we
to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for so great a blessing, so
great a blessing as affords this comfort against all the present frailties and
vileness of our bodies, against all excessive grief for the death of our
friends, against all tormenting anxious fears for our own deaths; as being
assured that Christ is not only risen from the dead, but risen as the first
fruits to ensure the glorious Resurrection of all those that belong to him?
This use of thankfulness for so great a blessing, the Apostle makes; Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3.
which has begotten us again to a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus
from the dead. And here St. Paul in the present Chapter, O death, where is thy
sting, O grave where is thy victory! Thanks be to God which gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; And indeed, he that considers what death
is backed with, sin and the unalterable Law of God, can easily be moved to
thankfulness for victory over it through our Lord Jesus Christ, and his death
and Resurrection.

Seventhly, if Christ be risen as the first fruits, etc. then let these bodies
of ours be sacred and holy to him here, which we look should be glorious and
happy in him hereafter; in him as glorified members of him a more glorious
head; he will never make him a glorious member that is not first a holy member;
never deliver him from the bondage of death, that does not seek first to be
delivered of sin; never deliver him from the corruption of the grave that does
not seek first to be delivered from the corruption of lust: If it were
possible that any member of Christ in Heaven should either be a sinful member,
or a poor contemptible member, sooner should it be a poor contemptible member,
then a sinful member; our Savior sometimes here upon earth had a vile
contemptible body, but never a sinful body; look we therefore that these
bodies of ours should be happy and glorious in him hereafter? let them be
sacred and holy to him here; Think with thy self, when gluttony and
drunkenness dishonours thy body, is this drunken body fit to be a member of
Christ's glorious body? when filthyness and uncleanness defiles thy body; is
this filthy body fit to be a member, etc? think with thy self when violence,
bribery, injustice, cozenage, and trading Legerdemanie cleaves to thy hand; is
this hand, fit to be a member of Christ's glorious body, etc? when pride, envy,
avarice, adultery sits in thy eye, is this eye fit to be a member of Christ's
glorious body, etc? when profane, and cursed speaking, horrible swearing,
slandering backbiting, etc. furs thy tongue, is this filthy furred tongue,
fit to be a member of Christ's glorious body, etc? How does the Apostle reason
against the abusing of the body by the sin of fornication? 1 Cor. 6.13.
Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord; and is it fit that that
body that is the Lords body, and looks to be raised up a glorious member of him
already a glorious head, is it fit that body should be for filthyness and
fornication? If we will needs so dishonor our selves as to make our bodies the
members of harlots, let us know that Christ will not so dishonor himself as
to make the members of harlots his own members. If therefore Christ be risen as
the first fruits, etc. he will not have, like Nebuchadnezzars image, the head
to be of gold, and any of the members, though the very feet, the lowest, to be
of base clay and dirt.

Eighthly, If Christ be risen as the first fruit; then let us be bold to
venture these bodies of ours, be it unto the death, in behalf of him and his
glory, who dyed for us and rose again to ensure the glorious Resurrection of
these bodies; our bodies are not so sure our own now that we have them, and
are clothed with them; as when they are off at his bidding: he does but lay
them up in a sure wardrobe, to restore us them again, far better then we doft
them off: so much deceived were those heathenish persecutours, that burning the
Christians, gathered up the ashes of their bodies and threw them into the river
Rhone to be carried away, who knows whither, that they might make the
Christians without all hopes of the Resurrection; but little knew they that
they had a head in Heaven that as those bones by prophesying came together bone
to his bone, so by but speaking unto them could make all those ashes come
together, were they never so scattered with the four winds; Eusebius. 5.
see how this, (the ensurement of our glorious Resurrections in and by Christ)
is made a special ground and motive in Scripture for our sufferings; 2 Cor.
4.14. Act. 20.20. 1 Cor. 15.32. Gal. 6.12.
so we believe, and therefore speak, speak without concealment of any part of
the truth of the Gospel, though thereby we procure our selves great persecution
at the hands of the Jews: and what is the ground of his boldness? Knowing that
he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus; so, 1 Timothy
6.13.
Exhorting Timothy to constancy in the Gospel whatsoever befell upon it, 2 Timothy
2.8.
upon what ground does he it? sc. this, Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed
of David was raised from the dead, Rev. 2.8.
etc. so the Lord exhorting the Church of Smyrna to endure tribulation for his
names sake, upon what ground does he it? sc. this, these things says the First
and the Last, which was dead and is alive; etc. And so though you dye in his
cause, fear not, he will make you alive again; if therefore Christ be risen
as, etc.

Ninthly, If Christ be risen as the first fruits, let us while we are in these
bodies of ours, be constant and abundant in all good works; knowing that our
labor none of it all shall be lost, but a day shall come, when if we could be
sorry for any thing, it should be especially for this, that we have slugged it
so much in the work of godliness. Let not thine heart envy sinners; Prove.
23.17, 18.
for surely there is an end (even that end 1 Cor. 15.24.) and thine expectation
shall not be cut off; And have hope toward God, Act. 24.15, 16.
that there shall be a Resurrection, etc. and herein do I exercise my self, to
have a conscience always void of offense, both toward God and man. And here
in this Chapter, after the Apostle has sufficiently proved Christ's
Resurrection, and also our glorious Resurrection in him, This is the very use
he makes of it in the last verse; (...).
Therefore, my beloved, be ye steadfast, settled, grounded, confirmed, in the
infallible faith of Christ's and your Resurrections; and unmovable, not only
settled, but unmoveably settled, that nothing be able to shake you from that
stedfastness, not the violence of Tyrants persecuting you, not the subtilty of
Philosophers seeking to circumvent you; and if you continue thus steadfast, and
unmovable in this your faith, what will then follow, but that you should
abound, not be spare and scanty, but abound; and that not when you are ready to
lay down these bodies of yours only, but always: Abounding always in the
work of the Lord.

FINIS.

