CHRIST THE CHRISTIANS CHOICE. OR A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr JOHN
CAVVS one of the MAGISTRATES of the FAMOVS CORPORATION of PLYMOVTH. March The
29. Anno Dom. 1645.

By ALEXANDER GROSS. B.D. and Pastor of Bridfoad.

Phil. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain:

Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory.

Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth,
that I desire besides thee.

Psalm. 73.26. My heart and my flesh fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.

LONDON Printed by R. B. for John Bartlet at the Gilt Cup under St. Augustines
Gate. 1645.

Philippians Chapter. 1. Verse. 23. Having a desire to depart, and be with
Christ which is far better.
NOah left the earth to enter into the Arc, The children of Israel left the
land of Egypt for the fruition of the land of Canaan: Every santified and
believing soul is willing to leave all that it may fully enter into Christ,
that it may have a complete fruition of Christ, who is all in all. Better then
all, infinitely more then all to every regenerate, and gracious soul. No
prisoner but is willing to leave the prisonhouse, for the enjoyment of his
own house; No excile but is willing to leave the land of banishment for the
repossession of his own Country: No soul that knows its own bondage under
corruption, its own alienation, and exilement from Christ, (in part at least,)
during the days of its abode in this earthly tabernacle. but with Paul, has a
desire to depart and be with Christ which is far better.

This our deceased Brother making use a little before his death of these words
to his wife, almost to the same purpose Saint Paul made use of them to his
Philippians. Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ which is far
better; Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you. Is that
which invited and moved me, to treat of these words, in this hour of his
funeral, and from them to deduce some instructions for the proffet and
consolation of the living.

The words propound unto us, and present before us, the choice of a gracious
soul the Paradise wherein it desires to dwell, the Sun which it desires to
behold, the Pearl which it desires to possess, the Haven wherein it desires
to harbor, the Tree whereon it longs to feed, and the Fountains whereof it
does desire to draw and drink a full and everlasting draught, even Jesus
Christ, and nothing else, Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ
which is far better.

In the words there is. 1. Motus, a motion, the internal moving, stirring,
longing, and working of the soul, excited, assisted, enabled, acted, moved,
framed, and disposed, bent, and inclined, thereunto by the gracious
presidentiall, active, and mighty power of the holy spirit; Like the motion and
stirring of the heart of a prisoner, longing after, and looking out at the
prison windows for some tidings of liberty and freedom-: like the motion of a
man in darkness, waiting for the appearance of the light; like the motion of a
wife, in the time of her husbands absence, looking for, and expecting her
husbands return: a motion raised, excited, quickened, and strengthened, by a
collation and comparison of the souls future felicity, with its present
misery. as the husbandman compares, the joy of his future harvest, with the
labor of his present winter. The soldier the glory of his future Crown with
the difficulty of his present battle; The traviller the comfort of his future
Paradise; with the sadness of his present Wilderness: lively sense of present
misery, sweet and powerful apprehension of future, and ensueing glory, fill
the soul truly gracious with longings of unwearied, and sacred vehemence.
Assurance of future happiness makes a good man restles under the presant burden
of his corruption.

Movens. The party longing desiring to depart; and that is Paul a chosen
vessel, afaithfull servant of God a liveing member of Christ. None can truly
desire to be dissolved but he that is sure to be saved. No man willingly
leaves his present habitation, but he that is assured of a better dwelling. No
wise man willingly to cast of his present garment, but he that has another, a
better to put on: No man can be upon right grounds willing to be dissolved, but
only that man who is truly fanctified: he who is not thoroughly interested in
Christ, cannot willingly leave all for Christ: Eleazar Abraham's servant, put a
jewel upon Rebeccaas face, Genesis 24.53.
and bracelets upon her hands, and gave her jewels of silver and jewels of
gould and raiment, and then she was willing to go with him, willing to leave
all, and enjoy Jsaac for her husband. That soul alone which Christ beautifieth
with the saveing gifts of his spirit, the love tokens of Christ, better gifts
then jewels of silver, and gold. Js the soul, the only soul, that can forsake
the dearest things of this life, that can readily leave its habitation in this
mortal flesh, and take up its everlasting abode with Christ.

Termin^s, the term whereunto this gracious foul moves, and that is double
the one Privative, the other Positive the first Privative a desire to depart or
be dissolved, exprossing the nature of death not an Annihilation. but a
dissolution, a separation of the foul and body, the foul is now in the body
as a bird in the cage, a prisoner in the prison house; a traviller walking
under a cloud, and therefore much desires a discharge, and exemption from his
fad and burdensome condition; No child of God desires death under the naked
and simple notion of death, it is in it self, the King of terrors, repugnant,
and disstructive to nature, a thing never desired for it self, but for some
other thing, therefore here is Secondly a Positive term wherein this motion,
and desire of the foul ends; that is in the fruition of Christ, that he may be
fully and everlastingly with Christ; that he may come out of the prison of the
flesh, to be clad with glory to sit down, and reign with Christ as Joseph came
out of prison having his prison garments taken from him, a Gould ring put upon
his finger, royal apparel put upon his back, and made the second person next
to the King in the Kingdom of Egypt: that he may come out of all the servitude
and slavery bondage and troubles of this life to triumph with Christ leaving
sin, Satan, and the world behind him, conquered, subdued, distroyed, as
Israel came out of the waters of the red Sea, triumphing, leaving Pharaoh and
the Egiptians, Exo 15, 1.
there drowned behind them. The fruition of the Lord Jesus makes death
desirable, and lovely in the eyes of al truebeleevers.

Motivum. The motice, which sets the soul on work, thus to desire to be with
Christ; and this is drawn Ab V^^^. From the fruit, and benefit thero: It is
fore better. To be with Christ then live here, to enjoy Christ then all things
else, it is not only better, but far letter, a thousand degrees better, for
the sa^ctity, for the liberty, for the Safety, for the Satie^y, for the sweet
Society and for the Fulness of all Glory there to be enjoyed. The present
felicity of Gods children is very little, even nothing, incomparison of the
future glory which shall be put upon them.

J cannot, time will not give me leave, to insist upon all the particular
branches of these words, though every one of them present, before us and offer
to us respectively, variety of useful, sweet, and comfortable fruit; had we
time and leisure but to gather them; I shall therefore for the present, give you
one general observation from them. St. Paul so Loved Christ, so Prized Christ,
so Delighted in Christ, so Longed after Christ, and Apprehended the fruition of
such a plenitude and sweetness, such duration, and continuance of all foul
ravishing, and heartcontenting excellencies in the fell enjoyment of Christ;
that he was willing to leave all, to depart with all, even with his very life,
for the full enjoyment of Christ. whence observe.

That there is nothing so dear and precious to Gods faith full servants,
Doctrine.
noe not their very life's, but they are willing to leave and lay them all down
for Christ's lake; for the present, and future enjoyment of Christ: thus it was
with St. Paul, and thus it is in proportion, in degree, according to the
measure of grace received, with every child of God: the wife leaves all to
enjoy matrimonial communion with the husband; Sarah left all, Psa. 45.10.
and went with her husband Abraham. True believers are the Bride and spouse of
Christ: they forget their own people and their fathers house to enjoy their
husband Christ: they so love, they so remember, they so delight in, and so long
after Christ, that they love nothing remember nothing, delight in nothing,
prize nothing, desire nothing in comparison of Christ Jesus; Mat. 13 44.
be it otherwise never so dear and precious: the merchant in the parable sold
all that he had for the precious pearl, true believers are spiritual
merchants, they trade, and traffic for Christ; Christ is to them a pearl of
that price, that they joyfully sell all, leave all for the present, and future
enjoyment of him: this truth is carried by way of command in the Iniunction
laid by our blessed Savior upon the Angel of the Church of Smyrna. Rev. 2.1.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
Whatsoever trouble do arise, whatsoever storm do toss and shake thee,
whatsoever cloud of contumely do seize upon thee, whatsoever band of violence
be stretched out to rob and spoil thee, yet be thou saithfull in thy covenant
with Christ, in thy profession of christ in thy undertaking for Christ in thy
dependence upon Christ, in thy love unto Christ, in thy defense of the cause of
Christ be thou faithful to the death let life, and all go, rather then let
go Christ; lay down all for the Crown of life, for the sweet, the full, and
everlasting enjoyment of Christ. Thus the Apostle peter having declared the
vanity and mutability of the whole frame of the creature, argues and urges
from thence the necessity of looking out for Christ, of hastening unto Christ,
of making Christ sure unto our souls. 2 Pet. 3.13.
Seeing then (says he) that all these things shalb^ dissolved, what manner of
persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and Godlynes. Looking for and
hastening unto the coming of the day of God. Looking for the coming of and full
enjoyment of Christ as a husbandman looks for the coming, Luke 12.36.
and gathering in, of the harvest; Looking and preparing for Christ as a good
servant waits, and prepares for the coming of his Lord and Master: thus have
the servants of God ever lively expressed the sadness of their condition without
Christ, their high prizing of Christ's gracious presence in his ordinances for
the present, though they enjoy him herein but in part, a farreof, and
obscurely, as we enjoy a friend in his letters, the Son in the stars. A bird
the bridgroome in his love tokens. Yet when Christ has at any time in his
behalse estranged himself from them, Psalm. 63.1.
they have been as dry ground without water, in an Incessant thirst, as a
chased Heart without the water brooks, full of restles motions, and ardent
cries after Christ: As the heart pants after the water brooks so pants my
soul after thee O God. my soul thirsts for God, for the liveing God. When
shall I come and appear before God. They follow him as sttai David whether in
life or in death, Rev. 14.4.
the Virgins follow the Lam wheresoever hoe goes whether in a codition of
honor, or ignominy, of perce or trouble of loss or gain they follow him:
Psalm. 84 10.
David accounts One day in the Courts of God better a thousand, and prizes the
place of a door keeper in the house of God above the choyfest habitation among
the tents of wickedness Preferring the poorest condition with Christ, above
the highest condition without Christ: what was Moses his choice? did he not
choose to endure affliction with the people of God rather then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Did not he refuse to be called the son of
Pharaohs daughter? did not he esteem the enjoyment of communion with Christ,
and his members, though in the wilderness, above the fruition of fellowship
with the greatest profane worldly Nobles. though in a Paradise of all earthly
pleasures? did not the primitive Christians take the spoiling of their goods
joyfully knowing they had an abiding substance in heaven: were not they
contented to be spoiled of all, rather then to be spoiled of Christ, and what
is the glory of Gods dear servants, but this They loved not their lives unto
the death; If they do all this for the present enjoyment of Christ, where they
enjoy him a far off, and but in part, how much more will they do it, for an
immediate and complete enjoyment of him in the next life: having their
conversation now in heaven, from whence also they look for the Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ, being turned unto God from Idols, to serve the living and true
God: and to wait for his Son from heaven. By all which it plainly appears
that there is nothing so dear and precious to Gods faithful servants no, not
their very lives, but they are willing to leave and lay them all down for
Christ's sake, for the present and future enjoyment of Christ.

For the fuller understanding, and clearer discerning of the extent and
latitude of this truth there be four things considerable, first the matter
left, secondly the persons leaving it. Thirdly the manner how they leave it.
Fourthly the end or final cause for which they leave it.

First the matter left things most dear and precious to them, things of
greatest price among the men of the world, things in their kind for their
quality most eminent as riches, Math. 9.^.
honors, pleasures favor credit countenance and applause amongst men: Luke
19.8.9.
they are contented for the enjoyment of Christ to be men of no name, of no
repute, of no wisedeme, Mat. 4.22.
of no authority, of no wealth among men: things for their use most necessary
as calling station and instruments of Livelihood, Mat: 10.37.
things for their relation very sweet and pleasant as friends father, mother,
and things for their number, the very all which they possess, Mat. 19.27.
things for their Intimacy and nearenesse the most dear and precious, as life
it self, so Paul here the traveller willingly leave all lamps, Luke: 4.26.
candles, torcher, the greater and the lesser stars to enjoy the Sun: the
true travelers in the way to God in Christ, willingly leave all other comforts
to enjoy Christ Jesus, the Sun of all true consolations:

Secondly the persons leaving all, laying down all for Christ, Paul, and such
as have the spirit of Paul: none have these desires besides the truly
gracious: none but the bride leaves all for the bridegroom, It is not Orpah,
Ruth 1.15.16. 2 Timothy 4.^. phil 3.7.8..
but Ruth that cleaves to Naomi in the day of her distress, it is not Demas
but Paul that esteems all but dung and dross in comparison of the excellency
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, it is not the Coward but the valiant
soldier, that willingly lays down his life for his Captain in the battle;
1 Timothy 19.20.
Hyminoeus and Philetus are no sooner shaken with a tempest, but they forthwith
make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, only Paul is the man that
fights the good fight, that finisheth his course and keeps the faith: he alone
that is a true partaker of Christ is the man that will leave all for Christ.

Thirdly, 2. Tim. 4.7.
the manner how they leave all willingly, it is their desire it is their
choice, the bird willingly leaves his cage, to soar and fing aloft in the
air. Israel willingly left Egypt to free their shoulders from Pharroahs heavy
burdens: the Lords faithful servants, the Israel of God indeed: willingly
hazard, leave and lay down all for God and Christ, to case themselves of the
hurthen of corruption, and to enjoy communion with God and Christ, this they
do with desire as Paul d sired to d part, and this desire carries in it.

First, a sensible apprehension of the miferie and troublesomnesse of their
present condition, the sense and feeling which Israel had of the sadness of
their estate under the heavy burdens which Pharaoh imposed on them, Exodus 3.
and cruel Taskmasters which he set over them made them willing to leave the
land of Egypt, Rom 7, 24
and desirous to go to Canaan: 2 Col. 12.7.8.
sense of the burthensomnesse of man's own corruption, and of the violence and
bitterness of the buffettings of Satan, fills the soul with sad complaints of
its present misery and ardent prayers, for the enjoyment of full freedom from
them and entire rest, and acquiescence in Christ's bosom.

Secondly, an high prizing of Christ, as the only glorious and shining Sun,
whence descend all the beams of spiritual consolation, as the Apple Tree,
Mat. 4.2. Cant. ^.3. Col. 2.3. Cant. 3.10.
whereon grows all sweet and desirable fruit for the noufishment of the soul,
and under whose shadow it can repose, and rest it sell with much delight: as
the storehouse whence is derived all celestial treasure for the fouls
inrichment: as the fairest of ten thousand in whom all soul ravishing, and
heart admiring excellencies are discerned: he alone that takes the true measure
of the worth of Christ, is the man that can leave, and lay down all for Christ.

Thirdly, servent and unfeigned love to Christ, She^h^ms love to Dinah made him
willing to undergo the pain or Circumcision for her, Genesis 34.
Jacobs love to Rachel put him upon a hard service, in the heat, and in the
cold, in the day, and in the night for her; servent love to Christ, 2. Cor.
5.14.
puts the gracious soul upon a ready undertaking of the hardest servie or
Christ, a patient toleration of the greatest difficulties in the way of Christ,
and a che refull effusion of its dearest blood for the exaltation of Christ,
for the fruition of full communion with Christ: true love to Christ rests in
nothing, Cant. 2 5.
but in the fruition of Christ; all desires after Christ which spring not from
unfeigned love to him, are fruitless have no acceptance with him never reach
him, 1 Cor. 13.3.4.
never work the soul into the possession of him.

Fourthly, Psa. 42.1, 2.
vehement longings after Christ, a holy restlinesse of the soul, and spirit
until it does come to Christ, as the Be until it comes unto the Hive: the
River until it emptieth it self into the Ocean: and as the Dove did fly up and
down, and found no rest for the sole of her foot until she entered into the
Arc. The soul which truly defires Christ meets with contentation no where
but in Christ; the thirst thereof is never satisfied until it drinks a full
draught of Christ, the heavenly Oecan, in whom are all soule-refreshing waters;
the motion thereof is never terminated until it comes fully home to Christ,
the paradise in whom dwell all spiritual comforts.

Fifthly, Cant. 3.1.
diligent Inquisition after Christ, careful use of all means to enjoy Christ;
these desires are no lazy, sluggish, weak feeble, and fleeting desires; Cant.
5.3 4.
but strong, active, and stirring desires, desires knocking at the door of the
heart, and awakening it as a loud sounding trumpet rouseth a man out of his
sleep; desires quickening man, like spurs in his motion unto Christ; desires
drawing a man like a loadstone unto Christ, 1 Samuel 23.15.
David desired to drink of the water in the wells of Bethel, and his Worthies
brake through the army of the Philistines, and brought waters thence: true
desires after Christ neglect no means leading unto Christ, break through all
oppositions between them and Christ: their souls are set upon an unwearied
inquiry after him, a constant use of all means to enjoy him, when Joseph and
Mary had lost Christ they went up and down, and sought him sorrowing, never
ceasing from their inquiry until they found him; Luk 2 46.
the soul which knows what it is to loose Christ, what the sadness of the
soul is without Christ: never cease seeking until he has found him, never
cease from his mourning, till Christ returns with sweet consolations again
unto him.

Sixthly, delight, he that ardently desires Christ, joyfully leaves all For
Christ, accounts it all joy to fall into m nifold temptations for the cause of
Christ: Ia. 1.2. Heb. 10 34 Acts 16.23. Dan. 3.
takes the spoiling of all joyfully, sings in prison, is cheerful in the
wilderness as in a paradise: walks like the three children in the fiery
furnace of great adversities as in a Palace: and comes when God calls him to
the stake and fiery trial as the hungry to a feast, the soldier to the
crown: or Bride to the marriage of the Bridegroom, and unto death it self
through many temptations, weaknesses and disasters as Mariners to the haven
through a violent and stormy tempest The way of the soul to Christ Jesus is not
such a way of sorrows, but that it is mixed with man, sweet and secret pleasures.

Seventhly, a confident Resignation into the hands of Christ, he that truly
and unfainedly desires Christ, does not dye as a man uncertain where he shall
go, ^^t comes as a Bride to the Bridegroom, as an obedient child to his
loving fathers house, with much assurance of gracious acceptance, of a sweet
and everlasting entertainment and welcome, though he sometimes feel the wind
of temptation blowing with much violence upon him: and dismal fear now and
then furprizing him, yet with Teter in another case he cries Mast r save me,
and immediately see Jesus stretching out his hand, Mat. 14.30.31.
and saving him from sinking in the waters ready to swallow him: he beholds the
wind ceasing, and an everlasting calm ensueing, upon the fall of this house
of his flesh he sees a glorious habitation provided for him; he knows that if
his earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, 2 Cor 5, 1
he has a building made of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in
the heavens.

Fourthly, here is the end or final cause, why the gracious soul does leave
all, and desires to go hence: it is for Christ's sake, that it may have the
full fruition of Christ, that it may mount aloft and come to Christ: as the
bird when the cage is broken or the prisoner when the prison house is beaten
down, and thrown into the dust have liberty, the one to fly, and the other to
walk abroad and meet their companions. (...) 4 17.
Thus the Lords servants desire to depart; to leave this mansion of the flesh,
that they may meet the Lord and so be ever with him, the ultimate end of every
good man's desires and endeavors is the full fruition of Christ Jesus.

Having seen what it is that this observation carries in it, let us now
descend to the reasons conducing both to the further illustration, and
confirmation thereof; Reasons.
now the reason why Gods servants do so willingly leave and lay down all for
the enjoyment of Christ is.

In regard of the Evil adherent to the present condition of Gods children
though they be a red^^ed people a people translated out of darkness into the
kingdom of Gods dear Son, Col. 1.13.
yet they have some fetters still upon them, Esa. 54.13.
though they be an instructed people, a people taught of God yet they have some
ignorance remaining in them though they be a ga der enclosed, an ^rchard of
pomegranates with sweet fruits yet they have some weeds, Cant. 4.10.11.12.
some thorns and briars, there sprouting and spreading: there is a manifold
evil yet adherent to Gods children.

First an evil of darkness the day-star^e indeed has appeared, 2. Pet. 1.19.
but the Sun is not yet fully risen in their souls is butday dawning they
know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.1^.
there is some ignorance mingled with their knowledge.

Secondly an evil of bondage, though they be not led away captive at the will
of Satan as voluntary slaves without reluctance and resistance: 2. Tim. 2.26
Romans 7.14.
yet they are sold under sin, as a man led captive against his will. Like
Lazarus they are risen but yet they carry some of their gravecloathes about
them which do in part still fetter and tie them.

Thirdly an evil of opposition, sickness opposes health in men diseased
Esau opposed Jacob in the womb of Rebecca, Saul opposed David and made
continual war against him, 10.11.43.44.2. Sam. 3.1.
the flesh opposes the spirit, corruption opposes grace in Gods children:
fleshly lusts war against the soul in the best of Gods people.

Fourthly an evil of uncleanness, Gal. 5 17.1 Pet. 2.11.
though they be washed, and sanctified and instified in the name of the Lord
Jesus and by the Spirit of our God, Job, 13.10.
yet this is but in part, they are indeed perfectly instified but imperfectly
sanctified: he says our Savior that is washed, needs not fave to wash his
seet but is clean every whit, and ye are clean, but not all.

Fifthly an evil of Temptation Egyptian Pharaoh pursued Israel after they were
gone out of Egypt, the infernal Pharaoh pursues God, Israd after they are
escaped the plenary servitude and slavery of this world, Zech 3.1.2.
and their own corruption, Satan stands at the right hand of Joshua the high
priest to hinder his supplication: 2 Cor. 12.7 8.
and he buffets Paul to disturb and vex him, Satan now and then obtaines
commission to tempt and try the best of Gods children.

Sixthly an evil of Burdens, there lies on the shoulders of Gods servants a
burden of corruption a burden of contumelies; a burden of manifold
afflictions, Israel in Egypt had cruel taskmasters over, and heavy burdens
imposed on them: Gods Israel in this world still travels under heavy burdens,
traveling like Israel through the wilderness of many troubles, and red sea of
many sorrows and sufferings, afmore or less, will rest as a burden on Gods
people, as long as they carry corruption about them.

Seventhly an evil of close and conscience-accusations, of heart smiting and
selfe-judgings, David's heart smites him for touching Saul's garment, Ioh 2 6.
Job sees enough amiss within him to make him abhor himself below the dust
and ashes: Esaiah is sensible of so much uncleanness, Esa 6.5.6.
that he is forced to cry out, woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of
polluted lips: no man walks with such exactness and circumspection, but that
his conscience now and then, brings matter of accusation against him:

Eighthly an evil of sorrows, for temporal or spiritual losses for their own
or others failings, for their own or others miseries: the Lords people are
seeds men sowing in tears now reaping in joy: Psa 126.5.
hereafter Gods children like Israel of old have such Canaanites like thorns
in Judges 2.2.
their sides and pricks in their eyes that they are full of lamentation, and
mourning

Ninthly an evil of Commerce and communion with profane people who prick like
thorns, Ezekiel. 2.3.
and sting like scorpions, and pierce and wound like arrows, vexing the
righteous souls of Gods people, and making their very lives a burden to them.

Tenthly an evil of Absence, they are not yet come fully home to Christ, they
are at much distance from him; have not the full enjoyment of him while they
are at home in the body they are absent from the 2. Cor. 5.6.
Lord: and therefore are willing to leave and lay down all that they may be
discharged from this manifold evil.

Termination of a gracious souls motion in Christ, every thing terminates its
motion, in its proper, Christ is the souls Center, the rivers move and stop
not, till they terminate their motion in the sea: the gracious soul is
restless till it comes unto Christ, Naomi said of Boaz unto Ruth the man
will not be in rest until he has Ruth. 3. ult.
finished the ma^ter this day: the soul intending wedlock with Christ, will
not, cannot be in full and through rest, until it has finished, and fully
perfected its wedlock with Christ, psalm 104.34. 1 Cor 2.2. Col 2.7.
the whole or a gracious man moves to Christ: the motion of his imagination is
to the thought, and meditation of Christ: the meditation of Christ is sweet
unto him; the motion of his und^rstanding is to the knowledge of Christ, he
desires to know nothing but Christ, and him crucisied, the motion of his faith
is to the alsufficiencie, Cant. 5 10. Cant. 2.5.
worth and efficacy of Christ: be i^ rooted, and built up in Christ, the motion
of his love is to the beauty and excellency of Christ: he is the fairest of ten
thousand in his eye, and his soul is sick o^ love to Christ: every way the
motion of a sanctified is to Christ, the travelers motion is to his home, the
the thirsty man's motion is to the fountain, the good man's motion is to Christ,
he never attaines his desired perfection until he has gotten the full
possession of him: and therefore leaves all to enjoy him.

union which a gracious soul has with Christ, by says and love, he is not so
united unto any thing, as to Christ, he is so united to him that he is be come
one with him box of his bone, Ioh. 17.21, Ephesians. 5.29. Ioh. 15.19.
ana flesh of his flesh he is united to Christ with a separating and singling
union, with an union separating him from the world as a woman joined in with an
union separating him from the world as a woman joined in wedlock is separated
from her own people, and her fathers house, with an union crucifying the world
unto him and him again unto the world: Gal. 6, ^.
he is united unto Christ with a deriving and enriching union, drawing from
Christ grace for gra^e, Ioh. 1 15.
filled with Christ's fullness and made complete n him: he is united unto
Christ with a translating and transforming union, an union transforming him
into the very image of Christ, making him pure as Christ is pure; he is united
to Christ with an inflaming and soul ravishing union: 1 Ioh. 3.3. Cant. 8.6.
kindling a fire in his heart which no waters can quench and many floods cannot
drown: he is united to Christ with an indissoluble union, Math. 15.18. Ioh.
10.28.
so united, that neither the powers of hell, nor earth can dissolve it; he is
united unto Christ with a victorious union, an union overcomming all the
proffers, 1 Ioh. 5.4. Ioh. 3.30.
and oppositions of the world: a prostrating union, casting a man and all his
gifts and abilities down at the feet of Christ, making a man willing to be
nothing in the eyes of men that Christ may be exalted: Ephesians. 4.12.13
an aspiring union ascending unto more and more perfection never ceasing until
the soul is wrought into a full communion with Jesus Christ, making a man
willing and industrious to cast away whatsoever may hinder his enjoyment of
Christ, to break prison to come to Christ, 1 Kings 19.^.
to leave all to be with Christ, as Elisha left his yokes of oxen to follow
Eliah

pre-eminence which Christ has in the heart of a gracious man, above all other
things he gives Christ pre-eminence:

First in his choice, he chooses Christ rather then all or any other thing
whatsoever, the traveller chooses the Sun rather then any other light to guide
him; the builder chooses the rock, rather then the sand to build upon: and the
wise merchant the pearl, rather then the pebble to enrich him: the gracious
man prefers Christ as the only wise Counselor able to advise him, the
ovely rack able to support him, and the only ^ear^e wherein is all worth to
enrich bun: he chooses the gifts and graces of Christ before all other
treasures: be preserreth the love of Christ, the light of his countenance,
above all other pleasures, and earthly abundance: there is nothing without this
can give him contentation. 2 ^ 31, 32.
Absolon thought it a small thing that he lived at Jerusalem, nay he esteemed
his life as nothing, unless he might see the Kings face: a good man esteems
it a little thing to live at Jerusalem, I mean to have all Gods ordinances,
unless he enjoy the face of Christ with them: Psalm ^3.3. Psalm. 4.6.
his very life without this seems but a burden: when the face of Christ
shines there is exceeding great joy and rejoicing, when this is hidden there is
a cry, much mourning and lamentation. Psalm. 30.7.


Secondly in his fear, men give pre-eminence in their fear to their
Sovereign, above the subject, children to their fathers above the household
servants: wives to their husbands above strangers: good men fear Christ as
their Sovereign as their fathers, as their husband with an awful, a
spiritual, a filial, an affectionate and submissive fear, choosing rather to
offend all the world then to offend Christ: they fear the command of Christ,
Acts 4 19. Mat. 10.28. Dan. 3.17.
more then the command of man: the wrath of Christ more then the wrath of men:
the loss of Christ favor, more then the loss of any, or all men whatsoever:
they choose rather to expose themselves to man's greatest rage and indignation,
then to provoke Christ in the least syllable of voluntary and witting deviation
from the rule which Christ has prescribed to them.

Thirdly in his love, the wife preferres the husband in her love above all
other persons; he that is married unto Christ loves Christ more then all
creatures, he loves him not carnally but spiritually, his love arises from a
seed of grace sown in the heart, it is a fruit of Gods Spirit, he loves him
not constrainedly but freely, his love moves to Christ like water flowing from
a living spring: he loves him not with a niggardly but a bountiful love, with
a love moving him to give all that he has to Christ: he loves him not with a
sinister but a sincere love; not in a show but in truth not in word but in
deed; he loves Christ not with a faint and languishing love, but with a strong
and victorious love; a love overcomming all opposition a love carrying him home
to Christ, a love causing him to abide with Christ in all changes, 1 Samuel
18.1.2.
to rest upon him in all conditions, a love like the love of Jonathan to David,
Jonathan so loved David that he was contented to run the hazard of his fathers
displeasure, to be abased that David might be exalted, and disrobe himself for
David's sake: the gracious soul so loves Christ, that he is ready for Christ's
sake to incur the hatred of his dearest friends according to the flesh, to
humble himself below the dust for the exaltation of Christ, and to put often
this garment o^ the flesh, that he may honor and enjoy Christ.

Fourthly in his possession, he had rather possess Christ then all things
else; all other possessions are but an empty vessel to the posessing of
Christ: Genesis 14.21.
the King of Sodom sometime said to Abraham give me the persons take thou the
substance: the gracious man is ready to say to his neighbor, give me Christ,
and take the goods, house honors, body, and whatsoever else he that will: all
other possessions are but a wilderness to this paradise: a b^amble to the
vine, the figtree and the olive tree as Iotham in another case expressed
himself Judges 9 9.
in this parable.

Fifthly in Communion men of generous disposition prize communion with princes
above communion with beggars: wives preserre fellowship with their husbands
above fellowship with servants: fellowship with Christ is the longing desire of
every gracious soul they say of this as Peter did of the mount it is good
being here, Math. 17.4.
the desire of their souls is to dwell with Christ: to live continually in the
blessed presence of Christ, and as they give him pre-eminence in their choice,
fear love possession and communion, so they are willing to leave and lay down
all for him.

Fifthly in regard of that gain which comes to a gracious man by leaving and
laying down his goods, liberty, or life for Christ's sake: the more he leaves
for Christ the more he shall receive, the greatest loosers for Christ are the
greatest gainers by Christ: Math. 19.29.
it is our Saviors promise whosoever shall loose father or mother or house or
lands etc. for my Names sake shall bare an hundred fold more in this life, and
life everlasting hereafter: the seed thus sown returns with a plentiful
harvest: this is the best adventure to make a rich merchant the least gain of
Christ is recompense enough for a whole worlds loss: Phil. 1, 23.
the having of Christ make every condition gainful, Christ says St. Paul is
both is life and death advantage. Israel by leaving Egypt, got a land flowing
with milk and honey. Mose^ by leaving the honor of Pharaohs Court, got
greater honor in becoming both a leader and a wonder-worker before the
children of Israel in the wilderness: Peter by leaving his nets became a
fisher of men, the Lord has many ways to make the grestest losses of his
servants most advantageous: by death it self a gracious man has a gain o^
much light he beholds the Sun in the fullness of his rising: 1 Cor. 13.12. 1
Ioh. 3.1.2 3.
he sees face to face, and knows even as he is known: he has a gain or
complete purity, Ephe. 5.26. Act 12.7.
like Absolon in another respect, having no blemish from the crown of the
head, unto the sole of the font, a man without spot or wrinkle: he has a gain
of liberty, he comes as Peter out of Herod's prison, all his setters smitten
off, as Israel out of the red sea leaving Satan, the world, and his own
corruption there drowned behind him. Lastly he baths gain of the greatest
honor communicable to the soul of man, Rev. 2.10. 2 Timothy 4 8.
a crown of life and glory given him: and hence it is hat such are willing to
leave and lay down all for Christ, that they may leave the full fruition of
him.

This by way of reprehension reproves two sorts of men: Use.
First such as are so far from leaving and laying down all for Christ, for
the present and future enjoyment of Christ; that they will neither lay out, nor
lay down any thing for Christ: so far from being willing and desirous with
Paul to be dissolved from their bodies, that they will not be dissolved from
the least part, or parcel of their possessions, honor, riches, pleasures,
liberties or privileges amongst men for Christ's sake: but when Christ, the
cause of Christ, the church of Christ in the course of Gods providence, call
for help, relief, supportment, comfort, and encouragement, at these men's
hands as sometimes David did at the hands of Nabal these men like the sons of
1 Samuel 25.11.
Nabal, answer Christ as Nabal their father answered David, who is David and
who is the son of Iesse; there be many servants now a days that break away
every man from his master, shall I then take my bread and my water and my flesh
which I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not
whence they be: thus they are ready to answer who is Christ, and who is the
church of Christ, there be many that rebel and without cause draw troubles and
calamities on their own heads: shall I then take my bread and water, my
possessions and riches which I have provided for me and mine, and give it to I
know not who: and of these may Christ truly say as David did of Nabal surely
in vain have I kept all that these fellows have, for they have requited me
evil for good: and as David was full of wrath against Nabal, and resolved the
utter extirpation of him and his house, so no doubt the indignation of Christ
is kinled, and burns like fire against such merciless and cruel caitiffes:
neither can they expect a blessing but a curse on themselves and their
posterity after them the sentence of our Savior against such is very
dreadful, and such as may make them act Belshazar living, in the midst of
their great possessions. Matthew. 25
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the
d^vill and his Angels, for I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat thirsty and
ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger and ye took me not in unto you. I was
naked and ye clothed me not: sick and in prison, Judge. 8 5.6,
and ye visited me not: verily (says Christ) in as much as ye did it not to
one of the least of these ye did it not to me, and these shall go into
everlasting pain: you may please to call to mind the story between Gideon
and the princes of Succoth: Gideon and his men were weary and aint in the
pursuit of their enemies, and Gideon said unto the men of Succoth, give I pray
you morsels of brean unto the people that follow me for they be weary that I
may follow after Zeba and Zalmunna Kings of Midian: to whom the princes of
Succoth answered, are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna now in thy hands that we
should give bread unto thine (...): to whom Gideon replied, therefore when the
Lord has delivered Zeba an Zalmunna into mine hands I will tear your flesh
with thorns of the wilderness and with briars: which upon his victory he did
accordingly: Gideon was a type of Christ, and Christ is the Captain of the
Lords host: Ios. 5.14.
when his soldiers his people at this day are weary and faint in fighting his
battles, in defending his cause, in pursuing his and their enemies, Christ
speaks to many amongst us, as Gideon to the men of Succoth: give I pray bread,
flesh, lodging, clothing, to these men that follow me, that stand for me, that
fight for me and my truth; that lay down all for me and my cause: to whom many
men answer as the men of Succoth answered Gilead, are the Cavalleirs now in
thine hands? have thou vanquished and overcome them: it is yet doubtful which
side will prevail; why then shall we give our bread unto, or make provision
for thine army: but let these men look to it, when Zeba and Zalmunna when the
public and open enemy shall be suodued, Christ has thorns and briars,
fearful judgments for them that withdraw their assistance in the day of the
Churches distress, judgment merciless is the portion of them that show no
mercy.

Secondly, Mat. 1.20.
it repr^veth such as will spare something, but not the best things like them
of old in the prophet, that would spa^e the blind the lame and the sick for
sacrifice, but not that which was sound and without blemish: Iam. 2.16. Ezekiel.
33.31.
they will spare the tongue, but not the hand their bodly presence but not
their hearted soul presence: they will spare some but not all for Christ, when
they are put upon this, to leave all, and take Christ alone, Mat. 19.21.
they go away sorrowful: some will spare their goods but not their lives,
they will not with Paul be dissolved, Peter once left all, but he would not at
that time leave his life for Christ, but denied his Master to save his life:
now these men do herein, and hereby plainly discover.

First an overprizing of the creature, so esteem it, M^t. 8.
that they value the unworthlest of their possessions as the Gaderines did
their swine above Jesus Christ: so love it, that upon the loss, or likely hood
of taking it away, they go weeping after it as sometimes ^haltiel went weeping
after Mical to Bahurim: so adore and serve it, so rest and rely upon it, that
when it is gone they run up and down like Mica after his idol, Judge. 18.24.
and cry out as men undone.

Secondly a shameful underprizing of Christ: he that will not leave a pebble
for a pearl, a broken bottell for a river, a barren branch for a fruitful
tree, under values the pearl, river, tree, all creatures excellency is nothing
in comparison of Christ's glory: they very wickedly, and shamefully disparage
Christ, that prefer or equalize any thing to Christ; Luke 14.8.
let such men with the invited guests in the parable, never look to partake of
Christ with comfort, whose love unto, or delight in the creature withholds them
from giving their hearts unto Christ.

Thirdly, hereby they hazard the very loss of what they retains, and get by
leaving Christ, their loss is ever greater then their gain, usually they
loose the very thing which they withhold; Ioh. 12.
he that will save his life shall loose it, he that will save his honors, his
riches, his liberty his favor with men shall loose the same: how ignominious
to all succeeding generations has been the name of the Scribes and Pharisees
who for the maintenance of their own name and honor, studied and consulted
the eclipsing and obscuring of the name and honor of Christ: how odious is the
name of Judas who labored his own gain, more then gaining of honor and souls
to his Master Christ: take this for thy portion whosoever thou art that seek
to make thy self rich and honorable, with the loss and dishonor of Christ,
thy name and riches both shall be everlastingly buried in the dust of dishonor
and reproach.

Fourthly, hereby they draw a curse on themselves and on their possessions, 2 Samuel 6.^.
they having of Christ like the Arc to the house of Obed Edon makes all to
prosper, like the ^rce to the waters of Marah, it makes the bitterest condition
pleasant and comfortable: Exo. 15, 25.
the denial of Christ the loss of Christ turns all into a curse, like the
evil herb that turned the prophets pot into a pot of death: 2 Kings 4.40.
all that men get against Christ, all that men keep with the dishonor of
Christ, proves like Achans golden wedge and Babylonish garment, Ios. 7.
a curse and ruin to their whole possession, therefore thus says the Angel of
the Lord, curse ye Meroz, Judge. 5.13.
curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help
of the Lord against the mighty

Fifthly hereby they contract shame, raise a cloud of dishonor upon their own
heads, that never shall be blotted out: is it not the shame of all shames, to a
wise to forsake her husband for the love of an unworthy servant; for a son to
leave his parent, and with the Prodigal to run a rioting with loose and
dissolute companions, to a soldier to leave his captain, and betake himself
unto the enemies quarters: is Christ your husband, your father your Captain;
will you leave him for the gain the honor, the pleasure of the world? will
you leave him and enter consort with profane people; will you fly from him, and
join with his enemies, be assured then your memory shall rot, your name shall
go out like a candle: leaving nothing but an unsavory smell behind it Your
honor shall lie in the dust, your name shall everlastingly perish.

This by way of counsel should advise all men to work their hearts to allow
prizing of their present estate, and every thing they have here, incompart on
of the enjoyment of Christ's Gods children desire to be dis^ed, they know it to
be better to be with Christ, then to continue here therefore look on all your
outward privileges, and prerogatives as on d^gand dross in comparison of the
excellency of Christ, Phil. 3 8.
nay look on the gift, and on all the best things of God which you have here in
this ^^e, in comparison of the full enjoyment of Christ, even a few gleani^^s
^n comparison of the full vintage as on the daw^ing, in comparison of the
Noonday, as on some small love tokens in comparison of the complete enjoyment
of the bridegroom: 2 Cor. 1.22.
we have the good things of God now as waters in a bottle, then we shall have
them as waters in the fountain, earnest penny, then we shall have them in the
full sum.

This ministers matter of sweet and singular consolation to the surviving
friend of all the godly deccated: it was their desire to be dissolved, Judge.
8.2.
it is better, yea far better for them, they have a possession now, the least
mite whereof is better then all the possessions of the earth we may say of this
as Gideon did of the gleanings of Ephraim: the gleanings of Ephraim are better
then the vintage of Abiezer here they were as ^itors now their mairrage is
consumm^^e, here they were as men walking in setters, now they are as men
walking in chains of gold: here their bread was mingled with grav^ll, and their
drink with gall, now they have a sumptuous and a costly feast, here they were
as soldiers in the Battle, now they have a glorious crown put upon them, here
they were (...) seed-men sowing in tears, now they are as harvest men reaping
in great job: here they were as runners in a race, now they have obtained the
prize: here they were as wor^s and no men, obscured with many clouds, now they
have a name as glorious as the Sun, here their dw^lling was as in a dungeon, as
in a house continually dropping through and ready to fall, now they have a
glorious ^al^ce wherein to dwell here they had consortship with men who were as
thorns in their sides, Rev. 14.13.
now they have communion with God, with Christ, with the glorious Angels and
glorified Saints: in a word now they are ceased from their labors, and heir
works follow them: therefore as we sorrow at our own loss, 1 These. ^13 14.
so let us rejoice in their gain remembering that of the Apostle. I would not
brethren have you ignorant concerning them which are a sleep, that ye sorrow
even not as others which have no hope, for if we believe that Jesus is dead,
and is risen, even so them that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

4. This by way of Excitation should persuade and move men to a singular
willingness to leave all for Christ to lay down life, and all, and be desirous
to be dissolved, for the enjoyment of Christ, to suffer wrong for Christ, to
abide in any low and sad condition with Christ as Ruth with Naomi: to long for
Christ's coming; to say with the Spouse, come Lord Jesus: But how shall we work
our hearts to this, to be willing to suffer for Christ to work for Christ to
lay down, Answer 1. Psalm 51.8. Job. 33.19.20.
and leave all for Christ.

Be experienced in the bitterness of sin, how it breaks the bones How it
causes man to abborre his bread, and his soul, dainty meat, how it makes his
flesh to fail: Romans 7.14.
that it cannot be seen, and his bones to shiver, How it strikes with sorrow,
and makes man to cry, O miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this
body of death, be experienced in the misery of this bondage, and thou shall not
much fear any prison whereinto man can cast thee; be sensible of the weight of
this burden, and the imposition of Pharaohs burdens shall not much molest
thee: know thou the hidiousnesse of a tempestuous and accusing consciences, and
all the accusations of men shall not much perplex thee, be sensible of the
bitterness of Gods wrath against sin, and the declination of the wrath of men
shall never prevail with thee to draw thee to do evil, be acquainted with the
loss which comes by sin, and thou shall be willing to loose all rather then
fall into any sin, be sensible of the troublesomnesse of this Inmate sin, and
thou shall be willing to go out of this house of thy flesh that thou may
cease from sin, the more the soul is afflicted with the burden of its own
corruption, the more it is experienced in the bitterness of the fruits of
sin the more it longs to depart from this tabernacle of the flesh and to be
with Christ. Col 3.11.


Secondly get a through taste of the goodness and sweetness of Christ, taste what
Christ is to the soul when all is gone, even all in all, a Sun in darkness,
a(...) in drought, and a stoore house in every want: and without Christ all
worldly fulness is very vanity and emptines, a body without a soul a s^mpe
without oil, a bone without marrow. Every high thing without Christ is base,
every strong thing without Christ is weak, and every full thing without Christ
is empty: it is Christ that fills all in all he is the fulness of our
knowledge, he that knows not Christ is very blind and ignorant, he is the
fulness of our faith, if we apprehend not Christ our faith is all empty
hand; he is the fullnes of our Love, love is never perfect, never rests
until Christ is embraced, he is the fulness of our joy, if we joy not in
Christ, we rejoice in a thing of naught, he is the fullnes of all our
possesions, if we posses not Christ with them we have but a barren possession,
like the dry ground which Caleb gave unto his daughter Achsa without the wither
springs, Ios. 15.19.
therefore get a full and thorough taste of Christ, of the sweetness and
pleasantnes of Christ, as the eye the sweetness of the Sun, the palate the
sweetness of the wine, satiate thy soul in Christ, in the goodness, fullnes
fatnes, and sweetness which comes from him, marry thy soul to him, take up
thine abode and dwelling with him; fill thine eyes with the beholding of
Christ's beauties, and say as Peter when he saw the glorious transfiguration of
Christ on the mount, It is good being here. Feed thy soul on Christ and say
with them John 6. John. 6.
Lord give us evermore of this bread. Let thy heart so love him, so admire him,
so choose, so cleave unto him, that thou may be able to say of Christ as
David of Goliahs sword, there is none to that, there is none to Christ; and
this will make thee willing to leave, and lay down life and all for Christ.

Thirdly got assurance of glory with Christ, be sure of reigning with him, and
thou shall be joyful in suffering and laying all down for him were the
soldier sure of the conquest and the crown, he would never fear to enter the
battle, assurance of the crown of life exceedingly sweetens man's passage
through the valley of death. Get clear and invincible evidence of Gods love,
and of intrest in the first resurrection, and then as Joseph willingly put of
his prison garment, so shall you this garment of your flesh, and as Israel went
joyfully through the sea to Canaan, so shall you through the deep waters of
all sorrows, troubles, changes yea death it self, unto heaven. You shall have
a desire to depart and be with Christ which is far better.

Now concerning this our deceased brother; There are in the course of divine
providence, some acts of God toward him worthy of observation; and some acts
again of his, in themselves worthy of imitation, If you cast your eye on God
and behold him in the way of his providence and dispensation you may observe.

1. An act of Gods liberal and bou-tifull communication; from small beginnings
the Lord increased and multiplied his outward and earthly stock to a great
abundance: he might have said as old Jacob did. I am less then the least of
all the mercies, Genesis 32 101
and all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant: for with my staff
came I over this Jordan, I now have gotten two Bands: you must know that riches
are the Lords, and he does with his own what be please: Mat. 20.5.
it is not the naked having, but the well using of riches that makes them
truly comfortable to them that have them. (...) 2.5.
It is not the rich in worldly goods, but the rich in faith are heirs of the
Kingdoms which God has provided for them that love him, riches without grace
and Holiness are but as a lamp in a foolish virgins hand without oil,
therefore as Christ charged his disciplet not to labor for the bread which
perishes but for the bread which endures to everlasting life: John 6.
so labor you not for fading and perishing riches, but for that riches, Heb.
10 34.
which is an abiding substance: when God makes men not only rich in goods, but
in true and saving goodness, there goes the character of Gods undoubted loving
kindness.

Secondly, You may here of serve Gods act of Exaltation; the Lord raised him
from a low condition, to the highest pitch and step of outward dignity this
place could afford him; wherein you may see that of Hanna verified, 1. Sam.
2.7.8.
The Lordmak the poor, and makes rich brings low and exalts, be raises
up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to
set them among princes, and ^o make them inherit the throne of glory: you may
here see that of the Palmist made good. Psalm. 7 5.6.7.
Promotion comes neither from the East, nor fram the West, nor from the
South, but God is the Judge, he makes low, and he makes high: Yet this
observe, that when God does not only exalt a man in civil jurisdiction over
his brethren but in spiritual jurisdiction over his corruption, Satan and the
world, that is the man whom God makes truly honorable: that man alone who
honors the place of eminency wherein God sits him, by his wise and gracious
deportment in it, and faithful discarge of it, is the man that shall be
everlastingly honored.

knowledge and understanding in the things of this life and partly in the
things of a better life: now there is a knowledge Hystoricall, and a knowledge
my^icall a knowledge speculative and a knowledge experiamentall, a knowledge
discussive and a knowledge practical: that man that does not only know the
way of God but all walk in it, is the man that shall be surely blessed, that
knowledge alone which is affective, submissive, and communicative argues a
saving illumination i^ them that have it, much knowledge in the understanding
without suitable obedience in the conversation, does exceedingly aggravate man's
condemnation

There are also some acts of his, which in themselves are worthy of Imnitation.

First, An act of Ministration he was not a sealed fountain, he kept not all
unto himself, but for diverse years together laid aside a certain some every day
for the poor: simply to give of what a man has, is not enough: he alone that
gives in love to God, in pity to them that need, Heb 23.13.
and for the glory of God, is the man that shall not loose his reward: thus to
communicate and to do good, is a sacrifice wel-pleasing in the sight of God.

Secondly, His discourse and communication was often of the best things, he
knew how to speak to edification; and usually according to that of our Savior,
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and so I suppose we are
to conceive it, unless we know the contrary to it.

Thirdly, It was observed by such as were very near him, that he seldom did
set himself about any weighty undertaking, but he first addressed himself to
God by prayer for council and a blessing: barely to pray is insufficient to
argue any man to be a child of God; that prayer alone is acceptable, and
returns with a blessing which proceeds from faith and unfeigned affection.

Lastly, you all know that he was a zealous maintainer and stout defender of
the Jurisdiction authority dignity and privileges of this Incorporation; and
as touching the common controversy of the Kingdom I am very confident by what
I have heard him speak, and seen him do that he was very really and cordial
to the Parliament, however some jealousies to the contrary were raised.

But why or for whose sakes is all this spoken, but for yours that are living:
shortly to let you see the vanity of all outward things, how then like Jonahs
goard that came up in an evening and wither in the morning, to let you see that
richer profit not in the day of wrath, only righteousness delivers from
death. 2. To move you to a faithful employment of that talent wherewith the
Lord has entrusted you, notwithstanding all your wealth and authority your
body like this your brother will lie shortly in the dust, and you shall appear
before the Lords tribunal there to receive according to that which you have
done in the body whither it be good or evil: therefore like good nurses draw
forth now your full breasts to nourish the Lords hungry servants cast out the
beams of consolation upon them that set in sorrow and sadness, as the Sun
casts out his light for the direction and comfort of poor travelers, and
the clouds their rain for there freshing and making fruitful of the dry and
barren ground. 3. To stir you to be men of prayer indeed, to pray not like
Mariners in a storm, not formally, customarily, coldly, and for fashion only
as many do, like a company of canting beggars that pray for custom and not
for conscience, but understandingly, sensibly affectionately that Christ may
hear and help you, and that Christ may abundantly bless and prosper you,
acquaint your selves with God by prayer daily, sweetly, thoroughly that peace,
and mercy may be upon you. 4. To persuade you to consecrate your selves and all
your abilities unto God to be active and lively indeed for God, to be
faithful in keeping Covenant with God, to be full and fruithfull in every
good way and work of God; to work and keep your soul in such an
understanding, holy, humble, penitent, believing, heavenly, sincere,
circumspect, and universally gracious frame and temper, condition and posture,
that you be able at all times and seasons, in all estates and conditions every
one for himself to say with the Apostle. I have a desire to be dissolved and be
with Christ which is serve better.

FINIS.

