A SERMON Appointed For Saint Paul's Cross, But Preached In Saint Paul's Church,
ON THE DAY OF HIS MAJESTY'S HAPPY INAVGVRATION.

MARCH 27. 1642.

By RICHARD GARDYNER, D. D. and Canon of Christ-Church, Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the sign of the Angel in Ivy-Lane. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD, EARL OF DORSET. The grand encourager of my
studies.
My Lord,
THe Auditors of this Sermon have passed their verdict that the Complexion
thereof is strong enough to come abroad, and to endure the public Air. Their
diffusive charity procured the means of communicating it to more ears, and
eyes then their own: But I am resolved it shall fly no further then your
Lordship shall please to add wings to it. The conscience of gratitude promptes
me to acknowledge that I have ripened, and grown to maturity by the warm
beams of your noble favor, and so encourages me to crave the same indulgent
influence upon this later issue of my brain. The Dialect discovers that it is
not of a different extraction from my former Labors. For freely, and sincerely
it speaks out the Dictates of a heart sound, and true to the King, and Country.
This supports me to walk as it were upon the ridge of a house, with such a
steady pace, that securely I overlooke all dangers, which might ensue by
lapsing on the dexter, or sinister side. The smart of some like a Sea-mark has
warned me to decline those Rocks, and Shelves, whereon incautelously they have
split. And yet lest the medicine here prescribed should turn to a wound, I
have attired Truth with an in offensive dress, and tempered it with
moderation; well knowing that gentle language has often been prevalent, where
the boystrous sword could not. To expunge misconstructions, and to clear all
scruples, I have anatomized, and laid open my whole inward man touching some
Doctrinals, and Circumstantials now much agitated, and wherein I might be
mistaken; hoping thereby to stand upright in the Judgment of Knowing Men, whom
alone I care to satisfy.

My Lord,

The drift of the Discourse is to cement together affectionate obedience in the
People, and cheerful protection in the Sovereign. The one being the highest
felicity of the King, and the other the greatest blessing of the Subject. The
completing of which happiness, is Your Honors daily practice; and shall still
be the study, and prayer of

Your Lordships obliged in all Observance, RICHARD GARDYNER.

A SERMON UPON THE DAY OF THE KING'S INAVGVRATION.
1 TIMOTHY 2.1, 2. J exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men:

For Kings and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness, and honesty.


WHEN vice grows so impudent that it out-braves Authority, and dares adventure
upon the danger of it, it were cowardice in a Governor to be blank'd. This
made Saint Paul, whose usual method was to cure by soft, and easy ways, to
stand upon his Apostle ship, and, as it is registered in the close of the
precedent Chapter, to censure Hymeneus and Alexander, because for some by
respects, they quitted their Station, and apostated from their faith, and
religion. Now that this, and the like awing Acts might be more successful, he
exhorts us to mix our souls in an unanimous devotion, that so a blessing may
descend upon that Government, which concerns the good of all, whether of
delinquents, that they may be reformed, or not delinquents, that they may be
forewarned, or the Common directive Head of them both, that the influence of
his Power may be more effectual in the orderly guiding of the body politic.
So that the Text is an Exhortation, Preaching a duty with its several
branches, J exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and Thankesgivings be made; The object is first laid down
generally, for all men; and then particularly, for the most Eminent of all men,
for Kings; and so by rule of subordination, for all that be in Authority; The
end, to lead a quiet, and peaceable life; the qualification, in all godliness,
and honesty. I must begin, as I am exhorted, first of all with Prayers,
Supplications, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings.

The Eye of Nature could discern, Aristes.
That Man by nature, is a Suppliant to his Maker; and the Light of the World
did foresee that this tribute of Prayer would be tendered every where, so that
not doubting of the matter, he instructs in the form. Matthew. 6.
When you Pray, Pray thus. The old people of Rome held it in such a religious
esteem, that they did institute a public Officer, by the name of Conditor
Precum, the Compiler of Supplications, whose task was to make particular
Collects upon gratulations for evident benefits. And not only Rome, but the
Inhabitants of the round world used prayer as an Introduction for the
happiness of all their designs. Still they went to work (...) by invocating
their Tutelar God. Our Church in Celebrating this happy Jnauguration of our
King. begins first of all with Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and
Thankesgiving, as with the prime, and principal part of Gods Worship. For
which reason the House of God is denominated the house of Prayer, it being the
exercise of the Church Militant here, and of the Triumphant above. Certainly
that religious Queen Elizabeth used earnestly by prayer to wrestle with the
Almighty, as Jacob did, for a blessing, and obtained it fully: For out of a
Comfortable feeling she frequently used to say, as Master Cambden relates, she
had rather by prayer talk devoutly with God, than hear others speak
eloquently of God. I say no more of the two excellent duties of Praying, and
Preaching but only this, Let not the one justle out the other, but let them
go hand in hand together, that God may be thereby Glorified, and the Church
Edified.

To keep my self to the words of my Text, I must acquaint you that by
Supplications we declare our humility; by Prayer we proclaim a Deity; by
Intercession we make way for Charity; by Thankesgiving we cheer up, and keep
warm the very life of Piety. To Supplicate, and not earnestly to Pray, is to
propose to be denied, he means not to obtain that leaves off in the very
Prologue: To Pray, and not to intercede, is to be afraid to be heard, to think
we shall be punished with a grant: To Supplicate, to Pray, and Intercede, and
yet to intend no retribution of thanks, is rather an expostulation for a due,
than a recognition of a Boon. That therefore this Juge Sacrificium of the
Church may ascend as a well pleasing Incense, it must be our care to leave out
none of these Apostolical ingredients, but to make a happy Compound of
Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and thanksgivings, and that [For all
men.]

There is no man so bad, but he may challenge our Prayers, and none so good,
but he may have need of them. The choycest of men are not the absolute, though
the principal Subject of our Devotion. It Is so with our Prayers as with our
Almesaeedes, by the one we do good to all, but especially to the household of
Faith, by the other we are to solicit God for every Man, though in a peculiar,
and more fervent relation for the chief of men. There be some who will have
none comprehended within the list of their prayers, but such as are sure of the
benefit. Will you have their reason? It Is far fetched, even from the close^
of the Almighty, and grounded upon his eternal purpose. There is no reason,
say they, to pray for their salvation, which God has never promised, or to
wish them eternal bliss, whom he has assured us he will condemn. By way of
answer, I must confess I should be ready to join hands with them could they
but show me who these were. But where is the Counselor of the Lord, that dares
say, this Man is a vessel of wrath, that other is the child of Beliall, and
of a third that he is infallibly allotted to eternal perdition. Since the
reprobation of any is locked up in Gods own bosom, and that he, who is a
wild Olive to day, to morrow may be grafted into a better stock, I see no
pretense why this Catholic duty of praying for all should not be enlarged to
high and low, good or bad. What if they dwell in darkness, and the shadow of
death? What if their religion be Idolatry, and a mere contradiction to piety?
The more misery and infidelity we see them plunged in, the more does Christian
affection bind us to pity their estate, and study their conversion. Charity,
which hopes all things, prays also for all men, and it becomes not us
altogether to condemn any man, whose repentance is not yet cut off by death.
There is a distinction, and God that knows it made it, but we must do our
own work, and let God alone with his.

Now if any shall yet question how the Almighty can accept those prayers, which
are sometimes against his will, though not with our knowledge: Let him know,
says Saint Austin, Enchir.
that a man may with a will that is good, will that, which God will not, so he
submits to Gods will, and rest when it appears. For the general revealed will
of God, which is here expressed to pray for all men, being the rule of our
actions, and not that, which remains secret, our requests for things opposite
to this secret will are not the less gracious in his sight.

Wherefore it is a Calumny to object we pray to God to save those men, whom he
determines not to save, whereas our prayers, abstracting from the reprobation
of any private person, desire no more than in possibility may be, and that also
not peremptorily, but meekely prostrating our wills, and requests to his
pleasure, and gracious interpretation. But can we doubt to pray for all men,
when Christ himself has enjoined us by Command, and commanded us by example?
Look upon him on the Cross, and behold, when the whole man was battered, and
every part besieged with a distinct death, when the tongue only enjoyed a short
truce, he used it not to empty his own sorrow, but to beg his Enemies
pardon. Now if this duty includes so large a prospect, as that it eyes all
mankind universally, even the Beggar that lies by the wall has an interest in
our prayers, how ought they to be multiplied for Kings, by whom we have
recourse to our Oratories, these Offertories of praise, and thanksgiving? For
although it be the Lord, which originally dat esse, and escam, gives us our
life and living, yet it is the Lords Anointed, who orders the distribution, and
metes out every ones dimensum, his just share, and thriving portion.

It is by him that we move in our proper sphere, and are not justled out of it.
The poor man's fragments, and the rich man's basketfuls are preserved by his
restraining power. Every crum we put into our mouths, every drop wherewith we
cool our tongues the very air we continually breathe in and out, we enjoy by
the wise government of the King. Were it not for the binding force of
Sovereignty, who durst raise a damme against the Torrent of Corruption? Our
meetings would be mutinies, our Pulpits Cockpits, authority would lose its
authority, no subordination, no subjection, the honorable would be levelled
with the base, the prudent with the child, all would be amassed, and hudled up
in an unjust parity, and the Land over-runne with inflexible generations.

Before the Deluge we read of no Kings, and therefore we find those times to
be the worst of all times, the inundation of vice being a greater plague than
that other of the Flood. Turn to the Annals of Israel, in the book of Judges,
Chap. 17.19.21. and there Micah's Idolatry, the defiling of the Levites wife
after an insatiable, and brutish manner, the bloody destruction of Jabes
Gilead, the rape of Virgins by fraud, and violence, these, and much more may
serve as a sad story, how it is far better to live under an evil King than
no King. In those days mischief did reign, and knew no bounds, all villainies
were let loose, and armed, standing like thieves by the highway side at noone
day, because, says the Spirit of God, there was no King in Israel. And
therefore though the Lord complains in Hosea, Chap. 8. they had set up a King,
but not by him, yet this does not infer that Majesty is not Jure divino, God
being displeased, not as if the authority of Kings was unlawful, but because
their infidelity, and distrust in his loving goodness, the lust of their own
liberties, their crooked and sinister means in purchasing it, were strangers
to him. For of all forms of Government, the Regal is the best: Tacitus
observes in the first of his Annals, how certain wise men discoursing of the
life of Augustus, after his death, affirmed rightly that there was no other
means to appease the disorders of a State, but by reducing it under the
Principality of one. A glimpse whereof appears through the whole course of
nature. For as God is one, who rules all, so he has created one chiefest
Light, to be Master of the day, and the Moon at night. You cannot take a turn
in some Gardens, but you may behold among the little Bees, one like a Monarch
leading the swarm, and the residue attending. Among the Cranes one flies
before, and one is Sentinel for the whole Company: in brute beasts, one guides
the flock, and is as it were Herds-man to all the rest. And may it not hence
be gathered, that man as far as may be, should likewise be conformed to Nature?

How dare then the Anabaptists deduce their Anarchy from the Law of God, that
so they may outlaw the Law of man? Saint Paul in the fifth Chapter to the
Galatians, bids us stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, they therefore will spurn at humane authority, as if Christianity, and
obedience to the Magistrate, were incompatible, and in themselves repugnant. If
they would reflect on the ^ to the Corinthians, and the 15. the same Apostle
would warrant them, that rule, and authority must hold till the last day of
Judgment, when the Kingdom is delivered up to God the Father. If sickness be
here, it is expedient that here we should have Physic; and if we be subject
to transgress, there must be government to suppress, and censure. But if they
be so pure that they cannot quench the Spirit of Grace, then Kings are
advanced to erect for them Trophes, and Monuments of glory. For if you do
well, you shall have praise of authority, 1 Epist. of Saint Peter chap 2.

Good God! what do these men conceive of Christ, of the Apostles, and blessed
Martyrs? Did not the Apostles yield allegiance to barbarous Infidels? Dare they
say our Savior did temporize, when he paid tribute to Caesar? Or will they
condemn the Primitive times of pusillanimity, in that they patiently hugged
their death, yielded their limbs to be torn, and rent asunder by the cruelty
of Tyrants? The people of Israel exhibited obedience to the Kings of Babylon,
of Egypt, of Persia. Those three famous Jews in the third of Daniel, were so
trusty to Nebuchadnezzar, that he made them universal Governors over all his
dominions Julian was an unbeleeving Emperor, was he not an Apostata, an
oppressor, an Idolater? and yet, In Psalm. 124.
says Saint Austin, Christian soldiers did serve that unbeleeving Emperor.

When they came to the cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord but him
which is in heaven; when he would have them sacrifice, and worship Idols, they
preferred God before him: But when he said, Go forth to fight, invade such a
Nation, they presently obeyed, they distinguished their eternal Lord from
their temporal, and yet were they subject to their temporal Lord for his
sake, that was their eternal Lord, and Master.

This should school unyoked stubbornness, and make each neck pliable unto
all manner of Ordinances of man, for the Lords sake, for so is the Will of God,
1 Pet. 2.13, 14. For seeing all Kings, without distinction, or restriction, are
Gods Vicegerents, profound King James in his book of the true Law of free
Monarchy, largely proves that submission is to be rendered to them, whether
just, or unjust, not so much as they are Men, but as they are the Deputies of
God, bearing a kind of Divinity about them, which makes their persons and power
always Sacred, and inviolable. If their injunctions do not contradict the
greatest King, we are to be nimble by an active obedience, in performing what
they will; If they clearly oppugn the Law of God, in case we cannot well fly
from their fury, we must be content by our passive obedience to yield our
selves to be executed rather than to execute them. Bonus si fuerit qui tibi
praeest, nutritor tuus est; malus fi fuerit, tentator tuus est, is Saint
Austins Doctrine; Kings, if they be good, are our Protectors, if bad, they are
Gods Instruments to prove our Loyalty. They are styled the Rod of his fury, a
sword to punish sinners. Ashur, the rod of my wrath, I will send him to a
dissembling Nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of my
wrath. Esai. 10. The Prophet Jeremy calls that Ethnic Emperor, Nebuchadnezzar,
the servant of God Ier. 34. And Saint Paul terms the tyrant Nero in his time,
the Minister of God, Romans 13. Conci. 1. cont. Auxent. de basilic. Tradit.
This made Saint Ambrose confess that tears were his weapons against the
arms, and Soldiers of the Emperor, that he neither could, nor ought resist.
For since, as Tertullian speaks, Ad Scap.
they receive from God whatsoever they are, and are only less than God, it is
not for us vindictively to meddle with them. For who can lay hands on Gods
Anointed, and be innocent? 1 Samuel 24. It was spoken of King Saul, who contrary
to all Law, equity, and Religion, had causelessly slain the Priests of the Lord.

But though Saint Ambrose in Apologia David tells us, Nullis vocatur ad poenam
legibus, tutus Imperii Maiestate, yet Kings are not to think they are exempted
from the direction of their Laws, and from conforming their actions thereunto.
Indeed a Tyrant makes his will a Law, because what he wills he will have to be
a Law; but a good King makes the Law his will, because he wills that which the
Law wills, and therefore voluntarily imposes upon himself a necessity of
keeping it, that thereby he may set a keener edge upon his Subjects to observe
it. For the light of Governors good example, like the rising of the Sun,
will pass into all the Corners of their Dominions.

Besides, the very name Rex coming a Regendo, from ruling, does include that
with their Regal dignity, there is a mutual duty, which they are to discharge
to their Subjects for their service: As to defend Religion, and the Law of God,
to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, as his Majesty declares he
does, and will do, to provide by all possible endeavors for the safety and
peace of the Common wealth. In which, if they shall fail, the most High God,
whose eyes are always on them, to see what they do, will to the terror of
their souls, stretch his arm at last to give them the sorer stroke: For to
them, who walk not worthy of the rich blessings they have received, the
greatness of their Prerogatives, and exemptions here in this life, will be the
augmentation of their plagues, and punishments hereafter in the world to come.
Thus I have endeavored to make my speech like a Bell, right and fully rung, to
strike on both sides, clearly sounding the Due, and duty of the Ruler, no
less than of those who are under Rule, and Government: For as I abominate
those odious, dispiriting relations of Tyrant, and Slave, (with which, God be
blessed, we are not enthralled) so I shall ever study to cherish the
sprightfull, exhilarating dependances betwixt King and Subject.

Again, in regard the King is the safeguard of the People, reason good the
People should yield all subsidiary helps that tend to the advancement of the
honor, and glory of the King. For when the Sovereign is insufficient by his
own stock to provide for the Public good, or his own Dignity, whereupon
the Public depends, it is natural that supply be administered to him from
inferior members; and it is profitable for the members freely to yield a
fitting support, since if the Head continue drooping, the members will likewise
languish in a consumption.

And now let me entreat that none impose a meaning far wide from my drift.
It was never in my heart, or tongue, any way to infringe the proper rights,
liberties, and proprieties of the people: I move only for a voluntary, free
aid, or assistance. It were a great dis-service to the King to inflame his
Prerogative to the evacuation of the Subjects Right; both must be kept entire
to keep up the King, and Kingdom. Should Kings be without right Prerogatives,
some black mouthed Rabshakehs will not spare to cry out they have naught but
the Name of Kings to commend them. And a people not quickened by their Original
privileges, and native liberties, will prove Corpus sine pectore, a heartlesse
useless trunk, portending nothing but sad events, as the beasts of old were
said to do, when at their sacrificing, the heart was found to be consumed.
Such a People may fill up a number, they will hardly be accounted considerable
members of a Commonwealth, because they have no pulse from any intrinsecall
principle of their own, but like pawnes at Chesse are to be moved, and removed
only by the fancy of the external Agent. It is therefore the equity, and
prudence of his gracious Majesty, sincerely to profess that he is as tenderly
affected to the Privileges, and rights of his Subjects, as to the preeminence
of his own Crown; well knowing he cannot be a puissant King of a flourishing
Kingdom, but by being King of a free Nation.

I know no stronger motive to confirm your zeal for the Kings honor, then to
remember you how God himself is so zealous of their honor, that in the 16. of
the Proverbs, he charge not to detract from them, so much as in our thoughts.
He knows what vexations his chief Stewarts endure under him, and therefore
he would have their anguish sweetened with our dutiful, and awful regard. But
most of us admire the height of their exaltation, few there are who sound the
depth of their care. We are taken with the gold, and precious stones in their
Crowns, we consider not how they are lined with thorns, and that there are
thistles in their pillowes as in their Ensigns. Valor. Max. l. 7.
Antigonus found it, when he told an old wife that was praising unto him his
happiness in his reign, showing his Diadem, that, if she knew how many evils
it was stuffed with, she would be loath to take it up, if she found it lying
on the ground. Moses was a Governor by Gods own appointment, Numb. 11. yet he
was so tired out that he prays to be rid of his life. Charles the fifth, after
a victorious Reign changed his Court for a Cloister. It is then the less
wonder if in that enigmaticall parable propounded by Jotham, Judges 9. where
the trees went forth to anoint a King over them; the Olive would not leave his
fatness to macerate himself with the cares of a Kingdom, nor the Fig tree
his sweetness, to taste of the bitter sweetes of a Kingdom; nor the Vine his
fruitfulness, chearing both God and Man, to afflict himself with the barren
cares of a Kingdom. And thus because the Governors load is greater than their
honor, that they may be won to a cheerful acceptance, supplications are to
be made jointly for the Supreme, and for the subordinate, for Kings, and all
that be in Authority.

So great is the care of the Almighty, to see all things well ordered, that he
has placed a threefold subordinate Authority in the World, Domestical in
private Families, Spiritual in the Ministerial Keys, and Temporal in the
Magistrate. For one as One cannot possibly govern many, though his Princely
mind be accomplished with Heroique Excellencies. And therefore as God
suffers his Vicegerents to share with him in his highest Title, so has
Regal Authority communicated part of its Royalty to their Substitutes, that
the greatness of their trust may put them in mind of their charge, which is
the conservation of the Kings honor, and our peace They move like wheels, one
within the other, the lesser within the greater, yet they all move in the
strength of the King, as the under wheels in Ezekiels Vision did by the great
compassing wheel, which alone appeared. The Head derives influence of sense
and motion to all the inferior members, whereby they are sustained, yet does
the eye watch, the ear hear, and every sense is employed for the direction of
the hands, and feet. So albeit Originally it is the King, which under God
upholds the people, he being called (...), See Wisd. 6.24. A wise King
according to the (...), called stabilimentum populi; the support, stay, or
staff of the people.
as it were the foundation on which his subjects rest, yet he has his ears,
and Intelligencers for the ordering of the Common good. As therefore we owe
allegiance to God through the King, so we owe it to the King through his
authorized Officers, by whose presence, and guidance it comes to pass that
every man sits quietly under his own roof, which is the end of our prayers,
and the Kings care, that we may lead a quiet, and a peaceable life.

They breed but ill blood, who hold Dominion more for the pomp of the
Governor, than for the benefit of the governed. The Commonwealth of Rome made
that a quarrel betwixt them, and the Senate. Menenius Agrippa compared it in
his Apologue to the variance, which the members of the body had against the
stomach, they objected that it devoured all, and took no pains, but lay idly,
and sluggishly in the midst of the body, while the rest labored full sore; and
so the eye would not see for it, nor the hand work for it, nor the teeth chew
for it, but every member refused to do its office. The stomach soon after
wanting meat, and being empty, the eye waxed dim, the hand weak, the feet
feeble, all the body began to languish and pine away, insomuch that at the last
they were compelled to afford their mutual Offices for the strength of the
stomach, that so themselves might be strengthened. Thus it fares between the
King and the People, for subjection is more for the good of the State, than for
the state of the King. Hereupon some would have Diadema compounded of (...),
which may in a Greek conjunction of words be sometimes used for For, and
(...), which is the People. And not only profane Writers, but Saint Paul, 1
These. 2. makes Coronam to signify the People; A fair remembrance, that as the
Crown compasses the Kings head, so is he set in the midst of his Subjects
to be employed for their welfare; the concord, and tranquillity of the
Commonwealth, being his greatest honor, and felicity.

The Emblem of the Netherlands by stamping money with two earthen pots
swimming in the Sea, Cambdens Eliz.
and wittily inscribing, Si collidimur, frangimur, if we knock together we are
broken, has a useful Moral for these times. Should we come to hear the
dreadful, and confused noise of War, the thundering of the Ord'nances; If our
ploughshares should be turn^d into swords, and our sithes into spears, the
famine of bread, cleanenesse of teeth, and dearth of all good things, would
make us fill the ears of Heaven with Orizons for Kings, and all that be in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life. But we are grown fat
with peace, and so begin to loath it, as Israel did their Manna; it is made by
most the fuel of vice, an occasion of looseness, and secure idleness, as if
we said within our selves as Babell did in her prosperity, We shall never be
moved, there shall be no leading into captivity, nor complaining in our
streets. A great impediment of our quiet, and peaceable life are homebred, and
domestical foes. The first are Papists, false-hearted, forraine-hearted
Papists I mean, who have a tongue for the King, and a heart for his enemies,
Jacobs voice, Esau's hands, who will be ready at every turn to open the door,
and let the thief in, and like sly Foxes will show the way for the wild Boar
to destroy. Howsoever they pretend a detestation of those more then inhumane
cruelties, which their Pseudocatholique fraternity inflict upon bleeding
Ireland, yet should they get the mastery here, which I trust Gods goodness
will ever prevent, we must expect no mercy. Geball, Ammon, and Amalek, Spain,
the Pope, and the Eagle would fly upon us, and combine all their forces to
devour us. For as Mahomet in his Alchoran promises the highest seat in
heaven to him that kills most Christians, See Phil. Morn. l. de ver. Relig.
Chr. c. 33. p. 608.
so the Pope, and Jesuits make it a matter meritorious to kill Protestants,
Heretics, as they please despightfully to term us, yea the more of us they
murder, the more glorious reward they shall have in heaven. Yet let us pray to
God to convert them; as for those which will not be converted, let us beseech
the All-wise God to continue it in the heart of his Majesty, and the
Parliament, whom it concerns, to curb, and keep them under, not to let them
have the remes too much at liberty, lest they take head, and like a pampered
Palfry throw their Rider, and bring a ruin to their King and Country in the
end.

The second Domestique foes to our quiet, and peaceable life, may be new
fangled Sectaries, who rashly condemn whatsoever their private spirits does
disallow, and esteem all disordered, that has not concurrence with their
particular Tenets. This makes them without warrant to obtrude bold Pamphlets,
casting therein the frame of Religion in the mould of their own private
fancies, as if they would prescribe to Higher powers, what they should enact.
Saint Austin speaks sharply against such kind of Polypragmaticks, stiling
them men swollen with pride, mad with headiness, treacherous in spreading
calumnies, turbulent in sowing seditions, who lest they should be discerned to
want the light of truth, Vmbram rigidae severitatis obtendunt, do cast forth a
glimmering show of demure austerity. They are the true translated words of that
Father in his third book, and first chap. Cont. Parmen. Saint Bernard also
complains passionately against contentions children of the Church: Pax a
Paganis, Sermon. 33 ad Pastor. in Syn. et 33 in Cant.
pax ab haereticis, sed non profecto a Filiis; Pagans, says he, fight not,
Heretics write not, her children do both, and rip out Maternall trophes by
tongue, and pen, maintaining their quarrel non Ratione, sed Pertinacia, not by
weight of reason, but obstinate dint of will, Ierom. in c. 1. ad Romans
Vbi non Veritas quaeritur, sed Adversarius fatigatur, whose aim is the foil,
and tyring of the Adversary, never the search of the Truth. For it is the
practice of Contention to defend those errors, which a right Judgment
disproves, In c. ad Ephos.
Ne cedere videatur, says Saint Ambrose, lest together with the Tenet, the
disputer might seem to fall. Thus while they debate, thus while they tear,
thus while they rend the Church, they give a signal to them without, and
encourage Aliens to join blasphemy with their dissension.

Where is now that solemn use of unanimous agreement? Apobg. c. 39.
In Tertullians days there was such unity among Christians, that it was ad
stuporem Gentium, to the amazement of the Heathen, See, say they, how the
Christians love each other, and are ready to dye one for another! The time was,
when one house, one board, yea one soul could suffice three thousands, Act
4.32. but now, (alas!) we are so estranged from such goodness, that we dwell
asunder under one private roof, and they who should be one flesh, nourish a
faction like two Nations. It is that which Saint Paul blames among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.
we hear there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, and so he
concludes them carnal. For such Schisms are not of the Spirit, but works of
Satan, and therefore he is properly called in our English tongue the Devil,
from Divello, which signifies to unjoyne, and put asunder; for he is always
laboring to dissolve that which God has joined. Wherefore to prevent the
snare of jarres, wherewith we may be entangled through admiration of men's
persons, and writings, Saint Austins resolution in his nineteenth Epistle to
Saint Jerome is to be embraced. Alios ita lego, I so read other men's works,
that notwithstanding their sanctity, and learning, I am not of their mind,
unless the truth of their opinions may appear vel Probabili ratione, vel per
Authors Canonicos, either by probable reason, or by Canonical Scripture. For
the members of Christ's holy Church should be so inspired with one right faith,
as in the model of the body, all parts are informed with one soul. For such
as the soul is to many members, such is faith to many souls; If every member
had a distinct soul, where were the body? If every soul had a distinct form
of faith, where were the Church?

And here give me leave to discharge my whole conscience touching the
representaons of sacred stories, and some undoubted Saints, as yet remaining in
Cathedrals, and Chapels, that so I may endeavor to remove some scandal, that
has, or may be taken. My protestation is hearty, and sincere, that I abhor
adoration of Images, as well relatively, as absolutely. No worship is to be
given to them, directly in themselves, nor obliquely by reflecting on the
prototypes, which they represent. Where they are yet remaining, they are to be
used only as Ornaments, or Historical Commemoratives. Gregory the great, who
well might be called the last of the best, and the first of the worst Popes,
first called Images Laymens Books; the Popes succeeding made an impious use
thereof, by teaching they were the only fit books for the Laity to pore on,
depriving them of the waters of life, and prohibiting them to read the
Scriptures, contrary to the express letter of the Scripture. It were somewhat
tolerable had they interpreted, those words did only mean that ignorant men
by asking what is signified by those Representments, which they see pictured
before their eyes, and by pondering a right answer to their question, might so
be instructed as it were out of a book, that the piety of such holy persons,
and sacred acts, which are expressed by those visible objects, ought to be
imitated in their lives, and deaths. But such a fober construction hits not the
scope of their meaning, for they instruct the people downright to Idolize
them; Bellarmine the Atlas of their predominant Hierarchy, does not tremble
terminis terminantibus, in express terms to aver that the Images of Christ,
De Imagine. Sancto. l. 2. c. 21.
and the Saints are to be worshipped not only improperly, but properly, and by
themselves, so that they terminate the worship presented to them.

For my own part, as I will not contend with shadows, so I shall never any
way strive for shadows, being resolved to approve no further these external
decorements, and other circumstantials in Gods house, then the Policy of the
Land wherein I live, shall think good to support. And this I suppose is to
keep within the compass of leading a quiet, and peaceable life, in all
godliness, and honesty, which is the close of my Text, and the total sum of
Christianity.

The heathen Orator could say, Tull. l. 1. de Offic.
Inter bonos been agere oportet, among good, and honest men must be good, and
honest dealing; much more they who profess themselves Christians should be
thus affected For since man is a sociable Creature, every one owes that
naturally to another by which humane society is conserved: But men cannot live,
and converse, if they may not believe, and trust one another in godliness, and
honesty. For this seeming zeal, this formal honesty is like the Trojan horse
in Virgil, which was pretended the gift of Minerva, but proved the ruin of
Troy. So that godliness, and honesty, faith and good works must not be set at
odds, but connexed, and linked in our peaceable life, as the cause, and the
effect, the Sun, and the light. For peace without godliness is a profane,
unhallowed peace; and peace without honesty, is an adulterate, a counterfeit
peace, it turns the grace of God into wantonness. In godliness; otherwise our
peaceable life is no better then consenting in a faction, in a combination; for
there is Concors Odium, unity in hatred, when men make a league against a common
good. Jn honesty; that you do not by holy pretenses swallow widows houses,
and by color of distributing to pious uses scrape together what is not your
own; build an Hospital for a few, and purloyne from many; Such a liberality
being no better then bountiful cruelty. But our lives must be lead in all
godliness, and honesty, squaring our drifts by our religion, and not our
religion by our drifts, as the Ephesians did, who cried up Diana, Diana, but
gain was in it; they had learned to varnish their filthy lucre with devotion,
and to make their godliness, yea their goddess the handmaid, the Stalking
horse to their own private Interest. We are to pray for such a peace as Christ
gave to his Disciples, a peace, knit together in all godliness, and honesty. I
will follow my Apostle, and end as I began, exhorting all in their
supplications, prayers, Intercessions, and thanksgivings to magnify the
Almighty, by the providence of whose goodness we have a renowned King, who is
an indulgent, and careful Father of the Church, and Commonwealth, a constant,
Exemplary Encourager, and Advancer of all godliness, and honesty. Some Kings
have been so composed that Jngentes Virtutes, and ingentia vitia, eminent
vices no less then eminent virtues held a joint concurrence in them, as we see
the dross runs with the metal; but his gracious Majesty is of so refined,
so sanctified a temper, that envy it self cannot find the least tracke of a
reigning vice in him. Who see's not he is Rex Mitioris Jngenij? His clemency,
and moderation Proclaim him a King of his passions, as well as of Nations. And
therefore, Continue him O Lord long, long continue him unto us: Protect him
against inbred, and foreign Adversaries, against the Fox at home, and
ravening wolves abroad: Let his enemies bescattered, and those slain that hate
him: Make his seed to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven:
Establish so firm an unity with the Head, and the whole. Body of the Kingdom,
that there ever be an happy intercourse of Love and Protection, obedience and
service. Let no cunning of Satan, nor any machination of his adherents be able
to withdraw them from leading quiet, and peaceable lives in all godliness, and
honesty, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
FINIS.

