Mr. GRIMSTONS SPEECH, IN THE HIGH Court of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkely and are to be sold at his shop at the
flying Horse near York House. 1641.

Mr. GRIMSTONS. SPEECH, In the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
Mr. SPEAKER.
THese Petitions which have bin now read, they are all Remonstrances of the
general and universal grievances and distempers that are now in the State and
Government of the Church and Commonwealth, and they are not them alone: But
his Majesty's gracious Expressions the first day of Parliament, that calls me
up to speak at this present, contrary to my own Intentions.

Mr. Speaker, his Majesty, who is the head of the body politic, and the
Father of the Commonwealth, has complained first, declaring his sensiblenesse
of our sufferings, and amongst other things, has put us in mind of our
grievances, and has freely left it to our selves (for our redress and repair
therein) to begin and end, as we shall think fit. And this draws me on with
much cheerfulness and zeal to contribute my poor endeavors to so great a
work.

And Mr. Speaker, I conceive it will not be altogether impertinent for your
direction and guidance in that great place, which by the favor of his Majesty,
and this House you now possess, a little to recollect our selves in the
remembrance of what was done the last Parliament, and where we ended.

It will likewise be very considerable what has bin done since that
Parliament, and who they are that have bin the Authors and Causers of all our
miseries and distractions, both before and sithence.

Mr. Speaker, the last Parliament, as soon as the House was settled, a
Subsidiary aid and supply was propounded, and many Arguments used to give the
precedencie before all other matters and Considerations whatsoever.

On the other side, a multitude of Complaints and Grievances of all sorts;
as well concerning our Eternal as our Temporal estates were presented and put
in the other balance: The wisdom of that great Council waighing both
indifferently, and looking not only upon the dangers then threatened from
SCOTLAND (which are now upon us) but likewise taking into their consideration
the Condition and Constitution of the present government here at home,
concluded that they were in no capacity to give, unless their grievances were
first redressed and removed.

For Mr. Speaker, it then was, and still is, most manifest and apparent, that
by some judgments lately obtained in Court of Justice, and by some new ways
of Government lately started up amongst us; the Law of property is so much
shaken, that no man can say he is master of any thing: But all that we have, we
hold as Tenants by courtesy, and at will, and may be stripped of it at
pleasure.

Yet Mr. Speaker, desirous to give his Majesty all possible satisfaction and
contentment, as well in the manner of supply for expedition, as in the substance
and matter of it, we confined and limited our selves but to three particulars
only, and to such matters as properly and naturally should have reference and
relation to those 3. heads.

1. The first was the privileges of Parliament. 2. The second mattees of
Religion. 3. The third, the propriety of our goods and Estates.
And we began with the first, as the great Arc, in which the other two,
Religion and property are included and preserved.

Mr. Speaker, the violations complained of the last Parliament, touching our
privileges, were of two sorts; either such as had bin done out of Parliament.

Concerning the violations of the first sort, it was resolved by vote, that the
Speaker refusing to put a question, being thereunto required by the House.

Or to adjourne the house upon any command whatsoever, without the consent and
approbation of the House it self; were breaches and violations that highly
impeached our privileges.

And having passed the vote, J conceive it were fit we should now proceed a
little further, and consider of a way how to be repaired against them that have
been the violators: For Execution does animare Legem. The putting of an old
Law in Execution, you know Mr. Speaker, does oftentimes do more good then the
making of a new one.

As concerning the violations of the other sort, done out of Parliament in
Courts of Justice, and at the Counsel board, where neither our persons nor our
proceeding ought to have bin controlled or meddled withal; And as concerning
matters of Religion, and the property of our goods and estates, there were
diverse things then likewise agreed upon by vote, whereupon a conference was
desired to have been had with the Lords: But what interjections and rubs we
met withal by the way, and how the Lords counter voted the precedence of our
grievances. And how our Speaker was taken away from amongst us, and what an
unhappy conclusion we had at the last. The remembrance of it were a subject too
sad to begin another Parliament withal.

Therefore Mr. Speaker, I shall pass from what was done the last Parliament
and come to what has been done since that Parliament ended.

Mr Speaker, there are some worthy Gentlemen now of this house that were
members of the last Parliament, that carried themselves in the matters and
businesses then and there agitated and debated, with great Wisdom and
unexampled moderation. But what had they at last for all their pains in
attending the public strince of the Commonwealth, As soon as ever the
Parliament was ended, their studies and pockets were searched as if they had
been Fellones and Traitors, and they committed to several Goales with an
intention J am confident of their utter ruin and destruction, had they not
foreseen a danger approaching; For Mr. Speaker, if J be truly informed an
information was drawn, or at least, directions given for the drawing of it,
against them in the Star Chamber.

Mr. Speaker, there has been since the last Parliament a Synod, and in that
Synod a new Oath has been made and framed, and enjoined to be taken.

Mr. Speaker, they might as well have made a new Law, and enjoined the
execution of that, as enjoined and urged the taking of the other, not being
established by Act of Parliament and in point of mischief, the safety of the
Commonwealth, and the freedom and liberties of the Subject are more concerned
in the doing of the one then if they had done the other.

The next exception J shall take to it, is to the matter contained in the oath
it self.

Mr. Speaker, they would have us at the very first dash swear in a damnable
Heresy, that matters necessary to salvation are contained in the Discipline of
our Church.

Whereas Mr. Speaker, it has ever bin the tenet of our Church, that all things
necessary to salvation are comprehended and contained in the Doctrine of our
Church only; And that has always been used as an Argument until this very
present, against Antidisciplinarians, to stop their mouths withal; And
therefore that for that reason they might with the less regret and offense
conform and submit themselves to the Discipline of our Church.

And Mr. Speaker, for prevention in case the Wisdom of the state in this
great Counsel, should at any time think fit to alter any thing in the
government of our Church, they would anticipate and forestall our judgments,
by making us swear beforehand, that we would never give our consent to any
alteration.

Nay Mr. Speaker, they go a little further, for they would have us swear that
the government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc.
is Iure divino, Their words are, as of right it ought to stand; Whereas Mr.
Speaker, we meet not with the name of an Archbishop, or a Deane, or an
Archdeacon in all the new Testament; And whatsoever may be said of the Function
of Bishops it is one thing: But for their Jurisdiction it is merely Humana
institutione, and they must thank the King for it.

As for their gross, absurd, etc. wherein they would have men swear they know
neither what, nor how many fathom deep: There is neither Divinity nor charity
in it, and yet they would put that upon us.

Mr. Speaker, what they meant and intended by this new Oath, and their book of
Canons, and their book of Articles, which they would have our Churchwardens
sworn unto, to enquire of, and to present thereupon, J must confess I know
not, unless they had a purpose therein to blow up the Protestant Religion and
all the faithful professors of it, and to advance their Hierarchy a step
higher which I suppose we all fear is high enough already.

Mr. Speaker, they have likewise in this Synod granted a benevolence, but the
nature of the things agrees not with the name, for in plain English it is six
Subsidies to be paid by the Clergy in six years: And the penalty they have
imposed upon the refusers, for non payment, is to be deprived of their
Functions, to be stripped of their freehold, and to be excommunicated, and
this Act of their Synod is not published amongst their Canons, for which they
might have some colorable seeming authority: But it comes out, in a Book
alone by it self in the Latin tongue, supposing as I conceive that Laymen
are as ignorant as they would have them; And thus they think they dance in a
Net

And as in this, so in most of their new Canons if they be thoroughly
considered, any Judicious man may easily discern and perceive, that they do
therein like Watermen that look one way and row another, they pretend one
thing but intend nothing less; And certainly Mr. Speaker in this they have
flowne a high pitch; For a Synod called together upon pretense of reconciling
and settling Controversies and matters in Religion to take upon them the
boldness thus out of Parliament to grant Subsidies and to meddle with men's
freeholds, I dare say the like was never heard of before, and they that durst
do this will do worse if the current of their raging Tyranny be not stopped
in time.

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have countenanced and cherished Popery and
Arminianisme to that growth and height it is now come to, in this Kingdom?

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have given encouragement to those that have
boldly preached those damnable Heresies in our Pulpits.

Who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have given authority and license to them that
have published those Heresies in print?

Who are they (Mr. Speaker,) that of late days have been advanced to any
dignity or preferment in the Church, but such as have been notoriously
suspicious, in their Disciplines, corrupt in their Doctrines, and for the most
part, vicious in their lives?

And who are they (Mr. Speaker) that have overthrown our two great Charters
Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta?

What imposition has bin laid down or what Monopoly has bin damned in any
Court of Justice since the last Parliament.

Has not ship money, Coal and conduct money, and money for other military
charges, bin collected and leavied, with as great violence as ever they were,
in violation of our liberties, confirmed unto us in our Petition of Right;
notwithstanding all our supplications and complaints the last Parliament.

And who are they Mr. Speaker, that have caused all those dangerous
Convulsions, and all the desperate unnatural bloody distempers, that are now
in our body politic?

Mr. Speaker, J will tell you a passage: J heard from a Judge in the
King's Bench. There was a poor man committed by the Lords, for refusing to
submit unto a project, and having attended a long time at the King's Bench
bar, upon his Habeas Corpus; and at last pressing very earnestly to be
bailed. The Judge said to the rest of his brethren, come Brothers (said he) let
us bail him, for they begin to say in the Town, that the Judges have
overthrown the Law, and the Bishops the Gospel.

Mr. Speaker, I would not be misunderstood in what J have said; for rhere are
some of both, functions and professions, that J highly honor and reverence in
my heart, for their wisdoms and integrities. But Mr. Speaker, J may say it;
for I am sure we have all felt it, that there are some of both functions and
professions, that have bin the Authors and causers of all the Miseries, Ruins,
and Calamities that are now upon us.

Mr. Speaker, This is the Age; This is the Age (Mr. Speaker) that has produced
and brought forth Achitophells, Hammans Woolsies, Empsons, and Dudlies,
Tricilians, and Belknapps Vipers and Monsters of all sorts. And J doubt not,
but when his Majesty shall be truly informed of such matters, as we are able
to charge them withal; we shall have the same Justice against these, which
heretofore has been against their Predecessors, in whose wicked steps they
have trodden.

And therefore Mr. Speaker, to put our selves into a way for our redress and
relief, J conceive it were fit that a Committee might be named to take these
Petitions, that have now been read, and all others of the like nature into
their considerations, to the end, that the parties grieved, may have just
repair for their grievances; and that out of them, Laws may be contrived, and
framed for the preventing of the like mischiefs, for the future.

FJNJS.

