POLITIC MAXIMS AND OBSERVATIONS Written by the most learned HVGO GROTIVS
Translated for the ease and benefit of the English STATESMEN.

BY H.C. S.T.B.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1654;

To the Reader.
I Shall not beg pardon for this Address to the English Readers. What is here
presented to view, is the Digest of the immortal HUGO GROTIUS. The Subject
matter was first lent by that learned Friar CAMPANELLA but he was rather the
Occasion than the Author. For CAMPANELLA'S share of this work, was only a
piece of his Philosophia realis, which had slept forgotten, had not GROTIUS'
waked it by these admirable Observations. And these speak the Author so fully,
that you will confess he travailed farther, while he sat still, then ever Ulysses
was feigned to do; and (without the Encounters of Circe and the Sirens) not
only (...), but(...)

Now if you suspect the English falls short of GROTIUS own Latin, I would
gladly know who it is that can reach it? but if you look for the sense
faithfully renderd (and-reasonably you can expect no more) I assure you it is
done; and that on his word who has chosen rather to lose his livelihood, than
to subscribe to a Lie.

Farewell.
To the most learned HUGO GROTIUS the Author.
OUr Ages Wonder, by thy Birth the Fame
Of Belgia, by thy Banishment the Shame:
Who to more knowledge younger did arrive
Than forward Glaucius, yet art still alive:
Whose Masters often (for suddenly you grew
To equal and pass those, and need no new;
To see how soon, how far thy Wit could reach)
Sat down to wonder, when they came to teach:
Often then would Scaliger contented be,
To leave to mend all times to polish thee,
And of that pains effect did highlyer boast,
Than had he gained all that his Fathers lost:
When thy Capella read (which till thy hand
Had cleared, grave and learned did under stand,
Though well thou might, at such a tender age
Have made ten lessons of the plainest page)
That King of Critics stood amazed to see
A work so like his own set forth by thee:
Nor with less wonder on that Work did look,
Than if the Bridgroom had begot the book,
To whom thy age and act seemed to unite,
At once the Youth of Phoebus and the Light.
Thence loved thee with a never dying flame,
As the adopted heir to all his Fame.
For which care, wonder, love, the riper days
Paid him with just and with eternal praise;
Who gained more honor from one verse of thine,
Than all the Canes of his Princely line.
In that he joy'd, and that opposed to all,
To Titius spright, to hungry Schoppius gall.
To what (with cause disguised) Bonarcius writes,
To Delrio's rage, and all his Loyolites
But though to thee, each tongue, each art be known,
As all thy time that had employed alone,
Though truth do naked to thy sight appear,
And scarce can we doubt more, then thou can clear,
Though thou at once do different glories join,
A lofty Poet and a deep Divine,
Can in the purest phrase cloth solid sense,
Scaevola's Law in Tulli's eloquence.
Though thy employments have excelled thy pen,
Showed thee much skilled in Books, but more in men.
And proved thou can at the same easy rate.
Correct an Author and uphold a State.
Though rare praise, do a full truth appear
To Spain and Germany, who more do fear
( Since thou thy aid did to that State afford)
The Swedish counsels then the Swedish sword.
All this yet of thy worth makes but a part,
And we admire thy head less then thy heart;
Which when in want was yet too grave to close
(Though wooed) with thy ungrateful countries foes.
When their chief Ministers strove to entice,
And would have bought thee, at what ever price:
Since all our praise and wonder is too small,
For each of these, what shall we give for all?
Above the reach or stroke of Fortune live,
Not valuing what she can take or give;
For low desires oppress the loftiest state,
And who looks down on vice, looks down on Fate.
FALKLAND.

MANIPVLVS POLITICVS OR, Politic Maxim's and Cautions.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of Politic Communities.
1.THE Sense and Apprehension of Man's self-insufficiency, Aphor. 1.
was the first thing that linked men into communities. For Man finding himself
unable to stand alone, was compelled by Necessity to betake himself to the
support of others.

2. Dominion therefore requires the Union of many into one Body, which is
called thence a Community, a Policy or Body; because no Man can Politically be
his own Lord nor the Lord of any one singular person.

3. Dominion is two fold.

1. Natural, or 2. Violent.
By the Natural, the Soul rules the Body, Parts, and Affections.

By the Uiolent, the Affections sometimes Lord it over the Reason.

Observator.

4. Man is borne to hold Society with All Men: an evident sign whereof is, his
Speech, and natural tender affections, if they be not corrupted by Education.

5. 6. There is a threefold Community 1. Of Souls or Minds. 2. Of Bodies. 3.
Of Fortunes.


First, the Community of Minds, which is called RELIGION, and that is the
chief community, which is the very Soul of Policy, and the shield of Natural
Justice: and it is the great Tie that links man to God, and man to man, whence
Religion has its name, a Religando.

Observat.

This Religious Union, is evident amongst the Jews, but more amongst True
Christians: amongst Mahumetans very little: amongst Pagans none at all: unless
we rather regard the bare sound of the Name, then any Moral effect.

2. The Community of Bodies. This stands in the second rank of Tye's or
Combinations. By this the Great Turk rules over Mahumetans, Jews and
Christians, which under his Empire are united in Body, although in Soul and
Religion far differing.

3. Community of Fortunes or Goods, obtaines the third place. By this the Turk
rules over the Turks, and Ragusians too, and the King of Spain over the
Genoese, Neapolitane and Spaniard: for the Geneoese have estates lying in that
Kings Territories, and traffic there.

Some Communities there are mixed of all these three.

CHAP. II. Of the Function and Degrees of Lords and Rulers, whence flows the
diverse kinds of Republiques and regiments, etc. Of their Circulations, etc.
He Naturally Rules, that excells in virtue. Max. 1.
He naturally serves that is Inferior in virtue, or has none at all. Where the
contrary is, there the dominion is violent.

2. Politic Excellency consists either in the 1. Mind, or 2. Body, or 3. Both.


3. He rules best that excells in both, as CAESAR did.

He Rules next-best that excells in Mind, as Ulysses.

Thirdly, He that excells in Body, that is, in strength and activity, as Ajax.

Observator.

But being it is Natural for the Soul to excel the Body: He that by strength
of body overrules them that excel in mind, rules violently: as of old the
Giants, and afterward Brennus, and Attila, and many more. 4. The first thing
that gained Dominion amongst Men, was 1. POWER. 2. WISDOM. 3. LOVE.


Addit.
The mixture of all three is rare, and admirable. Power without wisdom is
Brutishand Barbarous. Tyranny, this is Lyon-like Dominion. Wisdom without
Love, is but a Cheating Hypocritical Dommion. This is Foxlike. Hence Lewis the
II. of France, gained the title of Lewis the Fox. But Love cements all, and
makes Dominion durable.

Hence Poets say that Cupid (or Love) is the Antientest of all the Gods, for
indeed Love made the World and Harmony preserves it.

5. The Supreme Power is the Power of the Sword, that is the Power of Life and
Death, which resides in them to whom the last appeal in Criminalls is referred.

6. Dominion of one Good man is called Monarchy

Dominion of one Evil men, Tyranny.

The Dominion of many Good ones, Aristocracy.

The Dominion of many Bad ones, Oligarchy.

The Dominion of all Good ones, Policy.

The Dominion of all Bad ones, Democracy.

It is the Office (or Duty) of those that Rule

1. To teach and instiruct Their subjects 2. Defend Their subjects 3. Nourish
or Feed Their subjects 4. To maintain the rights of Their subjects
Which seeing no King can undergo of himself alone, he does the 1. By
Priests, Doctors, and Laws. 2. By Soldiers. 3. By Husbandmen, Merchants and
Artificers. 4. By Judges, that judge according to Law.


On the other side, the people owe to their Prince two things 1. Reverence and.
2. Obedience.


8. Those are called Kings which prefer the public before their own private
good: but Tyrants which do the contrary.

9. A Kingly Government, does very rarely degenerate (except by degrees) into a
Democratique, yet in Athens it did so: which Originally was a Monarchy.

10. When a Popular State, by Mis-government, is corrupted; there springs up in
lieu of it, either a Tyrant, as Pisistratus, at Athens, or a He was a Dubs
equal to a King.
King: as Cosmo Medices, at Florence. Or Vassalage under strangers, those of
Pisa, by this means, became slaves to the Florentines. Commonwealths by Luxury
and Pride, shrink and contract themselves into an Oligarchy. So Some fell into
the hands of a Decemvirate or Government by Ten-Men: which lasted not long, but
was quelled (observe it!) by the People Rising under the conduct of Virginius:
so the Athenians, under the conduct of Thrasybulus, cut off and suppressed the
Thirty Tyrants.

11. Strife betwixt Commons and Nobles, increases a Commonwealth: but if the
Commons be Conqueror, so as To draw the Nobles to their Bent: The Republique
goes to wrack: as it happened in Florence: a state of all others most subject to
changes. But if the Noblest win the day, Tyranny forthwith steps in: as
heretofore in Genoa: and the Republique falls to ground. But Contentions about
the Change of Religion, or the Sharing of State (which by a new Name, we call
Levelling) is ever the utter undoing of all, especially where the Conquerors
are but few. Yet in Flanders, Holland, and Friesland; they are not so much
wasted by varieties of Religion, as the French, Polack, and English are:
because they are compelled into Union by the common enemy the Spaniard.

Observator.

The strife of Pears and people, so long as they keep from downright blows,
may be reckoned in the number of those which Herod calls, (...)
Good and advant ageous contentions: but when by Ambition and Avarice the
Sedition of the Apuleij and the Gracchi, and after them the wars of Sylla and
Marius crept in, the Republique of Rome began to look Monarchish: which as Jul.
Caesar! invaded upon a Popular Account: so would Pompey have probably done,
upon the SENATES.

In some places, such is the Education of diverse that are called Noblemen;
that you may expect Virtue from any men, sooner then from Them.

Strifes about Religion are there most Pernicious and Destructive, where
Provision is not made Grotius favors Toleration
, for Dissenters:

That they may live secure: and the Supreme Magistrate makes not their security
good to them in good Earnest, whereupon Tumults and jarrs about Religion have
risen that have vexed Germany, but almost quite destroyed both France and the
Netherlands.

So much for Internal changes.

External follow. Such are Foreign Invasion, Plagues, Corruptions External.
Inundations, and Conflagrations Uuniversall.

Which Disasters oft-times so change the face of things, that Inhabitants are
glad to begin the world again.

Add.
These we may not (as the Author here seems to do) impute to any Magical
Fatality, in the Numbers of 7. or 9. (which yet he lays, have been
Experimentally found ominous) nor yet to the ill-complexion of stars, that (as
I may say) attend the Horoscope of such and such Kingdoms and Commomvealths:
(though I will not deny, but God ( the great Demiurgus) brings many Plagues
upon men, and Cities, by the Ministry of the Planets) but ascribe these
Calamities to the FINGER of GOD: which writ the PERIOD of the ASSYRIAN EMPIRE
upon the Wall. Dan, 5. and levelled Sodom and Gomorrah, with the plain whereon
they stood. Genesis 19.25.

Cities and Countries are sometimes destroyed by Natural Causes, but yet the
hand of God may set them on work: as if AEtna (by its Eruptions) should destroy
Sicily, or Vesevo, Campania: (as it has sometimes done) Earthquakes in Italy
are Naturally frequent: by reason of the many hollow Grots and Mountains in
that Country, but if they bring destruction to whole Countries, or Cities, (as
they have not long since done) vere Digitus Dei -- fiery sins of that Sodom, etc.

Venice subject to Oblimation.
The City of Venice is subject to Oblimation: or the casting up of Mud, and
Sands; which may in time choke her up, and be her ruin: which of her self is
so admirably complexion'd, that she can never Perish.

Observator.

Some remedies for this disease (though perhaps not strong enough) she has
already invented: and may devise more and better: Yet this advantage her Seas
bring, that they are her Bulwark against strangers: upon confidence whereof,
she has no Militia of her own; yet fears a Tyranny from her own strength: and
hence perhaps it may fall out, that by hyring of foreign Commanders, she may
at last come to ruin.

CHAP. III. Of the Essence, Constitution, and Division etc. Princedome and
Dominion, etc.
THE Romans, upon the sudden Emergencies of danger, by War, or seditions, did
choose themselves an extemporarie Monarch: Addit.
which they called a Dictatour:

whence at last (by the Authors leave) we may infer thus much: That a Monarch
is the best and safestengine for any People, in time of War or Danger. Hence
Homer makes his wiseman, [Ilysses vote clearly for that; to carry on the
Grecian War

-- It is not good to have many heads (says he) let there be one Chief, one
King! For

1. The Dominion of one good man, is always better then the Dominion of many,
nay, of all good ones. Yea,

2. The Maladministration of One, is much to be desired, rather then that of
Many, or of all in a Princedome, or Rule.

3. Simply and naturally, God is the Sole Lord Paramount: as having
Power-Absolute over all: whose Will (as most wise) is a law to it self, and
transcends the whole Scale and Predicament of things. But

4. Man is only Lord in Degree and Measure: because his Will cannot be a Law;
unless Regulated and bound up by the Law of God, either Natural, or Positive.

5. An Excellent Gradation.
He knows not how to rule a Kingdom, that cannot manage a Province nor can he
wield a Province, that cannot order a City; Nor he order a City, that knows not
how to Regulate a Village: nor he a Village, that cannot guide a Family: Nor
can that man Govern well a Family that knows not how to Govern himself:
neither can any Govern himself unless his reason be Lord, and c. Will and
Appetite her Vassalls: Nor can Reason rule, unless her self be ruled by God,
and [wholy] be obedient to him.

Ergo.

Conclusion thereupon.
Without the Divine Rule, no Man is truly a King, or Prince, according to
Nature, but rather to be counted, a Scourge of God, and c. Executioner of men.

But neither, according to the Divine Rule, is any Prince simply a LORD: but a
RULER and PASTOR of his People: Victrii Domini De, etc.
and the Vicegerent of the LORD GOD by whom Kings Reign.

6. Therefore ought a good Prince so far to Excel his Subjects in Virtue, as
the Shepherd does his Flock: who is of a Superior species to them: Now seeing
all men are equal as to the Species, it must here follow that Princes (as
such) must have somewhat of God, and c. peculiar Impresses of Elohim, the Deity
in them. Therefore

7. Wisdom alone Rules best of all: not Sophistical, but Philosophical [yet]
not the wisdom of the Cloister, or the * Cell, but Civil Wisdom, not
opposite, but Subservient to God.

8. The Dominion of The The 1. Male Over 1. The Female is Natural. 2. Father
2. His Children 3. Oldmen 3. Young men 4. Strong 4. The weak 5. Scholars 5.
Master Nature does bring forth men.
1. Of strong Intellectuals, though weak in constitution of Bodies to be
Priests, Philosophers, Counselors. 2. Active and strong bodies, with
courageous minds to be -- Soldiers. 3. Gross brains and rude hands to be
husbandmen. 4. Heavy and robustuous for the Cavalry or Horsemen. 5. Laborious
and nimblehanded to weaving, and other Manufactures. 6. Ready tongues, and
learned, for Embassies, and Orations. 7. Other sharp wits for Merchandise. 8.
Just men for the Bench, or Tribunal. 9. Weak in Body and mind, for Animadvers.
They are like to make but sorry servants and instruments: that are weak bath
in body and mind.
service, and to be instruments for their betters. 10. Men of abilities both of
body and mind, to be Commanders, Kings, and Masters of the Militia.


10. That therefore there is the best Republique, where every man bends
himself to those duties and employments which Nature has fitted him for: For
then Reason and Wisdom bear sway: and that the worst, where men are put upon
employments, which are contrary to thein grain, and Genius: for then Fortune,
and Chance, (that is the force of Ignorance) rule the roast.

11. Whence Magistrates are chosen, because they are the Sons of Nobles, or
Sons of friends of such as are in present power, or for their Wealth, or bought
Honor, and not because they are good, or wise men; There the Republique falls
to ground.

12. A Commonwealth goes to wrack soonest, when the Portion makes marriages,
and Equality of Wealth, and not an equal Valor Lat.
strength of body and mind, whence (according to the Pythagorean) the best
Issue is to be expected: Observator.
though Plato think (more rightly) the best breed to be of strong bodies, and
good wits: or on the contrary.

13. All mischiefs sway, where women have the Liberty to do, and say what they
please, etc.

14. These we count CITIZENS who not only are capable and partakers of
dignities and honors, in the Republique, but such, as by any Function, be it
never so mean (as the members of the body) contribute to the use and advantage
of the whole. The rest we count strangers, Excrements of a Commonwealth: such
as are many Noblemen now adays.

15. The [true] Office of the Nobleness or Peereage [in any Republique] is to
defend that, and private persons.

The Office of the Commons to seed, and sustain it.

The Office of the Wiser sort, to rule and Instruct it.

He that takes no prosession, or calling at all upon him is to be looked upon,
as an Excrement, or Drone: But they that mediate betwixt God and Man, are to to
be esteemed as the Diviner part of a Commonwealth: Such are the Legitimate
Priesthood.

CHAP. IV. Of Laws and Customs, and that which is called the Reason of State.
1. THat Lat. Optimis nascuntur.
Good Men may be borne, and employed in those Offices and Functions, to which
they were born, every Community stands ever in need of a Law.

2. As Virtue is the Private Law, of Individualls [or singular Persons] so Law
is the Public Virtue of a Community. Therefore being Virtue is the rule of
Actions, and Affections in a particular Person, ordained by the Decree of a
Potent and Volentis.
pliant Reason, for a chief private good: so Law is the Rule of affections, and
Actions Public: Constituted and published from the Dictates of Common Reason,
which respect the chiefest common good.

3. The chief good is Preservation: and that either Private or Public. which
is (as far as may be gathered) from Conservatives [simply] or Expulsives of
Destructives. Simply to Coserve is to Enternize [or perpetuate] Therefore
simply, both the Private and Public chief good is from [GOD] that Eternal
chief Entity. But partial from other things: as namely, Instrumentally and
Dispositively from the Rules of Reason.

4. Wherefore -- No Republiques can make Laws, where there is not common Reason
and common consent; unless where by common Reason (and consent) The Matter is
put into the hands of the Wisemen; Such as were Solon, Lycurgus, and Numa.

Or unto one whom God has Delegated [for his Vicegeret] as Moses, etc.

As for Minos and Mahomet, either Craft or the the Devil led them on, to be
Apes of the true messengers from God, as Moses was.

Observat.

Here the Observator steps in and says, I see no reason why the Edicts of one
or many Rulers may not deserve the name of Laws, not at all awaiting the
Peoples Consents: For neither in prescribing medicines, do Physicians require
the consent of their Patients.

5. Yhe Divine Law.
The Eternal and first Law is that, whereby God did Fashion, Create, Govern,
and change all things and bring them about to his own ends: Even changable
things, unchangably.

Law Natural.
From this is derived the Law Natural planted in the minds of men, and in the
whole Volum of nature which is * Gods Art, and Natures Directory: Qua est Ars
Dei: Ejusdemque Directrix.
Neither can it be violated but by God: [and that by him] as a Lord, not as a
Legislator.

Law of Nations.
From the Law Natural is is derived the Law of Nations, Common to all men.

Positive Law.
From the Law of Nations, the Positive Civil Law is derived, and so far as
it is agreeable to Nature, it is invariable: but as it serves present
necessities, it may, and sometimes ought, to be altered.

God himself also gave a Positive Law -- which is immutable, where it
contains the Law of Nature, where our necessities [onely] mutable, as the Law
of Moses in the Decalogue, remains [in full force] for ever, but not in the
forbidding of Swinesflesh: which was made on purpose to Lepram non] alendam.
Lat.
avoid Leprosy. Yet,

No man can alter Laws, but he that made them, or he that is Created his
substitute, for that very purpose.

Observator. Note. This observation cannot refer to any thing in the Antecedent
Paragraph.

Nature is the work of Reason without us.

Humane Reason, is the work of Nature within us

. The will [of man] is (of its own Nature) mutable: but Reason Immutable,
except improperly: namely, when the matter about which which she is conversant
is mutable.

6. Politic Reason, which some call the Reason of State: and of old, was the
same with Equity, does transgress the [strict] Letter of the Law, but not the
sense and scope of it: becauses it does not abrogate or interpret, and c. any
thing but for a greater good: as in the case of Fabius Vitulanus: to whom the
Roman Senate granted his life which was forfeited to the Law: and Horace that
slew the three Curatis, In the behalf of] or rather for the Empire.
in the quarrel of the Roman Empire.

But the Reason of State, as it is now adays, is nothing else but a devise of
Tyrants, that carries the face of Equity, supposing it lawful for them to
transgress, not only their own, but even the Laws of God, either to gain
or maintain their petty Dominions. But,

The difference between Reason of State, and Equity is this. For Equity
respects the Public Good and Truth: but Reason of State looks upon [onely]
the private and seeming good of the Power in being.

Now since Machiavel was found to play Achitophel, the name being confessedly
impious, Princes began, (that they might cover the shame of it) to call it the
Reason of good Government. Which names though given by a knavish Godfather, may
bear an honest meaning. As for example.

Cleonymus put to death the Ephori of Lacedamon by a right reason of State: but
so does not the [Great] Turk his Brethren: because although he seem to do it
for the Common good; yet being it is against the Law of God, and some other way
might be found out to prevent their aspiring to the Throne, the fact is
[Barbarous and] unreasonable.

7. A good Prince wants not this Reason of State, because his own goodness is
a perpetual shield unto him: and if any rise up against him: all the People
stand for him: as for David: whom his rebellious Son had deprived of his
Kingdom.

But a thousand thousand Machiavillian Arts cannot protect a wicked Prince:
because, cause, he is [both] Odious to the People, and to God the King of all
[the World]

Now, he that jarrs with [God] the Prime Cause, does foolishly depend upon
second causes: as it happened to Caesar Casar, Valentine Borgia, Lat.]
Borgia: who under themost wary, and provident [Discipline and] Mastership of
Machiavell, lost, both his life, and Fortune.

Thus are Machiavillians always taken in their own snare: for want of Divine
and Heavenly Knowledge, and by conceiting that by their own Wisdom they can
Fathom, and foresee, all things.

10. Those Laws are best, which are 1. short. 2. easy. 3. few. and 4. fitted
to the Manners [or Genius] of the People and the Public good. Tyrannical
Laws 02 are Many, and [those] obscure, difficult, like so many snares: that
serve the turns of some one, or few, but not at all accommodated, either to
the Manners, or advantage of the Public.

9. Where Laws are often changed: they are the forerunners of the instant
rain of a Republique: as Florence found it therefore [by sad experience.

Observator.

Laws belonging to Governments, ought not to be altered unless necessity
compel: nor yet others, but where the profit is [very] evident, and [very]
Great.

10. Where there are more Laws to Punitive quam Instructive.
punish, then to direct or instruct, it is a sign of an ill tempered Government.

11. The Acts of Laws are: to command what is good: to restrain what is evil:
and to tolerate things indifferent.

12. Reward, and Punishment are the two [2] spurrs of the Law [to prick men
forward to observation] of them.

Observat.

No Law can stand without punishment [of the transgressors of] and where no
punishment is expressed, there it is Arbitrary: otherwise it were rather a
Counsellthen a Law: but whether a Reason ought to be annexed to every Law, it
cannot universally be defined: Saleucus, and Charondas, and Plato too, followed
this course; being to make Laws for Free People, they thought good to use
persuasions. Where as Seneca ( having an eye upon his Under Nero.
own Times) affirms: A Law with a Preface to be a foolish thing: being a Law
should command and not persuade: and Dio Chrysostom compares Custom, to a
King, but Law to a Tyrant: in that Custom gives Law to men willing [to receive
it] but Law binds the unwilling also.

13. The three Guardians or Keepers of Laws are, 1. Honor. 2. Love. 3. Fear.


He that secures not his Law by these three, is either a weak or Ignorant
Lawgiver, or elsea Tyrant etc.

14. Where a thing which once was good, becomes hurtful, it is to be
forbidden: Where an Evil thing does prosit [the Publique] if it be Evil of
Punishment, and not Evil of Offense, it is to be Commanded. Where in its own
Nature indifferent as it falls oui, Good or Evil to the Republique, it is to
be [according] Commanded or Forbidden.

15. The Laws of men make rather good Citizens, then simply good men. Yet
Princes [and Rulers]ought to be simply good, because they are the Aliorum Lux
and Lex.
Light and the Law of others.

16. The Law ought to make and ordain Equality as the Nurse of the
Commonwealth, but not a Levelling; for as the Observator says excellently,
such strings make no Harmony but an Equality opposite to that destructive
Inequalitas Consumptrix. Lat.
consiming inequality, which is fatal to Commonwealths. For example: Extrem
Poverty makes Thieves, Insidious, Perjured, Ignorant, and Instruments, of Rich
wicked men. On the contrary, very Rich men are Proud, Luxurious, Unlearned,
Contumelious, [ and I may add out of Rhetor.
Aristotle, Injurious too]

Very crasty men are [commonly] given to change. Very stupid, are voluntarily
servants [or slaves] Only moderatemen are Stable in their place, and stations
where they live.

The Florentine Republique was ever the most unstable, by reason of the
subtlety of their wits: The Venetian, the most firm and stable of all, by
reason of a Mediocrity: and allay of Dullness.

17. A good Custom is a second Law: which does more preserve a Commonwealth,
then the Law it self.

Five Customs, made Rome, the Princess of Republiques: as Cato in Salust
witnesses. 1. Public Wealth. 2. Private Poverty. 3. Just Government abroad.
4. Freedom of speech at home. 5. Unliablenesse to fears, or designs.


All these [Customes] the Commonwealth of Venice observes as a Law: Except
only that she lies open to Fear: yet not in her Counsels: but from
Forraigners, through want of a Militia of her own.

For want of the first [Publique Wealth] the Genoesse, are not Lords of the
Sea: nor of the new world, etc.

For want of the fifth [that is unliablenesse to fear, and desire] the
Genoesse are as it were fervants to Foreign Princes.

For want of the Third [ vix, Just Government abroad] the French could never
fix their Dominion, without the Verge of France. In which the Spaniard is
peccant too: Every where severely and ceremoniously Lording it; not at all
regarding the manners, [and Temper] of the People [they rule over.]

For want of the Fourth [Custome] [that is freedom of speech] the Florentine
Republique went to wrack.

Observator.

Manners doubtless(i.e. Customs) can do more then Laws: and either add vigor
to the, or take it from them.

Customs have brought Laws under their subjection.

Obs. Customs are either from 1. Disposition of People or 2. Institution and
Education.


1. For disposition: The French now have much of the old Gauls in them:
Humanity and Fickleness says the Observator: give me leave to add Feverish
Valor in War: (which L. Florus observes in their Progenitors the Gauls)
Primus Impetus Major quam Virorum; Secundus minor quam Paeminarum. Flor.
In their first onsets they are more then Men, in their second, less then
Women.

2. For Education: what power that has over Nature, consult Xenophon, about the
Persians and Lacedomonians.

18. Good governors bring in good customs, ill men and women ill customs.
Ergo, neither ill men, nor [any] woman are fit to rule: the law of Nations is
the custom of the whole species. (1) All mankind.

19. Not a Rigid but easy government fit the N^rthern Nations, as being by
nature a fierce people, and will hardly brook the Fetters of a Republique; as
Tartars, Muscovites, Suedes, Germans, Switzers, and c.

Where they have Kings by succession, the people have much liberty, and the
Prince little power; yet after the Roman Culture, they began to live more
severely [and regularly, then before.] But

For Southern People, especially those that live under the Tropiques, no
Dominion fits them but the Despotique (1) Lordly Rule: and the severest Laws:
because they are weak in strength: but strong in subtlety. For which Reason
they were ever [very much] addicted to Ceremonies, Superstitions, and c.

Observat.

The Muscovite and Tartar are Addicte Despotice.
Slavishly Governed: for there the North bears Easterly. The King dome of
Swethland is become Hereditary, by occasion of Religion: but under such Laws,
as are observed in Elective Kingdoms.

20. Eastern People incline much to the disposition of the Southern: as the
Western to to the Northern, by reason of the Sea adjoining to them: and for
other Causes: but the Spaniard is like in conditions to the African by his
Vicinity, or Neighborhood.

CHAP. V. Of Legislators.
1. A Legislator is he, who Foundeth a New Empire: commonly upon new Laws,
Religion and Arms, Rites, and Fortunate Essays, or Enterprises: as Moses, a
good Legislator, Mahomet a Perversus. L.]
wicked one.

A Lawgiver therefore is either a God, as Christ: or the messenger of God as
Moses: or a subtle Politician, that can counterfeit the good ones: as Minos,
Osiris, Jupiter, Mahomet, Zamolxis, and the like: who to gain belief and love
from the People, feigned themselves to be sent from God. For

A Lawgiver should be most renowned, most wise, most Divine, and most Reverend.

Observator.

To pretend the Commands of God might perhaps bring some success to a Perito.
Cunning]
skillfull man, amongst a rude and ignorant People: as Sertorius amongst the
Spaniards: or to the Spaniard (now Iam Eruditis.
grown civil, and learned too) amongst the Americans: by the help of Natural
Philosophy, Physic, and Astronomic: But in a learned age, and place, This
Plot and Artifice, is cold [and ridiculous.]

2. Every Artist, because is wise, is a King in his own Art: for a Physician,
he is Lord and Ruler over a sick King: and so a Mariner, in a Tempest, says
to the Priests and Captains, and the principal men, Sit you here; stand thou
there, etc. Therefore must the Lawgiver be versed in all these Arts: at least
understand their ends: how they conduce either to the prosit, or prejudice of
the Republique -- to purge out the superfluous and retain the necessary. Hence
it was Plato banished Poets out of his Republique: because they were full of
lies, and Ribaldry: and by crying up wicked men, cried down goodness, and
discouraged virtue. Hence Moses expelled false Prophets and Painters (that
pictured the Deity) and Hucksters, and whoremongers, etc.

A Legislator must be thoroughly skilled, in the Temperament and manners of
Countries, by the * Air and the Earth: as likewise happy or unhappy accidents
that usually befall such and such a place, etc. as Inundations, Fires,
Leprosies, Famines, etc.

3. Legislators ought to reform and purify, not Exth pate Religion.

4. The Noblest Profession in Mountainous Countries, are, 1. Shepherds, as in
Switzerland, and Scythia.

In plain Conutries 2. Husbandmen: as in Egypt.

In Maritime Countries 3. Seamen and Merchants: who for the profit they bring
in; the moneys that they return [and exchange] and arts and Trades they bring
from Foreign Countries: have ever been held in highest place and esteem. But
Where other (especially superfluous) Arts are preferred before these, Imminent,
both loss and ruin must needs follow after.

5. A Divine Legislator has the Idea of his own Repubque in the Court of
Heaven.

The Humane [Lawgiven] in the Government of the Universe: and man's Body.

A body Politic how actuteda.
6. Man (Male and Female) are the Elements of a Republique: who consists of 1.
Soul. 2. Body, and External. 3. Goods.


1. The Soul of a Republique, is Wisdom and Religion.

2. The Body, a Senate or [Grand] Council: or whoever bear any Office
advantageous to the Public.

3. For External good [the Republique hath] Soldiers, Mercenary, and
Auxiliary: and Foreign Merchants and Artificers.

For spirits, she has Laws.

For Eyes, the searchers into Arts, and Sciences.

For ears, Spies and Merchants.

For a Tongue, Preachers, and Doctors, and Ambassadors.

For hands, her own Militia:

For feet, Husbandmen and Tradesmen.

7. As naturally the Soul rules the Spiritus.] sing, I at.
Spirits Policically, but the Body Despotically [(1.) by an Imverious, and
arbitrary way] and the Body rules the Estate as the Soul dictates to it: so
Religion has a Politic Dominion over Laws, and the Senate: but over
Soldiers, Tradesman, and such like, both *Senate, Law, Pro rata.
and Religion, rule proportionably.

8. Goods of the Mind are first to be looked after: next, those of the Body.
Those of Fortune, in the third place.

Observat.

The Laws of friendship, have a stricter tie then those of Civil society.

Here ends the first part of Politic Maxims and Cautions.
MANIPVLVS POLITICVS OR, Politic Maxim's and Cautions.
PART II.
CHAP. VI. Of Colonies and Cities.
THey that Rule over Countries lying under several Climes, must either govern
them by distinct Laws, or make exchanges of Inhabitants, by mutual
transplantations. So the Romans (to secure their Empire) carried Colonies over
into Germany, that by their example, the Germans, (unaccustomed to Roman
Laws,) might be the better acquainted with, and subject to them:

Observator.

The Trans-Rhine (which are the true, and proper) Germans, for the much
greatest part, were never Conquered by the Romans: but retained (sans mixture)
their own Language, and Manners, till, under Lotharius, they ^oluntarily
submitted to the Roman Yoke. You shall find more Germane Families in Italy,
then Roman Families in Germany.

2. Colonies are best made up of Citizens bred up in the Metropolis of the
Kingdom: or in the Neighboring Towns: for example either of Romans or
Latins; and because so many be planted, as will be able to defend the Province
[and any Enemy whatever]

3. If Colonies be sent from a Free State, it is good to build their Cities on
the tops of the Hills, for defense of their Liberty: if from a Monarch, better
in the Plain.

4. That Cities may wax great, it is expedient they be Situate [either] upon the
Banks of Rivers, or [neare] the Seashore, and in a Plain; Where necessaries
for life are easiest to be had: and commerce with strangers is most convenient:
But, for the Defense of Liberty and Laws, and the Non-impayring of Valor,
they are more commodiously seated upon Mountains and Rocks. Withal great
respect is to be had to the wholesomnesse of Water and Air, and Winds, and the
Prospect to the several Quarters of the Heavens.

5. Planters of Colonies are to be divided -- into 1. Governors: as Priests,
and Judges. 2. Protectors: as Soul-diers and Commanders. 3. Artizans: and such
as Nutritios] Reip. L.
feed the Republique. As Husbandmen, Shepherds, and the like.




Observator.

Nothing hinders but he that Uses Husbandry, may also follow a Trade, either by
himself, or his Wife

Rules that prescribe exact proportions of allowances for every person in a
Plantation, do often fail in the Practique.

Plains bear most Corn, Mountains most Wool, and c. Hence came Chaffering,
and Exchanging and Merchandising, and stamping of Goynes, and c. and for want
of Souldery [hereupon] were Forts, and Guns invented.

CHAP. VII. Of the instruments to gain and keep Kingdoms, etc.
TO gain, keep and govern Kingdoms, there are three [principal l]instruments:
The 1. Tongue, 2. Sword, 3. Treasure.


1. For the Tongue; it is the instrument of Religion, and Prudence. That is, of
the Goods of the Mind.

2. The sword is the [proper] Instrument of the Body and its Goods.

3. Treasure is more [the Instrument] of Fortunes, and Estates: which serves
the Body and Mind [onely] Secondarily: but the true Instruments are the Tongue
and the Sword.

2. They that use the sword only, founding their power upon that, those quickly
lose their dominion; as Tamberlaine, Attila, and Brennus, and most of the
Northern nations.

The Jesuits in Japan gain [first] souls, then Kingdoms to Spain and the
Papacy, by their tongues.

There be that gain Dominion by crying up some new sect, built upon some
specious color of truth, by sowing discord betwixt the old Religion, and the
new Sect, which shall be attempted and fitted to the gust and palate of the
multitude: But such Dominion is of it self not very long lived.

Ringleaders of Heresies, although [commonly] they gain much, they keep
little: as for example, John of Leydon, Dulcinus and Theudas.

Observat.

John of Leydon was an ignorant fellow, a person of of no worth at all, who
through the hatred against the Priests of his time (whose lives were abominable
in the eyes of all men) gathered together a rabble of the basest people.

They that use well the sword and tongue, do lay the foundations of durable
Dominion; but then the sword must be just, and the tongue veracious. Thus did
Moses build the Empire of the Jews, [namely, in veracity and justice,] which
impious Machiavell never took into consideration. p. 147.

The Law of Moises survived the Empire of the Jews, but Mahomets Laws shall
sink with his Empire: Thus fell the laws of Alexander with his person and
power; Thus Numa's, Belus, and Minos, Pythagoras, and Zamolxis his laws are
extinct, even for want of justice and veracity. He, that knows not how to give
laws to those he conquers, does quickly lose the Kingdom he has gained. Thus
Charles the fifth lost Tunis and Germany which he had won, for want of skill
to secure his conquest by the addition of Laws and Colonies. This misfortune
often befell King Pirrhus; but not so the Romans.

Observe.

He had need be a very wise man, that can give laws to men of a different
Religion, that shall be lasting and fitted to the disposition of them that
receive them, as it appears by the Romans in Jewry, who did the utmost of their
endeavor, and with all their skill strived, to establish the state and
tranquillity of that untractable people, by laws, conform to their tempers and
humors, as the excellent orations of King Agrippa, and Josephus made to their
Countrymen, [the Jews] do witness.

5. he that defends his Dominions by sword and tongue, preserves them better
and more safely, then he that makes use but of only one. For

6. Men of Arts are [usually] oppressed by Men of Arms. Thus Saturn (being a
Priest, as ancient Kings were) left his Kingdom to Jupiter; and Perseus the
Warrior, dethroned Atlas the [Scholler and] Astrologer: Thus was Pythagoras
supported by soldiers; Of Croton^.
and the Pope, till such time as he felt the use of his weapons, was often made
a prey to his enemies, and many times (good man) to his friends.

Observator.

Here the thrice worthy Grotius, notes well upon this late passage, concerning
the Bishop of Rome; that the benign aspects of opportunity, made way for that
power which the Pope now enjoyes: as for instance, the Christian World split
into many petty Kingdoms, Italy torn in pieces, and sluggish withal: an age
too dull to apprehend the meaning of that Artifice in due time, and diverse
other causes, which you may find in Guicciardin, and Machiavell.

7. He that uses only Arms for the defense of his Empire, and neglects wit
and eloquence, makes but a paper building, rules but weakly: and this is the
reason why the Emperor of Germany prevails no more, having a people of
different persuasions in Religion to rule over: and usually such Princes become
a prey to those that make the best use of their wits. Hence came it that the
Popes did so frequently make and un-make Emperors at their pleasure. Therefore
(as Salust observes) did the Romans [wisely] ever exercise both mind and body
together. For,

He that exercises both, makes his Empire last longest, as the King of the
Turks, and Abassines, Dux. Lat.
and the Dake of Muscovy. Fabulous Philosophy affirms as much, whiles it gives
Pallas (the Goddess of wisdom) a Book and a Spear to make her invincible; but
to Mars only Arnour, who (as the Poets sings) was therefore often Conquered.
Hence was it that

9. The Northern Nations that fell like swarms of Bees upon the Southern
Regions, who excelled them in religion and Policy, received Laws from them they
had conquered: So the Tartars and the Turks a Northern people, had laws from
the conquered Arabians, and Religion too; and the Hunns, Vandals, Lombards, and
Goths, from the Romans, whose Territories they had invaded.

Here the observator justly gives a check to the Author, and says that, Both
the Goths that ruled in Italy and Spain, and the Vandals in Asrick, to alienate
and estrange the minds of their own people from the Romans, Jeroboam- like,
end: avoured with barbarous cruelties to promote the Arian Heresia, by all
possible means they could.

10. God that he might plant Religion and Learning among the Northern people,
and Arms and Numbers amongst the Southern, did often make an enterchange, and
engrafted them one into an other, like Plants to make them the more generous;
but in both destroyed the degenerous Plants from the sons of Japhet: Empires
descended from Sem, Priesthood and Laws from Cham, Servants, and as the Author
(but mistakingly) affirms, Tyrants; for (as the observator notes) the greatest
Tyrants that ever were, came rather out of Asia, then Africa, which was Chams
portion.

CHAP. VIII. Of the causes of policies, and first of the first cause, God, and
Religion.
THere are three causes (if we speak politically) which found and govern
Empires, that is 1. God. 2. Prudence. 3. Occasion.


But in some, one is more evident then the other. As

In the Kingdom of the Jews, God was most evident; in that of the Romans
Prudence; in that of the Spaniard occasion: albeit (to speak Physically) God is
the cause of all causes.

2. All Dominations (except impious Machiavels) have confessed, that prudence
has not power sufficient to foresee the good and evil, which all ways and in
all things do await them: Therefore did all Nations fly to God, some by a
straight, others by a crooked way. Therefore,

The Assyrian, Egyptian, and Persian Kings, consulted the will and pleasure of
God, and implored his aid, by Astrology in the stars: The Greeks by Oracles
of the Sibylls: The Romans by soothsaying and Auguries, whom the Brasilians do
but a little recede from: but the Christians in a direct path [seek God] and
fly to the spirit of God in his Prophets, Vicarium, etc. Papam.
and counselors, and his Ministry.

3. Every Princedome is protected by its own proper Angel, and every Law as it
is good is from God, neither can their be any Law established which is void of
all good; as Divines and Nature teach us.

4. The Priesthood supplies the place of God in every Dominion, and therefore
no Commonwealth, no assembly of men, either was, or can be, without a
Priesthood, because not without God.

5. Priests ought to be wise, but rather in contemplatives then practicalls;
Valiant, but most in suffering; sober, liberal, ingenious, true, not lying so
much as in jest, faithful, cheerful, but enclining more to austerity, then
scurrillity; gentle, prone rather to meekness then Rusticity, whose Character
should be Piety, Wisdom, Charity, and tender-heartednesse, without hypocrisy.

Priests consult what is to be done, Rulers command that to be done, which is
contemplated or cousidered, and soldiers and artificers put commands and
consultations in execution.

6. Religion ever ought to be had in high esteem and veneration, not in vulgar
and mean account.

7. The Priesthood ought not to be prostitute to the people, lest it lose its
honor and reverence.

Therefore Aristotle, no less ignorantly then impiously, would make old
Soldiers Priests. Here the Author puts the fool upon the Calvinists (under
which notion he comprehends the worst of Schismatics) who (says he) both all
and some, count themselves Priests, which the famous Observator here seems to
prove, to defend, out of places (with reverence be it spoken) mis-urged both
out of the Scripture and Fathers, in defense of common or universal Unction.
and (by an injurious Concession) makes the Calvinist guilty of the
Schismatiques Phrensies: whereas it is most evident, both out of Calvin, and
Beza, in their several discourses, and conflicts with the Antiministeriall
Enthusiasts, that they were quite of an other temper, and opinion; ever bearing
high for an Ordinate Ministry: though they brought not clean, or Primitive
hands, to that great Work.

8. That Religion which contradicts Natural Policy, ought not to be retained.
Therefore the Maccabees in time of necessity taught, that War might be
piously made on the Sabbath day, when the Jews under Pompey and Antiochus
(being that day assailed) not defending themselves, perished. God gives no Law
to his People, [whereby his People should be destroyed] which is opposite to
their own being.

Observator.

Rituall Laws, do easily give place to Occasions, and Times: whence comes the
Hebrew Proverb: The life endangered, violates the Sabbath: and that [other] The
Sabbath was given into the hands of man, and not man into the Hands of the
Sabbath: Yet the foolish gloss of some Jews was such, that some of them kept
themselves in the self same Posture, both night and day: and therefore paid
dear for their Superstition; being not only by Pompey, but by Nebuchadnezzar,
Sossius, and Titus, taken Captives upon the Sabbath day.

9. The Doctrine of fatal Necessity is pernicious, in, and to Commonwealths:
for it makes Subjects seditious, and Princes Tyrannous: both pleading Necessity
for the Mischief they Act: and thus much Cicero acknowledged. But

10. This Doctrine of Necessity does no hurt among the Turks, because they are
rude, and illiterate, and are kept within compass by force, not by Law. But in
Italy, where they are a sharp witted People, it would make them stark mad, and
all turn Libertines, and lay all their sins upon Gods score, as the Author of
all Evil: but above all, it would make their Princes Tyrants, in Imitation
(forsooth!) of God, craftily imputing their own offenses to their subjects,
that they might [God-like] Torment them, to their own glory: Then which, what
can be more destructive to a Commonwealth?

11. Sophistical Sciences that thwart Religion, ought to be Banished the
Commonwealth: as Plato teaches.

Aristotle his School, did the Jews much mischief, under Antiochus; and now
to Christians: as Averroes did too, both to us, and his own Saracens. See S.
Vincentius [Lirinensis,]

Observat.

What is spoken here of Aristotle does very well agree with the opinion of the
ancient Christians. In whose Judgment Aristotle was accounted Impious. In the
judgment of all the Greeks, and (amongst the Latins) Saint Austin, Plato's
Philosophy is more consonant to Christianity: Aristotle coming but very lately
into esteem, and reputation, with the World.

Animadversions.

What the Friar, or Grotius affirm of Aristotle is only true, Accidentally,
and Vitio Utentis: and so all the Sect of Philosophers fall (as well as
Aristotle) under Tertullians Character, that they are PATRIARCHS of HERETICS:
but I am clearly of opinion, that Plato's Idea's in the head of an ENTHUSIAST,
or NATIONAL THEOLOGUE, have done much more hurt to Christianity, then
Aristotle's subtleties ever did: who being (as himself justly boasts) the Father
of Syllogism, and the first discoverer of Fallacy, might advance all Truths
(both Natural, Moral, and Sacred) more, (did not men abuse him to Sophistical
ends) then all the whole RACE of Philosophers ever did, or will do.

12. Religion that is repugnant to common Policy, although it be beneficial to
one particular City or Province, is subject to a change, or Reformation: and
therefore cannot last long, as the decree of Moses, about the choice meats:
and the Apostles, of abstaining from Idols, and things strangled. 1. There are
therefore some Laws, convenient for time, and Place, [and Person] as
abstinence from swines flesh, for the Jews, subject to Leprosy. 2. Other
Laws are eternal, profitable for all Nations: as to Honor our Parents. 3.
Some again are pernicious to all places, and times: as that a man does sin by
destiny, and does profit in any thing without liberty [in some degree] of his
own Will.


Observator.

Here Grotius affirms that the Law of not eating Swines flesh is of so long
continuance, that it not only remains in use amongst the Jews at this day,
but with the Mohammedan Arabians, and Abassin Christians: and not without good
cause: for that food in those Regions begets the Scab.

As for that ancient custom of abstaining from blood and strangled things, it
was a long time observed by the Christians, either out of hope to gain the
Jews, or out of Reverence to Antiquity: and that it has nothing in it contrary
to Republiques, or Communities, the continued observation of it, through
Christian Greece, and all the East, and the Edict of Leo the Emperor, make
evident.

13. All Religions and Sects have their proper Circles and Revolutions; as
Republiques have from Monarchy into Tyranny: thence into Aristocracy, thence
into Oligarchy, from that into a Polity, and so into a Democracy; and then
revert back again into Monarchy at last: either by the same, or some other
Track.

So, when Sects arrive at Atheism, the very Extremes of all mischief fall
upon the Peoples head: and the fierceness of Gods wrath breaks in upon them:
upon which, (but through many affections) they return to their Pristine good
Condition.

But when once they come to that pass, that they deny the Providence of God,
and the Immortality of the soul, they must needs suffer either an [absolute]
change, or a Reformation: because the Curb of Conscience is taken out of the
peoples mouth: and so being themselves wicked, they become a prey to no less
wicked Princes: and thereupon, tired with evils past, they gladly embrace any
Lawgiver, whether he be good or bad.

14. The Sects of Philosophers, passed not from one opinion to an other, any
further then Epicurus: and there they stopped: who denying God, and Providence,
all their Sects were utterly destroyed, as Laertius [excellently] observes.

The Religion established by Moses, when once the Sadduces crept in, that
denied the Immortality of the Soul, suffered a Reformation by our Lord CHRIST
The Lat. is ambiguous.
who brought immortality to all our souls.

When the Gentiles fell into downright Atheism, they fell into a world of
miseries: as appears under the Roman Emperors: whose lawless Licentiousness
marred all: as Cato in Salust, and Lucan, the Poet, observe.

The Sect of the Libertines, that held sin to be no sin, spring out of the
Calvinists, as the Author (but most slanderously) affirms.

Most of the Transylvanians, deny the Immortality of the Soul, and the Holy
Trinity.

That most impious Book of the three Impostors, Add.
the Friar would gladly fasten also upon the Reformed Churches: But, as Grotius
notes, it was Fathered long since upon the Emperor Frederick the second: but
adds withal, that he never saw the man, that saw that Book.

15. The Author (as it becomes a Friar to do, Ex Officio) Pleados high for the
Temporal sword of the Pope, and an armed Priesthood: affirming that the great
Turk, the King of Persia, Tartarie, Moors, and the King of Fez, living all
under an unarmed, naked Priesthood, are, by that means, split into so many
Heretical opinions: whereas the Kings of France, Spain, Germany, and the
Republique of Venice, and [many] other potent Princes united in one Religion
under an armed Priest, the Pope, have no Heresies started amongst them, but
with manifest hazard of their Crowns and Kingdoms.

Observator.

The Sophie [ of Persia] after many years, began to innovate some thing in the
rites of Prayer and Fasting: and made white hats (or Turbants) for the
Cognizance of his Faction: -- But at long running, the Posterity of this Sophy,
by pretenses of Sanctity, so bewitched the people, that in the end, they
Translated the Crown of Persia from the Assumbetan Kings, to their own.

16.and17. These two Paragraphs, savor altogether of the Cell, and the Cowle:
asserting the necessity, (at convenience) of the Papal Power, in Temporalls,
over Christian Princes.

Because (says he) The Pope 1. Poyzes the differences of Christendom, being
Umpire of Peace and War. 2. That he [alwaies] takes part with those that suffer
wrong: neither permits he any King to invade an other Christian Kings Dominion.
3. He links and unites Christian Princes, Cruciatus Lat.
against the [Common] Enemies of the Christian faith. And, 4. By his *
Crusado's and Indulgences and Excommunications, for good, and against evil
Rulers, he does erect and defend the Christian Commonwealth.


So that without that Pope (to speak as a man, and Politiquely) Christianity
had, ere this, gone to utter ruin. And the Author adds his opinion (in fine)
That all Christian Princes, would be as one: secure from one an other, and from
strangers too, and be always Victorious: would they but once make one Grand
Senate at Rome. And, that the reason why never any one Prince could attain an
Universal Monarchy, over the rest of Christian Princes, was no other, then the
Temporal Power of his Holiness; which was a Curb in their months. But (says
he in the close of all) It Is likely that the Monarchy of Christendom, will by
little, and little, fall totally into the Popes hands.

The Observator answers thus, to these two Paragraphs.

He that, with care and diligence, will look into story, shall find that
[farre] more Wars have been raised amongst Christians by the Popes of Rome,
then have been composed. But so far is it from them, that they either could or
would oppose themselves against the Spaniard ( that glutton of Empires) that,
on the contrary, the Papal Authority [alwaies] gave color and countenance to
the Spanish avarice; as Navarre can [sadly] witness: and France, in the times
of Henry the third. And lately, with most notorious injustice, Arms were
raised against the Duke of Mantua; yet would h^e receive no Assistance at all
from the Pope, although no bad man. The Papal [Bulls and] Edicts if they
avail any thing at all, it is with such as are not able to resist them. They
catch poor flies, but Eagles break through them. That Christendom fell not long
since into the hands of an Universal Monarch, it was no thanks to the Papal
Power, that hindered it: but the Germans were hindered by their own Discords,
and Germany hindered France, and France Spain, just as the Persian and Tartar
keep the Turk [from being Emperor of the World.]

18. Charles the great, and Constantine declared themselves Defenders of the
Pope; but Henry and Frederick enemies: for under Frederick those pernicious
factions of Guelfes and Gibellines (that is, Imperialists, and Pontificians)
arose in Italy.

Julian [the Apostat] endeavored to make Gentilisme and Judaisme aemulate one
the other, and vie for the Mastery, but perished under the attempt. The
Mohammedan Sect has many defects in it.

First, because if their arms fail, they fall.

2. Because it admitts not of diverse Princes. 3. Because in many things it
opposes God. And. 4. Because it is as a place of torture to all its enemics.
The Duke of Muscovy (a Country assailed by no man) defends himselfeby his
situation and schism; and stands rather by the discords of Christendom, then
upon his own bottom, as indeed the Turk himself partly does.

Charles the fifth, was a man that bid fairest for the Universal Monarchy.
When Constantius countenunced the Arians, and Julian Paganism, the Pope was
not a man in power, had no dominion then. Here therefore then is an error [or
fallacy] of no cause, put for a cause.

Here in this Paragraph, the friar seems to dream of the return of a Golden
age, of Innocence, under one (I know not what) Monarch of all, as Adam was at
first, and seems to point at the Spaniard for the man: the Observator suspects
some poison here; but I think there is much more vanity then venom.

20. That the world may be governed by one man, the Empire of Augustus does
partly prove it.

That the Spaniard does rule the 2 Hemisphears by Religion, which is the very
soul of an Empire, and Dominion, being all in the whole, and wholly in every
part.

21. If the World were governed by one man, as Alexander said by one Sun,
wars would cease, and Pestilence, by communication of Arts and Medicines, and
by transmigration from infected into wholesome air: By the same
transmigrations might Inundations and fire be avoided; so famine likewise might
be averted, by transportation of provision from plentiful into needy
Countries, etc.

Animad.

These are but the fumes and fancies of an idle brain, doting upon the Spanish
interest, and the Papal; and so I dismiss them proceeding to

CHAP. IX. Of the second cause of gaining and governing Kingdoms, which is
prudence.
A Monarchy is fitter to gain a Commonwealth then to conserve Dominion.

Monarchy is sooner depraved then many Rulers. Grotius confesses then a few (as
Oligarchy) which I under stand not; neither of them gives their reason, nor I
my assent. The Observator adds.

For duration, no Commonwealth in the world is worth the naming, but the
Venetian: and yet the Egyptian, Assyrian, Franceruns Franks.
and French Kingdoms have lasted longer then that.

Some are Kings
1. By Nature Rational [as it were Kings of wisdome] as Socrates and Cato. 2.
By Fortitude, as Domitian and Vitcllius. 3. By both, as Alexander. Augustus.
and David. 4. More by Nature then Fortune, as Scipio, and Hannibal 5. More by
Fortune then Nature, as Tiberius and Galba.
3. Prudence (the second cause of Dominion) does properly belong to those that
are truly Kings; and to such next under God, is Dominion due which prudence is
directly opposite to Craft or Subtlety, which is proper only to Machiavels
Tyrant.

Prudence is consonant to God, that is to eternal wisdom.

Craft agrees to nothing but a man's own will and pleasure: that is, acts all
Arbitrarily.

Prudence is magnanimous, Craft base, yet proud.

Prudence [alwaies] advances wise and valiant men, and puts them in place of
power and trust. Craft depresses and destroys them, that she may rule over
Bastard-Subjects, when the Legitimate are cut off.

Prudence treasures up riches for the good of men's souls and that their numbers
may increase: Craft aims at money and strong holds, and rejoices in the
Diminution and lessening of her subjects.

Prudence even in losing conquers, Craft by conquering is a loser.

Prudence is merciful, Craft is cruel.

Prudence is that of principal men and Chieftaines, such as Caesar, craft
belongs to servile persons, such as Davus.

Prudence has an eye to the Stern, but Craft to the Oar.

Prudence makes Laws for every man's good, but Craft only for her own.

Prudence punishes, and gains good will by it, and makes subjects the better;
Craft punishes and becomes odious, and the people the worse for it. It is proper
to magnanimity and valor, to gain Dominions, as to Caesar, and Charles the
fifth; but to justice and temperance to preserve them, as to the Venetians: and
he that is adorned with all virtues, is fit for both, as Augustus.

5. He that acquires Dominions, must have such a Prudence as is magnanimous,
stout, liberal, just, etc. but somewhat inclining to pride, boldness,
prodigality; but severity mixed with it, etc.

He that keeps and preserves Dominions, must have the same prudence, but
inclining to Pusillanimity, to fear, Tenacity, and [some] Licentiousness, etc.

6. He that gains a Kingdom, different from him in Religion: must either
Translate the Seat of his Empire thither: as the Turk did into Constantinople:
or else Translate the Inhabitants into an other Region, as Nebuchadnezzar did
the Jews, into Babylon: and plant new Colonies, in the Metropolitan Cities of
the Conquered Province; which shall be of thine own Religion, and Laws; place
[new] Preachers there, change Laws, and bring down the chief of the People; as
Cyrus did in Lydia, and the Spaniniard in America: But if they will buckle to
thy Religion: thou may make them Artists, and Mechanics, serviceable to thy
Colony: if not, doom them to slavery, and Transplant them far enough [be
sure] from thy seat Imperial.

But if they embrace the same Religion with thee (as the Neapolitanes with the
Spaniards) treat them gently, receive them into Common friendship, and change
not their Customs, nor Polirie, but by degrees: let the Supreme Judges be made
out of thine own men; the inferior out of theirs. If they did violently oppose
thine entrance, Level the Peers, with the People: but if they did receive the
as friends: Transplant them out of their Native soil, and drill them with
Honors, Rewards, and Promotions; but be sure let not the chief heads be left
behind: for they will either grow insolent, upon Familiarity, and render thee
odious to the People, or else they will rebel. By these defects, Pyrrhus and
Charles the fifth, lost all the Provinces they had gained, on a sudden. But
beware, lest by Calumnies, and fraud, you depresse any man; for by that means
you [only] prepare Ruin and Conspiracies against your self, and so alienate
their Affections, that upon the least occasion, they will rebel against you.

7. He that invades an others Kingdom, must not stick at the mischiefs
following. viz. To strike at the Head, change Laws, pull down Forts, and
Castles; Extinguish the Blood-Royall, or Translate it.

Animad.

This savours of Machiavel: whom the Friar so much detests: or (which is worse)
of the Jesuit.

8. A Prince should be known to do no evil, except that of punishment: and
that too, such as the People wish: as to Fleece Usurers, and ravenous
Magistrates, to banish Superfluous, and effeminate Arts: doom the sluggish to
the Oar: to punish Adultery, Pride, and all Enormous sins and sinners.

9. The People are kept in obedience, by [plenty of] Provisions, Soldiers by
good Pay: Nobles by Honors.

10. For the advance, and increase of Republiques, and Kingdoms; these Rules
following are to be observed.

1. All persons must take upon them those Functions and callings, for which
Nature has fitted them. 2. Magistrates are to be chosen, rather by Nature then
Fortune. 3. The greater good is ever to be preferred before the less, and the
Common before the Private. 4. Let there be a free Community of Goods, of
Knowledge, and of Religion. 5. Foment the Emulations of aspiring to Honors, by
Virtue. 6. Prefer ever Divine things before Humane. 7. Let every man learn
this Logic. viz. That God is: Ergo, He is wise, and good: Ergo, He has a
tender care over us: Ergo, he is just: And we are his Children, and therefore
after death, will reward or punish us. If this be not so, Ergo, God is not
just, not good, Ergo, neither is he God: The contrary whereof; All Nature, the
Fabric of the Universe, and its several Parts, and the use. Order and
function of cach Particle of it, do wonderfully [and loudly] proclaim. As also
his revealing himself to his Saints [on Earth] Angels, and Devils, and
Policies, and all Sciences in the World, [confessing it.]
CHAP. X. Of the third Cause, etc. viz. Occasion.
THE occasions of acquiring Dominion, are innumerable. But the chief are, I.
Thine own Valor, and Numbers; and the Imbecility of thine Enemies, and their
Associates. 2. The Division of the Province to be surprised, into petty Kings,
or jarring. Republiques; but especially into various Seots, and Schisms. 3. But
most of all, if any man call thee in, for his Protector. 4. If the Rulers Son
be in his Minority. 5. If the Ruler be hated of his People. 6. If the People be
covetous of change. 7. If the Nobles [or Patricians] may be bought and sold [
as those of Rome were, in Jugurths days.] 8. If there be any Interregnum, etc.
9. All gross and Enormous sins, and Vices, are so many Inlets, and doors for a
Conqueror, to come in by: as Idolatry, and Anthropophagie above the rest.


CHAP. XI. Of the Decay, Downfall, and Change of Monarchies: and the cause and
remedies thereof.
ALL Monarchy dies, or sinks [at least] either

1. Through want of Virtue in him that succeeds in it: so the Assyrian Monarchy
ended in Sardanapalus. Or

2. For want of a Successor; which evil Augustus prevented, by adopting Sons,
to succeed him.

3. By Division, or Discord of many successors: so the Roman Monarchy under
Constantius, became a Dyarchy under Constantine, and Constance, and afterward,
in Arcadius and Honorius, and the Spanish Monarchy was Rivall'd by Alonzo,
Ferdinand, and Sanctius.

The Turk prevents this mischief by killing his Brethren: but the King of China
by banishing them into some Mountain: which the King of the Abassines does
likewise.

4. Because the Kings Son is young and contemptible, as the Son of Scanderbeg,
and Antiochus, and Alexander the Great: and the last Duke save one, of the line
of Sforza Duke of Millaine: who all being Minors and Pupills, were committed to
Guardian Kinsmen, or Tutors, or strangers, and so, were either murdered or
deposed.

5. The Election of a King, if it be made by Soldiers, is dangerous, and
Schismatic; because they are [easily] carried from one to another, in their
affections. For,

Soldiers are naturally a dull kind of People: and value them most, who pay
them best, at present: not at all considering, the Public good: as it
happened in the times of Galba, Vitellius, Vespasian, and Otho in the Roman
state; and under Omri in Israel: with very much damage [to the Public.]

6. Election also made by all the People, is dangerous: for they understand not
the deep designs, of hidden, and disguised Tyrants: but are distracted, and
carried away with smooth Orators, whithersoever they please to lead them.
Besides, the People are ever at odds, with one another, and always changing
opinions. Hereupon Florence by such Popular Elections, sustained a world of
damage, and prejudice. Neither does the Populacy confide in their Nobles, but
call in strangers to pacify their Tunmults; So the Florentines called in the
Commander of Athens: by whom, they were more devoured then before.

The remedy is: if only the heads of Families be summoned to Election: but
this is a weak one.

7. Elections are best made by a prudent Senate: out of the body of the Senate
it self; as the Pope, out of the Conclave of Cardinals.

8. If an Election suffer a Schism in it, or Fracture, viz. an Interregnum (or
as they call it) a Vacant See; the Empire may go to wrack; and therefore the
Germane Emperor does make choice of his Successor before his death; as also the
King of Fez, before he dies, advances one of his own Sons into his Throne.

Observat.

It often falls out otherwise: for the Roman Emperor of time dies and
appoints no Successor: and the Polack cannot endure any such thing should be
done in that Kingdom.

9. The best is not always elected: but he whom the dying King loves best: as
Solomon chose Rehoboam.

Observat.

The odd number over does best in Elections: and therefore the King of Bohemia
was superadded to the six old Electors of Germany.

10. A Monarchy may be ruined likewise, by the insolency and pravity of a man's
Children [as in Tarquin the proud] or of his wife: who often hates the best
deserving men: as Sophia, the Wife of Justinian the Emperor, hated Narses [the
Gallant Eunuch] who therefore called in the Lombards into Italy, to the hazard
of the whole Empire.

11. Monarchy may be in danger also, and be ruined by the Authority of some
Prophet, or [bold Popular] Preacher: that dares cry it down. The instance here
is made in Samuel, and the Pope: which is an handsome comparison indeed. Here
the Friar draws the Curtain, and lays open the whole scene of the Popes
Encroachments upon Temporal Princes: which part I leave the Friar to Act by
himself, and thither refer the Reader: only he tells us ( page 198.) that
never any Prince prosper'd that opposed his Holiness, but fell at last; as
Frederick of Swevia, Roger Guiscand, etc. Yet

Some Princes called a council against Julius the second, and Pope Eugenius
the fourth.

All Clergymen (under the Papacy) love the Pope in their heart, Princes only
for preferment. Armed Religion was always Invincible, Vid. animad supr.

It is better for a Prince to yield to the Priest, as Theodosius did to
Ambrose, then to treat him ill, as Eudoxa did Chrysoctome; For he was confirmed
in his Throne, whereas she dyed an infamous death.

12. Division in Religion, albeit Monarchy be not preached down, does destroy
it, as it appears in France, Germany, and Poland, etc. for it divides men's
minds; and therefore both their bodies, and fortunes, and arms, and both
parties hate the King: The evil, because he favors the good, and the good,
because he does not extinguish the evil.

Obser.

Here Grotius (the great est advocate and favouror of toleration that lived in
our age) opposes the Friar, and affirms, That there does not upon difference in
opinions, seem so much hazard of divulsion (as he calls it) of minds, or
animosity amongst men, if the Magistrate would compel the Ministry to forbear
mutual and public railings, Condemnationes Lat.
and resutations one of another, and if by a public Law of State, every man
might be secure in the use and exercise of his own religion, as it is in Japan
and Poland; which liberty the reformed Churches of France being abridged of,
Tumults and Wars, were occasioned by it.

13. A Monarchy also fails by its own vastness and bulk, for which reason it
cannot [well] be governed by One, and he is therefore feign to call to his
assistance some to lend their shoulders to this great burden, who afterward
will admit no superiors, and so share the government; as we have often seen
it fall out in the Roman Empire.

The Remedy for this is, to keep an Empire within its own bounds, lest the
commanders and governors, being at too great a distance, usurp the Dominion:
As the Monarch of Japan [is a great example of this] who never sets foot beyond
his sixty six Kingdoms; and the King of China can or possess
claim nothing beyond those bounds which he has set himself, by walls and
Rocks, Woods, and Seas. Another remedy for this disease is, for a Prince to
keep the Wives and Children of Governors and Provincialls [abroad] at home with
him [as pledges] and engage them by Oath to Fidelity and Allegiance, etc. which
in part the King of Spain observes.

14. Sometimes a Kingdom's lost for want of provisions, because it has no
fruitful soil about it: This is the condition of Genoa, and Venice, and
therefore they provide against this [mischief] by Merchants and Factors, and
exchangers of commodities, by Granaries, Munitions, etc.

15. A Monarchy may also fall by Pestilence; against which, Civitatem portat
idem. L.
the King of the Abassines has provided a movable City, and so removes his Seat
at pleasure for the benefit of wholesomer Air; which thing the Tartars [now]
and heretofore the Veientes observed; nay the very Birds do the same: But with
us there be Officers for health purposely appointed, which the Author calls
Magistratus Sanitatis, like our Masters of the Pest houses

16. A Monarchy likewise is ruined by invasion of foreign Princes, that
overpower the right owner; as the King of Persia was by Alexander of Macedon;
and the Sultan of Egypt by Selemus the great Turk.

The best remedy against this, is the love of the subjects to their Prince, and
their gallantry on his behalf; next is, to procure a strong and ready Militia,
and to enter into league with many Princes, that may overpower the Rival of
his Crown: as the Macchabees did with the Romans, being afraid of Antiochus,
and the Venetian with the French when they feared the Spaniard. Neither is it
amiss to sow seeds of discord and hatred amongst the powers you stand in fear
of; as the Spaniard does betwixt the Turk and Persian, ths Abassine and
Muscovite, Polack and Transilvanian, all around, etc. and amongst the Nobles of
France, which is his Rival.

When the Nobility grow too rich and potent, as the Nobles of Iapan, and often
those of Naples, and the French likewise and the German Peers, they have
destroyed the Monarchy under which they lived, defining every one to live for
himself. The remedy for this is, to cut off Entailes of Land and Honors; The
Author means in the words, Ne feuda transeant ad Haeredes that they be not
established, as the Turk does. Next is to level their Forts and strong holds
with the ground, or garrison them with the Princes own soldiery, and then
under pretense of advancing, to humble the Nobles.

18. A Kingdom may be lost too, by the treachery of a Kings own Soldiers, as
it happened to Antiochus.

The remedy against this is, to keep them in their duty by art and cunning,
and divide them; and to fortify thy self with a strong guard of thy best
friends, whom thou must oblige with perpetual favors, and benefits, as the
Turk does his Janissaries.

19. A Crown may be lost by the sudden incu^sion of Barbarous people.

The remedy against this is, to oppose wisdom and religion to barbarous folly:
So Pope Leo opposed Attilla, and Jaddus the high Priest in Hierusalom, clad in
his Priestly Robes, met, and adored, and so pacified Alexander the great.

20. A man may lose his Kingdom too for want of Soldiery of his own, and by
entertaining too many Auxiliaries and Mercenary men; which was the ruin of
Lodovick Sforza, Duke of Millaine, etc.

The Remedy of this is to have a choice Militia of thine own always in
readiness; to arm and unite thine own men, but to disarme and dissipate the
strangers. For this reason also it is expedient, that none [of any Family] but
the firstborn inherit any estate, and let the rest be made Soldiers; or else
do as the Turk does, keep Schools or Colleges of Cloistered boys, to be
trained up in Military Discipline, which shall know no other Father but the
Monarch.

21. Sometimes a Kingdom is lost after a Victory, by the insolency of the
Conquering Army; or after a truce [or league] as it happened to Carthage after
the first punick war, under Hamilcar.

The remedy for this is, on a sudden to divide the Army into distant quarters:
and not to be embodyed till the General commands.

22. A Kingdom may bet lost for want of present pay for the Soldiery, when
the War is on foot, as it fell out to Maximilian of Austria.

Public treasuries are the best remedy against this. Besides the Rich (at
such a pinch) are to be compeli'd by Religion] be means sure Anathema's and
Terrors of Ecommunication] and other Penalties, to throw all their Money and
Plate into the Public Treasury: For so, neither can they rebel, and hereby
is the Kingdom confirmed, and Established: which was usual at Rome, and
Venice. And it is lawful too, in extremity, to melt down Consecrate Church
Plate: and to make the very Soldiers themselves part with their Gold to this
public purpose: but to sweeten them with fair hopes, and the Pillage of the
Field. Thus did Caeser, in the beginning of the Civil War: and thus did
Henry (the third I take it) King of France the Frer advises too: to make leaden
Coin (if need be) to be current as long as the War shall last, as the Venetians
have done.

23. Kingdoms are lost too, by the Luxury of the conquering Army, that does
break and effeminate it self: by the spoils, and delicates of Conquered
Provinces: as it fell out, to the Lombards, Goths, Huns, and Gauls; who
possessing themselves of Southern Kingdoms, full of delights and pleasures.
They [quickly] lost, both their strength and Empire: Which happened also to all
Kings of Naples; by reason of the soft delicacies of Air, and Soil. Josuah
found out a good remedy for this; who would not quite extinguish all the
Natives, [of Canaan] that his People might [still] have some body, whereon to
whet, and exercise their Valor. So [Scipio] Nasica advised [the Romanes] not
quite to destroy Carthage, lest Rome should grow effeminate [by losing her
Rival.]

24. By joining in Commerce and Traffic, and c. with two potent Princes. Thus
came the Raguscan to serve the Turk, and thus the Genoesse, to be under the
Spaniard: But the [Wise] Venetian prevented this. For he would never put to Sea
with the Spaniard; neither would he ever Traffic with him, nor hold any thing
by way of Tenure or Homage, in the King of S'pains Dominions, [as the Genoesse
and others do]

25. Heavy Taxes, and Impositions, often lose Kingdoms, and enrage the People
into Mutinies, and Rebellion; as it happened in Israel under Rehoboam; and the
Duke of Alva in Flanders.

26. The Cruelty of Provincialls: may be the loss of a Kingdom: which rule by
pride and Avarice. This the Axe must cure, as Goesar Borgia did by Orcus of
Cesena.

Punishments must ever be exacted by the sword, Tributes by the tongue; the
Militia by both.

27. A Crown gained, may be lost, if the Issue Royal find friends to help them
to their right: as in the case of Ioas: who was established in his Throne by
the high Priest: against Athaliah and her usurpation, and c.

28. A Kingdom may be lost by the conspiracy of strong and Potent men; as the
Tarquins were Erected by Brutus, and Lucretius, and the Magi of Persia by
Darius and his Accomplices.

Hidden Virtue in any man is a dangerous thing, especially if it be afraid of
the Prince that rules: for it will at last break out to the Princes loss, if
not Ruin: as it did in Brutus and his confederate. Valor and Light must be
ever set high on a Candlestick. Smothered Fire may do, and indeed ever does,
most mischief.

Observat.

How dangerous it was for Tiberius to advance Seianus [himselfe a well born
Person] to so great Honor: the Frince perceived and remedied: but not without
hazard. Therefore both he from that time forward and others, took a couse to
cast Honors upon meaner Persons: and those but Temporary.

Animad.

This observation becomes a man born in a popular state: But God himself seems
to make it a curse: when the Honorable person is overtop'd by mean fellows.
Isa. 3.1, 2. and 3.

The conspiracy of one man with himself to murder a King, etc. is Inevitable,
as that of Adad against the He means. Ehud and Eglon. lud. 3.6.20.21.
King of Edom: and Pausanias against Philip of Macedon: and Friar Clement
against Henry the third of France.

A conspiracy of many is hardly to be avoided: Therefore Probity and the
Peoples love [when all is done] is the strongest Guard a Prince can have.

26. Lastly, a Kingdom may be lost, when the Subject are wasted by War: and
so through want of Defendants, it lies open to Invasion; as now (says the
Author) Spain does.

Enfranchizing, or Endenization, is the only cure for this disease: by
admitting Foreigners into your Freedom: as the Romans did the Latins: and so
fill up your number.

CHAP. XII. Of the fall and change of Republiques where many Govern, etc.
1. TO take off the dissentions, between Peers, and People, the Author would
have them all participate of Honors: as, at this time, it is amongst the
Biscainers: Or, as amongst the Jews, that one Family chosen out of all the
rest should rule.

Observat.

It Is expedient, that betwixt the Peers, and the Plebeians, there should be a
middle sort, and degree of Persons, as a Seminary of Nobility: such as were the
Knights and Gentlemen of Rome: for this degree is a kind of tie, or Ligament
of both the other.

2. The Peers contend with the people [usually] about honors, Offices,
Tributes, and Matrymonie, and Lands, and the like: and if the Nobility get the
day, the Republique is ruined; for it is necessary for them to keep under a
jealous and suspicious people, and thence comes their downfall. But if the
people gain the day, the matter's worse then before, for either the Nobles are
driven into banishment, or else they call in strangers, and so the people
become a prey to every crafty Citizen, or foreign potentate, or valiant
Commander.

If once the Nobles mix and couple themselves with the Plebians, to the end
they may partake of the government with them; they grow vile and despicable
both together, and so the commonwealth falls to ground; as it always happened
in the Florentine republique, and diverse times in that of Genoa.

The remedy is, if the People (of a middle Size betwixt the Nobles and the
pelting Plebeian) get the upper hand, and share Magistracies and honors now
and then, and Lands and Provinces also, By such contentions Rome flourished and
grew great, and yet granted the honor of Victories, and the credit of them, to
the Commons: but Florence perished under them.

3. A republique is often destroyed, when Laws are made to the advantage of
great ones, and pressure of the people.

4. When the Powers in being, usurp Anthority [over the people] and keep
guards for their defense; as the Decemviri did at Rome, and the Thirty Tyrants
at Athens.

5. The Luxury of the Nobles, and their neglect of Arms [and Arts] makes them
vile and cheap in the peoples eyes; and so makes a republique sink into a base
Democracy.

6. When a Patrician grows too rich or potent, and Emulations grow rife about
priority, then the republique's lost: So Sylla when he had subdued Marius, and
Caesar when Crassus was slain, and Pompey conquered (who were then Rivalls in
the Empire) carried all before them, and were Tyrants at pleasure.

7. Correspondency with some foreign Prince, of any person in power, may ruin
a republique.

8. When any fawning Poplicola, in a time of Famine, or other occasion,
endeavors to gain the people by opportunity and advantage, and by such arts,
gets the power into his own clutches; these must be looked to, and suppressed,
as Metius was in Rome, etc. and Manlius etc. which King David neglecting in
Absosom, run the hazard [of his life and Crown.]

9. A Republique falls: to ground oft-times, because it wants a Militia; when
the people and Patritians mutually fear one another, and thereupon call in
foreign Commanders, which is usual in Venice.

Which commanders after some signal Victory obtained, either themselves seize
upon the common wealth (as Sforza did at Millain, or Colion.
and Bartholomew Coline might have done at Venice) or else they betray it to
foreign Princes, as Malatesta did Florence.

10. The faction of Citizens, that bear affection to some faction of strangers,
ruin a republique; so all the republiques of Italy split themselves into
Guelfes and Gibellins, or (which was worst of all) into Neuters; whereupon dire
and dismal slaughters and times ensued.

A Republique must never be Neutrall, because it must necessarily be a prey to
the Conqueror, not being supported either by friends or enemies [Nec amicis nec
inimicis fota Lat.]

11. A Republique falls, when the People confide not in the Nobility, nor the
Nobility in them; and therefore they call in a foreign Umpire, that will
devour them both: as Florence called in King Robert, and or General Dux.
, the Duke of Athens.

The remedy is, to commit the Vmpirage of the quarrel (not to strangers, but)
to religious men, Priests that are Natives; as Moises did by Gods command, and
as the Observator well notes, The old Gauls did to the Druides, and often times
both they and the Germans, to [godly and] grave Matrons. But this latter is a
crude observation.

12. Changes of Republique are innumerable, as their causes are. Read the
Florentine History (for that City ran through all varieties of change) and in
opposition to that the Roman.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Fate and change of Popular, or Democratique state, etc.
1. A Democracy, or Popular State assuredly goes to wrack, when Ignorant
Plebeians rule, that canno agree amongst themselves, and determine all things
by chance or affection.

2. Popular elections are ever attended with jarring, and noise of the
multitude, and obstreperous rabble.

3. In the Senate or Parliaments of Popular States, he that has the smoothest
tongue, is likeliest to cheat the people, and make himself be elected, [rules
in chief]though he be the veriest Knave in the Pack

4. It marres a Popular State, when the poorest of the people endeavor to grow
rich by public Offices, and the wealthier sort grow Tyrannous by their riches.

It is dangerous to call in a stranger to the administration of justice, as the
Florentines used to do; for this is a symptom of dissension amongst the
Natives, and often brings ruin with it, [yet has it been practiced elsewhere of
late, but with like success.]

5. This Paragraph about provisions and supplying the public necessities by
Corn, etc. is treated of in the precedent Chapter.

6. The next Bar of a Democratique State is, the General that fights their
Battails abroad, and returns home a King as well as a Conqueror; as Sforza
returned to Millain, and Caesar to Rome, etc.

Observe.

The Romans provided excellently against this mischief, they had ever at hand
good store of sit and able men for the conduct of any War, and ever and
anon changed their Commanders, whereby they both secured their liberty, and by
emulation provoked them to virtue and valor.

7. An other Engine to batter down Democracy, is a Public Benefactor: that
has got Power into his hands: and pretends himself in hazard of his life by
Conspirators: and thereupon desires a kind of Life Guard for the safety of his
Person, against his accusers and those he would accuse, and so being thus well
provided, he invades the Throne, (if I may so say) and dubbs himself King; so
did Pisistratus at Athens.

To prevent this: The People must commit themselves, to the care and Providence
of wise and religious men: reposing all trust, and confidence in them: For by
not believing Solon the Philosopher, who discovered to them the design of
Pisistratus, the Athenians lost their Liberty.

8. A Common wealth may fall, by the approach of sudden [and unexpected]
dangers: the Common people being dull and heavy in deliberations. So the
Romans lost Sagunt um whilst they [slowly] consulted, how to get it: and the
Venetians Cyprus, whilst they coldly deliberate how to relieve it.

In this case a Dictator must must speedily be pitched upon: to Rule, and
dispatch every thing as himself sees most Expedient, without Counsel or
control of any man. Necessity it self will compel the people to pitch upon
none, but the best and ablest man for that service: as the Practice of the
Romans [in that case] does witness.

9. A Popular State may miscarry too by some wealthy Citizen: who does favor
and foster Poets and Orators, and Preachers, and Grammarians, and all sorts of
men, that have Eloquence or wit, and by his riches, keeps an Academy in his own
house: of men that can Blazon, and Trumpet forth his praises and worth to the
People etc. Thus became Cosmo Medices Dake of Florence.

Let no man, that sets his wits and tongue to sale, have any pare in any Senate
or Parliament. Greece quite lost her self, by the Liberty of Orations: so did
Germany and France [by sermons] and the Switzers too late provided a remedy
against this disease.

The Last Paragraph concerning the danger of change.

All Change (be it never so little) of the Ancient state of things, in a
Commonwealth, or Kingdom is either, a Sign, or Cause, or Con-Cause, or
Preparation, to an Universal change of minds: and (by consequence) of all the
Republique, or Princedome revolting from its own Principles. As new meats, and
new Exercise, beget a new habit of Body. So

Darius by affecting to wear a Macedonian sword, did foretell that his Kingdom
should be ruined by the arms of Macedon. Therefore the change even of old
Fashions in Apparel, of Banquets and Marriages, and of women's behavior, and
of old Discipline, and the Pravity and corruption of youth (as Censorinus
notes) new Laws and Tributes ought ever to be avoided: for they either
suddenly, or totally, destroy a Kingdom: Whereupon the Venetian will not change
so much as his old Original Garb in his cloths for (as Solomon says) He
that fails in the least things, shall by degrees come to naught.

The COROLLARIE, and Conclusion.

It is Probitie, and Piety, that preserves a King and People: and not the
unlearned Craft, and subtlety of Machiavell: For all Virtue, and Power, derives
its Original from Hun: who is the Essential Power, and Wisdom of his Father
that Governs all things. To whom be all Glory.

FINIS.

