Mr. GRIMSTON HIS LEARNED SPEECH IN THE High Court of PARLIAMENT: CONCERNING
Troubles abroad, and Grievances at home.

SHOWING The inward Symptoms and Causes of all our Fears and Dangers, and
what probability there is of Reformation, in case due punishment be speedily
executed on the Incendiaries and chief Causers of those distractions that have
oppressed our Church and Commonwealth.

LONDON, November. 25. Printed for T. Wright. 1642.

M. GRIMSTON HIS LEARNED SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT.
M. Speaker,
THere has now a great and weighty business been presented to this House,
and a Letter has been read, importing a decision of the Kings natural
Subjects.

M. Speaker, this is a great case, and very worthy of the consideration and
advertisement of this great Council; but I am very much mistaken, if there be
not a case here at home, of as great a danger as that now put to be abroad; the
one stands without the door (for so dangers from thence, in all our histories,
have ever been termed:) but the case that I would put is a case of danger
already upon our backs.

And in those great cases of danger, which so much concern the welfare of the
Body Politic, we ought to do in them like skillful Physicians, that are not
led in their judgments so much by the outward expressions of a disease, as by
the inward Symptoms and causes of it. For it fares with a body politic, as
it does with a body natural: It is impossible to cure an ulcerous body,
unless you first cleanse the veins, and purge the body from those
obstructions, and pestilentiall humors that overcharge Nature, and being once
done too, botches, blaines, and scabs, that grew upon the superficies and
outside of the body, dry up, shed, and fall away of themselves.

Mr. Speaker, the danger that has now been presented to the House, it
stands at a far distance, and I wish heartily, that it were further off;
yet as it stands at a far distance, it is so much the less dangerous. But the
case that I shall put, is a case of great danger here at home, domestique: and
therefore so much the more dangerous, because it is homebred, and runs in the
veins.

And, Mr. Speaker, if the one shall appear, to be of as great danger, as the
other, I hope it will not be thought unreasonable this time, to put the one
as well as the other; And the case that I would put is this.

The Charter of our liberties called Magna Charta, was granted unto us by King
John; which was but a renovation and a restetution of the ancient Laws of this
Kingdom. This Charter was afterward in the succession of several ages,
confirmed unto us above 30 times, and in the 3 year of his Majesty's reign
that now is we had no more then a bare confirmation of it. For we had an Act
declaratory past, and then to put it out of question and dispute for the
future, his Majesty by his gracious answer Soit droit comme est desire,
invested it with the title of Petition of right.

Mr. Speaker,

It may be some may object. Parturiunt montes, etc. I promised to present the
House with a case of very great danger here at home, but the Mountain has
brought forth nothing but a Mouse; That this case is not worthy the name of a
case, and so not worthy the putting.

And truly, for mine own part, I should have bin of the same opinion (had not
some expositors, contrary to the Laws of God, and Man, and reason, and I am
sure contrary to the Dictamen of their own Consciences) marred the text with
their expositions, undermining the liberty of the Subjects, with new invented
subtle distinctions, and assuming to themselves a power (I know not where they
had it) out of PARLIAMENT, to supercede, annihilate and to make void the Laws
of this Kingdom.

What sad effects these ways and opinions have produced, I am confident, His
Majesty has neither seen nor heard, as we have felt them. And it is now his
Majesty's goodness and Piety, to give us leave to speak them, and to present
them with our Greevances, which are not few.

Mr. Speaker, the Commonwealth has bin miserably torn and macerated, and all
the proprieties, and liberties shaken: the Church distracted, the Gospel and
Professors of it persecuted, and the whole Kingdom overrun with Multitudes,
and swarms of projecting Cater-wormes, and Caterpillars, the worst of all the
Egyptian Plagues.

Then as the case now stands with us, I conceive there are two points very
considerable.

The first is, what has bin done any way to impeach the Liberty of the
Subject, contrary to the Petition of Right.

The second is, who have bin the Authors and Causers of it.

Mr. Speaker, the serious examination and decision of those two questions, do
highly concern his Majesty in the point of Honor, and his Subjects in the
point of Interest: and all that I shall say to it is but the words that Ezra
did to King Artaxerxes, to the setlement of that State, which at that time was
as much out of order, as ours is at this present; and which cured theirs, I
hope will cure ours. His words were these.

Whosoever has not done the Law of God, and the Law of the King, let judgment
be speedely executed upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or
unto Confiscation of goods, or to Imprisonment.

Now M. Speaker, it may be some do think this a strange text, and is it
possible! Some may think it as strange a case. As for the text, every man may
read it, that will. And for the case, I am afraid there are but few here, which
do not experementally know it, to be as bad as I have put it: And how to mend a
bad case, is part of the business we met about. His Majesty has graciously
confirmed unto us, our great and ancient Privilege of Freedom of Speech: and
having his Kingly word for it, I shall rest confidently upon it, as the
greatest security under heaven. And whilst I have the honor to have a place
here, I shall with humility be bound to express my self as a Freeman.

The Diseases and Distempers that are now in our body politic, are grown to
that height, that they pray for, and importune a Cure. And his Majesty out of
his tender care, and Affection, to his people, like a nursing Father, has now
offered himself to hear our prayers and Complaints.

Mr. Speaker,

We cannot complain that we want good Laws, for the wit of man cannot invent
better then are already made; There want only some Examples, that such as have
bin the authors, and causers of all miseries and distractions in the Church and
Commonwealth, contrary to those good Laws which be like Treakle to expel the
poison of mischeife out of others.

But my part is but Ostendere Portam, and therefore having put the Case, I must
leave it to the judgment of this House, whether our dangers here at home be not
as great and considerable, as that which was even now presented.

FINIS.
An Order from both Houses of Parliament for regulating of the Army.
WHereas there have been diverse Complaints made unto us of many disorders
committed by the Soldiers in their marching, and in such places wherein they
have been quartered or billeted, which disorders (as is informed) have been
partly occasioned by the neglect of their Officers to go along with them and
conduct them: It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that the Lord General be desired to give Command to all his
Officers, that they take care to attend according to the duty of their several
places, that the Soldiers thereby may be hereafter kept from straggling up and
down the Countries: And to that end to lay his Command upon the Officers of
each Company, both in the Marching, Quartering, and Billeting, to be in Person
amongst the Soldiers themselves, to prevent any disorders whatsoever, and
punish such as shall offend.

Joh. Brown Cleric. Parliament.


