A DISPLAY OF HERALDRIE: MANIFESTING A more easy access to the knowledge
thereof then has hitherto been published by any, through the benefit of METHOD;
Wherein it is now reduced by the Study and Industry of

JOHN GUILLIM late Pursuivant at ARMS.

Interlaced with much variety of History, suitable to the several Occasions or
Subjects.

The fourth Edition.

Corrected and much enlarged by the Author himself in his life time: Together
with his own Addition of explaining the terms of Hawking and Hunting, for the
use and delight of GENTLEMEN.

And now to this fourth Edition are added about three hundred new Coats and
Bearings of eminent Families, in their proper Sections, never before inserted.

As also a true Register of the Blazons of all the Knights of the Garter, from
the first Installment to the last: And also of all the Baronets from their
first Creation to the last.

Faithfully collested by FRANCIS NOVVER Arms-Painter (and Student in Heraldry)
in Bartholomew Lane, London.

Quod quisque privatim accipit, tenetur in communem usum depromere. Vnius labor
multorum laborem allevat.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Jacob Blome, 1660.

TO NONE BUT GENTLEMEN.
HAving attempted an Addition of some hundreds of Coats to the following
Discourse or Display of Heraldry, more through the importunity, and for the
advantage of the Printer (not so conscious of my insufficiencies as my self)
then prompted by any inclinations of my own: who though a great doter on, yet
can ill spare so much time where the sole return is the reputation of having by
affection elected the Profession I pretend to, not by chance fallen on it; I
thought it might be expected I should apologize, according to form, for my
Self and the Press: For the latter I shall give Billa vera, for the former I
will justify the Blazonry, though I know it sometimes wave the common road; I
may through inanimadversion have said too little of some Families, but (I
think) too much of none; there are three only in the Book I could wish
omitted, and twice that number inserted. It may be objected the Book was as
useful before, but I am sure much more delightful now, the major part of the
former Coats being namelesse, and some such as were never borne (or will be) or
of extinct Families: Not but there are also diverse Presidents of bearing in
this Edition that were omitted in the former. To be brief, if any person
think I have abated any thing of his due right, let him suspend his judgment,
and command my attendance, and I shall endeavor to evince. As I am not
incapable of reason, no man shall sooner acknowledge his errors,

Then Your humble Servant, FRANCIS NOWER.
Old Exchange London.
LENVOY TO THE AUTHOR BY WILLIAM SEGAR. Garter, Principal King of Arms.
KInd friend and fellow, since it is your will,
I should my verdict give of this your skill;
I say your Art was never so displayed,
Better composed, nor Groundwork truer laid,
To raise a Fabric to your lasting name.
Your painful study, curious search, and care,
In turning over Books both known and rare;
Your great Expenses and your little Gains,
To countervaile a Guerdon for your pains,
Does make your Merit to exceed your Fame.
But let me tell you, this will be the harm,
In Arming others, you Your self disarme;
Our Art is now Anatomized so,
As who knows not, what we our selves do know?
Our Corn in others Mill is ill apaid.
Bees suck the Flowers, others eat their Honey,
Poor dig the Mines, Rich men have the Money;
Sheep bear the fleece, others wear the Wool,
And some plant Vines, and some the Grapes do pull;
Sic vos non vobis, may to us be said.
We blazon Arms, and some esteem them not,
We write of Honor, others do it blot,
We uphold Honor, others pluck us down,
Burying themselves in base Oblivion:
Such are the effects of our defective Age.
Peevish Preciseness, loves no Heraldry,
Crosses in Arms, they hold Idolatry:
All Funeral's pomp, and Honor but a vaunt,
Made Honor only by the Honorant;
Shortly no difference 'twixt the Lord and Page.
Honors Recusants do so multiply,
As Arms, the Ensigns of Nobility,
Must be laid down; they are too glorious,
Plain, idleshewes, and superstitious:
Plebeian baseness does them so esteem.
Degrees in blood, the steps of pride and scorn,
All Adams children, none are Gentle born:
Degrees of state, titles of Ceremony:
Brethren in Christ, greatness is Tyranny:
O impure Purity that so does deem!
Well gentle Guillims, you have done your part,
I would Reward might follow your desert,
As Shadows follow bodies in the Sun:
Shadows (alas) are not substantial,
Shadows and Rewards, prove nothing at all,
For being both pursued, away they run.
John St. George to the Author.
THough Indian Ants, that scrape in Mines of Gold,
Dare not for Treasure make exchange with death,
Yet braver minds for honor dare be bold,
Courageously to sacrifice their breath;
A precious Gem is Arms, the subject of thy pen:
Which as a Diamond when thou did find,
Rude, and uncut, to bring the same to shape,
And Luster fit, thy Purse, thy Pen, thy Mind
Did all conspire this Work to undertake:
Which now performed, let Goldsmiths judge the price,
Till Aesops Cock and Indian Ants be wise:
And thy Guerdon seem not worth a mite,
To such base Prisers, deem it not the less,
For higher spirits will judge thereof aright:
And they at last too late will all confess,
That Gold and earthly Pleasures do bewitch;
But Grace and Honor only make men Rich.
JOHN St. GEORGE.

TO The the Right Honorable and truly Noble (my very good Lord) WILLIAM
Marquess and Earl of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, and Lord Seymour, and one
of the Honorable Privy Council to the late King CHARLES.
My Lord,
MY Grandfather RICHARD ADAMS did in his life time think it a principal
happiness that he was numbered in the Register of those who had the honor to
serve your Lordship; nor did his service rest in a naked expression only, but
was also practical; for he was a most affectionate lover and sincere honourer
of your Lordship, as being indeed obliged unto it, by those many important
favors you continually showered upon him. To exhibit to the world some
testimony of my grateful acknowledgement for those signal engagements; I have
by the fourth Impression of this well accepted Treatise of Heraldry, gained an
opportunity to insert your Honors Coat, as a pattern of the Atchievment of a
Marquess of ENGLAND, and do devote the whole Work to your Lordships
Patronage, wherein I hope I shall not in any wise diminish or obscure the
luster of your thrice noble Family, it having been my endeavor and design, to
improve, if it were possible, the estimate of it; which is still the
chiefestaym and only intention of,

My Lord, The most obliged to your Name and House, RICH: BLOME.

To his nearest and dearest Kinsman, John Guillim, Pursevant of Arms Tho.
Guillim wishes his own best wishes.
THis large display of thy Mysterious Art,
Each where displays such Luster, Labor, Learning,
To every one that can with due discerning
Survey thy Volume over every part;
As there is none, Noble or Gentle heart,
(And only such this subject is concerning)
That can deny thee (thine own virtues earning)
The praise and praise of thy divine desert,
If any Critics currishly repining,
Bark at thy Light, their fury is thy foil,
For, more we praise such Lamps so public shining,
And ever pray they never fail of Oil.
So fare thou ( Cousin) for this Work of thine,
Which with thy Name, shall now eternize mine.
To my worthy Friend, Master Guillim, on his present Work.
AS in a curious Lant-schape, often we see
Nature, so followed, as we think it is she,
Trees, Rivers, Hills, Towers, Valleys, Country-farms
Higher or lower placed; so here are Arms.
Of which the several Blazons, Ranks and Rites,
Now first explained by their due shades and lights,
In perfect method, wrought with Precepts, Laws,
Examples, and distinctions, for each cause,
Guillims elaborate hand has with such spright
Informed, as every part has life and light.
But when the whole together I behold,
So Fair, so Rich, so Even, so Manifold,
Of all the Books, we say, ere born with us,
Not one can boast a Nobler Genius.
Anthony Gibson.

To my deservedly beloved and worthy Friend and Countryman, Mr. John Guillim,
touching his Display of the Honorable Art of Armory.
THy Name, thy Country, and thy matchless Art,
Incites my Muse to raise her Arms of Power,
With praises to lay open thy desert,
To make it all-devouring Time devour.
But (oh) a small Reward it is to get
But Fame, too Cheap for that which cost so dear,
As Time, and Pains, and Cost; and all three great:
Yet that is the most, the most do look for here,
Thou have reduced an Art (much like our Law)
Vnmethodiz'd, to such a Method now,
That the whole Art, that was before but raw,
Is made most ripe in Rules, the same to know:
Here all the Terms by which the Art is known,
And the least Particle of each least part,
Are so Anatomized, and strictly shown,
That All may see the Soul of all this Art.
Here, all the Bearings, both of Beasts and Birds,
Of Fish, Flies, Flowers, Stone, and each Mineral,
Of Planets, Stars, and all, that All afford,
Are made by Art, appear most natural.
So that this Work, did ransack Heaven and Earth,
Yea Natures bulk it self, or all that is
In Nature hid, before this Book had birth.
To show this Art by them, and them by this:
Then Natures Secretary we may justly style
Thy searching Spirit, or else we may,
Plinius Secundus call thee; since (the while,
Rare Herald) thou do Natures Arms Display;
So that we cannot hold him Generous,
(If squared by Rules of Generosity,)
That will not have this Book (composed thus)
To understand Himself, and It thereby.
For, here by Arms (as sometimes Ships at Sea)
Is seen how Houses grapple, but for Peace;
(Yet being joined) distinguished so they be,
That we may see them (several) piece by piece.
For the whole Body to these Arms thou have,
So clearly purged from sad Obscurity,
That now this Art in FRONT may well be placed
Of Arts that shine in Perspicuity,
And if before, the same seemed most abstruse;
Now, have thou (for WALES glory, and thine own
Rare BRITAIN) made it facile for our use.
Since unconfusedly the same is shown:
Then, all that honor Arms must honor Thee,
That have made Arms from all confusion Free.
JOHN DAVEIS of Hereford.

To his worthy and well-deserving Friend, Master J. Guillim.
FAin would I praise thee as thy worth requires,
But (ah) I cannot, since my power decays;
I want the Muses aid, and sacred Fires
To offer up my love unto thy Praise:
For, thou by Arms, as here does well appear,
Deserve more praise than Papers Arms can bear.
JOHN SPEED.

In Authorem, Gulielmi Belcheri Eulogium.
ARmorum primus Winkynthewordeus artem
Protulit, and ternis linguis lustravit eandem:
Accedit Leighus: concordat perbene Boswel,
Armorioque suo very dignatur Honoris,
Clarorum Clypeis and Cristis ornat: eamque
Pulchre Nobilitat, Generis Blazonia, Ferni:
Armorum proprium docuit Wirleius and usum.
At tua prae reliquis, Guillime, hinc gloria crescit,
Quod tu cuncta simul, reliqui quae singula, praestas,
Et quae confuse reliqui, facis ordine primus,
Hinc tibi laus, inter laudatos, prima manebit,
Nobiliumque choro; (reliquos contemn) placebis.
G. B.

TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
HOW difficult a thing it is to produce form, out of things shapelesse and
deformed, and to prescribe limits to things confused, there is none but may
easily perceive, if he shall take but a slight view of the Chaos-like
contemperation of things, not only diverse, but repugnant in Nature, hitherto
concorporated in the generous profession of Heraldry: as the forms of the pure
Celestial bodies, mixed with gross Terrestrials; Earthly Animals, with Watery;
Savage beasts, with Tame; Whole-footed beasts, with Divided; Reptiles, with
things Gressible; Fowls of prey, with Homebred; these again, with River
Fowls; Aerie Insecta, with Earthly; also things Natural, with Artificial;
Arts Liberal, with Mechanical, Military, with Rusticall; and Rustic with
Civil. Which confused mixture has not a little discouraged many persons
(otherwise well affected to the study of Armory) and impaired the estimation of
the profession. For redress whereof, my self (though unablest of many) have
done my best, in this my Display of Heraldry, to dissolve this deformed lump,
distributing, and digesting each particular thereof into his peculiar rank;
wherein, albeit the issue of my enterprise be not answerable to the height of
my desires, yet do I assure my self my labor herein will not be altogether
fruitless, forasmuch as hereby I have broken the Ice, and made way to some
after-comers of greater gifts, and riper judgment, that may give a fairer body
to this my delineated rough draught, or shadow of a new framed method. For if
men of greatest skill have failed to give absolute form to their works,
notwithstanding their best endeavors, with little reason may such perfection
be expected from me, whose Talent is so small, as that I am forced to build
wholly upon other men's foundations: and therefore may be thought to have
undertaken an idle task, in writing of things formerly handled, and published
by persons of more sufficiency and greater judgment. Notwithstanding, who
knows not, that as every man has his proper conceit and invention, so has
he his several drift and purpose, so as diverse men writing of one self
Argument, do handle the same diversely? Which being so, what lets that every
of us, writing in a diverse kind, may not without offense to other, use our
uttermost endeavors to give unto this, erst unshapely and disproportionable,
profession of Heraldry, a true Symmetria and proportionable correspondence of
each part to other? In as much (if I be not deceived) both they and my self do
all aim at one mark, which is, so to adorn and beautify this Science, as
that it being purged from her wonted deformities, may become more plausible to
many, and be favorably entertained of all; which could not be otherwise better
effected, than by dissolving of this Chaos-like or confused Lump, and
dissevering of each particular thereof from other, and disposing them under
their peculiar heads, which is the full scope of these my Travels. Now to the
end I might the better accomplish this Task, after I had carefully collected
the chief Grounds, Principles, Rules and Observations, that Ger. Leigh, Boswel,
Fern, Bara, Chassaneus, and other best approved Authors in their several Works
have written touching the rudiments and first principles of Armory; then did I
seriously bethink my self for the orderly distribution of those their dispersed
Notes and Observations so by me collected, and digesting of them into some form
of Method, or at the least into some Methodicall resemblance, wherein I hope I
have in some sort accomplished my desire, and have for thy better understanding
and apprehension (gentle Reader) first distributed this Work into Sections, and
those into Chapters, briefly showing their several substances and orderly
connexions; and throughout the whole I have begun with the Genus of each kind,
and severed them into their Species, which also are subdivided into
Individuaes, annexing particular rules to each several sort. Moreover I have
added Definitions, Divisions, and Etymologies of the Artificial terms,
peculiarly pertaining to this Art, bestowed the chief grounds, Principles,
Rules and Observations under their proper heads, and manifested their use by
examples of special choice, whereby they receive not only warrant, but also
lively sense and vigor, in default whereof they would become destitute of all
force, according to that saying of Aretius; Praecepta quantumvis bona and
concinna, mortua sunt, nisi ipse auditor variis exemplis ea repraesentat.
Finally, to the end that nothing should be wanting that might give thee full
contentment, I have prefixed before every Section an Analogicall Table, briefly
comprehending the substance of each subsequent Section, and that with such
coherence that each of the said Tables answers in a Relative respect of the
one of them to the other; so as all of them do jump together in an universal
coherence, as by their particular references does manifestly appear, whereby I
have brought to pass (though with long and difficult labor) that in this my
Display of Heraldry, thou may easily find (bestowed according to Order)
whatsoever thou desire concerning the Principles of this Profession: So that
thou in short time, and with much ease may reap not only a profitable
gleaning, but a plentiful Harvest of this my long and painful Lucubrations.
FAREWELL.

Nihil est inventum and perfectum simul.
THis first Section shows the Original, beginning, and universality, diverse
denominations, composition and voluntary assumption of Arms and Ensigns; the
original discipline of them, the Equivocation of the Latin word Arma, and in
what sense the same is to be understood and taken, the necessity and use of
Arms and Ensigns; when and by whom they were first given for remunerations:
their Sympathy with their Bearers, and their conformities with names; their
Definition, Distribution, Blazon, Accidents, and Parts; their Diminutions or
Abatements; together with many Precepts, Rules and Observations, as well
general as particular, pertaining to blazon.

The Table of the First Section.
The skill of Armory consists in Blazoning, wherein must be considered,
Accidents, which are both Tincture, which consisted of Colors, which are
either General, As when things are borne in their natural colors: and
Special, Single, As white and black. and Mixed, Exactly compounded of white and
black, as Red. or Declining more to the one than to the other, with red, as
Yellow, Sanguine, Purpure, etc.


and Furs which consist either of One color, namely white, which is the
Livits skin or furre. or More than one, Two only which are either with black,
as Black with white, Ermine, which is black upon white. Ermines, white upon
black.
or Black with yellow, Ermynoys, black upon yellow, and Pean, Yellow upon Black.

or without black, as Verrey, which is composed of white and blue, or of blue
and white. Which is Green with Yellow, or Yellow with Green.

or More than two, Ermynytes, differing from Ermyne by a red hair added to
each side of the spots. and Vayre, which is of all colors, except Blue and
Green.



and Differences, which are both Ancient, As Bordures of all sorts. And
Modern, as Files, Cressants, Mullets, Martlets, Annulets.

and Parts which are the Escocheon; wherein we must observe the Accidents, viz.
Points, of which some are Middle, as the Fesse, Honor, and Nombrill Points.
Remote Superior, Exact Middle point of the chief, and the two extremes thereof,
viz. the Dexter and Sinister chief Points.
and Inferior, Precise Middle Point of the Base of the Escocheon, and the two
Extremes thereof, scil. the Dexter and Sinister Base Points.


and Rebatements which consist in Diminution, which are placed On the middle
point, as the Delfe and the Inescocheon reversed. or Elsewhere, and do occupy
Some one of the other points alone, as the Dexter point parted. or More Points
than one viz. Four, as a point in a point. or Fewer points than 4. Three, as
Point Champain, Point Plain, and Gore Sinister. or Two, as a Gusset Dexter and
Sinister.



and Reversing, which is a transposing or turning upside down of the whole
Escocheon.

and Kinds, whereof see the Table of the second Section.
and Ornaments without the Escocheon, whereof see in the Table of the sixth
Section.

and Marshalling, whereof hereafter in the sixth Section.


A DISPLAY OF HERALDRY. SECT. I. CHAP. I.
WHosoever shall address himself to write of matters of Instruction, or of any
other Argument of importance, it behooves, that before he enter thereinto, he
should resolutely determine with himself, in what order he will handle the
same: So shall he best accomplish that he has undertaken, and inform the
understanding, and help the memory of the Reader. For so does Chassaneus
admonish us, saying: Cassan.
Priusquam ad scientiam perveniatur, honum est, modum praescribere docendi and
ordinem, quia per ordinem res intellectae magis delectant animos, mentes
nutriunt, sensus magis illuminant, and memoriam reddunt clariorem. Such order
and course of writing does also procure in the reader a facility of
apprehension, as Erasmus notes, saying; Facilius discimus quae congruo
dicuntur ordine, quam quae sparsim and confusim.

What Order is, S. Augustine does inform us, saying, Definition of order.

Aug. de civit. Dei.

Order twofold.

Cas. Dialect.


Ordo est parium dispariumque rerum distributio. This order is twofold; the one
of Nature, the other of Discipline: The order of Nature (as Doctor Casius
notes) is a progression from simples to things compound: contrariwise, the
order of Discipline is a proceeding from things compound to simples. As
touching the order that I have prefixed to my self in this Display of Heraldry,
you shall understand, that forasmuch as the handling of one of these alone,
suffices not to the effecting of my intended Method, I must of force make use
of them both in some sort according to their distinct kinds. Order in this Work
observed.
Wherein albeit the order of Nature in right should have the precedence, as the
more worthy, quia Natura regitur ab intelligentia non errante: nevertheless, in
regard my principal purpose tends to the prescribing of a form of Discipline,
whereunto these tokens which we call Arms must be reduced, and therein to
manifest rather their location than their generation, their use than their
essence, their shadow than their substance; I am constrained to prefer the
latter (which serves directly for my purpose) before the former, which tends
thereto but collaterally: whose dignity notwithstanding I purpose regardfully
to observe, when I shall come to the distribution of things Natural in their
proper places.

Digression.
But before I enter my Method, I hold it expedient (though I do somewhat
digress) by way of introduction to the better conceiving and understanding of
that which shall be herein handled, briefly to offer to the consideration of
the judicious Reader, some few things of necessary note, touching the Subject
of this Work: Such are those ensigns or marks which we call Arms in English,
Equivocation of the word Arma.
and in Latin, Arma; which being a word of equivocation or ambiguity, needs
some explication; Digredi enim quand^que licet ex causa, non autem divagari:
for so it is very requisite, to the end it may be certainly known in what sense
this word is to be here taken, quia discenti ponenda sunt vera and certa.

Instruments natural.
It is therefore to be observed that this word Arma in Latin is sometimes taken
for very natural instruments, and in this sense does Doctor Casius use the
same, where he says, Arma belluis natura dedit, ut Leoni dentes, Serpenti
aculeum, Instruments Mechanical.
etc. Sometimes it is taken for all manner of instruments pertaining to
Mechanical Trades, as Arma Rusticorum, Rastra, Ligones, and hujusmodi. Also
Arma Coquinaria, lebes, patella, tripus, ol^a, etc. And Virg. Aeneid. 5.
speaking of the necessaries pertaining to shipping, says, Colligere arma
jubet, validisque incumbere remis.

Instruments Military.
Sometimes it is taken for all sorts of warlike instruments; and in this sense
does Doctor Casius take it, saying, At hominibus arma industria finxit, eoque
finxit, ut pro imperio rationis eis uteretur. But this word Arma here meant is
not understood in any of these significations, but must be taken in a
metaphorical sense, Metaphorical sense.
for that they do assume a borrowed name (by way of figure called Metonymia
subjecti) from the Shields, Targets, Banners, Military Cassocks, and other
Martial Instruments, whereupon they were engraven, embossed, embroidered or
depicted: which kinds of furnitures and habiliments are peculiar unto martial
men, and professed soldiers, to whom only it pertains to bear Armor; which
even at this day we do usually call by the name of Arms. And of them in Process
of time did these ensigns or marks receive their denomination, and were called
Arma, in English Arms, as Abra. Fra. notes, saying, Arma appellantur, quod
olim solis militibus data fuerunt, qui arma gerere solent. Nam cum ista sit
gloria armis, ut instrumentis comparata, placuit ipsam quoque mercedem arma
appellare.

Claudius Fauchet says, that Arms have their appellation or denomination,
because Military men bare their devices, or Inventions depicted upon their
Coat-Armours, and in and upon their shields: Claudius Fauchet.

Arms were called Symbola, which signifies signs, tokens, or marks, given in
time of hostility, or of Civil Tumults, by Captains to their Soldiers, or by
the authors of Rebellion to their pernicious associates and confederates, for
distinguishing of particular persons, as well among themselves, as from their
Enemies; for the better avoiding of such inconveniences (as I shall presently
show when I come to speak of them, and use of Arms.)

These Armoriall notes (so much in use with us at this day) are oftentimes
called Insignia, which name, as Aldronandus supposes, proceeded of the
barrenness of the Latin tongue, his words are these, Insignium nomen ex
linguae Latinae videtur fluxisse inopia; and certe vix alium vocabulum huc
magis quadrat quod haec praecipue virtutis and gentilitatis sive nota sive
signum sit.

How far the extent of this word Insignia, or Ensigns, does dilate it self, we
may perceive by this, that it compriseth generally all Signs, Marks, and
Tokens of honor, due to well-deserving persons, either in respect of their
Government, Learning, Wisdom, Magnanimity, etc. These albeit they have no
government annexed to them, yet have they in them much honor and estimation,
as were those Pontifical Ornaments, and Ensigns, wherewith Simeon the high
Priest was adorned and furnished at such time as he went to meet Alexander, by
means whereof his fury was appeased. In the like sort did Pope Leo attire
himself when he went to meet Attylia the Scythian Prince; who having subdued
the Country of Hungary, and destroyed Aqui leia in Italy, came forwards to Rome
with like intent. So also did Pope Benedict mitigate the fury of Totila, as if
there lurked some secret force and majesty in the very Ornaments and Ensigns.

Of the number of these Ensigns, are those notes, marks and shapes of Animals,
that martial men used to adorn the Crests of their Helmets withal, to make
themselves more eminent in the field: and to the end there might be better
notice taken of their valorous actions when they encountered their enemies in
Battle: or should draw on their forces to fight. Whereof we shall have cause
to speak hereafter in place more convenient, when we shall come to treat of
them particularly.

The use of these was yet extended farther than the adorning of Shields and
Helmets only: For Ships also, and other Navigable Vessels, were also garnished
and beautified in their fore-decks, yea, and that in very ancient time, for the
distinguishing of one ship from another; as we may see, Acts 28.11. Where Paul
says, he went in a Ship whose badge was Castor and Pollux. Also the fore-deck
of Europa that was carried away, had a form of a Bull painted thereon, which
gave occasion to the Fable: That a Bull had stolen away Europa. Neither did
the Ancients only use this, but it has been a received custom in all Ages
sithence, and yet continued with us unto this day. Hereof it comes that we
give the Ships the names of the things that are depicted upon them, as the
Bull, Bear, Lion, Tygar, etc.

Arms then as they are here meant, according to their original and first use,
may be thus defined: Arms are tokens or resemblances signifying some act or
quality of the Bearer. Or thus, These Signs called Arms are nothing else but
Demonstrations and Testimonies of Nobility, and of Worthy prowesfull exploits
performed in Martial services, especially if they be ancient, and bestowed by
a Noble and renowned Prince: and this is according to their use in the time of
Alexander the Great, and since until of later times: 3. Difinition of them.
But according to their modern (I mean since the time of Charles the fourth)
and present use, Arms may be said to be Hieroglyphicall, or Enigmaticall
Symboles or Signs, testifying and* demonstrating the Nobility or Gentry,
acquired by the virtue and good service performed by their Bearer or some of
his Ancestors, either in martial exploits abroad; or by their learning and
wisdom which they attained to, by spending their bodies and spirits in
continual study, to make themselves fit for the patronage and defense of the
Weal-publick at home.

How great the dignity and estimation of Arms ever has been, and yet is, we
may easily conceive by this, that they do delight the beholders, and greatly
grace and beautify the places wherein they are erected; so also they do
occasion their spectators to make serious inquisition, whose they are, who is
the owner of the house wherein they are set up, of what family their Bearer is
descended; and who were his next, and who is his remote parents or ancestors.

Arms, external demonstrations of the mind.
It is very probable that these Signs, which we call Arms, at this day,
howsoever in former Ages they have been named (whether Emblems or Pictures
graven, painted or embossed, or notes representing some secret or hidden
Mystery; as Hieroglyphics, or Enigmaticall, or hidden conceits) they were
external notes of the inward disposition of the mind, manifesting in some sort
the natural qualities of their Bearers, yet so as they were hidden from the
vulgar sort, and known to the judicious, only experimented in the knowledge of
the natural virtues and dispositions of bodies Celestial, of Animals and of
Vegetables, etc.

Arms, abstracts of Nature.
These in their beginning and first institution, were not bestowed upon vulgar
persons, neither were their intendments fitted for common capacity, but such as
were extracted out of the bowels, and very intrals of nature, and were neither
obscure to the learned, nor over-familiar to the common sort.

Their conformity with Names.
Between Arms and Names there is a certain conformity, so that as it is a thing
unlawful for a man (but upon great occasion) to change his name; Sic neque
arma (says Chass.) mutare licet, nisi magna and honorifica causa accesserit;
and another says, A nominibus ad arma bonum deducitur Argumentum.

There are sometimes Arms borne that may seem to have been devised (in their
first institution) according to the Sirnames of the Bearers, as a Bear for
Vrsonne, three Castles for Castleton, three Conies for Conesby, etc. Whether
these be either better or more ancient than other Arms, it is a question of
more difficulty to be resolved, than commodious if it were known.

If there were two distinct families of one Surname, yet bearing several
Coat-Armours, it is no consequence that they are originally issued from the
same Ancestors; for their agreement of their Sirnames may be said to be a
probability, but yet it is no proof that they are both extracted from the same
Ancestors, unless there be withal a resemblance of their Coat-Armours, which
are the express notes of distinction.

In case where there are two families, diverse in name, and issued from
several parents; and both of them do bear one and the selfsame Coat Armor,
and the name of one of them is agreeable to the Coat Armor, and the other
dissonant from the same; The same being in question, to whether of them this
Coat does properly appertain: it may be probably conjectured, that he is
interessed in the Coat Armor whose appellation is agreeable therewith; rather
than his, whose name has no conformity with it. For names were instituted for
differencing of each person from other severally, according to the saying,
Sicut nomina inventa sunt ad cognoscendos homines: Ita Arma and insignia ad
recognoscendum homines sunt inventa.

If two men of several Families shall bear one Coat Armor, and have their
abode in one Country or Territory; and one of them can produce no more proof,
why he does arrogate the propriety thereof, than the other can: In such case
the cause shall be questioned before the Sovereign, or before such as do from
him derive their authority, for the hearing, examining and determining cases of
this nature; Otherwise if either of them can prove that his Ancestors received
the same of the Kings gift, as a remuneration for service done, the Arms shall
be adjudged to be his.

The sympathy of Arms with their Bearers.
Also there is between these Arms and their Bearers, a kind of Sympathy or
natural participation of qualities, in so much as who so dishonourably or
unreverently uses the Arms of any man, seems to have offered indignity to
the person of their Bearer (so according to some Authors) their owner shall
right himself against such an offender, or wrong-doer, Action injuriarum.

As touching the antiquity of these signs which we call Arms, The Antiquity of
Arms and Ensigns Armoriall.
Diodorus Siculus makes mention, that Osyris surnamed Jupiter the just, son to
Cham the cursed son of Noah, called of the Gentiles Janus, being banished from
the blessed Tents of Shem and Japhet; by reason of the curse fallen upon his
father, was constrained to seek some remote place wherein he might settle
himself, his children, and people: for which purpose he assembled a great army,
and appointed Hercules his eldest son Captain. And in this so ancient an
expedition of wars, as well Osyris himself, as Hercules, Macedon, and Annubis
his sons, and others, did paint certain signs upon their shields, bucklers, and
other weapons; which signs were after called Arms: As for example, Osyris bare
a Scepter royal, insigned on the top with an Eye: Hercules a Lion rampant
holding a Battle-axe: Macedon a Wolf, and Annubis a Dog. And we find in Homer
and in Virgil, that the Heroes had their signs or marks, whereby their persons
were distinctly known, and discerned in Battle, as well as their Kings and
commons had their public Ensigns: For the Athenians bare the Owl; The
Persians an Ancher or Sagitary stamped in their coins: The Romans bare an
Eagle, Minotaure, and sundry other shapes, which (according to Pliny) they bare
in Battle unto the time of Marius, who bare in his Ensign an Eagle, Argent:
figured and embossed, Sus une haute longue, as may be seen in ancient Medals,
and chiefly in which is found this word, Allocutio.

Paulus Emilius says, That anciently the French Kings did bear, Argent, The
ancient Arms of the French Kings.
three Diadems, Gules. Others say, they bare three Toads, Sable, in a field,
Vert, alias Sinople, which cannot be good Armory, as the Masters of that
Mystery do hold, because of Color upon Color.

Whence they received those Arms it is not certainly known, unless they had
them from the Romans.

But their opinion is more probable who by the Blazon of the Shield of France,
would show that the first Frankes consist of Sicum'bri (a people of Germany,
inhabiting the Marches of Frizeland, toward Holland, Zeland and Gelderland)
gave unto them, Azure, which resembles the water (which being calm,
represents the colors of the Heavens) and therein three flower de Lis, Or,
which do grow plentifully in those Marches, and do flourish in May and June.

Others affirm, that the same was sent by an Angel from Heaven to Clovis, the
first Christian King of France.

But Gregory of Towers in his History mentioned no such thing, neither does it
appear that they bear those Arms before the time of King Pippine, but after the
time of Lewis Le Cross: at which time it seems that Armories began to become
hereditary, and were transferred from Father to Son in each Family.

In the first assumption of these Signs, every man did take to himself some
such Beast, Bird, Fish, Serpent, or other creature as he thought best fitting
his estate, or whose nature and quality did in some sort quadrate with his own,
or whereunto himself was in some respect in quality like or wished to be
resembled unto. Ex iis quibus quisque maxim delectatur qualis etiam sit ipse
cognoscitur. The reason is, for that no man is delighted but with things that
are like himself. Therefore wherein any man is specially delighted, himself
also is found to be in quality much like unto them.

Zanchius de immortalitate Animarum 133. Whereof it comes that our souls,
albeit they are naturally delighted with things that please, and delight the
External senses, yet shall we find that by how much the mind is more generous
and noble, by so much the more does it apprehend a more solid delight in things
pertaining to the inward faculties, than in such as pertain to the exterior
senses; As we may see in those Arts wherein the Fantasy is chiefly exercised:
whereby they receive a greater contentment of things pertaining to the mind,
that is to say, as well Moral, as Natural, and Supernatural Philosophy. For
like as our exterior senses are delighted with corporal, and corruptible
things, so in like manner are our minds affected to things Spiritual and
eternal, and are wonderfully delighted in them, by reason of the Sympathy of
their natural qualities. Similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus (ut aiunt in
Scholis) Many things may be like, yet nothing like in all points or respects.

Use of Arms, universal.
As their institution is not new, but very ancient, derived almost from the
beginning of the World, so their use was not limited, or restrained to some few
particular Nations, Kingdoms and Countries, but most largely spread all the
World over, in so much, as there is no Nation, Country or people, so savage or
barbarous, but that they have their particular Signs, whereby they may
particularly and distinctly be known and discerned from others. As in Example.

The Nations of the Israelites Scythians Egyptians Phrygians Thracians Romans
Persians
bare for their Ensigns The Hebrew letter Tau, A Thunderbolt, An Ox. A Swine.
Mars. An Eagle. Bow, and Arrows.


Corali a Savage people of Pontus, bare two Wheels.

Anciently Arms borne in Shields and Targets.
And Plutarch in the life of Marius says, That the Cymbrians, a people
inhabiting the parts of Denmark, Norway, and the Almaynes, which in those days
were cruel, and barbarous, nevertheless had their Shields adorned with the
forms and shapes of savage and cruel beasts, as also their Targets and other
Military Instruments suited accordingly, and that in such multitudes, and in
such glorious and glistering manner, that they dazeled the eyes of the
beholders.

Arms generally used for particular distinction.
Neither were these Signs peculiarly restrained unto Nations, Countries, and
Provinces, but they were so universal, as that there were no Tribe, particular
person or family, but had their Armoriall Signs, or Notes, whereby they were
not only distinctly known and discerned from other foreign Tribes and
Families, but also apparently discerned (amongst themselves) one from another,
by means of interposition of some minute or small differences, which
after-comers were forced to devise for the preservation of Common peace and
unity, when the multitude of Bearers (through long tract of time) increased
excessively.

Shields diversely adorned.
Achilles had his Shield beautifully adorned with great variety of things
Celestial, as the motion of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, and other the
Celestial Spheres, the Situation of the Earth, and the adjacent Islands, the
Seas, with the ebbing and flowing thereof, etc. whereof I shall have better
occasion offered to speak more at large hereafter. Also Amphiaraus (as Pindarus
the Theban Poet affirms) in his expedition to Thebes, bare in his Shield, a
painted Dragon. Capaneus one of the seven Captains that besieged Thebes, bare
the manifold headed Hydra, that Hercules fought withal, as Statius the
Neapolitan Poet reports. Polynices a Sphinx. Agamemnon in the Trojan Wars
bare in his Shield a Lion, with this Epigram, Terror hic est hominum, and qui
hunc gerit est Agamemnon.

Ulysses bare a Dolphin, and a Typhon breathing out flames of fire: First
production of Arms rough and rude.
Perseus Medusaes head: Antiochus a Lion, with a white wand: Theseus an Ox:
Seleucus a Bull, Augustus a Sphynx, with infinite others which I purposely
over-pass.

These signs or tokens were in their first production rough-hewen (as I may
term them) and rude, as also those other notes or signs that we now call Badges
or Cognizances: so as they may be said to have been rather painted Emblems,
than exquisite tokens of honor, or absolute signs or badges: in the time of
their first Institution they received diverse denominations, As Signs, Ensigns,
Tokens, Marks, Cognizances, etc. But when in after-Ages, they had been polished
and refined, then were these Tokens or Signs, Diverse Denominations of Arms.
that had been formerly (after a rude fashion) handled together, more carefully
distinguished, so as those which we now call Crests or Cognizances, worn upon
the Helmets of Military persons in the field, were distinctly known from those
that were borne in Shields and Targets, which we now call Arms in English, and
in Latin Arma. Men of ancient times devised, and invented many things
ingeniously, and with great care and consideration, but finished them not, but
recommended them to posterity, to be by them brought to perfection, according
to that saying, Invenit antiquitas, posteri perfecerunt; neither does this
derogate ought from the studious, and Industry of the ancient, neither is this
any indignity unto them; Non erubescat antiquitas (says Chassaneus) si quid
melius horum quae ipsa tradidit, Novitas adinvenit: for nothing is devised and
perfected at an instant, but it is continuance of time, and much labor and
industry that brings it to perfection.

These Signs, Marks, Notes, Ensigns or whatsoever else you please to name them,
are not all of one sort, for some of them may be applied to peace, and others
to military use; and of each of these there are diverse kinds or sorts: For some
of them are express notes of government and authority or jurisdiction, others
have no authority at all annexed to them.

Like as there is an absolute authority or jurisdiction royal, free from all
limitation, and another said to be a mixed government; yea, and that as well in
civil policy, as in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: so are also the ensigns
several, as well those that pertain to the City, or Commonwealth, as also
those that belong to Ecclesiastical government.

Those Ensigns that are remote or exempted from government and authority are
diverse, according to the diversity of conceits of the first institutors or
devisers of them. For some of them are in manner Vulgar, and Common, and such
as may fall to the lot of a person of mean condition: others again of more
subtle and deep invention; exquisite, beautiful and honorable, and are
remunerations or rewards of some noble exploits, of mere Divine wits, or of
some rare or excellent virtue, as a recompense of memorable and worthy deserts.

I know some are of opinion that these tokens or signs, Opinion of some
concerning the Antiquity of Arms.
which we do call Arms, were utterly unknown to the ancient Greeks and Romans;
and their memory not to be found with their Nations: They do confess that the
Romans did make the same use of their Images that we do at this day by our
Arms, viz. to produce them for testimonies of their generous race.

Another opinion.
Some other are of opinion, that they were excogitated and brought in use by
Charles the Great, and the Lombards, and some again do suppose, they began in
the time of Frederick Barbarossa, but the contrary appears by Authentical
proof, as I have even now showed: well may their opinion stand with reason,
that do hold, that the discipline of Arms in the reign (or rather) during the
imperial government of Theodosius, and in the time of Charles the Great, was
brought to some kind of perfection, and withal more generally propagated and
dispersed, according to that saying of Abra. Franc. Corolo potentissimo
Imperante haec and distinctius explicata fuisse, and frequentius usurpata
elucessit.

The principal end for which these signs were first taken up, and put in use,
was, that they might serve for notes and marks to distinguish tribes, families
and particular person, each from other: but this was not their only use, for
that they served also to notify, to the ingenious beholder of them, (after
some sort) the natural quality, and disposition of their Bearers; and so
behovefull was this invention thought to be, and their use so reasonable as
that they have been entertained of all succeeding posterities, among all
Nations, and continued (even to this day) without any immutation or alteration
of their primary institution. These Armoriall Ensigns thus ingeniously devised
had a further use; for they served also for the more commodious distribution of
Nations, Tribes, and Families, into Regiments and Bands; as also for
assembling, conducting, and governing of them in martial expeditions, and
distinguishing (as I have showed) of particular persons in wars, as well
amongst themselves as from their enemies; because it often falls out by
reason of the likeness of Armor and Weapons, of Disclipine of War, and of
Language and Voice (in default of such signs) that much treachery is wrought,
and many men after battle or skirmish do make their retreat to the troops of
the Enemy, to the danger of their surprise, or loss of life: So then it is
clear that this is one use of these Notes, or Marks of distinction called Arms,
that if a man shall meet and encounter us, we do forthwith discover by the note
or mark that he bears, whether he be friend or enemy; and for some of those
uses and ends which I have formerly showed, These Armoriall Ensigns have
received approbation in the highest degree, even from the mouth of God himself
(who, when he prescribed unto Moses and Aaron a form of ordering and conducting
the Israelites in their passage toward the Land of the promise, did expressly
command the use of Armoriall signs, saying, Filii Israelis quisquis juxta
vexillum suum cum signis secundum domum Majorum suorum castra habento:) which
order he required to be observed, not only in the conduction of them in their
journey, but also in the pitching and raising of their Camp.

In which precept we may observe, that God makes mention of two sorts of
Ensigns; the one general, the other particular; and that these latter were no
less needful than the former; for the orderly governing and conducting of so
huge and populous a multitude as the Israelites were, in a journey so long, and
withal subject to infinite dangers. The first sort of these Ensigns, God
calls Vexilla, that is to say, Standards or Banners, which served for the
conduction of their several Regiments. For the Israelites consisted of twelve
Tribes which were divided into four Regiments; that is, to wit, three Tribes to
each Regiment, of which every one had a particular Standard, which as they
differed in color one from another, so did they doubtless comprehend in them
several and distinct forms.

Here may arise a twofold question concerning these Standards before mentioned;
the one, what color each of them were? the other, Question.
what forms and shapes were depicted in them? As to the color, Lyra upon the
second of Numbers, says, Qualia sunt ista vexilla in Textu non habetur,
Resolution. Lyra upon Number. 2.
sed d^c^ntaliqui Hebraei quod vexillum cujuslibet Tribus, erat similis colori
lapidis positi in rationali, in quo inscriptum erat nomen ipsius Reuben, and
sic de aliis.

And as to their several forms, Martinus Borhaus, Number. 2. Forms borne in
Standards.
Martinus Borhaus in his Commentary upon the same place, has this saying,
Tradunt veteres in Rubenis vexillo Mandoragoram depictam fuisse, quam ille in
agro collectam matri Liae atiu^erat: In Jehudae Leonem, cui illum benedicendo
pater Jacobus contulerat. In Ephraim vexillo, Bovis species. In Danis vexillo,
serpentis Imago, qui serpenti and colubro a Jacobo comparatus erat, fiat Dan
coluber in via. And in conclusion he says, Sit fides penes Authors.

This sort of Ensign according to Calepine, is called, Vexillum quasi parvum
velum, and accipitur (says he) pro signo quo in exercitu vel class
Imperatores utuntur. The use of these Standards do consist herein, that they
being borne aloft upon a long pole or staff apparent to every man's view, the
Soldiers may be thereby directed (upon all occasions of service) and by the
sight of them may be dissevered and united at all times, as the necessity of
the service shall require. Of this use, Lyra upon the second of Numbers says,
Vexilla in perticis elevantur, Lyra. Number. 2.
ut ad eorum aspectum bellatores dividantur and uniantur: For like as a Ship is
guided in the surging Seas by the Stern or Ruther, even so are the Soldiers
ordered in their Martial exploits by their Standard or Ensign.

The other sorts of Ensigns, 2 Sort.
God calls Signa secundum domum Majorum suo^um: whereby is meant (if I be not
deceived) the particular Ensigns or Tok^ns of each particular Family, and of
the particular persons of each Family. For so do I understand that exposition
of Lyra upon the same place, Lyra.
Signa propria sunt in vestibus and scutis, quibus bellatores mutuo se
cognoscunt, and suos ab Adversariis distinguun^.

But here we must put a difference between these words, Arma and Insignia, and
we must separate those things that are proper to Arms from such as pertain to
Ensign^s.

Arms therefore being taken in the largest sense (as I have hitherto in this
Discourse used the word) may be said to be either Public or Private.

Such are said to be public Arms, as have some Sovereign Authority or
Jurisdiction annexed to them.

Of the first sort are such Arms as are borne by Emperors, Kings, and
absolute Princes, and free Estates, having Sovereign authority and power within
their several Empires, and Kingdoms, and Territories. These in propriety of
speech cannot be aptly said to be the Arms of their Stock or Family, whereof
they are descended, but do rather represent the nature of Ensigns than of
Arms, in regard of the public authority to them annexed; As also in respect
that whosoever shall succeed them in those supreme governments shall bear the
same Arms as the express notes and testimonies of such their several
jurisdictions, though they be extracted from Aliens, or foreign Families. For
so neither is the Eagle the peculiar Arms of the house of Austria, nor the
Lions of the Family of Plantagenet, nor the Flowers de Lis of the house of
Valoys. And these Arms or Ensigns may no man else bear, or yet mark his goods
withal, unless it be that in token of loyalty he will set up the Kings Arms
in his house, and place his own Arms underneath. And there are certain
Ensigns of dignity and office which every man having the same dignity or
office may lawfully bear as the Ensigns of a Proconsull, the Ensigns of a
Bishop. And these are peculiar to those only that have the exercising of such
dignity or office, if any other shall usurp the bearing or use of them, he
incurreth the crime of forgery. Private Arms are such as are proper to private
Persons, whether they be numbered in rank of the greater Nobility, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, having no Sovereign or absolute
power: or of the lesser Nobility or Gentry, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen;
neither yet are they Ensigns of any ordinary dignity, but peculiar to their
Family, and may be infinitely transferred to their posterity.

For Arms or Armoriall tokens, pertaining to some particular Family, do
descend to every peculiar person extracted from the same Agnation, whether they
be heirs to their father or Grandfather, or not. Sometimes the Bearers of these
do so greatly multiply, as that they are constrained for distinction sake, to
annex some apposition over and above their paternall Coat to them descended,
for differencing the persons. Quod licitum est, sicut nomini addere praenomen,
which they may no less lawfully do, than to add a Christian name to a
Surname, to distinguish two Children issued from one parent.

These Arms are sometimes composed of natural things, as of some kind of
Celestial bodies, viz. of the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Sometimes of four footed
Beasts, or of Birds, or of Serpents, or of Fishes, or some other Reptiles, or
else of some kind of Vegetables, as Trees, Shrubs, Flowers, Fruits, Leaves,
etc. Or else of some solid things, as Castles, Towers, Mountains, etc. Or of
things pertaining to Arts Liberal, or trades Mechanical* etc. Sometimes again
they are compact of none of these, but do consist only of the variations of
simple Colors, counter-changed by occasion of transverse, perpendicular, or
whatsoever other Line used in Coat Armor, whether the same be Straight,
Crooked, Bunched, etc. Whereby passing through the Escocheon, either traverse,
oblique, or direct, the colors become transmuted, or counter-changed; of all
which I have occasion to speak hereafter in their particular places.

Arms a token of propriety.
If question happen to arise touching the right of some desolate place, or
ruinated building, if in digging up the ruins, or taking up of the foundation
thereof, there be found any known Coat Armor; the questioned place shall be
adjudged to appertain to that Family, to whom that Coat Armor belongs.

Arms defaced.
If any man be attainted or convicted of Treason, for betraying his Country, or
of Heresy, to the end he should be branded with a greater note of infamy, his
Arms are rased, broken down and utterly defaced.

Arms int^rred with the Corpse.
Sometimes it falls out that if a noble Family be extinguished by the death of
the last of the same (deceasing without issue) whereby the bearing of the Arms
proper to that Lineage is from thenceforth abolished: The Arms are interred in
the grave, together with the corpse of the defunct.

Opinion of some concerning the Antiquity of Arms.
After long tract of time, these tokens which we call Arms became remunerations
for service, and were bestowed by Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and their
Generals and chief Commanders in the field upon Martial men, whose valorous
merits (even in justice) required due recompense of honor answerable unto
their worthy acts, the remembrance whereof could not better be preserved and
derived unto posterity, than by these kinds of honorable rewards. The first
we read of, that made this use of them, was Alexander the Great, being moved
thereunto by the persuasion of Aristotle his Schoolmasters: who having
observed his magnificent mind in rewarding his Soldiers to the full of their
deserts, did at length prevail with him so much, as that he caused him to turn
the Current of his bounty another way, and to recompense his Soldiers with
these marks, or tokens of honor; which he bestowed on them as hereditary
testimonies of their glorious merits. In later Ages Charles the fourth the
Emperor, gave Arms also unto learned men, and such as had performed any
memorable service, or excellent work, therefore Bartholus, being a most expert
man in the Laws, and one of the Council of the said Charles the fourth,
received in reward for his Arms from the said Emperor, this Coat Armor, viz.
Or, a Lion rampant his tail forked, Gules, which afterward descended
successively to his children and posterity. But Bartholus (though he were a
most singular and perfect Civilian) because he was unexperienced in Martial
discipline, durst not at first assume the bearing of those Arms: But
afterward upon better advise he bare them, knowing how unfit it was to refuse
a reward given by so potent an Emperor. And this was a noble institution of
Charles the fourth, that not only the skillful professors of the Civil Laws,
but the learned proficients, and the judicious students, in other Arts and
Professions, might receive remuneration for their virtues, Honos enim alit
Arts, omnesque incendun^ur ad studia gloria. Abr. Fra. pa. 76. And without all
doubt there is great reason that Arms should be distributed unto men, renowned
for their learning and wisdom, who with expense, even of their lives and
spirits in continual study, to enable themselves to be fit for to serve the
Weal-publick at home, by magistracy, and civil government, wherein they may no
less merit reward of their Prince at home, by their politic managing of
civil affairs; than the Martial man abroad, with his brandished slaughtering
sword, sithence they oftentimes in their civil government, do prescribe
limits to Martial affairs also, how far they shall extend their power,
according to that saying of Cicero; Offici. 1. Parva sunt foris Arma, nisi est
consilium domi. And this is the cause that Arms are given for remuneration in
later times, as well to learned and religious men, as to Martial men; yet not
so much for their valor, as for their wisdom, and to honor them withal,
according to the saying of a certain Author, Arma dantur v^ris religiosis, non
propter strenuitatem, sed propter honorem, quia honorabile est Arma portare; ut
Doctor in legibus vigin^i annis per legem Armorum fiet miles, non tamen propter
ejus strenuitatem, sed propter ejus dignitatem.

The examples of these two Great Potentates before mentioned in remunerating
their well meriting Soldiers, faithful servants, and virtuous and learned
subjects, with these Signs, or Symbols called Arms, the one, viz. Alexander
the Great, for service done in wars; The other, namely Charles the fourth, for
politic managing of Civil affairs by learning and wisdom at home, have been
immitated by diverse Emperors, Kings, and Princes, of succeeding ages, using
therein the ministry of the Office of Heralds; as subordinate officers
thereunto appointed and authorized, reserving always to themselves the supreme
Jurisdiction of judging and remunerating persons according to their deserts;
but using the ministry of the Heralds, as for sundry other uses of great
importance in a State, so also for the inventing and devising of congruent
tokens of honor, answerable to the merits of those that shall receive the
same: to do which although there is a power seeming absolute, committed to
them by the Sovereign, yet the same is restrained into a power ordinary, which
is to devise with discretion Arms, correspondent to the desert of the person,
that shall be thought worthy to have these honorable badges or tokens of
honor bestowed upon him.

Now sithence we have had cause here in this Chapter to make mention of a
Herald, it shall not be amiss to show what this word is, and his natural
signification.

Here-heaulte, by abbreviation (as Verstegan notes) Herault, as also Herald,
does rightly signify the Champion of the Army; and growing to be a Name of
Office, he that in the Army has the special charge to denounce Wars, or to
challenge to Battle, or Combat: in which sense our name of Heraulte
approaches nearest to Fecialis in Latin.

SECT I. CHAP. II.
SO much of such notes as are necessary to be observed for the better
understanding of these things that shall be hereafter delivered, touching the
subject of this work. Now we proceed to the practick exercise of these
Armoriall tokens, which pertain to the function of Heralds, and is termed
Armory, Definition of Armory.
and may be thus defined: Armory is an Art rightly prescribing the true
knowledge and use of Arms.

Now like as in things natural the effects do evermore immediately ensue
their causes, even so division which is a demonstration of the extent and power
of things, must by immediate consequence follow definition, which does express
the nature of the thing defined. Division is a distribution of things common,
Of Division and Use.
into things particular or less common. The use thereof consists herein,
that by the assistance of this division, words of large intendment and
signification, are reduced to their definite and determinate sense and meaning,
that so the mind of the learner be not misled through the ambiguity of words,
either of manifold or uncertain interpretations. Moreover it serves to
illuminate the understanding of the learner, and to make him more capable of
such things as are delivered, Ea enim quae divisim traduntur facilius
intelliguntur.

The practice hereof shall be manifested in the distribution of the skill of
Armory, with all the parts and complements thereof throughout this whole work.

Distribution.
This skill of Armory consists of Blazoning, and Marshalling.


Albeit I do here make mention of the Marshalling, or conjoyning of diverse
Arms in one Shield, or Escocheon; nevertheless, sithence it is far besides my
purpose, (for the present to have further to do with them, (in this place)
than only to nominate them, for distributions sake) I will reserve this kind,
of Marshalling, or conjoyning of the Arms of distinct Families in one
Escocheon, unto a more convenient time and place, peculiarly destinated to that
purpose, and I will proceed to the explication of those things which do
concern the first member of this distribution, viz. Blazoning.

Blazon is taken, Definition of Blazon.
either strictly for an explication of Arms in apt and significant terms, or
else, it is taken largely for a display of the virtues of the Bearers of Arms:
in which sense Chassaneus defines the same in this manner, Blazonia est quasi
alicujus vera laudatio sub quibusdam signis, secundum prudentiam, justitiam,
fortitudinem and temperantiam. A certain French Armorist says, that to Blazon
is to express what the shapes, kinds, and color of things born in Arms are,
together with their apt significations.

Like as definitions are forerunners of divisions, Of a rule.
even so divisions also have precedence of rules. To speak properly of a rule:
It may be said to be any straight or level thing, whereby lines are drawn in a
direct and even form. In resemblance whereof, we here understand it, to be a
brief precept or instruction for knowing or doing of things aright, as
witnesses Calepine, saying, Regula per translationem dicitur, brevis rerum
praeceptio, that is to say, a compendious or ready instruction of matters.

Rules are taken for brief documents prescribed for the delivery, or
apprehension of some Art or Science, by these the wits and inventions of men
are much comforted and quickened, according to that saying of Seneca, Ingenii
vis praeceptis alitur and crescit, non aliter quam scintilla flatu levi adjuta,
novasque persuasiones adjicit innatas, and depravatas corrigit. The force of
wit is nourished and augmented by Rules or Precepts; like as a spark is kindled
with a soft and gentle fire, and do add new inducements and persuasions to
those that are already apprehended, and corrects such as are depraved and
vicious.

It follows therefore, by due order of consequence, Rules of Blazon in genere.
that I should annex such rules as are peculiar to blazon in genere. For other
particular rules must be reserved to more proper places.

The aptest rules for this place, are these immediately following: In Blazoning

The more compendious your Blazon is, by so much is it holden the more Quia
quod brevius est semper delectabilius habetur. Therefore you must shun
multiplicity of impertinent words in your Blazon, Frustra enim fit per plura
quod fieri potest per pauciora. But herein you must observe this Caution, that
whilst you labor to be compendious, you omit nothing material or necessary to
be expressed: for as the one does eclipse the understanding, so the other is
offensive to memory, as Aristotle notes, saying, Omnis sermo, si sit brevior
quam oportet, obscurat intellectum, si autem longior, difficile erit retentioni.

You must take special heed to words in Blazon, for a different form of
Blazoning makes the Arms cease to be the same; Diversitas enim nominis
inducet diversitatem rei, in tantum quod nomina sunt significativa rerum.

You must not be too full of conceits in Blazon, nor over-forward in

You must use no iteration or repetition of words, in Blazoning of one

Especially of any of these four words, viz. Of. Or. And. With.
For the doubling of any of these, is counted a great fault, insomuch as the
offender herein is deemed unworthy to Blazon a Coat Armor.

Blazoning you must have regard of the things that are borne in Arms: as also
whereunto they may be resembled, whether they be natural or artificial, and
so to commend them accordingly.

Blazoning of any Coat, you must evermore observe this special rule. First to
begin with the Field, and then proceed to the blazon of the Charge, if any be.
Moreover if the Field be occupied with sundry things, whether the same be of
one or diverse kinds: you must first nominate that which lies next and
immediately upon the Field, and then blazon that which is more remote from the
same. What Field and Charge are, shall be showed in their proper places;
interim oportet discentem credere.

Preposterous Blazons
Chassan^us holds, that where the Chief of an Escocheon is of one color or
metal, or more, you should blazon the chief first; but I hold it more
consonant to reason, to begin with the Field (because of the priority thereof
in nature, as also in respect that it is the continent) rather than with the
Charge, which is the thing contained, and so consequently last in nature.
Nevertheless the French Armorists for the most part do blazon the Charge
first, and the Field after, which is a course merely repugnant to nature: by
whose prescript order, the place must have precedence of the thing placed, and
the continent of the thing contained: wherefore our Heralds manner of blazon is
more agreeable to reason than theirs. There be diverse forms of blazon: A
certain Dutchman who lived in the time of King Henry the fifth, Selected Kinds
of Blazoning.
used to blaze Arms by the principal parts of man's body, as Ab. Fra. writes,
page 63. Malorques a French man made use of flowers for this purpose: Faucon an
English man, who lived in the time of King Edward the third, performed it by
the days of the week; but in former times their predecessors used only these
three kinds following: first, or Metals and Colors, secondly, by precious
Stones, and thirdly, by the the celestial Planets. Out of which sundry forms,
I have made choice of these three last which are most ancient and necessary, in
respect that these above all other do best fit my purpose; which is, to apply
to each particular state of Gentry, a blazon correspondent. As for example, to
Gentlemen having no title of dignity, blazon by Metals and colors: to persons
ennoblished by the Sovereign, by precious Stones: and to Emperors, Monarchs,
Kings and Princes, blazon by Planets.



These selected forms of blazon, do seem to imply a necessity of their
invention; to the end that as well by Blazon; as by degree, Noble men might be
distinguished from Gentlemen; and persons of majesty, from those of noble
lineage, that so a due Decorum may be observed in each degree, according to the
dignity of their persons: for that it is a thing unfitting, either to handle a
mean argument in a lofty style, or a stately argument in a mean.

SECT. I. CHAP. III.
Distribution.
SO much of the definition and general rules of blazon. Now will I proceed to
the distribution thereof.

The principal means of teaching, and the chief part of Method consists in
distinction, therefore in the explanation or unfolding of this fabric of Arms
or Armoriall signs, I will use some manifest kind of distribution.

The blazon of Arms consists in their Accidents, and Parts.


I call those notes or marks, Accidents of Arms, Accidents of Arms what?
that have no inherent quality or participation of the subsistence or Essence
of them, but may be annexed unto them, or taken from them, their substance
still remaining; for so does Porphyrius define the same, saying Accidens potest
adesse and abesse sine subjecti interitu. Accidents may be said to be cousin
germans to nothing: For so after a sort does Aristotle reckon of them, saying,
Accidens videtur esse propinquum non enti, Metaph. 6. For they have no being of
themselves, but as they are in things of being, or annexed to them. As the same
Author further notes, Metaph. 7. Accidentia non sunt entia, nisi quia sunt
entis.

Accidents and forms do agree in this point, that both the one and the other
of them being separated from the substance, yet is not the substance thereby
altered from that it was, but remains still the same; which occasioned many
men to think that forms were accidents. These cannot alter the matter or
substance because they are not of the main, but come upon the by, as it were.
Nihil enim transmutat materiam, nisi sit in materia.

Accidents are in the subject, as passio in patiente, according to that saying,
Accidens ut est in subjecto, non idem est in subjecto, sed ut est passio ejus,
est sibi idem.

Such accidents as are here meant are these, viz. Tincture, and Differences.


Tincture is a variable hew of Arms, Tincture.
and is common as well to Differences of Arms, as to the Arms themselves.

And the same is distributed into Colors, and Furs.


Color, may be said to be an external die, Colors.
wherewith any thing is colored or stained, or else it may be said to be the
gloss of a body beautified with light.

And the color here mentioned is both General, and Special.


By general Color, Color general.
I understand the proper and natural color of each particular thing, whether
the same be Natural or Artificial, of what kind soever that are depicted and
set forth in their external and proper beauty. In this respect all colors
whatsoever (without exception) may seem to pertain to this Art, for so much as
there is nothing in this world subjected to the sight of man, but either is, or
aptly may be borne in Arms; so spacious and general is the scope of Armory.
In blazoning of things borne in their natural or proper color, Blazon of
things proper.
you shall only term them to be borne proper, which is a blazon sufficient for
things of that kind, and well fitting their property or nature, for there are
no terms of blazon allowed to things borne after that sort.

By special colors, I mean such colors, Special colors.
as by a certain peculiar propriety (as it were) do belong to this Art of
Armory.

These are both Simple, and Mixed.


Simple colors are those, Simple colors what.
whose existence is of such absolute perfection (in their kind) as that they
need not the participation of any other color to make them absolute, but do
communicate their natural qualities to all other colors, to make them
perfect, in which respect they are called elementa coloris, as shall be showed
hereafter.

And those are White, and Black.


Elements of colors.
To these in right belongs the first place amongst colors, because in the
order of nature they were before all other colors: Priora enim sunt compositis
incomposita: and are of A^ist^^l^ called Elementa colorum, saying, Albus and
niger sunt elementa colorum mediorum. Only White and Black are accounted
simple colors, because all other colors whatsoever are raised either of an
equal or unequal mixture or composition of these two, which are (as I may
term them) their common parents. These are said to be the common parents of all
other colors, in respect they have their original being from these, either in
an equal or disproportionable mixture. Therefore I will begin with them, and
so proceed to the rest that we call colores Medii, in respect of their
participation of both. Now forasmuch as practice is the scope of Doctrines, (to
the end those things that are, or shall be delivered, may be the better
conceived or borne in memory) I have thought good to manifest them by
particular examples of ocular demonstration, in the plainest manner that I can
devise, Quia qua^is est rerum demonstratio, talis futura est hominum scientia.

Examples and demonstrations are of great power and efficacy to illustrate and
bring things to light, wherein brevity, the prop and aid of memory and sweet
companion of facility, is higly commended, as Farnesius notes, saying, Nihil
est ad res illuminandas illustrius exemplis, in quibus brevitas adjutrix
memoriae, facilitatis socia, semper est commendata.

White defined.
example of blazon or coat of arms White is a color that consists of very
much light; as it is of Scrihoneus defined; Albedo est color simplex in corpore
tenuiore multa lumin^sitate constans: to which black is contrary. Note.
Note, as colors may be resembled to things of greatest Nobility or
reputation, so is their worthiness accounted of accordingly.

Resemblance of white.
The color White is resembled to the light, and the dignity thereof reckoned
more worthy than the black, by how much the light and the day is of more esteem
than darkness and the night, whereunto black is likened. Furthermore white is
accounted more worthy than black, Dignity.
in respect of the more worthy use thereof. For men in ancient time were
accustomed to note things well and laudably performed (and esteemed worthy to
be kept in memory) with white, and contrariwise whatsoever was holden
reproachful or dishonorable, was noted with black, as the Poet notes, saying,
Quae laudanda sorent, and quae culpanda vicissim,
Illa prius creta, mox haec carbone notasti.


Moreover white challenges the precedence of black (according to Vpton) in
respect of the priority of time, for that it was in nature before black, which
is a deprivation thereof. Precedence.
Like as darkness, whereunto black is resembled, is an exemption of light,
Omnis enim privatio praesupponit habitum. Finally, Vpton prefers white
before black, in regard that white is more easily discerned and furthest seen
in the Field.

This color is most commonly taken in Blazon for the metal Silver, and is
termed Argent, wheresoever the same is found, either in Field or Charge. This
Metal represents Water, which (next to the Air) is the noblest of all the
Elements, and in Armory it is termed Argent, for that it approaches near to
the Luminary Bodies. To this Metal is given the second place next to Gold, in
regard that the Armory cannot be good, that has not in it either Gold, or
Silver: It also for another cause bare the resemblance of Water, which
scowreth, cleanses, and puts away all filth and uncleanness: For in Blazon
it betokens innoceney, cleanness of life and chastity; amongst complexions
it is likened to fleame, as for the esteem of this Metal Silver, we may observe
in all Ages that Emperors, Kings, and Princes had and yet have their vessels
of chief use of Silver; As for the abundance of this Metal, you may read 2 Chronicles. 9. How every man brought unto Solomon presents, being vessels of Silver
and vessels of Gold, and Raiment and Armor, and sweet Odors, Horses and Mules
from year to year. And the King gave Silver in Jerusalem as stones, etc. Such
was the plentiful abundance of this Metal in the days of Solomon. In
composition of Arms, it is accounted a fault worthy blame to blazon this
otherwise than Argent, but in doubling of Mantles it is not so taken: for
therein it is not understood to be a Metal, but the Skin or Furre of a little
beast called a Lituit, so named (as I conceive) Lithuania, now called Luten, a
part of Sarmatia confining upon Polonia. this Furre has been heretofore much
used by the ancient Matrons of the honorable City of London, even by those
that were of the chiefest account, who ware the same in a kind of Bonnet called
corruptly a Lettice cap.

example of blazon or coat of arms Black is a color contrary to White, having
little participation of light, and is of Scribonius thus defined, Nigredo est
color in corpore crassiore exiguae luminositatis particeps. Whereby it is
apparent that black is of less perfection than white. For what thing soever
there is that has in it either light or heat, or else a life, either Animal
or vegetable, the same being once extinct, the thing it self becomes forthwith
black, which is said to be the color of horror and destruction; for which
respect mourning garments are made of that color, that does most significantly
represent the horror of death and corruption, Farnes. 3. 104. this color is
called in blazon Sable, of the Latin word Sabulum, which signifies, gross,
sand or gravel, in respect of the heavy and earthy substance, wherein it
abounds above all others. And this color is reputed far inferior in
dignity to white, and is likened to darkensse, called in Latin Tenebrae, eo
quod teneant, id est, impediant oculos, and visum prohibeant. Note that the
rest of those special colors before mentioned, besides white and black are
called colores medii, for that they have their primary Essence from these,
either by an equal or uneven concorporation or mixture of these two together:
and in regard of these two extremes from which they have their being, cannot
properly be called colores, nisi per participationem.

Now as touching Colores medii, or mixed colors; Colores medii.
it is to be understood that they are raised by the contemperation or mixture
of the two Simples formerly handled, as may appear by the Definition of
Scribonius, who says, Mixtus color est, qui ex Simplicium contemperatione
producitur.

All mixed or midling Colors, that we call Colores medii, are reckoned more
Noble, or Ignoble, by participation; that is to say, as they do partake more
or less of the nobility of white, which is resembled to light, or of black,
which has a resemblance of darkness, or deprivation of light.

Of these according to Scribonius, some are Exactly compounded of both Simples.
Declining more to the one than to the other, in an unequal proportion.


Red exactly compounded.
example of blazon or coat of arms That Color which is said to be exactly
compounded, does participate of the two Simples indifferently in a just
proportion, as Red; which Scribonius thus defines: Rubedo est color aequali
simul Alb^dinis and Nigredinis combinatione constans. Amongst Colors (next
after Metals) this Color, V^rmilion, or Red has the prime place: forasmuch as
it represents the fire which of all other elements is the most lightsome, and
approaches nearest to the quality and virtue of the Sun. In regard whereof it
was ordained, that none should bear this Color, (which betokens nobleness
of courage, and valourous magnanimity) but persons of honorable birth and
rank, and men of special desert. This color inciteth courage and magnanimity
in persons, that do grapple together in single or public sight. We read that
when those that strengthened their Battles with Elephants, when they would
provoke them to fight they produced before them res^mblances of this martial
Color, as the blood of Grapes and of M^lberies. This C^^our is likened to the
precious Rubie, amongst virtues it is compared to magnanimity, or boldness of
courage. And amongst the complexions, it is resembled to Choler. In Armory it
is called, Gules.

Yellow.
example of blazon or coat of arms This Color is bright Yellow, which is
compounded of much White, and a little Red, as if you should take two parts of
White, and but one of Red. This color in Arms is blazed by the name of Or,
which is as much to say as Aurum, which is Gold: and it is commonly called Gold
Yellow, because it does lively represent that most excellent Metal, the
possession whereof inchanteth the hearts of fools, and the color whereof
blinds the eyes of the wise Of the excellency of this Metal, H^siodus has
this saying: Aurum est in corporibu^ sicut Sol inter stellas. Dignity of Gold.
And therefore such is the worthiness of this Color which does resemble it,
that (as Christine de Pice holds) none ought to bear the same in Arms, but
Emperors and Kings, and such as be of the Blood Royal, though indeed it be in
use more common. And as this Metal exceeds all other in value, purity, and
finenesse, so ought the Bearer (as much as in him lies) endeavor to surpass
all other in Prowess and Virtue.

Green.
example of blazon or coat of arms This Color is Green, which consists of
more Black and of less Red, as appears by the Definition; Viridis est color
Nigredine copiosiore, and Rubedine minore contemperatus. This color is blazoned
Vert, and is called in Latin Viridis, a vigore, in regard of the strength,
freshness and liveliness thereof; and therefore best resembles youth, in that
most vegetables, so long as they flourish are beautified with this verdue:

example of blazon or coat of arms Blew is a Color which consists of much
Red, Blew.
and of little White, and does represent the color of the Sky in a clear
Sun-shining day. This in Blazon is termed Azure. Coeruleus color, a Coelo
dictus est, Definition.
quod tanquam solers and diligens nescit otiari. Farnes. 2. 18.

example of blazon or coat of arms Purpure is a Color that consists of much
Red, Purpure.
and of a small quantity of Black, and is thus defined: Purpureus color est,
qui a multa Rubedine, and pauciore Nigredine commiscetur. Cossaneus having
formerly handled those former six Colors, viz. White, Black, Red, Yellow,
Green and Blew, says, That of them all (being compounded and mixed together
according to proportion) this Purpure Color is raised. This Color usually
has no other name in Blazon.

Purpure Color has some resemblance of a withered Red-Rose, which after long
gathering, the glorious luster thereof fading, it becomes somewhat blackish,
as if it were a proportionable commixture of Red and Black together. This
Color has his Denomination, of a certain Fish called in Latin Purpara, a
kind of shellfish, whereof in times past, great store have been found near to
that famous City of Tyrus, situated next to the Sea coast in the Country of
Phoenicia: this kind of fish has in the mouth of it an excellent and precious
liquor, or juice, of singular use in dying of clothes, the invention and use
whereof was first found out by the Tyrians, for which cause this Color is
called Tyrius Color. They must be taken alive, and that chiefly in the Spring
season, at which time this juice is most plentiful in them, at other seasons
it is more scarce: They are gathered alive, and cast together on a heap, that
so by their continual motion they may vent out this rich liquor, together with
their spirit, which done in some near place or other provided for the clean
keeping thereof, it is taken up and spared for necessary purposes. This Color
in ancient time was of that precious esteem, as that none but Kings and
Princes, and their favorites might wear the same, as we may see, Dan. 5.16. Now
if thou can read the writing, and show me the interpretation thereof, thou
shall be clothed with Purple, and shall have a chain of gold about thy neck.
Also. 1 Macchab. 10.20. And Alexander sent Jonathan a Purple Robe, and a Crown
of gold; And again, When his accusers saw his honor as it was proclaimed, and
that he was clothed in Purple, they fled all away. Hereof (perhaps) it comes
that this Color is found of so rare use in armoriall signs. Moreover it is
said; And the King commanded that they should take off the garment of Jonathan,
and cloth him in Purple, and so they did, 1 Macchab. 10.62.

Tawny.
example of blazon or coat of arms Tawny (says Leigh) is a Color of worship,
and of some Hera^ds it is called Bruske, and is most commonly borne of French
Gentlemen, but very few do bear it in England. In Blazon it is known by the
name of Ten. It is (says he) the surest color that is (of so bright a hew
being compounded) for it is made of two bright Colors, which are Red and
Yellow: neither shall you have any Color so made among all that may be
devised; and not to be stainand.

Murrey.
example of blazon or coat of arms The last of the seven mixed Colors, we do
commonly call Murrey, but in Blazon, Sanguine, and is (as most truly says
Leigh) a Princely Color, being indeed one of the Colors appertaining of
ancient time to the Prince of Wales. It is a Color of great estimation, and
very stately, and is in use in certain Robes of the Knights of the Bath. Some
Heralds of approved judgment, do hardly admit these two last mentioned for
Col^urs of Fields, in regard they are reckoned Stainand Colors. Yet some Coats
of Arms there are, and those of reverend antiquity, whose Fields are of those
colors, for which respect they have been allowed for colors of Fields, as Sir
John Fern in his Glory of Generosity notes. This kind of bearing, Leigh does
instance in two English Gentlemen of ancient Houses, that have of long time
Borne Tawny in their Arms: the one of them he names Hounzaker, and the other
Finers.

I have purposely, for the avoiding of prolixity, omitted here to speak of the
Elements, virtues and complexions which every one of these Metals and colors
are respectively resembled unto, because Fern in his Blazon of Gentry has a
large discourse of the same subject, to which I refer the Reader.

SECT. I. CHAP. IV.
HItherto of Colors and Metals: Now of Furs, according to the series and
course of our distribution before delivered, page 15.

Furs.
Furs (used in Arms) are taken for the Skins of certain beasts, stripped
from the bodies, and artificially trimmed, for the furring, doubling, or lining
of Robes and Garments, serving as well for state and magnificence, as for
wholesome and necessary use. And these thus trimmed and employed, are called in
Latin pellicei, a pellendo, of driving away, (quite contrary in sense, Why
called Pellicei.
though like in sound, to pellices a pellicendo, for drawing all to them)
because they do repel and resist the extremities of cold, and preserve the
bodies that are covered with them, in good temperature.

Use.
These are used as well in doublings of the Mantles pertaining to Coat-Armours,
as in the Coat-Armours themselves.

Furs do consist either of One color alone, or More colors than one.


example of blazon or coat of arms That Furre that consists of one color
alone, White Furre.
is White, which in doubling is taken for the Lituits skin, before spoken of,
page 17. An example whereof we have in this Escocheon. Some perhaps will expect
that in the handling of these Furs, I should pursue the order of Gerard
Leigh, who gives the pre-eminence of place unto Ermyne, for the dignity and
riches thereof: but that form suteth neither with the Method that I have
prefixed to my self; nor yet with the order of Nature, which ever prefers
Simples before Compounds, because of their priority in time: for as Aristotle
says, Order of discipline.
Priora sunt compositis incomposita: which order, as it is of all other the
most reasonable, certain, and infallible; so do I endeavor by all means to
conform my self in these my poor labors thereunto: Natura enim regitur ab
intelligentia non errante. Note that this, Doublings what.
and all other the examples following throughout this Chapter (as they are here
placed) must be understood to be doublings or linings of Robes, or Mantles of
State, or other Garments, wherein (according to Leigh) they all have one
general name, and are called Doublings: but in Escoch^ons they are called by
nine proper and several names. What those Mantles are, shall be showed
hereafter when I shall come to the handling of the second Member of Division
before made. White furre blazoned in doublings.
In the blazoning of Arms, this Color is evermore termed Argent, unless it
be in the description of the Arms of one that is Reus Laesae Majestatis: but
being a doubling, it is no offense (says Christine de Pice) to call it White,
Rules for doublings.
because therein it is to be understood only as a Furre or Skin.

Furs consisting of more than one Color, are either of Two Colors, or More
than two.


Such Furs as are compounded of two Colors only, are sorted either with
Black, and are either Black mixed with White, as or Ermyne, and Ermynes.
Black mixed with Yellow, as Emynois, and Pean.

or without Black: such are, according to Leigh, Verrey,scz. A. and B. and
Verrey, Or, and Vert,



Knowledge is no way better or more readily attained than by demonstration:
Scire enim est per demonstrationem intelligere, Ermyne Rule.
says Aristotle. I will therefore give you particular example of their
several Bearings.

example of blazon or coat of arms Ermyne is a Furre consisting of White
distinguished with black spots. You must blazon this by the name of Ermyne, and
not Argent powdered with Sable. This is the skin of a little beast, less than a
Squirrill (says Leigh) that has his being in the Woods of the Land of
Armeniae, whereof he takes his name. The tail thereof is of a thumbs length,
which is of color brown, The Egyptians did propose this little Beast for an
Hieroglyphick of Chastity, Farnes. Lib. 2. fo. 15. So greatly is this little
Beast affected unto cleanness, as that she had rather expose her self to the
hazard of being killed or taken by the Hunters, then she would pollute her Coat
with the filth of the bird-lime laid before the entrance of the cave to take
her at her going in. Leigh in the former part of his Accidence, fol. 132.
seems therein to contradict himself, in that he affirms Ermyne to be no
Color, but a Compound with a Metal, and serves as Metal only. For mine own
part, I do not see in doubling of Mantles it should be reckoned a Metal, for
that all doublings or linings of Robes and Garments, though perhaps not
altogether, yet chiefly are ordained for the repelling of cold and weathers
drift: to which use Metals are most unfit, as King Dionysius declared, when
coming into a Church where the Images were attired in most rich golden Robes,
he took them away, saying, Such Garments were too cold for Winter, and too
heavy for Summer. A fair pretense to cloak his Sacrilegious Avarice. Order for
the wearing of Ermyne.
The same Author in his said Accidence, fol. 75. making mention of this Furre,
takes occasion to commend a late prescribed order for the distribution of this
rich and rare Furre, according to the dignity of the persons to whom the
wearing thereof is allowed, which is this; That an Emperor, a King or a Prince
may have the pouldering in their apparel as thick set together as they please:
a Duke may have in his Mantles cape, only four Raungs or Ranks of them: a
Marquess three Raungs and a half: an Earl a Cape of three Raungs only. In
some Coats these are numbered, but then they extend not to the number of ten.
These rows or rancks before named are of some Authors called Timbers of
Ermyne: for no man under the degree of a Baron or a Knight of the most
honorable order of the Garter, may have his Mantle doubled with Ermyne.

Doublings Ermyne.
example of blazon or coat of arms This is that other Furre, before mentioned,
to consist of a mixture of white and black, and has some resemblance of the
former: but differs in this; that where that is composed of white powdered
with black; contrariwise this is black, powdered with white. But neither in
that, Rule.
nor in this, shall you make any mention in blazon of any such mixtures, but
only use the name appropriated to either of them, which does sufficiently
express the manner of their composition to the understanding of those that are
but meanly skilled in blazon; Ermynes.
the names peculiarly allotted to this Furre is Ermynes.

Master Boswell is of this opinion, that Ermyne and Ermynes ought never to be
sorted in Arms with the metal of their color, because (says he) they are
but Furs, and have no proper blazon with any metal. Yet does he particularly
blazon the Coat of Walcot, fol. 106. in the Achievement of the Right
Honorable Lord, Sir William Cecil, Knight, late Lord Treasurer of England,
where he might fitly have taken exception against such bearing, if he could
have produced any good ground for warranting such his opinion; in default
whereof he there passes the same over with silence, knowing that Antiquity and
Custom (which has the vigor of a law, where there is no law written) are
powerful in things of this nature: he secretly relinquisheth his opinion,
forasmuch as it is manifest, that not only Walcot but Kingsmell, and many
others, both ancient and modern, has used such bearing without contradiction.

example of blazon or coat of arms Of those Furs before mentioned, that are
compounded of yellow and black, this is the first, and is termed in blazon,
Ermynois, Ermynois.
whose ground or field is yellow, and the Pouldrings black, though this be rich
in Arms (says Leigh) yet in doubling it is not so rich. Of the use of this
Furre, Bara makes mention in his book entitled, Le Blazon des Armoiries, page
14. and Edel. H^ryssen in his book entitled Le Jardyn d'armories, in the Arm
of Leefwelt.

example of blazon or coat of arms This is that other Furre composed of the
same colors, but disposed in a contrary manner to the former; for whereas that
consists of yellow powdered with black, this is black powdered with yellow;
and in blazon is termed Pean.

There are other sorts of Furs or Doublings consisting also of two only
colors, Other Furs.
which as they are much different in form, so do they also receive a diverse
blazon, from these before specified; which are these that follow, and their
like.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Verrey, Or and Azure, by the name
of Claude de Rochford, sometime Constable of France. In Coats of this sort of
bearing, in case where it may be holden doubtful whether should have the
precedence, Rule.
the Color or the Metal, the Metal must have the pre-eminence as the more
worthy. The Frenchmen, from whom we do borrow our terms of blazon, do call all
sorts of Doublings or Furs of this form, by the name of Vayre; perhaps, Quia
ex diversis coloribus altenatim variantur. To this sort of bearing, there are
no other terms of blazon allowed. If your vaire does consist of Argent and
Azure, you must in blazon thereof, say only, he bears vaire, and it
suffices: but if it be composed of any other colors, then you must say, Robes
of estate furred after this manner.
he bears vaire of these or those colors. The Latin blazoners making
mention of this sort of bearing, do thus describe them, Portat arma variata ex
pellibus albis and caeruleis, accounting them for skins of little beasts. For
that in ancient times they were used for linings of Robes, and Mantles of
Senators, Consuls, Alex. Genesis Dier.
Emperors and Kings, and thereupon are skilfully termed doublings. Of this
use of them, Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dierum, lib. 5. fol. 285. says, Legimus
Caligulam depictas penulas induisse.

Sometimes it was permitted to men grown to years, to use a kind of short cloak
called Penula, in time of wars, though it were in substance but slight and
thin: For Alexander Severus the Emperor, in favor of aged men, did grant them
a privilege for wearing of this kind of garments: Wolf. Lazius, lib. 8. The
garments of the Tribune of the people, and of the Plebeian sect, was most
commonly this Penula before mentioned, like as also was Sagum, which was a
soldiers Cloak, or Cassock, and Endormis which was an hairy garment much like
an Irish mantle, and hood. These were apt garments for repelling of cold; These
were not habits beseeming an Emperor or chief Commander to wear: nevertheless
we read that Caligula ware oftentime, Depictas penulas, Alex. lib. 5. Amongst
the rest this is to be observed, that Consuls were habited sometimes, in
Coat-Armours, called Paludamenta, and sometimes in Kirtles called Trabeae,
which was a kind of garment worn by Kings under their Mantles of State. So that
they were sometimes said to be Trabeati, and sometimes to be Paludati, according
to these several habits. Also the Lictores were Officers that usually attended
these Consuls, and were like unto Sergeants, or Ministers appointed to inflict
corporal punishment upon offenders, and were most commonly in number twelve.
These also attended the Consul to the wars, invested also with Coat Armor.

Concerning those Depictae penulae formerly mentioned, they are said to have
been in use with Emperors of later ages, that were addicted to wantonness and
delicacie, whereof Tranquillus, in Caligula, writes in this manner, Vestitu,
calceatuque and caetero habitu, neque patrio, neque anili, ac ne virili quidem,
ac denique non humano semper usus est: saepe depictas gemmatasque Penulas
indutus. Wolf. Lazius in Comment. Reip. lib. 8. 857. If you observe the
proportion of this vaire, you shall easily discern the very shape of the case
or skin of little beasts, in them; for so did ancient Governors and Princes of
the world (says Sir John Fern in Lac. Nob. page 86.) line their pompous
Robes, with furre of diverse colors, sowing one skin to another after the
plainest fashion. There is yet another kind of furs much differing from all
other the furs before expressed, not only in shape, but in name also, as in
example.

example of blazon or coat of arms This sort of furre or doubling, was (as
Leigh notes) of some old Heralds called varry cuppy, and varry tassa, which
(says he) is as much to say, as a Furre of cups, but himself calls it Meire,
for so he reckons it well blazoned, and very ancient, and a Spanish coat. But
I hold it better blazoned, Potent counterpotent, for the resemblance it has of
the heads of crowches, Potent counter-potent.
which Chaucer calls Potents, Quia potentiam tribuunt infirmis, as appears
in his description of old age in the Romcant of the Rose.

So old she was that she ne went
A foot, but it were by potent.
Potent what.
So much of furs consisting of two colors, only: now of such as are composed
of more than two colors, according to the division before delivered.

Such are these and their like, Viz. Ermynites Vaire of many colors.


Ermynites.
example of blazon or coat of arms This at the first sight may seem to be all
one with the second Furre, before in this Chapter expressed, but differs in
this, that herein is added one hair of Red on each side of every of these
Poulderings. And as this differs little in shape, and show from that second
Furre named Ermyne; so does it not much differ from the same in name, that
being called Ermyne, and this Ermynites.

The other Furre that is composed of more than two colors, is formed of four
several colors at the least, as in example.

example of blazon or coat of arms This differs much from all the other furs,
Vaire.
and (according to Leigh) must be blazoned vaire; this is composed of four
distinct colors, viz. Argent, Gule, Or, and Sable. Here I will note unto you,
Rule general.
a general rule that you must carefully observe, not only in the blazoning of
these furs, but generally of all Coat-Armours, viz. that you describe them so
particularly and plainly, as who so hears your blazon, may be able to trick
or express the form and true portrature thereof, together with the manner of
bearing, no less perfectly, than if he had done it by some pattern thereof
laid before him.

Although I have here in the Blazon of this kind of Fur, as also in the Table
of this first Section, put a difference between these three words, vaire,
verrey, and varrey, in ascribing to every one of these a particular property in
the Blazon of Furs differing in Metals and Colors; in which I must confess, I
have followed Leigh; yet I do for my own part rather agree with Sir John
Fern, who in the 86. page of his Book entitled Lacye^ Nobility, writes, That
there is no other blazon allowed to a Doubling or Fur of this nature, than
only vaire, or variated, for which word variated I have observed, that our
English Blazoners use verrey; from the French masculine participle, vaire; and
Sir John Fern there further says, That these differences of terms verrey,
varrey and vaire, are mere fantasies of Leigh his Blazon; and newly by him
devised, without any authority of Writer to infer the same; and that before
Leigh his time, all Authors had called this sort of Fur or Doubling, Vaire: And
if it be varied, or composed of Argent and Azure, then it is so called, and no
Colors named: but if it consist of any other Color, then it is blazed, Vaire,
of such and such Colors. And I shall hereafter in this my present Edition,
always blazon a Fur of this nature, of what Metal and Colors soever
composed, yea, although it consist of two Metals and two Colors, vaire or
verrey, always naming the Metal and Color, except it consists of Argent
and Azure: and thus concluding the Chapter of Tinctures, being the first kind
of Accidents of Arms, I will now go on to the second sort.

SECT. I. CHAP. V.
HAving hitherto handled the first part of the distribution before delivered
touching the Accidents, viz. Tincture: I will now go forward to handle that
other member of the same, namely, Differences; showing first what Differences
are; and so proceed in order to the Division of them.

But before I proceed to the definition and division of them, it is not
unnecessary to observe, That Arms may be resembled to Arithmeticall numbers,
for like as in numbers, the addition, or substraction of an unity, makes the
said number to receive a diverse form, from that it has before; in like
manner the apposition to, or exemption of any one thing from the Coat Armor,
be it either difference, or whatsoever else, the Coat Armor is not the same;
but varieth from that it was before. This variation (occasioned by the
addition, or exemption of some adventitious thing) nevertheless alters not
the substance of the Coat Armor; but makes the same to differ in form only
from that it was before, for these adventitious Appositions are of the nature
of Accidents, whose property is Adesse and abesse sine subjecti corruptione; as
I have formerly showed out of Porphyrus, p. 16.

Differences have no existence of themselves, but are of the quality of
Adjectives, which need the aid and support of some substantive, to be annexed
to them, and were devised, for the distinguishing of Coat Armor, of particular
persons, of one and the same Family, each from other among themselves,
according to that saying of Cass. Differentiae sunt quaedam accidentia per se
non existentia, quae inducunt diversitatem separativam, per quam dignoscuntur
talia Arma, in qu bus sunt inserta, ab armis alterius. But I will proceed to
the definition and division of Differences.

Differences are extraordinary additaments, whereby Bearers of the same
Coat Armor are distinguished each from others, and their nearness to the
principal Bearer is demonstrated.

Of Differences some are Ancient. Modern.


Those I call Ancient differences, that were used in ancient time for the
distinguishing, not only of one Nation or Tribe from another; but also to note
a diversity between particular persons also, descended out of one Family, and
from the same Parents. Such are bordures and imborduring of all sorts. The
Bordures that were annexed unto Coat-Armours, in the beginning were plain, and
(in all likelihood) were of some one of the colors or metals before spoken of:
But afterward in process of time (by reason of the multiplication of persons
and of Families) men were constrained to devise other sorts of bordures; to
induce a variety, whereby each particular person might be distinctly known, and
differenced ab omnibus and singulis ejusdem domus and familiae. Of these there
are diverse forms, as by these examples following may appear.

Plain.
example of blazon or coat of arms The first devised Bordures were borne plain,
after the manner of this, which is thus blazoned. He bears Argent, Rule.
a bordure Gules. Here you shall not need to mention the plainness of the
bordure: for when you say a bordure of this or that color or metal, and no
more, then it is always understood to be plain, albeit the same be not so
expressed. But if it have any other form than plain, in such case, you must not
omit to make express mention of the fashion thereof.

The plain bordure, used for differing of Coat Armor is resembled to those
Fimbria's, or Bordures, that Almighty God by the mouth of his servant Moses
commanded the Israelites to wear about the skirts of their Garments, to put in
mind of their duties touching their observation of his precepts; In respect
that the people were yet rude, and unexercised in obedience, therefore was this
ordinance prescribed unto them; As Saint Hierom notes in these words. Rudi
adhuc populo, and hominibus ad obedientiam insuetis, per Moysen, imperatur a
Domino: ut in fignum memoriae quod praecepta Domini recordentur, per singulas
vestimentorum fimbrias habeant cum cocco Hyacinthini coloris Insignia, ut etiam
casu huc illucque respicientibus oculis, mandatorum Coelestium memoria
nascatur. Of these Bordures were the Pharisees reproved by Christ, because they
perverted the use thereof, by wearing them, not for the putting of them in mind
of the observation of Gods precepts, but for a bravery, and their own vain
ostentation, and to the end they would seem more strict and severe observers of
Gods precepts than others were.

The content of the Bordures, (says Leigh) is the fifth part of the Field.
Rule. The content of a bordure.
Also it is to be observed, that when the Field and the Circumference or Tract,
about the same, drawn (as in this example) be both of one metal, color or
furre, then shall you not term it a bordure, but you shall say, that he bears
such metal, color, or furre, imbordured. Leigh reckons this sort of
imborduring, here spoken of, to be of the number of differences of brethren;
but Bartol (says he) has committed the distribution thereof to the Heralds.

Before I proceed to the Compound bordures above specified, Simple bordures.
I will give some few examples of other several forms of simple bordures;
(Quia simpli i^ p^iora fuerunt compositis,) as follows.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a bordure ingrailed,
argent; This word ingrailed, is derived from the Latin word Ingredior, which
signifies to enter, or go in; Quia ista sinea ex qua conficitur Bordura,
C^mpum plus aequo ingrediatur: or else it is derived of Gradu^, which
signifies a step or degree, and therefore it is called a bordure ingrailed,
Quia (as Vpton notes) ejus color gradatim infertur in campum Armorum.

The next sort of Bordure that I will note unto you, Bordures invecked.
is a bordure invecked, and the same is formed as appears in this next
Escocheon.

example of blazon or coat of arms This bordure is formed merely contrary to
the last precedent, and is blazoned in this manner. He bears Or, a border
invecked, Gules. As the former does dilate it self by way of incroaching into
the Field, contrariwise this does contract it self by inversion of the points
into it self; in regard whereof (it seems) it receives his denomination, and
is called Invecked, of the Latin word Inveho, which signifies, To carry in,
Quia ipsa linea gibbosa, in borduram plus aequo invehatur.

example of blazon or coat of arms This bordure differs in form from both the
other, Dent border.
and is thus blazoned; he bears, Gules, a bordure indented, Argent. Mr.
Wyrly, in his Book entitled, Wyrly.
The true use of Arms, treating of the honorable life, and languishing death
of Sir John de Gralhye, Capitol de Buz, and one of the Knights elected at the
first foundation of the Garter, by that victorious King Edward the third, does
therein make mention of one Sir Perducas Dalbreth, to whom this Coat Armor did
properly appertain, and describes the same in this manner.

Sir Perducas Dalbreth to the French returned, Who Guly shield about his neck
did fling
Wrapped with dent bordure silver shining.


This bordure is said to be indented, because it seems to be composed (as it
were) of teeth, whereof the same has a resemblance as well in property as in
form: for teeth (especially those of beasts of ravenous kind, or of prey) have
that part of their teeth next to their gums, broad and strong and their points
sharp after the manner above specified; Isiodor.
and they are called in Latin dentes a demendo (as Isiodorus notes) which
signifies to take away or diminish, Quia a^iquid de cibis s^mper demu^t. In
the same manner also do every of these I^dentings, entering into the Field,
lessen and take away some part of them as they go.

Note.
Note that all sorts of bordu es are subject to charging with things, as well
Artificial, as Natura^l; as by examples following, in part shall appear;
wherein I purpose not to be curious, either in their number, or yet in their
order; but as they shall come to hand, so will I set them down in their proper
places.

Hitherto of bordures simple, now of such as are compounded, as follows,

Bordure countercomponed.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a bordure
countercomponed, Or, and Gules, which is as much to say, as compounded of these
two Colors counterly placed. Note that Countercompony consists evermore of
two tracts only and no more. Note further, that the manner of differencing of
Coat-Armours by bordure is very ancient, but if you respect their particular
forms and charge, they are not so.

Bordure purflewe of vaire, Rule.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a bordure perflewe,
Verrey. Note here that, this term perflewe, is common to all the Furs before
handled, so often as they are used in bordures. Therefore whenever you shall
find a bordure of any of these several kinds, you must (for the more certainty
of the blazon) express by name of what sort of Furs the same is, if there be
a peculiar name appropriate thereunto. Otherwise if it be one of those kinds,
that have no certain name, whereby it may be distinctly known from the rest; or
if it be so, that the bordure be composed of some such of the Furs as do
comprehend under one name, diverse and distinct Colors, then must you of
necessity particularly name the Colors whereof every such bordure is so
composed, except it consists of Argent and Azure, as this does, and then it
suffices to call it only verrey; as in this example I have done.

Bordure checkie.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Bordure checkie, Or,
and Azure. Albeit this has a near resemblance of counter-compony before
handled, yet is it not the same, for that never exceeds two tracts or panes,
and this is never less than of three: therefore you must take special heed to
the number of the Tracts in Blazon, else may you easily err in mistaking the
one for the other. And this Rule holds not alone in Bordures, but also in
Bends, Fesses, Bars, etc. borne after those manners.

Sometimes you shall find the Bordures changed with things living, as in these
examples.

example of blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, a Bordure, Azure,
charged with Enaluron of Martlets, to the number of eight, Or: In your
blazoning of bordures of this kind of bearing, you must mention what sort of
Foul or Bird your bordure is charged withal, for that this term serves
generally for all kinds of bordures charged with things of this kind.

A like bordure did Jasper Earl of Pembroke bear, Jasper Earl of Pembroke.
Bordure Enaluron of Martlets.
that was half-brother to King Henry the Sixth, and was created Duke of
Bedford, by that most prudent Prince King Henry the Seventh.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a bordure, Gules, Enurny
of eight Lioncels passant, Or. Otherwise thus. He bears Azure, Hamlyne
plantagenet, base brother to King Henry the second.
a Bordure, Gules, charged with eight Lioncels passant, Or: Such a bordure is
set forth for Hamlyne Plantagenet that was base-brother to King Henry the
Second. This term Enurny is proper to all bordures charged with any beasts,
whose kinds, must be specially observed, and expressed in blazon, for the more
certainty thereof.

Sometimes you shall find two of these sorts of bordures before handled,
commixt in one, as in these next examples following.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a bordure quarterly, as
follows: Examples of Bordures charged with living and vegetable things. Hen.
Courtney Earl of Devon, and Marquess of Exceter.
Th first Gules, enur^y of three Lioncels passant guardant, Or. The second,
Azure, verdoy, of as many Flowers de Lis, Or. The third as the second: The
fourth as the first. Such a bordure did Henry Courtney, Earl of Devon, and
Marquess of Exceter, bear, (who lived in the time of King Henry the Eighth)
environing the Royal Arms of England, which he received as an augmentation of
Honor. And this Coat Armor may also be thus shortly blazoned, Argent, a
bordure quarterly England and France.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a bordure, quarterly
composed of purflewe, Ermyne, and Counter-compony, Or, and Azure, Hen. Fitz-roy
Duke of Richmond.
Such a Bordure did Henry Fitz-roy bear, who was Duke of Richmond and Somerset,
as also Earl of Nottingham. He was base son unto King Henry the Eighth.
Sometimes you shall find Bordures charged with leaves or flowers, and other
vegetables, as in example.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a bordure, Or, Bordure
verdoy.
charged with Verdoy, of Trefoiles, slipped to the number of 8. proper. Note
that this term Verdoy is appropried to all bordures charged with leaves,
flowers, fruits, and other the like vegetables. Wherefore, to make your blazon
more certain, it behooves, that you should expressly mention what kind of
vegetable the bordure is charged withal.

Bordure charged with things inanimate.
Otherwhiles you shall have bordures charged with other sorts of things
inanimate, or without life, as in this next example.

Richard Plant^genet King of the Romans.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a bordure, Sable, charged
with Entoyre of 8. Besants. Such a bordure did Richard Plantagenet, King of the
Romans, and Earl of Cornwall bear, that was Son unto King John, and Brother to
King Henry the third. Note, that this term Entoyre is proper to all bordures
charged with dead things: Entoyre. Note.
therefore you must name what kind of Entoyre the bordure is charged with,
whether with Roundles, Crescents, Mullets, Annulets, or whatsoever other dead
thing. A Beisaunte, or (as some call them) a Talent, is taken for a Massive
Plate or Bullion of Gold, containing (according to Leigh) of Troy weight, 104
l. and two ounces, and is in value 3750 l. sterling, and had for the most part
no similitude or representation upon it (as some hold) but only fashioned round
and smooth, as if it were fitted and prepared to receive some kind of stamp But
others are of opinion, that they were stamped, and that they were called
bezants (or rather bizants) of bizantium, the place where they were anciently
coined. Note, that whenever you shall find any Bezants or Talents borne in
Arms, you shall not need to make mention of their color in blazoning of them,
because they be evermore understood to be Gold.

Bordure gobonated.
example of blazon or coat of arms Sometimes you shall find bordures gobonated
of two colors, as in this next example. He bears Ermyne, a bordure
gobonated, Or and Sable: and such a bearing is so termed, because it is
divided in such sorts, as if it were cut into small Gobbets.

As this Bordure is gobonated, so shall you find Bordures, either Bendy, or
Bendwaies, or charged with Bends, as in this next Escocheon in part may appear.

Bordure Bendy.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a bordure, Sable, charged
with three Bends, Argent. I give it this blazon in respect that the Sable does
surmount the Argent, and stands (as it were) instead of a Field, but if they
both were of even pieces, then should I have termed it a bodure-bendee or
bend-waies, of so many pieces Argent and Sable, or Sable and Argent, as it
should happen.

There rests yet one example more of bordurings, which I have here placed, to
the end the same may serve instead of many particular demonstrations, otherwise
requisite for the full understanding of the manifold several sorts of
diapering, that may be used in bordures, as in example.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent a Bordure, Gules Diapered,
Bordure diapered. Note.
Entoyre, Enurny, Enaluron, Verdoy, etc. Note, that you may have diaper of any
two, three or more of these, or any other their like, in one bordure, and that
not only bordures, but also Fields of Coat-armours, are found diapered. That
Field or bordure is properly said to be diapered, which being fretted all over,
has something quick or dead, appearing within the Frets. And albeit things
having life and sense, or their parts, may be borne diapered, yet Plants,
Fruits, Leaves, Flowers, and other Vegetables, are (in the opinion of some
Armorists) judged to be more fit for such kind of bearing.

This kind of bearing diaper in coat armor, is sometimes seen in Coats of
France, and Belgia, but very rare or never in England, as Sir John Fern
notes. Diaper (says he) is known of every man to be a fantastical work of
knots, within which are wrought the signs or forms of things either quick or
dead, according to the invention of the work-master, as it is well known in
Ypres, Bruges, and some Cities of Heynault. In the blazon of such Coats you
must first name the color or metal of the Field.

As touching their first several Charges imposed upon these bordures
afore-handled, I should not (I acknowledge) have made mention of them at all in
this place (the order of my Method respected) sed propter necessitatem
nonnunquam recedendum est a regulis. But the occasion offered to treat of the
differences of bordures in this place, enforced me to make untimely mention of
those Charges, to the intent I might yield some satisfaction to the Reader
touching these variable forms, which I could no way better perform than by
demonstrative examples: Exempla enim ponimus, ut sentiant addiscentes.

Notwithstanding, that I take here only mentioned a bordure and imborduring,
for Ancient differences, yet I do not thereupon conclude, Ancien differences,
their first use Antiquated.
that Antiquity was not acquainted with any other than these; but the reason
that I do not particularly here discourse at large of those other Ancient
differences, is, because the use of diverse of them now, as differences, is
antiquated, and some of them are now used, as Ordinaries, or some other Charge
of the Field; which I shall afterward handle, but not here, because it suits
not with my intended method; others of those Ancient ones are still in use, as
differences; but to demonstrate some other younger brother than anciently they
did, and therefore now termed modern, by changing of their first use. Let it
therefore suffice only to name some of those first sort here mentioned as
Orles, Cotizes, Bends, etc. Which how they then were disposed of, in the
Terminall, Collateral and Fixall Coat-Armours, I refer you to Sir John Fern
and others, who have writ plentifully of them; In those elder times also, the
variation of Metal or Color, Transposition of Charge, yea, sometime change of
the Charge, or of part of the Charge, transmutation of Metal into Furre, and
such like, were used for distinctions of Families, as you may observe in diverse
Authors, and in the Coat-Armours of younger branches of many Ancient Families.

SECT. I. CHAP. VI.
Modern differences.
HItherto of the ancient manner of differencing Coat-Armours: Next, such as we
call modern differences, come in order to be handled. I call those modern
differences, that are of a latter institution, and put in use sithence the
invention of bordures. Such are these that follow, and their like, viz. the
File, Crescent, Mullet, Martlet, Annulet, Flower de-lis, etc.

Files what.
What these Files are, I cannot certainly avouch, because I find that diverse
Authors, and those very judicial in matters of this kind, do diversely judge
of them, Opinion of Upton.
according to their several conceits. Vpton, a man much commended for his
skill in blazon, and of some Armorists supposed to have been the first that
made observation of their use (but they are therein much deceived, for that
such use was made of them many ages before Vptons time) calls them Points,
such as men usually fasten their garments withal, and says, they may be borne
either even or odd, to the number of nine. Of Budaeus.
Budaeus, an ancient Writer, affirms them to be Tongs, and that they may not
be borne but odd. Of Alciatus.
Alciatus in his Parergon names them Plaitez or Plaits of garments. Bartolus
calls them Candles. Some other Authors call them Files, Of Bartolus.
and others Lambeaux or Labels. In this so great uncertainty, I forbear to
determine any thing, seeing those so learned cannot certainly resolve among
themselves what they are. Only concerning their diverse manner of bearing,
these examples following will give light: wherein I will begin with their
single bearing, and so will I proceed to their compound use.

example of blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, a File, with one
Labell, Gules. This form of bearing is found in the Chapel of the Castle of
Camphire, alias Trevior, in Zeland. Such is the dignity of the File, as that
the Heralds in their sound discretion, have caused many poor decayed
Gentlemen, and persons newly risen, to lay aside the bearing thereof, because
of the dignity of the same, being such, as the Son of an Emperor cannot bear a
difference of higher esteem, during the life of his Father.

Upton.
Vpton says, that Files are not borne for Arms, but for differences of Arms:
Tales lingulae sive labellae (says he) non dicuntur proprie signa, sed
differentiae signorum. Nevertheless in practice it falls out otherwise, as in
this Coat here expressed, and others following may be seen. For we find that
Labels are borne both single and manifold without any other manner of Charge;
so that it is clear, that they are borne sometimes for Arms, and not always
for Differences of Arms, as by the second Escocheon following, more plainly
appears.

Leigh.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a File of three Lambeaux,
Argent: this, says Leigh, is the first of the nine Differences of brethren,
and serves for the heir or eldest son, the Father living. Honorius says, that
one of the Labels betokens his father, the other his mother, and the
middlemost signifies himself.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a File of five points, or
Lambeaux, Azure: this seems to me a perfect Coat of it self, for I find the
same anciently set up in a glasse-window, in the Church of Estington in the
County of Gloucester, and is borne by the name of Henlington. Whence may appear
that this File is borne as a Charge sometimes, and not for a Difference of
Coat Armor always. Leigh.
The file of five Lambeaux, says Leigh, is the difference of the Heir whilst
the Grandfather lives, but his Grandfather being deceased, then he leaves
this, and takes that of three, which was his fathers Difference. But herein
his Rule fails; for that they have been anciently borne with five points for
the Difference of the Eldest son, in the time of King Edward the first, as
appears by diverse Seals, and other good authentic proofs of Antiquity.

Note, that as the Burdures before mentioned, so also these Files are
oftentimes charged with things as well quick as dead, whereof I will give you
some few examples in thse next Escocheons.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a File of three Lambeaux,
Azure, each charged with as Many Flewers de-lis, Or. Such a File did Henry the
fourth, Duke of Lancaster bear (over the Arms of England) who was Son to
Henry, Henry Duke of Lancaster.
Earl of Lancaster, whose Father was Edmund surnamed Crookback, that was first
Earl of Lancaster, and Son to King Henry the third.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a File of three Lambeaux,
Argent, each charged on the dexter side of the foot thereof with a canton,
Gules. Lionel Plantagenet.
A like File did Lionel Plantagenet bear (who was third Son unto King Edward
the third) over the Arms of France and England, saving that those Cantons,
were placed in the highest part of his Labels aforesaid.

The Labell of the Heir apparent (says Wyrley) is seldom transferred unto the
second brother, The Labell transferred upon occasion Wyrley.
but when the Inheritance goes to the daughters of the Eldest brother: in
which case, it was permitted unto him, to bear the File as heir male of his
family, and as one that remained in expectancy of the Inheritance, if the issue
of his Neeces should fail. Note, that the second brother, Rule.
might not intrude himself into the absolute Signs of his family, the
Inheritance being in his Neeces or Kinswomen. Hugh de Hastings, being a second
brother, and his posterity did bear a Labell for their difference upon the like
occasion, and for the reasons here mentioned.

example of blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Vert; a File of three points
parted perpale, Gules and Argent, on the first six towers, Or, and the second
as many Lionceaux rampant, purpure. Edward Plantagenet Duke of Aubemarle.
Such a File was borne by Edward Plantagenet son and heir to Edmund of Langly,
Duke of York, which Edward lived in the time of King Richard the second; by
whom he was created Duke of Aubemarle, and was slain in the battle of
Agincourt in the time of King Henry the fifth.

Robert D'artois.
example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a File of three Lambeaux,
Gules, each charged with as many towers, Or. Such a File did Robert D'artois
bear, who guided King Edward the third in all his wars against the French. This
Robert was a Frenchman, and was thought to have been the first that moved King
Edward the third to make his challenge to the Crown of France. Many more
examples might be given of the diverse manners of bearing and charging of Files,
but these here expressed may suffice to inform the Reader that they are no less
subject to Charges than the bordures before expressed: as also to move him to
take a more strict observation of them, as they shall come to hand.

Forasmuch as it has been anciently questioned (and for ought that I could
ever see, rests as yet undecided) by Bartholus, Budaeus, and other Judicious
persons of their times; whether Files, or Labels should be borne with even
points, or odd; some holding that they could not be borne but odd, others
maintaining they might be used indifferently as well even as odd. In my former
Impression I followed the stronger opinion, and in all the precedent examples
have produced patterns of unequal points. Nevertheless not so resting
satisfied, I have sithence endeavored to examine their use (the faithfullest
interpreter of things doubtful) to which end I took occasion to peruse certain
Miscellanean notes of Seals, which I had gathered long ago: by which Seals it
appeared, they had been anciently used to be borne as well even as odd,
whereupon (out of my desire to clear all doubts, and to make every thing as
perspicuous, and manifold as I could) I resolved to cut such Seals as came to
my hands, for the better approbation of this my assertion, and content of the
Reader, and withal to set them down according to order of even bearing, viz.
2. 4. 6. etc. before I would conclude this Chapter of files. As in example.

example of blazon or coat of arms Sigillum hoc appendit Chartae cujusdam Joh.
ap Howell de Monnemoth fact. Christianae Ball. continenti quoddam escambium
unius Curtilagii, in vico vocato Mowkentstreet, etc. Dat. Anno Regni Regis
Edvar. III. 32.

This piece of Evidence rests amongst the writings or deeds of George Thorpe
of Wanneswell, Esquire, and one of his Majesty's Gent. Pensioners, whose
residence is in the Parish of Barckley in the County of Gloucester.

An example of a file with four points, follows in this next Escocheon.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, two cheverons, Gules, on
a quarter of the second, a File of four points of the first. This Coat was
amongst others taken out of an old Masse-book at Gosworth, in the County of
Chester, wherein they were found fair Limmed many years ago. As appears by a
Book of visitation of that Shire, remaining in my own hands, extant to be seen:
which visitation was made by William Flower, alias Norrey, King of Arms of the
North part beyond the River of Trent, who was associated and accompanied
therein, with Robert Glover, Somerset Herald, his Marshall, Anno. Dom. 1580.

This Coat might have been more aptly placed hereafter in the second Section,
amongst Ordinaries of diverse kinds, borne one upon another; But that I desired
to place all my Labels of even points together without interruption, though I
digressed somewhat therein by giving way to necessity, albeit with breach of
Rule and Order; Nonnunquam enim propter excellentiam seu necessitatem receditur
a Regulis. This form of bearing of Files with four points, is also warranted by
Rowles of great Antiquity; As appears by the Coat of Sir Thomas Leyhourne,
that bare, Azure, six Lionceux Rampant, Or, a File of four points, Gules, which
I do here pass over, as well for brevity, as for impertinency thereof to this
place, in respect of the Lions the principal charge thereof. Note here a
strange bearing of a File.

example of blazon or coat of arms This Seal was affixed unto a certain deed of
one William de Curli, as appears by a Transcript thereof in my Book of Seals,
the effect whereof is brief, as follows in these words.

Will. de C. fill. Will. de Curli, etc. pro Salute Antecess. etc. terr. in
Territorio de Langle. 20. Henr. 3. Test Hug. le Poer. Vicecom. Warwick. Henr.
de Napford, Roberto de Clopton milit. This example serves to confirm my former
assertion; that Files are not only borne for differences, but sometimes for
the only Charge of the Coat Armor, as appears by the Coat of Henlington,
whereof I have given Example, elsewhere: and herein we may observe, a rare form
of position thereof, in bend Sinister.

example of blazon or coat of arms I have seen a like File of three points
borne dexter-waies in Bend, for the only Charge of the Field, as in this
Escocheon, which may receive this blazon, He bears, Argent, a File of three
points in bend, Sable. This Coat Armor belonged to one Morien an Alien born,
buried in Saint Mary's Church in Oxenford.

For the shunning of multiplicity of Examples, I will give an instance of a
Coat Armor, comprehending both sorts of Files, viz. even and odd points,
which for that it is simple, and unmixt with any Ordinary or Common Charge, may
serve instead of all. As in example.

example of blazon or coat of arms The Field is Or, Three files borne barwaies,
Gules; The first having five points, the second four, the last Triple pointed,
here I am constrained to say, Triple pointed, lest by the iteration of the word
Three, I should break the Rule given page 13. This is as I take it a Dutch
Coat, borne by the name of Liskirk, quasi lis Ecclesia.

Now if any man will demand of me, why I do spend my oil and travel in
things of so small moment? To such I answer, that so long as I travel to find
out the truth, I reckon my travel well bestowed, though the matter be of never
so small importance, Suave enim est in minimis etiam vera scire.

There is yet another form of bearing of files, diverse from these before
mentioned, which albeit, the same be not in use with us, but seems to be a
National Custom peculiar to the Kingdom of France: Nevertheless sithence I
have undertaken to treat amongst things of the use of Blazoning Coat Armor, I
would not willingly omit any form of bearing, or other remarkable thing, that
might make either my self or the Reader more expert in the use of Blazon. This
form of bearing files which I will now show you, is not distant some little
space from the upper part of the Chief (after the most usual fashion) but
grows immediately out of the Chief it self.

Pet. Matthew of the life and death of H. 4. King of France.
example of blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, a file issuing out of
the Chief without any intermission at all; And is thus blazoned in French; I
port D'azure Vng file de Gules, movant du Chief. These Armoriall differences
are (in France) observed upon the Robes of honorable Persons issued out of
Princely Families amongst themselves; such Robes (I mean) as are given them,
either at the marriages, and funerals of Kings and Queens. As for example; It
has been noted that the Lambeaux, Gules, upon the Mantles of Orleance, have
been adorned with Flowers de Lis. The Lambeaux of Arthois with Castles, Or.
Those of Anjou moving out of the Chief, only Gules.

In like sort diverse other noble Houses of France, viz. of Valois, of berry,
and of Allencon, have Bordures either plain or engrailed, or charged with
Reysants, those of Ever^ux bastons, Or, and Argent, and they of Burbon bastons,
Gules.

Here may rise a question, not unworthy our observation, viz Whether like as
the eldest brother is preferred before the second, so the son of the eldest
brother, shall in like sort be preferred, or take place before his Uncle? And
this has been holden a great and difficult question a long season; until at
length O ho the Emperor of Germany, being at Trevere with his Barons this
matter was there questioned, he ordained that the cause should be decided by
Combat, wherein the Nephew hardly obtained the victory, which because it was
deemed to have proceeded by the secret Judgment of God, it was decreed that
from thenceforth the Nephew should be preferred before the Uncle. Of this mind
are Nich. Boerius, Lucas de Penna, and John de Montoleno; that the Nephew
should take place.

The like question has risen in France between the second daughter, and the
son of the elder sister, as well in Avionin a city of Narbone in France, as in
other parts thereof, Chassa in Catalogo suo de Glor.
which remained long undetermined. At length it was finally adjudged in the
Court of Parliament (holden at Paris) for the Nephews, for whom also it was
likewise decreed in the City of Avinon.

If any man shall demand of me, how it comes to pass that the Diminutions or
Differences of Arms before mentioned, are so diversely borne, not only in
foreign Countries, but also in one self Nation: Or why there is not one set
form observed in the use of them with all Nations? I answer, that, it is not
possible, because of the infinite actions of men, which are no less infinitely
subject to mutabilitie, and therefore can by no means be reduced to a set
form of bearing universally, according to that saying of an uncertain Author,
Res sunt i^finitae, infiniteque mutabiles, idcirco praecepto generali
comprehendi non possunt.

Besides these Differences before mentioned, other sorts of modern differences
were devised for the distinguishing of brethren and persons issued out of one
Family, which for the reach they extend unto, do more manifestly express, and
(as it were) point out with the finger, how far their several bearers are
distant in degree from their original ancesters; as also, how each of them
stands in degree one to another among themselves; as by the examples ensuing
may appear.

The First House.
emblems of degrees of separation

The Second House.
emblems of degrees of separation

The Third House.
emblems of degrees of separation

The Fourth House.
emblems of degrees of separation

The Fifth House.
emblems of degrees of separation

The Sixth House.
emblems of degrees of separation

To these single differences expressed in the first of these Rancks does Gerard
Leigh add three other to make up the number of nine; which Number he labored
much to make complete throughout all his book. The form of which three, are
these: viz. the Rose, the Cross Molin, and the Double Cater-foile.

emblems of degrees of separation

Observation in bearing of Arms.
It has been evermore one observation with Nations in bearing of Arms, that as
every particular family (says Sir John Fern) did bear Arms, different in
substance from those of other families, so those that are descended of the
selfsame blood, should likewise bear the Arms of that house and Family
whereof they are descended, in a different manner each from other, (not in
substance but in accidents) for the distinguishing of their Line of Agnation.
And the apposition of these Differences, albeit they seem to make some
alteration in the Coate-Armours, whereunto they are annexed, yet is the same but
merely Accidental, the substance still remaining as it was before; the nature
of these Appositions being such as is of all other Accidents, Vt possunt
abesse, and adesse sine subjecti interitu.

Differences called Diminutiones Armorum, and why.
And these differences annexed to Coat-Armours are of some Authors termed (and
that not improperly) Diminutiones armorum, in respect they do derogate from
the dignity of the Arms whereto they are added, as expressly manifesting them
to be of less esteem than those from which they are derived: Multiplicitas
enim individuorum, in eadem specie diminutionem arguit. Occasion of invention
of Differences.
But doubtless, the conceit of Apposition of these differences to Coat-armours
was grounded upon the necessity (the common Parent of all inventions) as well
that thereby all confused bearing of arms might be avoided; as also that the
prerogative of the eldest son should be preserved inviolable. And for this
cause has the eldest of every noble and generous Family, Use of differences.
his peculiar manner of sole and plain bearing, which he will in no case permit
any other man to use, though he be of the same Family and Surname, Lyra in
Genes. 49.
but with addition of some kind of Difference, because the sole bearing of
Arms pertains only to the first begotten: In primogenito enim (says Lyra)
tanquam in capite, stat, and remanet splendour geniturae.

Tremelius in Genes. 49. Dignity of the first begotten.
As touching the dignity of the first begotten, Tremelius in his Annotations
upon the 49 of Genesis makes mention of two chief Prerogatives, due unto
Reuben, had he not defiled his Fathers Bed; the one of Honor, whereby he had
his Brethren in Subjection unto him; the other of Strength, by reason of his
double portion of inheritance. Chassa. Conolu. 76. part. 1.
And Chassaneus says, Ea quae acquiruntur Primogenito, acquiruntur titulo
universali, item acquiruntur ut constituto in dignitate. For these respects the
Arms of the Family ought to remain entire to the Eldest, because the second,
third, and fourth begotten Sons, cannot arrogate to themselves any such
Prerogative, and therefore may not bear their Coat but with Difference.

Another use of differences.
Furthermore, these differences here spoken of, are of some Authors called
Doctrinae Armorum; and that very aptly, in regard that by the apposition of
them to Coat-Armours, our understanding (upon sight of them) is informed from
what Line of Consanguinity the Bearer of such difference does abstract
himself; whether from the Line ascending, descending, or collateral, as also
in what degree he stands; as, whether he be the second, third, or fourth
begotten child of such a Parent. And such apposition is no less lawful, than
is the addition of names of Baptism unto the Surname of the Family: Sicut enim
nomina inventa sunt ad cognoscendos homines, ita arma vel insignia ad familias
and personas distinguendas singulatim.

A further use of differences.
There is yet a further use of these differences, in that they serve to prevent
and avoid dissentions, debates, challenges, combats, and slaughters. For as to
all Brethren there is but one surname allowed, yet for difference, that one of
them may be discerned from another, there is added unto each Brother a
praenomen, or name of Baptism; so is it necessary, that sithence the
Coat Armor of the Ancestor is competible to all the children (as the mark of
the family, whereof they are descended) that a difference should be added to
the Coat Armor of every brother, to mark and limit out to all men's sight the
diversity of their Birth and Line whereupon they depend, that so all occasion
of challenge may be prevented, when each man knows not only his place of
precedence, but also his nearness and place of title to the Inheritance.

Whereas I have formerly among the examples of bordures, Differences of
Bloud-Royall more eminent, and why. The first reason.
used demonstrations of differences in the blood-royall, of some of the younger
sons of Kings; I hold it fit before I conclude this Tract of differences, to
give a little touch of the necessity why these should be more eminent than
those of ordinary use, with persons of inferior estate. First, in regard that
if the Coat Armor of others should have too near a conformity and resemblance
with the Sovereign Ensigns, the vulgar sort perhaps might (in some cases or
pretenses) be seduced to follow such a one as were not their King, to the great
disturbance of the State, and no less peril to the person of their lawful
Sovereign. And not only is it so in Coats pertaining to the blood-royall, but
also in other inferior callings: for in ancient time (says Wyrly) when men
could not sufficiently distingush their Coat-Armours by changing their devices
into other colors, for the number of leaders, that many times were of one
house or family; then were they forced to vary their marks by the said
additions. And very seldom should you see in those times, Crescents, Mollets,
or such small things borne for a difference: or if any such were, they were
made so large, that they might easily be discerned by the distance of forty
foot. Furthermore, the Sovereign estate and dignity being compared with the
quality of any Subject, the difference will be found so great between them, and
the one so far surmounting the other of them, as that reason it self wills
that so great a difference should be put between the Royal Ensigns and the
Arms of a Subject, as there is between their estates and degrees, since those
Ensigns are the marks of their worthiness and esteem.

For these and other respects, it has been, and yet still is in use, Honorable
Ordinaries, used for differences.
that in addition of differences to the Arms of Kings younger children, the
skillful Heralds have given some of the Honorable Ordinaries, for more
apparent distinctions, as a F^sse, Chief, Bend, Pile, Bordure, and such like,
as we may manifestly see in diverse ancient Coats borne by such noble Personages
as have descended from the collateral lines of the Kings of England, France,
Scotland, etc.

Concerning those modern differences before expressed in the form of six
rancks, page 36. viz. Crescents, Mollets, Martlets, etc. Crescents, Mollets,
etc.
notwithstanding their institution was ingenious, yet has tract of time
discovered their use to be dangerous, especially in Martial affairs, by
reason of their darkness and unapparent forms, occasioned by imposition of one
difference upon another: the peril whereof has not a little extenuated their
estimation. Nevertheless, their invention is not therefore to be condemned, in
as much as the events have not fallen out answerable to the intention of their
first Deviser: Neither can it be therefore justly said to be done without
ground of reason, as a certain Author notes: Si finis in intellectu operantis
sit rationabilis, etiamsi non sequatur quod intenditur, non idcireo dicitur
irrationabiliter operari.

Here it is to be observed, Note. No differences for daughters.
that differences do in no ways appertain unto Sisters, for that they are
reputed to be separated and divided from the Family whereof they are descended,
in as much as when they are once married, they do lose their own surname, and
do receive their denomination from the Family whereof their Husbands are
descended. And so much does the word Soror notify unto us, as Sosinus says:
Soror est quasi seorsim nata, and a familia separata.

Arms of Daughters. Why Daughters are not allowed differences.
To Daughters it is permitted to bear the Arms of their Father, even as the
elder brother does after his Fathers decease, without any scandal or challenge
of their elder brother, for that to daughters never were any differences
allowed, and that for three causes: First, because their Coats are never, or
very seldom advanced in the Field, forasmuch as to that sex war is reputed
odious. Secondly, for that the Coat Armor is no longer borne by them than
during their life, for the same extends not to their Issue. Lastly, because
so long as Issue continues of any of the Brethrens Lines, they are debarred
from the inheritance. Yet in some cases they shall bear the Coat Armor to them
and their heirs, as in example. If all the issue of the Brethren happen to
become extinct, then the Daughters shall Inherit the Land of their Ancestor. In
which case, they may therewithal assume his Coat Armor, and bear the same by
themselves and their heirs for ever. But betwixt those Sisters be allowed no
differences or badges of Pedegrees: the reason whereof is, for that sithence by
them the Name of the House cannot be preserved; therefore they are admitted to
the Inheritance equally, and are adjudged but one Heir to all intents and
purposes, in Laws as well Martial as Civil, without any eminent prerogative
either of Honor or Possesion, betwixt Elder and Younger.

SECT. I. CHAP. VII.
SO much of the Accidents of Arms. viz. Tincture and Differences, comprehended
in the first part of our premised distribution.

Now of the second member thereof, viz. Parts of Arms.

The parts of Arms are the Escocheon. Ornaments without the Escocheon.


An Escocheon is the form or representation of a Shield of what kind soever,
and is so called of the Latin word Scutum, which has the same signification:
whence also an Esquire or Page takes his name, of Scutiger, signifying
primarily a Target bearer. And the Target is not unaptly deduced from the
Latin word tergus, a beasts hide, whereof at first Shields were made,
whereupon Pliny says, Tergus ad scuta galeasque impenetrabile, An impenetrable
hide fit to make a Shield. And the Poet Statius, -- caesis clypeos vestire
juvencis:
With bullocks hides they clad their Shields.


Whence Virgil calls Ajax his Buckler, Septemplex, for the sevenfold doublings
of leather: Camden, Brittan.
as elsewhere he describes a Target-duo taurea terga: made of two Ox hides.
But the clearest star of our Profession, Mr. Clarenceaux takes it from the
British word Tarian, and that from the French Thireos, which Pausanius says,
is the Buckler in use amongst the old Gauls. If any here should ask me, why
then Escocheons should be used in Heraldry, since other men are invested with
Ensigns of honor, besides Martial men; I answer them, that as to Military
men that token is proper for reward of that kind of service; so if others by
their Virtues, Arts, or Actions, Escocheon, an Hieroglyphike of defense.
advance either the honor or the welfare of their Country, their service is
as behoovefull as the others, and themselves as Defenders or Preservers of
their Countries peace and happiness (as I have formerly showed) deserve
likewise the reward of the Escocheon, being the Hieroglyphick or Emblem of
defense and preserving. In which respect that good Prophet Eliah was called The
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. And by the Civil Law (Imp. in L. Advoc. C. de
Advoc.) an Advocate is said to be Miles, a martial man, and to have the same
prerogatives, in that they do civium vitam and patrimonium defendere, defend
the life and livelihood of the Subjects. Advocate termed Miles.
Touching the diverse forms of Shields, I will not here speak; every Country
almost having their diverse makings: amongst which, the smallest were in use
amongst our old Britans, as being most manageable; and the greatest amongst the
Romans and Grecians, as may appear by Alexander, who being to pass a river,
used his Shield for his Boat, and his Spear for his Ruther to guide himself
over. And it was ever held more dishonorable for a man to lose his Buckler,
than his sword in field, because it is more praiseworthy to defend a friend,
than to hurt a foe, as a Noble General once said: Mallem unum Civem, etc. I
had rather save one good Subject, than kill an hundred enemies.

The Accidents in this Escocheon are Points. Abatements.


Points are certain places in an Escocheon diversely named according to their
several Positions.

Whereof some are Middle. Remote.


The Middle Points are those that have their location in, or near to, the
Center of the Escocheon.

Such are these; viz. the Honor Fesse Nombrill
Points.

The Fesse Point is the exact Center of the Escocheon. Fesse, Honor, and
Nombrill Points.
The Honor Point is the next above the same in a direct line. The Nombril is
next underneath the Fesse Point, answering in a like distance from the Fesse
Point, as Gerard Leigh has set them down.

Remote Points are those that have their situation naturally in places further
distant from the center of the Escochon. Remote Points.


Of these some are Superior. Inferior.


The Superior Remote Points are those that have their being in the upper part
of the Escocheon.

Of these there are Middle, Extremes.


The Superior Middle Point does occupy the precise Midst of the chief,
between the two extremes. The two Superior extreme Points do possess the
corners of the Chief part of the Escocheon.

And are termed Dexter, Sinister.


The Superior Dexter Point has his beginning near unto the right corner of the
Escocheon in the chief thereof. The Superior Sinister point is placed near
the Left Angle of the chief, in opposition to the Dexter chief; whereunto, as
also to the Middle chief Point, it answers in a direct line.

The inferior Points do occupy the Base of the Escocheon, and thereof have
their denomination, and are called Inferior, because they are seated in the
lower parts thereof.

Of these also there are both Middle, Remote.


Note, That each of these do answer in opposition unto the several Superior
chief Points above mentioned, in a direct line, insomuch as by them the
location of these might be easily conceived without any further description of
them, quia posito uno contrariorum, ponitur and alter. Nevertheless, because
those things that are delivered dividedly, are best conceived and understood, I
will particularize these as I have done the former, beginning with the Middle
Point.

The Middle Base Point does occupy the exact Midst of the Base of the
Escocheon, and answers perpendicularly to the Middle Superior and Inferior
Points. And in like sort do both the Inferior Base Extremes answer in example
of blazon or coat of arms an equi-distant proportion to the Extremes of the
Superior Points placed in the Corner of the Escocheon. That Extreme Base Point,
on the right hand is named the Dexter Base Point, and that on the left hand is
the Sinister Base. And for the better explanation of that which has been here
delivered touching the Points of an Escocheon; I have here (because examples
add light) expressed the same by manifest demonstrations, placing several
letters upon every of the said Points, according to the description before
mentioned. Pre-eminence in nomination and location.
As there is pre-eminence in the priority of nomination of things, so is there
also in their local distribution: wherefore you must have respect unto the
points of an Escocheon, for therein also consists a dignity, in as much as
one point or place of the Escocheon, is more worthy than another, whereunto you
must have regard in blazoning, Quia a dignioribus semper est incipiendum. What
those points of an Escocheon are, appears in the last precedent Escocheon;
and here made more manifest; as in example.

A Signifies Dexter Chief Point. B Signifies Precise Middle Chief Point. C
Signifies Sinister Chief Point. D Signifies Honor Point. E Signifies Fesse
Point. F Signifies Nombrill Point. G Signifies Dexter Base Point. H
Signifies Exact Middle Base Point. I Signifies Sinister Base Point.


Note the necessity of the knowledge of these points.
The knowledge of these Points is very requisite in respect, that when diverse of
these Points are occupied with sundry things of different kinds (as oftentimes
it falls out in some Escocheons) you may be able thereby to assign unto each
Point his apt and peculiar name, according to the dignity of his place. For no
man can perfectly Blazon any such Coat, unless he does rightly understand the
particular Points of the Escocheon.

SECT. I. CHAP. VIII.
WE come now from points, the first part in our partition of Accidents of an
Escocheon, to the second part, which is Abatements. Abatements.
An Abatement is an accidental mark annexed to Coat Armor, Abatement what.
denoting some ungentleman-like, dishonorable, or disloyal demeanor,
quality, or stain in the Bearer, whereby the dignity of the Coat Armor is
greatly abased.

Abatements do consist in Diminution. Reversing.


Diminution is a blemishing or defacing of some particular point or points, of
the Escocheon, Diminution what.
by reason of the imposition of some stainand color thereupon. Note that all
these marks of diminution, in the Escocheons next following, must be evermore
of some one of the stainand colors, viz. Tawny, or Murrey, and must in no wise
be of Metal, Note the Tinctures of Diminutions.
neither must they be Charged in any case, for so should they be additions of
worship.

These are placed on The Middle. Some other part of the Escocheon.


Such as are placed in the Middle are expressed in these next two Escocheons
following, whereof the first is a Delfe, as in this example.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Delfe, Ten. A Delfe
for revocation of challenge.
To him that revoketh his own Challenge (as we call it) eating his word, (says
Leigh) is this abatement given in token thereof. Note.
Note, that whenever you shall find two or more of them in one Escocheon, you
shall not reckon of them as signs of Abatement, but of Honor; and in like
manner, if either they be of Metal, or Charged upon; and so is it also in some
other Abatements, which either by their number or colors, do change their
quality and become Charges of perfect bearing.

example of blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, an Escocheon reversed,
Sanguine. Escocheon reversed for deflouring either maid or widow
This is that other abatement that occupies the Middle point of the Escocheon,
and is given unto him that discourteously entreats either Maid or Widow
against their will; or to such an one as flies from his Sovereigns Banner: he
shall bear his Arms after this sort until such time as he have done some
valiant exploit, worthy to be noted by the Heralds; upon whose true report, it
may please the Sovereign to restore him to his former Bearing; which admission
must be done in no less private Assembly than in the Mustering of a Camp.

Such Diminutions as are placed upon some other part of the Escocheon,

Do occupy One point alone. More than one.


That which occupies one alone, is called a Dexter point parted, an example
whereof you may see in this next Escocheon.

Point dexter parted for too much boasting.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a point Dexter parted, Ten: this
Diminution is due unto him that overmuch boasts himself of his Martial
acts. If a man do perform any praiseworthy Action, the self deed will
sufficiently commend him though he hold his peace; and therefore Seneca lib. 2.
de Beneficijs, does reprehend this kind of vain boasting; Res loquatur (says
he) nobis tacentibus, Let our deeds speak, let our tongues be silent: or if we
will needs have verbal praise, let us seek it by the direction of that wise
King, Laudet te alius, and non os tuum, aliena labia non lingua tua. Let
another man be thy Trumpeter, and not thine own mouth. For indeed, that mark
wherewith Judicio Virgil brandeth Drances, does seldom deceive, Lingua melior,
sed frigida bello Dextera, Whose tongue is quickest to speak, his arm in fight
is weak. And albeit a man be truly valiant in deeds of Arms, yet Laus in ore
proprio sordescit, It is ungentlemanlike to boast of it, Plutarch writes of
young Marius, that his talk and gesture was so stout, that he got the name of
Martis filius, the son of Mars; but when it came to the proof, he was so
far from what he seemed, that he gained a new name of Veneris filius, the
son of Venus.

Such Diminutions as do occupy more then one point of the Escocheon,

Do comprehend, Four points. Less then four.


That diminution of the former sort, is this which you see in this Escocheon,
and is due to him that is slothful in the wars.

Point in point for sloth in war.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Point in Point, Sanguine, Herein you
may see in part how necessary it is to know the Points of the Escocheon before
expressed. Inasmuch as this one Abatement compriseth these four Points, viz.
the Honor, together with the dexter and sinister, and the exact base points.
For it is very manifest that the one of these Arch-lines has his being from
the dexter, and the other from the sinister base points, and do meet in an
acute Angle in the Honor point, answering perpendicularly to the precise base
point. In former ages this vice was chastised by another kind of punishment,
says Chassaneus, Quando Miles se male gesserit in bello, potest Iudex scutum
suum perforari facere, Piercing of the Shield a punishment for Cowardice.
ut hoc exemplo alij Milites in praelio sint fortiores: If a Soldier demean
himself not well in fight, the Judge Martial may cause his Escocheon to be
pierced, to teach others by this chastisement, to be more valorous But
contrariwise it is honorable for a man of Arms, to have blows appear in his
Bukler, given by his foes; as is memorable in our ancient Countryman Scaeva
(the principal man who taught Julius Caesar the way to conquer Britain) whose
valor Caesar has eternized with this acknowledgement, that it was he alone
who saved the fortification against Pompey at Dyrrachium, where Caesar perused
his Buckler, and found 230. holes pierced in it. And therefore because the
dastard dares not come so near the Enemy, to bear his strokes on his shield,
he must be content to take this piercing of some of his own side in Arms.

Those Diminutions that do comprehend fewer than four,

Are either, of Three, Two.


Such are said to comprehend three points, whose lines do bound so many within
their limits, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, Point Champain, Ten. Point Champain
for killing of a Prisoner.
This is the first of those Diminutions, that do comprehend three points, and
is formed of one Arch-line, which takes his beginning from the Dexter base
(and including the middlemost) and ends in the Sinister base point. This is
due unto him that kills his Prisoner, (humbly submitting himself) with his
own hands, though in extreme need it is allowed by the Law of Arms, rather to
kill, then to hazard himself to be slain; Froysard.
Always (says Sir John Froysard) by right Arms of a man ought to grieve his
enemy, and good company of Arms is mercy to Knights and Soldiers.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a plain point Sanguine. Point plain or
lying.
This Abatement comprehends the same points that the last precedent does, but
differs from the same herein, that the former is framed of an Arch-line, and
this of a Right-line. This Abatement is due to him that tells lies, or other
false tales, to his Sovereign. For if light ears incline to light lips, harm
ensues; and war is then easily begun but hardly allaid again, when misreport
and light credence meet together.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Goare Sinister, Ten. A goare
for Cowardice.
This Abatement consists of two Arch-lines drawn from the Sinister chief,
and bottom of the Escocheon, and meeting in a sharp Angle in the Fesse Point.
This is the third and last of the Abatements, that occupies three points of
the Escocheon, and is due to him that is a coward to his enemy. For we must
conceive that Gores and likewise Gussets are things in use among women,
especially Sempsters, and therefore are fit notes of cowards and womanish
dipositions. But as for the Dexter Goare, we must otherwise esteem of it; for
(says Leigh) though it be of Stain and color, yet is it exempted out of the
number of abatements, Leigh.
and it is a good Coat for a Gentlewoman; many of which sex are so far from the
stain of Cowardice, as they will not turn their backs to men of greatest
valor; but like the valiant Penthesilea, Audetque viris concurrere virgo, The
damsel fair dares meet the stoutest man; says Virg. 1. Aeneid. But if there
be both Dexter and Sinister (says he) it is too bad to be borne, for although
it be charged, yet does it dishonor the thing that is thereupon.

That Abatement that comprehends only two points of the Escocheon is called
a Gusset, Gusset.
and is formed of a Traverse line drawn either from the Dexter or Sinister
chief point of the Escocheon tending to the Honor point, and descending from
thence perpendicularly to the extreme base parts of the Escocheon; as in this
next example appears, wherein are expressed both the Dexter and Sinister
Gores.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, 2. Gussets, Sanguine. In Abating
(says Leigh) there is but one Gusset: and he that is too much devoted to the
smock, shall wear the Gusset on the right side; but he that commits
Idolatry to Bacchus, the Gusset on the left side, shall be his reward. If he be
faulty in both, then he shall bear both, as in the Escocheon present. Such a
Coat as this I find borne by the name of Coningham, saving that the field is
Sable, and the Gussets Argent, and therefore not to be taken to be of this
kind, according to the rule touching the Delfe.

Hitherto of such Abatements as do abase the estimation of the Coat^arm u^
whereunto they are annexed, in some parts or points of them only, being the
first sort of Abatements, whereof we prmised to speak.

Reversed Coats for Treason. Reversing what.
Now follows the last, and worst of all the rest, which is a Coat Armor
rev^rsed. Reversing is a preposterous manner of location of a Coat Armor, by
turning of the whole Escocheon upside down, contrary to the usual form of
bearing, after this manner.

blazon or coat of arms He bears light blew, 4. Mollets, yellow. 2. in the
Fesse, and as many in the Chief. This form of bearing is peculiar to a
Traitor, such an one (says Leigh) was he that owed these Arms, whose name was
Sir Armery of Pavy, a Lombard born, an unworthy Captain of Calice, and Traitor
to King Edward the third, in selling the same to Sir G ffrey Charney for 20000.
Crowns. To this kind of bearing is this form of B^^zon (beginning at the Base
first) peculiar, and to no other, in respect that as this Escocheon stands,
the Base Point is the high^st part thereof. By this inglorious subversion of
the Escocheon, the dignity thereof is not blemished only in some points, as the
former, but is essentially annihilated in the whole. In all other Crimes,
though Capital, the punishment transcendeth not the person of the Offender,
Qu^a nullum de^ic^um patris innocenti filio poena est (says Chassaneus) the
innocent son shall not bear the punishment of the fathers offense. Crimen
Laesae Majestatis.
But in this which we call Crimen Laesae Majestatis, or high treason (being an
offense so horrible and detestable before God and Man) it is far otherwise, for
herein as well the children of the Offenders, as the Traitors themselves, shall
participate of the heavy vengeance due to so great an impiety, although not in
that deep measure that the father does; and that by the imitation of the divine
Justice; that so men might be deterred, not only from the actual committing,
See Number. 16 and Number. 27.1, 2, 3.
but also from the confederation and concealment of an offense so highly
displeasing God, and abhorring Nature. For when a fact is committed or intended
against the person of him that swayeth the Sovereign State (wherein he
represents the image of the divine government) it is not so much offensive
against the person of the Prince, as it is against the Majesty of the Eternal
God, whose Image he bears. And the welfare of the Subjects depending on the
safety of the Sovereign, the danger intended to the one, has in it a guilt of
endamaging the lives of millions.

Punishment of Treason by the Law of Arms.
As touching persons convicted of High Treason in the Justice of the Law of
Arms, for the further coertion of so heinous a fact as Treason is, and for a
further punishment both of the Traitor and of his whole Progeny; it is to be
observed, that if a Gentleman of Coat Armor has issue diverse Sons, and
commits Treason, he has forfeited his Coat Armor for ever, neither may his
issue bear the same, Quia eorum memoria d^strui debet. For that the memory of
them may utterly be exstinguished. For sithence it is held they may be lawfully
killed, seeing they are said to be enemies to the King and People, much more is
it lawful to prohibit to their Heirs, together with the inheritance, their
Arms also, and style of Gentry: in so much as some are of opinion, that the
son loses Jura Sepulchrorum, the rights and ceremonies of Burial accustomed
to G^ntry. And of Mar^us M^nlius (who was condemned of Treason against the
Roman State) we find a Law, that none should ever bear that name. A notable
example whereof we saw of late on the instrument or that devilish Parricide on
the late puissant King of France, for the obliterating of the name and memory
of such a villain out of that Kingdom. Statut. Hyler. Fol. 175.
And in Ireland such Traitors as are convicted by the Acts and Ordinances of
the high Court of Parliament, are by force thereof adjudged to suffer damage
in their name, state, pre-eminence, dignities and honor to them due in
fore-passed times. As in all their Offices, Lor ships, Castles M nnors, and in
all their Hereditaments whatsoever: Moreover that they shall sustain corruption
of their blood and family, and both himself and his posterity are (by force of
such conviction and Judgment) disabled to demand, receive or recover of any man
by descent from any of their Ancestors, either lineall or collateral; neither
are the Children of persons so convicted, permitted to make their Pedigree, or
to derive themselves from such Parents.

Finally, if such an one were invested with any honorable dignity, the Laws
adjudg not only his Coat Armor to be razed, and his Shield reversed, but also
his Spear trunked, his spurs hewn from his heels, his horse docked, his sword
to be broken upon his helmet, his Crest divided, his Statues pulled down, his
blood corrupted, and his body to death, (nisi speciali Regis rescripto
intervenerit gratia, without the Kings special pardon) his Family at an end,
his possessions taken away (and for a greater terror) given to some other
Family, whose profitable service to the King and State may better deserve it.
Heinousness of Treason.
So loathsome is this offense to Nobility, that she cannot suffer the Marks of
him that has offended in so high a degree, to possess any place with her
Ensigns; but that the same shall be without all reverence defaced, and spurned
into some base place: so that by such his degradation, he receives far greater
shame and ignominy, than ever he received honor by his advancement; according
to the old Proverb, Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hospes*
The shame is less never to attain,
Than having won to lose again.


The end of the first Section.
Tum Dignum operae pretium venit, cum inter se congruunt Praecepta and
Experimenta.
THE second Section makes mention of the several Kinds of Escocheons: Also,
what Field and Charge are: The several kinds of Charges, and their Common
Accidents: Of Lines, with their diverse Forms and Properties: The Making, and
diverse manner of Bearing of Ordinaries; and their Subdivisions: Together with
diverse Notes, Rules, and Observations to them particularly belonging.

The Table of the Second Section.
Kinds, which are of Some one Tincture, as when a Coat Armor consists of
any one of the Metals, Colors, or Furs only. More Tinctures than one,
wherein must be considered the Field, which has Tincture Predominating: of
which form of bearing, there be manifold examples in and throughout the second,
third, and fourth Sections. Not Predominating: whereof there are diverse
examples in the fifth Section.
Charge, which is Proper, which are called Ordinaries. Wherein note their
Making, which consists of lines: wherein observe their Accidents which are
their Rightnesse, as when they are evenly carried throughout the Field.
Crookedness, whereof some are Bunched form, as in lines Engrailed, Invecked,
Waved, etc. cornered, Rect-Anguled, as in Coats Embattelled, Crenelle, etc.
Acute-anguled, as in Indenting and Dancette.


Kinds, Single, which of it self makes a Chief. Manifold, viz. Twofold,
whereof are formed these Ordinaries following, viz. a Pale, Bend, Fesse, Gyron,
Canton, Quarter-Pile, etc. More then twofold, which do constitute a Cross,
Saltire, Inescocheon, and Orle.


Manner of bearing which is Simple, comprehending One sort, whereof some are
Single, as when a Cross, Bend, Pale, Pile, Fesse, or other Ordinary is borne
alone, without any other Apposition or Imposition. Manifold, as when more of
the same kind are borne One upon another, as a Cross upon a Cross, a Saltire
upon a Saltire, etc. One besides another, as a Pallet Bend Pale
besides a Pallet 2 Cotizes 2 Endorses.


Diverse sorts borne in like manner, One upon another, Bars Cheuron Escocheon
upon a Cheuron. Pile. Saltire.
One besides another, Saltire Escocheon Cheuron
besides a Chief. Cross. Chief.


Compound, as having in them some kind of mixture, by reason of apposition, or
imposition of Common Charges unto or upon these Ordinaries.

Common, whereof see the Table of the third Section, at this mark, 69.



SECTION II. CHAP. I.
HAving formerly handled in the first Section the Common Accidents of an
Escocheon, viz. Points and Abatements: Several kinds of Escocheons.
Now will I proceed to show their several kinds.

Escocheons are either of One Tincture. More than one.


Those Escocheons are said to be of one Tincture that have only some one
Metal, Color, or Furre, appearing in the Shield of any Nobl^man, Escocheons
of one Tincture.
or Gentleman. Concerning this form of bearing, it has been holden of some
Writers a matter doubtful, whether one Metal, Color or Furre borne alone in
a Shield be ancient or honorable: Sir John Fern affirms, such Bearing to be
false Arms, and not worth the receiving, except in some special cases; being
perhaps thereunto induced, because it was reckoned among the Romans a thing
reproachful to bear a naked Shield without any Portraicture, in regard it was
an usual thing with men of valor and courage to have their Shields painted.

example of blazon or coat of arms White Shields were accustomed to be bestowed
upon such as were Novices in Martial affairs, White Shields.
or (as we commonly call them) Freshwater Soldiers, to the end they might in
future time merit to have them garnished with the titles and testimonies of
their valorous deserts, until which time such Shields were reckoned
inglorious: Virgil*
as Virgil notes in his Aeneidos lib. 11.

Ense levis nudo, parmaque inglorius alba:
Quick he was with naked Sword,
But white Shield did no praise afford.
Contrariwise, Leigh reckons such unportraicted bearing to be good, and
withal very ancient, grounding his assertion (if I be not deceived) upon the 1
Kings 10.16. where it is said, that King Solomon made 200 Targets of beaten
gold, and that 600 Sheckles of gold went to a Target; as also that he made 300.
Shields of beaten gold, and that three pound of gold went to one Shield.

Also we read, that Simon, the High Priest of the Jews, sent Numenius with a
Shield of great value to the Roman state, to confirm the league of friendship
between them, as appears in 1 Macchab. 14.24. in these words; After this
Simon sent Numenius to Rome, with a great Shield of gold of a thousand pound
weight, to confirm the friendship with them: And in the letter of Lucius the
Consul mention is again made of the thousand pound weight of this golden
Shield, 1 Macchab. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Golden Shields.
example of blazon or coat of arms That these Shields were void of
Portraictures, it may be probably conjectured, in that there is no mention of
any; for otherwise, such might have been the curiousness and excellency of
their workmanship, as that it might have been prised above the worth of the
gold it self: an example whereof, Ovid in M tamor. lib. 2. gives, where
describing the glorious beauty of the Palace of the Sun, he says, Argentei
bifores radiabant lumine valvae,
Materiam superabat opus; nam Mulciber ille, etc.
The two leaved silver gates bright rays did cast,
Rich stuff, but Vulcans Art therein surpast.


Alex. Severus Impe.
Furthermore we read that Alex. Severus the Emperor had certain golden Shields,
whose Bearers were named Chrysoaspides, the golden Shield Bearers. And as
touching the Bearers of Shields made of clean Silver, we read that Alex. Alex.
Macedo.
Macedo had such, whose Bearers were named Argiroaspides, Silver-Shield
Bearers, which manner of bearing (says Alex. ab Alex.) they borrowed of the
Samnites. Neither is there any mention that these were garnished with any
Emb^ssements, Graving, or Portraictures.

Shields of Colors.
Now to prove, that not only Metals, but Colors also have been anciently borne
alone in Shields: I will note unto you the words of the Prophet N hum, Chap. 2.
where it is said Clypeus potentum ejus rubricatus, bellatores coccinati, etc.
The Shield of the mighty ones were red, etc. alluding to their bloody fights.

We also find that the Grecians used Russet Shields; the people of Lucania in
Italy, situated between Calabria and Apulia, had their Shields wrought of
Osiers, or twigges, and covered over with leather. It was the manner of the
Scythians, Medes and Persians, to have their Shields of Red color, to the end
that the effusion of their blood should not easily be discovered (when they
received any wound) either to the discouragement of themselves, or animating of
their enemies. Moreover, these Nations used Scarlet and Red colors i^ their
Military garments, and Shields, to the end they might thereby strike the
greater terror and astonishment into the hearts of their enemies.

Eumenius de la Brect.
example of blazon or coat of arms Of this sort of Bearing, I find in a note
worthy of credit, amongst the Coat-Armours of many Noble Personages, Only
Furs. borne in Shields.
and valorous gentlemen, that did attend the person of King Edward the first
(in his Expedition that he made into the parts of Scotland to the siege of
Kalavero^k) that one Eumenius de la Brect, did bear in his Shield only, Gules.
Finally, that Furs also have been alone in Shields (without any Charge) as
well as Metals and colors (besides the Coat Armor of the Duke of Britain) I
could produce many examples even to this day; were not the use hereof so
vulgar, as that it is altogether impertinent to give instance therein.

blazon or coat of arms You have received a Rule before page 23. and 25. how
you ought to Blazon a Furre of this sort. This kind of bearing of a Furre
without any other Charge in the Field, is both ancient and good, says Leigh.
And this kind of Furre is much in use with persons Nobly descended, and
gentlemen of good reputation have long borne the same, as Ferrars of Chartley,
Beauchamp, Somerset, Marmion, Staunton, and others.

Yet will I note unto you three Coat-Armours consisting of Furs, for their
beauty and rarity, and those of no vulgar bearing, as you may see in these next
Escocheons following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Varey, a Chief, Or, by the name of
Tichborne, of Tichborne in the County of Southampton, at this time dignified
with the title of Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears verrey, Ermyne and Gules, by the name of
Gresly of Drakelow in the County of Darby. Sometimes you may Observe in this
kind of bearing, the Metal part charged with some other thing than Ermine,
viz. with Drops or such like. Of this Family is the honorable Sir Thomas
Gresly of Drakelow Baronet now living, 1658.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a Fesse between two Cheverons Vaire,
which is the Coat of the ancient Family of Good-yere of Hadley in the County of
Middlesex. Hythrope in Com. Oxford, and P^ulsworth in Warwickshire.

SECT. II. CHAP. II.
FRom Shields or Escocheons consisting of one Tincture only, Shields of many
Tinctures.
we come to such as have more Tinctures than one. Such Escocheon is that,
wherein diverse colors are represented to our sight.

Of this some have Tincture Predominating, Not Predominating.


Tincture is said to be predominate, when some one metal, color, or fur,
Tincture predominate
is spread or (at least) understood to be spread all over the Superficies or
Surface of the Escocheon, which we usually call the Field thereof. In such
Escocheons as have in them more Tinctures than one (as is usual with the
greatest number of them.

We must observe the Field, Charge.


Field what.
The Field is the whole Surface (if I may so call it) of the Shield overspread
with some Metal, Color or Furre, and comprehends in it the charge, if it
has any. Look how many Metals, Colors and Furs there are before named, so
many several Fields of Arms there be. In Blazoning of any Arms, you must
(according to the Rule given, page 14.) first express the Metal, Color or
Furre of the Field, saying, He bears, Or, Argent, Gules, etc. or thus, The
Field is Or, Argent, Gules, etc. but you must not name this word Field, when
you use these words, He bears; saying, He bears a Field, Or, Argent, Gules,
etc. but you shall only name the Metal, Color, or Furre; thus, The Field is,
Or, Argent, Gules, etc. or, He bears, Or, Argent, Gules, etc. and then
proceed to the Blazon of the Charge, if there be any. The first Metal, Color
or Fur, that you begin to Blazon withal, is always understood among our
English Blazoners to be the Field. Rule 2.
Also in Blazoning of Arms composed of Field and Charge, if there be several
charges, whereof the one lies nearer to the Field than the other, after you
have nominated the Metal, Color or Furre of the Field then must you proceed
to the immediate charge that lies next to the Field, and after to that which
is more remote.

Tinctures of Field what.
Whereas I have formerly made mention of the Tinctures or Colors, when I speak
of the Tinctures or colors of Fields, I understand thereby, those special
colors before named, which as by a certain peculiar right belongs to the
Art-armoriall, utterly excluding all those that are named general or proper
colors, as altogether unfit for Fields of Coat-Armours.

SECT. II. CHAP. III.
THese Fields are the parts of Arms, containing: Charges, which are the parts
contained, are next to be considered.

A Charge, is that thing whatsoever that does occupy the Field, and is in the
same as Contentum in Continente, whether it be Sensitive or Vegetable, Natural
of Artificial, and is placed, either throughout all the Superficies of the
Escocheon, or else in some special part of the same.

The common accidents of Charges are Adumbration, or Transparency.
Transmutation, or Counter-Changing.


Adumbration or Transparency, is a clear exemption of the substance of the
Charge, or thing borne, in such sort, as that there remains nothing thereof
to be discerned, but the naked and bare proportion of the outward lineaments
thereof, or the outward Tract, Purfle, or shadow of a thing; and such kind of
bearing is by better Heralds than Gramarians, termed transparent, quasi
transparens, because the Field being (as it were) on the further side of the
Charge, or underneath the same, yet the Tincture and Color thereof shows
clean thorough the Charge, and that no less clearly than as if it were
thorough a glass.

Rule.
In Blazoning of Coat Armor of this kind, you shall say that the owner thereof
bears this beast, bird, tree, etc. umbrated; for that by reason of the
exemption of the substance thereof, which was intended to be the Charge, it
affords no other representation than the simple shadow thereof, which in
Latin is called umbra, and thereof is it termed umbrated. And the Portracting
out of any thing umbrated, is nothing else but a slight and single draught or
Purfle, traced out with a Pensill, Protracting of things umbriated.
expressing to the view a vacant form of a thing deprived of all substance,
which must be done with some unperfect or obscure color, as Black or Tawny,
unless the Field be of the same Color.

Such bearing has undergone the sharp censure of those that judged it to have
been occasioned by reason of some ungentlemanlike or unthrifty quality, in
regard that the same represents a shadow void of substance. Opinions of
bearing umbrated.
Others are of opinion that their owners were such, whose Progenitors in
forepassed times have borne the same essentially and completely according to
the true use of bearing; but forasmuch as their patrimony and possessions were
much impaired, or utterly wasted; their Nephews and Kinsmen seeing themselves
deprived of their Inheritance, and yet living in hope, that in future time the
same may (by some unexpected accident) revert unto themselves or to their
posterities (laying aside all ordinary differences) chose rather to bear their
Arms umbrated, that whenever either that inheritance or any other high
fortunes should light on their family, they might again resume the wonted
substance to such their umbrated form, and so reduce their Arms to their
ancient bearing. And it is deemed a far better course (upon such occasion) to
bear the Arms of their Proginitors, umbrated, than utterly to reject the same
whereby it might (within a few descents) be doubted much, if not denied, that
they were descended from such a Family.

Whatsoever is borne with Arms umbrated, Rule.
must not be charged in any case: In Blazoning you must never nominate the
color of such tract of the thing that is umbrated, Rule.
because they do only bear a show of that they are not, that is to say, of a
Charge; and therefore is the color of such Adrumbration esteemed unworthy to
be named in Blazon. As touching the distribution of Charges, it is to be
observed, that

All Charges of Arms are either Proper, or distribution of Charges.
Common.


Those Charges are said to be Proper, which by a certain property do peculiarly
belong to this Art, and are of ordinary use therein, Proper Charges.
in regard whereof, they are called Ordinaries: and they have also the title of
Honorable Ordinaries, in that the Coat Armor is much honored thereby,
Ordinaries, and why so called.
forasmuch as they are oftentimes given by Emperors, Kings and Princes, as
Additions of Honor unto the Coat-armours of persons of desert, for some
special service already past, or upon hope of some future worthy merit.
Moreover (as Leigh shows) they are also called, most worthy partitions, Most
worthy partitions and why so called.
in respect that albeit the Field be charged in diverse parts thereof, whether
with things of one or of diverse kinds, yet is every of them as effectual as if
it were only one by the Sovereignty of these partitions being interposed
between them.

In these we must consider their Making, Manner of bearing.


The making of Ordinaries consists of Lines diversely composed. Their making.
Lines therefore are the matter whereof these Ordinaries are formed, and
according to the diverse Tracts and forms of Lines, they do receive a diverse
shape and variation of Names. For this cause, Lines must be duly considered,
and especially their properties: in speaking whereof, I must crave pardon of
Euclydes Artists, if I trace not in their steps and definitions, but use such
descriptons as shall be fittest for our practice.

The Properties of those Lines are their Rightnesse. Crookedness.


Duae sunt lineae ex quibus figurae omnes componuntur, linea recta, and linea
curva, Zanch. Lib. 3. Cap. 422.

Consisting of Rightnesse, Crookedness.
Rightnesse is a property of a Line whereby it is carried levelly or equally
throughout the Escocheon, without either rising or falling. Crookedness is a
property of a Line merely contrary to Rightnesse, in that it is carried
unevenly throughout the Escocheon, with rising and falling.

Rule.
In Blazoning of Ordinaries formed of straight lines, you must only name the
Ordinary, without making mention of the straightness of the Line whereof the
same is composed: but if the same be made of any of the manifold sorts of
crooked Lines, the form of such crookedness must be especially mentioned; as
by Examples shall be plain hereafter in their proper places.

These Honorable Ordinaries before mentioned (according to Leigh) are in
number nine, viz. Cross, Chief, Pale, Bend, Fesse, Escocheon, Cheuron,
Saltire, Bar,
whose Content is 5. Part of the Escocheon uncharged, and charged the 3. 3.
Part. 3. Part. 5. Part uncharged, and charged the 3. 3. Part. 5. Part. 5. Part
according to Leigh: the 3. according to Chas. 5. Part uncharged, and charged
the 3 part thereof. 5. Part.


Lines crooked.
As touching the properties of a Crooked Line, it is to be observed, that

A Crooked Line is Bunched Cornered.


Bunched.
A Bunched Line is that which is carried with round reflections or bowings up
and down, making diverse hollow Crooks or Furrows, by reason of the sundry
bendings to and fro, as by these examples next following may appear.

Of these some are Invecked, Ingrailed, Waved, Nebulae,
As in example, bunched line bunched line bunched line bunched line


Cornered.
A Corner Line is framed of sundry lines meeting together corner-wise.

Of cornered Lines, some are Rect-anguled: so called of their right corners or
angles, and are formed after this manner, corner line Acute-anguled: so named
because their corners or angles are acute, or sharp; and these we call
Indented, after this manner, corner line Daunsette, which are formed after this
sort, corner line


Note, That these two last mentioned sorts of Lines, viz. Note.
Indented and Daunsette, are both one, secundum quale, but not secundum
quantum: for their form is all one, but in quantity they differ much, in that
the one is much wider and deeper than the other. Of all these several sorts of
Lines, examples shall be given hereafter, as occasion shall arise.

SECT. II. CHAP. IV.
HAving spoken of the properties of Lines, so much as serves for our intended
purpose; let us next take a view of the several kinds of those Lines, as far
forth as they have use in Heraldry. Several kinds of lines.


For they are used Single, Manifold.


Of both which kinds and forms are all the Honorable Ordinaries composed,
Single lines.
as we shall show hereafter. And first for the Single Lines and their use, it
is to be understood, that one single line does make that sort of Ordinary which
we name a Chief. A Chief.
A Chief is an Ordinary determined by some one of the several forms of Lines
aforesaid, added to the Chief part of the Escocheon, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Chief, Argent, by the name of
Woorkesh. When I say, that a Chief is determined by one line, I mean not, that
one single Line is of it self a complete Chief, but that the bounds and
proportion of such an Ordinary is designed out and limited by such a single
Line: for otherwise, to speak more properly, a Chief contains in depth the
third part of the Field; and the same may be diminished, Signification.
but in no case divided into halves. The Chief betokens a Senator or
honorable Personage borrowed from the Greeks, and is a word signifying a Head,
in which sense we call Capitaneus (so named of Caput the Head) a Chiefetaine:
though he spoke wittily, who derived the name of a Captain, a capiendo and
tenendo, of taking and then holding: For, Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere,
parta tueri:
No smaller praise is in it,
To hold a Fort, than win it.


And as the head is the chief part in a man, so the chief in the Escocheon
should be a reward of such only, whose high merits have procured them chief
place, esteem, or love amongst men. Rule.
This Ordinary in our example you see is formed of a straight Line: you must
therefore in the Blazon thereof, only name the kind of Ordinary (as before we
admonished) making no mention at all of the straightness of the line: but if
the same, or any other Ordinary be framed of any other form than straight,
then must you expressly mention the form of the line whereof such Ordinary is
composed, be it Bend, Cheuron, Fesse, Saltire, etc. showing the same to be
either Invecked, Ingrailed, Wavay, Indented, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, a Chief, Gules, by the Name of Lumley,
and is the bearing of that worthy Gentleman Sir Martin Lumley, Baronet, Son of
Sir Martin Lumley Knight and Baronet, son of Sir Martin Lumley Knight, Lord
Mayor of London, 1623.

Chief Crenelle.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a Chief Crenelle, Argent; by the name
of Ryncester. This term is derived of the French word Crene, which signifies
the dent or notch in the horn of a bow, or such other thing. There is a kind
of bearing much like unto this in show, but yet far different from it in
kind: therefore good deliberation must be used, lest being carried away with a
deceivable appearance, we do utterly mistake the truth of things in Blazoning.

Their forms.
Chiefes are made of all those several forms of lines before mentioned, as
well as other Charges, as by the examples of Bordures before handled may in
part appear, and shall be more fully showed hereafter in other kinds.

Chief charged.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Ten, a Chief, Or, charged with a
Shapourneth, Ermyne. This term Shapournet (if I mistake not) is derived from
the French word Chaperon, which signifies a Hood, whereof this is a
Diminutive, and bears a resemblance. Leigh seems to take this form of
bearing to be a kind of partition, and for that cause does extend the dividing
line (as in this Escocheon) to the extremities of the Chief; for which cause I
have inserted the same (although untimely) in this place, which otherwise I
would have reserved to some other. For mine own part, I take the same to be
rather a Charge to the Chief, than a portion thereof, distinguished from the
same only by a conceited line of partition, never heretofore heard of: which
moved me to shorten the head of the rising line, whereby the middle part has
the more resemblance of a Chaperon or Hood, in respect that it is made large
below, and so ascending with a comely narrowness to the top of the Chief: and
if the Chief be the Head, as before we said, what place can be fitter for the
Hood to be on, than the Head?

A Chief (says Sir John Fern) may be honored of another, as an Addition to
the former, as in Examples:

Chief surmounted of another.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a Chief, Argent, surmounted of
another, Or. This is accounted good Armory, and signifies a double reward
given by the Sovereign. So well may a Gentleman deserve in giving counsel to
his Sovereign, that he may be twice rewarded for the same, as was the Bearer
hereof a French Counselor, which when it happens, must be placed in this
manner: Those Additions of honor that are given in reward for Counsel or wise
actions are thought to be placed most fitly on the chief part or head of the
Escocheon, Quia a Capite edenda est omnis ratio, Because all reason proceeds
from the brain. That contrariwise a Chief may be also diminished, this next
example may teach us.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, a Chief, Azure, A Fillet.
a Fillet in the nether part thereof, Argent. Some perhaps strictly observing
the form of my undertaken Method, will conceive that this Coat might have been
more fitly placed hereafter among such Ordinaries as are made of a twofold
line. Nevertheless, though it may seem to be of the number of those, yet in
very deed, one line being added to the lower part of the Chief, does constitute
a Fillet, whose Content must be the fourth part of the Chief, and must be
placed properly and naturally in the precise lowest part thereof. For a twofold
respect was the name of Fillet given it; the one in regard of the thing
whereunto it is resembled, by reason of the length and narrowness thereof, So
named for two respects.
and the other because of the place wherein it is bestowed. For as the Fillet
is shaped long and narrow for the more commodious use of women in trussing up
of their hair, as also for the fastening of their Head-tires, and restraining
of their hair from scattering about their brows; so is this very aptly placed
on the Chief, which is the head of the Escocheon, and does confine and
encompass the uttermost borders of the same. This Head-tire being taken from
women, may well fit an uxorious or luxurious person, or such an one as in
matters of importance is overswaied by a woman: Fillet to home fitting.
which does not a little extenuate and impair their dignity or estimation
amongst those of graver sort; for that they are deemed to have their head fixed
upon the shoulders of others, and those of the weaker sex.

SECT. II. CHAP. V.
HItherto has our Pencill drawn out to your view, a single line, Manifold
Lines.
which does create an Ordinary, or some other of the Charges last mentioned: it
rests, that I show what a Manifold line is, and the use thereof according to
the project of our prefixed method. I call that a Manifold line, when as more
than one Line are required to the perfecting of an Ordinary.

Manifold lines are Twofold, More than twofold.


Twofold lines I understand to be there, where is constituted an Ordinary of
two lines. Of which kind of Ordinaries are these only, viz. The Pale, Bend,
Fesse, Bar, Quarter, Canton, and their like, as shall appear by example in
their several places, first of a Pale.

A Pale is an Ordinary consisting of two lines drawn perpendiculary from the
Top to the base of the Escocheon, comprehending the third part of the
Escocheon. The content of the Pale must not be enlarged* ^hether it be charged
or not.

Pale.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a Pale, Or: which Coat was borne very
anciently by Hugh de Grandemesnill Lord of Kinkley in Leicester Shire, and Lord
High Steward of England, in the time of King Henry the first.

This Ordinary is subdivided into Pallet, Endorse.


Pallet.
A Pallet is the moiety or one half of the Pale, and thereof receives his name
of Diminution, as being a Demi or little Pale. And an Endorse is the fourth
part of a Pallet. Leigh.
Example of each ensues.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a Pallet, Argent. The Pallet is never
charged with any thing, either quick or dead, neither may it be parted in any
case into two, as some Armorists do hold: but that it may be parted into four,
Leigh.
Leigh makes no question; for he gives an example of the bearing of the
fourth part thereof, which he terms an Endorse; as in this next Escocheon
appears: But Sir John Fern says, it contains the eighth part of the Pale,
which in effect is all one with the fourth part of the Pallet.

Endorse.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, an Endorse, Gules. This Endorse (says
Leigh) is not used but when a Pale is between two of them. But Sir John Fern
says, he was very confident and bold to set down such Rules of Blazon. Fern.
And that an Endorse may very well be borne in any Coat Armor between Birds,
Fishes, Fowls, Beasts, etc. But then (says he) it shows that the same Coat
has been sometimes two Coats of Arms, Endorse may be borne alone.
and after conjoined within one Escocheon, for some Mystery or secret of Arms.
And for the approbation of such bearing, Instance of such bearing.
he gives an instance of an Escocheon of pretense, or Engislet, (so he
terms it) borne over these four Coats, viz. of Austria, Burgundy, Sieile and
Flanders; which is, Or, an Endorse between a Lion saliant, and an Eagle
displaied. Gules.

Now from the Pale, and the several Subdivisions thereof, let us come to the
bend, and the distinct parts of the same. A bend is an Ordinary consisting also
of twofold Lines drawn overthwart the Escocheon, from the Dexter chief to the
Sinister base point, of the same, so that the exact point of the Dexter and
Sinicter corners thereof, may answer to the precise Midst of those
equidistant Lines, whereof the bend is made, as in example.

Bend.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a bend, Sable. Which Arms were
anciently borne by Peter de Mololacu or Mawley, a noble Baron of this Kingdom;
in the time of King Edward the 3. The bend contains in breadth the first part
of the Field, Content.
as it is uncharged; but if it be charged, then shall it contain the third part
thereof. Of all the Ordinaries there is none divided like this, as by example
shall hereafter appear.

The Bend seems to have his Denomination from the French word Bender,
Denomination.
which signifies to stretch forth, because it is extended betwixt those
opposite points of the Escocheon, viz. the Dexter chief, and the Sinister base.
Yet in ancient Rolls I find the Bend drawn somewhat Archwise, or after the
resemblance of the Bent of a Bow. Notwithstanding, Representation of a scaling
ladder.
according to some Armorists, it does represent a Ladder set aslope on this
manner, to scale the Walls of any Castle or City, as shall be showed
hereafter, and betokens the Bearer to have been one of the first that mounted
upon the enemies walls. This Bend drawn from the right side to the left, is
called a bend dexter; but you shall also find a bend exactly drawn like to this
on the contrary side, having his beginning from the left corner of the chief,
and his termination in the Dexter base point of the Escocheon, Bend Sinister.
Rule.
for which cause it is named a Bend Sinister, as in example hereafter shall
illustrate. In Blazoning of bends, if the same be Dexter, you shall only say,
he bears a bend, not using the word Dexter; but if it be drawn from the
Sinister chief to the Dexter base, then you must in blazon by no means omit the
word Sinister.

Note that the bend, and diverse other Ordinaries following, Voiding what.
are subject to exemption or voiding. Voiding (as erst we showed) is the
exemption of some part of the inward substance of things voidable, by occasion
whereof the Field is transparent through the charge, leaving only the outward
edges, bearing the color and quantity of the charge, as appears in this next
Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, a bend voided, Gules, Bend Voided.
by the name of Ireton. Note that if the void part of the bend, were of a
different metal, color or furre, from the Field, then should you term the
same, a bend bordured, Gules (according to the opinion of some Armorists:) but
I am of opinion that it were better blazoned, a bend of such and such metal,
color or furre, edged. For this difference do I put between them, that when
it is blazoned edged, it must be understood, to be an edge or hemme, running
along the sides only; but if it were termed in blazon bordured, then must it
be conceived that the bend is environed round, as well the ends as the edges.

blazon or coat of arms The late Right Honorable Henry Earl of Sussex, Henry
Earl of Sussex.
Viscount Fitz-water, Lord of Egremont, Burnell and Botatoart, Engrailed.
Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, bears, Pearl, a bend
ingrailed, Diamond. This Ordinary is composed of diverse other of the forms of
Lines, before mentioned, as sundry other of the Ordinaries are, as by these
next, and other subsequent examples in their due places shall appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Bend engrailed, Gules, which is
the Coat Armor of that right ancient and worthy Family of Colepepper of Kent,
now existing in the Persons of one Baron, two Baronets, and several Knights
and Gentlemen of much worth and esteem.

Wavey.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Bend, Wavey, Sable. This
Coat Armor peratineth to Sir Henry Wallop of Farleigh Wallop in the County of
Southampton Knight. This is termed Wavey, or waved, in respect it bears a
Representation of the Swelling Wave or Billow of the Sea, which being tossed by
contrary flawes of wind do rise and fall after this manner: and this also by
some is called unde, of the Latin word unda.

This form of bearing may put us in mind of the manifold (and those
inevitable, yet profitable) afflictions, which do attend this mortal state of
ours, for so has God ordained that they should be means to win and bring us to
himself, therefore must we receive them patiently, as the evident tokens of
Gods great love and mercy. Eccl. 2.4, 5, 6.
As the Preacher admonishes us, saying, Whatsoever comes unto thee receive it
patiently, and be patient in the change of thine afflictions, for as Gold and
Silver is tried in the fire, even so are men acceptable in the furnace of
adversity. Believe in God and he will help thee, order thy way aright, and
trust in him, hold fast his fear, and grow old therein.

Crenelle.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Bend Crenelle, Argent, by the name
of Walleyes: what Crenelle is I have before showed. After this manner,
Soldiers in default of scaling Ladders, used to nick or score a piece of
Timber with their Swords (for want of better Tools) and so found means to
ascend the walls, and surprise the enemies.

Flory.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a Bend, Flory, Argent, by the Name of
Highlord or Helord, and is the Coat Armor of Highlord of Moreden in Surrey
Gent. and of Tho. Highlord of London Merchant.

Parts of a Bend.
The parts of a bend are Such as are duduced from it. Bendelet.


Such as are derived from a bend do contain Half. Less then half.


blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, three Bendlets, Argent, a Chief,
Ermine. This is the Coat of Sir William Martin of Woodford in the County of
Essex Knight.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Bend between two Mullets, Sable,
pierced, this is the Coat of Walter Pell Esquire, Merchant Adventurer of London.

That which contains half the bend is called a Gartier, Gartier.
whereof you have here an example in this Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, a Gartier, Gules. Derivation of a
Gartier.
This is derived either from the French word Jartier, or else from the Norman
word Gartier, both which are the same that we call in English a Gartier, the
form whereof this Charge does represent. It is a name of Honorable esteem in
English Heraldry, and it gave beginning to the most renowned order of Knight
wood, of which College and Society have been more Kings and Princes, and
Princely Peers, than of all the Knightly orders besides in Christendom. This
contains half the bend in bigness.

Such as do contain less than half the Bend, are Cost, Riband:
Both which be exemplified in these next Escocheons.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, a Cost, Or. Cost what, and the
content thereof.
The content of this is the fourth part of the Bend, and half the Gartier, and
is sometime called a Cotise, and also a Batune (as Leigh notes:) But Bara
makes a Cotise and the Batune two distinct things. This word Cost or Cotise is
derived from the Latin word Costa, Why named a Cost.
which signifies a Rib, either of man or beast. And Farnesius says, Costae a
custodiendo sunt dictae. Farn. 1.45. When one of these is borne alone, as in
this Escocheon, then shall you term it in Blazon a Cost; but if they be borne
by couples in any Coat (which is never, says Leigh, but when a Bend is placed
between two of them) then you may name them Cotises, as in Example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Bend, verrey, Bend verrey.
between two Cotises or Costs, Gules. This Coat pertains to Sir Edmund Boyer
of Camberwell in the County of Surrey Knight. Not unfittly are these so termed
Costs or Cotises, in respect they are placed upon each side of the Bend, and
do enclose the same, as the ribs of man or of beast do bound and defend their
intrailes. And concerning such Charges or Fields composed of verrey. I refer
you (for the avoiding of needless repetition) to the Rules before delivered.
Note, that as well the Subdivisions of Ordinaries, as the Ordinaries themselves
are formed of the several sorts of lines before expressed, as may be gathered
out of Vpton, Notes.
whose opinion you shall hear when we come to speak of Batunes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, a Riband, Gules. Riband what, and the
content thereof.
This is that other Subdivsion that is derived from a bend, and does contain
the eighth part thereof. The Name accords well with the form and quantity of
the same, in that it is long and narrow, which is the right shape of a Riband.

Thus much may suffice touching the Benddexter, Bend Sinister what.
and the Subdivision thereof: let us now consider the Bend sinister, and how
the same is subdivided. A Bend Sinister is an Ordinary consisting of a twofold
line, drawn traverse the Escocheon, from the Sinister chief corner to the
Dexter base point; and differs (as we said) from the Dexter Bend only in
this, that it is placed on the opposite part of the Escocheon, as in example.

Rule.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Bend sinister, Vert. You may
perhaps sometimes find this Bend borne jointly with the Bend dexter in one
Escocheon, which to look upon are much like unto a Saltire. In Coats of such
bearing, you must carefully observe which of them lies next to the Field, and
that must be first named. And this Rule holds not alone herein, but also in
all other Coat-armours formed of diverse charges, whereof the one lies nearer
to the Field than the other, according to the sixth Rule of Blazon formerly
given.

The Bend sinister is subdivided into a Scarpe. Batune.


Scarpe what.
A Scarpe (as Leigh notes) is that kind of ornament (much in use with
Commanders in the Field) which we do usually call a Scarf, as may be gathered
by the derivation thereof from the French word Escharpe, signifying that
ornament which usually is worn by Martial men after the same manner from the
left shoulder overthwart the body, and so under the arm on the right side, as
in Example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Scarpe, Azure. You need not in
Blazon thereof make any mention of this word Sinister, because it is never
borne otherwise than thus. Notwithstanding this Charge has some resemblance of
the common Note of Illegitimation; yet it is not the same, neither has it any
such signification, for that it agrees not with the Content thereof, nor with
the manner of bearing the same, as is plain by this next Escocheon.

Batune what.
blazon or coat of arms He bearth Or, a Batune, Gules. This word Batune is
derived from the French word Baston, which signifies a wand or a cudgel. The
French men do usually bear their Batune (as it were) couped after this manner;
Whereof I do better allow than of that form which is commonly used among us in
England, because the same being so borne, does better resemble the shape or
form of a Cudgel or Batune. And though this has the form and quantity of a
Cost, yet it differs from the same, in that the Cost is extended to the
extremities of the Escocheon, Note of illegitimation.
whereas the Batune shell be Couped, and touch no part of the same, as by this
Escocheon appears. This is the proper and most usual note of Illegitimation
(perhaps for the affinity betwixt Baston and Bastards; or else for that
bastards lost the privilege of freemen, and so were subject to the servile
stroke:) and it contains the fourth part of the bend sinister; and being thus
borne, differs from all the subdivisions of the Ordinaries before manifested
sufficiently, what conformity soever any of them may seem to have therewith.
This Mark was devised both to restrain men truly generous, The use of this
mark.
from the filthy stain of this base (but common) sin, when they consider,
that such accusation to themselves, and shame to their issue, shall never be
severed from their Coat Armor, which should be the blazon of their honor. For
let the spuriours birth have never so noble a father, yet he is base-borne; and
base will be ever the first syllable in a Bastards name, till by his own
Virtues he has washed off the stains of his Fathers vice, as many high
spirits have done; Leigh.
who though so borne, have attained to the highest pitch of glory. Every
bastard may have his batune of what color he will, but not of metal,
Legitimation of Bastards.
which is for the bastards of Princes. At the first, bastards were prohibited
to bear the Arms of their reputed fathers. Then (says Sir John Fern in his
Glory of Generositie) they did by suit obtain a toleration from Sovereigns
and Kings, to be made legitimate, and to be matriculated by the Kings Grant, as
children lawfully born; which Grant did enable them to be capable of many
immunities and prerogatives which others lawfully begotten do enjoy: and so by
such legitimation they are discharged of all those dishonours which in former
time they were subject unto, and were acquitted from the stain of their
bastardy, Excepto quod ex tali legitimatione non admittebantur ad Jura
Sanguinis cum aliis filiis: Except only, that they had not the right of blood
and inheritance thereby; to participate with the lawful inheritance of their
Father, as appears Judge. 11. And when the Woman's children were come to age,
they thrust out Jepthah, saying, Thou shall not inherit in our Fathers house,
for thou art the son of a strange Woman. By pretense of these legitimations,
they bear the Coat Armor of their reputed Ancestors, with a sign of bastardy,
now commonly known to every man, by reason of frequent use: which Mark (as some
do hold) neither they nor their children shall ever remove or lay aside, Ne
sordes per errorem inter praecipuos reputentur; Least the fruits of lust should
by error gain the estimation of Generosity.

It is not lawful for those that are base born to usurp the Arms of their
reputed Fathers, unless it be branded with certain notes or marks proper to
men illegitimate, devised of set purpose to separate and distinguish them from
such as proceed from lawful Matrimony. Moreover it is often questioned,
whether such as be illegitimated (by Act of Parliament, or whatsoever other
means) may bear, or assume the bearing of the Arms of their reputed Fathers?
Some are of opinion they may: Others do hold the contrary, unless they do bear
them with the apposition of some of the before mentioned notes appropriated to
the quality of their illegitimate generation and procreation. By legitimate
issue, is not to be understood legitimate only, that is to say, such as be
adopted Children: For there is in such but a bare imitation of nature, of such
we have no use in this Land of Adoption or Arrogation. But of such as are both
natural and legitimate; natural so termed, Quia naturaliter generati;
legitimate, Ex Legitima parentum conjunctione approbata per Leges. Such as are
otherwise begotten are bastards, and the issue of an unlawful bed.

Consanguinity, is a bond or link of persons descended of the same stock,
derived from Carnal propagation: So called, Consanguinitas, quasi sanguinis
unitas, viz. the unity or community of blood.

To discern priority or nearenesse in blood, two things must be regarded
principally; viz. Linea and Gradus, the line is that, that gathers together
the persons containing their degrees, and distinguishing them in their numbers.
This is called Collectio personarum. The other, viz. Gradus, shows the state
or condition of the distant persons, how near they be, or how far distant
asunder (in themselves) from their common Stock, or either from other. This is
called, Habitudo distantium personarum. Et dicetur Gradus, ad similitudinem
sclarum graduum, sive locorum proclivium; quia ita gradimur, de proximo ad
proximum.

This before mentioned Line is threefold, viz. Ascending, Descending,
Collateral.


The Ascending Line is, from me to my Father, Grandfather, and so upwards.

The Descending Line is, from me to my Son, Nephew, his Son, downwards.

The Collateral Line is placed on either side.

This Line also is twofold, viz. Equal, Unequal.


The equal collateral is that, where equally the persons differ from their
Common Stock: as Brothers and Sisters be equally distant from their Father; As
also Brothers and Sisters children from their Grandfather.

The unequal collateral is, where one precedeth another: Such are brothers,
and their brothers and sisters children.

Affinity is (after the laws) personarum proximitas proveniens ex justis
nuptiis; A nearness of persons proceeding from lawful marriage. So called
Affinitas, quasi duorum ad unum finem unitas; A union or consolidation of two
that be of diverse Kindreds by marriage or other copulation conjoined.

By this, Affinity is contracted two manner of ways, viz.

By Lawful Marriage, Unlawful Knowledge.


The first is thus contracted; My brother and I are Consanguine in the first
degree, He takes a Wife, her they call, personam additam personae per carnis
copulam. This is the first kind of Affinity (contracted by means of my brother)
viz. between his Wife and me, and the first degree; for thus they be the
kindred and degrees) discerned in Affinity, viz. by the persons that be in
consanguinity, or blood, either nearer or farther off. As for example.

My brother is in the first degree to me in consanguinity; his wife in
Affinity: My brorhers son in the second, his Nephew in the third, his Nephews
son in the fourth. They in consanguinity: their Wives in the same degrees,
second, third, or fourth unto me, but they in Affinity.

Note that they attain not (in me) by their addition, that that I have attained
(by blood) in the persons to whom they be added. For herein, that is to say, in
Attinency we be distinguished in Consanguinity and Affinity. To make it plain.
My brother is my Consanguine, his Wife my Affine, only they retain and
participate with me the degree, whether it be first, second, third or fourth;
that I have with the persons that they be carnally known by, the which they
alter not.

Consequently, they shall be every person in Consanguinity to my wife, in
Affinity to me, in what degree in the one, in that degree in the other. But
always in the first kind, be they Brother, Sister, Nephew, Niece, etc. But to
return to our Batune. Vpton calls this baston or batune, a Fissure: and
making mention of the variable forms thereof, says, Istae Fissurae tot modis
variantur, quot modis fiunt bendae: These Fissures have as many varieties of
forms as the bends have.

Several forms of Fissure.
For there are of them (says he) Planae, Ingrediatae, Invectae, Fusilatae,
Gobonatae.
Plain. Ingrailed. Invecked. Fusile. Gobonated.


And (he says) it is commonly called a Fissure (which is a cut or rent) pro eo
quod findit Arma paterna in duas parts; quia ipse basterdus finditur and
dividitur a patrimonio patris sui: in that it cuts or rents the Coat Armor in
twain, because the bastard is cut off from his fathers Inheritance. In some
Countries they used to distinguish these from the lawful begotten, by setting
of two letters upon their garments, S. and P. quasi, Sine Patre, without Father.

Cui pater est populus, pater est huic nullis and omnis.
Brats are priviledg'd above any:
We have but one Sire; they have many.
And perhaps S. P. did signify Situs Populo, the Sanne of the People.
Signification of the letters S.P.
Chassaneus says, that bastards are not capable of their Fathers patrimony,
either by law or custom, Quia filius Ancillae non erat haeres cum filio
Liberae: The servants child must not part stakes with her Mistresses. Leigh is
of opinion, that the lawful son of a bastard shall change his Fathers Mark to
the right side, observing still the quantity thereof: for so I do understand
him, in respect that he adds immediately, that the same may at the pleasure
of the Prince be enlarged, or broken after this manner.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Bend, double Dauncette, Sundry
notes of bastardy.
Argent, by the name of Lorks. This (says Leigh) shall never be called other
than a bend, after it is thus parted: but bastards (says he) have sundry other
marks, every one according to their unlawful begettings; which with hundreds
of others are the Secrets of Heralds.

Besides those bearings bendwise above demonstrated, Bendlet.
we mentioned another by the name of a bendlet, which has greater resemblance
with a bend than any of the rest, and by the name it may seem to be some
subdivision of the bend. It has yet no certain quantity, but contains
evermore a sixth part of the Field, (according to the observation of Leigh)
whereof you have an example in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, a bendlet, Gules. Difference of
the bend and bendlet.
Two manner of ways does this charge differ from the bend: the one, that the
bend contains the fifth part of the Field uncharged, and the third part
thereof charged. And this is limited to the sixth part of the Field, which it
may not exceed. Secondly, it is distinguished from the bend, secundum
locationem, in place, in as much as the bend is so placed, as that the corner
of the Escocheon does answer to the just middle of the same, between the upper
and nether lines thereof: but the bendlet begins in the exact corner of the
point of the Escocheon; so as the lower line is distant from the corner thereof
the full breadth of the bendlet.

SECT. II. CHAP. VI.
OUR prefixed order does now call upon me to bend my course from bends, with
the parts and subdivisions thereof, Fesse and content thereof.
and to proceed to the Fesse, which challenges the next place. The Fesse is an
Ordinary, formed of a twofold line, drawn overthwart the breadth of the
Escocheon; in the midst where of is the very center of the Shield. And it
contains the third part of the Field, and may not be diminished, albeit the
French Heralds do blazon three bars gemels, for a fesse of six pieces.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Vaire, Or, and Vert, a Fesse, Gules, by the
name of Duffield. This word Fesse is a French word; and does signify the
Loins of a man. This Ordinary has been anciently taken for the same that we
call Baltheum militare, or Cingulum honoris, a belt of honor: because it
divides the Field into two equal parts, it self occupying the middle
between both; even as the Girdle environeth the middle part of a man, and
rests upon his Loins.

This Girdle of honor may seem to have been in ancient time given by
Emperors, and Kings, and their Generals of the Field unto Soldiers, for
reward of some special service performed by them: and it is not improbable,
that such a reward it was that the General of David's Army, Ioab, would have
given the Messenger that brought him news that Absalom was hanged by the hair
of the head in an Oak, if he had slain him, where Ioab says, 2 Samuel 18.11.
Why have thou not killed him, that so I might have rewarded thy service with
ten Shekles of Silver, and a girdle (or an arming Belt?) For some translate it
Cingulum, some Baltheum. Amongst the Macedonians, it was ordained by a Military
law (says Alex. ab Alex.) that the Soldier that had not killed an Enemy, Non
Militari Cingulo, sed capistro cingeretur; should not be girt with an Arming
girdle, but with a halter. And not without reason is a man adorned with a
Military girdle, signifying he must be always in a readiness to undergo the
business of the weal public; for the more speedy performance of which charge;
he should have his garments close girt unto his body, that the looseness of
them should give no impediment to the execution of his assumpted charge and
enjoined services. And these tokens of Chiva^ry were so highly esteemed in
ancient times, St. Ambrose.
that Saint Ambrose says, in his age Duces, and Principes, omnes etiam
militantes, operosis cingulis auro ^u gente pretiosi^, ambiunt, etc. Great
Captains, Princes, and Martial men, delight to wear their Belts curiously
wrought, and glittering with gold, etc.

As the bestowing of this Military Girdle, was reputed very honorable, because
none were to receive it but men of merit, so also was it ever accounted most
dishonorable for any just cause to be again deprived of the dignity thereof;
neither should such an one be restored thereunto, but upon very singular and
especial desert, as Ferettus notes, where he says, Augustus laudabiliter
militarem disciplinam gessit severissi^^e: Augustus Imperat.
and privatos militari Cingulo nunquam restituit, nisi illos prae caeteris
virtutum merita insignirent: Augustus the Emperor got much honor by the
severity of his Military Discipline: for if a man were once deprived of his
Arming girdle, he never would restore it unless he performed some excellent
service above all others. Notwithstanding, there is also one kind of putting
off the Belt, of no less honor, than the putting on of it; yea much more
glorious it is, in that it is the end and perfection of the other; and that is,
when the victory is achieved, victory being the end of Arming, as peace is of
Battle. To which purpose is that saying, 1 Reg. 20.11. Ne jactet se qui se
accingit, ut qui discingit: Let not him boast who girds himself as he that does
ungird: meaning we must not triumph (as the saying is) before the victory; but
it being once attained, it is the honor of a generous mind, to put off his
Belt, and not to sanguine his blade with cold blood. For those Gallants, who in
times and places of peace, are still drawing their swords, like warriors, in
times and places of war, prove (for the most part) p^^ceabler and calmer then
they should be.

But if a Knight be disarmed of his Military girdle by his demerits and
offense, he is therewithal deprived of all Military privileges, like as it
fares with a Captain, who (if he happen to lose his Ensigns, is disabled to
advance any other in the Field, until he has either regained the same, or by
his valor extorted some other from the enemy. Which kind of deprivation of
Knights and M^rtiall men for any notable transgression, was of frequent use in
times past, and in some places is continued unto this day with greater severity
and much more infamy than in former times. Depositio Cingulorum and Balth^orum
(says Wolfgan. Wolfgangus Lazius.
) Lazius quod genus poenae proprio seorsim vocabulo discinctura and recinctura
vocabatur, manet hodie ad huc in ordine Equestri, majori quam olim ignominia.
Quo ritu (ut nos dicimus) Equites ^urati degradantur. The depriving of the Belt
(which was wont to be termed, the discincture or ungirding) is at this day
still in use amongst Knights, and with more ignominy than was in ancient times:
which is nothing else but that which we call degrading of a Knight. If any ask
me how this comes about that such Degradation of a Knight, is more infamous
than of old: I answer, it is because it is more rare, and therefore more
remarkable. If again, you ask why it is more rare than of old: I answer, it is
because it is more infamous, and therefore Princes more unwillingly to inflict
it. Howsoever, the truth is, that base and unknightly actions and qualites,
deserve a base and unknightly chastisement.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, two Cheurons, Gules: this is the Coat
of that eminent and ancient Family of Mounson. Of which are worthy Ornaments
William Viscount Mounson, and Sir John Mounson of Carleton in Lincolnshire
Baronet, son and heir of Sir Thomas Mounson created Baronet, 29. of June, 1611.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, four Cheurons, Gules, which is the
bearing of Sir Henry Every son of Sir Simon Every or Ivory of Eggington in Com.
Derb. Baronet, so created May 26. 1641.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, three Cheurons, Gules, a Labell of
three points, Azure, by the name of Barington, and is the Coat of that worthy
Gentleman Sir John Barington of Barington Hall in Essex, Knight and Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Cheuron, and in the Dexter point a
Trefoyle Sable, which with a Crescent for a difference of a second brother is
the Coat of that grave Citizen Sir Thomas Foot Knight, Lord Mayor of London,
1651.

Fesse Dauncet.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, a Fesse Dauncette, Sable. These Arms
pertain to the worthy Gentleman Sir Thomas Vavasour, who in the Reign of King
James was Knight Marshall of his then Majesty's household, and of the vierge
thereto appertaining. Whose Family anciently had the addition Le to the name,
as being the Kings Valvasores, being in times past a degree not much inferior
to a Baron, and given to their Family ex Regio munere, as M. Cambden notes in
Yorkshire, speaking of Haselwood, being the ancient inheritance of the said
Family.

Cheuron what.
So much of a Fesse: now of a Cheuron. A Cheuron is an Ordinary, formed of a
twofold line Spirewise or Pyramidall; the Foundation being in the Dexter, and
Sinister base points of the Escocheon, and the Acute angle of the Spire near
the top of the Escocheon: as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Topaz, a Cheuron, Ruby. This Coat
pertains to the Honorable and Ancient Family of Stafford, now Barons, and
sometimes Earls of Stafford, and Dukes of Buckingham. This Ordinary is
resembled to a pair of Bargecouples or Rafters, such as Carpenters do set on
the highest part of the house, Ancient form of bearing thereof.
for bearing of the roof thereof; and betokens the atchieving of some
business of moment, or the finishing of some Chargable and memorable work.
This was anciently the usual form of bearing of the Cheuron, as appears by
many Scales and Monuments yet extant, and is most agreeable to reason, that as
it represents the Roof of an house (though I am not ignorant that Leigh
says, it was in old times the attire for the heads of Women Priests) so
accordingly it should be extended to the highest part of the Escocheon, though
far different is the bearing thereof in these days. In which respect it were
fit that common Painters, the common disorderers of these tokens of honor,
were better looked unto; who both in former ages, and much more in these days,
have greatly corrupted these honorable signs, by adding their new fantastical
inventions; that so they might make the things borne in Coat Armor more
perspicuous to the view, or because they would be thought to be well overseen
in Heraldry. Idle inventions of Painters.
For indeed they want the eye of judgment, to see and discern that such is the
excellency of these honorable tokens, that the least alteration either by
augmentation, diminution, transposition, or whatsoever other means, does
occasion a change in them so great, as that they thereby differ from
themselves, not only in their accidental, but also in their substantial
parts, and cease to be any longer the same they were before, and their owners
are debarred to challenge any propriety or interest in them, in respect of such
alteration. Modica alteratio in membro principali magnam alterationem facit
(says the Philosopher) A little alteration makes a great alteration in a
principal part. As the least spot in the Eye, which is the worthiest part of
the face, does more disfigure the same, than ten times so much in any other
member of the whole body.

The Content of the Cheuron is the fifth part of the Field (according to Leigh:
Content of a Cheuron.
) but Chassaneus reckons the same amongst those Ordinaries that do occupy the
third part of the Field. You may have two cheurons in one Field (says Leigh)
but not above; and if they exceed that number, Note.
then shall you call them cheuronwaies. But I suppose they might be termed
much better cheuronels, that is to say, Minute or small cheurons; for so is
their Blazon more certain. This charge following, and the subdivisions thereof;
are diversely borne, as well in respect of the diverse location, Cheuron reversed.
as of the variable form thereof; for sometimes it is borne on chief,
otherwhiles on base, sometimes Enarched, sometimes Reversed, sometimes Fretted,
etc. as hereafter by examples appears.

blazon or coat of arms He b^areth, Or, a Cheuron in chief, Azure. Cheuron in
chief.
Note that the lower part of this cheuron is far above the ordinary place of a
single cheuron; for it is pitched as high as the Nombrill of the Escocheon,
whereas others have their rising from or near above the dexter and sinister
base points. The Ancestors of this bearer (says Leigh) have borne the same
otherways, which was for some good purpose removed, although it were better
after the common manner of bearing. Accidents of an Escocheon.
There are diverse Accidents incident unto this Ordinary, viz. Transposition, as
in this last Escocheon, Couping, Voiding and Reversing. Of all which I purpose
to give several examples in their proper places.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, a Cheuron, couped; Cheuron Couped.
Sable, by the name of Jones. What couping is, I have before showed, whereunto
(for shunning needless repetition) I refer you.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cheuron engrailed, voided, Or,
Cheuron Engrailed.
by the name of Dudley. What voiding is, I have showed before. In the blazoning
of Coat-Armours of this kind, I mean of Charges voided, you shall not need
to make any mention of the color of the exempted part thereof, saying, that it
is voided of the Field: for if you say, voided, only, it is ever understood
that the field shows through the middle part of the charge voided. If the
middle part of this cheuron were of a different metal, color, or furre, from
the Field, then should you Blazon it thus: A Cheuron, engrailed, surmounted of
another, of such or such color.

The Subdivisions of this Ordinary are Cheuronell, Couple-close.


Cheuronell what.
A Cheuronell is a diminutive of a Cheuron, and signifies a minute or small
Cheuron, and contains half the quantity of the Cheuron, as for example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a cheuronell, Vert Of these (says
Leigh) you may have no more than three in a Field, except partition. The. other
Subdivision of the cheuron is called a couple close. A couple-close is a
subordinate charge derived from a cheuron, and formed of two lines erected
cheuronwaies.

Couple-close what, and the content thereof.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Vert, a couple-close, Argent. This
contains the fourth of the cheuron, and is not borne but by Paires, except
there be a cheuron between them. Well does the name of this charge, agree with
the use thereof, which is not only to be borne by couples for the most part,
but also to have a cheuron between them which they enclose on each side.

Bar.
The next in order to the Cheuron is the Bar. A Bar is composed of two equi
distant lines drawn overthwart the Escocheon, after the manner of the Fesse
before mentioned, as in this next Escocheon appears.

blazon or coat of arms This Ordinary differs from the Fesse, not only in
that it contains the fifth part of the Field, whereas the Fesse occupies the
third part thereof, but also that the Fesse is limited to one certain place of
the Escocheon to wit, the Exact Center or Fesse Point thereof, whereas the Bar
is not tried to any prescript place, but may be transferred unto sundry parts
of the Escocheon. But if there be but one only Bar in the Escocheon, then must
the same occupy the place of the Fesse, as appears in this Escocheon. This
Charge is of more estimation than is well considered of many that bear the
same. If you have two Bars in the Field, they must be so placed, as that
thereby the Field of the Escocheon may be divided into five equal parts; so
shall each of them receive their just quantity.

Subdivision.
A Bar is subdivided into a Closet. Barulet.


A Closet is a Charge abstracted from a Bar, and consists also of two
equidistant lines drawn overthwart the Escocheon, as in Example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Closet, Sanguine. Content of a Closet.
This contains half the Bar, and of these there may be five in one Field,
and are very good Armory. The other Subdivision of a Bar, is called a
Barulet, which (after the opinion of Leigh) cannot be borne dividedly, but must
be borne by couples, unless they be parted with a Bar, whereof you have an
example in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, two Bars, Or. This is the Coat of
that eminent ancient Family of Burdet, which flourishes at this day in the
persons of Sir Fran. Burdet of Bramcot in Warwickshire Baronet, and Robert
Burdet of London Merchant, sons of Sir Thomas Turdet of Bramcot created
Baronet, Feb. 25. 1618. which Sir Francis Burdet married, Jane daughter of Sir
John Walter Knight, Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Barulet, Argent. Barulet what it
contains.
The Content of the Barulet is the fourth part of the Bar, whereof is a
derivative, as by the name of Diminution imposed thereupon does manifestly
appear. Barulets (says Vpton) are diversely borne in Arms, viz. Plain,
Engrailed, etc. whereunto good heed must be taken in Blazon.

Hitherto of a bar: Now of a Gyronne: A Gyronne what.
A Gyronne is an Ordinary consisting of two straight lines drawn from diverse
parts of the Escocheon, and meeting in an Acute-angle in the Fesse point of the
same. Signification of a Gyronne.
A Gyronne (as one says) is the same that we call in Latin Gremium, which
signifies a Lap, and is the space between the thighs: and thence perchance
do we call the Groyne; which name, whether it be given to this charge, because
it determines in gremio, in the very lap or midst of the Escocheon, or
because it has a bending like the thigh and leg together, I cannot define.
Gyrons are borne diversely, viz. single, by couples, of six, of eight, of ten,
and of twelve, as shall appear hereafter, Form of making thereof.
where I shall speak of Arms having no Tincture predominating. For the making
this Ordinary, behold this next Escocheon, where you shall find one single
Gyronne alone, which does best express the manner thereof, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sanguine, Single Gyronne.
one Gyronne issuing from the Chief Dexter point, Or If these two lines whereof
this Ordinary is framed, were drawn throughout to the Extremities of the
Escocheon, then would they constitute two Gyrons, as in this next Escocheon
appears. But if this Gyronne had stood in Fesse in the Dexter part, and the
Gyronne Argent, then were it the second Coat of the Lord de Wolfo of Swesia,
whose daughter was married to the Marquess of Northampton, and after to Gorge.

Two Gyronnes.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Gyrons, Gules. You need not
say, meeting in Point, the one from the dexter Chief, the other in the
Sinister base, because they do evermore meet in the Fesse Point, be they never
so many. Here you see, that as two lines drawn, the one bendwaies from the
dexter corner of the chief part of the Escocheon, and resting on the Fesse
point, and the other drawn Fessewaies overthwart the Escocheon, and meeting
with the same in the said Fesse point, do make one Gyron: so do the same drawn
throughout produce two Gyrons.

A Canton what.
So much of a Gyron: Now of a Canton and Quarter: A Canton is an Ordinary framed
of two straight lines, the one drawn perpendicularly from the Chief, and the
other transverse from the side of the Escocheon, and meeting therewith in an
acute Angle, near to the corner of the Escocheon, as in this next appears.

Whereof so named.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, a Canton, Argent, charged with a
Cheuron, Gules, by the name of Middleton. This Ordinary is termed a Canton,
because it occupies but a Corner or Cantell of the Escocheon. Some Armorists
do hold, that the Canton is a Reward given to Gentlemen, Esquires and Knights,
for service done by them, and not to a Baron. Some others notwithstanding are
of a different opinion, that a Canton may well beseem an Earl or a Baron
receiving the same at his Sovereigns hand; yet in the Quarter to be preferred
in dignity before the same: Pre-eminence of certain Ordinaries. Note Base
Squires how made. Rule.
and before them both, Sir John Fern prefers the Escocheon of Pretense,
which he calls an Engislet or Fessy Target. Note that a Canton parted
traverswaies, whether it be from the Dexter corner, or From the Sinister, does
make two base Squires. And if the Canton be placed in the Dexter corner of the
Escocheon, you must in blazon only name it a Canton, not making any mention of
the local situation thereof: but if it be placed on the contrary side, then
must you in Blazon ad this word Sinister; as he bears a Canton Sinister.
Canton Sinister.
The Sinister Canton is all one with the Dexter in form, in quantity, and in
estimation, but differs from the same both in regard of the local position
thereof (by reason that it is placed in the sinister corner of the Escocheon)
as also in that it is not of so frequent use.

Quarter what.
Hitherto of a Canton, now of a Quarter. The Quarter is an Ordinary of like
composition with the Canton, and holds the same places, and has great
resemblance thereof; insomuch as the same Rules and Observations, that do
serve for the one, may be attributed to the other, Quia similium similis est
ratio: of like things the reason is alike. The only difference between them is,
Difference of a quarter and Canton.
that the Canton keeps only a cantle or small portion of the Corner of the
Escocheon, and the quarter comprehends the full fourth part of the Escocheon,
as in example.

Estanton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Verrey, Argent and Sable, a Quarter, Gules,
by the name of Estanton. The quarter a reward for service.
Albeit that (according to Leigh) the Quarter is for the most part given by
Emperors and Kings to a Baron (at least) for some special or acceptable
service done by him; yet do we find the same bestowed upon persons of meaner
dignity for like occasion. Contrariwise, the canton (being received at the
Sovereigns hand) may beseem the dignity of a Baron or an Earl, as aforesaid.

Having spoken of the Canton and Quarters, as much as for this present is
requisite; I will reserve some other their adjuncts to a more convenient place.
And will now speak of a Pile, showing some variable examples of the diverse
bearing thereof.

A Pile is an Ordinary consisting of a twofold line formed after the manner of
a Wedge; that is to say broad at the upper end, A Pile what.
and so lessening by degrees throughout with a comely narrowness and
Taper-growth, meeting together at the lower end in an Acute-angle, as in this
next Escocheon appears.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Pile, Gules. Use of the Pile.
This Coat pertained to the right worthy and valiant Knight Sir John Chandos,
Baron of Saint Saviors, le Viscount in France, great Senescal of Poictow, high
Constable of Aquitain. All given him by King Edward the third, who also made
him one of the Founders of the most noble Order of the Garter. In all
fortifications and buildings, in case the ground be distrusted to be unsure and
deceivable: Men are accustomed to build upon Piles, and by them to force an
infallible, and permanent foundation

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Pile, Ermyne, which was the Coat
of Sir Peter Which, Knighted 1626. sometime Ambassador at Constantinople for
the late King Charles, and is the bearing of Nathaniel Which, now President to
the Indies, and several other worthy Gentlemen and Merchants.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Pile Engrailed, Sable, by the name of
Waterhouse, and is the bearing of that Ingenious Gentleman and great lover of
Antiquity and Heraldry, Edward Waterhouse of Greneford in Com. Mid. Esquire,
who is lineally descended from Sir Gilbert Waterhouse, of Kirton in Low-Linsey
in Lincolnshire: temps Hen. 3. of which family are diverse worthy and well bred
Gentlemen now extant.

Sometimes you shall find three of these in a Field, as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, three Piles, Sir Guy Bryan.
meeting near in the Base of the Escocheon, Azure. This Coat was borne by Sir
Guy Bryon Knight, one of the Noble Knights of the most honorable order of the
Garter, in the time of King Edward the third: and he was also a chief mean unto
the said King for obtaining the Charter of Privilege and freedom of his
Majesty's Forest of Deane, in the County of Gloucester, for the benefit of the
Inhabitants of the same Forest.

Sometimes you shall find this Ordinary borne, Note.
transposed or reversed, contrary to the usual form of their bearing, viz.
with their points upward, which naturally ought to be downwards, being
supposed to be a piece of Timber, whose nether part is sharpened, to the end it
maybe more commodiously driven into the ground; as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, three Piles, one issuing out of the
Chief between the two others transposed or reversed, Sable, by the name of
Hullets. The Pile is an ancient Addition to Armory, and is a thing that makes
all foundations to be firm and perfect, especially in Waterworks.

Rule.
When there is but one Pile in the Field, it must contain the third part of the
same at the Chief. This Ordinary is diversely formed, and borne, as in these
next Escocheons appears.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Triple Pile, Flory on the tops,
issuing out of the Sinister base, in Bend, toward the Dexter corner, Sable,
This sort of bearing of the Pile, has a resemblance of so many Piles driven
into some water-worke, and by long tract of time, incorporated at their heads,
by reason of an extraordinary weight imposed upon them, which gave impediment
of their growth in height.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Pile in Bend, issuing out of the
Dexter corner of the Escocheon, Sable, Cotised, Ingrailed, Gules. I have made
special choice of this Coat Armor, (out of the glory of Generos.) as well for
the rareness thereof, as for that I find the same there commended for fair
Armory, and good in regard of the variety thereof for Blazoners to look upon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Pile waved, issuing out of the
Dexter corner of the Escocheon, Bendwaies, Or, by the name of Aldam. As this
Pile waved issues out of the Dexter, so also may the same be borne from the
Sinister chief point. Moreover you shall find them borne in Pale, and sometimes
issuing out of the Base with the point thereof transposed, which I leave to
observation.

Now the bearing of Waves, or of things waved, may well fit those that are
tried in the furnace of Afflictions, which are the badges and the testimonies
of our election in Christ, who suffered for us; the just for the unjust, to
bring us unto God. Therefore we should bear our afflictions gladly, forasmuch
as if we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified with him. For so does
the Apostle admonish us, saying; That no man should be moved with these
afflictions, for ye your selves know that we are appointed thereunto, 1 Thessalonians.
3.3. And again, thou therefore suffer affliction as a good soldier of Christ,
2 Timothy 2.3.

So much of Piles and their variety, as well of Form, as of Location. There
rest yet some other sorts of Ordinaries, that are composed of a twofold line
not hitherto spoken of.

Such are these, viz Flasque. Flanch. Voider.


In some men's conceit perhaps these Ordinaries last mentioned might have been
more fitly placed amongst such as are before handled, and are composed of a
single line, (of which number these may be well reckoned, if we consider them
each one apart by themselves:) but forasmuch as none of them are borne single,
but always by couples; for convenience I have chosen rather to sort them with
these that are formed of a Twofold Line; and first of a Flasque.

A Flasque is an Ordinary, consisting of one Arch Line, A Flasque what.
drawn somewhat distant from the corners of the Chief, and meanly swelling by
degrees until you come toward the midst of the Escocheon, and from thence
again decreasing with a like comely descent unto the Sinister base points, as
in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Or, two Flasques, Azure. A Flasque what
kind of reward.
This Reward (says Leigh) is to be given by a King for virtue and learning,
and especially for service in Embassage: for therein may a Gentleman deserve
as well of his Sovereign, as the Knight that serves him in the Field. This is
called an Arch line of the Latin word Arcus, that signifies a Bow, which
being bent has a moderate bowing, void of excess of tuberosity. This word
Flasque is derived, either from the French word Fleschier, or from the Latin
word Flecto, which signifies to bend or bow.

The next in order is the Flanch, which is an Ordinary formed of an Arch line,
taking his beginning from the corner of the chief, and from thence compassing
orderly with a swelling embossement until it come near to the Nombrill of the
Escocheon, and thence proportionably declining to the Sinister base point, as
in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Ermyne, two Flanches, Vert. This (says
Leigh) is one degree under the aforsaid Flasque, yet it is commendable Armory.
Note.
This word Flanch (as some do hold) is derived from the French word flans,
which signifies the flank, of man or beast, that includes the small guts,
because that part stouteth out, cum tumore quodam, as it were a blown bladder.
Sometimes you may find this Ordinary made of some other form of Lines than
plain, which when it shall happen, you must in the blazon thereof make special
mention of the form of Line whereof it is composed.

Last of all in our Ordinaries, comes the Voider; Voider what.
consisting of one Arch Line moderately bowing from the corner of the chief by
degrees toward the Nombrill of the Escocheon; and from thence in like sort
declining until it come unto the Sinister base, and has a more near
resemblance of the bent of a Bow than the Flanch has, in that it rises not
with so deep a compass, as in example.

Reward for a Woman.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Ten, two Voiders, Or. This is the ReWard
of a Gentlewoman for service by her done to the Prince; but when the Voider
should be of one of the nine furs or Doublings. Such Reward (says Leigh)
might the Duchess of Montfort have given to her Gentlewoman, who served her
most diligently, not only while she kept the Town of Hanybot, but also when
she rode armed into the Field and scared the French men from the siege thereof.
These are called Voiders, either because of the shallowness wherein they do
resemble the accustomed voiding Plates with narrow brims used at Tables,
Voiders why so called.
or else of the French word voire, which signifies a looking Glass or Mirror
(which in ancient times were commonly made in that bulging form) especially
considering they are given to Gentlewomen in recompense of service, unto whom
such gifts are most acceptable; and withal implying that Gentlewomen so well
deserving, should be mirrors and patterns to others of their sex, wherein to
behold both their duties, and the due reward of virtues. His counsel was so
very behovefull, who advised all Gentlewomen often to look on Glasses; that so,
if they saw themselves beautiful, they might be stirred up to make their minds
as fair by virtue as their faces were by nature: but if deformed, they might
make amends for their outward deformity, with their interne pulchr^^ude and
gracious qualities. And those that are proud of their beauty, should consider,
that their own hue is as brittle as the Glass wherein they see it; and that
they carry on their shoulders nothing but a Skull wrapped in skin, which one
day will be loathsome to be looked on.

SECT. II. CHAP. VII.
Ordinaries of lines more than two fold.
HAving showed the manner and making of such Ordinaries as are composed of a
twofold Line: we will now proceed to that other member of the Distribution
before delivered, which makes mention of Ordinaries, consisting of Lines more
than twofold; and will show how they also are made.

Such Ordinaries do consist of Lines Threefold, Fourfold.


Those that are formed of a threefold line, are the Inescocheon and the Orle.
The Inescocheon is an Ordinary formed of a threefold line, Inescocheon what.
representing the shape of the Escocheon, as in example.

Inescocheon named Escocheon of Pretense.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, an Inescocheon, Gules, by the name
of Hulgreve: This name of Inescocheon, is proper only to those that are borne
in this place, for if the same were borne in any other place, than upon the
Fesse point of the Shield, you should term the same then an Escocheon; and not
an Inescocheon: so must you also, if there be more than one in the field. This
Escocheon is sometimes termed an Escocheon of Pretense, as shall appear
heareafter. Note.
This Ordinary contains the fifth part of the field (says Leigh, but his
demonstration denotes the third part) and may not be diminished; and albeit it
be subject to some alteration, by reason of the different forms of Lines before
specified, yet keeps still one set form of an Escocheon, as we shall see by
and by.

The next in rank of this kind is the Orle, Composition of an Orle.
which is an Ordinary composed of a threefold line duplicated, admitting a
transparency of the field, throughout the intermost Area or space therein
enclosed. This has the form of an Inescocheon, but has not the solid
substance thereof, being evermore voided, as in these following Examples
appears.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, an Orle, Azure, Derivation.
by the name of Bertram, Lord of Bothall. This word Orle seems to be derived
from the French word Oreiller, which signifies a Pillow, and is attributed to
this Ordinary, because the same being of a different tincture from the Field,
and formed only of a double tract, in regard of the transparency of the Field
within, and the surrounding thereof without, it receives the resemblance of an
embossed substance, as if it were raised like a Pillow above the Field. Vpton
terms it in Latin, Upton.
Tractus which signifies a Trace, or Traile, because the field is seen both
within and without it; and the Traile it self is drawn thereupon in a different
color. If this were flored (says Leigh) then must it be called a Tressure,
which must contain the fifth part of the Field. And if two of these be in an
Escocheon, you must term them a double tressure. Chassaneus says, that the
Orle is sometimes formed of many pieces, and that they are borne to the number
of six. As touching the doubling of this plain Orle, I will not here give
Example, for that I purpose to present to your view a Threefold Orle or Tract,
which does include the twofold, as in this next Escocheon appears.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, an Orle of three pieces, Sable. Orle of
three pieces.
That this Ordinary is borne of many Tracts, it appears by this Example,
taken out of Vpton for the Readers satisfaction, where it is said, Sunt insuper
alii qui habent istum Tractum triplicatum and quadruplicatum, ut nuper in Armis
Episcopi Coenomanensis, qui portavit pro Armis unum tractum triplicatum de
nigro, in campo aureo: Some bear the Orle tripled and quadrupled, as the late
Bishop of Maine, who bare a tripled Orle, Sable, in a field, Or. This Ordinary
is born diversely, according to the several forms of Lines, before handled, as
may appear in the Examples ensuing.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, Orle Engrailed.
an Orle Engrailed on the inner side, Gules. I found this form of bearing
observed by an uncertain Author, whom at first I supposed to have either
unskilfully taken, or negligently mistaken the Trick thereof; but after I had
found in Vpton, that in Blazoning of an Orle Engrailed, he Blazoned the same,
An Orle engrailed on both sides, I took more special notice of this kind of
bearing, for that such a form of Blazon (proceeding from a man so judicious in
this kind) seemed covertly to imply a distinction of that from this form of
bearing. And because diversa juxta se apposita magis eluces^unt, things
differing give light each to other, I will here produce the Coat it self, and
the Blason thereof, as I find it set down by Vpton.

blazon or coat of arms Il port (says he) de Gules ung trace engrailee, de
chascun cost d'Or. And in Latin thus: Qui habet ista Arma, portat unum tractum
ex utraque part ingradatum, de Auro in campo rubro. Note.
He bears an Orle engrailed on both sides, Or, in a field, Gules. And no
doubt by heedfull observation you may find these Orles in like sort borne
Invecked, Similium enim similis est ratio; for like things have the reason and
respect. Note, that diverse Charges, as well artificial as natural, are born
Orlewayes, or in Orle; as likewise in form of Cross, Bend, Cheuron, Saltire,
etc. the examples whereof I must pass over, until a fit place be offered to
handle Charges of those kinds. Concerning the bearing of Orles, composed of the
sundry sorts of Furs, I hold it needless to use examples to express them to
the view, for that by consideration of the manifold sorts of several
Ordinaries before expressed, their diverse manner of bearing may be easily
conceived: and therefore I will leave them to observation.

Ordinaries of fourfold lines.
Hitherto have we considered the making of such Ordinaries as are composed of a
threefold Line: Our order calls me now to speak of such Ordinaries as do
require a fourfold Line for the effecting of them.

Of this sort is the Cross, Saltire.


Cross.
The Cross is an Ordinary composed of a fourfold Line, whereof two are
perpendicular, and the other two are transverse, for so we must conceive of
them, though they are not drawn throughout, but meet by couples in four acute
Angles near about the f^sse point of the Escocheon; to look upon (if they were
couped, as they are sometimes found) like to four Carpenters Squares; as the
example following will demonstrate. This Ordinary is called crux a cruciando,
or a cruciatu, because of the unspeakable torture and torment which they do
suffer, Crux dicitur a cruciatu, in regard of the unspeakeable torture it gave
to the executed thereupon.
who undergo this kind of death. The content of the Cross is not the same
always; for when it is not charged, then it has only the fifth part of the
field; but if it be charged, then must it contain the third part thereof. To
give you particular examples of all the different forms of bearing of the
Cross, were as needless as endless, considering the variety set down by other
Authors; I will therefore content my self with these ensuing.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, a Cross, Or: This Coat Armor
pertains to the right worshipful Family of Shelton, Shelton.
in the County of Norfolk, whence descended that Honorable virtuous Lady, Mary
Shelton, who was many years of the most Honorable Bedchamber of that Glorious
Queen Elizabeth; and was also wife to the right worshipful Sir John Scudamore,
of Home Lacie in the County of Hereford Knight, Standard Bearer to her
Majesty's honorable band of Gentlemen Pensioners. This Ordinary is oftentimes
diversely named, according to the diversity of Lines whereof it is composed: for
as is the form of Lines whereof it is made, so is the denomination thereof. In
the ancientest Institution of the bearing of the Cross (without all
controversy) it had this form; Content of the Cross.
which is taken to be the true shape of the Cross, whereupon our blessed
Savior Christ Jesus suffered; whose godly observation and use was in great
esteem in the Primitive Church; though in later times it has been
dishonourably entertained by two opposed kinds of fantasticks; the one, who so
superstitiously dote on it, that they adore it like their God: the other, who
so unchristianly detest it, that they slander the most godly and ancient use
thereof, in our first initiating unto Christ, as if it were some devilish
Idol. But the true Soldiers of such a Captain need not to be ashamed to bear
their Generals ensign. And this bearing was first bestowed on such as had
performed, or at least undertaken, some service for Christ and Christian
Profession: and therefore being duly conferred, I hold it the most honorable
charg to be found in Heraldrie. But the form and bearing hereof (as well as
the cheurons formerly spoken of) has been also depraved through the
inconsiderate handling of common Painters. For which cause I have caused this
precedent cross onley to be cut after this fashion, in the rest I have ensued
the vulgar manner of bearing now used, choosing rather to sway with the
multitude in matters of small importance, than that I would seem to affect I
know not what singularity; Nemo enim errantem arguit, qui cum multis errat.
This manner of bearing of the patible cross is warranted by Rolls of greatest
Antiquitity, and is most consonant to reason, that the stem thereof should be
much longer than the cross part, by how much it was requisite that the same was
to be deeply fixed in the ground: So then if we shall compare this ancient
bearing, with that of modern times, we shall find this to be natural; and that
adulterate.

Crosses do receive manifold varieties of Denomination, Diverse denominations of
Crosses.
according to the multiplicity of their different shapes, and variable
properties of lines whereof they are formed.

The bearing of the cross, is the express note or badge of a Christian that
he bear the same according to the prescript rule and will of his Lord and
Master. For as Barth. says, Insignia ad voluntatem Domini sunt portanda, and
non alias.

All Crosses may signify unto us tribulations and afflictions, which (how
burdensome soever they may seem to the flesh) yet is there much comfort to be
found in them, to those that make a right use of them, and do undergo the
burden of them cheerfully, and without recalcitration. For it is the property
of Worldlings that have been dandled (as I may say) in fortunes lap, and
pampered with worldly delights, to forget both God and themselves, and in their
fullness to spurn and kick up the heel; According to that saying of Moses in his
Song that he made a little before his death; But he that should have been
upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel; He was fat, he was gross, he
was laden with fatness, therefore he forsook God that made him, and regarded
not the strong God of his Salvation; Deuteronomy. 30.15.

Sithence then our Lord and Master (for our sakes) did willingly take upon him
this grievous, and almost unsupportable burden, why should we then, that would
be counted his professed Soldiers and Servants shrink thereat; Especially
sithence by the Discipline of the Cross, we are brought to the true knowledge
of God, his Omnipotency, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and all other his divine
Attributes, and of our own miserable and damnable estate, through our adherent
and inherent corruption of sins as well Actual, as Original.

A like form of bearing of this, is that Cross which we find borne in the
Shield of S. George; but diversely from this, both in Metal and Color which of
some Armorists of Vptons time, (as himself notes in his discourse of Arms)
received in those days a very strange and absurd kind of Blazon, which he
there sets down after this manner; the Shield, Gules, four Quarters,
Argent: whose reason herein (says he) I do not allow, for that by such manner
of Blazon, the bearing of a plain Cross shall never be known. Moreover,
herein also may we observe the Blazon hereof to be erroneous, in that they say,
four Quarters: which are indeed but so many Cantons; else should they all
four meet in the Center of the Escocheon. This Ordinary is subject to voiding
and couping, as these examples following show.

Alphonsus K. of Aragon.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cross voided, Azur. Panormitan
writes of Alphonsus King of Aragon, (what time he besieged Putcoli, a city by
the Sea side in Campania) that resorting daily to the Seashore, for his
recreation, upon a time he chanced to find the corpse of a man of Genea in
Italy, that had been cast out of a Galley; and thereupon alighting speedily
from his horse, caused all others that were near him to light; and commanded
some to dig the Grave, whilst others covered the naked Corpse: and he himself
with his own hands did make a Cross of wood, which he sticked fast at the head
of the man so interred; to testify that all Christian offices may beseem the
greatest Kings; and that whatever death we die, it is not material, so we live
to Christ So great is the Resemblance oftentimes of things born in Coat Armor:
which yet in their Existence, are much differing, that a man well seen in
Heraldry, may easily commit an error in the blazoning of them, as by comparing
of this Coat Armor with the next will manifestly appear: wherefore you must
use an advised deliberation in blazoning, especially of Arms of near
Resemblance.

Cross Fimbriated.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a cross Patee, Sable, Fimbriated,
Gules. The reason wherefore this Cross is called Patee, I will presently show
you, when I come to speak of the Shield of Cadwallader. This approaches near
to the former in respect of the double tract thereof; yet does it much differ
from the same in substance, forasmuch as the charge of that is a twofold
cross, viz. one surmounted of another, and this a single cross bordured, or
environed with a hem or edge. Moreover, that this is not a cross of Gules,
surmounted of another, Sable, it is clear, because the edge that goes about
this cross is much narrower than is the space between those two crosses.
Besides, it cannot stand with the Rules of good Armory, to bear color upon
color, or metal upon metal. This is called a cross Fimbriated, of the
Latin word Fimbria, which signifies an edge, welt, or hem, for a Garment, and
is to be understood to be of the same thickness with it, and not to lie either
upon or underneath.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron between ten Crosses,
Formee, Argent, and is the Coat of the Right Honorable George Lord Barkley,
descended in a direct male line from Robert Fitzharding, a second son of the
blood Royal of Denmark, whose son Maurice Barkley was Father of Thomas, and he
of Maurice, Father of a second Thomas, called by writ to Parliament the two and
twentieth of Edw. the first.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a cross ingrailed, Gules, Cross
Engrailed.
by the name of Norwood of Lekhampton in the County of Gloucester. As this cross
is formed of bunched lines, so are there others that are composed of sundry
other sorts of lines before showed, as experience will inform you, and as you
may in part see by the example following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a cross wavey, voided, Sable,
Cross wavey.
by the name of Duckenfield in Devonshire. In Coats of such bearing, you shall
not need to say in the blazon of them, that the charge (whatsoever the same be)
is ^oided of the field: because when you say only voided and no more, it is
always understood to be voided of the field.

Of all other sorts of crosses the cross waved is a more special note of
tribulation, in regard it represents the turbulent Waves or surges of the
Seas, occasion^d by some turbulent gust or flaw of boystrous winds or storms,
causing a success of surging billows: notifying unto us consequent afflictions
and troubles following immediately one upon another ^eck, which the children
of God must sustain with a constant resolution, Following therein the
instruction of Eccl. 2.1. My son, if thou will come unto the service of God,
stand fast in Righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul unto temptation. And
again, Settle thy heart and be patient, bow down thine ear, and receive the
words of understanding, and shrink not away when thou art assailed, but wait
upon God patiently; Join thy self unto him and depart not away, that thou
may be increased at thy last end, Verse. 3.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a Cross, Engrailed, Or, in the first
quarter a Mullet, Argent. Tirone, viz. Argent, a Sinister hand coupe, Gules,
which is the Coat of that Noble Gentleman Sir Thomas Peyton, son of Sir Samuel
of Knolton now first Baronet of Kent. And of Algernoon Peyton of Donington in
the Isle of Ely Esquire, son of Sir John, second brother to Sir Thomas Father
of Sir Samuel.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, Crusily, a Cross molline, Or, voided
throughout by the name of Knolles, and was the Coat of Sir William Knolles
Baron, Viscount Wallingford, and Earl of Banbury, etc.

Cross Patee Fitched.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a cross patee fitched in the foot,
Gules. This Coat was borne by Galfride de Scudamore that lived in the time of
King Henry the second; it is termed fitched of the Latin word figo, which
signifies to fasten or make sure, because by the means of the sharpness added
to the foot thereof, it becomes more apt to be fastened any where. There is
another sort of fitching of crosses that have the whole fourth part sigetive,
as in this next Escocheon.

Cross Patee on three parts, and Fitched on the fourth.
blazon or coat of arms The field is Jupiter, a cross Patee on three parts,
and fitched on the f^urth, Sol. This (says Gerard Leigh) was the Shield of
blessed Cadwallader last King of Britain; who slew Lothaire King of Kent, and
Ethelwold King of South Saxons. I confess in tearming this kind of cross, a
cross Patee, I differ from Leigh who calls it formy: But Chassaneus blazons
it Patee, and gives this reason thereof, Quia extremitates ejus sunt patulae,
because his ends are broad and opened, Chass. fol. 28. Bara is of the same
opinion, Bara le blazon des Arm. 67. and with these agree many of our Blazoners.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a Cross potent, Or, by the name of
Allen, and is borne by Sir George Allen Baronet, by the decease of Sir Edmund
Allen his Nephew without issue male. Thomas Allen also of London Alderman, and
John Allen of Grayes-Inne Esquire, that hopeful and ingenious Professor of the
Law, are Ornamentall Branches of this Family.

blazon or coat of arms The field is Jupiter, a cross potent fitched, Sol.
This kind of cross was borne by Etheldred King of the West Saxons, who lived,
Anno Salutis, 946.

What a potent is I have formerly showed in the first Section, p. 24 It may
also be blazoned a cross crowchee, for the resemblance that it has of a
Crowche, which Chaucer calls a potent, which is properly sigetive: For were
it that the overthwart or cross part hereof should be exempted, then would the
middle part show it self to be a perfect Crowche, used for the stay and
sustentation of feeble and aged persons. Like as old Age is a blessing of God,
so contrariwise it is a token of his heavy displeasure, to be cut off before a
man shall attain thereto: As appears by that saying of God unto E^i the
Priest, Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine Arm, and the Arm of
thy fathers house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house, 1. Sam.
2.31. And again, and there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever, Ver.
32. And further, And all the multitude of thine house shall dye when they be
men, Ver. 33. Moreover it is said in the Prophet Zach. Zach. 8.4.
on the contrary part, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, There shall yet old men
and old women dwell in the ^^reets of Jerusalem; and every man with his Staff
in his hand for very Age: Whereby is meant, that God would preserve them in
life, so long as nature might sustain them.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, a cross patonce Sol. You may
read in Leigh his accidents of Armory, page 59. that, King Egbert did bear in
battle a cross of this form or fashion in his left hand, and in his
Azure-coloured banner likewise. Here you may observe how this cross patonce
differs from the cross patee, (demonstrated before in the Shield of
Cadwallader) and also from the cross Flourey or Flurtee, which I shall
presently show you in Penthars Coat Armor.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a Cross patee, Or, by the name of
Ward, of Kent, London, etc. I know some will quarrel at my blazoning this
Cross thus, and not either Flory or Patonce which they do weakly surmise to be
two different bearings, Cross voided and Couping. Piercing what.
whereas it is manifest by observations of old Seals, Monuments, etc. that it
was the Fancy or Error of the Painter or Carver to make the points expand open,
or patere, or more erect as is found by hourly experience: now for calling it
Patee which is a title given to a Cross of another form, as may be seen in
the Coat of Scudamore and Cadwallader, immediately before there appear to me
great reason to adhear to the opinion of Leigh, and not to expunge the word
Formee quite, for what is said of that Cross may better fit this, extremitates
ejus sunt patulae, his ends broad and opened, that Cross being broad formed,
but not opened.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Ermine, a Cross, Raguly, Gules, a Canton,
Ermines, which is the bearing of that worthy and accomplished Gentleman John
Laurence now Sheriff of London, 1658.

Whereas I have formerly made mention of Voiding in the Chapter of bends, and
of one other Accident, namely Couping in the Chapter of Fesses, I will now
express them both in one example in this Escocheon following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a cross voided and couped, Sable,
by the name of Woodnoth.

There is another Accident whereunto this Ordinary is subject, that is to say
Piercing. Piercing is a Penetration or Perforation of things that are of solid
substance: and it is threefold:

That is to say Round. Losengwaies. Quadrate.


blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a Fesse between three Crossets,
Fitchee, Or, by the Name of Gore, of which Family are the two Sir John Gores of
Hertfordshire, Sir William Gore of Ireland Baronet, William Gore of Moreden in
Surrey Esquire chosen Alderman, Gerrard Gore of Tottenham, and his Brother
Robert Gore of London, Merchant Adventurer, Gerad Gore late chosen Alderman,
and diverse other persons of Worth and Reputation.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a Fesse, Dauncette, Ermine, between six
Crossets, Argent, which is the Coat of Barnardiston of Suffolk, a very Ancient
and Knightly Family now flourishing in the Persons of Sir Thomas Barnardiston
Knight, Nathaniell, Samuel Pelethiah, William and Arthur, Barnardiston,
Merchants, of the Levant, Sons of Sir Nathaniell Barnardiston late deceased,
Knighted at Therbald, December 1618.

Round Piercing.
As touching Round Piercing, you have an example in this next following
Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cross couped, Pierced, Or, by the
name of Grill. If this Round in the midst were of any other color than of
the Field, then should you account the same to be a Charge to the Cross
wherefore good heed must be taken in blazoning of Coats of this kind, and
chiefly of the Orbicular form in the midst of the Charge; to the end that you
may know when to take the same for a Piercing, and when for a Charge.

Cross Moline Losenge pierced.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, a Cross Molinge Pierced
Losengewaies, Or. This is the second form of Piercing before mentioned, and
the Coat was borne by Richard de Molineux of Lancaster, that lived in the time
of King Richard the second. Concerning this Cross Moline, (Leigh says) that
if it stood Saltire-waies, then should you call it Far de Molin, that is to
say, a Mill Rind, or the Ink of a Mill: which to me seems a very Paradox,
that Transposition (being a thing merely accidental) should give a new
denomination, to the thing transposed, and consequently alter the essence
thereof: Quia novum nomen dat novum esse rei, where are new names, new things
are supposed to be. It were a thing worthy of admiration, that Accidents should
have such power in them; for Aristotle Physicorum 1. says, Accidentia possunt
miraculose, and non alias mutare subjectum: Accidents change not the subject
but by Miracle. Addition doubtless and Substraction, are of greater force than
Transmutation or Location, yet is there no such power in them as that they can
alter the essence of any thing, Quia augmentum vel diminutio (says Chassaneus)
circa accidentia contractuum non reponunt contractum in diverso esse, neque per
ea intelligitur ab eo in substantialibus recessus: the adding or diminishing of
Accidents makes not the thing lose the nature of his being.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cross Moline, Quarter-pierced,
Cross Moline quarter-pierced.
Or. This Coat was borne by Thomas Molyneux of Haughton, in the County of
Notting. that lived in the time of King Henry the fourth. Leigh in blazoning of
this form of Cross, makes no mention at all of the Piercing thereof, perhaps
because it resembles the Ink of a Mill, which is evermore Pierced. This is
termed Quarter peirced, quasi, Quadrate peirced, for that the piercing is
square as a Trencher.

So much of the Cross, with the Accidents thereof: A Saltire what.
Now of that other Ordinary that is framed also of a fourfold line, that is to
say, a Saltire. A Saltire is an Ordinary consisting of a fourfold line, whereof
two are drawn from the Dexter chief toward the Sinister base corners, and the
other from the Sinister chief toward the Dexter base points, and do meet about
the midst by couples in Acute-angles. I know the learned Geometer will find
many more lines here than I do mention: but (as I said of lines in the Cross)
this our description agrees best with Heralds, and our purpose.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Saltire, Argent, The use of a
Saltire.
by the name of Aston. In old time (says Leigh) this was made of the hight of
a man, and was driven full of Pinnes, the use whereof was, to scale the walls
therewith, to which end the Pinnes served commodiously. In those days (says
he) the walls of towns were but low, as appears by the walls of Rome,
which Remus easily leaped over: and the walls of Winchester, which were
overlooked by Colebrand the Chieftaine of the Danes, who was slain by Guy
Earl of Warwick, who was Champion for King Athelstane.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Saltier, Gules by the name of
Gerard, of which Family is that true noble Gentleman the Lord Gerard Baron of
Gerards Bromley in the County of Stafford, and also Sir Gilbert Gerard of
Harrow Hill in Middlesex.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Saltier, Azure, in Chief three
Ermines, by the name of Williams, of London, and is borne by William Williams
of London Merchant of the Levant, a person of eminent note and Reputation; and
by Daniel Williams his Brother, as also by John Williams and William Williams,
and a third Brother, all Merchants of London.

A Saltire verrey.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Saltire, Verrey, by the name of
Willington. This Ordinary is limited to the fifth part of the Field, the same
not being charged, but if it be charged, then shall it contain the third part
thereof. This charge also varieth his name in Blazon, according to the diverse
forms of Lines, whereof the same is composed; for that it is no less diversely
made in respect of the lineaments thereof, than the Cross before handled.

SECT. II. CHAP. VIII.
Diverse bearing of Ordinaries.
HAving hitherto showed at large the several forms of making of such Charges as
we call honorable Ordinaries: Order requires that I should now show their
diverse manner of Bearing, according to our prefixed Distribution.

These are borne Simple, Compound.


Those are said to be borne Simple. when only Ordinaries do appear in the
field.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Ermine, a Saltier, Engrailed, Sable, by the
Name of Ingoldesby, and was the Coat of Sir Richard Ingoldesby late of
Lethenborough in Buckinghamshire Knight, who by Elizabeth Daughter of Sir
Oliver Cormwell of Hinchingbrook, in the County of Huntington, Knight of the
Bath, has left a Noble and hopeful Progeny.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pales, Ermine and Ermines, a
Saltire ingrailed, counter-changed by the names of Latton, of Kingston in the
County of Berks, a person of good worth and quality.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pale, Argent and Vert, a Saltier
counterchanged, and a Canton, Ermine, by the Name of Hunt, and is the Coat of
that ingenious Gentleman Richard Hunt of Rumford in the County of Essex.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Gyrony of four, Argent and Gules, a Saltire
between as many Croslets, all counter-changed, this is the Coat of Sir Roger
Twisden of East Peckham in Kent, Knight and Baronet, a worthy Gentleman and
judicious Antiquary; as well appears to those whose studies are that way
inclined: nor less eminent and celebrated for his understanding in the Laws
is his Brother Thomas Twisden Esquire, Sergeant at Law, Sons of Sir William
Twisden, Knighted May the 11. 1603. created Baronet June 29. 1611. by Ann Finch
Daughter of Elizabeth, Countess of Winchelsey, by whom he had also William,
John and Francis, Elizabeth wife of Sir Hugh Cholmley Knight and Baronet, and
Anne married to Christopher Yelverton Knight and Baronet, which Family
aforesaid by marriage of the Daughter and heir of Chelmington of Chelmington in
Chart. magna, there seated themselves many Ages ago, though since removed to
Roydon Hall in East Peckham, by marrying Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Thomas
Roydon Esquire then Proprietor.

These Ordinaries comprehend One sort. Diverse sorts.


Ordinaries are said to be of one sort, Ordinaries of one sort what.
when only one kind of them is borne in the Field without mixture of any other.

Whose bearing is Single, Manifold.


By single bearing I understand some one Ordinary borne alone in the Escocheon:
Single bearing what.
such are these precedent examples before handled.

By Manifold bearing of Ordinaries, Manifold bearing what.
I mean the bearing of diverse Ordinaries of the same kind, whether the same be
borne of themselves alone, or else conjunctly with some of their Subdivisions.

Which form of bearing is twofold, viz One upon another. One besides another.


What is meant by the bearing of Ordinaries of one kind, one upon another, may
be easily conceived by these four Escocheons next following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a cross, Gules, surmounted of
another, Argent, by the name of Malton. Amongst the crosses formerly
exemplified, I have given an example of one much like to this in show, but yet
much differing from the same, as you will easily find by comparing them
together: for in the former the field shows thorough the innermost parts
thereof, but in this it is far otherwise; forasmuch as herein are two
crosses, whereof that which lies next the Field is, Gules, and the other that
is placed upon the same is Argent; so as in this it can by no means be
conceived to be of that kind before handled, for then should the Ermines appear
in the inner part thereof, as well as in the rest of the Field, then might you
boldly call the same a cross voided, as that formerly handled.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a cross couped, Argent, charged with
another, Gules. This example does more apparently express the double charge
showed in the last precedent Escocheon, for that the cross that lies next the
field is made more spacious than the former: and withal it does inform our
understanding, that there is great difference between the bearing of this, and
of the Cross fimbriated, herein, that in the cross fimbriated the edges
thereof do occupy the least portion thereof, and in this the surmounting
Cross has the least part of the same. This therefore cannot by any means de
understood to be a Cross fimbriated, for so should the guard or edge thereof be
larger than the thing that is said to be guarded, which were a very absurd
affirmation.

Saltire Charged.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Saltire, Or, charged with another,
Vert, by the name of Andrews. What has been formerly said in the last
precedent example touching the Cross, does hold also in this and other like
bearings: for in things having a conformity or resemblance one of another, the
same reason holds in the one as in the other: where contrariwise, of things
having no resemblance or likeness, the reason is diverse. Saltire what use
thereof.
This Engine (as Leigh notes) in old time was of the height of a man, and was
borne of such as used to scale the walls of Cities or Towns (which then were
but low) and it was driven full of pins fit for that purpose. Vpton says, it
was an Engine to catch wild beasts, and therefore bestowed upon rich and
covetous persons, that willingly will not depart from their substance.

Ordinnaries borne one besides another.
Proceed we now to examples of Ordinaries of the same kind borne one besides
another: such are these next following, and their like.

Three Pallets.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, three Pallets, Gules. This Coat
appertains to the ancient Family of Berchem, Lord of Berchem in Brabant near
Antwerpe. And as there are Ordinaries of this kind borne in straight lines, so
are they also borne in lines unde, as in example. The bearing of Piles, Pales,
Bends, Bars, and their extracted parts, was called of old Heralds, Restriall,
in respect of their strength and solid substance, which is able to abide the
stresse and force of any trial they shall be put unto.

Pallets waved.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Pallets Wave, Gules, by the
name of Downs of Debnam, Suffolk. Note, that such Ordinaries, as either of
themselves, or else by reason of some charge imposed upon them, do challenge
the third part of the Field, are exempted from this kind of bearing one besides
another, because of such the Field can contain but one of them at once. But
their Derivatives or Subdivisions may well be sorted with them in the same
Escoheon; as a Pale between Two Endorses, a Bend between two Cotises, and such
like of the same kind, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, a Bend Ingrailed, Argent, Cotissed,
Or. This Coat Armor pertains to the worthy Family of Fortescue of Devon. As
these Cotisses are borne plain, so shall you find them varied after the diverse
forms of lines before expressed, as in these examples following may in part be
seen: and Vptons assertion (before delivered) touching their diversity of
shapes approved as by practice the diligent observer shall easily peceive.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a Bend, Argent, between two Cotisses
dauncette, Or, by the name of Clopton, albeit these Cotisses may seem to be of
a diverse kind from the Bend wherewith they are sorted: yet is it otherwise
inasmuch as they are subdivisions abstracted from the Bend, as has been
before showed. Now I will show you Bends borne one besides the other.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, two bends, Gules. This Coat Armor
I find in an Ancient Manuscript, of Collection of Englishmens Arms in Metal
and Colors, with the Blazon in French, of the time of our Henry the Sixth, as
it is apparent by the Character of the letter: over which Coat Armor is there
written the bearers name, viz. Mounsieur John Haget; from whom Master
Bartholmew Haget, late Consul of Aleppo, deriveth his descent. This book at
this present remains in the custody of a worthy friend of mine, a curious
Collector and careful preserver of such ancient monuments.

blazon or coat of arms Or, two Bendlets, Azure, by the name of Doyly, a Family
of very great antiquity, and diverse hundreds of years ago Barons of
Parliament; for Robert Lord Oyley or d'Oyley came into England with the
Conqueror and founded the Castle of Oxford within five years of the Conquest,
whose Son Robert the second Lord D'-Oiley was Constable to King Henry the
first, and founded the Abbey of Osney.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, three Croslets, Fitchee between two
Bendlets, Or, being the Coat of Sir Norton Knatchhull of Marsham Hatch in the
County of Kent Knight and Baronet, a Gentleman of much worth and wisdom, and
generally beloved in his Country.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, three Bends wavey, Azure. This is
the ancient Paternall Coat Armor belonging to Wilbraham of Ch^shire, as
appears by diverse Records in the Office of Arms, and elsewhere. The chief of
which name is Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey Knight and Baronet, lineally
descended from Sir Richard Wilbraham Knight, who lived in the Reign of King
Henry the third, and was high Sheriff of the aforesaid County in the beginning
of King Edward the first. From which Family of Wilbraham of Woodhey descended
Sir Roger Wilbraham Knight, lately one of the Masters of Requests in Ordinary
to King James, and Surveyor of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries; who
at Nantwich (the place of his birth) and elsewhere, has by his charitable Acts
left pious Monuments of his name and memory. Master Boswell in his Works of
Armory observes that the Bearer of such Bends as these, or of the like
Coat Armor may be thought to have done some great enterprise upon the Seas
worthy of perpetual commendation. As for Ordinaries of other sorts borne
likewise one besides another of the same kind, behold these next Examples.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, three Bars waved, Argent, by the
name of Samford. To the end I may make plain (by demonstration) the use of the
several forms of Lines before expressed; I made choice of this Coat Armor;
to exemplify the third sort of Bunched lines there mentioned. This kind of
bearing may put us in mind, that like as in a tempestuous storm, the seas
being troubled, do raise their waves one immediately upon another: So likewise
has God ordained that one trouble should succeed an other to keep his chosen
in continual exercise, and may have manifold experiments of his gracious
providence and fatherly care, in preserving of them in all their troubles, and
gives them a comfortable event, and happy end of all their afflictions: As
appears. Job 5.19. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh
the evil shall not touch thee. It is a blessed thing to be under Gods
correction, as witnesses Job 5.17. Behold, blessed is the man whom God
corrects, therefore refuse not thou the chastisement of the Almighty: for he
makes the wound and binds it up, he smites and his hands make whole, Verse
18. Again, he delivers the poor in affliction; and opens their Ear in
trouble, Io^ 36.15. By afflictions God moves the hearts of his children to
feel their sins, that they may come to him by repentance, as he did
Manasseh. And if they be bound in fetters and tied with cords of affliction,
(Job 36.8.) Then will he show them their work, and their transgressions that
they have exceeded, Verse 9. Behold God exalts by his power, what teacher is
like unto him? Verse 22. Affliction brings us to knowledge and acknowledging
of our sins, as we may see, Deuter. 31.17.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Bars Dauncette, Gules,
Dauncette.
by the name of Delamare. This example serves to inform our understanding of
the use of that sort of Acute anguled Ordinaries, that in Blazon we term by
the name of Dauncette; and is in shape like to that other sort of Acute anguled
Line, which is there named Indented, but differs from the same only in
quantity, wherein these do exceed those, as deing more spaciously drawn than
they.

Now from Ordinaries of the same kind borne one upon another, and one besides
another, with their extracted Subdivsions, Ordinaries of diverse kinds.
proceed we to Ordinaries of diverse kinds, and their Diminitives abstracted
from them, eftsoons found likewise borne both one upon another, and one
besides another: Such are these next following and their like.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Cheuron, Argent, Cheuron with
Bars Gemelles.
three Bars Gemelles, Sable, by the name of Throkmorton of Gloucester shire.
These are termed in Blazon Bars Gemelles, of the Latin word Gemellus, which
signifies a Twin, or children of one birth, as Gemelli fratres, brothers of
one birth, for like as these are twins of a birth, so are those in like sort
borne by couples.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Pile, Argent, Pile and Cheuron.
surmounted of a Cheuron, Gules, by the name of Dyxton. This Coat is found in
the Abbey Church of Cirencester in the County of Gloucester; and it serves
fitly to exemplify a Rule formerly delivered touching the usual Blazoning of
distinct things borne in one Escocheon; viz. that the Charge lying next and
immediately upon the Field, shall be first nominated, and then things more
remote.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, on a Satire Engrailed, Argent,
Saltire and Inescocheon.
an Inescocheon, Or, charged with a Cross, Gules, by the name of Morris. It
may be of some conceived that there is false Armory in this Coat, in respect of
the Escocheon, Or, placed upon the Saltire, Argent, which is Metal upon
Metal, a kind of bearing (as also color upon color) utterly condemned for
false Armorie: but such kind of falsitie is evermore meant of metal upon
metal, or color upon color, placed in one self-same Escocheon: but here are
several Sheilds, and those pertaining to distinct Families, and therefore not
to be holden for false Armorie.

Pale and bordure.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Pale, Sable; three Crosses
Patee, Or, within a Bordure Engrailed, of the second, by the name of Crowch of
Alswike in the County of Hartford. Here you may observe that when you are to
Blazon an Escocheon wherein are borne a Pale and a Bodure, that you must
mention the Pale before the Bordure.

Fesse and canton.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, a Fesse and Canton, Gules. This
Coat Armor pertained to the honorable Family of Woodvile, created Earl
Rivers in the time of King Edward the Fourth, who was also L. Treasurer of
England: from whom many worthy persons of high calling are descended. As
touching Ordinaries of diverse kinds borne one upon another, you must observe,
that if they be both of one metal, color, or Furre, their parts contingent
are not severed by purfle, for that by their forms it may be easily conceived
what Ordinaries they are, notwithstanding the defect of the purfle.

Bars and canton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, two Bars and a Canton, Argent, by
the name of Deane, of Tatton in the County of Hereford. As to the omission of
purfle last before mentioned, the Rule there given holds not alone in that,
but also in these and all other Coats of like bearing, I mean such as have in
them a Canton or Quarter borne jointly (as in these) with some other Ordinary
of the same metal, color, or fur, now I will add one example of the joint
bearing of a Canton with three Bars, as in this next Escocheon appears.

Three Bars, and canton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Bars and a Canton, Gules, by
the name of Fuller. Many more examples of Coat-armours of like sort of bearing
could I produce, were it not that I hold these few sufficient to inform the
understanding of studious Armorists, that as well Ordinaries of diverse kinds,
as those of the same kind, are found born one upon another; and withal to
occasion them to pry more narrowly into these curious and nice manners of
bearing, which numbers of them do slightly pass over, as if they held them
unworthy of more than ordinary observation. But here the Bars are cut too
little.

Bend and Chief.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Bend and Chief; Or. This is a Coat
of rare bearing, which I find cut in stone in the Abbey Church of Westminster,
in the North part thereof. The conjoyning of these two Ordinaries does
constitute (on the left side thereof) the form of a Gyronne; and the
Ordinaries themselves thus united, do resemble the form of the Arithmeticall
figure of Seven turned backwards.

Now for Ordinaries of diverse kinds borne one besides another, you shall have
these Examples ensuing.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Fesse between two Cheurons, Sable;
This Coat Armor was borne by Sir John Lisle Knight, one of the first founders
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, as appears by his Plate whereon these
arms are enameled, and yet remaining in his Stall in the Quier in the Chapel
of Saint George at Winsore. Which Sir John Lisle was Lord of the Manor of
Wilbraham in the County of Cambridge, of which said Manor William Lisle
Esquire is at this day Seized. A Gentleman, to whom the Studious in our ancient
Saxon tongue are much obliged, for the clear light he has given therein by his
great travel and pains.

Robert Lisle, who was a Baron in the times of King Edward the second, and
Edward the third, bore the same Coat Armor. And diverse Ancient and Eminent
Nobles of this Kingdom do rightfully quarter these Arms, being descended from
the heirs general of the Family of Lisle.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cross, Argent, Cross and
Escocheon Dexter.
in the Dexter Quarter, an Escocheon, Or, charged with three Cheuronels of the
first, by the name of Saint Owen; which Family either for affection, or for
some Lands which they anciently held of the house of Clare, may seem to have
assumed the Arms of the said Clare in the dexter point of the Field; which
form of bearing is of very rare use.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Crosse-floury, Gules, in the
Sinister quarter, an Escocheon, Sable, charged with a cross of the first; by
the name of Penthar. This Coat I have also inserted here, because of the
variety and rarity of it, being of no less rareness than the former, and
seldom seen to be borne by any: in Blason of which I break not the Rule
formerly given, by twice repeating the word cross, because it is in the
Eseocheon by it self.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Topaz, a Saltire and chief, Ruby; Saltire
and the Chief.
and is the Arms of Thomas Bruce Lord of Kinloss in Scotland, Earl of Elgin,
and Lord Bruce of Worleton in the County of York, Persons of much worth, and
great Lovers of Arts and Sciences. These Arms sometime belonged to the old
Bruses of Anandale, and also to the Earls of Carict; out of which House this*
right honorable Lord derived his descent.

Bars and Chief indented.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, two bars and a chief indented,
Or, by the name of Hare; and as I take it, derived from the ancient Arms of
Harecourt, and is the Coat of Sir Ralph Hare of Stow Bardolph in Com. Norf. and
also of the Lord Hare, Baron Colrane, a Family of no mean account, whose
Coat Armor it is if the chief were away. In this Escocheon you may observe in
some part, the variable shape of chiefs, occasioned by reason of diverse forms
of lines (before showed) whereof they are composed. The rest, time and diligent
observation will make plain.

Cheuronels and Chief.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, three cheuronels, brased in the
base of the Escocheon, and a chief, Or. This Coat Armor pertains to the
honorable Family of Fitzhugh, sometimes ancient Barons of the North parts of
this Land; of whom the right honorable the Earl of Pembrook is heir, and
writes himself, Earl of Penbrooke.
amongst his other titles, Lord Fitz Hugh, and also quartereth the Coat. These
are termed in Blazon Ch^uronels, in respect they are abstracted from cheurons,
whereof they have not alone the shape, but also a borrowed name of diminution,
as if you should call them minute, or small cheurons.

The end of the Second Section.
Naturalia, sunt specula eorum quae non viden^ur.
THis third Section begins to treat of such Charges of Coat-Armours as are
called Common Charges, whereof some be Natural and merely formal; such are
Angels and Spirits: and others are both Formal and Material: as the Sun,
Moon, Stars, as also such Natures as are Sublunar, whether they be living after
a sort, as all kinds of Minerals, or that they live perfectly, as all manner of
Vegetables, and Sensitive Creatures, with their General and Particular Notes,
Rules, Precepts and Observations.

The Table of the Third Section.
Common Charges whereof some are Natural, Formal, As all kinds of spirits,
which albeit they are Incorporeall Essences; yet in respect that some of them
have had assumpted bodies, as those that appeared to Abraham, Lot, etc. they
have been borne in Arms according to such their assumpted shapes.
Material. Simple Constant Heavens. Stars. Fixed. Wandering: as the Sun,
Moon, Comets, etc.

Inconstant, as the Elements, Islands, Mountains, Fountains, etc.
Mixed. Brute as Meteors Fiery, as the Mullet, or falling Star, Lightening, etc.
Watery, as Clouds, Rain-bowes* and their like.
Living, After some sort, as Metals, or Minerals, Liquefiable, as Gold, Silver,
etc. Not Liquefiable, as Stones Precious, as the Diamond, Sapphire, Escarbuncle,
Ruby, etc. Base, as all sorts of stones of vulgar use, and employment.

Perfectly, Plants and other vegetives that grow upon a Stump Simple, that do
grow upon one body or stem, as all kind of trees with their limbs, leaves and
other parts. Manifold, as Shrubs of all sorts, whose leaves, flowers and fruits
are of more frequent use of bearing in Arms, than is their whole bearing.
Stalk: Such are all kinds of herbs and their parts, viz. their leaves and
flowers.
Sensible Creatures. Common parts Contained, whereof only blood is of use in
Arms. Containing. Adjuncts, scil. their Support as the bones. Covering, which
is their Skin.
Their Animal parts destinated to Sense and Motion together, as the Brain,
whose excrement, viz. tears, are only of use in Armory. Motion alone, the use
whereof in Arms is the heart.


Kinds which are unreasonable, such are Animal, Terrestiall that live Upon the
earth, and are Four footed and do produce Living creatures Whole footed, as the
Elephant, Horse, Mule, Ass, etc. Diversely clove^ viz. In two, as Hearts, Goats,
etc. Into many parts as Lions Bears, Wolves, etc.

Eggs of which some have Four-feet, as the Tortois, Frog, Lizard, Crocodile,
etc. More than four feet, as the Scorpion, Ante, Grasshopper, etc.

Creeping, or rather gliding, as Snakes Snailes, Blind-wormes, etc.
Above the earth, having their feet. Whole and plain, and are called
Palmipedes, as the Swan, Goose, Ducks, and other like river Fowls Divided, as
Eagles, Hawks, and all Birds of prey, and domestical Fowls.

Watery whose coverings, Soft of which some are Skinned, as Lampreis, Eeles,
Congers, and such like. Scaled, as the Dolphin, Barhell, Carp, Bream, Roch, etc.
Hard, which are Crusted, as Lobsters, Crabs, Crevices, Prawns, Shrimps, etc.
Shelled, as Escalops, Oysters, Periwinkles, Muskles, etc.


Reasonable, which is Man.






Artificial, whereof see the Table of the fourth Section, at this Character, C.

SECTION III. CHAP. I.
HAving performed the task which our proposed Order imposed on us, touching
Proper Ch^rges, together with their making, and diverse manner of Bearing: the
same orderly Progression now calls us to the handling of common charges,
mentioned in the second member of the same distribution. Common Charges what.
By Common charges I mean all such other charges hereafter following as are not
hitherto handled.

Whether they be Natural, Artificial.


Things Natural (according to Philosophers) are Essences by themselves
subsisting. Zanch. lib. 1. de operibus. p. 55.
Res naturalis est essentia per se subsistens. Manifold, and in manner infinite
are these things Natural, as Zanchius notes, saying, Multae sunt, and prope
infinitae, non ^am res, quam rerum species, in Coelis, in Aere, in Terris, in
Aquis: therefore it is not to be expected, that I should in exemplifying of
them, pass through all the particulars of them; but only touch superficially
some of their chiefest, selected out of that innumerable variety, whereby I may
manifest in what ranks, and under what heads, each peculiar thing must be
bestowed, according to their several kinds, and so redeem them from all former
confused mixture.

Of things Natural, some are Formal, Material.


Formal natures.
The formal Nature is most simple and pure, and consists of the propriety of
its own form, without any body at all: of which sort are Spirits, which
(according to Scribonius) are Essentiae formatae rationales and immortales,
Essences perfectly formed, reasonable and immortal: I say, perfectly formed,
to distinguish them from the souls of men, whose forming is not perfect in it
self, but is for the informing and perfecting of the body and the whole Man.

Amongst such Forms are numbered Angels, Cherubims.


Etymology of the word Angel.
Angels (in the opinion of most men) are incorporeal essences of a spiritual
Nature, void of all material substance* Angelus in Latin, is the same that
Nuntius is, that is to say, a Messenger; and the same is a name of Office, and
not of Nature, as S. Augustine notes upon Psalm 104. saying, Quaeris nomen
hujus naturae? Spiritus est. Quaeris officium? Angelus est. Will you know the
nature of it? It is a Spirit. Will you know the office of it? It is an Angel
or Messenger. Ministers Gods messengers.
The like may we find (says he) in man: Nomen naturae Homo, officij Miles:
nomen naturae Vir, officij Praetor: To be a man, is a name of nature; to be a
Soldier or Praetor, is a name of office. Angels are M ssengers, by whom God
has manifested his will and power to his Elect in Christ Jesus: In which
respect also, the Ministers of God are called in Scriptures Gods Angels, and
therefore to be honored as his Ambassadors and Messengers; and their doctrine
is Evangelium, the good Angelical Message of life eternal with the Angels in
Heaven.

All Angels are of like sprituall substance, of like intelligent faculty, of
like will and choice; In fine all of them created a like good, and in nature
perfect. Nevertheless, as all men by nature and natural dignity are alike,
but by accident some of them are of more esteem and worthiness than others:
So it is also with Angels, inasmuch as some of them (if we give credit to
Philosophers) are appointed to attend the motion of the Heavens, others to
express the rage of Devils, as appears Job 8. Others have charge of
preservation of Kingdoms, and to keep under the rage of Tyrants, as is
manifest Daniel 20. Some have charge of some particular Church, others of
Apostles and Pastors, and others of private persons, Psalm. 91. And all of them
are by Scripture said to be Ministering Spirits.

Of this diversity of functions, and several administrations, it is thought
(because some of these offices are of higher employment than others are) that
some of them are simply called Angels, some Archangles, some Virtues, some
Dominations, as Saint Hierome expressly shows.

And albeit these heavenly Spirits be in their own nature void of all
corporeal or material substance, yet is it certain, when it pleased God so to
employ them, they had assumpted bodies for the time, to the end they might the
more effectually accomplish the service that God had enjoined them. Such bodies
had the three Angels that appeared to Abraham, Genesis 18. Assumpted Bodies.
Such bodies also had the two Angels that came unto Lot, Genes. 19. And as God
gave them bodies for that time, so did he give them also the faculties
answerable to such bodies: viz. to walk, talk, eat, drink, and such like.
These bodies and bodily faculties were given them, to the end they might more
familiarly converse and discourse with the godly, to whom they were sent, and
the better perform the charge enjoined them, insomuch as they did unfainedly
eat and drink, as Zanchius notes; whereby they did the better conceal their
proper nature, until such time as they should make known unto men what they
were indeed. Hereupon it seems the Ancients of forepassed ages have used the
bearing of Angels in Coat-Armours, according to those bodily shapes and habits
wherein they appeared unto men, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, an Angel volant in bend, Angel
volant.
pointing to the Heavens with his right hand, and with his left to the Earth,
habited in a Roabe close girt, Sol: having an escrole issuing from his mouth,
containing these four Letters: G. I. E. D. The Letters do signify the words
uttered by the multitude of heavenly Soldiers that did accompany the Angel
which brought unto the Shepherds the most joyful tidings of the birth of our
biessed Savior Jesus Christ, praising God, and saying, Gloria in excelsis Deo,
and in terra pax: Glory to God on high, and on earth peace. This Coat may well
beseem any Ambassador or bringer of happy news. especially such as first plant
Religion both in preserving and propagating the purity of Religion, than any
other of the World.

Angel standing.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Mars, an Angel standing direct, with his
hands conjoined, and elevated upon his breast; habited in a long Roabe close
girt, Luna: his wings displaied, as prepared to fly, Sol. Amongst the
Coat-Armours of such as were assembled at the Council of Constance, Anno Domini
1413. I find this Coat, borne by the name of Brangor de Cervisia. Furthermore,
amongst the persons there assembled, I find that the King of Arabia bare for
his Coat an Archangel, couped at the breast, the wings displaied, and insigned
in the forehead with a cross. And that Gideon Episcopus Pellicastrensis did
bear an Angel issuing out of the base of the Escocheon, with his hands
conjoined, and elevated on his breast, the wings displaied for readiness of
flight.

Angels kneeling.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Luna, upon a cheuron Saturn, three Angels
kneeling, habited in long Robes close girt; with their hands conjoined, and
elevated as aforesaid, and their wings displaied. Sol. This Coat is said to be
borne Maellock Krwm of Wales. And indeed this form of kneeling well fitteth
the Angels, to show their continual adoring of their Almighty King; in whose
chamber of Presence they daily wait: but that we should kneel to them, that
themselves condmne in the Apocalypse: and Saint Paul expressly forbids
Angell-worship. And indeed a madness it is, when Christ commands us to pray; O
Our Father, that any should teach us to pray, O my Angel. After Angels
Cherubims (whose use in Armory is less frequent) are to be handled. Bearing
Cherubims.
Of these I find two examples of several bearing; the one out of Hier. Bara,
expressing the sole bearing of a Cherub; another out of Leigh, of a Cherub
borne upon an Ordinary: to which I have thought fit to add a Coat of name, for
a more manifest proof of their use in Arms, as also to show that they are borne
as well with Ordinaries between them, as upon Ordinaries.

Cherub, Sol.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Jupiter, a Cherub having three pair of
wings, whereof the uppermost and nethermost are counterly crossed, and the
middlemost displaied, Luna. As to the forms of those Cherubims that covered the
Arc; it is of some holden, that they had the similitude of certain birds, such
as never any man has seen; but that Moses saw in his most blessed Vision such
shapes upon the Throne of God. But Joseph Lib. Antiq. Judaic. 8. says, Hae
cherubicae effigies quanam specie fuerint nemo vel conjicere potest vel eloqui:
Of what shape these Cherubims were, no mortal man can conjecture or utter.

Cherubim upon an Ordinary.
blazon or coat of arms This and the following Escocheon are transposed.
He bears Luna, on a chief, Jupiter, a cherub displaied, Sol. The Cherubims
were portraicted with wings before the place where the Israelites prayed, to
show how speedily they went about the Lords business. Cherubim (according to
Zanchius, Lib. 2. de Nominibus Angelorum) is not the name of any order of
Angels, or celestial Hierarchy (as others would have it) but such as may well
agree with all Angels; neither does that name always signify their nature, or
ordinary office, but for a certain reason, even so long as they do appear to be
such, as by those names they are signified to be. And it is to be observed,
that Cherub betokens the singular number, and Cherubim the plural number.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Sable, a Cheuron between three Cherubims,
Or. This Coat pertained to the right worthy Gentleman, Sir Thomas Chaloner
Knight, sometimes Governor to the most high and mighty Prince Henry, Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Rothsay, and Earl of Chester. In our division we
distinguished these from Angels, because by most they are taken for a distinct
order above ordinary Angels, taking that name from the fullness or abundance of
divine and mystical science. Thus have you Examples of Cherubims borne, not
only Sole, but also upon and with Ordinaries.

SECT. III. CHAP. II.
FRom things natural that are mearly formal, Of natural and material things.
Material defined.
we come to such as are Natural and Material. Those are said to be Essences
Material, that do consist of a Body subjected to motion and alteration; Natura
materiata est essentia in corpore motui obnoxio subsistens, A Material nature
is an Essence subsisting in a body subject to motion.

These are Simple, Mixed.


Simple, are certain Orbicular or round bodies, or bodily Essences, originally
consisting of an unmixted matter.

Of these some are Constant. Inconstant.


Those are said to be Constant natures which in respect of their perfection are
of most lasting continuance; such are the Celestial Globes and the Stars.
Constant natures.


The heavenly Spears or Globes, are Immovable. Moveable. Spears.



The Immovable is holden to be that uttermost Sphere that glistereth so
gloriously as that it dazeleth the sharpest sight of man, Immovable.
and is called Coelum Empyreum, the fiery Heaven: whereof we shall be better
able to judge and speak, when God shall bring us thither, and yet our
Star-gazers will take upon them to talk so confidently and particularly of
those incomprehensible bodies, as if they had been there and surveyed every
corner thereof. This celestial Globe (according to Scribonius) is the Mansion
place and Palace of all the Heavenly Natures; wherein the Angels and other the
Blessed of God, do with endless joy behold the presence of Almighty God face to
face. To this place (according to the same Author) were Enoch, Elias and Paul
rapt up before their deaths.

But now for more orderly progression herein forasmuch as we have occasion here
offered to speak of a Sphere, we will first show what a Sphere is, and so
proceed to the rest.

A Sphere is a figure or body exactly round of all parts, Sphere what.
Sphericall form perfectest.
and void of all angles and corners. The Sphericall or round form is of all
other the most perfect, as also the most beautiful capable and fit for motion,
in as much as it is void of all corners, which might give impediment to
moving, therefore is this form most agreeable to the Heavens and Celestial
bodies, which are evermore in continual and restless motion. It was requisite,
that the perfectest body (such as the heavens are) should receive the
perfectest form, which is the orbicular or round figure. Figura Sphaerica
(says Arist. Lib. de Coelo and mundo) est omnium figurarum nobilior.

The motion of the Heavens is the most sincere and unlaboured of all motions,
Movetur enim sine labor, and fatigatione, Arist. de Coelo 2. As also it is
said in Eccl. 16.26. The Lord has set his Works in good Order from the
beginning, and part of them he sundred from the other, when he first made them.
He has garnished his works for ever, and their beginning so long as they shall
endure: they are not hungry, nor wearied in their labors, nor cease from their
Offices, Ver. 27. Again, None of them hinders another, neither was any of them
disobedient to his words, Ver. 28. He builds his Spears in the Heaven, and
has laid the foundations of the Globe of Elements in the earth: he calls the
waters of the Sea, and powers them out upon the open earth; the LORD is his
name, Amos 9.6.

The matter whereof the Heavens are composed, has in it this natural
property, Not to be moved violently, neither yet naturally to rest. As the same
Author testifies in these words, Natura materiae Coeli est innata, non movere
violenter and non quiescere naturaliter, Lib. de coelo: without intermission is
the motion of the Heavens. Therefore are high and noble Spirits resembled to
the celestial bodies, according to Lipsius, A^ti ae^her^ique animi, ut ipse
ether, semper gaudent motu: Men of ethereall or heavenly spirits cannot be
idle, but are evermore in action, and exercise of things commendable and
virtuous, being thereto moved, and quickened by an honest and free disposition
and affection of the will and desire of the mind: Omnia enim honesta opera
(says Seneca) voluntas inchoat, occasio perficit. But virtue hardly receives
her due merit at all seasons. Nevertheless, Saepe honorata est virtus, etiam
ubi eam fefellit exitus.

The circular motion receives beginning in it self, and has the smoothest
passage: for in all other forms you shall find Angles, either more or less,
which do give impediments to motion, whereby they give occasion of some stay or
rest (as I have said before.) Therefore it behooves, that the sincerest body
should be fitted with the simplest form and motion. In this kind of motions of
the Heavens, is signified the very eternity of God, wherein there is neither
beginning nor ending to be found; and therefore it is rightly said by the
Apostle, The invisible things of God, are conceived and understood by his
creatures: as also his everlasting power and divine essence, whereof his
visible works are the express Characters.

Mercurius Trismegistus in his description of God, resembles him to a Sphere,
saying, Deus est Sphaera, qui ratione sapientiaque comprehenditur, cujus
centrum est ubique, circumferentia vero nusquam, etc. God is a Sphere that is
apprehended by reason, whose center is every where, and his circumference no
where. For God has neither beginning nor ending, he wants beginning because he
was not made by any; but was himself the Creator of all things: and he is void
of ending, by reason that he had no beginning: Nam quicquid finitur, in sua
principia resolvitur, Whatsoever has an end, the same is resolved into that it
was at the first.

Substance of the Heavens.
As touching the substance of the Heavens, Scribonius says, that it is Corpus
constans ex aqua, in firmissimam essentiam instar pellis extensae concameratum.
It is a body (sath he) co^^^sting of Water, in the most solid substance thereof
spread out v^uit-w^^e like a skin.

Though it may seem to th^e (Courteous Reader) that I do undertake a needless
labor is manifesting that the glorious Heavens and Earth, were formed and
framed by the most powerful God, a thing so frequent in the sacred Scriptures,
and also so clear, as that no man can doubt thereof: yet give me leave for my
own particular, who do labor to apprehend every occasion, to publish the glory
of the Eternal and Omnipotent God (which is the (...) and principal end of
our Creation) especially sithence the order of my Method requires the same;
and that bonum aliquod soepius repetitum delecta^; Give me leave, I say, in
this my latter impression, to reprove my self for my too much neglected duty
in my former: that so, though very late, yet at the last, I may prefer the
glory of God before the order of Method.

The Moveable Sphere of the Heavens is the Firmament. Moveable Firmament.
The Firmament is that continual moving Heaven, which with his swift
Revolution swayeth all the Inferior Orbs, and is called in Latin Firmamentum
(according to Scribonius) a firmitate, that is, of the stability thereof;
meaning (as I conceive) either the durable subsisting of it, or else the
unmoveableness of the two Poles, Artick and Antartick: otherwise, one selfsame
thing cannot be said to be moveable and constant, but in a diverse respect; even
as an Iron wheel in a Clock, though still in motion, yet both in respect of
the metalline solidity, and of the sure fastening to the Axell, it may be said
to be Firm and Immovable. If any man bear a representation of the Heavens, in
his Coat Armor, whether the same have the likeness of a Solid or Armill
Sphere, they must be reduced to this head: of this kind did the famous
Archimedes choose for his Device, who before his death, commanded that a Sphere
should be engraven on his Sepulcher. And such a bearing is honorable for any
great professor of Astronomy, not such witless wizards and fortune tellers as
usually deceive the world with their idle predictions, but those noble spirits,
whose Eagle-eyes search out the true natures, revolutions and properties of
those Supernall Essences.

The regardfull consideration of the Heavens and the Ornaments thereof,
together with their certain and orderly motions, should mightily move and
provoke us to raise up our thoughts, from the love and contemplation of base
and earthly objects (whereon we usually dote) to the admiration of his
unspeakable power and love of his incomprehensible goodn^sse, who made such a
wonderful Architecture; first, to serve for our use in this life, and
afterward, to be our blessed Palace and Mansion in a better life. For though
all creatures demonstrate the wisdom of their wonderful workmaster, yet the
Heavens, especially declare his glory, and the firmament his handywork* which
made the godly King David, to rise out of his bed in the night, to behold the
Heavens, and thereby to call to mind the perversity of Man, which never keeps
the course that God prescribes, whereas those bodies though void of sense, yet
from their first creation never faltered in their endless journies.

Now sithence I have demonstrated, and laid open unto you what a Sphere is, the
form, perfection, dignity, property, motion, substance thereof, and the like; I
will now show unto you, an Example of a Shield, illustrated with manifold
variety of Celestial bodies, etc. Which will be very necessary and commodious
to be inserted in this place.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, a Sphere, Azure, beautified and
replenished with manifold variety of Celestial bodies, environing the
Terrestrial Globe, All proper.

These were the Ornaments wherewith the Shild of that famous and valiant
Grecian Captain Achilles was illustrated and garnished: Which he caused to be
engraven therein, to the end that the mind of the beholders of them might be
raised thereby to a considerate contemplation and meditation of the admirable
power and wisdom of the Omnipotent Creator of them: which Duty whosoever
performs, he accomplisheth the sum and effect of all true Nobility.

This Shield did Vulcan garnish with variety of stars of manifold kinds, and
added thereto the skillful feats and practices as well of Peace as of Wars,
and all their rights and Offices; omitting (in a manner) nothing pertaining to
the well governing of the assemblies and societies of men.

By this invention did he labor to manifest unto us that there is no shield
more powerful to rest the vehement and violent assaults of adverse fortune;
than for a man to be furnished throughout with the complete Armor of cardinal
virtues, so shall he be fitted and prepared to sustain whatsoever brunt, or
forcible encounter shall assail him.

If we shall compare this Shield of Achilles, thus garnished and furnished with
manifold varieties of things, both Celestial and Terrestrial, with those
Coat-Armours that consist of Lions, Griffons, Eagles, and such other Animals,
or ravenous creatures; we shall find that to be more available to chase away
and foil all passionate perturbations of the mind, occasioned by the
concurrence of some sudden and unexpected danger, than any, or all of these
together can be: by how much that compriseth a mixture of calamities and
comforts together. For as the Globe of the earth does represent unto us the
dreadful and dismal dangers that attend our mortal state, by reason of the
manifold mutability of things Sublunar, to the daunting (oftentimes) of the
most valiant: so contrariwise, the Celestial forms do represent unto us an
Antidote or preservative against all dangerous events and Accidents, when we
call to mind that those Celestial powers, or rather Gods power in them, is
able to divert or mitigate in a moment all harmefull events and dangers
whatsoever, be they never so deadly. For these Celestial bodies are Gods
mighty and strong Army, wherewith he oftentimes discomfiteth and subdueth his
enemies, and such as seek the spoil and destruction of his chosen people. As we
may see Judge. 5.20. They fought from heaven, Judge. 5.
even the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera. The Sun stayed his
course at the prayer of Josuah, Iosuah 10.
10.12. And the Sun abode, and the Moon stood still, until the people avenged
themselves upon their enemies, ver. 13. And there was no day like that before
it, nor after it, that the Lord harkned to the voice of man, Ecclesiast. 1.5.
for the Lord fought for Israel. And again, Eccl. 46.4 Stood not the Sun still
by his means, and one Day was as long as two, ver. 14.

By these visible forms we should be incited and provoked (upon their view) to
invocate the most powerful God, for his aid and deliverance, when we find our
selves any way distressed or beset with perils by the example of Jos. He called
unto the most high governor, when the Enemies pressed upon him on every side,
and the mighty Lord heard him, and fought for him with Hailstones, and with
mighty power. So should we receive like comfort in all distresses, as Josuah
did. Thus should their view put us evermore in mind, to raise our thoughts to
Godward, and take every occasion to glorify him, by invocating him for his
aid; and say with the Kingly Prophet David, I (...) my Eyes to the Hills from
whence comes my help, etc. So should we evermore in all distresses find the
comfort of his ever-ready and never failing promise and providence: For in all
things, O Lord, thou have magnified and glorified thy people, And have not
despised to assist them in every time and place, Wisdom 29.21. Wisdom 29.21.


These kinds of Coat-Armours are so much more noble and excellent, than these
that we receive by descent from our Progenitors (as remunerations of their
virtuous demerits) by how much they have in them store of Art, witty Invention,
and of efficacy to admonish and put us in mind to persist in the performance of
our Duties.

This manner of adorning of Shields does Aldrovandus commend above all other
garnishings, saying, Nihil aeque atque Philosophia, ab omnibus adversis tuctur,
nihil ejus explicatu aptius est ad scutum exornandum and honestius. There is
nothing that does so safely protect a man against the damage of adverse
Fortune, as Philosophy does, neither is there any thing more fit and seemly to
beautify a Shield withal than the explanation thereof.

Emblems, Hi^roglyphicks, and Ensigns of noble Families, inasmuch as they do
instruct our eyes unto virtue, they cannot be defaced or blemished without
great wickedness: The reason thereof does Farnesius give in these words, Cum
virtutum imaginibus tantum debemus, quantum mutis praeceptoribus: Si illae
tamen mutae dici possunt, qui in silentio omni Doctrina sunt verbosiora. Of all
the things that are (says Cicero) there is nothing in the world that is
better, nothing more excellent, nothing more beautiful and glorious to behold;
and not only that there is, but that nothing can be thought or imagined to be
of more surpassing beauty than the world; whereunto Lipsius annexeth this
addition, examine the universality thereof, consider the great and small parts
thereof, and you shall find them composed and compacted in such orderly sort,
as that they cannot possibly be bettered for use, or more glorious to behold.
The consideration whereof moved King David to break forth in admiration.

The Sphericall figure is of all other forms the fairest, the most capable, and
the simplest, and comprehends all other forms: In a Sphericall Line the end
is all one with the beginning, therefore it does aptly agree with the noblest
and perfectest Body, such as the Heavens are.

There is nothing that more apparently expresses the Sphericall or round Form
of the Heavens than does the Sun by his Circular motion; Ecclesiast. 46.
The Sun, says Solomon, Eccl. 1.5. rises and goes down, and draws to his
place where he rises.

To the most simple body, the simplest motion is due, as also the simplest form
and shape.

Those things are said to be moved without labor, which are moved without any
intermission or rest, or any appetite or desire of rest: such is the motion of
the Heavens, because they are Circular or round: in the Circular motion there
is no rest at all.

That the world is Orbicular or round it is manifest by the infallible
testimony of the Prophet David, Psa. 89. The Heavens are thine, the earth also
is thine, thou have laid the foundation of the round world, and all they that
dwell therein, Psa. 24.1. The Orbicular form that we observe to be in Celestial
bodies is to them natural, but Accidental to the Elements. According to that
saying, Figura Sphaerica in Coelestibus essentialiter, in Elementis vero
accidentaliter. Arist. 1. de Coelo.

A Star (which is next to be considered after the Heavens) is a permanent and
constant Essence, and the more condensate or compacted part of the Sphere,
wherein it is fixed, for the illuminating of inferior bodies: for albeit it be
an usual distinction, that of Stars some are fixed, and some are Planetary or
w^ndring, yet they are indeed all fixed alike, and settled in one certain part
of the Sphere, but in respect of our eye, and in reference of their motions one
of another, they have a diverse aspect, and so have gotten a diverse name. It is
holden that the fixed Stars are discerned by their sparkling or twinkling, by
reason that our sight being bound as it were by the forciblenesse of their
resplendent rays, our eyes do become wavering and trembling in beholding them;
and for this cause ought all Stars to be made with their rays or points waved,
as in example.

Stars of six points.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Star, Argent, by the name of
Ingleby. If this Star were borne Or, which is his proper color, it would add
much more grace unto it, especially in regard of the Azury-Field, the proper
color of the Heavens, wherein Stars have their natural mansion. For a Star,
says Farnesius, is a Mystical Character, or Figure of God, to whom all
worship and religion does properly appertain; for like as Stars are called in
Latin, Stellae, a stando, because they be evermore fixed in the Firmament: so
there is nothing more constant or of more perpetuity than God, whose sacred
Will is the Regular direction of all things whatsoever; and therefore may it be
said not unfitly that they signify God and Religion, or otherwise some eminent
quality shining above the ruder sort of men, as a Star in the obscurity of the
night.

Now the chiefest, but not the sole end of the Creation of Stars, was not alone
to give light, and with their influence to be assisting to the Sun, and Moon,
in their procreation, production, and fructification of the Seeds, Sets, Plants
and Herbs committed to the Earth; but also to the designation and foreshewing
of times and seasons, like as the Sun and Moon were, as shall be showed in
place convenient hereafter. As for example, The rising of the Star Arcturus,
placed near to the Bear, called Vrsa Major, or the greater Bear denotes unto
us the presence of the Spring.

This Star shows it self after the expiration of January and February, as a
manifest note of the beginning of the Spring, when the Sun enters the sign of
Aries.

The rising of the Pleiades or seven Stars do demonstrate unto us that the
Harvest season is at hand; and so forth of others. We may read hereof Job 38.
where he speaks of the influence of these and of other Stars.

The most part of all the Stars are as it were publishers and proclaimers to
admonish us what we ought to do in each season concerning the things serving
for the use of this present life.

Stars are Gods Instruments whereby he works the effects of his providence in
these inferior bodies; Instrumenta autem utitur Artifex pro suo Arbitrio, An
Artificer uses his Tool at his pleasure and to serve his will. In vain
therefore are the predictions of them that take upon them to foretell of things
contingent, and that shall come to pass in future time, and will confidently
affirm what good or evil fortune shall befall a man: A thing that only known
to the secret will of God, and rests in his divine providence to dispose
thereof at his good pleasure. As appears, Prove. 20.24.

As to the number of points whereof a star consists, we must observe, they
must never be fewer than six; but when the same is formed of more, then must
you in blazoning of them express their certain number: for sometimes you shall
find a star formed of sixteen points, as in this next example shall appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a star of sixteen points, Gules,
Star of sixteen points.
by the name of Delahay. The field of a Coat Armor (as some men do hold) being
Argent or white does signify Literature, and the charge surmounting the same
being Gules or Red, which is an Imperial Color, and is sometimes, per
Synecdochen, taken (as the thing signified) for the sign it self that is
thereby represented: And white, being a token of Justice (is in such a Case)
surmounted of Red, which is proper to fortitude, betokens, as they do conceit
it, Learning, which gives place to Arms; and not Arms to Learning. This did
the Poets secretly express, when they preferred Pallas to be the Governesse of
Learning, and Mars being a man, to the managing of martial affairs; whom they
would have to receive the denomination of Mars, A magnitudine Artis.

The excellency of the Stars is highly commended, Eccl. 43.9. where speaking of
the glorious beauty of their order and constellations, it is said, that it is a
Camp pitched on high, shining in the firmament of Heaven. The beauty of the
Heavens are the glorious Stars, and the Ornament that shines in the high
places of the Lord. By the commandment of the Holy one they continue in their
order, and fail not in their watch. And the particular Stars (says David) God
calls by their names; as likewise does patient Job remember the titles of
several constellations.

Stars are sometime found pierced, and other whiles charged: Piercing what.
for the difference of which two forms of bearing, you have had a rule formerly
delivered. Moreover, it is a rule infallible, Stars evermore pierced round.
that the piercing of Stars must be evermore round; for the piercing square,
and Losenge-waies are repugnant to the nature of Stars. Here I will give you a
general observation, touching Bearing of Ordinaries and common charges
together.

That in the mixed bearing of Ordinaries and common Charges together, all common
Charges may be and are borne In, upon, or with Chief, Pale, Bend, Fesse,
Cheuron, Bar, Gyronne, Cross. Saltire, Orle.
or one common Charge, Rule.
in, upon, or with another.

This General rule I have thought good to set down in this place, The use of
the general rule.
here being my first entrance into the handling of common charges, and where
their mixed bearing with Ordinaries is first mentioned, to the end that the same
may serve as the stern of a Ship to direct your understanding, touching such
interposed bearing of any of the Common charges with Ordinaries; because I
labor to shun all idle iterations, and multiplicity of unprofitable examples,
tending to one and the same end. This form of bearing shall you find
dispersedly, yet not confusedly, exemplifyed in this work, that will give
approbation to the generality of this note, which does not warrant this form of
bearing alone in these, but also generally in all other Coat-Armours of like
kind. Of these several forms of bearing, I have chosen some particular
examples, as in these next Escocheons, and others shall follow in their proper
places.

Star of eight points.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Star of eight points, between two
Flanches, Ermyne, on a Canton, Argent, a Sinister hand, Couped at the wrist,
Gules. This is the Coat Armor of Sir John Hobart, of Blicklinge in the County
of Norfolk, Knight and Baronet. Stars are numbered amongst the Host of Heaven,
for that it pleases GOD sometimes to execute his vengeance upon the wicked,
Stars why called Gods Army.
with no less dreadful destruction by them than by Numerous and militant
Armies, as appears by the place of Scripture, by me formerly cited, Judges,
5. As touching the color of Stars, I hold it sufficient to name them only
when they be borne properly, and in their natural color, which is, Or; but if
they be of any other color, then the same must be named: as for the Canton
thus charged, it being an augmentation or remuneration given by our late Dread
Sovereign King James, to such as his Majesty advanced to the dignity of Baron
(it being an Order and degree by him directed,) One of which number was Sir
Henry Hobart, Knight and Baronet, and late Lord chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas; Father to this Sir John Hobart. I shall have better occasion to
speak thereof in the sixth Section, and second Chapter. When I come to treat of
such Armoriall Signs, as by the Sovereigns favor are sometimes assigned for
Augmentations.

Indented Chief.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, on a Chief Indented, Gules, three
Stars by the name of Escourte, When you find any ordinary charged upon (the
Field having no other charge, as in this example) you must reckon their
charging to be a dignity unto them, forasmuch as they are deemed to be thereby
greatly honored. Ordinaries when, and why called Honorable.
In regard whereof they are called Honorable Ordinaries: like as this Chief is
charged, so shall you find the Bend, Cheuron, Fesse, Saltire, Bar, and all
other the before mentioned Ordinaries, charged upon, as before we observed, and
hereafter shall appear.

A Canton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Stars, a Canton, Ermyne, by
the name of Leverton. Here I do name three Stars, as if the Canton were away,
Why blazoned three Stars. Star not rebated.
as well to the end that the manner of their position may be perfectly
understood by such blazon, as also to show that the Canton does not rebate the
Star in the Dexter point, but only does surmount the same.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, an Escocheon, Argent, Escocheon
within an orle.
between eight Stars in Orle. This Coat is borne by Sir John Chamberlen of
Priestbury in the County of Glouc. Knight. These Stars are said to be borne in
Orle or Orle-waies; but they cannot be properly said to be an Orle of Stars,
because they have no connection to fasten them together, but are borne severally
and apart one from another.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Diamond, Pole Arctick, and Antarctick.
a Fesse wavey between the two Pole Stars, Arctick and Antarctick, Pearl. Such
was the worth of this most generous and renowned Knight, Sir Francis Drake,
sometime of Plimmouth, as that his merits do require that his Coat Armor
should be expressed in that selected manner of Blazoning, that is fitting to
noble personages, in respect of his noble courage and high attempts achieved,
whereby he merited to be reckoned the honor of our Nation and of Navall
profession, in as much as he cutting thorough the Magellanike Straits, An. Dom.
1577. within the compass of three years he encompassed the whole World;
whereof his Ship laid up in a Dock near Detford, will long time remain as a
most worthy monument. Of these his travels a Poet has thus sung: Drake,
pererrati novit quem terminus orbis,
Qemque semel Mundi vidit uterque Polus;
Si taceant homines, facient te Sydera notum:
Sol nescit comitis non memor esse sui.
The worlds survaied bounds, brave Drake, on thee did gaze;
Both North and Southern Poles, have seen thy manly face;
If thanklesse men conceal, thy praise the Stars will blaze:
The Sun his fellow-travellers worth will duly grace.


blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, ten Stars, Or, I take it granted that
it is needless here to mention the placing of them, this being the best and
most usual form; This is the Coat of Sir Thomas Alston of Woodhall or Odhill
in Bedford-shire Baronet, and Sir John his Brother Knight, as also of that
eminent Physician Docter Edward Alston.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse between three Stars, A
Fesse between three Stars.
Gules, by the name of Everard. The three Stars expressed in this Escocheon,
may put us in mind of that threefold path of Religious passage unto the
Heavenly Canaan, viz. Moderation and sobriety, toward our selves, Piety
toward God, and Justice toward men.

The Stars may signify unto us, Ordinaries called most worthy partitions.
a hopeful success and happy event, in the turbulent time of Tempestuous
flawes and turmoiles of this present life.

Like as in the Winter season the Stars shine more clear and resplendent than
in the Summer time; even so is the glory and virtue of a generous and
magnanimous spirit more evidently discerned in a shattered and broken estate,
than in prosperity.

Whenever there is a separation of common charges borne in Coat-Armours, by
reason of the Interposition of some of the before mentioned Ordinaries, then
are they not termed Ordinaries, but most worthy Partitions; and they are such
(says Leigh) as though the common charge annexed do occupy more than one point
of the Escocheon, yet every of them is in as great effect as though it were one
only thing by the reason of Sovereignty of the same Partition interposed.

Thus I have given you a taste of the Particular and Variable manner of bearing
of Ordinaries, commixt with common charges, according to the General rule
formerly given. As for example, that common charges are borne with Ordinaries,
you may see in the first and third of these six Escocheons: that they be borne
upon Ordinaries, it is manifest by the second Escocheon: that they are parted
by Ordinaries interposed between them, it appears by these last Escocheons:
that they are borne in form of Ordinaries, or Ordinary ways it is clear by
the fourth Escocheon. Note.
Note, that albeit I have here set down but one example of each of these
particular forms of bearing, yet must you hold that in every of these several
sorts there are diverse other particular kinds of composition of Coat-Armours,
as shall appear hereafter at large unto the diligent observer. Furthermore,
whereas I have given only two examples of Common charges borne with
Ordinaries, one example of Ordinaries charged upon, one of Ordinaries
interposed, and one of common charges borne Ordinary-waies, or in form of
Ordinaries; you must understand by the first sort, all common charges
whatsoever, borne with a Pale, Bend, Fesse, Cheueron, or any other of the
Ordinaries before named in any sort: by the second, all sorts of Ordinaries
charged upon, with any kind of common charge: by the third, an interposition of
whatsoever sort of Ordinary between common charges: lastly by the fourth, you
must understand all sorts of common charges born in form, or after the manner
of a Cross, Saltire, Pale, Bend, Fesse, or of any other of the said
Ordinaries. These have I here handled briefly, because I must of necessity
deal more copiously, in each particular of them in places better fitting
thereunto.

SECT. III. CHAP. III.
THus far of such Stars which we called fixed: Now of those Planets whose
shapes are of most use in Heraldry; The aspect of the Planets is less to the
view.
I mean those two glorious Lights, the one for the Day, the other for the
Night: for, as for the other five planets, because their aspect is less to the
view, therefore they cannot easily admit a different form from the fixed Stars.
The Sun is the very fountain of Light, and (as some Philosophers think) of Heat
also; and all the splendour which the Moon has, it borrows from the Sun, and
therefore as the Sun goes further off, or nearer to her, so her light does
increase or diminish. The borrowed light of the Moon. Conformity of planets
with Planets.
And between both these and the Stars there is a great conformity, in respect
of their sparkling and resplendent beams, which are in appearance more
evident, and in operation more effectual, or at least more palpably discerned
in these, by reason of their neerenesse unto us, than of those that are from us
so far remote. But herein they are unlike, that the beautiful and blazing
brightness of these is oftentimes subject to the passion of darkning or
eclipsing. Of whose glistering, eclipsing and variety of forms, we have
bearing, these and other like examples following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Sun in his glory, The Sun in his
glory.
by the name of S. Clear. To express the color of the Sun being thus borne,
I hold it needless: for who knows not that the chiefest glory and highest
commendation that may be given to the Sun does consist in this, that he is
beautified with the brightness of his proper beams: which cannot be better
expressed than by the color Gold, or Gold-yellow. But if it be borne of any
other than this, which is his natural color, then must the same be expressly
mentioned, as in due place shall appear. The Sun is called in Latin Sol,
according to some Authors, vel quia solus ex omnibus sideribus est tantus, vel
quia quum est exortus, obscuratis aliis solus apparet: for that only he is so
great, or for that when he is risen, he so darkneth all the rest with his
splendour, as that he alone appears in Heaven, as a Monarch in his Kingdom.
Of the glory and excellency of the Sun, it is said, Eccl. 42.16. The Sun that
shines, looks on all things, and all the works thereof are full of the glory
of the Lord. And again, Eccl. 43.2. The Sun also, The forcible power of the Sun.
a mavelous instrument, when he appears, declares at his going out the
work of the most high. At noon it burns the Country, and who may abide for
the heat thereof? ver. 3. The Sun burns the Mountains three times more than
he that keeps a furnace with continual heat. It casts out the fiery
vapors, and with the shining beams blinds the eyes. Great is the Lord that
made it, and by his commandment he causes it to run hastily. And if we
consider how many foggy mists it dispelleth, how many noisome vapors it
consumes, and how all creatures are overcome with the heat thereof, we shall
find that King David did very aptly compare it to a Giant (for strength)
refreshed with wine (for the heat) to run his course, for his swift motion.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a chief, Argent, on the lower part
thereof a cloud, the Suns resplendent Rays thereout issuing, Proper, by the
name of Lesone of Whitfield in Northamptonshire. The former example wherein
the Sun is borne, does represent a visible form of a corporeal shape of a body,
from which these Rays or beams here demonstrated may be apparently seen to
issue; And these are as it were strained through a Cloud. Sometime one Raie or
beam of this glorious Planet is borne in Coat Armor, without any other
charge, as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, one ray of the Sun, issuing out of
the dexter corner of the Escocheon Bend-waies, proper by the name of Aldam.
Here I do not in the blazon make any mention of the three points or lines which
are on either side of the Raie, for in Nature they have no essence, but proceed
from the weakness of the Eye, which is not able to behold so glorious an
object as the Sun.

Occasion of the Suns Eclipse.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Sun eclipsed, Sable. If this color
were not accidental in respect of the eclipse of the Sun, the same should not
have been named. The Suns eclipse is occasioned by the Interposition of the
Moon, which though it be far less in quantity, yet coming betwixt us and
the Body of the Sun, it does divert the Beams thereof, and debarreth us of the
sight of them, even as the interposition of our hand, or any other small body,
before our eyes, does debar us from the sight of some greater Mountain. For
to think that the Sun does lose his light by the Eclipse, as does a candle
being extinct, proceeds out of mere rustic ignorance: as the like error is
in those, who think the Sun loses his light, or goes to bed every night,
whereas it does only remove it self from our Horizon, to inlighten other
Countries situated in other parts of the world. As was well expressed by
Secundus the Philosopher, who being demanded by Adrian the Emperor, what the
Sun was, taking his Tables in hand, wrote in this manner, Sol est Coeli
oculus, caloris circuitus, splendour sine occasu, dici ornatus, horarum
distributor: It is the eye of heaven, the Circuit of heat, a shining without
decay, the days Ornament, the hours distributer. The most miraculous eclipse
of the Sun that ever was, happened then when that Sun of Righteousness, the
Son of God, was on the Cross, when all the earth was so benighted at
noonday, that Dionysius Areopagita a Heathen Athenian cried out, Either the
world was at an end, or the Maker of it was suffering some great agony. The
Stars and Planets hitherto spoken of do shine alike, or after one manner. Now
others there are which shine after a diverse sort: such are the Moon, and
Comets, which we call Blazing Stars. Neither are we ignorant, that in proper
speech, and truth of Philosophy, Comets are not Stars, but Meteors: yet the
Vulgar opinion, and the received name and shape used in Heraldrie, may warrant
me for thus ranking them amongst the Stars. But as touching the Moon, her
light is merely reflective, as the brightness of a Looking-glass against the
Sun; and in respect that her substance is very unequal, as in some parts of
thicker substance, and in some parts thinner, therefore she is unequally
enlightened by the Sunbeams, which makes the weak eye, and weaker judgment, to
fancy a face of a man in the Moon: whence we have gotten the fashion of
representing the Moon with a face. But why the Sun should have the like, I wot
not, unless it be that he should not be outfaced by the Moon being his
inferior. The most wise and provident God, before the creation of his other
works, did first create the Light, to teach man to lay the first foundation of
all his actions in the light of true knowledge, thereby to direct his ways
aright, and that his doings be not reproved as works of darkness: especially
since God would not suffer the Night it self to be so wrapped in darkness, but
that the Moon and stars should somewhat illuminate it. And according to the
diverse apparitions of the Moon, has she her diverse denominations in Heraldry;
as her Increment, in her increase; her Complement when she is at Full; her
Decremen^, in her Waning; and her detriment, in her Change and Eclipse. And
according to these varieties, is she also diversely borne in Coat Armor, as the
examples following will show.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, an Incressant, Or, Entry of the Moon
into her first quarter.
by the name of Deseus. This is the state of the Moon from her entrance into
her first Quarter, which is most usually the seventh day after the change, unto
her full. In which time she is more and more illuminated, until she has
filled her Circle. This word Incressant signifies the Moons Increment, or
increasing estate, and it may fitly represent the rising fortunes of some
hopeful spark illightned and honored by the gracious aspect and beams of his
Sovereign, who is the bright Sun, and fountain of all the light of glorious
Nobility, and may confer the Rays of his grace on whom it best pleases him.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, three Incressants, Gules. This Coat
pertains to the Family of the Symmes of Daventree in the County of
Northampton.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azre, Complement of the Moon what.
a Moon in her Complement (which is as much to say, as the Moon illustrated
with her full light) proper. Here you need not to name the color of the Moon,
for the reason before delivered in the first example of the Sun. Proper color
of the Moon.
The proper color of the Moon we in Heraldry take to be Argent, both for the
weakness of the light, and also for distinction betwixt the blazoning of it
and the Sun; and therefore when we blazon by Planets, we name Gold Sol, and
Silver Luna. Concerning the use of the Moon, it is said, Use of the Moon.
Eccl. 43.6. The Moon also has he made to appear according to her season, that
it should be a declaration of the Time, and a sign for the World, Verse 7. The
Feasts are appointed by the Moon, the light thereof diminishes unto the end,
ver. 8. The Moon is called after the name thereof, and grows wonderfully in
her changing. The Moon is the Mistress by which all moist, The Moon Mistress
of mutability.
mutable and unconstant things are ruled; as Mulier, Mare, Flumina, Fontes: a
Woman, and the Sea, Rivers, and Fountains: the ebbing and flowing of the Sea
following the motions of the Moon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a Moon decressant, Proper, The Moon
in her decrement.
by the name of Delaluna. This is the state of the Waning Moon, when she
declineth from her- Full, and draws to her last Quarter, which is
accomplished most commonly the seventh day after she has attained the Full,
and receives a diminution of her light, to the wasting of the one half
thereof; and from the said seventh day after her Full, she diminishes
continually more and more, until she become again (as many honest men are)
corniculata, sharp-horned, and suffers continually diminution unto the
instant of her Change; and differs from her prime state after the Change,
only in this, that the first (represented by the first of these Examples) is
turned to the right hand of the Escocheon, and this other to the left. And
hitherto I have proposed examples of her natural aspects, you shall now see
her accidental form, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Moon in her detriment or Eclipse,
The Moon in her detriment.
Sable: the Moon is Eclipsed only at such time as she is at her full state:
and diametrically opposite unto the Sun; when by interposition of the Earth
between them, she seems to our sight for the time to be deprived of her
light, through the shadow of the gross body of the Earth. This is a passive
form of the Moon; and such her Passions are called in Latin, Labores Lunae,
the throws or pangs of the Moon. In former time the old Germans thought the
Moon was in a Trance, and used to shout and make a noise with Basins, to wake
her: or else they supposed she was angry with them, Passive forms of the Moon.
and therefore they howled till she looked cheerfully on them again. Of this
mutable state of the Moon, thus writes the Poet: Nec par aut eadem nocturnae
forma Dianae,
Esse potest usquam, semper hodierna s^quente:
Dame Cynthia imitates the Dames of our Nation;
Every day she attires her self in a new fashion.


Witty moral.
Which occasioned a witty Moral related by Plutarch (as I think) how on a time
the Moon sent for a Tailor to make her a Gown, but he could never fit her, for
it was ever either too little, or too big for her; which was not the Tailors
fault but her own inconstancy: so impossible a thing it is to fit the humors
of one that is fickle and unstable.

blazon or coat of arms He Bears, Or, three Stars issuant from as many
Cressants, Gules, by the name of Bateman, and was borne by Robert Bateman
Esquier, Chamberlain of London, who left a hopeful and flourishing issue,
viz. Richard Batemam, William Bateman, Anthony Bateman, now Sheriff of London,
1658. and Thomas Bateman, all Merchants and Members of that noble City.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Fesse indented, Azure, three
Stars, Argent, a Canton, of the second, charged with a Sun in glory by the name
of Thompson, being thus borne by William Thompson now Alderman of London,
Colonel George Thompson, and Maurice Thompson Esquire Governor of the East India
Company, sons of Robert Thompson of Wotton in Hertfordshire, Gentlemen of much
worth and quality.

Sometimes you shall find all these several kinds of Lights before expressed,
borne together in one Escocheon, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, the Sun, the Full Moon, Sun, Moon,
and seven Stars.
and the seven Stars, Or, the two first in Chief, and the last of orbicular
form in base. It is said that this Coat Armor pertained to Johannes de
fontibus, sixth Bishop of Ely; who had that (after a sort) in his Escocheon
which Joseph had in his dream, Genesis 37.9. where the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars
did do him reverence; signifying, his Father, Mother, and eleven Brethren. For
as in Scripture, so in Heathenish devotions also, the Sun and Moon were
accounted the Male and Female, and sometimes Man and Wife; and as the Moon has
all her light from the Sun, so has the Wife from the Husband; and as the Moon
is ever lighter on that side which looks toward the Sun, so should the wife
study to be fairest in her husbands eye. And many wives in their husbands
absence do truly imitate the Moon in this, that they are lightest when their
Sun is farthest from them. Howsoever this marriage betwixt Sun and Moon was
made up, it is certain that once the Banes were forbidden; as appears by one,
who speaking of Queen Mary's days, and of her Marriage relates, how when the
Sun went first a woing to the Lady Moon, Holinsheds Chron. in Q. Mary.
all Nations (especially those of hot Countries) preferred a petition to
Jupiter, to hinder the Nuptials; alleging, that there then being but one Sun,
yet he scorched and burned all, but if he should marry, and get other Suns, the
heat would so increase, as all must needs perish: whereupon Jupiter, stayed the
match for that time; or at least, was so propitious, that no issue came of the
conjunction of those fiery flames. The several states of the Moon increasing
and decreasing before handled, are now very rare in bearings and in manner
antiquated: inasmuch as in these days, not only their shapes, but their very
names also are extinct, and instead of them we have another new coined form,
having neither the name, shape, nor yet so much as the shadow of the former
remaining, as may be seen in the next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, three Cressants, Gules, by the name
of Butuillaine of Northamptonshire. Comets.
At this day we take no notice of any other form, either of the increasing or
decreasing Moon, but only of this depraved shape, which corrupt custom has
rashly hatched, as a form much differing from those before exemplified, if not
merely repugnant to Nature. The patricians of Rome used to wear the badge of
the Moon, on their shoes: as these Cressants are, sometimes the sole Charge of
the Field, as in this last Escocheon; so they are also borne upon the
honorable Ordinaries as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Ermyne, on a Chief, Sable, three Cressants,
Or, by the name of Preston of Suffolk as appears in diverse ancient Books
remaining in the Office of Arms. Concerning the chief and furs demonstrated in
this Coat Armor, I have elsewhere at large spoken of them in their proper
places.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a Crescent Argent; This is the Coat
of Lucas Lucy of London Merchant, and Richard Lucy his Brother, a Gentleman of
much worth and credit in this City.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, three Crescents, Or, and is the
Coat Armor of the ancient Family of Rider, originally of the North, of which
Family is that discreetly accomplished Gentleman Captain William Rider of London
Merchant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Chief, Sable, three Crescents,
Argent, by the name of Harvey, and is the Coat Armor of Master John Harvy of
Antwerpe, Daniel Harvy of Comb Nevill in Surrey, Eliab Harvy of London, and
Michael Harvy, Esquires, Sons of four of those seven Harvies Brethren, so
eminent some years since in and about this City, the eldest of which was that
profoundly learned Doctor William Harvy, the second Thomas Father of John above
mentioned, the third John a member of the Parliament the third of November,
1640. the fourth Daniel father of Daniel above mentioned, late high Sheriff of
Surrey, who has to wife the Daughter of Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton. The
fifth Brother is Eliab Harvy of Broadstreet London Esquire, the only surviving
of the seven, Father of Eliab abovesaid, which latter a while since married
Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Thomas Whitmore of Aply in Shropshire, Knight and
Baronet, not long after his Sister Mistress Mary Harvy had been married to Sir
William Whitmore Baronet, son of the said Sir Thomas. The sixth and seventh of
these brethren were Matthew and Michaell Harvy twins, whereof the former dyed
without issue, as also did the first and third; But Michaell (whose widow is
remarried to William Steel Chancellor of Ireland) had issue Michael
aforesaid, who has late married the Daughter of William Underwood Sheriff of
London, 1652. which Family is a hopeful and spreading Ornament to this
Kingdom.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Bars in Chief, three Crescents,
Gules, by the name of Nowers.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a Cross engrailed between four
Crescents, Argent, borne by Robert Barnham of Kent Esquire, eldest Son of Sir
Francis Barnham descended from Stephen Barnham of Southwick in the County of
Southampton, of whom it is thus remembered; Hic Stephanus Barnham oriundus erat
ab Waltero Barnham, Capitali Baroni de Scaccario Domini Regis Temopre R. 2.
militi.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, three Crescents parted paly wavy,
Gules, Azure, by the name of Haynes, which Family is not a little splendid by
the actions of two persons of it, Father and Son, whose conduct and management
in their commands, at Jamaica, where the noble Colonel unfortunately though
honorably fell, and lately at Dunkirke by the Son, may not sleep in Oblivion.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Fesse, between three Crescents,
Sable, this is the Coat of that accomplished Gentleman Sir Henry Lee Baronet
(who married Anne Daughter of Sir John Danvers of Dautsey) and was Son of Sir
Henry Son of another Sir Henry Lee of Quarenden in Buckinghamshire, created
Baronet June 29. 1611. whose widow was secondly married to the Earl of Sussex,
and thirdly to Robert Earl of Warwick.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Crescents, Sable, by the name of Withers, of which Family is Master Withers of
Wandesworth now living in good account and estimation; this is borne also by
Captain George Withers well known and much celebrated for his Britains
Remembrancer, and other Poems.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Azure, a Star issuant from between the
Horns of a Cressent, Argent, this is the Coat of the ancient Family of
Minshall of Cheshire; of which is Sir Richard Minshall Knight, a great
incourager of Arts and Industry.

The other sort of Stars, that do shine after a diverse sort, are those that we
call comets or Blazing-stars, whose Form is commonly as in this next Escocheon
is represented.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Blazing-star, or Comet streaming
in Bend, Comets.
proper. The Comet is not of an orbicular shape, as other the celestial
natures are; but does protract his light in length like to a beard, or rather
dilate it in the midst like a hairy bush, and growing thence Taperwise, after
the manner of a Fox-tail, and it does contract his substance or matter from a
slimy exhalation, and has not his being from the creation, neither is it
numbered amongst the things natural, mentioned in the History of Genesis, but
is Aliquid praeter naturam; and yet placed with the heavenly bodies, because
they seem to us to be of that kind. They are supposed to prognosticate
dreadful and horrible events of things to come: whereupon Lucan says, Ignota
obscurae viderunt sydera noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, coeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces, crinemque timendi
Sideris, and terris minitantem Regna Cometam.
In sable nights new stars of uncouth sight,
And fearful flames all over the Heavens appear,
With fiery Drakes, and Blazing bearded light,
Which fright the World, and Kingdoms threat with fear.


SECT. III. CHAP. IV.
Inconstant natures.
SO much of the first Member of the distribution before delivered, viz. of
Constant essences, which are only those Celestial creatures, which being void
of this corrupt mixture that is found in all creatures Sublunar, have a
privilege by divine appointment from the mutability, whereto all things under
the Moon are subject. Now come we to that other member thereof, Inconstant
natures what.
namely, such as are Inconstant natures, so far forth as there is use of them
in Arms. Inconstant natures are bodily Essences of small continuance by reason
of their ignoble or base substance, such are the four Elements, viz. Fire,
Air, Water, and Earth.

Fire, Winters treasure: Water, Summers pleasure:
But the Earth and Air, none can ever spare.
Elements what.
Elements are simple essences of small stability, and the womb of all mixed
things (as Scribonius notes) and according to some Authors called Elementa ab
alendo, of nourishing; but Saint Hierom calls Elementa, quasi Elevamenta, for
their proportionable mixture in the composition of the bodies sublunar, whereby
they are made fit for motion: of these Elements these examples next following
have a representation.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, seven Firebrands Flammant,
Profitable use of fire.
and Scintill^^^, Proper. Some Writers do affirm that none of the Mechanical
trades were found out by men before they had fire, which being at the last
obtained, and the use thereof known, from thenceforth were produced all manner
of Arts behovefull for man's use, and through assistance of fire, they did daily
put in practice some new invention and experimental proof, whereby they
attained their perfection of skill. Yet if we weigh the manifold mischiefs that
sometimes come by fire, we might doubt, whether the good or the hurt thereby
ensuing be greater. For both fire and water are good servants, but unruly
masters.

Fire in the Scriptures is often taken for a special token of Gods favor, and
that he is pleased with the Sacrifices that are done unto him; as when he
answers (as it were by Fire) like as we read Judges 6.21. Then the Angel of
the Lord put out the end of his staff that he held in his hand, and touched
the flesh and unleavened bread, and there arose up Fire out of the stones, and
consumed the flesh and unleavened bread, etc. And as when Eliah contended with
the Prophets of Baal touching the manifestation of the true God; Then the Fire
of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt Offerings, and the wood, and the
stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench, 1 Kings
18.38. And again, when Solomon had made an end of praying, Fire came down from
Heaven and consumed the burnt offerings, and the Sacrifices, and the glory of
the Lord filled the House, 2 Chro. 7.1.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, Whereupon this
Coat was given.
between three flames of Fire, Proper. This Coat stands in the Church of
Barkley in the County of Gloucester, in a window on the South side of the same.

The Cheuron being (as we before have said) a memorial and token of building,
it may seem the Heralds were not well advised to put Flames of fire so near it:
but it is no enforced conjecture, to suppose that this Coat Armor was first
given to him who had restored some public edifice, which Fire had consumed.
This next ensuing has also a resemblance with it.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron voided, Azure, between
three flames of Fire, Proper, by the name of Wells. Many Coat-Armours seem to
allude to the bearers name, but surely this is not so, this hot Element having
little affinity with that watery mansion. Fire betokens zeal, and every
Sacrifice was offered with Fire, to show with what zeal we should burn, that
come to offer prayer or praise and thanks to the Lord: Fire what it signifies.
the Holy Ghost also descended upon the Apostles in Fire, to show the fervency
of them upon whom it rested. But as here this painted fire yields little heat,
Hypocritical zeal.
so does an Hypocrites colored zeal; and many now adays might bear such
painted Fire upon an Escocheon of Pretense for their Device.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Billets Raguled, and Truncked
placed Saltire-wayes, the Sinister surmounted of the Dexter, Azure, inflamed on
their tops, Proper. This is a Dutch Coat, and is borne by the name of Shurstab.
Not unfitly is the force of counsel shadowed under the Fire of Prometheus,
Force of Counsel.
because that as Fire, so counsel does give light to the darkest obscurity of
things.

A Bend between six Fountains.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Diamond, a bend, Topaz, between six
Fountains, proper, borne by the L. Sturton. These six Fountains are borne in
signification of six springs, whereof the River of Sture in Wiltshire, has his
beginning, and passes along to Sturton the seat of that Baronie. And to this
head are referred, Spaciosa Maria, Vada Speciosa, Fluvij lati, Fontes Grati:
The sp^^ious Seas, the beuteous Shallowes, Rivers spreading, Fountains
pleasing. The Sea is the Riches of a Kingdom, and a fair River is the Riches
of a City: and therefore their Waves are held good bearing for one that has
done service upon either.

Fresh and sweet Waters are reckoned amongst Gods peculiar blessings promised
to the observers of his Laws, and those of chiefest rank; For the Lord thy
God brings thee into a good land, a land in the which are Rivers of Waters,
Fountains and depths that spring cut of the Valleys and mountains, Levit.
26.7.

A Rock what.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Rock, Sable, by the name of
Securades. A Rock signifies safety, refuge, or protection, as Psalm. 31. Thou
art my rock and my fort^ (...) For he that rests under the defense of the
Almighty, is like a Castle of strength situated upon an inaccessible Rock,
whereto none can approach to do hurt. I have set this as a pattern of the
earth, as being one principal parcel thereof, and withal to represent the
stability of the earth, which God has so fixed that it cannot be removed.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, a Mountain, Azure, inflamed, Proper.
A Mountain enflamed.
This Coat pertains to the Family of Mackloide, Lord of the Isles of Skey and
Jews in Scotland. Here you see are two elements borne together, the earthy and
fiery. Aetna is like this, or else this like Aetna, it being a Hill in Sicily,
which uncessantly casts forth flames of fire, whereto the envious man may be
fitly compared, who still disgorgeth his furious malice against others, but it
inwardly eats out Brimstone like his own bowels. One writes of this Hill
Aetna that on the one part it keeps Snow all the year long, and on the other
it ever burns, like those who can breath hot and cold out of one mouth.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, fieteene Islands, Fifteen Islands.
diversely colored. This Coat Armor pertains to the King of Spain in
respect of certain Islands of that number within his Dominions. And amongst
these examples of earthy bearing I have produced the bearing of a Mountain (a
heavy bearing, but much in use among the Germans:) Hillockes and Turfes might
I add, which may sooner be conceived by the undestanding, than delineated by
my Pencell. Touching the Element of the Air, I have represented no shape, for
to do that were as wise an attempt, as to weigh the wind in a balance: yet
some have expressed the boisterous motions thereof by a man's face, with swollen
and puffed Cheeks, Witches of Norway.
whence issues as much wind as out of the Witches bottles of Norway, who will
sell any wind that a Merchant will ask for: if they sold wines out of
bottles, I should sooner believe them, and I think the Buyers should be less
cozened.

SECT. III. CHAP. V.
HAving showed by particular examples the bearing of simple essences, Natures
of mixed kind.
or (at the least) of such things as have a mutual participation of qualities
with them; I will now proceed to the handling of the next member of the
Distribution, which comprehends Essences, or Natures of Mixed kinds.

Such are Brute, or without life. Living.


By Brute natures I understand all Essences whatsoever of mixed kind that are
merely void of life. Such are Meteors, Meteors unperfect.
which are unperfect kinds of mixture, which by their strange apparitions do
move their beholders to an admiration, and these are called Corpora sublimia,
Corpora sublimia.
because they are engendered aloft in the Aierie Region. The matter whereof
these Meteors are engendered, is a certain attracted fume drawn up on high by
the operation of the Sun and Stars.

This fume or smoke is Vapor. Exhalation.


Vapor is a moist kind of fume extracted chiefly out of the water, and
therefore is easily dissolved again thereinto, and hence are watery Meators.
Vapor what.
Exhalation is a drier kind of fume, attracted up from the earth and apt to be
inflamed, and they are fiery Meteors. There are also other Meteors formed of a
mixture of both these fumes.

Fiery Meteors are forms consisting of hot Exhalations attracted into the
Aerie Region, having a hot quality, which at length breaks into a Fire.
Fiery meteors what.


And of these are Simple. Mixed.


Simple fiery Meteors are of diverse sorts and different forms whereof there is
little use in Coat Armor, except of the falling Star, Meteors of diverse
sorts.
which of Blazoners is termed a Mullet; which is an Exhalation inflamed above
in the Air, and stricken back with a Cloud, whereby it is forced to run
downwards in such sort, that to the ignorant a Star seems to fall. There is
oftentimes found upon the earth a certain gelly fallen from above, and
dispersed into diverse points, which of many is taken to be the substance of the
falling Star or Mullet. Diverse bearing of Mullets.
Note that such Mullets borne in Coat Armor, are now most usually of five
points, but anciently you shall find them borne of six points, as in the next
Escocheon.

And so I have seen them in diverse very Old Rolls, in the Custody of that
worthy Kight Sir Richard Saint George, now Clarenceaux King of Arms, whose
industrious travel in the careful Collection of such Antiquities, and his
free communicating of the same to the studious in that way, merits much.

Mullets of 6. Points.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a Mullet of six points, pierced,
Gules, be the name Hassenhull. These kinds of Meteors have an appearance of
Stars, but in existence they are nothing less; for they are (says Bekenhab)
certain Impressions of the Air, appearing for a time, and in time do vanish
away, because they be of nature fluxible, and nothing permanent. Concerning the
bearing of Mullets of five points, behold these examples.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, three Mullets, pierced, Sable, by the
name of Wollaston, and was the Coat Armor of the late deceased Sir John
Wollaston Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of London.

Of five Points.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, six Mullets, three, two, and one,
Or, by the name of Welsh. In Blazoning of Mullets of, this form, you shall not
need to make mention of their points, because it is the usual form of
Bearing, but if they do consist of more than five points, then must you
specially observe their number, as in the former Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ruby, on a Chief, Pearl, two Mullets,
Diamond. I give this selected form of Blazoning to this present Coat Armor,
because it appertained to that Honored and right worthy Knight, Sir Nicolas
Bacon, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, in the Reign of our late
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, to whom he was a Privy Counselor, and for
his wisdom, Learning, and Integrity by her advanced to that high place of
Lord Keeper. His eldest Son Sir Nicolas Bacon, was the first Baronet that our
late Sovereign King James of ever blessed memory, made by Letters Patents under
the great Seal of this Kingdom: And Sir Francis Bacon, one of his younger
Sons, was Lord Keeper, and afterward Lord Chancellor of England, in the reign
of the said King, who created him in the year of Grace, 1617, Baron of Verulam,
and in the year following viscount of Saint Albans, and is the Coat Armor of
Francis and Nathaniel Bacon Brothers and Masters of Requests to his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, and descended from the aforesaid Family of the Bacons
of Redgrave in the County of Suffolk where it flourishes to this day.

Though the falling Star it self is but the Emblem of the inconstancy of
high fortunes, and unsure footing of Ambitious Aspirers, which may shine for a
time, but in a moment fall headlong from the Heaven of their high hopes; yet
the Mullet in Heraldry has a more noble signification, Noble signification of
Mullet.
it being supposed to represent some divine quality, bestowed from above,
whereby men do shine in virtue, Learning and works of piety, like bright Stars
on the earth, and these are Stellae dimissae e coelo, Stars let down from
Heaven by God; not Stellae dejectae, thrown down, as those which the Tail of
the Dragon threw down, which are Apostatates from God and their Religion; nor
yet cadentes stellae, falling stars, such as the stroke of Justice and their
own demerits casts down from the hight of their honors.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, on a Chief, Gules, two Mullets, Or, by
the name of Saint-John, and is the bearing of the Right Honorable the Earl of
Bullingbrook, Lord Saint-John of Bletso, of Sir Walter Saint-John of Lydyard
Tregos in Wiltshire and Battersey in Surrey Baronet, and of Oliver Saint-John
Lord chief Justice of the eommon Pleas, all descended from John a second Son of
John Lord Saint-John of Basing, 28 Ed. 1. the elder issue male being extinct by
the match with Paulet, thereby Lord Saint-John of Basing, since Marquess of
Winchester.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Cross, Argent, five Mullets,
Rule prescribed by Leigh.
pierced, Sable, by the name of Randall of Ailesford in the County of Kent.
Sometimes the round in the midst of the Mullet is not of the color of the
Field, and then you must not take it for a piercing, but for a Charge of other
signification. Gerrard Leigh seems to prescribe this General Rule touching
Mullets; that if the same do consist of even points, they must be called
Rowels, meaning (as I conceive) Rowels of Spurs. But he might more aptly have
applied the same in particular unto mullets pierced, in respect of their nearer
resemblance of such Rowels than those that are not pierced. Some are of
opinion, that all mullets, whether they consist of five or six points, pierced,
or unpierced are Rowels of Spurs, Diverse opinions concerning Mullets.
with this difference that those which are unpierced, are Rowels not fully
finished or made up by their maker, and their reason is, because that in old
French or Norman Languages, this word mollette signifies a Rowell of a Spur;
as appears in an ancient French Manuscript remaining in the Office of Arms,
where the Author there treating of the complete Armor of a Combatant a Cape a
pee, according to his degree, he there speaking of the Harness or Armor of
the Leg, uses these words concerning Spurs; -- Et ungz esperous d'ores qui
seront atachiez a une cordellette autour de la jambe affin que la mollette ne
turn dessoubz le pie. The French is old, M.S* Nt. 18. fol. 135. b.
and according to the Orthography of those times, which I, as precisely as I
can, have showed you. Others think that the Heralds have borrowed this word
used by them in blazon from a kind of fish so called, not that which is most
usually known by the name of mullet, but another not much unlike in shape to
that thing which is used in Armory; and as I am informed is often found upon
the Sands at the ebbing of the Sea; and is in Kent now by the vulgar people,
propter similitudinem called a Tailors bottom or a Five-finger, and in ancient
time it was for the like cause known by the name of a mullet; the form whereof
I have procured, according to the best description that I could gain from such
as have seen and well known this kind of fish presented unto your view here in
the Margent.

blazon or coat of arms And I find in a very ancient Roll now in the custody
of the before mentioned worthy Knight Sir Richard, St. George, Clarenceaux, in
the Blazon of Gilbert Hausarts Coat Armor, those which we now in Heraldry
blaze by the name of Mullets there to be termed Esteiles, I think it is meant
Estoeles; yet are not their points, which are five, there waved; but in this
variety of opinions I leave every man to follow what in his judgment he shall
approve to be best and most probable.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Ermine, on a Fesse, Sable, three Mullets,
Or, by the name of Lister, of which Family were Sir William, Sir Matthew, and
Sir Martin Lister, and many other Gentlemen of worth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, on a Fesse, Sable, three Mullets of
six points, Or, by the name of Grimston, and is the Coat Armor of that learned
Gentleman Sir Harbotle Grimston of Bradfield in Essex Baronet, second son, and
at length heir of Sir Harbotle Grimston of the same place, Knighted 1603.
created Baronet 1612.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, two Bars, Sable, each charged with
three Mullets of six points, Or, by the name of Hopton. As they are born upon
Ordinaries, so shall you find them commixt with other common Charges, as also
oftentimes sorted with Ordinaries interposed between them, one example whereof
I will now presently show you, which for the rarity of the form of the Ordinary
is worth your observation.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron Rompee, between three
Mullets, Or, by the name of Sault. This Cheuron in Blazon is called Rompee, or
rather Rompu, from the French verb Rompre, derived from the Latin Rumpo,
Rumpere, to break. Thus have you examples of the diverse bearing of these simple
meteors: to wit, the bearing of them sole, unpierced, pierced, some of five
points, and others of six.

So much of simple fiery Meteors, so far forth as there is use of them in
Coat Armor: Meteors mixed. Fiery Meteors what.
Now of such Meteors as are of mixed kind, according to the distribution before
delivered in the next precedent. These are fiery meteors bred of an exhalation
somewhat more gross and impure than those before specified, by reason of a
more thick and slimy vapor whereof they be ingendered.

Meteors of this kind are Thunder. Lightning.


Thunder is an inflamed Exhalation, which by his powerful force breaks
thorough the Clouds violently, with great noise and terror. Thunder what.
The forcible power thereof is rather apprehended by the ear, than subjected
to the sight: nevertheless, the ancient times have devised a certain
imaginary form whereby they would express the forcible power thereof, as
also of the lightning.

Thunder is supposed to be ingendered two manner of ways, viz. When either a
hot or dry vapor is enclosed in a cold and moist Cloud, and being unable to
contain it self therein, by reason of the contrariety, it labors by all
means to find a vent, and so striving by all means to get passage, it makes
way with great vehemence and horror of sound: such as a Glowing Gadd of Iron,
or any other fiery matter makes, when water is infused thereupon in abundance,
or that it is therein drenched, it makes a furious and murmuring sound. Such
is that weak and feeble sort of thunder; that seems to be ingendered in some
region of the Air far remote from us, yielding only (for a small time) a kind
of turbulent noise or murmuring.

Or else it is engendered in a more violent manner, to wit, when this enclosed
dry and combustible matter, being inflamed in the Clouds of contrary
qualities, does break out with vehemence, then does it yield a terrible and
forcible sound, not unlike a great piece of Ordnance when it is overcharged.
And this sound thus ingendered is called Thunder.

This sort of sound is used oftentimes Metaphorically, as when God threatens
his Judgments against sin, he is said to thunder them out. In this sense does
Petrarch use the same, saying, Deus ideo tonat in Coelis, ut tu in terras been
vivas, quodque amore debueras, saltem metu facias. For unless God loved man he
would never threaten him, but rather punish him; forasmuch as man does evermore
minister many and those grievous occasions of execution of Gods Judgments.

Lightning is a vehement eruption of an inflamed exhalation, Lightning what.
proceeding from Thunder; which though it is in time after the Thunder, yet is
first represented to our senses, by reason that our sight is far more subtle
and apprehensive than is our hearing. And in regard that Thunder and Lightning
do both proceed from one self-cause, they have in such their imaginary fiction
conjoined them both under the Form, after this manner.

Thunderbolt.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Azure, Jupiters Thunderbolt in Pale, Or,
Inflamed at both ends, Proper, shafted ^alti^e ways, and winged Fesse-waies,
Argent. Chassaneus describing the Ensigns of sundry Nations, notes this for
the Ensign of the Scythians: and in the Glory of G^nerosity it is said, that
Tomyris Queen of Scythia did bear the same in this manner. The bearing of
Lightning betokens the effecting of some weight^ business with much celerity
and foreceab^^^esse; b^^^use in all ages this has been reputed the most quick,
forcible and terrible dart, wherewith the Almighty strikes where himself
pleases: which the Heathen religiously acknowledged, though he thereupon
infers an irreligious conclusion, saying, Si quoties peccent homines, sua
fulmina mittat
Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit:
If God should Thunder-strike still when he sin does see,
His shafts would soon be spent, and arm un-arm'd would be.
His inference had been truer thus:
If God should Thunder-strike still when he sin does see,
All men would soon be spent, yet God still armed should be.


Hitherto of Fiery meteors, now of such as be watery. Watery meteors are
certain cold and moist vapors, Meteors waterie.
copiously attracted by the powerful operation of the heavenly bodies into the
Air, and there transmutated into their several forms. Of these there are
diverse sorts, whereof Clouds are most usually borne in Coat Armor. A Cloud is
a Gross vapor, attracted into the middle Region of the Air, A cloud what.
and there thickened, by reason of the coldness of the place having in it store
of matter apt to engender water. A Cloud (according to Zan.) is a most thick
vapor, attracted from the waters by the heat of the Sun, unto the middle
Region of the Air, and there thickened by the coldness thereof, and so
continues until it be again dissolved by the Suns heat, and so converted into
rain, and does distill down in drops. Zanch. de meteoris aqueis, 483. The
Clouds are said to be Gods chariots, as we may see Psalm. 104. He lays the
beams of his Chambers in he waters, and makes the Clouds his Chariot, and
walks upon the wings of the winds. The Clouds are Gods instruments wherein he
contains and retains at his pleasure, the showers of Rain as in Bottles: as
we may see Job 38.37. Who can number the clouds by Wisdom? Or who can cause
to cease the bottles of Heaven?

The Clouds are resembled to a Sponge replenished with Water, and God with the
hand of his providence wringeth the Sponge moderately, not pressing out all the
moisture thereof at once, but leasurely, and by little and little after a
gentle and soaking manner. Coined form of Clouds.
No pencill can make a true representation of Clouds, because every instant and
moment of time, does add unto them some kind of alteration, whereby it
differs from that it was late before: nevertheless, former times have coined
(of these also) a conceited form, as in these next Escocheons may be seen.

blazon or coat of arms This Coat Armor, is Bar Nebule, of eight pieces,
Topaz and Diamond; and pertains to the Honorable Family of Charles Late
Earl of Devon, and Lord Montjoy, Lieutenant governor of Ireland, Great Master
of the Artillery of England, Captain of Portsmouth, Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, and of his Majesty's most honorable privy Council. The
bearing of Clouds in Arms (says Vpton) does import some Excellency in their
Bearer.

In the Clouds has the Rainbow his temporary residence, and therefore next
let us cast our eyes on it.

blazon or coat of arms A Rainbow is a diverse colored Arch or Bow, Rainbow
what.
formed in a hollow, thin, and unequal Cloud, by the reflection of the Beams
of the opposite Sun. The cause of the rare use of the Rainbow in
Coate-Armour, perhaps may be for that the colors thereof cannot be aptly
counterfeited, as witnesses Aristotle, Meteor. Lib. 3. saying, Difficult
representing of the Rainbow.
Soli colores Iridis non possunt fieri a Pictoribus: whereby it seems of all
other the hardest thing to imitate. The natural colors of the Rainbow
(according to Scribonius) are Red, Green, Blew, and Yellow. The Field hereof
is, Argent, Issuant out of two Petit Clouds in Fesse, Azure, a Rainbow, in the
Nombrill point a Star, proper. The Rainbow is a token of Gods Covenant made
with Noah, and in him with all people; The Rainbow a token of Gods Covenant.
as appears, Genesis 9.13. I have set my Bow in the Clouds, and it shall be
for a sign of the Covenant between me and the Earth, etc. As touching the
Beauty of the Rainbow, it is said, Eccles. 43.11. Look upon the Rainbow, and
praise him that made it: very beautiful is it in the brightness thereof; it
compasses the Heaven about with a circle, and the hand most high has bended
it, Ibid. 12. And indeed worthily is he to be so praised, who when he could
have made a Bow to destroy us, rather chose to make his Bow to assure us, he
would not destroy us. A noble president, A president for Nobles.
to teach Nobles to use their strength and their weapons rather to preserve and
help, Farnesius.
then to overthrow or hurt those who are under their power. Farnesius says,
that the Rainbow appearing in the South, betokens Rain; in the West, it
fore-sheweth Thunder; and in the East, prognosticates fair Weather.

SECT. III. CHAP. VI.
HItherto have we prosecuted our intendment, Things living what.
touching things of mixed nature, which are brute of livelesse: now proceed we
to the consideration of things of Mixed nature having life. Mixed Natures that
are living are corporeal Essences, endued with a vegetable Soul; Soul taken in
the largest signification.
for here we use this word Soul, as also the word Life, in his largest
signification. A vegetable Soul is a faculty or power that gives life unto
bodies.

Whereby they do live After a sort, or Perfectly.


Such as do live after a sort, or less perfectly, are all sorts of Metals;
which because they are supposed to grow and increase in the earth, we will (for
our present use) ascribe life unto them. Metals what.
Metals are bodies imperfectly living, and are decocted in the veins of the
Earth.

Of these some are naturally Liquefiable. Not Liquefiable, or less Liquefiable.


Liquefiable.
The Liquefiable are Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, and other of like kind.

Not Liquefible.
The not or hardly Liquefiable are Precious. Brittle.


Stones.
Those that are altogether Hard are Stones of all sorts. Stones are bred of a
waterish moisture, and of an oily kind of Earth firmly compacted together.

Of Stones, some are Precious. Base.


Precious Stones.
Stones precious are of that sort that we call in Latin Gemmae; which are of
estimation either for that they are rarely to be gotten, or for some virtue
fancied to be in them, or for that they are such as wherewith man's eye is
wonderfully delighted by reason of their pureness and beautiful transparent
substance. Of which kind are the Diamond, Topaz, Escarbuncle, Emerald, Ruby,
and such like. Of which sorts, twelve of chiefest note were appointed by God
himself to be used in the principal ornament of the High Priest, Escarbuncle
of most use in Arms.
when he appeared before the Lord, presenting therein the Names of the Twelve
Tribes of Israel, to show how precious in his sight is the People and Nation
which serves him, as himself prescribes. But of all these several kinds,
the Escarbuncle is of most use in Arms, and is borne as in these next
Escocheons appears.

Escarbuncle of eight staves.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Ruby, a Chief Pearl, over all an
Escarbuncle, of eight staves, or rays, pommette and florette, Topaz. This
Coat Armor pertained anciently to the Earls of Anjou, from whom came Geffrey
Plantagenet Earl of Aniou, Geffrey Plantagenet.
that married Maud the Empress, daughter to Henry the first, King of England.
This Stone is called in Latin Carbunculus, which signifies a little Cole,
because it sparkleth like fire, and casts forth as it were fiery rays. There
is another kind of but fiery Carbuncle, which Surgeons can best handle, one
of those of the Lapidaries, is more to be desired than ten of the other.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Bars, Azure, over all an
Escarbuncle, of eight rays, Gules, Pommette and Florette, Or. This Coat is cut
in stone upon the Church Porch door of Magnotsfield in the County of Gloucester,
and is borne by the name of Blount. Blount.
As there is in all kinds of Minerals, a vegetable life, even so and much more
(says Zanchius) is it judged that Stones have this life, yea, and that they
have a passive capacity of Sickness, of Age, Passive capacity of Minerals.
and also of Death. Whether this be so or not, sure it is a pretty device, to
advance their estimation with those who already too much dote on them;
insomuch, as it was said of the Roman Empresses, that some of them did wear
whole Kingdoms at their Ears, so now many a one hang whole Mannours on their
sleeves.

Stones base.
So much of Precious Stones: now of those which are Base; such we esteem all
those to be, which both for their ordinary and base employments, and also for
that they are easily to be had of all men, are of small estimation; as are
these next following, with their like.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, three Flint stones, Argent,
Flint-stone.
by the name of Flint. This Coat is quartered by the Right Honorable the
Earl of Cumberland. The Flintstone is an ancient Emblem or token used by
great persons. Johannes Digionius Earl of Flanders gave for his Device,
Ignitabulum Silicem feriens, Digionius Earl of Flanders.
a Steel and a Flint stone, which well agreed with his disposition. This Earl
was taken Prisoner by Bajazeth the Turk, and when he should have been put to
the sword, a Physiognomer, much esteemed by the Turk, persuaded him to let him
go free, saying, he foresaw in him, Censure of a Physiognomer.
that when he came home, he would set a great part of Christendom in a
cumbustion; as indeed he did, by reason of the murder of Jews, brother to the
French King, Charles the sixth; which his murder, the Franciscane Friars did as
impiously defend, by the examples of Zimri killed by Phinees, Holofernes by
Judith, Franciscane Friars.
Sisera by Jael, and the Egyptians by Moses. As the like examples are still
produced by the traitorous Parricides of Kings and Princes, set on work y the
Grandfather of such holy Treasons. The said Earls son, Philippus Bonus, was
Founder of the Order of the Golden Fleece, which hangs at a collar made with
the forms of the said Steeles and Flint stones; Steeles.
which order the King of Spain still upholdeth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Milstones, Argent, by the name
of Milveton. Three Milstones.
The Millstone represents unto us the mutual converse of humane Society;
because Milstones are never occupied single, but by couples; and each stands
in need of the others help, for the performance of the work whereunto they are
ordained. Hereupon our mutual amities and assistances are termed in Latin,
Necessitudines Amicitiae, because every man stands in need of some fast and
assured friend, Whereto resembled.
by whose counsel and advice he may be supported for the better compassing of
whatsoever affairs of importance he shall undertake. Of all the rare Stones
before mentioned, in my judgment men have cause to esteem the Millstone (though
here we have placed it amongst baser stones) the most precious Stone of all
others; Needful use thereof.
yet I would be loath to wish any Lady to wear it at her Ear.

So much of Metals or Minerals (for I use the word in the largest sense) that
are hard and not Liquefiable; Minerals used in the largest sense.
there are other also which we reckoned to be hardly Liquefiable, in respect of
their brittle nature; such are Alome, Salt, Amber, Chalk, etc. but there is no
use of them in Arms. Because in this Chapter, I have spoken of Precious
stones, diverse of which are of use in Heraldry, for Blazoning of the
Coat-Armours of Nobility (as my self have often occasion to do in sundry parts
of this Work) before I proceed further I will set down those several stones,
as they answer to their several metals and colors; together with the Planets
also, which I use only in the Achievements of Kings and great Princes.

Selected Forms of Blazon before mentioned Metal and Colors. 1 Or. 2 Argent.
3 Gules. 4 Azure. 5 Sable. 6 Vert. 7. Purpure. 8 Ten. 9 Sanguine.
Precious Stones. 1 Topaz. 2 Pearl. 3 Ruby. 4 Sapphire. 5 Diamond. 6 Emerald. 7
Amethyst. 8 Jacynthe. 9 Sardonyx.
Planets. 1 Sol. 2 Luna. 3 Mars. 4 Jupiter. 5 Saturn. 6 Venus. 7 Mercury. 8
Dragons head. 9 Dragons tail.



SECT. III. CHAP. VII.
SO much touching examples of such Natures, as do live after a sort: in the
next place succeed those things, which do live perfectly or properly; such
Natures are those as have in them express and manifest tokens of a living soul.

Of this kind, some are Vegetable. Sensitive.


Forasmuch as I am now to treat of vegetable Animals, and of their particular
kinds; I must excuse my self in two things before I enter into the Exemplifying
of them: The one, that there is no cause that any man should expect at my hands
an express demonstration of each particular species of them: And that I should
run through and display their manifold and almost innumerable kinds, for that
would be a tedious travel and (besides) an infinite and unnecessary charge and
cost, and withal far wide from the project of my prefixed purpose. The other
thing (and the same more pertinent to that I do intend) is, That in handling of
vegetables and Sensitives, I purpose only to distribute their several ranks
of Distribution, according to their Order to them prescribed by Nature, which
to express is my chiefest drift, and the principal scope that I do aim at.

Of the perfect sort of Creatures there are many kinds, whereof some are of
more perfection and more worthy than others, according to their more excellent
kind of life, or worthiness of soul.

Of these the less perfect sort of bodies were first created; and then such as
were of more perfection. Plants are more worthy than Metals, and Animals of
more reckoning than Plants: therefore were these first created, and those
afterward.

Of Animals wherewith God did adorn the Air, the Waters and the Earth, there
are diverse kinds, whereof some were more worthy than others; in the Creation of
these did God observe the same order.

Between the Creation of Plants and Animals, it pleased God in his unsearchable
wisdom, to interpose the Creation of the Stars wherewith he beautified the
Heavens, he did it to this end; to give us to understand, that albeit the Sun
with his light and motion together with the Stars do concur in the generation
of Plants and Animals, nevertheless their generation is not to be attributed
simply to the influence and power of these Celestial bodies; but only to the
Omnipotency of God, inasmuch as by his powerful Word he commanded the Earth to
produce all sorts of Plants and their fruits, before the Stars were created.

From the most fertile and pleasant Garden of Eden, unto the most barren and
desolate Wilderness, may we see and behold the great and wonderful Works of
God, and take occasion to extol his Omnipotency, Wisdom and Mercy. As we may
observe, Esaias 41.19. I will set in the Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree,
and the Myrre tree, and the Pine tree; and I will set in the Wilderness the
Fur tree, the Elm, and the Box together. Therefore let them see and know,
and let them consider and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has
done this, and that the Holy one of Israel has created it, Verse 20. Hence we
may gather that there is no object so mean that presents it self to our view,
but will minister some just occasion to glorify God.

Men are accustomed to attribute the propagation of these, either to the
influence of nature, or to the travel and industry of man; but these were
produced before any other of like kind could be found upon the face of the
Earth, whereof it might be imagined they might receive being; for as yet there
had never fallen any rain to fructify the Earth, whereby it might produce
green herbs, nor as yet was Man created, that might manure and till the ground
for that purpose: therefore neither were they produced naturally, or of their
own accord, nor yet by the Art, Skill, or industry of Man, but by the immediate
Word and commandment of God.

The reason that moved Moses to give an instance of Plants and Herbs, how that
they were produced by the virtue and power of Gods word only, and not
naturally, or by the skill and industry of man; neither yet of Animals, nor of
any other of the infinite number of things created ( Genesis 1.11.) was this,
because the generation of Plants and Herbs might be much more doubted of, than
the original of other things.

Of the first springing of Trees in the Creation Moses says, Et germinare
fecerat Jehova Elohim e terra omnem arborem concupiscibilem, id est, visu, and
bonam ad escam; which words do comprehend all the desirable qualities of fruit
trees* for in them we expect that their fruits should be either delightful to
the Eye, or that they should be fit for food and wholesome, and that they be
also fragrant and sweet smelling: For the fruits of Trees, the better they be,
the more odoriferous they are.

That the Trees, wherewith Paradise was planted, had all these qualities, it is
manifest by the words of Moses, in that he says, Concupiscibilem ad visum, and
bonam ad escam: whereby we gather that the sight is delighted with things
beautiful and glorious, the smell with sweet and pleasant savours, and the
palate with things of sweet and pleasant taste. And none of these are in
themselves evil; for such was the constitution of Adam before he transgressed,
that he might have delighted himself in them all without offense; and to that
end did God create them, that he should use them with thanksgiving.

Moses describes unto us two principal qualities of the Garden of Paradise,
whereby he lays before us the pleasantness of the situation thereof, and
also the beauty and fertility of the soil: The first of these qualities was
that it was replenished with all sorts of Trees, not only most pleasant and
delightful to the Eye, but also most pleasant to the taste; for that they
produced the best and sweetest fruits. The other quality was, that the whole
circumference of the Garden of Paradise was surrounded and environed with a
River, being distributed into four heads, which did highly beautify the same,
and made it most pleasant to the view.

In this description Moses makes mention of two Trees of special qualities,
that were planted in the midst of Paradise: The one named the Tree of Life,
the other the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil.

The first of these had a vivificant power in it self, the fruit whereof was
ordained to this end; That being eaten it would enable a Man never to feel
sickness, feebleness, old Age, or Death: but should evermore continue in the
same state of strength and agility of body: This was the efficacy and power
that was given to this Tree; whereof it was never yet deprived. Therefore was
this quality after a sort natural thereunto.

For this cause was there a Cherub set at the entrance of Paradise, to keep out
such as would enter the same, and eat of the fruit of the Tree of Life; that
he should not always live that kind of life.

How behovefull the knowledge of the virtues and operations of Trees, Plants,
Herbs and other vegetables are for the extolling and manifesting the
Omnipotency, Wisdom, Mercy, loving favor, and fatherly providence of our most
gracious God toward sinful Man, is, in that he has created for the behoof
and use of man, as well touching his necessary food and raiment, as for
recreation and delight; we may evidently perceive by Solomon's industrious
investigation of the virtues and operations of all sorts of vegetables, for
(besides other his admirable qualities wherewith he was richly endued) he had
surpassing knowledge in the virtues, operations and qualities of herbs and
other vegetables, insomuch as he was able to reason, discourse, and dispute,
not only of Beasts, Fowls, creeping things and fishes, but of Trees also and
Plants, from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyssope that springs out of the
Wall, that is, from the highest and tallest tree to the smallest shrub and
lowest herb. Thus we see the knowledge and skill in natural Philosophy to be
holden in great estimation in all Ages, insomuch as it has been reckoned a
study well befitting the dignity of a King, yea of Solomon who was the wisest
King that ever was, and a Type of our Savior Christ. But to return to the
vegetable.

Such are said to be vegetable as have in them a lively power of growing,
budding, leafing, blossoming, and fructifying, as Trees, Plants, Herbs, Grass,
etc. and of these some grow on Trunks or solid bodies, some upon flexible
Stalks: some again grow upon a single Stem, as commonly all Trees do, some
upon manifold Stemmes, as Shrubs, Roses, etc.

Trees what.
Trees are certain Plants, springing from a root with a single Trunk or Stem
(for the most part) shooting up in height, and delineated with lims, sprigs or
branches. Of these Trees some are more proper to hot Countries, as the
Frankincense tree to Arabia; the Balsamum, Myrrh, Mace, and Nutmeg trees, as
also the Pepper trees, and such like, which chiefly grow in India, the Plane
tree in Egypt and Arabia; the Pomegranate in Africa, etc. which I purposely
pass over, and will only give examples of other sorts to us better known,
Examples of fruits better known to us.
whether they be Trees fruitful or barren. In giving examples whereof I
purpose not to observe any precise order, but to mingle then pel-mel one with
another, because I hold such curious sorting them, better fitting a professor
or Physic or some Herbalist, than an Armorist; to whom it suffices to show
superficially, that these, and their several parts, are borne in Coat Armor,
as well simply of themselves, as also with things of different nature, as in the
examples following may appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Or, on a Mount in base, An Ooak.
an Oak acorned, Proper, by the name of Wood. Almighty God, what time by his
powerful word he did enable the Earth to fructify, and produce Herbs and
Trees with their variable fruits, said, Let the earth bud forth according to
his kind, the bud of Herb that seedeth seed, the fruitful Tree which bears
fruit according to his kind, which has seed in it self upon the earth; and it
was so: Genes. 1.24.
whereby (says Zanchius) we are admonished that they should be preserved and
nourished in the earth unto the time of seed for our necessary use, for that
they profit little until they be come unto their full ripeness. The Oak is
of the strongest sort of Trees, and therefore may best challenge the first
place.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Mount in a Base, a Pine Apple
tree, fructed, Proper, by the name of Pine. Pine Apple Tree.
There is a difference between the production of seed of Trees and of Herbs,
as well for the propagation as for the preservation of their several kinds, for
the Herbs do produce their seed in their stalks without fruit; and the Trees
do produce theirs in their fruit.

It is holden of some that the Pine Tree is a representation of Death,
forasmuch as the same being once felled, or cut down by the ground, the root
thereof is said never to sprout or spring any more.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Mount in Base, a Pear tree, Pear
Tree.
fructed, Proper, by the name of Pyrton, As God for the necessary sustenance of
Man, ordained manifold varieties of nourishment, so likewise many sorts were
created not only for man's necessity, but also for his delight, both to Eye and
taste; as too well appeared by the first woman, whose rash affection in this
kind, all her Posterity has since rued. But withal God teaches us by these
dumb instructors, that man should not be fruitless, lest he become thereby
f^ll only fit for burning.

Those proposed examples are of whole bearing of Trees: Now of their parts,
viz. their Leaves, Fruits, Slips, etc. promiscuously, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, Trunk.
the Stem or Trunk of a Tree Eradicated, or Mooted up by the roots, as also
Couped in Pale, sprouting out two branches, Argent, by the name of Borough,
alias Stockden, of Borough in Leicester shire. Branches must needs wither which
have neither shelter from above nor nourishment from beneath: being therein
like that Roman Embassage, where the one Ambassador had a giddy head, and the
other gouty feet, whereof one said, that it had neither head nor foot.

^^^ee Oaken ^^^ps.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three
Oaken slips, acorned, Proper, by the name of Amades of Plymouth. By the words
formerly noted to be extracted out of Genesis 1.24. Let the earth bud forth, etc.
we do gather (says Zanchius) a diverse manner of conserving of the several
kinds of Herbs and Trees by propagation (through the production of their Seeds
whereby their particular sorts are preserved) the one that do bring forth their
seed in their stalks without fruit, and Trees do produce their seed in their
fruit.

Sterved branches.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three sterved branches, slipped,
Sable, by the name of Blackstock. This Example is of different nature from all
the former, those bearing the signs of their vegetation and life, but this
being mortified and unvested of the verdour which sometimes it had; which is
the condition of all mortal men, whose most flourishing estate must have a
change, their beauty turned to baldness and withered wrinkles, and they leave
all their riches, or their riches, leave them: this is the end o^ (...) Tree,
an^ fruits of our worldly estate; but the fruits of holiness will (...)
perish, and the righteous man shall be as the tree planted by the Waters of
life. Other Escocheons of the same kind ensue.

Limb of a tree.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Bend of the limb of a Tree,
Raguled and Trunked, Argent, by the name of Penruddock. That which I spoke of
before touching the Bend Crenelle, fitted by Art for the scaling of a Wall, the
same seems to be here naturally found. At the first approach of King William
and Conq^^^^r, the green boughs of trees, borne by Soldiers* ^^ed for an
excellent Stratagem of defense; and as helpful an instrument of offense to the
enemy may this trunked tree be, when other helps are wan^^ng to the besiegers.

Stock.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Stocks or Stumps ^f Trees,
Couped and Eradicated, Sable, by the name o^ Retowre. If the top or boughs be
cut off, yet the Root standing there is hope of a new growth: but when the Root
is plucked up, there remains no hope of reviving. And therefore that was a
fearful warning, Now is the Axe put to the Root; which should quicken us to
the bearing of good fruits, lest otherwise we mean to bear that dreadful
stroke, and the issue of that terrible commination.

blazon or coat of arms H^ ^eareth, Azure, three Laurel leaves slipped, Or,
This is the paternall Coat Armor of Sir Richard Leveson of Lilleshall in the
County of Salop who was made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles. That the Laurel was in ancient times, thought to
be a remedy against poison, lightning, etc. and in war used as a token of peace
and quietness, you may at your leisure read in Master Bossewell his book of
Coats and Crests.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Topaz, five fig leaves in Saltire,
Emerald. Fig Leaves.
This Coat appertains to the Count Feria of Spain. The Fig Leaves are the
ancientest wearing that is, being the first clothing of our first
transgressing Parents. And Iraeneus says, that they used not the Leaves of any
other Tree, to show the torture and anguish of Repentance, signified by the
roughness and sharpness wherewith this sort of leaf is beset. Our Savior
Christ liked not to see Fig Leaves without Fruit, and therefore cursed the
Tree: and accursed will their condition be, the growth of whose Faith and
Religion is in show, and not in substance of fruitful works.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Ermine, two bars, Sable, Elmen leaves.
each charged with five Elmen leaves, Or, by the name of Elmes of Lilford in
the County of Northampton. It is supposed that there is great love, and a
natural Sympathy betwixt the Elm Tree and the Vine, because the Vine never
prospers better than when it grows by the Elm, whereas the Elm it self is
of all Trees the most barren. So should those who have few good parts in
themselves, yet at least cherish and support such, as Nature and Art have
enabled to produce better fruits of their industry.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, Three Woodbine leaves pendant, Woodbine
leaves.
Azure. This Coat Armor pertains to the Family of Gamboa in Spain. Sometimes
you shall have these Leaves borne bend-waies, as in this next Escocheon. The
Woodbine is a loving and amorous plant, which embraces all that it grows near
unto; but without hurting of that which it loves: and is therein contrary to
the Ivy (which is a Type of lust, rather than of love) for it hurts that
which it most embraces. Sometimes you shall find Leaves of sundry sorts of
Trees borne Ordinary ways, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Woodbine leaves Bend-waies,
Proper, 2. and 1. by the name of Theme. These Leaves are all one with those in
the last precedent Escochon in shape, but different from them in the manner of
their position, in that those are borne with their points downwards, and these
naturally or upwards. Other whiles they are borne in form of other Ordinaries,
as by example shall hereafter be made plain. Moreover you shall find them
sometimes borne with Ordinaries between them, as in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Cheuron, Gules, between three Nettle
Leaves, Nettle leaves.
Proper, by the name of Malherbe, Devon. The Nettle is of so tetchie and
froward a nature, that no man may meddle with it, as many testy-natured men
are. One writes, that a little Girl being stung by a Nettle in her fathers
Garden, complained to him that there was such a cursed Herb in his Garden, as
that it was worse than a Dog, for it would bite them of their own house. Her
Father answered her, that it was the nature of it to be unpartiall, and friend
or foe were all alike to it. Yet this property it has, that the harder you
press it the less it will sting.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Sable, three Wallnut-leaves, Or, between
two Bendlets, Argent, by the name of Waller, and is the Coat Armor of Sir
William Waller of Winchester Castle in Hampshire and Groombridge in Kent, Sir
Hardress Waller Major General of Ireland, and Edward Waller of Beconsfield
Esquire, all descended from Richard Waller of Groombridge Esquire, who at the
battle of Angencourt took prisoner the Duke of Orleans, to signalize which
action the Family have ever since borne hanging on their ancient Crest ( viz. a
Wallnut tree) the Arms of France with a Labell; this Coat with his due
difference belongs to Richard Waller Merchant Adventurer of London.

Holly leaves.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Holly Leaves pendent, Proper,
by the name of Inwine. Note that when leaves are borne after this manner, viz.
pendent, you must tell in what fashion they are borne: but if their points
only be upwards, then it suffices to say Leaves, because it is their most
natural and proper way when they are in full vigor. Now I will show you an
example, where three leaves are borne Bar-wayes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Holly leaves, Barwaies, two
and one, their stalks toward the Dexter part of the Escocheon, Borne
barwayes.
Proper, by the name of Arnest, Devon. These seem to have been, (as still
they are) much used in Adorning the Temples an^ Sacred places; especially at
the most solemn time of our Saviors Nativity, and thence to have taken that
Holy name. There is a kind of Holly that is void of these Prickles and of
gentler nature, and therefore called Free-holly, which in my opinion is the
best Holly; and so it was in his, who says, that charity (the daughter of true
holiness) is gentle and hurts not, but rather suffers all things: far
unlike to those Hedge-hogge holy-ones, whose sharp censures and bitter words
pierce through all those who converse with them.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, a Pomegranat, in Pale, slipped,
Pomegranats.
Proper. These Arms do pertain to the City and Country of Granata, within the
Dominions of the King of Spain, situated by the Mediterranean Sea. This fruit
is holden to be of profitable use in Physic, for the qualifying and allaying
of the scorching heat of burning Agues, for which end the juice thereof is
reckoned to have a very sovereign virtue.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Pears, Or, Pears.
by the name of Stukeley, Devon. This fruit, as other, was ordained for the
comfort of man: but as the Devil made use of the Apple to the destruction of
man, so did the Divils Imps use the Pear to a wicked end, when the Monks of
Swinsted inviting King John to a Banquet, poisoned him in a dish of Pears,
though others write it was in a Cup of Ale.

Concerning the fruits of Trees, Prohibition of the Tree.
God in the beginning gave unto Man a free scope to use them without restraint,
only the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil excepted, whereof he
was prohibited the eating upon pain to dye the Death whenever he should taste
thereof. In this prohibition God would, that he should not so much respect the
fruit of the Tree, as the Sovereign authority of him that forbade the eating
thereof, yea, this chiefly and principally first, and secondly, the fruit
because of the interdiction.

The end for which God did prohibit Adam the eating of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, was, that notwithstanding God had given him a
Sovereign jurisdiction on earth, yet was he not so absolute a governor and
commander, but that he had a Lord Paramount to whose hests he was simply and
with all reverence to obey, and that he should know that God his Creator was
above him, whose will should be unto him the Rule of all Justice, and whereunto
he should conform all his actions, counsels, and cogitations, that he should
evermore have an awful eye unto him, and always hope in him, glorify, fear,
reverence, and love him. The end I say, was this; That Adam should know both
God, and himself: God as his true creator, himself to be his creature; God, to
be his Lord; himself, his servant; God a most bountiful and magnificent giver
of all good blessings; himself, Gods foster-child, and such a one as must
acknowledge that whatsoever he possesses, proceeds from Gods free bounty and
mercy; and therefore should render under him continual praise and thanks for
the same, from the ground and bottom of his heart.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Gules, a Cheuron, Ermine, between 3 Pine
Apples, erected, Or, by the name of Pine. A Cheuron between three Pine Apples.
The Pine tree was in much request in ancient times, for adorning of walks
about Mansion houses; according to that of the Poet: Fraxinus in sylvis
pulcherrima, Pinus in hortis,
Populus in fluviis, Abies in montibus albis:
The Ash in Woods makes fairest show;
The Pine in Orchards nigh;
By Rivers best is Poplars hew,
The Fur on Mountains high.


Three Mulberies.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Mulberies, their Stalks trunked,
Proper. The Mulbery tree is an Hieroglyphick of Wisdom, whose property is to
speak and to do all things in opportune season: And it is reputed (as I may
say) the wisest of all ^rees, in regard it never sprowteth, nor buddeth, until
such time as all extremity of cold Winter season be clearly past and gone. This
Fruit has a Purple blushing color, in the the one resembling the Judges
attire who attempted Susanna, Susanna
in the other that hue of their face which should have been in them, if they
had been so gracious to blush at their fault, as they were hasty to commit it.
A greater sin in them than in others, because they were to punish others for
the like offenses: but it is no rare thing to see the great Offenders hang the
little.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Bend, Sable, three Clusters of
Grapes, Argent. This Coat appertains to Sir Edmound de Maroley Knight of the
County of York. He lived in the time of Edward the First. How profitable the
moderate use of the juice of the Grape may be to man, is as manifest, as the
inconvenience that does attend the too much bibbing of the same is odious.

Apple called Pomum.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Bar, Argent, three Apples erected
in Base, or by the name of Harlewin, Devon. An Apple is called in Latin Pomum,
which is a general word for all sorts of eatable fruits, insomuch as Plin.
lib. 15. cap. 22. comprehends Nuts also under this name, albeit the same is
most commonly taken for this sort of fruit. If we desire to have Apples to
continue longer upon the trees then their accustomed season of ripening, Slow
ripning how procured.
we may effect the same by wreathing of the boughs and platting them together
one in another; as Farnesius notes, saying, Praeter naturae tempus, ex arbore
pendebunt Poma, si ramusculos contorqueri jusserimus: whereof he yields this
reason, that by means of such wreathing and platting, the humor is more slowly
concocted or digested, so that they cannot ripen with that maturity, as those
which are not hindered of their natural passage and action. Hereby we learn,
that Art works forcibly in things merely vegetable; Force of Art.
how much more effectual and powerful is education (which is reckoned a
second nature) in forming and reforming the conditions and inclinations of men?

SECT. III. CHAP. VIII.
Plants growing on a manifold stalk.
HItherto of Plants growing upon a simple body or Stem with their common
parts. Now of such as grow upon a manifold stalk or tender sprigs, as Flowers,
Herbs, and such like, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a Rose, Sole bearing of a Rose.
Gules Barbed and Seeded, Proper, by the name of Beverley. Amongst Flowers of
ancient time, the Rose was holden in chiefest estimation, as appears in
Scholiis Epist. St. Hieron. de vit. Hilar. where it is said, Rosis apud Priscos
prima gloria fuit inter flores. The Portracture or resemblance of a Rose, may
signify unto us some kind of good environed or beset on all sides with evils,
as that is with prickles, which may give us notice how our pleasures and
delights are bejet with bitterness and sharpness. Here I do blazon this Rose
Gules, because the word Proper fitteth not this flower: for if I should blazon
it a Rose Proper, it could not be understood of what color the same were,
forasmuch as White and Crimson are as proper to Roses as Red. Therefore for the
more certainty I have blazoned it Gules.

blazon or coat of arms Or, a Cheuron between three Roses, Gules, by the name
of Byshe, an eminent Ornament to which Family is Edward Byshe Esquire Garter
principal King of Arms.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Roses, Gules, on a Chief, of
the second as many of the Field, by the name of Caesar of Bennington in the
County of Hartford, and of this Family were Sir Julius and Sir Charles Caesar,
both Masters of the Rolls.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules, on a Chief,
Sable, three Roses of the Field, this is the Coat of the Honorable Sir Francis
Russell of Chippenham in the County of Cambridge Baronet, who has issue
William Russell Esquire, and other Sons and Daughters, of which Elizabeth is
wife of Henry Cromwell second son of Oliver late Protector of England, which
Sir Francis was Son of Sir William Russell, Knighted 1615. created Baronet
1628. many years Treasurer of the Navy-Royall.

A Rose upon a Canton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Canton, Gules, a Rose, Or,
Barbed, Proper, by the name of Bradston of Winterborne in the County of
Gloucester. This beautiful and fragrant flower does lively represent unto us
the momentary and fickle state of man's life, the frailty and inconstancy
whereof is such, Whereunto resembled.
as that we are no sooner born into the world, but presently we begin to leave
it; and as the delectable beauty and redolent smell of this pleasant flower
does suddenly fade and perish; even so man's life, his beauty, his strength and
worldly estate, are so weak, so mutable, and so momentary, as that oftentimes
in the same day wherein he flourishes in his chiefest jollity, his beauty
consumes, his body decays, and his vital breath departs, and thus he
leaves his life as if he had never been. Of this sudden fading of the Rose a
certain Poet writes in this manner.

Mirabar celerem fugitiva aetate rapinam,
Et dum nascuntur consenuisse Rosas.
Quam long a una dies, aetas tam longa Rosarum,
Quas pubescentes juncta senecta premit.
As fades the blushing Rose, so speeds,
our flowery youth away:
It grows, it blows, it speeds, it sheds,
her beauty in one day.
Fruit bearing plants of manifold stalks.
Of such Plants that grow upon a manifold body or stalk, there are some other
sorts that do bear fruits, as in part may by this next example appear.

Hurt berries.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Hurts, by the name of Baskervile, in the County of Hereford. These (says
Leigh) appear light-blew, and come of some violent stroke. But if I mistake
not, he is far wide from the matter, in that he likeneth these rundles unto
vibices or hurts in a man's body proceeding of a stripe; whereas they are indeed
a kind of fruit or small round berry, of color betwixt Black and Blew, growing
upon a manifold stalk, about a foot high, and are found most commonly in
Forests and Woodland grounds; in some places they are called Wind-berries; and
in others Hurts, or Hurtle-berries. They have their time when Strawberries are
in season. The near resemblance of their names caused Leigh to mistake the one
for the other.

SECT. III. CHAP. IX.
Of such as grow on a single stalk.
THus much of Vegetables, growing either on a single or manifold Stem or Body.
Now of such as grow upon a bending Stalk, such are Herbs of all sorts. And of
these some are Nutritive, others less Nutritive: the first sort are in
ordinary use of diet, such are both those which produce Grain, and those serve
for seasoning of the Pot, Salades, and the like. Such as do produce Grain are
these, and their like, Wheat, Rye, Producing Grain.
Beans, Pease, Barley, Spelt, Oats, etc. Of these such are most usual in
Coat Armor as are accustomed to be bound up in Sheafs, as Wheat, Rye, Commin,
etc. As in part by these next examples may appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, Issuant out of a Mount, in Base,
Wheat stalks
three Wheat stalks, Bladed and Eared, all Proper. This is a Venetian
Coat Armor, and pertains to the Family of Garzoni. And here we see a Mount
borne, which we before mentioned, as a bearing of the nature of one of the four
Elements. As before we hohonoured the Millstone with the name of the chief of
precious stones, so may we justly give precedence to this Plant above all other
in the world; no one kind of food being so necessary for preservation of man's
life as this, which therefore the Scripture calls the staff of bread, because
it upholds the very being of mankind. For which cause, as the Heathens
accounted Ceres and others, as gods for inventing means to increase Corn; so
are those to be held Enemies to mankind, whosoever through covetousness
overthrow Tillage, as by Enclosures, and depopulations of Villages, etc. And
how inestimable a blessing Corn is, may by this be conceived, that no Country
is said to have a Famine, so long as it has Corn, though all other things be
scarce: but if all other things abound, and Corn be wanting, that one want
brings both the name and the heavy punishment of a Famine.

Among the manifold blessings promised by God to the observers of his Laws,
plenty of Corn is reckoned one of the chiefest, Levit. 26.3. If ye walk in my
Statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; then will I give you rain in
due season, and the Land shall yield her increase, and the Trees of the field
shall yield their fruit, and your threshing shall reach unto the Vintage, and
the Vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and you shall eat your bread to
the full, and dwell in your land safely. And again, Deuter. 8.7. For the Lord
thy God brings thee into a good Land, a Land of brooks of Water, of Fountains
and depths that spring out of Valleys and Hills; A Land of Wheat and Barley, and
Vines and Fig Trees, and Pomgranates; A Land of Oil Olive and Honey; a Land
wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any
thing in it. A Land whose stones are Iron, and out of whose Hills thou may
dig brass.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Ears of Ginny Wheat, Wheat
stalks.
Couped and bladed, Or, by the name of Grandgorge. This is a kind of Grain not
much inferior to our Wheat for use, but for multiplication, beauty and
largeness much beyond it: and of this, most undoubtedly true is the saying of
our Savior, that one Grain brings forth fifty, yea an hundred fold: and such
should be the increases of Gods graces in us, which are not put into us there
to dye utterly, but to increase to our own good, and the givers glory. Saint
Paul makes an excellent argument here to satisfy a very natural man, touching
the Resurrection of the dead, which is no more unpossible than for dead corn
to sprout out of the earth, much more flourishing, yea, and more abundant then
it was cast in.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Bend, Argent, three Rye stalks,
Sable, by the name of Rye, or Reye. Were it that these stalks had been borne
in their proper kind, Three Rye stalks.
it would have beautified the Coat greatly, and made the same much more
commendable for bearing, by how much sweet and kindly ripened Corn is more
valuable and to be desired, than that which is blasted and mildewd: that being
a special blessing of God, and this the express and manifest tokens of Gods
heavy wrath inflicted upon us for our sins. As appears in the Prophet Amos.
4.9. I have smitten you with blasting and Mildew, etc. And likewise in Haggai
the second, the same words are used. Amos 4. Hag 2.


blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Ermyne, two Flaunches, Azure, each
charged with three Ears of Wheat, couped, Or, by the name of Greyby of
Northampton shire. it makes not a little to the commenda^ion of this grain,
that it is taken in the Scriptures for the faithful where it is said, Which
has his Fa^me in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and gather his
Wheat into his Garner, etc.

These sorts of Grain are most usually borne in Coate-Armour bound up in
sheafes, and banded of the same Metal or Color; A Garb of Wheat.
yet shall you find their band sometimes of a diverse Metal or Color from
them.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, a Garb, Or, This Coate-Armour
pertains to the ancient Family of Grav^nor of Cheshire, whose name was
anciently written Grosvenour, or Grosvenor, as it is at this day. They bear
this Garb from their Ancestors who were of consanguinity to the ancient Earls
of Chester, as it is proved in the Record of that famous suite betwixt Sir
Richard Scroope plantiff, and Sir Robert Grosvenour defendant for their Arms
in Anno 12. Regis Richardt Secundi. For with William the Conqueror came Hugh
Lupus his Nephew, and with the said Hugh Lupus came one Gilbert le Grosvenour
Nephew to the said Hugh, who was Ancestor to the said Sir Robert Grosvenour:
from whom is Lineally descended Sir Richard Grosvenor of Eaton in the County
Palatine of Chester, Knight and Baronet, Heir Male of that Family. Of which
Family is also that accomplished Gentleman Colonel Gravenor. A like unto this
is borne by Holmeshed, saving that the band of that Garb is Vert. There is a
kind of wretched Cormorants, whose Garbes are so fast bound that the poor
curses their merciless hearts: and such an one was Hatto Abbot of Fulda,
Munst. Cosmograph.
who suffered Rats rather to eat up his Corn, then he would help the wants of
the poor; but his punishment was answerable thereunto; for the Rats devoured
him, though he guarded himself in a Castle purposely built in the midst of the
River Rehene, which is there this day to be seen.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Garbes, Or, by the name of
Preston. This Coat Armor is quartered by the worthey Family of Hennage of
Lincolnshire, for John Hennage of Hainton in the County of Lincoln married
Elizabeth the Daughter and heir of John Preston. Here you may observe that I
mention not the bands of Garbes because they differ not in Metal or Color
from the Garbes. Sometimes you shall find these Garbes borne with an Ordinary
interposed between them, as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Pearl, Cheuron between Garbes.
a Cheuron between three Garbes, Ruby. This Coate-Armour pertains to the
right honorable Edmund Earl of Mulgrave, Baron Sheffield of Butterwicke, and
Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter. An Escoheon like unto this (but
of different Color and Metal, viz. the Field, Sapphire, a Cheuron between
three Garbes, Topaz, as here next follows) was borne by Sir Christopher
Hatton late Lord Chancellor of England, Counselor to that Peerless Queen
Elizabeth of immortal memory: a Coat well befitting his Magnificencie and
bounteous Hospitality, wherein he has scarce had any Rival ever since.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cheuron between three Garbes, Or,
by the name of Hatton, this is the Coat of that right worthy Gentleman and
excellent Antiquary Sir Christopher Hatton Knight of the Bath, Baron of Kirby
in Northamptonshire, and also of Sir Thomas Hatton of Long Stanton in the
County of Cambridge, Knight and Baronet, lately deceased. Of -- Hatton, of
London Merchant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron, engrailed, Ermine,
between three Garbes, Or, by the name of Hill of Somersetshire, a very ancient
Family there, of which is Roger Hill, one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, on a Fesse, Azure, Garb upon a Fesse.
three Garbes of the first, by the name of Vernon. This is an ancient Family of
Cheshire, and descended of the worthy Stem of Vernons that were Barons of
Shipbrooke, and do bear these Garbes for a difference from the elder House
that did bear, Or, only a Fesse, Azure. And the reason of the bearing of
their Garbes was, for that they would make known that they were descended from
the said Barons of Shipbrooke, who anciently held of the Earls of Chester.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse between three Garbes, Or,
by the name of Le-white of Bromham in Wiltshire. The Garb, signifies in
Heraldrie plenty, or abundance, and that the first Bearer did deserve well for
his Hospitality.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse Dauncette, between six
Garbes, Fesse dauncettie between Garbs.
Or, by the name of Rayncowrt. Leigh calls i^ a Sheafe of Wheat; but though
it were of Rye, Barley, or Comine, or whatsoever it were (says he) it is
sufficient to call it a Garb (which is a Freneh or rather Teutonicke word,
signifying a Sheafe) telling the Color or Metal whereof it is. As to their
sole and diverse bearing upon, and with Ordinaries between them, these few
examples may suffice for the present. Others shall follow in their places.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Bean Coddes Barrewayes, two
and one, Bean Cods.
Proper, by the name of Hardbeane. The Bean in ancient times amongst the
Grecians, was of great authority, for by it they made all the Magistrates of
their Commonweals, which were chosen by casting in of Beans in stead of
giving of Voices or Suffrages. But Pythagoras taught his Scholars to hate the
Bean above all other Vegetables; meaning perchance, that they should shun
the bearing of any Office: though others give other reasons of that his
doctrine: Some write, that the flowers of the Beans, though very pleasing to
the smell, yet are very hurtful to weak brains; and that therefore in the
time of their flowring, there are more foolish than at other times; meaning
belike those, who then distill these flowers to make themselves fair therewith.

To this Head must be referred all other sorts of Nutritive Herbs borne in
Coat Armor, Reference.
whether they produce Grain in Ear, Cod or Husk; or that they be Herbs for
the Pot, or Sallads, as Betonie Spinach, Coleworts, Lettice, Purslain, Leeks,
Scallions, etc. All which I leave to observation, because I labor by all means
to pass thorough this vast Sea of the infinite varieties of Nature, with what
convenient brevity I may, because Quod brevius est, semper delectabilius
habetur; in such things as these, The shorter the sweeter.

SECT. III. CHAP. X.
Herbs less nutritive.
NExt after Herbs Nutritive, let us take a taste of Herbs less Nutritive, which
are either Coronary or Physical. Coronary Herbs are such as in respect of
their odoriferous smell have been of long time, and yet are used for decking
and trimming of the body, or adorning of houses, or other pleasurable use for
eye or sent: as also in respect of their beautiful shape and color, were most
commonly bestowed in making of Crowns and Garlands; of which uses they received
their name of Coronary. Amongst which, we may reckon the Rose before expressed,
to be one of the chiefest, as also Violets of all sorts, Glove-Gilloflowers,
Sweet Marjoram, Rosemary, White Daffadill, Spikenard, Rose Campion, Daisies,
etc. But of all other, the Flower de lis is of most esteem, Estimation of the
Flower de-lis.
having been from the first Bearing, the Charge of a Regal Escocheon,
originally borne by the French Kings, though tract of time has made the
Bearing of them more vulgar: even as Purple was in ancient times a wearing
only for Princes, which now has lost that prerogative through custom. Out of
these several kinds I have selected some few Examples, as in the Escocheons
following appears.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sapphire, a Flower de lis, Pearl, by the
name of Digby, of which Family there are many worthy accomplished branches, as
George Earl of Bristol, and the Lord Sherburne his son, Sir Kenelme, and John
Digby Esquire his son (who married that excellent Lady the Lady Katharine
Daughter of Henry Howard late Earl of Arundell) the Lord Digby of Geshull, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Flower de lis, Argent, by the name of
Fowke or Foulke, an ancient and spreading Family, of which a deserving Ornament
is Thomas Foulke now Alderman of London.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a Flower de lis, on a Chief, Sable,
a Mullet, Or, by the name of Gaire, and was borne by Sir John Gaire, late
Alderman and Mayor of London, who left issue male John Gaire Esquire, since
deceased, and Robert Gaire a hopeful Gentleman.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, Cheuron between three Flowers de lis.
a Cheuron between three Flowers de Lis, Sable. This Coat Armor pertains to
the very worshipful Sir Thomas Fanshaw Knight of the Bath, his Majesty's
Remembrancer of his Highness Court of Exchequer. This Flower is in Latin called
Iris, for that it somewhat resembles the color of the Rainbow. Some of the
French confound this with the Lily; as he did, who doubting the validity of the
Salike-Law to debar the Females from the Crown of France, would make it sure
out of a stronger Law; because (forsooth) Lilia non laborant, neque nent; the
Lillies neither labor, nor spin: which reason excludes as well a Laborious
Hercules, as a spinning Omphale.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, on a Cheuron, Gules, between three
flowers de lis, Sables, an Inescocheon of the first, charged with a sinister
hand couped at the wrist as the second. This is the Coat Armor of that Noble
Knight and Baronet, Sir Basil Dixwell of Folkston in Kent deceased. Whose
real expressions of true love and affection to his native Country deserves
commemoration; and is now borne by the honorable John Dixwell Esquire, a
member of this Parliament, and one of the Counsel of State, Nephew to the said
Sir Basil. Here I name of the first, and as the second, to avoid iteration of
the same words, according to the rule formerly given.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Fesse wavy between three Flowers
de lis, Or, by the name of Hicks, which is the Coat of Sir William Hicks of
Beverston in Glocestershire, Knight and Baronet, now of Essex, and was also the
bearing of Sir Baptist Hicks Knight and Baronet, Viscount Campden in
Glocestershire, a munificent Benefactour to that Town, and also to several
places in Middlesex.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, on a Cheuron engrailed, between six
crosses Patee-Fitchee, Cheuron charged upon.
Or, three flowers de lis, Azure, each charged on the top with a Plate, by the
name of Smith of Nybley in the county of Gloucester. The Plate is the
representation of Silver Bullion fitted for the stamp, and therefore need not
have other Blazon than its own name. Armorists hold that this bearing of Sable,
and Or, answers to Diamond joined with Gold, whereof each gives honor to the
other; and it may well beseem a Bearer, whose sober and well composed
conditions are accompanied with the luster of shining virtues.

Bend interposed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Bend, Argent, between six Flowers
de lis, Or, by the name of Redmere. This Coat Armor have I added in regard of
the variety of bearing hereof from those before handled, inasmuch as in this
one Escocheon, is comprehended the full number contained in both the former; as
also to make known in what manner, these or other Charges of like Bearing must
be placed, the same being borne entire: But if they were strowed, or (as I may
better term it) Seminated all over the Field; then were it not a bend between,
but upon, or over them; forasmuch as in such bearing only the halves of many
of them, or some greater or lesser portion of them would appear as well under
the Bend, as in the limits or edges of the Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cross, Sable, five flowers de
lis, of the first: This Coat Armor in the time of King Henry the fourth,
appertained unto Robert le-Neve of Tivetishall in the County of Norfolk (as
appears by Seals of old Deeds and ancient Rolls of Arms) from whom are
descended those of that surname now remaining at Aslactun, Witchingham, and
other places in the said County. If this Cross were seminated all over with
Flowers de lis, showing upon the sides or edges thereof but the halves of some
of them, then it should be blazoned Semie de flowers de lis: And the like is to
be observed when they be so borne upon any other Ordinary, or Charge.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Saltire, Sable, five flowers
de li, Or: This Coat Armor pertains to Sir Thomas Hawkins of Nash in Kent,
Knight. I have inserted this Escocheon not only to show you that this flower
is borne upon this kind of Ordinary, but also to give demonstration that the
Saltire charged contains the third part of the field, according to the rule
formerly given.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse, Engrailed, between three
Flowers de lis, Argent, by the name of Ashfield, of which is now Sir Richard
Ashfield of Netherhall in Suffolk Baronet, son of Sir John Ashfield of the same
place, created Baronet July 27. 1626.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Flowers de lis, Argent, a
Chief, Vaire, by the name of Palms of Yorkshire, and elsewhere.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, six Flowers de lis, Azure, a Chief,
Or, being (with the Arms of Vlster) the Achievement of the honorable Sir
William Paston of Oxnead in the County of Norfolk Knight and Baronet, a great
Patron and Promoter of Arts and Ingenuity.

^olledge of Winchester.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sable, three Lillies slipped, their
stalks, seeds, blades and leaves, Argent. These Arms pertain to the College
of Winchester, founded by the renowned Architect, William Wickham, Bishop of
Winton, who contrived those many and most curious Castles and other buildings
of King Edward the third: and besides this goodly College of Winton, built
another magnificent College (called the New College) in the University of
Oxford: two such absolute Foundations as never any King of this Land did the
like. This Wickham having finished the Castle of Windsor, caused to be
inscribed on the Wall of the Round Tower, This made Wickham; which caused such
as were envious of his high favor, to suggest unto the King, that he arrogated
all the honor of that great Work to himself: but he pleasantly satisfied the
King, saying, that he wrote not, Wickham made this; but, This made Wickham;
because by his service in these Works he had gained his Sovereigns Princely
favor.

Treefoiles slipped.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse Nebule, between three
treefoiles slipped, Gules. This Coat pertaineh to George Thorpe of Wanswell in
the County of Gloucester, Esquire, one of the honorable band of his Majesty's
Gentlemen Pensioners. The Treefoile is accounted the Husbandmans Almanac,
because when it shuts in the leaves, it fore-telleth rain; The husbandmans
calender.
and therefore the Fesse Nebule, representing the rainy clouds, is not unaptly
joined with it. This Leaf being grassie, some may marvel I should reckon it
amongst the Coronaries: but they must know, that in ancient Roman times,
amongst other sorts of Crowns the Graminea corona, or Grassie Crown, was of
very high honor to the Wearer.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron, between three Treefoiles,
Or, which is the Coat of that worthy Merchant John Lewis Esquire, of an ancient
Family of that name in Yorkshire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cheuron, Azure, between three
Treefoiles, Parted per Pale, Gules, and Vert, as many Bezants, being the Coat
of Sir Henry Row of Shakelwell, of Colonel Owen Row, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, two Cheurons, between three Treefoyles,
Sable, which is the Coat of Sir Thomas Abdy of Felphall in Essex, Knight and
Baronet, and Robert Abdy of London Merchant, and John Abdy, sons of Anthony
Abdy sometime Alderman of London.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Quaterfoyles, Argent, which is
the Coat of Sir Francis Vincent, of Stoke Dabernon in Surrey, Baronet; of which
Family is also William Vincent Esquire, Alderman of London, Sheriff 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, Columbines
slipped.
between three Columbines slipped, Proper, by the name of Hall of Coventrie.
The Columbine is pleasing to the eye, as well in respect of the seemly (and not
vulgar) shape, as in regard of the Azurie color thereof; and is holden to be
very medicinable for the disolving of impostumations or swellings in the throat.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Bend, Or, in the sinister Chief a
Cinquefoyle, Ermine, this is the Coat of Sir Erasmus de la Fountain of London
Knight, whose Lady is Sister to the right honorable Baptist, Viscount Camden.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, in the dexter
point a Cinquefoyle, Gules, and is the Coat of Alderman Ricard of London.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three
Cinquefoyles, Or, being the Coat of the honorable John Thurloe Secretary of
State.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron between ten Cinquefoiles,
The Cinquefoile.
four, two, one, two, and one, Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to the
worshipful Family of Barkley of Wymundham, which descended out of the right
noble progeny of the Lord Barkley. This Coat is of an usual kind of Blazon,
and therefore I held it the fitter to be here inserted, as a pattern for all
such Coat-Armours, whose Charges are marshalled in this order. The Cinquefoile
is an Herb wholesome for many good uses, and is of ancient bearing in
Escocheons. The number of the leaves answer to the five senses in a man, and he
that can conquer his affections, Resemblance thereof.
and master his senses (which sensual and vicious men are wholly addicted unto)
he may worthily and with honor bear the Cinquefoile, as the sign of his
fivefold victory over a stronger Enemy than that three headed monster Cerberus.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Gilloflowers slipped, Proper,
Gilloflowers slipped.
by the name of Jorney. These kinds of flowers for beauty, variety of color,
and pleasant redolencie, may be compared with the choicest attires of the
garden: yet because such daintiness and affected adornings better befit Ladies
and Gentlewomen; than Knights and men of valor, whose worth must be tried in
the Field, not under a Rose-bed, or in a Garden plot, therefore the ancient
Generous made choice rather of such Herbs as grew in the Fields, as the
Cinquefoile, Treefoile, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent a Cheuron, Gules, between three blew
Bottles, Blew Bottles.
slipped, proper, by the name of Chorley of Chorley, an ancient Family in the
County Palatine of Lancaster. These few examples may suffice, to show that all
others of like kind (which I for brevity sake voluntarily pass over) are to be
reduced unto this head of Coronary-Herbs; from which we will now proceed to the
Physical, whose chief and more frequent use consists in asswaging or curing
of maladies and diseases: And of these, some are Aromaticall, which for the
most part, in respect of their familiar and pleasing nature, do serve for the
corroborating and comforting of the inward parts of man's body, and for that
purpose are often used in meats; of which sort, are Saffron, Ginger, and such
like: other are merely Medicinal, and such as a man (were it not for
necessity) would wish rather to wear in his Escocheon, than in his belly.
Examples of which kinds I will willingly pass over, only as it were pointing
out with the finger, unto what head they must be reduced, if any such be borne
in Arms. Of the Plants, Trees, Fruits and Herbs before mentioned, some are
foreign, and some Domestical, Of Plants, Trees, etc.
some grow in Mountains, some in Marish and Fenny grounds, some by the Rivers,
some by Seacoast. Concerning their causes, natures and effects, Philosophers,
Physicians and Herbalists do seriously dispute; and doubtless they are the
admirable work of the most Omnipotent God, who has sent as many kinds of
Medicines, as of Maladies, that as by the one we may see our own wretchedness,
so by the other, we might magnify his goodness toward man, on whom he has
bestowed, Fruit for Meat, and Leaves for Medicine.

SECT. III. CHAP. XI.
HAving hitherto handled that part of our distribution which comprehends
things Vegetable; proceed we now to the other, Things Sensitive.
concerning things senstive, which are all sorts of Animals or Creatures endued
with senses. The senses, as likewise the sensitive soul, are things in
themselves not visible, and therefore estranged from the Heralds uses: but
because they reside in Bodies of differing parts and qualities from any other
before mentioned; therefore in handling of these sensitive Creatures, I hold it
requisite to begin with their parts (for of them the whole is raised) and these
are either the parts contained, or containing, or sustaining.

But sithence we are now to speak of things Sensitive and amongst them) first
of Terrestial Animals and their parts; it shall not be impertinent to produce
some few causes amongst many, why these Terrestial Animals and Man were created
in one day, viz. the sixth day.

First, because God had appointed the Earth to be the joint habitation of Man
and Beast together. Secondly, in respect of the near resemblance both of bodily
parts and natural properties that these Terrestrials have of Man, in respect
either of Fowls or of Fishes. Lastly, for that very many of them were to serve
for man's ease and necessary use: as Oxen to till the ground, Horses for his
ease in travel, Dogs to be watchful keepers of his House, and others for
other his necessary and domestical uses.

There is no Animal but has at the least these parts, viz. Head, wherewithal
to receive food, and wherein their senses have their residence; a Belly, to
receive and concoct his meat: intrals, whereby to eject the supperfluities or
excrements of aliment; members also, serving for the use, and exercise of the
Senses, and others ordained for motion from place to place; for without these
members he cannot receive food or nutriment, neither feel, nor move: Therefore
there is neither laboring beast, or beast of savage kind, domestical
reptiles, or other, that can be with these bodily parts.

By the name of Soul, and Life, wherewith all sorts of Animals are endued from
God: Moses teaches us, Natural blood* or supplementall Humor.
that there is no living Creature to be found that has not either true and
natural blood, or at the least some kind of hot humor that is to it instead of
blood, Anima enim cujusque Animalis in sanguine est, as Moses teaches,
Leviticus 17. and in sundry other places. And in the common received opinion of
all men, In humido and calido consistit vita.

That which is spoken of diverse kinds of Insecta, that there is no blood to be
found in them, it is to be understood to be meant of true perfect and natural
blood, but of necessity they must have in stead thereof some kind of humor in
them, that has the quality of blood, viz. that is both hot and moist, as
aforesaid, else can they not live.

Concerning Animals in general, it is not to be doubted but that all sorts of
them, as well those of savage and ravenous kind, as those of domisticall and
laboring kind, as also venomous Serpents, of themselves and of their own
nature, were themselves good, and might be good to others, and profitable for
man's use; forasmuch as it is said, Et vidit Elohim quod bonum: But in that they
are now become noisome, and painful to man, that is per Accidens; for this is
occasioned by the sin and transgression of Man, whereby all things became
accursed for his sake.

The utilitie or benefit that comes to Man by these Terrestrial Animals is
twofold; the one, pertaining to the body, the other, to the Soul. The
corporal benefit that comes to man by them, who knows not? For daily
experience shows us how beneficial the use of Horses, Oxen, Kine, Calves,
Sheep, and other sorts of Beast and Cattle of all sorts, are for the service of
Man: whereof some serve us for food, some for raiment, some for carriage, some
for tillage, and other for diverse other uses. Of this use of them Moses says,
That God has subjected all things to man; Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus ejus,
etc. And made him Ruler over the Fishes of the Sea, the Fouls of the air, and
the Beasts of the Land: whereby he gives us to understand, that all sorts of
Animals were created for the diverse uses of man, and each one of them ordained
to a several end. But their spiritual use is far more noble and excellent, by
how much the soul surpasses the body in dignity and worthiness.

And their use consists not alone in this, that by the consideration of them
we are led to the knowledge of God, and of his wisdom, power and goodness
(for this use has all things else that are created) as appears Romans 1. and
elsewhere: But also that in these Animals God has proposed to us such notable
examples of imitation, in respect of vices to be eschewed; that the sacred
Scriptures excepted, there is no moral precepts can better instruct us than
these Animals do, which are daily in our view, and of which we have daily use:
amongst these we may produce some examples of Fishes and Fowls, but many more
may we gather from Terrestrial Animals. And to the end we should shun the
ignorance of things, Psalm. 32.
such especially as are celestial, David, the kingly Prophet, proposes to us
for examples, the Horse and Mule saying, Non eritis sicut Equus and Mulus in
quibus non est intellectus.

Like as natural Philosophy consists in other things, so does it chiefly in
the knowledge of Animals, viz. in the understanding of their wisdom, natures
and properties, which knowledge has been approved by God himself from the
beginning, and not only approved but also ordained, and given to Adam; for
Moses says, God brought these Animals unto Adam to the end that he should
advisedly view and consider them. To the end that Adam should give them names
answerable to their shapes, natures, proportion, and qualities. And that the
imposition of these names should not be casually or at adventure (for God
abhoreth all disorder and confusion) but deliberately and according to reason:
So as every thing might be aptly distinguished from other, by their particular
names, and according to their several natures and dispositions: And that for
our benefit; That we hearing their names, and understanding their
significations may be led to the understanding of their natural properties,
for which Etymology, or true interpretation and derivation of words is very
behovefull and of great use.

The Parts contained are Humors and Spirits, whereof only the first is used
in Coat-armours, wherein are represented sometimes Drops of blood, Humors.
and sometimes Tears, which both are naturally Humors contained, though in
Armory they are supposed no longer to be contained, but shed forth. The Bearing
of this Humor, Blood, Blood.
is understood to be evermore borne Drop-meale (as I may so term it) or by
Drops. Which manner of bearing is in Blazon termed Gutte, of the Latin word
Guttae, which signifies a Drop of any thing that is either by Nature liquid,
or liquefied by Art. These Drops do receive a different manner of Blazon
according unto their different color, or diversity of the substance, whereof
they do consist; as by example shall appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Gutte de Sang. Drops of blood.
by the name of Lemming. These Drops are seldom borne of themselves alone, but
rather upon or with some other kind of Charge, either ordinary or
extraordinary, or else dividedly, by means of the interposition of some of the
lines of Partition hereafter to be handled. These are termed Guttae de Sang.
Quia ex guttis sanguinis constant; Because they signify Drops of Blood;
wherein the life consists. And if the blood of those who boast of their
Generous blood should once drop forth of their veins, no difference should
appear betwixt it and the meanest man's blood; unless perhaps it be in this,
that usually it is more corrupt and vitiated, whereas in the poorer sort it is
more healthful and pure. Which should teach such great ones not to prize their
blood at too high a rate. But rather to excel others in virtues, since they
cannot surpass in that humor, which is alike in all: and if they look in the
first originals of both sorts, they shall find that Adam was the first Ancestor
of the Poor, as well as of the Mighty, and so the one of them as anciently
descended as the other.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Gutte de Sang. a Cross, Gules,
Gutte de Sang.
by the name of Fitz. of Fitzford in the County of Devon. This is the most
principal and predominant humor whereby the life of all Animals, is nourished
and continued, and whose defect brings present death. For the life of all
flesh is his blood, it is joined with his life: Therefore I said unto the
Children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no flesh, for the life of all
flesh is the blood thereof, whosoever eats shall be cut off.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Gutte de Larmes, or de Larmettes, a
Cheuron voided, Sable, by the name of St. Maure. This is that other humor
before mentioned: and this bearing is called Gutte de Larmes, Quia ex
Lacrymatum guttis constant, because they represent Drops of Tears falling,
these Gutte, are always understood to be of color blew.

Gutte de Larmes.
In blazoning of Coat-armours charged with drops, you must evermore consider the
substance whereof they are, and to give them a denomination accordingly; so
shall you not need to name their color at all, forasmuch as by their substance
their colors are easily conceived, whereof I will give you some few examples
in these Escocheons next following; which albeit they may seem to be unduly
bestowed with these, yet in respect of their uniforme manner of bearing, to
wit, by drops (as the former) I have chosen rather to sort them together with
these; than to bestow them confusedly under several heads.

A Turnip, proper.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Turnip, Proper, a chief, Or,
Gutte de Larmes. This is a wholesome root, and yields great relief to the
poor, and prospers best in an hot sandy ground, and may signify a person of
good disposition, whose virtuous demeanor flourishes most prosperously even
in that soil where the scorching heat of Envy most abounds. This differs
much in nature from that whereof it is said, And that there should not be among
you any root that brings forth Gall and wormwood.

Gutte de Eau.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, Gutte de Eau, a Canton, Ermyne, by
the name of Dannet. This word Eau is a French word, and signifies the same
that Aqua does in Latin: which is as much to say, He bears drops of water:
if he should blazon it in English, the proper color thereof is Argent. This
had been a worthy Escocheon for a Soldier of that Christian Legion called
Fulminatrix, at whose prayers in a great drouth, God poured down rain in the
sight of the Heathen, as Eusebius testifies; and yet they were no Fresh Water
Soldiers, but were as ready to have embrued their Escocheons with drops of
blood, as to have thus sprinkled them with drops of Rain.

Gutte de Poix.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Gutte de Poix, a Chief Nebule,
Gules, by the name of Roydenhall. This word Poix is a French word, and is the
same that we call Pitch in English. Yet among our English Blazoners these
colors and drops are termed Gutte de Sable. This Coat serves aptly to give
warrantize of the bearing of chiefes, consisting of some of the bunched loins
before mentioned in the first Section. There are Ordinaries framed of sundry
other former sorts of lines, before expressed in the first Section, which I
leave to the stricter observation of the curious searchers of those things.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cross ingrailed, Sable, Gutte de
Or.
charged with Gutte de Or, by the name of Milk field. These drops may be
understood to be drops, either fusible or molten, as Gold, either molten in
fire, or otherwise liquefied, whereby it may be distilled dropmeale.

Note, that if such kind of Drops be Or, Note.
then shall they be taken as representations of fusible or liquid gold: if they
be Vert, then shall they be taken to be drops or oil Olive, as herafter shall
appear, when I shall speak of Coate-Armours, whose fields have no Tincture
predominating. Blood what.
But to return to the humor of blood (from which we have upon occasion
hitherto digressed) it is infallible that there is no Animal or living creature
but has in it, either blood or some other kind of hot humor in quality like
thereunto, as I have said before.

These humors before mentioned, Humors divided.
in respect of their most and fluent nature, do stand in need of some other
thing to contain them: and such containing parts, are either the outmost
includer which is the skin (of which we have already spoken in the first
Section, where we treated of Furs) or the whole body it self, with the
several members and parts thereof; all which because they need their
supporters; those we will first speak of, and and so descend unto the whole
bearings and parts. Covering.


But I will first show you an example of the bearing of dead men's sculls, and
then proceed to the supporting parts.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cheuron, Gules, three dead
men's sculls of the first, by the name of Bolter: Support.
this kind of bearing may serve to put both the proper owner of this
Coate-Armour, Bones.
and also the serious spectators of the the same in mind of the mortality of
their bodies and last end.

Parts of support whereof we have use in Arms, are those solid substances
which sustain the body, viz. the Bones, whereby the body is not only
underpropped, but also carried from place to place, by help of their ligatures
and Sinews. Of the use of these in Coat Armor, you shall have examples in
these Escocheons next following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable Shin-bone in Pale, surmounted of
another in Cross, Argent, by the name of Baynes. A Shin-bone surmounted of
another.
I do give this form of blazon hereunto, because the first lies nearer to the
Field than the other does, for they cannot be properly said to be a Cross of
bones, because they be not incorporated one with another, but are dividedly
severed by interposing the purflings.

Two shinne bones Saltire-wayes.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, two Shinne bones Saltire ways, the
Sinister surmounted of the dexter, by the name of Newton of Derbyshire. To this
Coate-Armour I give the blazon in the former, for the reason before delivered.
Concerning bones, Jesus Syrach recording the fame and virtues of Joshua, Caleb
and Samuel, says; Let their bones flourish out of their place, and their names
by succession remain in them that are most famous of their children, Eccles.
46.12. And though they seem like the withered bones in Ezechiels vision, yet
shall they revive again by virtue and power of him who died on the Cross, and
of whom it was said, Not a bone of him shall be broken. Thus in brief you see
the use of these parts of support.

SECT. III. CHAP. XII.
IN following the tract which our Method first chalked out unto us, we are at
length come to such Blazons as do present to the eyes those sensitive things
which we called the Containing, because they are the mansion, in which not
only the blood and spirits, but also the bones (which we named the parts
sustaining) are enclosed. Definition of Animals.
These are Animals or living creatures, with their parts and members. An Animal
is any substance consisting both of a Body fitted for diverse functions, and of
a Soul giving Life, Sense, and Motion.

Animals (says Zanchius) especially such as do produce a living creature, have
a more near resemblance of Man, both as touching the parts of their Bodies, as
also concerning the faculties of their mind, and subtilty, and quickness of
wit: for their bodies also do consist (like as ours do) of flesh, sinews,
Arteries, bones, gristles and skin, etc. In like sort they have head, neck,
breasts, back, a chine or backbone, thighs, legs and feet: As also heart,
lights, liver, spleen, guts, and other inward parts as we have; furthermore
they do participate with us in our Actions, as to eat, drink, sleep, watch and
move: Albeit in many other things they are much unlike us.

In the handling of Animals, it might be a scruple, whether the bearing of such
creatures whole should have precedence in their bearing before their parts, and
also in what rank and order the several kinds of creatures are to be
marshalled by us, that thereby the dignity of their bearing may be best
conceived; because the dignity of those things that are borne in Coat Armor,
being truly known, and duly considered, does not a little illustrate the
worthiness of the Bearers, in the displaying of their Ensigns: for taking
away these scruples, I hold it requisite before I proceed to give Examples,
first to set down certain Notes by way of introduction to that which follows,
showing how the dignity of these Animals, hereafter to be handled, is to be
accounted of, either in a relative respect of things of distinct Natures
compared one to another, or in a comparative reference of Animals of the same
kind each to other.

This dignity cannot be better understood, than by taking a considerate view of
that Order, Dignity of Animals how understood.
which the Author of all Order, and the most wise and powerful Disposer of all
things, did observe, not only in the creation of the celestial, but also of
the elementary parts of the World, with their several Ornaments, wherein be
observed a continual progression from things of less perfection, to things
more perfect. For was there not a Chaos, without form and void, before it came
to that admirable beauty whereof it is said, Lo, it was very good? In the
Celestial, the Sun (the glory thereof) was made after the Firmament, and the
Night was before the Day. In the inferior bodies, the vegetables, as Trees,
Order of God in Nature.
were made before sensitive and living creatures: and amongst these, the Fishes
(which have neither breath nor voice, and therefore imperfecter) were before
the Fowls: and both of them before terrestrial creatures; and all of all sorts
before Man, made after Gods Image, for whose service all other things were
made, as he was made for Gods Service. Moreover, in the creation of Man, the
Body was before the Soul, which yet is a thing incomparably of more perfection.

By this rude draught of God and Natures admirable Method, Diverse ends of Art
and Nature.
you may conceive the natural dignity of those creatures, as often as they
shall occur in Armorie. But as Art has not always the same end which Nature
has (because the one intends the being, the other the knowing of things) so
is not the Method of both always alike in attaining their ends: for Natures
process is a simplicibus ad composita, from the single parts to the whole,
whereas Art descends from the compounds to the simples: in imitation whereof,
we shall in this our progress, follow this course; that first every whole
bearing of any Animal shall precede, and then such parts and members thereof ^s
usually are borne; Whole bearing needful to be first known.
for so every one that first has seen the whole, will discern the parts the
better, whereas he that sees a part (having never seen the whole) knows not
whereof it is a part. And in Coat Armor the whole bearing of Animals is most
worthy, Whole bearing better than the parts of Animals.
yet is not the bearing of parts to be misliked, but if we consider both the
one and the other respectively, then does the whole bearing far surmount the
parts in honor and dignity.

Neither must we here precisely esteem the worth of every bearing by this order
of Nature, Twofold dignity.
because Art does sometimes stamp a peculiar note of dignity; for some
particular respect, as for some especial use, quality, or action in the
things. And this Dignity or Nobility may have a twofold relation; the one,
betwixt Animals of diverse kinds, as a Lion and a Spaniel, a Woolfe and a Lamb;
the other, betwixt things of one kind, as whelps of one litter, whereof yet one
may be nobler than the other; as the one will run to the Chase, the other to
the Pottage Pot. And forasmuch as the living things before mentioned, as well
vegetable as sensitive, have their peculiar virtues worthy imitation, as also
their particular vices to be eschewed, and that it is a chief glory to
Gentlemen of Coat Armor, to have their virtues displaied under the types and
forms of such things as they bear, it is to be wished that each one of them
would considerately examine the commendable properties of such significant
tokens as they do bear, and do his best to manifest to the world that he has
the like in himself: for it is rather a dishonor than a praise for a man to
bear a Lion on his Shield, if he bear a Sheep in his Heart, or a Goose in his
Brain: being therein like those Ships which bear the names of Dreadnought,
Victory, and the like, though sometimes it speed with them contrary to their
Titles. A true generous mind will endeavor that for his selfe-vertues he may
be esteemed, and not insist only upon the fame and merits of his Progenitors,
the praise whereof is due to them, and not to him.

Nam genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco,
-- Ovid. Met. Lib. 13. Verse 140. Great Birth, and blood, and Ancestors high
worth,
Call them not thine, but what thy self bringst forth.
And now we will proceed to some particular precepts, concerning things
Sensitive borne in Coat Armor. Wherein first observe, that all sorts of
Animals borne in Arms, or Ensigns, must in Blazoning be interpreted in the
best sense, that is according to their most Generous and noble Qualities, and
so to the greatest honor of their Bearers. For example; the Fox is full of
wit, Rule. 1.
and withal given wholly to Filching for his prey: If then this be the Charge
of an Escocheon; we must conceive the quality represented, to be his wit and
cunning, but not his Pilfering and Stealing, and so of all other. All Beasts of
Savage and fierce nature, must be figured and set forth in their most noble and
fierce action; as a Lion erected bolt upright, his Mouth wide open, his claws
extended (as if he were prepared to rent and tear;) for with his Teeth and
Claws he does exercise his fierceness: In this form he is said to possess
his Vigor and Courage: and being thus formed he is said to be Rampand. Action
does the Prophet David approve to be proper to a Lion, Psalm. 22. Where
describing the cruelty of the wicked toward him, he says, They raged upon me
with their mouths, as it were a Ramping and Roaring Lion. A Leopard or Wolf,
must be portraied going (as it were) Pedetentim, step by step; which form of
action (says Chassaneus) fitteth their natural disposition, and is termed
Passant: All sorts of placable or Gentle-nature, must be set forth according to
the most noble and kindly action of every of them as a Horse running or
vaulting, a Greyhound coursing, a Dear tripping, a Lamb going, with a smooth
and easy pace, etc.

And concerning the true placing of Animals of whatsoever kinds in Armory
according to order, True placing of Animals.
Art and the propriety of their nature; The use of the thing whereupon they are
to be placed or depicted, must be first considered of, and so must they be
placed accordingly; whether they be borne bolt upright, passant, or tripping,
or howsoever.

As if they be to be placed in Banners they must be so placed as that it be
agreeable to the natural quality of the thing that is borne, In Banners.
Ars enim imitatur naturam in quantum potest: therefore sithence it is proper
for a Banner to be carried upon a staff, according to the use thereof the
staff does proceed, and the Banner comes after: Therefore ought the face to
look toward the staff, that is, directly forwards. So is it likewise in every
other thing whose parts are distinguished per Ante, and Post; in such the
forepart of the thing borne shall be placed toward the staff: otherwise it
would seem retrograde or going backwards, which were monstrous to behold.

Head only borne how to be placed.
If a man do bear only the head of some Animal (then most commonly) the
forepart thereof cannot aptly regard the staff, but is borne sidewayes chiefly
being full faced, whether it be the head of Ram, Bull, etc.

As touching the orderly placing of the feet of Animals, this is a general
Rule, that the right foot must be placed foremost, Quia dextra pars est
principium motus. And withal it is the most noble part in regard it is the
stronger and more Active, and therefore thus to describe them, is to set them
forth in their commendablest fashion; for Dispositio laudatissima Animalis est,
ut in omnibus dispositionibus, suis sit secundum cursum naturae: that is the
best disposition of every creature, which is most agreeable to nature.

But here you must observe, that in a Banner, Natural and Accidental bearing.
that which is made for the one side, will seem to be the left foot on the
contraryside, but that chances by accident. And therefore the side next to him
that bears the Banner must be chiefly respected, that the same be formed
right in regard of him; like as it is in writing, that side next to the writer
is according to order, whereas if we turn the paper, all falls out after a
preposterous fashion. Therefore we must chiefly respect the side next the
Bearer, let the rest fall out as it shall.

Arms are sometimes depicted or embroidered upon the Garments of Men, and
chiefly upon the uppermost vesture of Military persons: Especially Emperors,
Kings, and their Generals, and other Commanders in Military services, used to
cast over their Armou^s a kind of short habit, as a Jacket, Mandylian, or such
like, whereupon their Arms were richly beautified and curiously wrought. To
the end, that in time of service, their Soldiers who could not be directed by
the ear (by reason of the far distance that was oftentimes upon occasion
between them and their commander) they might by their eye be instructed
according to the necessity of the present service, and might by occular
observation of their commander (being so eminently clad) know and discern
their fit times and opportunities of marching, making a stand, assailing,
retiring, and other their like duties, whereupon this kind of short garment was
called a Coat Armor, because it was worn aloft upon their Armor. And it was
called Paludamentum, quia ex eo gestans tale vestimentum palam fiebat omnibus.
Such was the Coat Armor of Alexander that he left in Elymais in the Country of
Persia, whereof mention is made, where it is said, 1 Macca. 16.1.
Now when King Antiochus traveled through the high Countries, he heard that
Elymais in the country of Persia was a City greatly renowned for riches, silver
and gold. And that there was in it a very rich Temple, Coat Armor of Alexander.
wherein were coverings of Gold, Coat-armours and harness, which Alexander,
King of Macedonia the son of Philip that reigned first in Grecia, had left
there.

For proof that Emperors used to wear Coat-armours, it shall be to good
purpose to produce the verbal testimony of Baysius; speaking in these words,
Fertur eo die Crassum non purpure, ut Romanorum Imperatorum mos erat,
paludamento ad Milites processisse, sed pallio nigro.

And further the same Author says, Paludamentum vero fuisse Imperatorum planum
fit ex Tranquillo in Caesare, Coat Armor of Emperors
qui Alexandriae circa oppugnationem pontis, eruptione hostium subita compulsus
in scapham, pluribus eodem praecipitantibus cum desiliisset in mare, nando per
ducentos passus evasit ad proximam navem elata laeva, ne Libelli, quos tenebat,
madefierent, paludamentum mordicus trahens ne spolio potiretur hostis.

Of all creatures apt to generation and corruption Animals are most worthy. All
Beasts have a natural, and greedy desire for the supply of their wants,
insomuch as for the attaining thereof, they do rore, bellow, bray, and cry out
exceedingly.

All Beasts of Savage and harmfull kind, are naturally armed with some thing
wherewith they may hurt a man, for which they are reckoned dangerous to be
shunned. As the Boar, with Tuskes, the Lion with Tallans, the Stag with
Horns, the Serpent with Poison, etc.

Notwithstanding that the Bearing of things properly (whether vegetable or
sensitive) is specially commended, Note.
yet must not such peculiar commendation be extended to derogate from the
dignity of other Bearings, as if they were of no esteem, in regard they be not
borne property: for there are as good and honorable intendments in these as in
them, data p^ritate gestantium, if they be as ancient as the former; and their
Bearers of equal estate and dignity; which is not the least respect that must
be holden in the esteem of Coat Armor, A chief respect.
Quia Arma nobilitatem sumunt a persona gestantis: Arms are honored by the
Bearers. And sometimes the variation from the property may be of purpose to
prevent some other quality, which may be no less honorable than the proper.
Besides, it is one thing to bear a living creature in color or in action
diverse from Nature; and another, to bear him repugnant or contrary to
Nature; Note.
for the former may be borne commendably, but this latter sort of Bearing is
holden desgracefull, or rather is condemned for false Arms, and therefore not
worthy of Bearing. In the Blazoning of things borne in their natural Color,
whether the same be celestial, except the Sun, Moon and Stars, or sublunar,
it suffices to say, He bears this Comet, Meteor, Beast, Bird, Fish, Foul,
Plant, Tree, Herb, Flower. etc. Proper, without naming of any Color, for by
proper, is evermore understood his natural colors, and for the Sun and Stars
when they be of the color of the Metal, Or, which is their natural color,
it suffices to say a Sun, or Star, without adding the word proper, or Or. And
so it is of the Moon, when she is Argent, which in Heraldrie is holden her
proper color.

Rule. 2. General observation.
As touching the Dignity of things borne in Coat Armor, I have already showed
how the same is to be reckoned in the Order of Nature, but if it be considered
according to vulgar estimation, then we must hold this for an observation that
seldom fails, that since every particular Empire, Kingdom and Nation have
their distinct Ensigns of their Sovereign jurisdiction, look what Beast, Bird,
Fish, Foul, Serpent, etc. he that swayeth the Sovereignty does bear for his
Royal Ensign in each particular Nation, the same is accounted there to be of
greatest dignity. So is the Bearing of the Lion chiefly esteemed with us in
England, because he is borne by his Majesty, for the Royal Ensign of his
Highness Imperial Sovereignty over us: So is the Bearing of the Eagle esteemed
amongst the Germans: and in like sort the Flowers de lis, amongst the
Frenchmen. Four-footed Beasts, whether they be borne Proper, or Discolored
(that is to say, varying from their Natural color) are to be esteemed more
worthy of Bearing in Coat Armor than either Fishes or Fowls are, in regard
they do contain in them more worthy and commendable Significations of Nobility.
Amongst things Sensitive, the Males are of more worthy bearing than the
Females. Some men perhaps will tax me of inconsideration, in not treading the
usual steps of Armorists in the handling of these sensible creatures, for that
I do not prefer the Lion (in respect of his regal Sovereignty) before all
other terrestrials. For clearing of my self in this point, I must plead, that
the project of my prescript method has tied me to another form, and does
enforce me to prefer other Beasts in place, before those which otherwise are
preferred in dignity. And albeit I cannot say there was any priority of time in
the Creation of Beasts, because God spoke the word and it was done, he
commanded and they were created; nevertheless in regard of discipline, there
is a priority to be observed; wherein those things that do promise us a more
easy access to the distinct knowledge and understanding of the succeeding
documents, Priority to be observed.
ought to have the precedence.

The Authors prefixed order.
The order that I prefix to my self in treating of these Beasts, shall concur
with the Table of this present Section, as first to set down Animals of all
sorts living upon the Earth: Secondly, such as live above the Earth, as Fowls:
Thirdly, Watery Creatures: and lastly, Man. And because of the first sort, some
are Gressible, having feet, and some creeping or gliding as Serpents: we will
begin with the Gressible; and first with such beasts as have their feet solid
or Undivided, or (as I may term them) Inarticulate; that is to say, without
toes; then will I proceed to such as have their feet cleft in two, and lastly
to Beasts that have their feet divided into many.

SECT. III. CHAP. XIII.
HAving delivered diverse Rules and Observations concerning living things and
their parts in genere, Use of demonstrations.
I will now annex such examples as may demonstrate these several sorts of
bearing, forasmuch as demonstrations give life and light to ambiguous and
doubtful Precepts, as Aristotle Ethic. 7. notes, saying, Demonstrationes sunt
perfectiores and nobiliores, quando inducuntur post orationes dubitab^les:
Demonstrations are ever best, after doubtful passages. Of these briefly, as in
the next Escocheon. Bearing of beasts, of whom borrowed.
The invention of Arms wherein Beasts or their parts are borne, are borrowed
(says Sir John Fern) from the Hunnes, Hungarians, Scythians and Saxons,
cruel and most fierce Nations, who therefore delighted in the bearing of
Beasts of like nature in their Arms, as Lions, Bears, Wolves, Hyenes, and such
like; which fashion likewise came into these our Countries when those barbarous
people overran with conquest the West part of Europe. Now to the end that the
Rules, and Observations formerly set down, may receive both life and warrant by
Presidents, I will now exemplify them in their order. And first of
whole-footed Beasts with their Members.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, an Elephant passant, Argent, Tusked,
Or, by the name of Elphinston. Concerning these Arms that are formed of
Beasts, it is to be observed, that generally those are reputed more noble which
do consist of whole Beasts, than are those that are formed of their parts: yet
sometimes the parts may be given for some such special services as may be no
less honorable than the whole bearing. The Elephant is a Beast of great
Strength, but greater Wit, and greatest Ambition; Pride of the Elephant.
insomuch that some have written of them, that if you praise them, they will
kill themselves with labor; and if you commend another above them, they will
break their hearts with emulation. The beast is so proud of his strength, that
he never bows himself to any (neither indeed can he) and when he is once down
(as it usually is with proud Great ones) he cannot rise up again. Elehpants how
provoked to fight.
It was the manner of such as used the force of Elephants (in set Battles) to
provoke them to fight by laying before them things of Scarlet or Crimson Color
to make them more furious: as we may see, 1 Mac. 6.34. And to provoke the
Elephants for to fight, 1 Mac. 6.34.
they showed them the blood of Grapes and Mulberries. Furthermore they were
placed in the strength and heart of the battle, as in the same Chapter
appears, where it is said, And they set the beasts according to their ranges,
so that by every Elephant there stood a thousand men armed with coats of maile,
and Helmets of brass upon their heads; and unto every Beast were ordained five
hundred Horsemen of the best, Verse 35. Which were ready at all times
wheresoever the beast was: and whithersoever the beast went, they went also and
departed not from him, verse 36. The hugeness and incomparable strength of
this beast, The incomparable strength of the Elephant.
may be conceived by this, that he bare thirty two fighting men in strong
Towers of wood fastened upon his back. As we may see expressly set down in the
same Chapter in these words: And upon them were strong Towers of wood that
covered every beast, which were fastened thereon with instruments: and upon
every one were thirty two men that fought in them, and the Indian that ruled
him, Ver. 37.

Three Elephants heads.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Parted per Pale, Sable, and Argent, three
Elephants heads counter-changes, by the name of Saunders, a Family of good
Eminence in Northamptonshire, Buckingham, London, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Fesse, Gules, between three Elephants
heads, Erased, Sable, and is borne by the name of Fountain, and is the
Coat Armor of John Fountain Esquire, Sergeant at Law, and now one of the
Commissioners of the great Seal of England, 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, on a Fesse, between three Elephants
heads, Erased, Argent, as many Mullets of the first, by the name of Pratte.
When any part is thus borne with ligges, like pieces of the flesh or skin,
depending, it is termed erasing, of the Latin word erade, to scrape or rent
off, or of the French, Arrasher, the same signification. This being the first
place of such bearing, I thought good here to observe that this Erasing and
Couping are the two common accidents of parts borne. Couping is when a part is
cut off smooth, as in this next example.

A proboscide of an Elephant.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Purpure, the Proboscide, Trunk, or Snout
of an Elephant, in Pale, Couped, Flexed and Reflexed, after the form of a Roman
S, Or. Bara, Page 147. sets down this for the Coat of Cyneus King of
Scythia, where also he notes that Idomenes King of Thessaly, the son of
Deucalion did bear, Gules, a Proboscide of an Elephant after this manner,
Argent. The Elephant has great strength in this part, and uses it for his
Hand, and all other uses of agility, wherein Nature has recompensed the
unaptnesse of his legs, which other beasts do use to such services. The Roman H
stories, do relate of an Elephant of a huge greatness carried in a show about
Rome, which (as it passed by) a little boy pryed in his Proboscis, therewith
being enraged he cast up the child a great height, but received him again on
his Snowt, and laid him down gently without any hurt, as if the beast had
considered, that for a childish fault, a childish fright were revenge enough.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse, A Fesse between three
Horses.
between three Horses passant, Argent, by the name of Stamp. A horse erected
boult upright, may be termed enraged, but his noblest action, is expressed in a
Saliant form. This of all beasts for man's uses, is a most noble and behovefull,
either in Peace or War. And since his service and courage in the Field is so
eminent, it may be marvelled why the Lion should be esteemed a more honorable
bearing. But the reason is, because the Horses service and strength is
principally by help of his Rider, whereas the Lions is his own: and if the
Horse be not mounted, he fights averse, turning his heels to his adversary,
but the Lion encounters affront, which is more manly. It is observed of the
Horse (as also of other whole-footed beasts) that their Legs are at the first
as long as ever they will be: and therefore young Foales scratch their Ears
with their hinder foot, which after they cannot do, because their Legs do grow
only in bigness, but not in length, Plin. lib. 11. cap. 48.

The Horse is a beast naturally stubborn, fierce, hauty, proud and insolent,
and of all beasts there is none that vanteth more after victory obtained, or
dejected if he be vanquished, none more prone in battle or desirous of revenge.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Horse head couped, Argent, A Horse
head couped.
by the name of Marshe. The neighing of the Horse is a token of his great
courage, as appears, Job 29. Have thou given the Horse strength, or covered
his neck with neighing? Whose fierceness also he singularly describes thus:
He swalloweth the ground for fierceness and rage, and he believes not that it
is the noise of the Trumpet. He says among the Trumpets Ha, Ha; He smells
the battle a far off, and the noise of the Captains and shoutings.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, on a Canton, Sable, A Horse head
couped on a Canton, Ermine. Job 39.
a Horse-head, Couped, Argent, with a Bit and Rains, Gules, by the name of
Brixton. The undantable courage of the horse, Job in the forecited Chapter
does portray most lively, saying: Have thou made him afraid as the Grasshopper?
His strong neighing is fearful. He diggeth the valley, and rejoices in his
strength, and goes forth to meet the Harnessed man. He moketh at fear and is
not afraid, and turns not back from the sword: Though the quiver rattle
against him, the glittering Spear and the Shield. To govern him, no less
needful is the Bit and Rains sometimes to hold him in, than is the Spur to put
him forward: and therefore David likens an unruly man, to a horse, which thou
must keep in with bit and bridle, lest he fall upon thee.

Three Asses passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, between three Asses
Passant, Sable, by the name of Askewe. The Ass is the lively Emblem of
patience, whom therefore our blessed Savior (being Patience and humility it
self) honored with his own riding: which have made some to fancy ever since
that time, that the black line on the ridge of all Asses backs, thwarted with
the like over both the Shoulders, is stamped on them as the Mark of his Cross
whereon he was to show his patience by suffering for us.

An Ass head erased.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, an Ass head Erased, Sable, by the
name Hocknell of Cheshire. In the second of the Kings we read that Benhadad
King of Aram, did beset the City of Samaria with his Host, and laid so
straight siege thereunto, as that an Asses head (which as it seems was
reckoned amongst things of least esteem) was valued at fourscore pieces of
Silver. Which perhaps gave occasion to the old Proverb: Asini caput ne laves
Nitro: Wash not an Asses head with Niter; which is a matter white like salt and
full of holes as a Sponge: whereby we are admonished not to bestow our time,
charge, and travel in matters of small moment: and not (as we say in our
English proverb) make more ado about the broth than the meat is worth.

A Mule passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Mule passant, Argent, by the name
of Moile. The generation of Mules seems to be the invention of Anah the son
of Zibeon. For it is said, Genesis 36. This was Anah that found Mules in the
wilderness, as he fed his Father Zibeons Asses. Who not contented with those
kinds of beasts which God had created, found out the monsterous generation of
Mules between an Ass and a Mare. A Mule depicted passant; has his chiefest
grace.

SECT. III. CHAP. XIV.
AFter Beasts whole footed, succeed those, who are cloven-footed, whether into
two parts or more. Beasts whole footed.
And first, for those which have their feet divided into two parts only, they
are for the most part Armed with horns, as the following examples shall
illustrate. And by the way this must be noted, that these horned beasts,
besides that their members are borne Couped, and Erased, (like other beasts)
have also their heads borne Trunked: Which of some Armorists is blazoned
Cahossed of the word Cabo, which in the Spanish Language does signify a head,
which form of blazon gives us to understand that it is the head of some such
beast, borne sole, and of it self, having no part of the neck thereto
adherent; an accident that seldom befalls beasts of other kinds, which most
usually are borne with the neck conjoined. Which form or bearing you shall
hereafter see in due place.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a bend, Sable, three Calves, A
bend with three Calves.
Or, by the name of Veale. If these Calves live to wear Horns which differ
either in Metal or in color from the rest of the body, then must there be
special mention of such difference in blazoning, as you shall see in the next
example. Pliny says, that Nature seemed to sport her self in making such
variety of horns of beasts, as so many several kinds of weapons, wherewith
they come armed into the Field; for in some she has made knagged and branched,
as in the Red and Fallow dear; In other plain and uniforme without Tines, as
in Spitters, a kind of Stags which thereupon are called in Latin Subulones,
and that their horns are like to the blade of a Shoomakers Awle; but of all
other, the horns of the Bull may most properly be called his Arms, they being
of so piercing and violent a stroke, as hardly can be resisted.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, a Bull passant, Gules, A Bull
passant.
Armed and unguled, Or, by the name of Bevill. The Bull is the ringleader
amongst ruther beasts, and through hope of his increase of breed, he is
privileged to range in all pastures with free ingresse and egresse. The Bull
being gelt changes both his nature and name, and is called an Ox. The
Athenians to signify their gratefulness for the laborious travel of the Ox,
did stamp the similitude of an Ox upon a certain coin which they called
Didrachma, which piece contained two Drachmaes, which makes of our money
little more than Elevenpence halfepenny. Whereupon this Proverb was grounded,
Per linguam bos inambulat: The Ox walks up and down with the tongue.
Reproving thereby the dishonesty of those Advocates (that having received
bribes of the adverse part) do from thenceforth seek to pervert and poison
the cause of their Client, either by betraying of his cause to his Adversary,
or else by not pleading, or by covenous pleading, utterly to defeat his Clyents
right. Ab his and similibus serva nos Domine.

The bearing of a Bull or the head thereof, is a note of valor or magnanimity,
where contrariwise the bearing of an Ox, or the head thereof, denotes
faintness of courage, as Vpton notes, that their first bearers were either
gelt persons, or such as had some notable defect in the generative parts, as
that thereby they became altogether unfit for procreation.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Bulls head erased, Sable, by the
name of Carselack. The Bulls head may signify a man enraged with desire of
revenge, whom nothing can satisfy but the utter spoil and ruin of his
adversary. The strength of the head and the Neck of a Bull is very great, and
his forehead seems to be made for fright, insomuch as he is of some thought
to be named Taurus a torvitate, in respect of his stern and ghastly look: his
horns are strong and sharp, wherewith he tosseth great and weighty beasts
into the air, and receives them again, doubling their elevation with renewed
rage and strength, until they be utterly confounded.

Cheuron between three Bulls heads couped.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Luna, a Cheuron, Mars, between three
Bulls heads, Couped, Saturn, Armed, Sol. This Coate-Armour pertains to the
Right Noble Family of Thomas Bulleine Lord Hoo and Hastings, Vicount Rochford,
who was created Earl of Wiltshire, and of Ormond, by the renowned King of
famous memory Henry the Eighth, who married the virtuous and beauteous Lady
Anne, daughter of the same Earl, and Mother to the most Glorious Queen
Elizabeth: the memory of whose long, most prosperous and flourishing
Government, be blessed and eternized to all future posterities.

Bulls heads trunked.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheueron between three Bulls Heads
trunked or cabossed, Argent. Armed, Or, by the name of Baynham. Bara a good
French Armorist uses neither of these words at all; but blazoneth it a Bulls
head only: because any head thus borne, is understood to be so cut of, as no
part of the neck be appendant to the same.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Goat, passant, Argent, by the
name of Baker. The Goat is not so hardy as politic, therefore that Martial
man which uses more policy than valor in atchieving a victory, may very aptly
bear for his Coate-Armour this Beast.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, on a Fesse, counter Battilee between
three Goats passant, Argent, as many Pellets, and is borne by the name of Man,
of which Family is many worthy Gentlemen in this City. And there are of this
name that vary the Pellets to Torteuxes. Now I will show you an Example of the
bearing the heads of this beast.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermyne, a Goats head Erased, Gules,
Attired, Or, by the name of Gotley: by this Blazon you may observe how you
ought to term the horns of a Goat in Armory, when you find they differ in
metal or Color from the beast, or that particular part of the beast which is
borne. The Philosophers write, that the blood of a Goat will mollify the
Diamond.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, a Fesse, wavee, between three Goats
heads erased, Argent, and is borne by the name of Sedley, of which Family are
Sir Charles Sedley of Southfleet, and Sir John Sedley of Saint Cleers in Ightam
in Kent, Baronets, of Hartford-shire also, and Norfolk.

Sithence we are now come to treat of beasts of the Forests, I hold it fit to
speak somewhat in my first entry of their Numbers, Names, Qualities, Royalties,
Armings, Footings, Degrees of age, etc. according as they are termed of
skillful Forresters and Woodmen. And first of their kinds.

Of Beasts of the Forest, some are Beasts of Venery. Chase.


Of Beasts of Venery there are five kinds, viz. the Heart. Hynde. Hare. Boar.
Wolf.
As old Woodmen have anciently termed them.

These have been accounted properly Wild Beasts of the Forest, or beasts of
Venery. These beasts are also called Sylvestres (Scil.) beasts of the Wood or
Forest, because they do haunt the Woods more than the Plains.

Proper Names, Seasons, Degrees and Ages of Beasts of the Forest and of Chase.

Wherefore you shall understand that the First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth.
years, you shall call them Hind or Calfe. Brockett. Spayade. Staggarde.
Stagge. Heart.


But here by the way we must observe that some ancient Writers do report, that
in times past Forresters were wont to call him a Stag at the fourth year, and
not a Staggard, as we do now; and at the fifth year they called him a great
Stag: And so they were wont to distinguish his several ages by these words,
Stag and great Stag.

The knowledge of the Ordure or excrements of every beast of Venery and chase
is necessary to be observed, because their ordures are a principal note
whereby good Forresters and Woodmen do know and observe the place of their
haunt and feeding, and also their estate. And therefore it is a thing highly to
be observed, for that a Forrester or Woodman in making his reports shall be
constrained to rehearse the same.

The Ordure of a Heart 1 Hare 2 Boar 3 Fox and 4 all Vermin
is termed 1 Fumets or fimashing of all Dear. 2 Crottelles or Crotizing. 3
Lesses. 4 Fiantes.


Term of footing or treading of all beasts of Venery and Chase.

That of a Heart Buck and all Fallow Dear Bear
is termed Slot. View. Tract or Treading.


That of an Hare is termed according to her several courses, for when she
keeps In plain fields, and chaseth about to deceive the Hounds: Beats the
plain Highway where you may yet perceive her footing, it is said she (...)
Pricke^^.


Terms of the Tail.

That of a 1 Heart 2 Buck, Roe, or any other Dear 3 Boar 4 Fox 5 Wolf 6 Hare
and Coney
is termed his 1 Tail. 2 Single. 3 Wreath. 4 Bush, or holy water sprinkle. 5
Stern. 6 Scutte.


The fat of all sorts of Dear is called Sueete. Also it may be very well said,
This Dear was a high Deeres Grease.

The fat of a Roe Boar and Hare.
is termed Bevy Grease. Grease.


You shall say that a Heart Buck Roe Hare Conie Fox
Harbors. Lodges. Beddeth. Seateth or Forms. Sits. Kenneleth.


You shall say a Dear Hare Fox
is broken. Cased. Uncased.


You shall say Dislodge Start Vnkennel Rowse Bowlt
the Buck. Hare. Fox. Heart. Cony.


You shall say 1 Heart or Buck 2 Roe 3 Boar 4 Heart or Conie 5 Fox 6 Wolf.
goes to his the 1 Rule. 2 Turn. 3 Brymme. 4 Buck. 5 Clicketting. 6 Match,
or to his Make.


Terms excogitated and used by Forresters;

You shall say, a Heart Buck Roe Hare and Conie Fox Wolf.
Belloweth. Growneth. Belleth. Beats, or Tappeth. Barketh. Howleth.


You shall say, a Litter of Cubs. Nest of Rabbets.


Skillful Forresters and good Woodmen.

Do use to say, a Heard Heard Bevy Sounder Kowte Riches Brace, or Lease Brace,
or Lease Brace, or Lease Couple
Of Hearts. All manner of Dear. Roes. Swyne. Wolves. Marternes. Bucks. Foxes.
Hares. Rabbets or Conies.


These are apt terms of Hunting pertaining both to Beasts of Venery and of
Chase.

Whereas some men are of opinion that a Stag of what age soever he be, shall
not be called a Heart, until the King or Queen have hunted him, Stagge when
properly called an Heart.
that is not so: for after the fifth year of his Age, you shall no more call
him a Stag but a Heart. So then at six years old he is called a Heart. Now if the
King or Queen do hunt or chase him, and he escape away alive, Heart Royal, when
so named.
then after such hunting or chasing, he is called a Heart Royal.

Note that if this Heart be by the King or Queen so hunted or chased that he be
forced out of the Forest, so far, that it is unlike that he will of himself
return thitherto again, and then the King or Queen gives him over, either for
that he is weary, or because he cannot recover him; for that such a Heart has
showed the King pastime for his delight, and is also (as Budeus notes) Eximius
Cervus, a goodly Heart, and for that the King would have him return to the
Forest again; he causes open proclamation to be made in all Towns and
Villages near to the place where the same Heart so remains. That no manner of
person or persons shall kill, hurt, Heart Royal proclaimed.
hunt or chase him, but that he may safely return to the Forest again from
whence he came. And then ever after such a Heart is called a Heart Royal
proclaimed.

So that there are three sorts of Hearts, viz. Heart. Hearts of three sorts.
Heart Royal, and Heart Royal proclaimed.


A Hind has these degrees. First Second Third
year is called, a Calfe. Brockets sister. Hynde.


Good Forresters have observed that when a Heart has past his sixth year, he is
generally to be called a Heart of Ten. And afterward according to the
increase of this head.

Whether he be Crochod, Palmed, or Crowned.


When he breaks heard and draws to the Thickets or Coverts, The Forresters
or Woodmen do say, he takes his hold.

Forasmuch as it may oftentimes fall out as well in Coat-armours as in Badges,
that the Attires of Deer both Red and Fallow may be borne bendy, barry, or
otherwise Counter-coloured, I have thought it for the more apt blazon of them,
to annex such propriety of terms, as the skilfullest Forresters or Woodmen do
attribute unto their several kinds, so there may be a fit correspondence of
Artificial terms as well Woodman-like as Armoriall: Adding withal their
forms and shapes of their several attires, for the better and reddier
conceiving of their particular parts, and fit application of each particular
term to his proper part, by the help of the Alphabeticall letters that I have
for that purpose annexed to each part.

diagram of left, right and facing antlered deer labelling their various parts
deer's antlered head

Skillful Woodmen describing the head of a Heart, do call the a Round Roll next
the Head b Main horn c Lowest Antlier d Next above thereunto e Next above that
f Upper part of all The Bur. Beam. Browanteliers. Bezanteliers. Royal.
Surroyall Top.

And in a Bucks head they say, Bur. c Beam. b Branch. d Advancers. e Palm. a
Spellers.


And though every Gentleman is not an Armorist, or a skillful Woodman, yet it
is not well beseeming men of a generous race to have a superficial skill in
either of these professions, forasmuch as they both (especially the former) do
well beseem the dignity of a Gentleman, the one tending to the delight and
recreation of the mind, and the other to the health, solace, and exercise of
the body. That so in their mutual converse, they may be able to deliver their
minds in fit terms in either kind, and not in speeches, either vulgar or
obsolete. For which cause I here set down the terms appropried (by skillful
Forresters and Woodmen) to beasts of Chase, according to their several names,
seasons, degrees, and ages, like as I have formerly done of beasts of Venery,
as in example.

Of Beasts of Chase, the Buck is the first,

And is termed the First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth year, a Fawn.
Pricket. Sorel. Sore. Buck of the first head. Buck, or great Buck.

Next to the Buck is the Do, being accounted the second beast of Chase.

And is termed the First Second Third year, a Fawn. Prickets sister. Do.

The third Beast of Chase is a Fox, which albeit he be said to be Politic and
of much subtilty, yet is the variety of terms of a Fox very scarce.

For in the First year Second he is called a Cub. Fox. Afterward an old Fox,
or the like.

The Martern, or Marton (as some old Forresters or Woodmen do term them) being
the fourth Beast of Chase, has these terms.

He is called the First Second year, a Martern Cub. Martern.

The fifth and last Beast of Chase is the Roe, whose proper terms pertaining to
chase are these.

He is said to be the First Second Third Fourth Fifth year, a Kydde. Gyrle.
Hein use. Roe Buck of the first head. Far Roe Buck.

These Beasts of Chase do make their abode all the day time in the Fields,
Fallow Dear more fearful than hurtful.
and upon the Hills and high Mountains, where they may see round about them
afar off, for preventing their danger: for these are more timorous of their own
safety, than dangerous and harmfull to men. And in the night time when men be
at rest, and all things quiet, then do they make their repair to the Corn
fields and Meadows for food and relief, for which respect they are called
Campesties, because they do haunt the Field and Champion grounds, more than the
Woods, and thick coverts or thickets; as we do most usually observe them.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Mount, Proper, Stag on a Mount.
a Stag lodged, Gules, by the name of Harthill. The Stag is a goodly beast,
full of state in his gate and view, and (amongst Beasts of Chase) reputed the
chief for principal game and exercise: it is observed of him, that finding
himself fat, he ever lodges and sculketh in secret places, to avoid chasing,
as knowing himself worth following, and worth killing (as was said of the great
Stagge at Killingworth) but most utfit for flying.

A Stag standing.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Stag standing at Gaze, Argent,
attired and unguled, Or, by the name of Jones of Monmouthshire. The Stag which
erst you saw lodged, you now see standing, as listening to the approach of any
danger. And nature having denied this beast other securities, yet has endued
him with two excellent favors above others; the one, exceeding quickness of
hearing, to foreknow his hazards, and so the sooner to prevent them, (for which
cause, the Stag amongst the Emblemes of the five senses, represents the
Hearing;) the other exceeding speed of foot, to fly from the danger when it
approaches.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Stag Tripping, Proper, attired
and Vnguled, A Stag tripping.
Or, by the name of Holme. The Heart born in Arms (says Vpton) betokens
sometimes one skillful in Music, or such an one as takes a felicity and
delight in harmony: Also, a man that is wise and politic, and well foreseeth
his times and opportunities: A man unwilling to assail the Enemy rashly, but
rather desirous to stand on his own guard honestly, than to annoy another
wrongfully.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Stag springing forwards, Or, by the
name of Gilstand. A Stag springing.
Pliny says, that horns are so mollified with wax whilst they are yet growing
upon the heads of the beasts, that they may be made capable of sundry
impressions, and are made divisible into many parts: but Nature needed not this
device, neither can Art form a fashion of more stately decency, than she has
done on the Stag. All horns in a manner be hollow, save that toward the
pointed tippe they be solid and massy. Only Deer, both red and fallow, have
them solid throughout.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Buck Passant, and Chief indented,
Or, by the name of Humble or Vmble, as it was entered in the Visitation of
London, 1634. for George Humble Esquire; as may appear by several Monumentall
Ensigns in Saint Mary Wolnoth Church in Lumbard-street, where diverse of the
Family lie interd, and in which the chief Branch is now Inhabitant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Stag in his full course, Or,
pursued hotly by a Brace of Dogs, A Stag in his full course, pursued by a brace
of dogs.
Argent, all Bendwaies and at random, by the name of Yardly. Though horns be
assigned to the Stag, Buck, and other like Beasts, for weapons, both offensive
and defensive, yet do they seldom use them to those ends; ^^ing therein like
many Gallants well attired and Armed, but it is more for show than for use,
when it comes to proof. So David speaks of some, who carrying bows turned
their backs; as having Arms, but wanting hearts. And it may be, the Heart has
his name (as Mons a movendo,) for being heartlesse: but sure it is, that all
the Armor in the Tower is not enough to Arm a Dastards heart.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Fesse, between three Buckes, in
full course, Or, by the name of Robertson. Three Bucks in full course.
This kind of Deer is called Cervus Palmatus, for the resemblance that his
horns have with the hand and fingers. This Beast reposeth his safety chiefly
in flight, wherein he is uery swift in case of pursuit: his color most
commonly Sandy, with a black struck along his back; their Sides and Belly
spotted with White, which spots they lose through age: their Females are more
variable in color; as being sometimes all white.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Cheuron Argent, between three
Robucks in full course, Or, by the name of Robertson. Three Robucks in full
course.
Although this Beast as a coward flies with his weapons, yet two times there
are when he dares turn head on his foe: the one is when it is for his life,
as when he is chased out of breath, and his strength so spent, that he cannot
by flight escape; Despera^io facit audacem: he is more than a coward that will
not fight when he sees his case desperate: and therefore it is a general rule
in good policy never to put them to the utmost exigent and extremity, with
whom we desire to prevail, according to the old English Proverb, Compel a
coward to fight, and he will kill the Devil: which was the cause that the
Romans landing in this Kingdom, English Proverb.
burnt their own Navy, thereby to enforce the Army to be resolute, by
despairing of any escape or return by Sea again. The other time of the Stags
courage is for his Love, at which time he will fight to the death with his
Rival or hinderer of his hot desire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Bucks tripping, Or, Three
Bucks tripping.
by the name of Green, and is the paternall Coat of John Green of Boys-Hall in
Navestocke in the County of Essex, Sergeant at Law, and one of the Judges of
the Shrieves Court London, lately deceased, father of John Green Esquire who
succeeded him in the said place, and is at present Recorded of the said City.
The Buck is a worthy beast, and has a degree and measure of all the properties
of the Stag, but comes far short of his stateliness and boldness, (for there
are degrees of courage even among Cowards.) And Nature has made his horn
rather broad, for a defensive buckler, than sharp as the Stags for the thrust.
Their best quality is, that they are sociable, and love to keep together in
Herds; Sociablenesse of fallow Deer.
which is the property of all harmless and peaceable creatures, which are of
comfort and courage only in company; whereas all beasts and birds of prey are
given to wander solitary, neglecting societies: and that made the Philosopher
say, that a solitary and unsociable man, was either a Saint, or a Devil.

Stags at gaze.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse Azure, between three
Stagges standing at gaze or gardant, Gules, by the name of Robertson. Sometimes
the femals both of Red and Fallow Dear, to wit, Hindes and Does, as well as
Stags, and Buckes, are borne in Coat Armor: but such bearing is holden less
commendable than that of Males, Female Dear borne.
because Masculinum dignius est Feminino, as Aristotle witnesses, Topic. 1.
the Male is ever nobler than the Female. Arist. Top. 1.
To prove that Females are borne also, I have (out of many examples) selected
one of rare bearing, here next following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, two Hindes counter-tripping in
Fesse, Hindes counter-tripping.
Argent, by the name of Cottingham. Pliny in his Natural History, Lib. 9.
writes, that among all sorts of Beasts, the Males are more stomackfull, and of
greater courage than the Females, excepting in Panthers and Bears: and that
those parts that Nature has bestowed upon Beasts, Plin. lib. 9.
to serve them (as it were) in stead of Weapons, as Teeth, Horns, Stings, and
other such like, she has given them especially unto the Males, as to those
that are both better and stronger, and has left the Females altogether
disarmed: whereof Martial writes in this manner.

Dente timetur Aper; defendunt cornua Cervum:
Imbelles Damae, quid nisi praeda sumus?
Martial. The Boares Tusks him protect; the Heart trusts to his Horn:
We harmless armelesse Hindes for prey are left forlorn.
Stags heads couped.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Stags Heads Couped, Sable, by
the name of Rigmaiden. Some Authors are of opinion, that the attires of
Gentlewomens Heads, were first found out and devised, by occasion of the fight
of the Horns of this Beast, because they are seemly to behold, Attires of
Gentlewomen.
and do become the beast rightwell, and that Nature bestowed Horns on them,
more for Ornament than for Assault, appears by this; that they repose their
safety, rather in their Speedy footmanship, than in the strength of their
Heads: The Tines of the Stags Head do increase Yearly, until he has
accomplished the full number of Seven Years, and then decreaseth again.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Diamond, three Stags heads Cabossed, Pearl,
attired Topaz, and is the Coat of the Right Honorable William Marquess and
Earl of Nawcastle, Viscount Mansfield, and Lord Ogle, etc. And of the Right
Honorable William Covendish Earl of Devonshire, and Baron of Hardwick.

blazon or coat of arms The field is, Gules, three Stags heads trunked, Or,
Three Stags heads trunked.
Armed or Attired, Argent. This Coat is borne by the name of Faldo in the
County of Bedford, where there are diverse Gentlemen of that name yet
remaining, and some of them yet owners of the said Manor (as I take it.) For
two respects I have inserted this Coat; The one in regard that the Attires are
of a different Metal from the heads, which is not usual: The other to show
that Sir John Fern in his book entitled the Blazon of Gentry, page 240.
sets down for the Armoriall Ensigns of this Family, a Coat of device, which
he supposes to have been invented by some of the Ancestors thereof. Which (as
he says) was very ancient, yet no Coat of Arms, as indeed it is not, but a
mere fantastic device: which being so, he had done much better to have
expressed the true Paternall Coat of that Family, as it is here expressed,
rather than the adulterate or counterfeit Coat, which neither relisheth of true
Armory, nor yet of any sharpness of ingenious device or invention.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Bucks heads Couped, Or, by the
name of Deering. Three Bucks heads couped.
The bearing of the head of any living thing, betokens Jurisdiction and
Authority to administer Justice, and to execute Laws; for the greatest esteem
of the head in Coat Armor, is in respect of the more noble use thereof; for by
it is the whole body governed and directed, and is called in Latin Caput: Quia
capiat omnes sensus, and he that is a head should be sure to have all his
Senses about him, as the head has.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Fesse, Sable, three Stags
heads Erased, Or, by the name of Bradford, Three Stags heads erased.
Sir John Fern in Lacies Nobility says, that the head of any beast borne
Erased, as this is, is one of the best manner of bearings. The heads of such
horned beasts were wont to be held Sacred to Apollo and Diana; perchance
because Diana signified the Moon, which is her self a horned Creature, and
Apollo for being a good Bowman, deserved the horns for his reward.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Bend, Engrailed, Azure, between
two Bucks heads Cabossed, Sable, and is the Coat of the Right Honorable Robert
Needham, Viscount Kilmurrey, and also of Sir Robert Needham of Lambeth Knight.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Bucks head, trunked or Cabossed,
Bucks head trunked.
Gules, by the name of Try. Of all the parts or members of Beasts, Birds, or
other living things, the bearing of the head (next to the whole bearing) is
reckoned most honorable, for that it signifies that the owner of such
Coat Armor feared not to stand to the face of his enemy.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Bucks head Cabossed, between two
flanches, Or, by the name of Parker of North Moulton in the County of Devon.
This Coat Armor seems to have some congruity with the name of the bearer, it
being a name borrowed from the Office, which it is probable the first Ancestor
of this Family held, viz. a Park keeper, which in old English was called
Parker, who by office has the charge of the beast whose head is borne in this
Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Passant, Gules, between two
Bars, Sable, charged with three Bezants in Chief, the like number of Bucks
heads Cabossed, of the third. This is the Coat of that ingenious Gentleman
Philip Parker Esquire, and Calthrope Parker of London Merchant, sons of Sir
Philip Parker of Arington Hall in Suffolk Knight, of which Family is also the
Right Honorable the Lord Morley and Mounteagle.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three rain Deeres heads, Trunked or
Cabossed, Three Rain-Deeres heads.
Sable, by the name of Bowet. If you should have occasion to make mention of
the horns of any sort of Dear, by reason that they be of a different Metal or
Color from their bodies, you must term them Attired. If upon like occasion
you shall speak of their Claws, you must say they be unguled, of the Latin
word ungula, which signifies the Hoof or Claws of a beast.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Attires of a
Stag, fixed to the scalpe, Argent, by the name of Cocks. The Stag does mew his
head every year, unless he be castrated or gelt whilst his head is in his
prime: for in such case he never meweth his head, neither does his beam Burre,
or Tynes augment, or diminish any more, but continue still in the same state
wherein they were at the time of his castration.

Forresters and Hunters do call this yearly mewing of their heads, the beauty
of their wildness, and not the mewing of their Horns as the Latinists do term
it.

These having mewed their heads do betake themselves to the thick brakes and
coverts to hide them, as well knowing they are disarmed of their natural
weapons. And therefore do never willingly show themselves abroad in the day
times, until the Spring that they begin to bud, and burgeon, toward their
renovation of force.

Horns do betoken strength and fortitude, inasmuch as God has bestowed them
upon beasts to be unto them Instruments, or Weapons, as well offensive as
defensive. As we may probably gather by that which is spoken by the Prophet
David, Psalm. 75.12. Psalm. 75.12.
All the horns of the ungodly will I break, but the horns of the righteous
shall be exalted.

blazon or coat of arms This Field is, Sol, three Attires of a Stag, borne
Paly, Three attires of a Stag.
Barry, Saturn. This Coat Armor pertains to the renowned Family of the most
High Puissant and Noble Prince Frederick, late Duke of Wirtemberge, and of Tec.
Count of Mountbleiard, Lord of Heydenheib, etc. and Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter. The Stags having cast their Horns do skulke in secret and
desolate places, because they find themselves disarmed and destitute of their
former strength, which makes them more careful of their safety, as Aelianus
notes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, an Unicorn Seiant, Sable, An
Unicorne Seiant.
Armed, and Vnguled, Or, by the name of Harling. The Unicorn has his name of
his one Horn on his forehead. There is another Beast of an huge strength and
greatness, which has but one Horn, but that is growing on his Snout, whence
he is called Rinoceros, and both are named Monoceros, or one Horned: it has
been much questioned amongst Naturalists, which it is that is properly called
the Unicorn: and some have made doubt whether there be any such Beast as this,
or no. But the great esteem of his Horn (in many places to be seen) may take
away that needless scruple.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, an Unicorn tripping, Argent, An
Unicorne tripping.
Armed and unguled, Or, by the name of Musterton. Touching the invincible
nature of this beast, Job says, Will thou trust him, because his strength is
great, and cast thy labor unto him? Will thou believe him, that he will bring
home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn? And his virtue is no less
famoused than his strength, in that his Horn is supposed to be the most
powerful Antidote against poison. Insomuch as the general conceit is, that
the wild beasts of the Wilderness, use not to drink of the Pooles, for fear of
venomous Serpents there breeding, before the Unicorn has stirred it with his
Horn. Howsoever it be, this Charge may very well be a representation both of
strength or courage, and also of virtuous dispositions and ability to do good;
for to have strength of body, without the gifts and good qualities of the mind,
is but the property of an Ox; but where both concur, that may truly be called
manliness: and that these two should consort together, the Ancients did
signify, when they made this one word, Virtus, to imply, both the strength of
body, and virtue of the mind.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Unicorns in Pale, Current,
Argent, Three Unicornes current.
Armed, Or, by the name of Farrington. It seems by a question moved by
Farnesius, that the Unicorn is never taken alive; and the reason being
demanded, it is answered, that the greatness of his mind is such, that he
choseth rather to die than to be taken alive: wherein (says he) the Unicorn
and the valiant minded Soldier are alike, which both contemn death, and
rather than they will be compelled to undergo any base servitude or bondage,
they will lose their lives.

Three Unicornes heads couped*
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Unicorns heads Couped, Argent,
by the name of Shelley. The Unicorn is an untameable beast by nature, as may
be gathered by the words of Job, chap. 39. Will the Unicorn serve thee, or
will he tarry by thy crib? Can thou bind the Unicorn with his band to labor
in the furrow, or will he plow the valleys after thee?

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Camel passant, Argent, by the name
of Camel. This Coat Armor stands in Bury Pomeroy Church in the County of
Devon. This beast far surpasses the horse in swiftness, in travel, to whom
he is a hateful enemy. After all these cloven footed beasts, I will add one
more, no way inferior in stomach, and absolute resolution to any of the former.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Boar passant, Gules, Armed, Or,
A Boar passant.
by the name of Trewarthen. The Boar though he wants horns is no way
defective in his Armor, nay he is beyond those formerly exemplified, and is
counted the most absolute Champion amongst beasts, for that he has both
weapons to wound his foe, which are his strong and sharp Tusks, and also his
Target to defend himself, for which he uses often to rub his shoulders and
sides against Trees, thereby to harden them against the stroke of his
adversary; and the Shield of a Boar well managed, is a good Buckler against
that cruel Enemy called Hunger.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Boares heads couped, Sable,
Three Boares heads couped.
Armed, Or, by the name of Cradock. The Boar is so cruel and stomackfull in
his fight, that he foameth all the while for rage, and against the time of any
encounter he often whetteth his tusks to make them the more piercing. The Boar
has been much honored by being the crest of an Earl, which seems to be
given to the House of Vere, because Verres is the name of a Boar in Latin.

The bearing of the Boar in Arms betokens a man of a bold spirit, skillful,
politic in Warlike feats, and one of that high resolution that he will rather
die valorously in the Field, than he will secure himself by ignominious flight.
He is called in Latin Aper (according to Farnesius) ab asperitate, because he
is so sharp and fierce in conflict with his foe. And this is a special
property in a Soldier, that he be fierce in the encountering his Enemy, and he
bear the shock or burnt of the conflict with a noble and magnanimious Courage;
Miles enim dura and aspera perfringit animi and virium robore.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Boares heads erected and erased,
Sable, Armed, Or, by the name of Boothe: here those which are young Students in
Armory may learn to be careful in observing the manner of the position of the
charge of the Field, by comparing these two last Coat-Armours together,
admitting that they neither of them differ in Metal nor Color, and that the
Boares heads in both Escocheons were couped or erased, yet the very manner of
the position of them were sufficient difference to vary one Coat Armor from
the other.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Cups, Or, out of each a Boares
head erected, Argent, and is the Coat of that truly noble Gentleman the
Honorable Sir Robert Bolles Baronet, son of Sir John Bolles of Scampton i^ the
County of Lincoln, created Baronet 24. June^ (...) who was son of Sir George
Bolles Knight, (...) from Alane de Swinshead, Lord of the Manne^ (...) hall in
Swinshead, and from thence his Prog^^^ so surnamed.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cheuron between 6 Rams, accosted
Counter-tripping, two, two, and two, by the name of Harman of Rendlesham in the
County of Suffolk. The chiefest strength of the Ram consists in his head.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Rams heads
couped, Argent, by the name of Ramsey of Hitcham in the County of Buckingham,
of which Family was Adam Ramsey, Esquire for the body to King Richard the
second. The Ram is the Captain of the whole flock, I shall not need to mention
the great profit that is brought to this Kingdom by the winter garment of this
beast.

blazon or coat of arms This is the Coat of Sir Thomas Bendish of Steeple
Bumsted in Essex Baronet, Ambassador for many years to the Grand Signeur from
the King and Parliament of England, son of Sir Thomas Bendish created Baronet
29. of June 1611. and is thus blazoned, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between three
Rams heads Erased, Azure, Armed, Or, Vster.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three holy Lambs, staff, cross,
and banner, Argent, by the name of Row of Lamerton in the County of Devon. The
Holy Lamb is a Tipycall representation of our blessed Savior: who is
understood by diverse to be that Lamb mentioned in the Apocalypse of Saint John:
and all the Christian Churches acknowledge him for that Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World. This kind of bearing may well befit a brave
resolute spirit who undertaketh a war for Christ's cause.

SECT. III. CHAP. XV.
Beasts having many Claws.
HItherto of such beasts as we call Animalia biscula, which have their feet
parted only into two claws: the next part of our distribution, contains
those which are called Multifida, which have many claws; of which sort, are
not only Lions, Bears, Wolves, and others of fierce and ravenous kind, that
live by Prey and spoil: but such also as are of timorous nature, whose
chiefest safety consists rather in swiftness of foot, than in any other
m^anes, as Foxes, Hares, Conies, and others of less harm^full kind, whereof I
will give particular examples: but first I will ^^er unto your ^eed^ull
observation, certain notes as well of general, as o^ particular use,
concerning beasts of this kind; not forgetting (by the way) such rules and
observations* as have been already commended to your regard, that especially,
touching mixed bearing of Ordinaries, and common charges, which must serve for a
regular direction throughout our whole Work. And in delivery of these
Observations and Examples, I hold it fit to begin with Beasts of fierce nature;
and first, with the Lion reckoned the King of beasts: Dignioribus enim digniora
loca sunt danda, Highest person highest place.

Some French Armorists are of opinion that the Lion should never be made
Gardant or full faced, Opini^^ of (...) French Arm^^^^ts.
affirming that to be proper to the Leopard; wherein they offer great indignity
to that royal beast, in that they will not admit him (says Vpton) to show his
full face, the sight whereof does terrify and astonish all the beasts of the
field; and wherein consists his chiefest majesty, and therefore may not be
denied that prerogative, Quia omnia Animalia debent depingi and designari in
suo ferociori actu, ex illis enim actibus, Rul^ general.
magis vigorem suum ostendunt. All Beasts should be set forth in their most
generous action, for therein they show their chiefest vigor. As concerning the
true Note whereby the Leopard is distinguished from the Lion, Vpton lib. de
Armis, writes thus, Cognoscitur Leopardus a Leone, quia Leopardus ubique
deping^ur habens naturaliter maculas nigras, Difference between the Lion and
Leopard.
cum grosso capite, and est Animal planum non hispidum: Leo vero habet unum
colorem continuum, cum pectore hispi^^, cum certis jubis in cauda. The Leopard
is portraied with black spots and a great head, and no where shaggie: whereas
the Lion is one color, shaggy brested, with a certain ^uft of hair in his
train. So that it is evident that the Leopard is notably distinguished both in
shape and color, and not by his full faced countenance as they dream.
Moreover, Vpton says, that he had often observed Leopards borne by diverse
noble men, as well half faced as gardant.

It is observed that the generous nature of the Lion, is discerned by his
plentiful shaggy locks that do cover his neck and shoulders, which are
infallible tokens of his noble courage, especially if those his locks be
crisped and curled, and short withal. Such Lions were those whereof Saint
Hirome makes mention, In vita Pauli cremitae, saying, Talia in anima voluente,
ecce duo Leones ex interioris Eremi part currentes, volantibus per colla jubis
ferebantur: Two Lions came running with their shaggie looks wavering about
their shoulders. Moreover the thickness of the Lions Mane, Lions snaggy Locks.
is a testimony of his generous birth, and by the same he is distinguished from
the degenerate and Bastard race of Leopards, begotten between the Adulterous
Lioness and the Parde, which are naturally deprived of this noble mark; and
not only so, but they are also bereft of that bold and invincible courage,
that the generous sort of Lions have. For these respects, the degenerate brood
of Lions are called in Latin, Imbelles Leones, that is, Heartlesse or Cowardly
Lions; whereas the true Lion is termed in Latin, Generosus Leo, Cowardly Lions
which.
Quia generosum est quod a natura sua non degeneravit: That is generous which
degenerateth not from his kind: by which reason, a man of noble descent, and
ignoble conditions, is not truly generous, because he degenerateth from the
virtues of his Ancestors.

Lions, Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts of ravening kind, Rule 1.
when they are borne in Arms feeding, you must term them in Blazon, Raping,
and tell whereon. To all beasts of prey, Nature has assigned teeth and tallons
of crooked shape, and therewithal of great sharpness, to the end they may
strongly seize upon and detain their Prey, and speedily rend and divide the
same. And therefore in Blazoning of beasts of this kind, you must not omit to
mention their Teeth and Tallons, which are their only Armor: Rule 2.
for by them they are distinguished from those tame and harmless beasts, that
have their Teeth knocked out, and their Nails pared so near to the quick, as
that they can neither bite nor scratch with much harm. Those Teeth and Tallons
are for the most part in Coat-armours made of a different color from the
bodies of the Beasts: and therefore in Blazoning of Beasts of this kind, when
you speak of their Teeth or Tallons, you shall say they are thus or thus
Armed. So likewise if you please to speak of their Tongues, you shall say they
are thus or thus Langued.

To bear a Lion or whatsoever Animal in a diverse color from his kindly or
natural color, as to bare a blew, green, red, purple Lion, Bear, Bearing of
Beasts in a diverse Color from that which is natural, whence taken.
etc. or whatsoever other color different from that which is Natural unto him;
is not a bearing reproachful, though disagreeing to his nature, if we consider
of the occasion of their primary constitution: for that the custom of such
bearing seems to have proceeded from eminent persons, who habiting themselves
either for their sports of Hunting, or for military services (as best fitted
their fantasies) would withal suit their Armours and habiliments with Colors
answerable to their habits, with the shapes and portraitures of forged and
counterfeit Animals.

Or else perhaps by occasion of some civil tumults, as that between the
Guelphi and the Gibelini in Italy, they perhaps of each faction bearing Lions,
Bears, and Wolves, or other Animals, to avoid confusion, and to the end the
one of them should not be entrapped by the other of the contrary faction, when
they were intermixed one with another, and that their valorous actions might be
more particularly discerned from the other, they distinguished themselves by
different and unlike colored garments, that so each Governor and Leader might
know those that were of his own faction.

The like may we observe to have been of late years used amongst our selves,
when private factions have sprung amongst us; one sort was known from others
of the contrary faction by a Carnation R^band, worn about, or in his hat: or
by a Crimson feather, or other thing, the contrary faction wearing like thing,
but in a different color, or fashion.

Property of Beasts of Rapine.
The Lion (says Vpton) passing through stony places, does contract his Tallons
within his flesh, and so walks on his feet, as if he had no Tallons at all,
keeping them exceeding choisely, lest he should dull and blunt their
sharpness, and so become less able to attach and rend his prey. And this
property seems not to be peculiar to a Lion, but common to all beasts of
Rapine: as Pliny ascribes the same property to Leopards, Panthers, and such
other, as well as to the Lion.

Defective production of beasts of rapine. Natures foresight herein.
Not only Lions, but also all other beasts of ravenous kind, (according to
Bekenhawb) do bring forth their young in some part defective, as Lions do
produce their whelps dead, Dogs bring them forth blind* Bears deformed and
shapelesse, etc. For Nature would not that they should atta^^ perfection in the
womb, in regard of the safety of their Damme, least in their production they
should spoil and rent her womb by their teeth and t^llons.

Other more particular Rules there are concerning the diverse kinds and peculiar
actions of beasts of Rapine, which shall follow in their more convenient
places. In the mean time, let us proceed to Examples that may give life and
approbation to those premised Rules: Praecepta enim quantumvis bona and
concinna, mortua sunt, nisi ipse auditor variis exemplis ea percipiat: Good and
fit precepts, are but dead, unless examples give them life. Of which opinion
was Leo the Tenth, when he said.

Plus valent exempla quam praecepta,
Et melius docemur vita quam verbo.
Examples are more forcible than Precepts,
And our lives teach more than our words.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Jupiter, a Lion Dormant, Sol. the Hebrew
Rabbis (says Leigh) writing upon the second of Numbers, Lion dormant Standard
of the ^^^be of Judah.
do assign to the Tribe of Judah, a Lion after this manner; alluding belike
unto that blessing that Jacob (a little before his death) did pronounce upon
Judah, saying; He shall lie down and couch as a Lion; Judah seems to sleep.
who dares stir him up? Wherein one notes, that Jacob seems to allude to
that diminution, which happened at such time as the more part of the People of
that Tribe did fall away unto Jeroboam: Tunc enim (says he) Rex Judae similis
esse coepit Leoni dormienti; neque enim erectis jubis timorem suum late
effudit, sed quodam modo occubuit in spelunca. Latuit tamen quaedam occulta
virtus sub illo sopore, etc. The King of Judah was then like a sleeping Lion,
which did not show his rage with his erected Shag; but did as it were lurk in
his Den, yet so as he lost not his Strength in his sleep, neither durst any the
most adventurous to rowse him. This may be true of the King of Judah; but
surely the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, does neither slumber nor sleep, though
he seems to sleep; neither does their vengeance sleep who dare provoke him.
It is reported that the Lion sleeps with his eyes open, so should Governors
do, whose Vigilance should show it self, when others are most at rest and
secure.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Lion couchant. The Lion couching
after this manner, must not be deemed to have been compelled thereunto, but
that he has so settled himself of his own accord; for it is contrary to his
Magnanimous nature to couch by any chastisement, or to be corrected in himself;
but if a Whelp or some other beast be beaten or chastised in his sight, he
thereupon humbles himself after this manner: But as touching himself he must
be overcome with Gentleness, and so is he easiest won. Generosus enim animus
facilius ducitur quam trahitur: The generous mind you may easier lead than
draw. So when the children of Princes offend, their Pages are whipped before
them; and the Persians, if a Noble man offend, brought forth his Garment and
beat it with wands.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Lion Seiant, Argent. Though this
form and gesture has affinity with the former, yet the difference is easy to
be observed, by comparing the manner of their reposing: and in these kinds the
varieties of gestures, you may observe, that by degrees and steps I proceed
from the most quiet, to the most fierce gesture and action.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Mars, a Lion passant, Gardant, Sol. Lion
passant, gardant.
This was the Coat Armor of William Duke of Aquitane, and of Gwyan, one of the
Peers of France, whose Daughter and Heir named Eleanor, was married to Henry
the second King of England: by reason of which Match the Field and Charge being
of the same Color and Metal, that the then royal Ensigns of this Land were,
and this Lion of the like action that those were of; this Lion was united with
those two Lions in one Shield: Sithence which time the Kings of England, have
borne three Lions Passant, Gardant, as hereafter shall appear.

A like Lion in a Field, Azure, was borne by Lewellya aur Dorchock Lord of Yale
in Wales, Ancestor to Gruffith of Bromfield ap Cadwgan, from whom is descended
Edward Bromfield, Alderman of London.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, two Lions Passant, Or, which was the
Coat of Sir Robert Ducy, who had issue Sir Richard Ducy, Sir William Ducy
Baronets successively: Robert and Hugh Ducy: The said Sir Robert Ducy was
Sheriff of London 1620. Lord Mayor 1630. Knighted July 5. 1631. Created Baronet
November 28. 1629. and lies buried in Saint Laurence Church by Guild Hall,
London.

Three Lyoncels passant, gardant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Lioncels, passant, Gardant,
in Pale bar-wayes, Langued and Armed, Gules. This Coat Armor pertained to that
worthy Gentleman Sir John Brograve, Knight, sometimes Attorney General of the
Duchy of Lancaster. In the Blazoning of Arms consisting of more Lions in a
Field than one, Reason.
you must term them Lyoncels (according to Leigh) which is as much to say, as
so many young or petite Lions. The reason of this rule I take to be this, that
inasmuch as the Lion has a Prerogative Royal over all Beasts, and cannot
endure that any other should participate of the Field with him, Quia Principes
nolunt pares, Princes will admit no fellows, to the impeachment of their
Sovereignty; therefore the bearing of diverse Lions in one Field must be
understood of Lions whelps, which as yet have not so great feeling of their own
strength, or inbred noble courage, nor apprehension of their ingenerated Royal
Sovereignty over all beasts as Lions have. But Leones adulti participationem
non admittere solent: When they are of years, they will know their own worth.
Note that this Rule must be understood with a certain limitation in some
particular cases, Quia non est regula adeo generalis, quin admittit exceptionem
in suo particulari: For this rule holds not in the Sovereigns Ensigns, where
these beasts are said to be Lions, propter dignitatem Regiae majestatis; next
this rule has no place in Coat-armours wherein any of the honorable
Ordinances are interposed between these beasts, for by such interpositions of
these Ordinaries (says Leigh) every one of them is reckoned to be of as great
dignity, Limitation of this rule.
as if he were borne dividedly in so many several Escocheons, and that in
respect of the Sovereignty of the Ordinary so interposed; for which cause, they
have the title of most worthy partitions. And so shall you reckon of all other
Coat-armours consisting of things so divided.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, three Lions Passant, in Pale,
Gules, and is the Coat of Tobias Comb of Helmsted Bury in the County of
Hartford Esquire, whose son and heir Richard was Knighted by Oliver late
Protector.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Lions Passant, Argent, by the
name of English of Kent, now existing in the persons of William, Henry, Thomas,
and Edward, Brethren.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cross, Gules, five Lioncels
saliant, Or, by the name of Aud^n of Dorchester in the County of Dorset. The
Prophet Esaias d^scribeth the valorous courage of these kind of beast^ ^^^ugh
young, where he says, that as a Lion or a L^ (...) roareth upon his prey,
against whom if a multitude of Shepherds be called, he will not be affrayd
(...) their voice, neither will he humble himself at their noise, so shall the
Lord of Hosts come down to sight for Mount Sion, and the Hill thereof, Esaias
31.4.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, two Lions Passant, Argent, by the
name of L' Estrange, a Family of great Eminence and Antiquitity yet existing
(and where I hope it long may) at Hunsta^^^ in Norf^^ke, a goodly and pleasant
Seat, not long since in the possession of Sir Hamond L' Estrange Knight, who
left issue 3 hopeful and accomplished G^ntleman Sir Nicholas L' Estrange
Baronet, deceased: Hamond L' Estrange, and Roger L' Estrange, both living 16^9.
and a daughter Eliz. married to S^^^^l Spring of Pakenh^m in Suffolk Baronet,
which Sir Nicholas left his estate and title to his eldest son Sir Hamond and
he as yet in his flourishing spring to his brother Sir Nicholas.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, two lioncels counterpassant, Argent,
the uppermost toward the si^ister side of the Escocheon, both collared, Gules,
by the name of Glegg of Gayton in the County of Chester: some blazoners have
given another blazon to this Coat Armor thus; He bears, Sable, two
lyoncels, the one passant, the other repassant, Argent, both collared* Gules,
but in mine opinion no man by this last blazon is able to trick, or express
the true portraiture and manner of the bearing of these lioncels; for it
appears not by this Blazon, toward which part or side of the Escocheon their
heads are placed, which is contrary to the Rule give chap. 4. Sect. 1. page ^4.
The Lion and the Lioness do never go one and the same way* either when they
seek their prey or when they go to fight; the skillful and expert men render
this reason for it, that these beasts stand so much upon their strength of body
as that neither of them needs the others help.

Now that Lions and Lyoncels are borne in Arms, the first with interposition
of some of the Ordinaries, the other charged upon Ordinaries, the following
examples will make it manifest, and in Blazoning of such Coat-Armours care must
be taken to observe and remember, what concerning this point of their
difference I have even now delivered.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse, Wavey, between three Lions
passant, Or, Armed and langued, Gules. This is the Coat Armor of John Hawes,
or Hawys of London, who draws his descent from William Hawys of Walsh^m of
the Willowes in Suffolk, which William was seized of lands there, in the time
of Edw. the third. The Lion passing his ground leisurely, and as it were
pedetentim, step by step; which kind of gate we usually do call passant;
expresses his most generous and noble action of Majesty, Clemency and
Circumspection.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Fesse, Argent, three Lyoncels
Passant, Gardant, Purpure. These Arms appertained to Arnold Oldsworth Esquire,
late Keeper of the Hanaper of the High Court of Chancery. Such is the noble
courage and magnanimity of the Lion, as that in his greatest rage and fury be
never does tyrannize over those that do prostrate themselves to his mercy:
whereof a certain Author thus writes: Parcere prostratis scit nobilis ira
leonis:
Tu queque fac simile, quisquis regnabis in orb.


blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lion passant, Or, between three
Griffons heads Erased, Argent, by the name of Box, and is borne by Henry Box of
London Esquire.

blazon or coat of arms

Lion passant parted per Pale.
blazon or coat of armsHe bears, Gules, two Bars, Ermine in Chief, a Lion
Passant, parted per Pale, Or, and Argent, by the name of Hill of Hales in the
County of Norfolk. This Lion is different from the former Passants, in that he
goes directly forward, showing in the Escocheon but half his face, whereby he
is distinguished from the Gardant, which shows the whole face. This Lion
Passant seems to go with more confidence and resolution, but the Gardant,
with more vigilance and circumspection; which both being joined, do make an
absolute Commander.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a Saltier and Chief, Gules, on the
last a Lion Passant, Or, Vlster, this is the Coat of Sir Michael Armine or
Aermine of Osgodby in the County of Lincoln Baronet, brother and heir of Sir
William, lately deceased, sons of Sir William Armine, created Baronet No. 28.
1619. son of Sir William Armine, Knighted April 23. 1603. descended from
Gilbert Aermine Lord of the Manor of Newland upon Air in the County of York
1164.

Lion Saliant how discerned.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Lion Saliant, Gules, by the name of
Felbridge. The Proper form of a Lion Saliant, is when his right fore-foot
answers to the Dexter corner of the Escochron, and his hindmost foot the
sinister base point thereof. And he is termed Saliant, a saliendo; His gesture
in prosecution.
because when he does prosecute his Prey, he pursues the same leaping, which
action he never uses when he is chased in fight (as Pliny notes) but is only
Passant. And it is sometimes no dishonor to go softly, or retire leasurely out
of the Field, but to fly is a reproach; and therefore of all gestures I never
find any Lion Current.

blazon or coat of arms The field is Ruby, a Lion Rampand, Pearl. Lion Rampand
how known.
This was the Paternal Coat Armor of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk in the
time of King Richard the Second: and now is quartered by that most Honorable
and flourishing Family of the Howards. As touching the bearing of the Lion after
this manner, I hold that then he may be truly said to be Rampand, when he
stands so directly upright as that the Crown of his Head does answer to the
Plant of his foot, whereupon he stands in a perpendicular line, His gesture
in seizing.
and not by placing of the left foot, in the Dexter corner of the Escocheon, as
Leigh would have it. As the former example shows the gesture of the Lion
pursuing his prey, so this shows his gesture in seizing on it when he has
attained it.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine a Lion Rampand, Azure, Crowned, Or,
by the name of Mydhope. A Family of good note, which has matched with diverse
other Families of worthy reputation. As appears by the descent of that
industrious Gentleman Edmund Mydhope (late Clerk of the Pleas in the Court of
Exchequer within the Realm of Ireland) seen, perused and allowed by Master
Norroy King of Arms, and ratified by the second part of a certain Lidgier
Book, sometime belonging to the late dissolved Abbey of Furneis, containing a
transcript of Deeds, concerning Lands given in Frank Almaine to the same Abbey,
by diverse Gentlemen of worthy Name and Reputation: Amongst which there is
extant to be seen a Deed of certain Lands given to the said Abbey by Roger de
Mydhope, Son and Heir of Henry de Mydhope, whose Coat is fair limned in the
first letter of the same Deed, in manner as the same is here blazoned; which
Deed bears date Anno Dom. 1290. As may be seen in the said Book.

blazon or coat of arms Argent, a Lion Rampant, Sable, by the name of
Stapylton, a Family of great Eminence and Worth, whereof there have been two
Knights of the Garter, one whereof, Sir Miles, was one of the Founders being
the eighth in order, beside King Edward, yet flourishing in Yorkshire at
Wighill and Myton.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Pearl, three Bars, Gemelles, Ruby, over
all a Lion Rampand, Diamond, his Supporters are two Lions Rampand, Diamond,
purfled, Topaz, and is the Achievement of the right Honorable Thomas Lord
Fairfax, Baron, of Camroone in Scotland.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lion Rampant, Argent, over all a
Bendlet, Gules, by the name of Churchhill of Gray's Inn, Counselor at Law,
Esquire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, parted per-fesse, Sable, and Argent, a Lion
Rampant, counter-changed. This is the Coat of the Right Honorable Sir Richard
Vaughan, Knight of the Bath, Earl of Carberie, etc. A great encourager of
Virtue and Industry.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampand, the tail elevated
and turned over the head, Sable. This is the Coat Armor of John Buxton of
Tibenham in the county of Norfolk, Esquire. Although this manner of Bearing in
respect of the tail is rarely used, yet it is very ancient, as appears by an
old Table of the said Arms taken out of the Monastery of Bungey in Suffolk,
having been before the dissolution of the Abbeyes there hanged up; for one
Styled Le Seneschall Buxton, which table now remains in the custody of the
said Mr. John Buxton. Here Blazoners may please to observe how requisite it is
to take advised consideration in what manner the tail of this beast is borne
in signs Armoriall; but I shall presently in this Chapter have further
occasion in the Coat Armor of Cork to treat more largely of this point.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lion Rampand, Argent, A Lion
Rampand, a File of three points or Lambeaux.
a File of three Lambeaux, Gules, each charged with as many Bezants: This is
the Coat Armor of the worthy Gentleman Thomas Covell, one of the Captains of
the City of London: here I tell not the color of the Bezants, because every
Rundle in Armory (of which sort these Bezants are) has his proper color and
name in Blazon, as shall hereafter be more particularly declared when I come to
speak of Rundles in general.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, a Lion Rampand, parted per-fesse, A
Lion Rampand parted per-fesse.
Azure, and Gules, armed and langued, Argent. This is the Coat Armor of Ralph
Sadlier of Standon in the County of Hartford, Esquire, Grandchild and heir male
to Sir Ralph Sadlier, the last Knight Banneret that lived in England, a Grave
Counselor of State to King Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, and Queen
Elizabeth. This kind of bearing of a Lion parted per-fesse, appears in a very
old Roll of Arms in colors, now in the custody of the before mentioned Sir
Richard Saint George, Knight, Clarenceaux King of Arms; wherein is depicted
this Coat Armor, viz. Argent, a Lion Rampand, parted per-fesse, Gules and
Sable, and superscribed in French in an ancient letter Joan de Lovetot.

blazon or coat of arms The Right Honorable William Lord Gray of Warke bears
this Coat, viz. Ruby, a Lion Rampant within a Bordure Engrailed, Pearl.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lion Rampant, Argent, Crowned, Or,
Bordered, as the second, Pellettee, by the name of Henley.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Girony of four, Or, and Azure, a Lion
Rampant, counter-changed. This Coat may be blazoned thus, per Saltier, Or, and
Azure, a Lion Rampant counter-changed; This is the Coat of Nicholas Gold of
London Merchant, a Member of the Parliament begun 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Diamond, a Lion Rampant crowned, between
three Croslets, Topaz, Armed, and Langued, Ruby. This is the Coat of the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of Chichester, Son of John King Lord
Bishop of London.

Now I will show unto you one other Lion Rampand; which in regard of the Pale
upon which he is charged is worth your observation.

Upon a Pale Radiant Rayonee, a Lion Rampand.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, upon a Pale Rediant raionee, Or, a
Lion Rampand, Gules, by the name of Colman of Brunt Ely in the County of
Suffolk, had not the shining rays of this glistering Pale extraordinarily
invited me to gaze upon the rarity of this bearing I should without respect of
the Lion rampand (of which kind you have had already great variety) being this
rare Pales only charge, omitted to have here demonstrated this Coat Armor,
but I doubt not if the skillful Artist in this way observe it well, he cannot
but commend the invention of its first deviser.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampand between three
Cressants, Sable, a Chief, Verrey. This is the Coat Armor of Thomas Wilkocks
of Tottenham-High-crosse in the County of Middlesex.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Lioncels Rampand, Gules, a
Chief of the Second, by the name of Yelverton, a principal branch, of which
Family is that worthy Gentleman Sir Harvy Yelverton Baronet, Son and Heir of
Christopher Yelverton of Easton Manduit, in the County of Northampton, Knight
and Baronet. The Lion (says Farnesius) is a lively Image of a good Soldier,
who must be valiant of courage, strong of body, politic in counsel, and a foe
to fear. Such an one was the most valiant Prince Richard the second, surnamed
Ouer-d'lion, whose renowned adventures, suited with all courage and politic
care, gave him the eternal name of the Lion heart. And now I will with your
patience show you an Escocheon wherein you shall find an Ordinary charged with
three Lyoncels Rampand.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, on a Cheuron Engrailed, Argent,
Three lyoncels Rampand on a Cheuron engrailed.
between three ^refoiles slipped Ermynois, as many Lioncels Rampand, Sables,
armed and langued, Gules, by the Name of Barliffe, Bariffe, or Beriffe; for I
find the name variously written, which I note here to give a caveat to
Gentlemen to be careful to keep the Ancient and true Orthography of their
Surnames, lest in time the differing variety thereof may call their descents
and Arms into question; for it is utterly unlawful by the law of Arms for
one Gentleman to bear the Coat Armor of another, they both being descended
from several Families, although their surnames be near agreeing, or the same.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Lion Rampand, between three
Crosses, formee, Or, by the name of Ayloffe of Essex, of which Family is Sir
Benjamin Ayloffe Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules, be-three
Trefoyles, Vert, and is the Coat of Sir Michael Livesey of East-church in the
Isle of Shipey, in the County of Kent Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampant, Sable, between
three Holly leaves, Proper, by the name of Sherman: of this Family are Samuel,
John, and Edward Sherman, sons of Samuel Sherman of Dedham in Essex, originally
extracted from Yaxley in Suffolk, which Edward Sherman being of London
Merchant, has married Jane Daughter of John Wall of Bromley, by Jane Daughter
and Heir of Sayer.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, Crusily, a Lion Rampant, Azure, Gules,
Armed and Langued, and is borne by the name of Bonnell of Norfolk.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, Crusily, a Lion Rampant, Argent,
Armed and Langued, Gules, by the name of Kinardsley of Loxley in the County of
Salop, which Family was of good note before and at the time of the Conquest a
singular Ornament of which is at this time Clement Kinardsley of the Wardrobe.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, Semy de Cinquefoyles, a Lion
Rampant, Argent, by the name of Clifton, and is the Coat of Clifford Clifton
Esquire, son of Sir Gervis Clifton Knight, created Baronet the two and
twentieth of May 1611. (the first day that Honor was conferd) by Frances
Daughter of Francis, fourth Earl of Cumberland: which Clifford Clifton married
Frances, second Daughter of that Honorable Gentleman Sir Heneage Finch Knight.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Pearl, Semy de Cinquefoyles, Ruby, a Lion
Rampant, Diamond, by the name of Pier-point, of which Family the chief and most
illustrious Ornament is the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester, a
Peer of great Honor, Learning and respect to learned men. Nor is that great
Lover of this Art, and Incourager of other, his Brother William Pierpoint
Esquire to be forgotten.

In a very old Roll in my custody about the time of Henry the third, or Edward
the first; I find one Sir Robert Pierpound doubtless of this Family, for his
Arms are Argent, Semy de Roses (or thus, Argent, within an Orle of Roses)
Gules a Lion Rampant, Sable. Now that Roses for Cinquefoiles (and e contra) are
promiscuously used, is very obvious: perhaps its sometimes Vitium pictoris.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, two Lyoncels Rampand, Combatant, Gules,
Langued and Armed, Azure, Lyoncels rampand, combatant.
by the name of Wycombe. Leigh says, that these were two Lions of sundry
Regions, which of manhood must combat, only for Government, The signification
thereof.
for the Lion is as desirous of mastery, as a courageous Prince is ambitious of
Honor: which if it be in a just title and claim is a virtue in a King, and no
way to be disliked: for it was a Royal Apothegme worthy that great King, Nemo
me major, nisi qui Justior; I acknowledge no king greater than my self, but he
that is Juster.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, two Lyoncels Rampand, Lyoncels
rampant, endorsed.
Endorsed, Or. This Coat (says Leigh) was borne by Achilles the Grecian at the
Siege of Troy: and Leigh takes it to be a combat intended between two valiant
men, and they both keep appointment and meet in the Field, but the Prince
favoring both parties, takes the matter into his hands, and then turn they
back to back, and so depart the Field, for their stout stomachs will not suffer
them to go both one way, because it is counted an injury to hardiness to go
first out of the Field.

There are yet other forms of bearing the Lion, than are hitherto expressed,
as in these next Escocheons may be seen.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Mars, a tricorporated Lion, Lion
tricorporated.
issuing out of the three corners of the Escocheon, all meeting under one head
in the Fesse paint, Sol, Langued and Armed Jupiter. A like Lion did Edmund
surnamed Crouch-back Earl of Lancaster, A like Lion borne in device.
and Brother to Edward the first, bear in Device. As appears by the Seal of
the same Edmund; the circumference of which Seal contains this inscription,
SIGILLUM ED MUNDI FILII REGIS ANGLIAE. Only herein it differs from this,
that where the middlemost of the bodies in this is borne Rampand, and the other
two descend from the corners of the Escocheon; contrariwise in the Seal the
two lowermost are borne Passant, and the third descended from above, and are
all conjoined in the Center of the said circumference. The like was borne in
Device by one of the Ancestors of the Right Noble and Honorable late Lord
Carew, Earl of Totnesse. But the Field of this was Topaz, and the Lion
Diamond; more-over the middlemost body of this was Rampand, and the other two
after a sort Passant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, per Pale, Gules, and Azure, a Cheuron, Or,
between three Lions Rampant, Argent, by the name of Hoskins of Oxted in Surry,
of which Family is also Edmund Hoskins of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sapphire, three Lions Rampant, Topaz, Armed
and Langued, Ruby. This is the Coat of the Right Honorable William Viscount
Say and Seal, and of his truly noble sons the Lord John Fines, and the Lord
Nathaniel Fines, one of his Highness Honorable Counsel, and Commissioner of
the great Seal 1658.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Lions Rampant, Azure, which
is the Coat of Mildmay of Essex, a flourishing and very worthy Family.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Topaz, on a Chief, Sapphire, three Lions
Rampant of the first. This is the Coat of the right honorable John Lisle
Commissioner of the great Seal of England 1658.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Bend Engrailed between six Lions
Rampand, Or. This is the Coat of Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Baronet, one of the
Privy Counsel to his late Highness, a Gentleman of much worth and estimation
in his Country.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Fesse indented, between three
Billets, Azure, (each charged with a Lion Rampant, as the Field) so many
Bezants, this was the Coat Armor of Henry Rolls, late Lord chief Justice of
England, Sir Samuel Rolls, and John Rolls of London Merchant, Brethren,
which Henry Rolls left issue that worthy Gentleman Henry Rolls Esquire,
living 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, two Bars, Gemelles, in Chief a Lion
Passant, Or, which was the Coat of Sir Richard Sprignall of Highgate in the
County of Middlesex, Baronet, late deceased, Father of Sir Robert Sprignall
Baronet, living 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Bend, Compony, Ermine, and Sable,
between two Lions heads erased, Sable, on a Chief of the last, three Billets,
Argent, and is the bearing of the Right Honorable William Steel, late Lord
chief Baron of the Exchequer, and now Lord Chancellor of the Kingdom of
Ireland.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Demi Lions and a Chief indented,
Gules. This is the Coat of Sir Thomas Fisher of Islington, Baronet, son of Sir
Thomas Fisher Knight and Baronet, so created March 12. 1616.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Demi Lion Rampand, Gules, A demi Lion
Rampand.
by the name of Mallory. There are certain forms of bearing much like unto
this at the first sight, but are diverse from it in bearing, and do receive a
different form of blazon, whereof good heed must be taken, Quia diversitas
nominis denotat diversitates rei. The diversity of names does manifest the
diversity of things: in as much as names are significant demonstrations of
things, and express notes of the differences.

A Lion Issuant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, on a chief, Or, a Lion Rampand,
issuant, Gules, Langued and Armed of the first, by the name of Markham. This
Lion is said to be Issuant, because he does issue from out of the bottom of the
Chief, and so must other things be blazoned which thus arise from the bottom
thereof.

Lion Jessant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Chief, Gules, a Lion Rampand,
Jessant, his tail forked, Or, by the name of Hastang.

A Lion Jessant borne in Coat Armor, is where the Coat is first charged with a
Chief, or other Ordinary, and after by some occasion some Animal is added
thereunto, but is not subjected to the primary charge, but is borne over both
the Field and Charge, and is therefore called a Lion Jessant, a jacendo,
because of such lying all over. Some Blazon this Coat Azure, a Chief, Gules,
over all a Lion Rampand, his tail forked, Or.

A Lion naissant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, out of the midst of a Fesse, Sable, a
Lion Rampant, naissant, Gules, armed and langued, Azure. This Coat was borne by
St. Hen. Emme, Knight. of the most Honorable order of the Garter, and chosen
companion thereof by Ed. 3. when he did erect and establish the same. This Lion
is said to be Naissant, because he seems to issue out of the womb of the
Fesse, Quasi nunc esset in nascendo. This form of Blazon, is peculiar to all
living things, that shall be found issuing out of the midst of some Ordinary or
common charge.

A Lions head erased.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lions head erased, Gules, by the
name of Govis. Concerning the dignity of this part of the body, and how the
same is preferred before all other the parts and members thereof. I have
formerly made mention, as also of the commendable bearing of Members Erased.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Topaz, on a Chief, Diamond, three Lions
heads erased of the first, this was the Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Richardson,
Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, who left
issue Sir Thomas Richardson Knight, and he Thomas Richardson, Baron of Cramond
in Scotland, now living 1659. I do here give this Coat Armor this kind of
blazon by precious stones, in respect of that high place of Justice which its
bearer executes under his Majesty.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron, between three Lions heads
Erased, Argent, which is the bearing of the Right Honorable George Monk, one
of the Admirals of the Sea Forces, and now General of the Army in Scotland,
duly deriving himself from an Illustrious Stem, his Ancestors having matched
with the Plantaginets more then once.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Azure, a Cheuron, Argent, between three
Lions heads erased, Ermine, crowned, Or, this is the Coat Armor of Sir Paul
Pinder of the City of London, Knight; whose bounteous piety manifest in many
other charitable actions, was the year 1632. more conspicuous in the richly
adorning and exquisite beautifying the Quire of Saint Paul's Church. Erasing is
a violent rending of a member from the body, and may signify some worthy and
memorable act of the bearer, that has severed the Head from the Shoulders of
some notorious, turbulent, or seditious person.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lions Head erased between three
Croslets, Or, which is the Coat of Sir Francis Armitage of Kirkleces in the
County of York, created Baronet 15. December 1641.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Sable, three Lions heads erased,
of the field, Crowned, Or, this the paternall Coat of John Wroth Esquire, and
Sir Henry Wroth his Brother, of Durants in Enfield in Middlesex, where that
Family has flourished many hundred years, and of whence are also descended
John Wroth and Anthony Wroth, sons of Sir Peter Wroth of Blenden Hall in Bexley
in Kent, deceased.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, Sable, between three Lions
Heads erased, Gules, which is the Coat of Sir William Farmer of Eston-Neston in
the County of Northampton, Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, two Lions Paws issuing out of the
Dexter and Sinister base points, erected in form of a Cheuron, Argent, Armed,
Gules, by the name of Frampton. The fore-feet of the Lion have five toes upon
each foot, and the hinder feet but four, whereby nature has enabled him, for
the more sure seizing and retaining his acquired prey, the Lions Claws are
crooked and exceeding hard, with these he carveth and rendeth his prey, and for
this purpose he keeps them very choicely and tenderly, and is no less
careful to save them from blunting, than a good Soldier is to keep his Armor
and Weapons from rust and bluntness, by the greatness and sharpness of the
Lions claw, we may easily conjecture how dangerous a thing it is for a man to
encounter him, for wheresoever he seizes, if he break not the bones, yet he
renteth away the flesh, so also may we give a near guess, if not make a
certain demonstration of his proportion and bigness, for so we read that
Phydias the famous Carver of great Images in Gold and in Ivory, upon the sight
of a Lions claw only, did raise the whole proportion of his body, which gave
occasion (as is supposed) of the Proverb, Leonem ex ungue estimare; whereby is
meant, that of one probable conjecture, a man may give a near guess of the
whole business.

blazon or coat of arms Gules, three Lions Gambes or Paws, Erased, Argent, by
the name of Newdigate of Warwickshire, of which Family a worthy Ornament is
Richard Newdigate Sergeant at Law, and one of the Justices of the upper Bench.

Two Lions paws erased, and surmounting each other.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Lions paws Erased, in Saltire,
the Dexter surmounted of the Sinister, Gules. That Lions, Panthers, and
Leopards do hide their claws within their skin when they go or run, it may
seem a little miracle; for they do never extend them but when they offer to
seize their prey, lest they should be blunted, and so become less serviceable
for the apprehension, retention, and division of of their prey.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Lions paws, Couped, Three
Lions paws couped.
and Erected, Argent, Armed, Gules, by the name of Usher. Sometimes these paws
are found borne upon Ordinaries, as in this next Escocheon, where there is a
Lions pawe borne upon a Canton. And you must observe, that albeit I do here use
but one example for an instance, yet shall you by observation find them borne
as well upon other Ordinaries as on this.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Canton, Sable, a Lions pawe
erased in bend, Or, by the name of Bowtheby. A Lions pawe on a Canton.
This one Coat does minister occasion of a twofold observation; the one, that
this member is borne upon Ordinaries: the other that it is borne after the
manner or fashion of Ordinaries, as Cheuron-wayes, Crossewayes, Saltire-wayes,
etc. As by the precedent examples may appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Lions tails erected and
erased, Argent, by the name of Cork. Three Lions tails erased.
The Lion has great strength in his tail, the much motion whereof is a
manifest token of anger: when he minds to assail his enemy, he stirs up
himself by often beating of his back and sides with his tail, and thereby
stirs up his courage, to the end he do nothing faintly or cowardly. The Lion
when he is hunted, carefully provideth for his safety, laboring to frustrate
the pursuit of the Hunters by sweeping out his footsteps with his tail as he
goes, that no appearance of his track may be discovered, whereby they may know
which way to make after him.

The Lion bears his Tail after a diverse manner, insomuch as we may thereby
(if not certainly know, yet give a near guess) what a mood he is in for the
present, viz. whether he be furiously bent, or peaceable, or majestically
affected. And these qualities are manifestly discerned by the Inversion,
Eversion, or Extention, etc. of his Tail.

Here may rise a question, Whether the bearing of the Tail of the Lion in any
of these several manners be a sufficient difference to prevent all causes of
challenge?

For my own part (albeit I have not read or seen in Gerard Leigh, Boswell,
Fern, or any other Armoriall Writers the state of this question handled) I
hold that they be differences sufficient to debar all challenge: my reasons are
these; first, Sufficit quod inter Arma mea and tua talis sit differentia, qua
detur diversitas. And again, Nova forma dat novum esse rei: I hold them not
only to be differences, secundum quid; but simpliciter, that is to say,
absolute and essential differences. Furthermore, Data una dissimilitudine
etiam paria judicabuntur diversa. Moreover experience shows us, that the
least addition or substraction in Armoriall signs makes them cease to be the
same that they were; Omnia Arma Arithmeticis figuris sunt simillima, quibus si
quid addas vel subtrahas non remanet eadem species, as I have formerly showed.
Finally, for approbation of these my opinions I will add this infallible
assertion; Ea differunt quorum definitiones differunt.

These are my reasons that induce me to be of this opinion, that the diverse
manner of bearing of the Tail of the Lion as aforesaid, are or may be (without
exception) essential differences: which nevertheless I refer to the
Judicious censure of the learned in this profession, who perhaps may convince
me with more forceable grounds.

But because demonstration is the best of Arguments to convince the
incredulous, it is apparent that Buxtons Coat before mentioned differs not from
that of Smeres, but only in the manner of the bearing of the tail, both of them
being Argent, a Lion Rampand, Sable, only in Buxtones Coat the tail is
elevated and turned over the head of the Lion, as it more plainly appears
before in this present Chapter.

Now as touching particularizing of the beforementioned assertion, I say that
the Eversion of the tail of the Lion is an express token of his placabilitie
or tractablenesse, as contrariwise the Inversion of his tail is a note of his
wrath and fury, especially if he do beat the back therewith, and do roar
withal: of this property of the Lion Catullus makes mention in these words.

Age, coede terga cauda tua, verbera pateant
Face, cuncta mugienti fremitu loca retonent.
The gate of a Lion when he is passant is an apparent note of his jurisdiction,
and regal authority and Soveragnitie wherewith the extension of his tail
does fitly quadrate and agree: inasmuch as when he hunteth after his prey, he
roareth vehemently, whereat the Beasts being astonished do make a stand,
whilst he with his tail makes a circle about them in the sand, which circle
they dare not transgress, which done out of them he makes choice of his prey
at his pleasure.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is party per Pale, Gules and Azure, a Tiger
Passant, Argent. This was the paternall Coat Armor, of that grave Citizen John
Mabb Chamberlain of London in the time of Queen Elizabeth, Grandfather of
Ralph Mab, at whose charges the second Edition was presented to the public
view. The Tiger may well take place next to the Lion, it being a beast of great
cruelty and incomparable swiftness, whence some think the River Tigris had
its name.

A Tiger passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Tiger Passant, Regardant, gazing
in a mirror or Looking-glass, all Proper. This Coat Armor stands in the
Chancell of the Church of Them, in Oxfordshire, in a Glass window of the
same Chancell, Impaled on the sinister side with the Coate-Armour properly
pertaining to the Family of de Bardis. Near to this Escocheon is placed this
inscription, Hadrianus de Bardis Prebendarius istius Ecclesiae. Some report
that those who rob the Tiger of her young, use a policy to detain their dam
from following them, by casting sundry looking-glasses in the way, whereat she
uses long to gaze, whether it be to behold her own beauty, or because when she
sees her shape in the glass, she thinks she sees one of her young ones,
and so they escape the swiftness of her pursuit. And thus are many deceived of
the substance, whilst they are much busied about the shadows.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Bear Passant, Argent. A Bear
passant.
It is written of the She Bear that she brings forth her young ones
unperfect and deformed, like a lump of raw flesh, and licks it till it come to
shape and perfection. The She-beare is most cruelly enraged against any that
shall hurt her young, or despoile her of them: as the Scripture says in
setting forth the fierce anger of the Lord, that he will meet his adversaries,
as a Bear robbed of her whelps. Which teaches us how careful Nature would
have us to be of the welfare of our children, since so cruel beasts are so
tender hearted in this kind.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Bear Rampand, Sable, muzled, Or,
by the name of Barnard. The Countries that were reputed famous for the Cruelty
of Bears were Lucania, and Vmbria in Italy, now called the Duchy of Spoletum;
and so in ancient times was our Island of Britain; for Bears were carried
from hence to Rome for a show, where they were holden in great admiration. The
Bear by nature is a cruel beast, but this here demonstrated unto you, is (to
prevent the mischief it might otherwise do, as you may observe) as it were
bound to the good behavior with a muzle: I must confess I have often seen a
Sable Bear Saliant, in a Field, Argent, borne by the name of Bernard.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between three Bears
heads erased, Sable, muzled, Or, by the name of Pennarthe of Cornwall.

blazon or coat of arms The Bear is reported to combat with the Bull; in
which fight he uses no less policy than strength; as evidently may appear
out of Aristotle de Animalibus lib. 8. chap. 230.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse between three Bears heads
couped, Sable, musled, Or, which is the Coat of the Honorable Lord John
Disborow, one of his Highness Privy Counsel, and General at Sea, and Major
General of the West.

A Wolf Saliant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Wolf Saliant, Argent, langued and
armed, Gules, by the name of Down. Some such Ensign did Macedon the son of
Osyris (surnamed Jupiter the just, whose Father was Cham the Son of Noah) bear
in his Shield at such time, as he together with diverse of his Brethren and
Kinsfolk, did warfare under the conduct of Osyris, as witnesses Diodorus
Siculus: Osyridem duo filii, virtute dispares, Anubis and Macedon, prosequuti
sunt, uterque Armis usus est insignibus, aliquo animali haud ab eorum natura
dissimili: nam Anubis Canem, Macedon Lupum, insigne Armorum tulit. Anubis
(says he) gave a Dog for his device on his Arms, and Macedon a Wolf. This
Coat Armor may serve to exemplify that which I have formerly delivered,
touching the Antiquity of Arms. The ancient Romans also in their Military
ensigns did bear the Wolf, as appears by Vegelius Valturius, and others.

Two Wolves passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, two Wolves passant, Argent, by the
name of Low. Vpton leaves to the consideration of Heralds, whether the bearing
of the Wolf in Arms be not fit for such persons as in Parliament and places
of great Assembly, are accustomed to wrangle and show themselves contentious;
and (quasi Johannes in opposito) to put on a resolute determination to be
contrary to all others. For it is the Wolves nature when they assemble together
to fall a howling. Some write that those who suddenly look on a Wolf, do lose
their voice; it were fit, such wolvish and snarling persons, would look on
themselves in a glass, and so become silent.

Thus ending with the Wolf, I will perclose this tract of beasts of fierce
nature, comprehending all others of this kind, as Ounces, Lynxes, Hyenaes,
Panthers, etc. under these before handled. Forasmuch as the greatest part of
the general Rules, as also of the sundry forms of bearing attributed unto
Lions and Wolves, may be aptly applied to all, or the greatest part of other
Beasts of like nature.

SECT. III. CHAP. XVI.
HAving given examples of Ravenous and Fierce kind, that by main force do
prosecute and obtain their prey: I will now proceed to the handling of beasts
less Fell and harmfull; of which number some are Wild and Savage, other are
Domestical and Sociable, as Dogs of all sorts, of which I will first entreat;
because the Dog, whether it be for pleasure and Game in field, or for thrift
and guard at home, deserves a very high estimation, and of all Dogs, those of
chase are most in use in Armory; whereof some prosecute their prey speedily,
others more leasurably; of the first sort is the Greyhound, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Greyhound passant, Sable,
Greyhound Passant.
by the name of Holford. Such Dogs as do pursue their Game with a more
leasurely pace, are Hounds fitted for all sorts of Game: as Hart-hounds,
Buck-hounds, Harriers, Otter-hounds, Bloud-hounds, etc. which are of some
authors called Odorisequi canes, quia odoratu investigant, for following by the
smell; and Cicero calls them, Sagaces canes, because of their tender and
quick sent; and both these and the Greyhound are called canes venatici, Dogs
for the chase.

Note that it appears in an old Manuscript treating of blazon, that a
Greyhound cannot properly be termed Rampand, for it is contrary to his kind to
appear so fierce as the Author there writes in his said book, now remaining in
the custody of that worthy Knight, Sir William Seger, Garter, Principal King
of Arms, whose great study and travel in this Heraldicall Art, has by his
own works already published, been sufficiently manifest.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Bars, Sable, charged with three
Treefoyles of the Field in Chief, a Greyhound Current of the second; this is
the Coat of Sir William Palmer of Clarkenwell Knight, a Learned and Ingenious
Gentleman, who by Dorothy his Lady, a worthy Daughter of so noble a Father Sir
John Brampston Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, has an hopeful
issue.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Talbot passant, Argent, Talbot
Passant.
by the name of Borgoigne. It is a general observation, that there is scarce
any Virtue incident to a man, but there are singular Sparks and resemblances of
the same in the sundry kinds of Dogs: For some are so courageous, as if they be
in the encounter, you may cut off a Leg or any Lim before they will let go
their Holdfast: in which kind the English Mastiffe has highest praise;
insomuch that Histories report, that the Romans took Mastiffes hence, to carry
in their Armies instead of Soldiers: Some others have been so trusty and
loving to their Masters, as being by error lost, they have refused meat, though
it were to their death, till they saw their Masters again. For their admirable
Property in finding any thing that is lost, in fetching any thing they are
enjoined, in pursuing any man by the sent of his Foot after he is Fled; it
requires a Naturalists large discourse, rather than the touch of an Heralds
pencill.

Fesse Dauncette and three Talbots.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Fesse Dauncette, between three
Talbots passant, Sable, by the name of Carrick. These kind of dogs, are
called in Latin, Canes sagaces, for the tenderness of their sent, and
quickness of smelling, because thereby they do readily discover and find out
the Tracks, fourmes, and lodgings of beasts of chase, and of Savage kind:
which done they do prosecute their undertaken chase with open mouth, and
continual cry; that oftentimes through hot pursuit they do so tire it, as
that it is either taken up by the Hunts men, or do become a prey to themselves.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse, between three talbots
Heads erased, Or, by the name of Burton of Lindley in the County of Leicester.
To this head must be referred all other Sorts of Dogs of Prosecution: As
Beagles, Terriers, and such like, so called, Quia feras sub terra prosequuntur
(for that they prosecute their prey under the Ground, as the others do above
ground) also Land, and Water-spaniels, and such others. Now for the Wild or
Savage sort of beasts, some do atchieve their Prey by Subtle means, as Foxes,
Ferrets, Weasels, Cattes, etc. some by prudent Providence, as the Hedde-hogge,
Squirrell, and such like. Others also there are, whose care is, not so much how
to come by their prey, as that themselves become not a prey to others; as
Hares, Conies, etc. Of these briefly, I will give some few examples, to show
to what head they are to be reduced, as follows.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, two Reynards, counter saliant in
bend, the dexter surmounted of the Sinister-like, Gules, by the name of
Kadrod-Hard of Wales. These are somewhat unlike Samsones Foxes, that were tied
together at the Tails; and yet these two agree in Aliquo tertio: They came
into the Field, like two enemies, but they meant nothing less than to fight,
and therefore they pass by each other; like two crafty Lawyers, which came to
the bar, as if they meant to fall out deadly about their Clients cause; but
when they have done, and their Clients purses well spunged, they are better
friends than ever they were, and laugh at those Geese, that will not believe
them to be Foxes, till they (too late) find themselves Fox-bitten.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, three Cats-a-mountain in Pale,
Passant, Azure, this is the Coat of that worthy Citizen Thomas Adams Esquire,
Lord Mayor of this City, 1646. yet living, 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Cat-a-mountains Passant, in
Pale, Sable, and is the Coat of Jonathan Keate of London, an Ingenious
Gentleman, son of Gilbert Keate Esquire, deceased.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Azure, between three
Squerrils Seiant, Gules, by the name of Lovell. A Cheuron between three
Squerrils Seiant.
This Beast has his name Sciurus, or Scuitell, by reason of the largeness of
his Tail, which shadoweth all his body. And is therein like one, who carefully
keeping the love and affection of his Followers and Retainers, is sure they
will stick to him, protect and shadow him in time of need: To whom those
Villains (mentioned in the Roman history) were much unlike, who betrayed their
Proscribed Lords, flying to them for Shelter and secret Coverture: and such a
one was the faithless Cartismandua, to whom our renowned British King
Caractacus, flying to hide himself, till he might gather his forces together
against the Romans, she betrayed him unto his foes, to the ruin of this
Kingdom: that Infamous Queen had not Caudam Sciuri, a Squirels shadowing
Tail; but Caudam Draconis, Fiery and venomous.

blazon or coat of arms The field is Parted per Fesse, Gules and Azure, in the
first Six whole Ermines, Ermyne, Couchant, three and three, This was the
Coate-armour of a Bishop in the Kingdom of Scotland who lived Anno Dom. 1474.
as I find it in Master Garters (before mentioned) Manuscript. The Surname of
this Bishop is not there set down. I have inserted this Coat Armor, in regard
of the raritie of the bearing of this Beast whole in an Escocheon, which is
seldom so used: but the Skin of this beast is of very frequent use in Arms,
it being that furre in Blazon called Ermyne, of which I have formerly treated
in this book, Section 1. Chapter 4. I was as curious as I could in procuring
this Escocheon to be cut like unto that which is depicted in that Manuscript,
because I was desirous to demonstrate unto you the fashion of Escoheons of
those times, I must confess that I find the Blazon there to differ from this
of mine; for there he begins to Blazon the Base part of the field first,
which manner of Blazon at this day is not approved of by English Blazoners.

To these must be added all other fourefooted beasts that are provident in
acquiring their food, as the Hedghog, and such other. It rests that I should
now give example of the last sort of beasts, among them of Savage kind before
spoken of, which are those timorous and fearful nature. Such are these that
follow and their like.

Three Conies.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Conies, Sable, by the name of
Strood. Conies are bred in most Countries, but in few are they so plentiful as
in England. Amongst the Baleares they were so abundant, as that the people made
suit to Augustus to grant them a military company of Pioneers to destroy them.
Of this little beast it seems that men first learned the Art of undermining
and subverting of Cities, Castles, and Towers, by the industry of Pioneers.

Three Conies in bordure Ingrailed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Conies Seiant, Argent a Sable,
Bordure Ingrailed, by the name of Conisbie. Though nature has not given these
timorous kinds of beasts such craft or strength as to the former; yet are they
not destitute of their succors, in that they have their strong Castles and
habitations in the earth, and their food ever growing so nigh them, that they
need not put themselves into danger except they list. Three Hares heads couped
Nebule.


blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Fesse Nebule, Sable, three
Hares heads couped, Or, by the name of Harewell. The Hare is a simple creature,
and reposeth all her safety in swiftness, wherein she uses many shifts to
help her self withal, both to defend her self from the peril of the Hounds,
and to frustrate the endeavors of the Huntsmen. She naturally fears the
Eagle, Hawke, Fox, and Wolf, her natural enemies. It is strange which some
have written of Hares, that their nature is, for the self same to be sometimes
Male, and sometimes Female. Such an one also (as Poets write) was Tiresias, of
Thebes, who being a man, became a woman, and so continued seven years, and then
returned again to his former shape. Afterward a great controversy rising
betwixt Jupiter and Juno, whether the man or the woman were more insatiate of
Venerie, or took most delight therein, he was chosen Arbiter in the matter, and
gave the Garland to Juno and the Female Sex, as being invincible in the
incounters of Venus.

Tortois passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Tortois passant, Argent, by the
name of Gaudy. The shells of the Arcadian Tortoises, are very great, therefore
out of them they do make Harps, whereof Mercury is said to be the Inventor, who
finding a Tortois left upon the Rocks after the falling of the River Nilus,
Harps how invented.
the flesh being consumed, and the sinews that remained dried up, he struck
them with his hand, and they made a kind of Musical sound whereupon he framed
it into a Harp, which caused others to imitate his practice, and to continue
the same unto this day.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, A Tortois erected, Or, by the name
of Cooper: this Escocheon, I have caused to be inserted in this Edition to
manifest the various bearing of this Gressible Reptile in Armorie.

And hitherto we have handled such Terrestrial Animals only, as are called
Vivipara, because they do bring forth Living creatures; whereas the other
Terrestrials do bring forth Eggs, and are therefore named Ovipara, of which sort
we will speak in the next place.

SECT. III. CHAP. XVII.
THis other sort of four footed Egge-bearing Animals (as I may so term them)
notwithstanding that in many things they have no small resemblance with man,
as well touching the faculties of the Vegetable soul, as also the parts of the
body: yet are they far more unlike us than those that bring forth a living
Creature. And albeit that these Egge-breeding four footed Animals do consist of
the same bodily parts that the Vivipara, or Animal-producing do, and of the
four humors that are answerable in quality to the four Elements, and have all
parts as well internal as external senses, and many other things wherein they
do communicate with the Vivipara; yet are there many other things wherein they
differ not only from these, but also even amongst themselves one from another
of them. For neither do we find in these that quickness of wit that we
observe in others, neither like parts of strength of Body that the other have.

Like as man (especially in his soul) approaches near unto God in likeness;
so, in like manner do other Animals resemble man, wherein they do participate
with man in likeness, after some sort, but in diverse degrees, forasmuch as
some of them have more and some less likeness with us than others have.

There is not (says Beda) amongst the Universal works of nature, any one
thing so little, or of so base esteem, wherein a man cannot find some divine
thing worthy of admiration. No less (says Farnesius) may we admire the force
of a silly Flea, than the hugeness and strength of an Elephant.

Not without reason does the Husband man prognosticate the approach of some
great shower of Rain by the croaking of Frogs, more frequent than usual,
whereupon he says, that they do cry for Rain. For this observation is
grounded upon a Physical reason, Omne enim simile gaudet suo simili, and suae
naturae utili ac convenienti; Every like is delighted with his like, and with
that which is commodious and agreeable to his nature; Sithence then that
Frogs are exceedingly delighted with water, as with that which best agrees
with their nature, therefore when they do apprehend a fore-sence of Rain,
they do rejoice, and do testify their joy by singing after their manner.

Animals of base esteem, and of no industry, have (for the most part) not
only four but manifold Feet: whereby we are admonished that perverse and
evil diposed persons have multiplicities of affections, in respect that by the
motion of the Feet our bodies are perduced from place to place; so do our
affections transfer us from one delight to another, according to that saying,
Pes meus, affectus meus, eo feror, quocunque feror.

Though some perhaps may esteem these Egg bearing Animals unworthy the dignity
of Coat Armor: yet for my own part, I hold their bearing to be no less
Honorable than many of those that in common estimation are reputed far more
worthy; insomuch that they may well beseem the bearing of the greatest
Potentate. For if it pleased the Sovereign King of Kings to use them as his
special instruments to chastise the stubbornness of such as rebelled against
his Ordinance, and to arm those his minute and weak creatures, with such an
incredible boldness, as that they feared not the face or forces of men, but
that the very Frogs entered the houses and chambers of the Egyptians, upon the
people, into their Ovens, and into their kneading Troughes; yea even into King
Pharaohs Chamber, and upon his Bed: Moreover if God has vouchsafed to give to
the Grasshopper, the Canker-worme, the Catterpiller, and the Palmer-worm, the
honorable title of his huge great Army, why should we prize them at so low a
rate, as that we should disdain to bear them in Coat Armor? Sithence God says
by the Prophet Joel, I will render you the years which the Grasshopper has
eaten, the Canker-worme, and the Catterpiller, and the Palmer-worm; my great
Host which I sent among you.

It is therefore to be observed, that they also have their actions not to be
omitted in Blazon, albeit not in that variable manner, nor yet so copious as
some others. And because they are far different from those formermerly handled,
not only in shape but also in the manner of their living, in their gate and
actions, therefore must they receive a diverse manner of Blazon. They are called
in Latin Reptilia, or Creeping things; Quia reptant super terram; and here we
must distinguish between those things, quae reptant, which Creep, as Frogs,
Ants, etc. and those quae serpunt, which glide, as Snakes, which latter kind we
shall speak of afterward.

But here we mention those Reptiles which are Gressible, such as by means of
their feet, are able to go step by step from one place to another, so termed a
gradiendo, which is proceeding by degrees; and hitherto also are referred such
as by skipping, mounting or leaping, raise their bodies above ground, and so
alter their station, place or seat. Of which kinds, some have four feet, some
have more. Such as have four feet only, are these that follow with their like.

I have omitted in my second Edition that Escocheon Sol, charged with three
Toades erected, Saturn, which according to some Authors was the Coat Armor of
the ancient Kings of France, because since my first Edition I find great
variety of opinions concerning this matter, of which I have given a touch in
the first Chapter of the first Sect. page 5. And in liew thereof I do present
you with the Ancient Coat Armor of the same charge borne by a Family in this
Kingdom.

Three toades.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Toades erected, Sable, by the
name of Botereux of Cornwall, which Family long since there flourished, as you
may read in learned Camden. Toades and Frogs do communicate this natural
property, that when they sit, they hold their heads steady and without motion:
which stately action Spencer in his Sheapheards Calender calls the Lording of
Frogs. The bearing of Toades (after the opinion of some Armorists) does
signify a hasty Choleric man, that is easily stirred up to anger, whereunto
he is naturally prone of himself, having an inbred poison from his birth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Moules, Sable, their Snout,
and feet, by the name of Nangothan or Mangotham, a Family, as I take it of
Scotland. I could not well here term these Moules Proper, because there be many
white Moules, which color whether in them it is occasioned by age or not, I
will not here dispute. The Moule in Latin is called Talpa, from the Greek
word, (...), i. Caecus, Caecitas.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between three Moles or
Wants, Sable, and is the Coat of Sir George Twisleton of Barley in Yorkshire
Baronet, of which Family is also that of the same surname at Dartford in Kent,
Colonel Twisleton and others.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Hedg-hogs, Or, by the name of
Abrahall. The Hed-hog signifies a man expert in gathering of substance, and
one that providently lays hold upon proffered opportunity, and so making Hay
(as we say proverbially) whilst the Sun does shine, preventeth future want.

Bara in his Book entitled, Les Blazones dez Armories gives an example of two
Lizards, erected one against another (as if they were Combatand) and terms
them Rampand, a term very unfitly applied to Reptiles, to whom the terms of
mounting, leaping, or skipping are much more proper. To this head must be
reduced, Crocodyles, Salamanders, Camelions, Ewtes, Lizards, and whatsoever
other Egge-bearing Reptile having only four feet, as to their natural and
proper place. There rests yet one other sort of this kind of Reptiles, which
are diversely shaped from all the former, and are called in Latin Insecta
Animalia, because that being divided in their body between their head and
belly, their parts do seem so divided as if they hanged only together by small
strings; having no flesh, blood, sinews, etc. And there are also insecta which
fly, Insects that live upon the earth.
but here we speak only of Terrestrials, leaving the other to their due place;
and because such bearing is rare, I am enforced (rather than to pass them over
with silence) to use Coats of Device, for expressing their sundry forms, as in
example.

A Spider in her web.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Cobweb, in the Center thereof a
Spider, proper. The Spider is borne free of the Weavers Company; she studieth
not the Weavers Art, neither has she the stuff whereof she makes her thread
from any where else, than out of her own womb from whence she draws it;
whereof through the agility and nimblenesse of her feet, she weaveth ginnes,
and dilateth, contracteth, and knitteth them in form of a Net. And with the
threads that she draws out of her body, she repaireth all rents and wracks of
the same. Not unaptly is man's life resembled to a Spiders web, which is
wrought with much care and diligence, and is suddenly marred with the least
occurrent that may befall it. For that it is protracted with much care and
diligence, and suddenly ended by swallowing of a Crum, or Hair, or some other
lesser accident (if less may be.) In like manner Sophistical Arguments are
likened to Spiders webbes, for that they are framed with much Artificial
cunning, and yet are fit for no use, but to entangle Flies and weak capacities.
And to like purpose does the Poet compare the execution of Laws to Cobwebs,
saying, Laws like Spiders webs are wrought,
Great Flies escape, and small are caught.


What understood by the Spider.
Vpton says, that he has seen Spiders borne in Coat Armor by a certain
Lombard. By the Spider we may understand a painful and industrious person,
occupied in some honest and necessary business, a man careful of his private
estate, and of good foresight in repairing of small decays, and preventing of
wracks. The Spider her self is poysonfull and deadly, yet is her web reckoned
an Antidote against poison, notwithstanding the same is extracted out of her
womb. In like sort (says Aelianus) out of the poysonfull contagion and
infectious venom of sin and transgression, the Sovereign powers do take
occasion to extract and establish wholesome and profitable laws, Pro. 30.28.
against such notorious crimes. Of the Spider, Solomon writes in this manner;
The Spider takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces.

Example touching procreation.
A very remarkable note does Farnesius propose unto us, taken from this poor
despised creature the Spider, touching the procreation of Children. It is a
matter of great consequence of what Parents a man is descended. If we desire
(says he) to have a good raze of Horses, a litter of special good Hounds for
game, choice Plants and stocks to plant our Orchards and Gardens with
delectable fruits, do we not use our uttermost endeavor to effect them. How
much greater should our care and providence be in the procreation of our
children? The first instruction that the children receive is in the veins and
bowels of their Parents, whereof we may take an Example from Spiders, which are
no sooner hatched and excluded out of their Eggs, but forthwith they practice to
make webs; as if they had brought with them (even out of their Mothers womb)
together with their life, the Artificial skill of webbing. Holy and reverent
is that piety that we owe to our Parents, Parens enim est genitor, parens
patria, parens denique est ipse Deus. For he that begot us is our parent, our
Country is our parent, and lastly God himself is our parent.

It has been often questioned, why the Father loves the Son more de^^ly,
tenderly and affectionately, than the Son does the Father. The reason is this,
Quia patris amor in filium a natura est, filii in parentem ab officio. The
affectionate love of the Father proceeds of Nature, that of the son of duty:
Therefore the sacred Law has decreed, Amabis patrem and matrem tuam, Thou
shall love thy Father and thy Mother, but not contrariwise: for where the Law
of Nature speaks, there is no need it should be assisted by Commandment.
Notwithstanding (even naturally) the love of the son to the Father is great.

We may learn (says Zanchius) by these minute Animals, how many and how great
instructions we may receive from the universal number of creatures, that God
has given us for instructors and teachers of Moral Discipline, so that we
will open our eyes to behold them, and listen to Gods disciplining us in them.

Admirable doubtless is the Omnipotency of God in these his creatures; for as
Saint Hierome says, Epist. ad Heliod. Creatorem non in Coelo tantum miramur,
etc. We do not admire Gods power in Heaven only and in earth, the Sun,
Elephants, Camels, Oxen, Boares, Lions, etc. but also in his smallest
creatures; the Ant, Flea, Fly, and small Worm, and others of like kind, whose
bodies or shapes are better known unto us than their names.

So much were the Israelites assotted in Idolatry, as that they esteemed beasts
for Gods, as appears Wisdom 12.24. For they went astray far in the ways
of error, and esteemed the beasts, which their enemies despised, for gods,
being abused after the manner of children, that have no understanding.

So long is any Animal or living creature said to have life, Breathing a token
of life.
as he has breath, and the exercise thereof. And this rule holds not only
in four-footed Animals, but also in those that we call Insecta, and in gliding
Animals also: As both Galen and Pliny do teach: though Aristotle denies these
latter to have breath, but therein he speaks comparatively, viz. in respect
of other Animals that do attract and deliver their breath more strongly and
more sensibly, they seem to have no breath at all.

One example more I will propose which shall be of the Emmet, is in this next
Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, eleven Emmets, 3.2.3.2.1. Eleven
Emmets.
Sable. Of this silly creature also does Solomon make mention, saying, The
Pismires a people not strong, Pro. 30.25. Pro. 6.6. Ibid. 7.
yet prepare they their meat in Summer. To this simple and feeble creature is
the slothful man sent to learn wisdom, where it is said, Go to the Pismire O
Sluggard, behold her ways and be wise. For she having no guide, governor nor
ruler, prepares her meat in the Summer, and gathers her food in Harvest,
etc. Very often do the sacred Scriptures propose unto us examples of brute
creatures, as well to upbraid us with our vices, as to stir us up unto virtue.
For as there are in man sparks of the understanding and practice of heavenly
spirits, even so the brute Animals, have certain shadows or footsteps of the
virtuous qualities, that are or ought to be in men. Moreover, Job. 12.
Job 12.7. Ask now the beasts and the fowls of the Heavens, and they shall
tell thee; or speak to the earth, and it will show theee, or the fish of the
sea, and they shall declare unto thee. And by the least of Gods creatures may
we learn many exemplary inducements to virtue, as also many forcible
disswasions from vice, by reason of the apparent signs of the wisdom, power
and mercy of God that are found in them. Signification of the Emmet and Pismire.
By the Emmet or Pismire may be signified a man of great labor, wisdom and
providence in all his affairs, and of a pregnant and ready memory.

The examples hitherto produced, are taken only from Reptiles gressible, and
though of that kind which has more than four feet, I have alleged only the
two last Examples of Insecta, yet there are some other of many feet, which are
not insecta, as the Palmer-worme, Cheeslip, Kitchinbobs, which being touched
gather themselves round like a Ball, and such like, which must be referred to
the same head. And besides all these, there are yet other some which be both
Gressible and volant, such are these, that having their livelihood only upon
the earth, by the help of a kind of wings they oftentimes change their place
for the acquiring of their sustenance, as in example.

A Grasshopper passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Grasshopper in Fesse Passant, Or,
Grasshoppers (says Pliny) do fly with wings made like Pellicles or fine skins.
The Males of the Grasshoppers do sing in the Summer season, but the Females are
silent. Whereupon the Emmet, who did work (whilst the other did sing) takes
occasion (as it is in the Fable) to taunt their slothfulnes and poverty,
saying, Estate quae cantaveris, in Hyeme salta. You that sung all Summer may go
shake your heels in the Winter. Among the Athenians the Grasshoppers were
holden for a special note of Nobility; The nature of the Grasshopper.
and therefore they used to wear golden Grasshoppers in their hair (as Pierius
notes) to signify thereby, that they were descended of noble race and
homebred. For such is the natural property of the Grasshopper, that in what
soil he is bred, in the same he will live and dye, for they change not their
place, nor hunt after new habitations. Hereupon Antisthenes took occasion to
scoff at the Athenian, saying, that in this property they did communicate with
Tortoises and Cockles, born and living in the same shells, Solomon reckons the
Grasshopper for one of the four small things in the earth that are full of
Wisdom, saying, The Grasshopper has no King yet go they forth all by bands.

Vagipennae why so called.
There are other of this kind, whose wings are less manifest than the
Grasshoppers, because they are closed in a kind of case that can hardly be
discerned, but when they are preparing to fly for which respect they are
called vagipennae (says Calipine) Quia alas vaginis quibusdam inclusas habent,
for carrying their wings sheathed; as the Hartflye, Beetle, Lady-cow, etc.
which together with Locusts, and such other as are both Gressible and volant,
and many-legged, are to be reduced to this head, as to their proper and
natural place. I will close up all these with one example of the Scorpion,
which Aeianus, and others report, to be winged in Egypt and India, though he
doubts whether they are not rather bred by the heat of the Sun, than by
copulation (and if by this latter) whether they come of Eggs, or come forth
living.

Cheuron between three Scorpions.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Scorpions reversed, Sable, by the name of Cole. Pierius in his Hieroglyphics
says, that if a man stricken with a Scorpion fit upon an Ass with his face
toward the tail of the Ass, his pain shall pass out of him into the Ass,
which shall be tormented for him. In my opinion he that will believe this, is
the creature that must be ridden in this case; Cure of the Scorpions sting.
but that the oil of Scorpions is a chief cure against their own stinging, is
an ancient observation; and it is a rule of Equity, that where the wrong is
offered, there the amends should be made. And as these in this Escocheon are
borne with an Ordinary betwixt them, so sometimes are they borne upon
Ordinaries (according to a general rule premised) as may be seen in a Window
of Saint Giles in the Fields in Middlesex, where is borne in an Escocheon,
Gules, three Pallets, Verrey, on a Chief, Or, a Scorpion erected, Sable. And
thus much of Gressibles of all sorts.

SECT. III. CHAP. XVI.
NOw touching such Creatures as we termed Gliding: Gliding Animals.
those may properly be said to be such, which having no Feet at all, do yet
move and as it were slide from place to place, some more slowly, but other some
with a certain Volubility and flexible Agitation of the Body do make their
speedy way upon the Earth, with many pliant Bowings; and of these also, some
have for coverture, their Skin only, some both Skin and Shell also: of the
Former sort are those now following, with their like.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, an Adder Nowed, Or, An Adder Nowed.
by the name of Nathiley. There is a natural Antipathie betwixt Man and
Serpents of all kinds; in which Lite^all sense, that was verified which God
promised; that there should be Enmity betwixt the Woman's Seed and the Serpents,
though a Spiritual Enmity betwixt Christ and the Devil (that old Serpent) was
principally foretold. The Serpent is very Prudent and Subtle, either to Hurt
other, or to save himself; Property of the Serpent.
but his especial care is to defend his Head, knowing that part to be the
Principal, and withal the weakest. This here enfolded, may seem to be one of
the Locks, of that Monstrous Dame Medusa, every Hair of whose Head, was said
to be a Snake: and indeed Albertus says, that the Hair of Women, taken at
some seasons and laid in Dung, will become very Venomous Serpents; which some
have supposed to befall that Sex, for the ancient familiarity it had at first
with that accursed Serpent.

To the four-footed Egge-breeding Animals do the Serpents come very nigh, as
also other Reptiles. For all Serpents have blood, flesh, sinews, and other
like parts as four-footed Animals have, although not in that perfection that
they have them. They are endowed also with head, nostrils, eyes, tongue, teeth,
and with lights and spleen, and other inward parts and bowels of the body, but
much discrepant from the members and bowels of all others.

Notwithstanding that Serpents are far unequal to four-footed Animals both
in shape and strength; yet will they not give place to many of them for
sharpness of wit. It is a creature full of subtilty, as Moses testifies, Genesis
3. And the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field; for besides
his exterior senses, he is crafty and and subtle in preserving his life, in
making choice of his lurking dens, in acquiring his food, in hatching up his
brood, in expelling from him and putting off his old slowgh. So that for good
cause did our Savior exhort us (in goodness) to imitate the wisdom of the
Serpent.

Animals as have both skin and shell.
These few examples may serve instead of many, which might be brought of
Serpents of sundry other names, and natures, which all are hitherto to be
referred. Now let us see one example of such Gliding or Sliding Animals as are
more slow-paced, and have both Skin and Shell to cover them; of which number is
the Snaile, reckoned of all other that are borne in Coat Armor, the slowest:
and no marvel, since it carries on her back no less a burden than her whole
house; for which cause she is called Tardigrada Domiporta, the slow-going
House-bearer.

Three house Snailes.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse, between three
House-snailes, Argent, by the name of Shelley. These are called House-snailes,
either because they so carry their houses upon their back, whereby they be
aptly distinguished from the Garden snaile, that has no house or shel, or
because usually they breed about old houses. The Bearing of the Snaile does
signify that much deliberation must be used in matters of great difficulty and
importance: for albeit the Snaile goes most slowly, yet in time, by her
constancy in her course, she ascends the top of the highest Tower, as the
worthy and learned Gentleman Master Carew of Antony, has wittily moralized in
his Poem entitled the Herrings tail. It is also fabled, that when the Snaile
and the Hare were to go a journey for a wager, the Hare confident of his
footmanship, resolved to take a nap by the way; the Snaile knowing he had
nothing to trust to, but his infatigable perseverance came to his ways end
before the Hare could awake. But a worse thing in the Snailes going is this,
that wheresoever he goes, he leaves such marks and lines, that a man may as
easily track him, as a young thief that is not yet perfect in his trade. And
thus by little and little have we also with the Snaile ended one part of our
journey concerning Animals Terrestrial, or which live upon the Earth: and
because we have yet much way to travel, we will now take wings, and will mount
up with such Creatures as live above the Earth.

SECT. III. CHAP. XIX.
Animals living above the earth.
A Second general member of our division of living Creatures concerning such as
live above the Earth in the Air, as are the Fowls and Birds of all sorts: and
as we distinguished the former by their Feet, so the same Method we will follow
in these. Their Feet therefore are in some whole or conjoined; in others
divided: the whole-footed do in a sort resemble the Palm of a man's hand, and
are therefore in Latin called Palmipedes; such as the Swan, Whole-footed what.
Goose, Duck, and for the most part all River Fowls, as partly shall appear
hereafter by Examples. But here I hold it necessary, entering into this
Discourse, to set down some general Rules or Notes concerning the Bearing of
Birds or Fowls, Fowls more worthy than Fishes.
that the Reader may know whither to resort for a resolution of such doubts as
may arise touching their bearing. Fowls or Birds are of more worthy Bearing in
Coat Armor, than Fishes, because they do more participate of Air and Fire
(the two noblest and highest Elements) than of Water or Earth. All Fowls, of
whatsoever kind; must be borne in Coat Armor, as is best fitting the propriety
of their natural actions, of going, sitting, standing, stying, etc. Rule
general.
Otherwise such Armorie shall be said to be false, because Ars imitatur naturam
in quantum potest: Art as much as possible it can, does imitate nature. All
Birds are mustered under the name of Fowls as under their Genus or General,
and so may seem (after a sort) to be one. Nevertheless, in their Species,
Different qualities of Fowls.
or several kinds they differ much touching their particular qualities: for
some of them are simple, some others subtle, some solitary, some sociable,
some melodious, some articulate, some docible, some doltish and indocible, some
of long continuance, and some only of a few months lasting. Leigh says, that
Birds in an Escocheon shall be numbered unto Ten, and if they exceed that
number, Numbering of Fowls in Arms.
then they shall be said to be sans number, and shall be so Blazoned: but
Chassaneus says, that they shall be numbered unto sixteen; and of such Bearing
and Blazoning he gives instances of Monsieur Montmorancie, and of the Lord
Lovale.

Concerning the Beaks or Bills and Feet of Birds, most Armorists finding them
to be of a different color from the rest of the body, do term them all
generally, membred. But under reformation of the skill, I hold, that as there
is a difference in the Nobility of Birds, so ought they to have distinct terms
of blazon: so that all those that either are whole-footed, or have their feet
divided, and yet have no Tallons should be termed, membred. But the Cock and
also all Birds of prey should be termed in Blazon Armed, for as much as nature
has assigned the Cock (being a Bird much addicted to battle) spurs, and to the
birds of prey sharp and hooked Beaks and Tallons, The Cock and Fowls of prey
termed Armed.
not only for encounter and defense, but also to seize upon, gripe and rend
their prey, and are to them as teeth and claws unto Lions, Tigers, and other
fierce beasts. Similium enim similis est ratio: Where the things are like, the
reason is like. It is generally observed, that amongst Fowls of Prey, The
Female of fowls of prey hardiest.
the Female is the noblest and most hardy: which Nature did so provide,
because (besides her own sustenance) the care of feeding her young does
especially lie on the Female, and therefore if she should be timorous or
cowardly, she should not be able to provide food for her self and them. Such
Fowls (says Vpton) as either in respect of their uniformity do never change
color naturally, or by nature are diversely colored, shall be only named in
Blazon, and no mention at all made of their Colors, but shall be termed
Proper; unless they either in part or in whole be borne of some other Color
than is Natural to them. In the Blazoning of Fowls much exercised in flight,
if their Wings be not displaied, they shall be said to be borne close; as he
Bears an Eagle, Falcon, Swallow, etc. Close. As in other forementioned
Creatures, so in Fowls also besides the whole bearing, the Parts or Members
are also usually borne in Coat Armor, as the Heads, Wings, Feathers, and Legs:
and both Couping and Erasing are as incident unto the parts of Fowls, as of
those Terrestrials, as by Examples following shall appear; wherein I will first
begin with River Fowls (which for the most part are Whole-footed) using
neither Curiousness in their form of Placing, or Copiousnesse in their Number;
but only that by the assistance of some few chief Examples, that which has
been delivered by Precepts and Rules, may be the more easily understood.

A Swan membred of the same.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Swan, Argent, by the name Leigham.
All River Fowls have their Tails shorter then other Birds; wherein Nature has
providently ordained, that the length of their Tail should not be any
impediment to them in their Swimming, Diving, or Running. The Swan is a Bird of
great Beauty and Strength also: and this is reported in honor of him; that he
uses not his strength to Prey or tyrannize over any other Foul, but only to
be revenged on such as first offer him wrong; in which case (says Aristotle)
he often subdueth the Eagle.

A Swan with her wings Expansed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Swan with her wings expansed,
Argent, membred, Or, within a bordure engrailed of the same, by the name of
Moore. The Swan never encounters with any other of his own kind, but in these
two cases: First, if any other be a Rival in his love, or offer to court his
mate; in which quarrel he will be revenged to the death: also, if another
incroach upon his possession and place of haunt, he is never at quiet till he
has expulsed him: and these two points are causes of most quarrels amongst the
noblest spirits.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Gules, between three
Ogresses, as many Swans, Proper, this is the Coat of George Clerk of Warford in
the County of Northampton Esquire, and his Brethren, Robert and Clement, sons
of Sir George Clerk sometime Sheriff of London, as also of Francis Clerk of
Vlcombe in Kent Esquire, and also of George Clerk, Clement Clerk, George Clerk,
and a third George Clerk, and others, Merchants of London, descended all from
Willoughby in Warwickshire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, two Swans, Argent, between two
Flanches, Ermine, by the name of Mellish of Sandersted in Surrey.

Three Swans necks erased.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Swans necks erased, Proper, by
the name of Lacy. It seems, these Swans dyed a violent death, by the renting
of their Necks: but for their natural death, diverse write, that it is so
acceptable unto them, that foreseeing the same, they sing for joy, which they
never do in their young days. In which respect, as also for his whiteness
(the color of sincerity) he was by the Ancients called Apolloes Bird, because
those that are learned, know best how to contemn this life, and to dye with
resolution (...) and Hawks of all sorts, which are much exercised in flying,
and albeit they do build their nests, and have their feeding upon the earth,
yet is their agitation above in the Air. Therefore in regard of the
worthiness of the Element, wherein they are chiefly occupied, I will begin
with Birds of Prey, and after our former order, first with their whole bearing,
and so descend to the parts (promiscuously) of sundry birds, according to the
dignity of their place, or more noble use, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sapphire, an Eagle displayed, Pearl, An
Eagle displayed.
Armed, Ruby, on a Canton of the second, a sinister hand couped at the wrist,
as the third. These Arms appertained to the right worthy Sir Robert Cotton of
Connington Knight and Baronet now deceased, a learned Antiquary, and a singular
favourer and preserver of all good learning and Antique Monuments.

The Eagle having her wings thus displayed, does manifest her industrious
exercise, in that she is not idle, Signification of the Eagle displayed.
but continually practices that course of life whereunto nature has ordained
her: and does signify a man of action, evermore occupied in high and weighty
affairs, and one of a lofty spirit, ingenious, speedy in apprehension, and
judicious in matters of ambiguity. For amongst other noble qualities in the
Eagle, her sharpness and strength of sight is much commended; and it is a
greater honor to one of noble offspring to be wise and of sharp and deep
understanding, than to be rich and powerful, or great by birth.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, an Eagle displayed, Sable, being
the Coat of Theophilus Biddulph of London and Greenwich in Kent, Esquire, a
person much beloved, and well worthy of it, in this City; and also of Robert
Biddulph of London Merchant Adventurer.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, an Eagle displayed, Or. This is the
ancient Coat Armor of the Family of Goddard of Norfolk, and by descent
belongs to Guybon Goddard Esquire, Recorder of Lynne Regis in the said
County, and one of the present Judges of the Sheriffs Court London, 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, an Eagle displayed, Gules, Armed,
Or, by the name of Beddingfield. This is an Ancient Family and of good note in
the Counties of Suffolk and Norfolk. The Eagle is said to be Altivolans avis,
an high-soaring bird, that sometime flies so high a pitch, as that she
transcendeth the view of man: she has a tender care of her young, when they be
fligge or flush (as we say) and ready for flight, then she stirs up her nest
and fluttereth over them; yea, she takes them on her wings, and so soareth
with them through the Air, and carries them aloft, and so frecth them from
all danger. In that she carries her young ones rather upon her Wings than in
her Tallons, she shows her tender care and love that she bears unto them.
She is abundantly full of feathers, by means whereof she glideth through the
Air very lightly, and makes way through the same with great expedition and
swiftnese. Our persecutors (says J.r.) are swifter than the Eagles of heaven.
And again, 2. Sam. 1.23. Saul and Jonathan were swifter than Eagles. The Crown
of her head is enlarged with baldness as her years are increased. As we may
see Mic. 1.16. Make thee bald and shave thee for thy delicate children: Enlarge
thy baldness as the Eagle, for they are gone into Captivity from thee. Wherein
the Prophet alludeth to the customs of the Gentiles, who in the time of their
mourning used to shave their heads, and cut their flesh, and to scortch the
same with stigmaticall marks, which customs God did expressly forbid the
Israelites to use, as appears Deuteronomy. 14.1.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, an Eagle displayed Checkey, Sol,
and Mars. This Coat Armor (according to Bara) pertains to the Kingdom of
Moravia. Albeit that this kind of bearing may seem strange to us in England,
yet is it very common in Germany (says Sir John Fern in his Glory of
Generosity) to bear beasts or any quick thing of Colors checkie, as well as
any other charge of dead things. And notwithstanding that such bearing be not
agreeable to nature, yet (says he) if it were either as Ancient, or borne by
so great an estate (in regard of the Armory) it holds comparison with the
Coat of Caesar which is Or, an Eagle displayed, with two Necks, Sable, as far
dissenting from Nature, since it is monstrous for one body to have two heads.
Yet in this and other like, there are special mysteries of as honorable
intendments as there is in those that are borne according to Nature.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, three Eagles displayed, in Fesse, Or,
by the name of Win, this is the Coat of Sir Owen Win Baronet, son and heir
of Sir John Win of Gwidder in Carnarvanshire, created Baronet June 29. 1611.
This is also the Coat of Sir John Williams of Minster in the Isle of Thanet,
created Baronet Apr. 22. 1642. nor is it strange to see two names bearing the
same Coat, considering they are descended from one Tribe, and the different
surname is but a late accident.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, an Eagle displayed between two
Cotizes, Argent, a Canton sinister, Or, by the name of Jordan of Catwick in the
County of Surry. Now I will show you an example where three of these kind of
Birds are borne together upon one Ordinary, but when you find two or more of
them so borne, or in one Escocheon without interposition of some Ordinary
between them, you must not then term them Eagles but Eaglets as Leigh has
observed, page 99. And I take it this Rule of his is grounded upon the same
reason, that I have formerly given concerning Lions and Lyoncels in the 15
chap. of this third Section page 177. for the Eagle is the Sovereign of Birds,
as the Lion is of Beasts.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Gules, three Eaglets
displayed, Or, an Annulet (for a difference of a fifth brother) of the second.
This Coat Armor pertains to the family of Abington of Dowdeswell in the
County of Gloucester, of which was descended that generous Gentleman Mr.
Abington now deceased, sometime Gentleman Usher to Prince Henry, and afterward
one of the Gentlemen Pensioners, both to King James and also to our now
Sovereign. These Eaglets because they be still in exercise, do lively represent
their Sires to be no bastards, or degenerate brood. It is Storied, that the old
Eagles make a proof of their young, by exposing them against the Sunbeams,
and such as cannot steddily behold that brightness, are cast forth, as
unworthy to be acknowledged their offspring. In which respect William Rufus,
King of this Land, gave for his Device an Eagle looking against the Sun, The
Eagle given in device.
with this word, Perfero, I can endure it: to signify he was no whit
degenerate from his puissant Father the Conqueror.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, a Cheuron, Verrey, between three
Eagles displaied, Or: this is the Coat Armor of Sir William Wilmer of Sywell
in the County of Northampton Knight. The true magnanimity and fortitude of the
mind is signified by the Eagle, which never seeks to combat with any small
Birds, or those which for their weakness be far unequal to her self.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron, Engrailed, Ermine,
between 3 Eagles, Argent. It may be objected that the usual way of bearing
Eagles nine times in ten, being displayed, these might have been blazoned close
for distinction, but I love brevity, and think this significant enough to a
punctual Emblazoner. This is the Coat of the spreading family of Child, and is
thus borne by Major John Child of London, Burgess for Portsmouth in the
Parliament called 1658. and was entered in the visitation of London 1634.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Eagles heads erased, Three
Eagles heads erased.
Sable, Armed, Or, by the name of Yellen. The Eagle though he mounteth high,
yet is his eye still roving on the ground; so those who are highest elevated in
honor should yet still entertain the humblest thoughts: But with this difference
from the eagle, in that she looks downward to seek out some prey; which is
most unworthy of any noble spirit, whom it ill befitteth to pry and prole into
poor men's states to make a prey of them, as those great ones of whom David
says, that they humbled themselves that the congregation of the poor may fall
into the hands of their captains. The Beak of an Eagle in her old age waxes
so hooked that it hinders her feeding and so impaireth her strength, then
(according to some Authors) she flies to the rock, and whetteth the same so
long until she makes it proportionable to the nethermost, whereby she becomes
no less capable of food than before: And so renews her strength as Psalm.
103. Which satisfies thy mouth with good things, making thee young and lusty
as an Eagle.

Two wings inverted and conjoined.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Ruby, two wings, Inverted and conjoined,
Topaz. The wings are Hieroglyphics of celerity, and sometime of protection and
coverture; as the Psalmist often speaks of hiding under the shadow of the wings
of Gods favor: because the Hens do shelter their young from the rapine of the
mightier, with spreading their wings over them. And therefore some have thought
that the displaying of the Roman Eagles wings, did signify the protection of
the obedient, and the extending of her griping Tallons, to betoken the rending
and ruin of all that were resistant. Like as the Eagle in her life makes prey
of all other foul, so her feathers being mingled with the fathers of other
fowls, are said to consume them all to dust: and therefore one compares them
to riches gotten by oppression or fraud, which will eat out in time all the
rest though well gotten.

Five Marlions wings.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, five Marlions wings in Saltire,
Argent. This Coat pertains to Sir Arthur Porter of Newarke in the County of
Gloucester, Knight. As wings of fowls are borne whole, so are their feathers
also, amongst which the Ostriches may justly bear praise for beauty, for
distinction from all others, and for frequent use and note in Armory; as I
could show by diverse examples of their bearing, both by themselves, and with
and upon Ordinaries: but these following may suffice.

Three Ostrich-feathers on a bend.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Bend, Sable, three
Ostrich-feathers, Argent, passing through as many Scroles of the first, by the
name of Roger Clarenden, that was base son to the puissant Black Prince. The
proper conuzance of the Princes of Wales, being the same three feathers borne
all together with one Escrole, having this Motto, ICH DIEN; whereby in Princely
modesty they dutifully profess, that which Saint Paul avowes, That the Son as
long as he is under tuition, is himself a subject. But the Ostrich feathers in
plume were sometimes also the Device of King Stephen, who gave them with this
word, VINULLA INVERTITUR ORDO, No force alters their fashion, alluding to the
fold and fall of the feather, which howsoever the wind may shake it, it cannot
disorder it; as likewise is the condition of Kings and Kingdoms well
established.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, six Ostriches feathers, 3.2. Six
Ostrich feathers.
and 1. Sable, by the name of Jervis. This man was a principal Founder of
Exbridge in the County of Devon. Of the Ostrich some have doubted whether he
should be reckoned a Beast or a Foul, in respect of some participation of both
kinds: yet does P. Belon du Man's make no scruple at all to sort him among
Birds: therefore I have held it fit to place his feathers here amongst the
parts of Birds.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, an Eagles leg in Pale, erased, An
Eagles leg erased.
a la quise, Argent, the Tallons, Gules, by the name of Canbanser. This is
termed, a la quise: and Quise in French signifies a thigh. It is most
undoubted that the devourer shall be devoured in his due time; even as the
rending and preying leg, is here it self rent off from the body: A worthy
document for all great men, whose bearing is of the ravening and preying kind,
to stand in fear how they seize on any prey against Justice, because if they
escape the like measure with man, yet it is a just thing with God, to show no
mercy to them which are merciless.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, two Eagles legs, bar-wayes, Two Eagles
legs erased.
erased (...) quise, Sable, Armed, Gules. Though the Eagles strength be much in
her legs and beak, yet sometimes she is for to use her wit to rend her prey;
as especially she does in breaking open all shellfish, which she uses (as
fortune does many great men) to carry them up very high, that they might fall
with greater force, and so be broken up for her food. Whereof there is recorded
one memorable, but pitiful experiment on the Poet Aschylus, who sitting in
deep meditation, an Eagle thinking his bald head had been a stone, let fall a
Tortois upon it, and so made a Tragical end of that noble Tragedian.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, Cheuron between three Eagles legs
erased.
a Cheuron between three Eagles Legs Erased, a la quise, Sable, their Tallons
Armed, Gules. To these Legs of Eagles, I hold it not unfit to adjoyne (for
company) three Ravens Legs, borne after another sort. The Raven was the Ensign
of the Danes when they invaded this Kingdom: whose whole bearing, you shall
find hereafter.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Ravens legs erased, Ravens
legs erased.
Sable, meeting in the Fesse-point, their Guly Tallons extended into the 3
acute corners of the Escocheon, by the name of Owen of Wales, the son of
Madock. The Raven has his name for his Rapine, whence other like Birds are
termed Ravenous; but his stomach is most showed on Dead carcasses, whereas
amongst Generous spirits, it is accounted base to be valiant amongst them that
cannot resist, or to hurt the name and reputation of the dead.

As the Terrestrial Animals have their peculiar actions and gestures, so
doubtless have Birds and Fowls their gesture according to their kind: for
sometime we find them born pearching, which action is more usual with Birds or
Fowls of Prey that are thoroughly mained and brought to the fist. As in this
example.

blazon or coat of armsHe bears, Gules, a bend Wavie Argent, in the Sinister
chief point a Falcon standing on a Perch, Or. This Coat pertains to the
Family of Hawkeridge of Hawkworthy in the County Devon.

Now, sithence we are come to treat of Fowls of Prey: Whereof (next to the
Eagle which is reckoned the Sovereign Queen of all Fowls, like as the Lion is
reputed the King of all Beasts) the Goshawk, the Falcon, the Ger-falcon, and
all other long winged Hawks; as also all Sparhawkes, Marlyons, Hobbeyes, and
other like small Fowls of Prey are the chief, it shall not be altogether
impertinent (though therein I do somewhat digress from my principal purpose,
if I give some litte touch of the propriety of terms commonly used of
Fawlconers in mannaging their Hawks, and things to them appurtenent, according
to the slenderness of my skill: always subscribing herein to the censure and
reformation of professed Fawlconers. The cause of this my digression, is the
desire I have to give some superficial taste unto Gentlemen of the terms of
Fawlconry; like as I have done, Chap. 14. of the terms of skillful Woodmen, or
Huntsmen. That so in their mutual conversing together, they may be able to
speak properly (though but superficially) and deliver their minds in apt
terms, when in their meetings they happen to fall into discourse of the noble
recreations and delights, either of our generous Armorial profession, or of
Hunting and Hawking; That so the standers by may say of them (when they shall
observe their skillful discourses) as old Father Simon said to Sofia his late
Bondsman, touching the delights of his Son Pamphilus, Ter. And.

Quod plerique omnes faciunt adolescentuli,
Vt animum ad aliquod studium adjungant, aut equos
Alere, aut canes ad venandum, aut ad Philosophos:
Horum ille nihil egregie praeter caetera
Studebat, and tamen omnia haec mediocriter.
It is an usual thing with the most part of young men, to delight themselves
either in pampering of Horses, or to cherish Dogs for hunting, or to addict
themselves to the study of Philosophy; he fixed not his delight in any one of
these more then another, yet was he meetly well seen in them all.

The terms of Fawlconry that I purpose to touch in this place, are briefly
these that follow:

First, a Hawk is said to Bate, when she striveth to fly from the fist.

She is said to Rabate, when by the motion of the bearers hand she recovereth
the fist.

You must say, Feed your Hawk, and not Give her meat.

A Hawk is said (after the has fed) she smites, or sweepeth her Beak, and not
wipeth her Beak or Bill.

By the Beak of an Hawk, is understood the upper part which is nooked.

The nether part of the Beak, is called the Hawks Clap.

The holes in the Hawks Beak, are called her Nares.

The yollow between the Beak and the Eyes, is called the Sere.

Hawks of long small black feathers like hairs about the Sere, are properly
called Crinites.

You must say, your Hawk, jouketh, and not sleeps.

Also your Hawk pruneth, and not picketh her self.

But your Hawk cannot be said properly to prune her self, but when she begineth
at her legs, and fetches moisture at her tail, wherewith she embalmeth her
feet, and strikes the feathers of her wings through her Beak.

Her fetching of the Oil, is called the Note.

Your Hawk is said to Rowse, and not shakes her self.

Sometime your Hawk countenances, when she picketh her self.

Then shall you not say, She pruneth her self, but that she reformeth her
feathers.

Your Hawk Collieth, and not Beaketh; your Hawk straineth, not clitcheth, or
snatcheth.

She mantleth, and not stretches, when she extends one of her wings along
after her legs, and so the other.

After she has thus mantled her self, she crosses her wings together over her
back, which action you shall term, the warbling of her wings, and say, She
warbleth her wings.

You shall say, your Hawk Mutesheth, or Muteth, and not skliseth.

You shall say, Cast your Hawk to the Perch, and not Set your Hawk upon the
Perch.

Furthermore, You shall say, She is a fair, long, short, thick Hawk, and not a
great Hawk.

Also you shall say, This Hawk has a large, or short Beak, but call it not a
Bill.

Also your Hawk is full gorged, and not cropped.

And that she has a fine head, or a small head well seasoned.

You shall say, Your Hawk puts over, and Endueth, but both of them in a
diverse kind.

She puts over, when she removes her meat from her Gorge, into her Bowels,
by traversing with her body, but chiefly with her Neck, as a Crane, or some
other Bird does.

She never Endueth, so long as her Bowels be full at her feeding: but as soon
as she has fed, and rests, she Endueth by little and little.

If her Gorge be void, and her Bowels any thing stiff, then shall you say, She
is emboweled, and has not fully endued.

So long as you find any thing in her Bowels, it is dangerous to give her meat.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Goshawk, Argent, A Goshawk upon a
Stock.
pearching upon a Stock, fixed in the Base Point of the Escocheon of the
second, Armed, Jessed, and Belled, Or, by the name of We Will, and is quartered
by Copleston of Egford. This Coat stands in Staverton Church in the County of
Devon: and it may represent some Bearer who was ready and serviceable for high
affairs, though he lived at rest, and not employed.

A Falcon on a Canton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Canton, Azure, a Falcon Volant,
with Jesses and Bells of the first, by the name of Thurston. This Foul has
her Tallons or Pounces inwardly crooked like a hook, and is called in Latin,
Falco (says Calepine) Non quod falcatis unguibus, sed quod rostro and aliis
tota falcata sit ad rapinam; because it has both Tallons, Beak, and all made
hooked for to prey. Upon calls her Alietus, saying, Alietus, (ut dicit Glossa
super, Deuteron. 14.) idem est quod falco. This Bird (according to the same
Author) is very bold and hardy, Alietus the same that we call Falcon.
and of great stomach, for she encountereth and grapleth with Fowls much
greater then her self, invading and assailing them with their breast and feet.
Others (says he) affirm, that Alietus is a little Foul that preyeth upon
small birds; of whom it is said, The property of the Falcon.
Obtinet exiguas Alietus corpore vires;
Sunt and aves minimae praeda cibusque suus:
The Aliet is a bird of little power;
And little birds are all he eats and does devour.


This bird (according to Vpton) does show that he that first took upon him the
bearing thereof, was such an one as did eagerly pursue, vex and molest poor and
silly creatures.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cheuron engrailed, between three
Falcons, or, Sparhawks, Or, This is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable,
Bulstrode Whitlock, one of the Commissioners of the Great Seal, and now of the
Treasureship of his Highness, 1658.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Sable, a Cheuron between three Owls,
Argent. This is the Coat Armor of Sir John Prescot, Knight. The Owl in
Armoury, signifies Prudence, Vigilance and Watchfulness by night; it is
Minerva's Bird, and was born by the ancient Athenians for their Armorial
Ensign, as I have before showed.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Sable, three Owls of
the first. This is the bearing of the Right Honorable, Thomas, Lord Savile of
Pomfret, Viscount Savile in Ireland, and created lastly Earl of Sussex. Of this
Family is also that hopeful Genleman, Sir George Savile Baronet, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron embattiled, between three
Owls, Argent, by the name of Sleigh of London, and was the Coat of Edmund
Sleigh Sheriff of London 1654. whose Widow is now Wife of the Honorable John
Ireton Lord Mayor.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Pelican in her nest, Four duties
of a Father.
with wings displayed, feeding of her young ones, Or, vulned proper, by the
name of Carne of Wenney in the County of Glamorgan. The Egyptian Priests (as
Farnesius notes) used the Pelican for a Hieroglyphick to express the four
duties of a Father toward his children: whereof the first is generation; the
second, is his office of education; the third of training up, or instruction of
learning; the fourth and last, this duty of informing the eyes of his children
with the example of his virtuous and honest life: for in the institution of
civil behavior, the eyes are more easily informed for the apprehension of
instruction, than the ear. This Bird was also borne Topaz, in a Field Sapphire,
by that Sapient and great Peer of his time, Richard Fox Bishop of Wincester,
Lord Privy Seal, A like borne by Fox Bishop of Winchester.
and Counselor to two Great Kings, Henry 7. and Henry 8. which noble Prelates
memory shall be eternally blessed for being the cause of the most happy
Marrying of the Lady Margaret (Daughter of Henry the Seventh) to James the
Fourth King of Scotland; by whose glorious issue, Great Brittany, now enjoys
the height of Glory and Happiness. The said Bishop was the Magnificent Founder
of Corpus Christi College in Oxford, which also bears the (...).

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Raven, Proper, by the name of Corbet.
This is good and ancient Armory, as we showed before in the Escocheon of the
Ravens three Legs: It has been an ancient received opinion, and the same also
grounded upon the warrant of the sacred Scriptures (If I mistake not) that such
is the property of the Raven, that from the time his young ones are hatched or
disclosed, until he sees what color they will be of, he never takes care of
them nor ministers any food unto them; therefore it is thought (...) the mean
space nourished with the heavenly dew. And (...) ^oth the Kingly Prophet David
affirm, Which gives fodder (...) and feeds the young Ravens that call upon
him, Psalm. 147.9. (...) of color black, and is called in Latin Corvus, or
Corax, and (...) Alexander) has but one kind of cry or sound which is Cras,
(...) perceives his young ones to be pen-feathered and black like (...) ^oth
he labor by all means to foster and cherish them from (...).

(...) his manner is clamorous, fraudulent, filching things away (...) ^^ding
them secretly; furthermore Alexander says, That Ravens do sometimes skirmish
amongst themselves with much eagerness, and do assail each other with their
Armors, viz. with jobbing with their bills, scratching with their Tallons, and
beating with their wings: in which conflict if the Hen do chance to have the
better of the Cock, she ever after holds him in subjection. But howsoever
they do coape together in their encounter, certain it is that the victor ever
after carries a hand over the conquered.

Hitherto of Fowls of Prey, leaving other particulars to each man's
observation: Now of those which are Predable, whereof some are Savage, some
Domestical: the Savage I call those that are not subject to man's government,
but do naturally shun their society, and usually are commorant in Woods,
Forests, Heaths, etc. and are subject to prey and tyrannical oppression, as
these which ensue.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, Gules, between six Cornish
Choughs, Proper, by the name of Oneslow of Surrey, and is borne by Sir Richard
Oneslow Knight, Father of that much esteemed Gentleman Arthur Oneslow Esquire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Bend, Or, on a Chief, Argent, two
Choughes, Proper, this is the Coat of Sir Thomas Vinor, Lord Mayor of London
1653. Knighted by Oliver Lord Protector, at Grocers Hall, Feb. 8. 1653. and the
first Knight he made.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Bust^ (...) name of Nevill.
These cannot p^ (...) volant, albeit they may seem t^ (...) more aptly said,
according to the (...) zo^ers to be volentes volare, as mu^ (...) ^ring
themselves to make their flig^ (...) ^tion of Pliny that all Fowls having to
(...) their flight) stretch forth their legs Tails; but such as are short
legged (...) to the midst of their bodies.

Swallows Proper.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Swallows close (...) name of
Watton. This bird is the most (...) benger, showing the approach of the p^
(...) being therein like feined and temporizing (...) in the Spring of Honors,
and Summer o^ (...) will gladly converse with those, whom (...) of Adversity
they will forsake, and sca^ (...) ^ledge they ever saw them before. Su^ (...)
that proud Cardinal, who upon his new dignity, not vouch-safing to look on his
familiar friends, one of them came to him (while all others did congratulate
his felicity) to deplore his misery; who wondering thereat, and asking the
cause of such his sorrow, Because (quoth he) since that Red H^t came on your
Head, you have quite lost your Eyesight, and cannot discern your friends as
you were wont.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, A Bar between three Swallows.
a Bar between three Swallows volant, Proper, a Chief, Gules, by the name of
Swallow. The Swallow (says Vpton) has a small bill and comely shape of a
seemly black, white on the belly, and red about the throat, having little
flesh, out well stored with feathers, and large wings, and therefore is swift
of flight. Man's industry will hardly suffice to perform that which this little
bird does fashion out in clay, in making her Nest. The bearing of a Swallow
fitteth well a man that is industrious, prompt, and ready in the dispatch of
his business.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a bend, Bend Cotized between six
Martlets.
Argent, Cotized, Or, between six Martlets of the same. This Coat Armor
pertains to the ancient Family of de Labere, whereof Richard de Labere of
Sowtham in the County of Gloucester Esquire, is lineally descended. The Martlet
or Martinet (says Bekenhawb) has legs exceeding short, that they can by no
means go: and thereupon it seems the Grecians do call them Apodes, quasi sine
pedibus, not because they do want feet, Martlet has little use of her feet.
but because they have not such use of their feet as other birds have. And if
perchance they fall upon the ground, they cannot raise themselves upon their
feet as others do, and so prepare themselves to flight. For this cause they are
accustomed to make their Nests upon Rocks and other high places, from whence
they may easily take their flight, by means of the support of the air. Martlet
why given to the fourth brother.
Hereupon it came that this bird is painted in Arms without feet: and for this
cause it is also given for a difference of younger brethren to put them in mind
to trust to their wings of virtue and merit, to raise themselves, and not to
their legs, having little land to put their foot on.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXI.
FRom Predable Fowls that are Savage, we come to Fowls Domestical and
home-br d, Fowls domestical.
that are delighted with Man's society: Such are these that follow, with their
like. And of these I think the Dove as the Emblem of peace, mutual love and
other virtues, may deserve the precedence.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, on a Chief, Or, three Martlets,
Gules, by the name of Wray, a worthy Family in Lincolnshire, of which is Sir
John Wray Baronet, son and heir of Sir John Knight and Baronet, son and heir of
Sir William Wray of Glentworth in Lincolnshire* Knighted July 23. 1603. created
Baronet November 25. 1611. son of Sir Christopher Wray Lord chief Justice of
England, which Sir William had also a second son Sir Christopher Wray, Knighted
1623. and he William his son and heir.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, an Inescocheon within an Urle of
Martlets, Sable, and is the Coat of Sir John Brownlow of Belton, and Sir
William Brownlow of Homby in the County of Lincoln Brethren, Baronets.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, and Chief, Sable, on the
last three Martlets of the Field, by the name of Wild, and is the Coat of that
Eminent Lawyer William Wild.

blazon or coat of arms He beearth, Gules, a Fesse, Ermine, between three
Martlets, Or, and is the Coat of the Family of Covert of Sussex and Surrey of
good Eminence and Antiquity.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Fesse, Counter-battilee, Or,
three Choughs, Proper, by the name of Christmas, and is the Coat Armor of
William and Robert Christmas of London, Merchant Adventurers.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Chief, Azure, three Doves Argent.
This is the Coat of John Frederick Esquire, Alderman of London.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Cocks, The Cock Knight amongst
birds. His Armor.
Argent, Armed, Crested, and Vellopped, Or, by the name of Cock, As some
account the Eagle the Queen, and the Swallow or Wagtail the Lady, so may I term
this the Knight amongst Birds, being both of noble courage, and also prepared
evermore to the battle, having his Comb for an Helm^t, his sharp and hooked
Bill for a Fawcheon or Court-l^ to flash and wound his enemy: and as a complete
Soldier armed a Cape a pee, he has his legs armed with Spurs, giving example
to the valiant Soldier to expel danger by fight, and not by flight. The Cock
croweth when he is Victor and gives a testimony of his Conquest. The Cock most
properly said to be Armed.
If he be vanquished, he shunneth the light and society of men. Of all Birds,
this may best be said in blazon to be armed, that is thus furnished and
prepared to the encounter.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Capons, Sab^e, Armed,
Crested, and Jow-lopped, Or, by the name of Capenhurst. I do term these Capons
Armed, Capons why said to be A^med.
because Natura sunt bellicosi, tametsi castratione facti sunt omnino imbelles,
by nature they were Valorous, though by reason of their Kerving, their courage
is not only abated, but utterly taken away. This Bird, because he waxes the
fatter for being kerved, is brought for one of the Arguments to prove the
single life the happiest, and that Caeli^es are Coelites: the single life, the
Saint-like life. But Lipsius must bring better witnesses then Capons to approve
the truth hereof, before it will be received for truth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Peacocks in their pride,
Three Peacocks.
Proper, by the name of Pawn. The Peacock is so proud, that when he erecteth
his Fan of Plumes, he admireth himself; and some write that he swalloweth up
his Excrements, because he envieth man the use thereof: Indeed those which are
most proud, are generally of such sluttish and dirty qualities. He displayeth
his Plumes against the rays of the Sun, that they may glister the more
gloriously; and he loses this beautiful Train yearly, with the fall of the
leaf; at which time he becomes bashful, and seeks corners where he may be
secret from the sight of men, until the Spring of the year, when his Train
begineth to be renewed. And such is the quality of many Dames, who being
painted, and richly attired, cannot keep within doors, but being undressed, and
in their own hew, they are loath any man should see them.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cross Gules, between four
Peacocks, Azure, being the Coat Armor of Smith, alias Carington of
Leicestershire, of which Family is Charles Smith, Viscount Carington, of
Barrefore in Ireland, and also Henry Smith, alias, Nevil, of Cressingtemple in
Essex.

A cheuron between three Turkicocks.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between three
Turkicocks in their pride, Proper, by the name of Yeo of Devonshire.

Like as there are Insect Animals that live upon the earth, as has been before
showed in shutting up the Tract of Terrestrial Animals; so are there in like
sort Insects that live above the earth, whereof I purpose to produce some few
examples, and so to perclose this Treatise of such Animals as do live above the
Earth in the Air.

Three Bees volant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Bees, Volant, En arriere, by
the name of Bye. The Be, I may well reckon a Domestic Insect, being so
pliable to the behoof of the Keeper: the admirable policy and regiment of whose
Commonwealth, both in Peace and War, with the several duties, both of the
sovereign Be, and of the subjects, is beyond belief, and will ask as large a
Volume as the Commonwealth, either Platoes or Licurgus, to set it forth as it
deserves.

These small and slender bodies, are endued with a perfect soul (if I may so
say) as by the effects appears; for they do not only live and engender, but
also have the use of the senses, as sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
feeling, no less than other Volatiles, or flying Animals, and in some of them
we may observe a singular sharpness of Wit, and (to speak with Solomon)
fullness of Wisdom; as in these Bees, and such others. Great is the Lord
therefore that made them, and right mavelous also is he in all his works, who
has given this fullness of Wisdom to these contemptible creatures

The Be is reputed to be of a doubtful kind, in regard that it is uncertain,
whether he may be fitly numbered amongst the Savage or Domestical kind of
Animals; therefore they are reckoned his that has obtained the possession of
them, according to our vulgar speech, Catch that catch may: they are said to
be, ferae naturae, therefore the Bees that do swarm on your trees, until you
have gathered them into an Hive, they are no more reckoned yours, then the
birds that do build their nests in your tree: but being once Hived, they cease
to be public, and shall be adjudged the possessors, though he be not
interessed in the ground. And till then, it is lawful for any man to take the
Honey-combes, if they have any at all. Also a swarm escaped out of your Hives
is no longer reckoned yours, then you have them in sight, and it is lawful for
you, so long to prosecute them; but if they fly out of your sight, Fiunt
occupantis.

The Egyptians reckoned the Be, a figure of Regal power, because in him
(besides the nature of bruit Animals) he is constituted a King that
administreth his function (as it were) by deep counsel, forasmuch as he is
void of sting, and governs his Hive as his commonwealth altogether by lenity.

If a Be sting a dead carkase she loses not her sting; but if she sting a
living man she loses her sting: So death stinging us who were as dead flesh,
did not lose his sting: But stinging Christ, has lost his sting. Therefore we
may say, O death where is thy sting? etc. 1 Cor. 15.
1 Cor. 15. death has only the name of death, but not the sting of death, as
the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness had the form and shape of a Serpent, but
not the life nor sting of a Serpent, Numb. 21.9. Numb. 21.9.


blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Bee-Hive, Bee-Hive.
beset with Bees diversely volant, Sable, by the name of Rooe of Makelesfield in
Cheshire. The Be (says the Wiseman) is the least of Birds, but she is of much
virtue; and she provideth both Honey for Pleasure, and Wax for thrift. And not
only do they carefully preserve their own petty-state, but by their labors do
much sway in all humane states and policies also: as is said in that verse.

The Calf, the Goose, the Be;
The World is ruled by these three.
Meaning that Wax, Pens, and Parchment sway all men's states, Bees have three
properties of the best kind of Subjects, they stick close to their King; they
are very industrious for their livelihood, expelling all idle drones, they will
not sting any but such as first provoke them, and then they are most fierce.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, A harvest-flye.
a Harvest-fly in Pale, volant, en arriere, Argent, by the name of Bolowre. As
touching Insects that live above the Earth in the Air, Pliny gives this
general note; Note general.
that all such as are armed with a sting, in their body or tail, have four
wings a piece: and no^ ^gain have above two, that carry their weapon in their
mouth. To the former (says he) nature has given it for their revenge, to the
other only to feed themselves withal, and to content nature. All Insects
(says the same Author) having hard eyes, have their fore-feet longer than the
rest, to the end that with them they may other whiles scour their eyes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, Three Gad-Bees volant.
three Gad-bees volant, en arriere, Argent, by the name of Burninghill. This
Fly makes a great humming noise when he flies, and of some is called the
Gad-bee, and of others the Dun-flye, Brimsey, or Horse-flye, which in the
Summer time do grievously vex Cattle, having, as Aelianus says, a sting both
great and stiff. These are of the nature of Common Barrators, Petti-foggers,
and Promooters, which are ever disturbing the quiet state of their civil and
honest neighbors.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXII.
Watery Animals.
HAving finished our intended survey of Animals, both Terrestrial and Aeriall,
and of their use in Armory; I will now (according to order) proceed to the
handling of watery Animals, being such as have their principal abode and
relief in the waters, as Fishes of all sorts. As Fishes are of a less complete
nature than Earthly or Aeriall Animals, so must they in reason be of less
esteem in Coat Armor; Data paritate gestantium, unless the quality of the
bearer add an honor thereto: because those others do approach much nearer to
the nature of man, than the watery sort does; Et i^lud est melius, quod optimo
est propinquius; That is the better, which comes nearest to the best. And the
Picture which is the adumbration of the thing pictured, cannot invert or alter
the order or worth of the things whereof it bears the similitude, Quia fictio
non plus operatur quam veritas; representations may not alter the truth of the
principal.

Enobled by the bearers dignity.
But her^ spoke of Arms composed of Fishes, as they are considered in their
self-nature; which notwithstanding as they be borne of many persons des^ded of
noble and royal Families, are so much enoblished in their estimation, as that
they are to be preferred before many that are formed of Beasts or Fowls. This
therefore must be here also recommended for a general rule, Rule general.
that the worthiness of the bearer is not the least respect we should use in
considering the dignity of things borne in Coat Armor.

Like as Birds have their plumes, wings, and trains, by means whereof they do
cut their way, and make smooth passage through the Air; in like sort, Fishes
are furnished with Finnes, wherewith they guide themselves in their Swimming,
and cut the current of the streams and waves, for their more easy passage,
wherein their course is directed by their tail, as Ships are conducted by their
Helm or Ruther. And for their kinds of motion, Fishes are in Scripture termed
Reptilia: Psalm. 154.25.
In ipso magno Mari and spatioso, illic reptilia sunt, etc. In the great and
wide Sea there are things creeping innumerable both small and great* which are
therefore said to be Reptilia, as Chassaneus notes, Qui^ ^mnia quae natant
reptandi habent vel speciem, vel naturam: because things when they swim seem to
creep along in the water.

Fishes, albeit they have not breath (as we may say in a comparative sort) so
strong and sensible as four-footed Animals have, because they want lungs or
lights, as Aristotle has taught; yet it behooves they should have both
Attraction and Respiration of breath in some fashion, which we call in Latin,
Inspiratio, which is a drawing in of breath, and Respiratio which is a venting
out of the breath attracted, as both Plato and Galen do teach; who do affirm
that Fishes do receive and deliver their breath by their gils; For no longer is
any Animal said to have life, than he has attraction and remission of breath.

Whereas Moses makes mention Genesis 2.19, 20. That God caused all the Beasts of
the field, and the Fowls of Heaven to come unto Adam, that he might see how he
would name them: there is no mention of the coming of Fishes unto him, neither
that he gave names to them. The reason is, for that such is the nature of
Fishes, as that they cannot live long out of their proper element which is the
Water. Besides fishes do serve men for no other use, but for food and some
sorts of them for medicine; whereof it comes that we have not so many names
of fishes mentioned in the Scriptures, as of other Animals. For these reasons
Fishes were not produc^ before Adam, that he might give them names answerable
to their natures. Nevertheless God gave him Dominion over them as well as over
the rest, when he said Dominamini piscibus maris, etc.

Hereof it comes that man has less familiarity and acquaintance with Fishes
than with many other Animals, as Horses, Dogs, small birds of many kinds,
which we daily use, either to serve our necessities or for our delights.

Fishes are borne after a diverse manner, Manner for their bearing.
viz. directly, upright, inbowed, extended, indorsed, Respecting each other,
Surmounting one another, Fretted, and Trianguled, etc. All Fishes (says Leigh)
that are borne feeding shall be termed blazon, devouring, because they do
swallow whole without mastication or chewing: and you must tell whereon they
feed. All Fishes raised directly upright, and having Finnes, shall be termed
in blazon Hauriant, ab hauriendo, signifying to draw or suck ^cause Fishes do
oftentimes put their heads in such sort above the wa^ (...) ^fresh themselves
with the cool and temperate Air, but especia^ (...) waters do so rage and
boil in the depth of the Seas against some ^ous storm, that they cannot
endure the unwonted heat thereof. ^es being borne Transverse, the Escocheon
must in blazon be termed Naiam, of the word Nato, (...) swim; for in such
manner do they bear themselves in the waters when they swim.

Concerning both the variety and the innumerable multitude of Fishes Pliny is
of a prettey fantastical conceit, affirming that the seeds and universal
Elements of the World, are so sundry ways commixed one with another, partly by
the blowing of the winds, and partly by the rolling and agitation of the Sea,
that it may be truly said, according to the vulgar opinion, That whatsoever is
engendered or bred in any part of the world besides, the same is to be found in
the Sea, besides many things more in it, which no where else are to be seen. A
Fish (if you will believe Farnesius) i^ called piscis a pascendo, Quia ad rem
nullam nisi ad pastum natus est, he ^bred only to eat and to be eaten.
Derivation.
Of Fishes some have hard and crusty coverings, others have a softer outside:
and those latter are also of two s^rts, some having only skin, and other
scales. Scaled Fishes by their fins are both adorned, and greatly assisted also
in their swimming: but Congers, Eeles, Lampreies, and such like, may seem (in
respect of the smalnesse of their fins) to have received them of nature, rather
for ornament, Fishes Scaled what.
than for use in swimming, especially because these lie most in the bottom of
the waters, and therefore less need their fins.

Of these several kinds I will briefly give some few examples, wherein I
rather purpose to lay open their diverse forms of Bearing in Coat Armor, than
meddle with their unlimitable particular kinds: as in example.

Three Eeles naiant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Eeeles Naiant in Pale,
Barrey, Sable, by the name of Ellis. Of this sort are all Lampries, Congers,
and others of like kind, whereof some are borne Naiant after this manner, and
others H^uriant. This sort of all others does most nearly resemble in their
motions, such Reptiles as having no feet do with a kind of volublenesse make
their way in the waters with many intricate doublings. To these may be added
Plaices, Soles, Flounders, and whatsoever other Fish whose covering consists
merely of skin, and have not the defensible furniture of Scales, such as next
ensue, as in example.

Soles.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Soles fishes Hauriant, Proper, within a Bordure engrailed, Sable. This Coat
pertains to the Family of Soles of Braban in the County of Cambridge. These
Arms are agreeable to the Bearers name, which happen very of^ Armory, for
diverse men taking their names fr^^ (...) Birds, Fowls, or Fishes, do bear
Coat-a^^ (...) ^lant thereunto. This fish is known unto t^^^^ (...) by three
names, Solea, a similitudine Soleae, i. (...) sole: Sandalium, which comes
from the Gree^ (...), or (...), a kind of shoe open with latchets on the
instep: Lingu^aca, quod formam linguae referat: The French call this (...), Vne
sole: the delicateness of it in taste has gained it the name of the Partridge
of the Sea.

Dolphin naiant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Dolphin Naiant, Imbowed, Argent,
by the name of Fitz-James. The Dolphin is a fish of so great strength and
swiftness, that when the fishes, which he follows for his prey, fly to the
Rocks or Shore for shelter, in the fierceness of his pursuit, he sometimes
dasheth himself dead against the Rock, and sometimes runs himself on Shore.
Such many times is the success of over-heady and outrageous men, who seeking
furiously the hurt of others, feel the smart themselves, in their own
overthrow.

Dolphin hauriant.
blazon or coat of arms The field is Jupiter, a Dolphin hauriant, Sol. This
Coat is evermore borne quarterly with the three Flowers de Lis, Sol, in a
field, Jupiter, by the Kings Eldest Son, who bears the title of the Dolphin
of France; and is thereby known to be Heir apparent to the Crown of that
Kingdom. The Naturalists write, that the She-Dolphin has dugs abounding with
milk wherewith she gives her young ones suck; and that she is, as in that
respect like to women, so also in her affection of love; insomuch that Dolphins
have fallen so exceedingly in love with fair youths, as that they became most
familiar with them, and afterward wanting their company, have dyed for grief.
They are reported also to be great lovers of Music.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Dolphins Naiant, Dolphins
Naiant.
extended in Pale, Barrey, Or. This is a Venetian Coat Armor, and is borne by
the name of Dolphin. These Dolphins here are in their natural form of
swimming, wherein they use to marshall their great troops in admiring order:
Their order observed in swimming.
for in the vantguard swim all their young ones, in the middle all the Females,
in the rear-ward all the Males; like good Husbands, looking both to the orderly
demeanor of their wives and children, and also having them still in their eye,
to defend them from danger.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three
Dolphins naiant, imbowed, Argent; This is the Paternal Coat Armor of Samuel
Bleverhasset, of Lowdham in the County of Suffolk, Esquire. The Dolphin is said
to be a fish of such exceeding great swiftness, as that oftentimes he
out-strippeth a Ship under sail, in her greatest ruff and merriest wind, in
swiftness of course. In this fish is proposed unto us an example of charity,
and kind affection toward our children, as Pliny in his description of the
nature of ^ish shows, Lib. 9. Cap. 8. And Aelianus lib. 5. cap. r8. As also
of ^lar love toward man, whereof Aelianus produces strange exam^ To this Head
must be referreed all other Fishes of hard scale, as the (...) etc. Other
scaled Fishes there are, but of a more soft and tender ^h as these are which
ensue.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Salmons Hauriant, Three
Salmons Hauriant.
Argent, by the name of Salmon. If Apicius (whose tongue was a touchstone to
try the excellency of all dishes) were to give his sentence in the Senate House
of Gluttons, it is thought he would prefer the Salmon before all other fishes,
though the old Romans made chief reckoning of Acipenser, a fish of an
unnatural making and quality, for his scales turn all toward the head, and
he ever swimmeth against the stream. The fish Acipenser.
These three Salmons here were very fair bearing in a great Charger (...).
Fishes are borne hauriant, both respecting each other, and also en^ as in these
next Examples.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, two Barbels hauriant, Two Barbels
respecting each other.
respecting each other, Argent. A like Coat to this (but different in colors)
is borne by the Family of Colston of Essex. This fish even in his name
bewrays his shape, which gave occasion thereof, by reason of the small and
tender filmes that grow about his mouth, resembling after a sort the form of a
Beard, whereupon he receives the name of a Barbell.

Two pikes hauriant Endorsed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, two Pikes, hauriant endorsed, Or.
This Coat is quartered by the high and mighty Prince the now Duke of
Wittenberg, for his fourth Coat, and are the Arms of the dominion of Phiert,
within the Territories of the said Duke. Sometimes you shall find fishes borne
fret-wayes, that is to say, fretted or interlaced one over another, as in this
next example.

Trouts fretted in Triangle.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Trouts Fretted in Triangle*
Test a la Queve, Argent, by the name of Trowtbeck. We use these words Test a
la Queve, in Blazon, to signify the manner of their Fretting. The Heir of
this Family was in the time of Henry 7. married to John Talbotte of Albrighton,
from whom the Talbots of Grafton now living, are lineally descended, and do
Quarter this Coat.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Pale, Sable, a C^ head
erected, Coupee, Or, borne by the anci^ (...) ^mily of Goscoigne of Harwood,
and Gawthorpe (...) shire.

Three Chalbots.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Chalbots hauriant, (...) This did
belong to that worthy Earl Philip C^ Earl of Newblanch, and great Admiral of
(...) whom King Henry the Eighth vouch-safed t^ Knight, and companion of the
most noble O^ the Garter. A Chalbot fish seems to have the (...) of a
Gournard, for so does Bara describe him.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXIII.
Scales of Fishes not continuate.
THE Hardness of Scaly fish (whereof we have before spoken) is not Continuate,
but Plated fitting for Motion; but there is another sort of hard covering,
whieh is continuate: Of which sort, some are crusted, other some are shelled,
as Examples shall show.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Cheuron between three
Crevices.
Sable, between three Crevices upright, Gules. I term these upright, because
they wanting fins cannot without breach of the Rule formerly given be properly
said to be Hauriant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Bend, Or, a Lobster, A Lobster
upon a Bend.
Sable. Gongulo Argote de Molina, In his book entitled Nobleza de Andalviza,
notes this for the Coat Armor of Grilla. It is noted by certain Naturalists,
that the Lobst^r is subtle in acquiring his food, for he watches the
Escallop, Oyster, and other like fishes that are fenced by nature with a
stronger and more defensible Coat than himself, to become a prey unto him, by
observing when they do open their shell either to receive food or air, and in
the mean time with his (...) he takes a stone, and casts it between the
shells of the Oyster, so (...) neither save her self, nor annoy her foe; using
his wit for a sup^^^s strengths defect, according to the old proverb, Where
the Ly^^^ is too scant, it must be peeced out with a Fox case.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Lobsters paws.
a Lobsters Claw in Bend Sinister, Saltire-like, surmounted of another
Dexterwayes, Gules, by the name of Tregarthick. Those other Fishes which are
said to be shelled, and are naturally enclosed in strong and thick walls, do
dilate and open their shells at certain seasons, either to receive the benefit
of the air, or of food: and again contract them (at their pleasure) and so
defend themselves from all harm and violence. Of these, the Shells are of most
frequent use in Arms, (...) diversely borne, as well with Ordinaries between
them, as (...) upon Ordinaries, as by Example in the next Escocheons in part
^ppeare.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Barry Wavey of six, Or, and Gules, three
Prawnes naiant in the first and of the second, by the name of Sea, alias, Atsea
of Herne in Kent.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron ingrailed, Sable* between
three Sea crabs, Gules, by the name of Bridger. It is an observation amongst
Fishermen, that when the Moon is in her Decrement or Wane (as we commonly call
it) these sort of Fishes have little or no substance at all in them, which
moves them to forbear to fish for them in that season, in regard that the Moon
is the natural and secondary cause, that the Crabs of the Sea are either full
and plum, or else sheare and (after a sort) empty.

The claws of the fore-feet of this sort of fish are called forcipata brachia
Cancrorum, of forceps, which signifies a pair of Tongs or Pincers, or such
like, alluding to their quality, which is to pinch and hold fast whatsoever
they do seize upon.

Escallop shell Gules.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, an Escallop Shell, Gules, by the
name of Prelate. This Coat stands in the Abbey Church of Chirencester within
the County of Gloucester, and seems to have been of long continuance there.
The Escallop (according to Dioscorides) is engendered of the Dew and Air, The
nutritive quality of the Escallop.
and has no blood at all in it self, notwithstanding in man's body (of any
other food) it turns soonest into blood. The eating of this fish ra^ is said
to cure a surfeit.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Cheuron, Ermine, b^ 3 Escallops,
Argent, this is the Coat Armor (...) worthy and noble Gentleman Sir Horatio
(...) Baronet, son of Sir Roger Townesend, so crea^ (...) 16. 1617. by Mary
Daughter and Co-heire (...) Vere Baron of Tilbury, who is re-married to M^
Earl of Westmerland, and has by him several ^dren

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Pearl, a Lion Rampant, Ruby* (...) Chief,
Diamond, three Escallop Shells of the first (...) is the Paternal Coat of the
Right Noble and (...) Family of the Russels, Earl of Bedford. Such (...)
beautiful shape that nature has bestowed up^ (...) shell, as that the Collar
of the Order of S. Mic^ France, in the first institution thereof, was richl^
^nished with certain pieces of gold artificially wro^ as near as the Artificer
could by imitation exp^ the stamp of Nature.

Which institution doubtless was grounded upon great reason, to show the
steadfast amity and constant fidelity, that ought to be between brethren and
companions of one society and brotherhood: for take one of these fishes and
divide the shells, and endeavor to sort them with (I will not say hundreds) but
millions of other shells of fishes of the same kind, and you shall never match
them throughout: therefore do they resemble the in dissoluble friendship that
ought to be in fraternities and societies, because there can be according to
Cicero, Offic. 1. Nulla firma Amicitia nisi inter aequales. The consideration
whereof (if I be not deceived) moved the first Founders of this Order to sort
them in the collar of this order by couples, for that all others do disagree
with them, Secundum magis vel minus, and none do concur together with them in
all points, but only those that nature has conformed, and made agreeable to
each other in all points.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, six Escallop shells, Six Escallops.
Or, three, two, and one, by the name of Escott of Cornwall. Here I think it
fit to note out of the number and position of the Charge of this Coat Armor
two things: the one concerning the number which you see is six, which some
Armorists hold to be the best of Even and Articulate numbers, that can be borne
in one Eseocheon; their reason is, because none other even number under ten,
can decrease in every rank, one, to the base point of the Escocheon, and
produce an odd one in the same point. Next touching this manner of the
Position of this number; which suteth most aptly with the figure of a
Triangular Escocheon, as in the Elements of Armories, page 181. is observed.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Bend between six Escallops,
Argent, by the name of Frechevile, a Family of very good account and antiquity
in Darbishire.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, on a Fesse, Azure, 3 Escallop
shells of the first, a Bordure engrailed, as the second, in chief, a Cressant,
Gules, for a difference of a second brother. This is the Coat Armor of that
worthy gentleman John Fenne; one of the Captains of the City of London: MS. M.
1^. fol. 116.
I read in a French Manuscript remaining in the Office of Arms, to this
effect, that in bearing of the Escallop in Arms signifies the first bearer of
such Arms to have been a Commander, who by his virtues and valor had so
gained the hearts and loves of his Soldiers and Companions in Arms, that they
desired much to follow him even into dangers mouth, and that he in
reciprocation of their loves had ventred to sacrifice himself for their
safeguards.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, ten Escallops, Ten Escallops.
4.3.2.1. Sable, on a Canton, Gules, a Mullet pierced, Or, by the name of
Kingscot, in the County of Gloucester. I do here Blazon the charge to be ten
Escallops, although there be but eight to be discerned; for such was the Coat
before the addition of the super^acent Canton, Rule.
which as it is indended, does over-shadow those other two that are not seen.

A Heron volant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Heron volant, in Fesse, Azure,
membred, Or, between three Escallops, Sable, by the name of Herondon. Here
also you see one gesture of a Foul volant, in the carriage of his legs, which
was not before exemplified. Pliny says, that all Fowls that stalk with long
shanks, as they fly they do stretch out their legs, in length to their tails;
but such as are short legged, do draw them up to the midst of their bellies.

A Fesse between three Welks.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse engrailed between three
Welkes, Or, by the name of Shelley. of which family is Sir Charles Shelley
Baronet, and also Thomas Shelley of Greys-Inne Esquier, Who so shall advisedly
view the infinite variety of Natures workmanship, manifest even in the very
shells of Fishes; shall doubtless find just cause to glorify God, and admire
his Omnipotency and Wisdom, showed in these things of meanest reckoning. To
this head must be reduced all other Shell fishes, of what kind soever, that are
enclosed with hard Shells.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXIV.
A Transition from things unreasonable.
WE have long insisted in the bearings of Animals or Living Creatures
Unreasonable, distinguishing them according to their Kinds, sorting them into
several Ranks, placing them under Sundry Heads, exemplifying their manifold
Use and Forms of Bearing in Coat Armor, to the end that they might give
better life and warrant to such Rules and Observations, as concerning them are
formerly given. The last place I have here reserved, to the most Noble creature
and first in estimation, I mean, Man, Man the Noblest of Gods creatures.
whom God has endued with a reasonable Soul, and for whose sake he created
all other things, subjecting them to his Soveraigntie, that they should serve
Man, and Man should serve God. Thou have given him (says David) Soveraigntie
over all the Works of thy hands, and have put all things in subjection under
his feet; all Sheep and Oxen; and all Beasts of the Field, the Fowls of the
Air and Fishes of the Sea, etc. For God made Man in his own Image, not only
in giving him an Understanding soul, and an Holy will, but also a Sovereign
jurisdiction over these inferior creatures; even as Kings are the Image of
God, in a more peculiar manner, because God has given them Soveraigntie over
Men: Neither is the Beauty of the Body it self lightly to be regarded; whose
admirable Proportions and uses, made Galen (an Heathen) to acknowledge the
Infinite Wisdom of an Eternal Creator: And that Godly King to break out into
terms of Admiration, saying, Thine eyes did see my substance yet being
unperfect, and in thy book were all my members written, which day by day were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. Inasmuch as we are now come to
treat of man the most excellent of all Gods creatures, and for whose sake all
things else were created. Let us take a considerate view of the order of the
Creation, and we shall find many forcible motives to stir us up to the
glorifying of our gracious God, that has so graciously and abundantly provided
for our sustentation and maintenance before we were yet created: that so we
may be provoked with more circumspection and regard to meditate upon Gods
admirable omnipotency, mercy and gracious providence, and be induced more
regardfully to ponder and consider the inexplicable glory of the Heavens, and
their most beautiful Ornaments, the fruitfullnesse and riches of the Earth,
the infinite variety of shapes, olours, qualities, and operations of Animals
and vegetables; of all which there is not the least; or whatsoever we hold most
contemptible, but will minister unto us just cause to glorify Gods
omnipotency, mercy, and wisdom.

Man as touching his body has a three-fould estate, viz. Esse in Creatione,
Non esse, in Morte, Semper esse in Resurrectione.
God has created man and placed him in this world, to the end he should be a
diligent searcher, viewer, and beholder of all his works, and withal that he
should not be only a Spectator, but also a serious and zealous Enarrator of his
infinite wisdom, power, and mercy, in that he has most powerfully created
them, most wisely disposed them, and most providentially conserveth them in
their several ranks and subordinate places and offices.

But when we speak of man, we must not understand him to be that outward form
or lineaments of body, that is subjected to our visible sense; but the mind of
each man is the man indeed, not that part of him that may be demonstrated by
pointing of the finger.

The mind of man penetrateth and passes through all things in a moment, more
swiftly then the stars, more speedy then imagination, yea with more celerity
than time it self.

So great is the estate and dignity of man's condition and nature, as that there
is no good can suffice him, but the chiefest and only good of all.

The Soul of man is of a Divine nature, Dignity of man's soul.
and therefore immortal and eternal, he ascends up by degrees evermore, and
never cease until he attain divine and celestial things: Which nature and
property is not found in any creature but in man only.

God indeed has created man of an upright stature, with his countenance raised
up toward heaven, Man of an upright stature why so created.
whereas he has given all other Animals a grovelling countenance, fixed upon
the Earth: whereby he would notify, that man's soul is a Celestial thing, and
that his ultimum bonum is in heaven; that heaven is his Country, that there is
his everlasting habitation, if he love his God, and become pliant and obedient
unto his divine will.

Plato calls man the miracle of God; Man an epitome of the whole world.
for, says he, man is endued with the force of nature of the World. For what
is the world, but an universality of things compacted together in the form of
a Sphere? And what is man, but a compendium or epitome of the universality of
things? Therefore was he not misnamed by Aristotle, when he called him a little
world: For he understands with the Angels, he has sense with living
creatures, he communicates of food, growth and generation with plants, and
finally he has being with all the Elements, and retains with the world the
form of a Sphere. For as Julius Solinus says, look how much breadth a man has
when he extends his hands to the full, so much is his length from the crown
to the heel: So as if you draw a circle about him, you shall comprehend him
within the form of a compassed Sphere.

Moses speaking of the particular works of God in his creation before he had
created man, says, Ea visa fuisse Deo bona; but after he had created man and
all things pertaining to his sustentation and preservation, as also all things
behovefull for the propagation of all mankind prepared, then did he take a
general view and survey of the whole Fabric of the world, Et Deo visum
fuisse valde bonum: They were exceeding, that is, so perfect good in the
highest degree, as nothing could be wished to be added thereto for the
bettering thereof.

As touching the food allotted to man, at the first it is most certain that
the same was herbs and fruits, as appears Genesis 1.29. Ecce dedi vobis omnem
herbam, etc. And God said, Behold I have given unto you every herb bearing
seed, which is upon all the earth: and every tree, wherein is the fruit of a
tree bearing seed, that shall be to you for meat. That is to say, (says
Zanchius) multam, amplissimam, suavissimam and utilissimam; In great plenty,
abundant, most delicate and most wholesome; herewith shall ye be satisfied and
contented without seeking after other food.

These three things (says Zanchius) are most certain; first, that before the
flood, both herbs and fruits of trees were so wholesome and good as that man
needed no other food; in regard whereof there was no need that the eating of
flesh should be permitted unto him. Secondly, it is also undoubtedly true, that
after the flood the earth was so corrupted by the inundation thereof, and
consequently man's body became so weakened, that he stood in need of more solid
and strong nourishing meats; as the flesh of Oxen, Kine, Sheep, etc. In
regard, whereof God gave him permission to use them for food. Thirdly, this
also is without all controversy, that God did not prohibit unto man any sorts
of meats, because all things are clean to the clean: as also for that every
creature of God is good, because they are sanctified by his Word.

Of the mixture and composition of the four Elements before mentioned; and of
the humors of them, and of them engendered, two principal parts of matters of
our bodies have their being, viz. Our bones with their nerves or sinews,
wherewith they be conjoined and knit, and our flesh with the veins, whereby
the blood is conveied throughout all parts of the body, together with her
Arteries, whereby the vital and Animal spirits are carried into every part
and member thereof.

These two parts did Adam well express, when speaking of Eve he said, Haec est
os ex ossibus meis, and caro de carne mea. First, he makes mention of bone, as
the more solid and substantial part, and as it were the fundamental part of
the whole body, and after of the flesh, as of the matter wherewith the bones
are covered.

To these two parts there is annexed a skin, wherewith the whole frame of the
body (being united and knit together) is covered, and wherein it is
comprehended and contained: and this skin is not scaly, such as is proper to
Fishes, neither feathered after the manner of Fowls, neither hairy and rugged,
as many sorts of Beasts are, neither thick-skinned as many bruit Animals have,
but a soft tender skin, and of a delicate touch, and such as may well beseem
such a mind, as the mind of man is: for where there is store of wit there
needs not a hard skin, but a soft, tender skin fitteth best a generous and
ingenious mind. For so was it the pleasure of the most wise God, to add unto
the Noblest mind, the Noblest flesh, and the tenderest and most daintis skin,
that so the external shape might be an evident testimony of the inward mind.
That this creature Man is aso borne in Coat Armor both Lim-meale (as I may
term it) and also entire, with all his Parts conjunct, I will show by
examples, and we will first here set down the whole Bearings, and afterward
proceed to the Parts. Man and his parts borne in Coat Armor.


blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Jupiter, Our Lady with her Son.
our Blessed Lady with her Son in her right hand, and a Scepter in her left,
all Topaz. This Coat pertains to the Bishopwrick of Salisbury. Since it has
pleased some (doubtless out of a devout affection) to assume the bearing of the
blessed Virgin with her most blessed Babe; I hold it great reason to set this
Escocheon in the first place. For, I am far from their opinion who damn it for
superstition to portract that glorious Virgin, or her Babe; but yet I hold it
undoubted Idolatry to offer to these, or any other Pictures those services of
worship and prayer, which God has made his own peculiar prerogative, not to be
communicated to that holy Virgin her self, much less to her Image; which yet
are so far oftentimes from being her Image, that it has been acknowledged,
that some lewd Painters have portraied that unspotted Lady to the likeness of
their own Curtizans, and so have proposed her in Churches to be adored. This
worship of the Virgin Mary, has almost worn out the worship of her Son,
especially where their ridiculous fained miracles daily broached, do find any
credit.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Topaz, A King enthronized.
a King enthronized on his Seat Royal, Sapphire, Crowned, Sceptered, and
invested of the first, the cape of his Robe, Ermine. These are the Arms of the
City Sivil in Spain. As we formerly prescribed of unreasonable creatures, that
they should be set forth in their noblest Action, Man in his noblest action.
so much more is it fit, that man (the most excellent of Gods creatures) should
be set forth in his greatest dignity. And as amongst men there are manifold
degrees and callings, Many degrees* of callings.
so is it decent (says Bartolus) that each particular person should be habited
as is fitting for his estate, calling, and employment, viz. Princeps in solio
Majestatis, Pontifex in Pontificalibus, Miles in armis, sive equestris, sive
pedestris, depingi debet: A King in his Throne of Majesty, a Bishop in his
Pontifical vestures, and a Soldier in his Military habit, either on foot or
Horseback: So shall they receive such reverence as is answerable, both to
their persons and functions.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Sapphire, a Bishop seated in his Chair, A
Bishop in his Pontificals.
habited in his Pontificals, sustaining his Croisier in his left arm, stayed
upon the Chair, and extending his right hand toward the dexter point of the
Escocheon, Pearl. This Coat Armor was quartered by Eberhardus, sometimes
Bishop of Lubrick in Saxony, who was descended of the noble progeny of the
Hollii. The dignity Episcopal is next unto the Regal, insomuch that
Constantine the great (the first Christian Emperor) received a Bishop with no
less reverence and honor, The dignity Episcopal next the Regal.
than if every one of them had been his own Father: and great reason; sithence
they directly succeed the Apostles of Christ in the government of the Church;
especially if together with this Apostolical dignity, they join the truth of
Apostolical Doctrine, which the Romish Bishops have abolished.

A Saracens head erased.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Saracens Head erased at the Neck,
Argent, environed about the Temples with a Wreath of the second, and Sable, by
the name of Mergith of Wales. After examples of the whole bearing of Man, it is
fit the Head should first be handled before the other Parts; for that amongst
all the parts of Living creatures the Head obtains the chiefest pre-eminence,
says Pierius; and (as Isiodore notes) it is called Caput, not only because
it is Capeable of the knowledge attained by the Senses; but for that also it
comprehends and contains them all. As this Member is chiefest in dignity,
so has Nature appropried thereto, the highest and principal place, it being
lifted up on high, as in a Watch Tower, that it might over-see all approaching
danger before it come near, for which cause also Nature has given man more
Flexibility to turn about his neck and look on all sides, than other creatures
have.

In the workmanship of this principal member of man's body may we behold with
admiration the unspeakable power, providence and mercy of God, if we shall
attentively consider the order and composition of the head, with the external
and internal parts thereof.

First of all the skull called in Latin, Cranium, is the uppermost bone of the
Head, fashioned in the form of a Globe, and distinguished with their orders of
small holes and seames. An example of bearing in Coat Armor of three of these
skulls on a Cheuron, I have formerly given you, page 153. where I treated of
bones. The skull is outwardly covered with skin and thin flesh, lest the same
should be over-burthened with too much weight; This flesh with that skin is
therefore made full of pores, or small invisible holes, for the more commodious
evaporation of the gross humors of the brain, and certain excrements thereof;
whereof hairs are engendered, and may have their passage: The skull is
inwardly hollow, to the end that the brain, which is the seat of all the
senses, might be the more commodiously conferred therein.

The skull has God distributed into three parts, viz. into Sinciput, which is
the forepart thereof, and conjoyneth to the forehead; into Occiput, which is
the hindermost part thereof; and into Verticem, which is the Crown, or middle
part of the same, seated between the fore and hinder part before named.

Under these three partitions are placed three several faculties: In the
forepart is the Fantasy, or Sensus Communis, scil. the Judgment of the
senses, or universal notion of things: In the middle the Imagination; And
memory in the hinder-part of the head.

Within the concavity of the skull, the brain has his being, distinguished
with three little ventricles or Cells, one in the forepart, another in the
midst, and the last in the hinder-part: in which three ventricles, the forms
and Ideas of things, apprehended by the exterior senses, are severally and
distinctly imprinted; therefore to the end the same might be more effectually
performed, God made not the brain fluent, like water, for then would it not
apprehend or retain those conceited forms, nor yet of solid substance, like
bones, for then could it not easily admit the impressions of such imaginary
forms, but he made the brain of an indifferent temper, viz. moderately soft,
and moderately hard, to wit, of a soft and temperate nature.

Furthermore, God has made in the brains of man certain concavities or
hollownesses, and those has he replenished with vital spirits, without which
the interior senses could not consist: and these spirits does the soul use to
understand by, and to the performance of other actions which she produces in
the head.

Moreover, in the brain has he placed the fountain of the sinews, which from
thence are dispersedly conveyed throughout the body, as well those nerves and
sinews as are sensitive, as also those that are motive, viz, those that give
motion to the body. But who can express or conceive in mind, the manifold
instruments of the soul that God has placed in the head of man?

In the head we may observe (well-nigh) all the uses of the soul: Behold the
admirable composition of man's head, which of all other parts of the body is the
noblest; and how all and singular the parts thereof are accommodated and
applied by our most gracious Maker, Conserver, and Redeemer, to serve for the
uses of all the faculties of the soul.

If the framing of this one member (I mean the head of a man) be so admirable
in it self, how much more is the composition of the whole frame of the body,
being conjoined and united together, with sinews and arteries, in a
proportionable manner, and furnished throughout with all the external and
internal parts, and their particular appurtenances to be admired?

The members of Animals are (of Philosophers) usually distinguished into
External and Internal, and so to be handled severally, each one apart by it
self: but I laboring to be brief herein, will handle those outward and inward
parts only, whose shapes and forms I find to be borne in Coat Armor, leaving
the more copious and exact handling of them to the consideration of Physicians,
Chyrurgions and Anatomists professed, to whose consideration they do more
properly appertain.

The head in Latin is called Caput, because it is the chief and principal
beginning of the whole Fabric of the body, and withal, the noblest of all
other the members thereof.

In the head do the two principal faculties of the soul rest, viz. the
Intelligent and Sentinent, and do there execute their functions; albeit that
the vegetable faculty also has his operation there, but the other two do
reign, and chiefly predominate therein: Therefore it is the seat and residence
of all the senses, as well Internal as External, placed in the head, and that
for good cause; for sithence that the faculty Intelligent, understands not in
any other sort than by inspection of Imagination and Imaginary shapes which are
ingendered of External forms, and are by the outward senses conveyed to the
Fantasy or Image conveyed in the mind. Most wisely therefore has God there
placed the seat and wisdom of all the senses, where the mind has her being,
that so she need not go far to seek those imaginary forms whereof she is to
consider, to understand and dispose of according to Order.

Therefore in as much as the senses are become serviceable to the mind, there
the seat or residence of the senses is most fitly placed where the mind does
exercise her offices and operations.

From the same head do proceed all the nerves and sinews wherewith each bone
and members, as also the universal body is conjoined and fastened together,
and consolidated, and also receives increase and being. In the head is placed
the principal part of manly form, the visage, whereby he differs from all
other Animals; and does far surpass them in favor and comeliness; whereof the
Poet rightly wrote in these words, Finxit in effigiem moderatum cuncta deorum.
Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
Ovid. Met. 1. -- fixed The form of all the all-ruling Deities.
And whereas others see with down-cast eyes,
He with a lofty look did man endue:
And bade him Heavens transcendent glories view.
Forasmuch as God would that the faculties both intelligent and sentinent
should predominate in the head; therefore did he form and accommodate therein,
instruments well fitting for either use: Of these instruments there are only
two sorts, whereof the first contains the instruments of the inferior senses,
and the other of the outward.

The Instruments serving for the use of the external senses (whereof there is
use in Armory) are not many, therefore will I handle them as I shall find use
of them in Coat Armor, the rest I will only name, and so pass them over as
impertinent to my purpose. These instruments of the External senses are in
number five, that is to say, the eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth, with the roof
and palate thereof, and the tongue. Of these I find only the eyes borne in
Coat Armor, therefore of them only will I treat some thing in their due
place, as those that are best known to use.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between three
Blackmores heads couped, Proper, by the name of Ives. I find that some have
given this Coat Armor another Blazon, thus, He bears, Argent, a Cheuron
between three Jews heads couped, Sable; but then I take it the Bearers name
should have its Orthography thus; Jews.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Mores-heads couped, Sable, banded
about the head, Argent, this Coat belongs to Samuel Mico of London, Esquire,
and to Edward Mico, and Aaron Mico, Brothers, eminent Merchants of the said
City.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Blackemores heads couped,
Proper, between two Cheuronels Sable, And is the bearing of Sir George Sondes
of Leez-Court in Shelvich in the County of Kent, Knight, of the Honorable
order of the Bath, at which place, and his (near adjoining) seat of
Throughley, this family has flourished many Hundred years.

This Order of the Bath is as Ancient as King Alfreds time, of which with all
its Rites and Ceremonies you may Read a large description in Master Dugdales
excellent book of the Antiquityes of Warwickshire.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, on a Fesse, Sable, between three
Blackemors heads erased, Proper, as many Cressants, Argent. This is the
Coat Armor of Humphrey Blakamore of the County of Middlesex: now I will show
you a rare, yet an ancient Bearing of Childrens heads couped, enwrapped about
the necks with Snakes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Childrens
heads, couped at the shoulders, A Cheuron between three heads couped.
Argent, their Peruques, Or, enwrapped about the necks with as many Snakes,
Proper, by the name of Vaughan. It has been reported (how truly I cannot
say) that some one of the Ancestors of this family, was borne with a Snake
about his neck; a matter not impossible, but yet very unprobable: Ideo quaere.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Chevron, Gules, between three
Peruques, A Cheuron between three Peruques.
Sable. This Coat stands in one of the windows of New Inn Hall without
Templebarre in London. Clodius (surnamed Commatus, because of his long hair)
having attained the government of the Stern in the kingdom of France, at his
first coming to the crown, did institute a Law, that the Frenchmen should in
common wear their hair long, in token of liberty. And so contrariwise shaving
off the hair was a sign of servile bondage: For the Romans (says Francis de
Rosiers) did institute by a public Edict, that the hairs of bondmen should be
shaven in token of bondage. But as hayres change according to time, so it is
the part of a wise man (says Farnesius) to conform himself to the mutability
of times and seasons.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Barrey Nebule of six pieces, Azure and
Argent, on a chief of the second, three eyes, Gules, by the name of de la Hay
of Ireland. The eyes has God formed with admirable skill in such sort, as that
by them the visible spirits are transferred to the soul. For by them, as it
were by Windows, the soul does apprehend the forms and kinds of things colored
by way of attraction; therefore to the end the same might be the more
commodiously performed; first of all, he made them slippery and round, that
they might more easily move and stir every way, and so apprehend the colors of
all sorts of things, which are either above, below, on the right hand or upon
the left, as it were in a moment: he would that the eyes should consist of 3.
distinct humors, to wit, of a watery or whitish humor, of a glassie and
christalline humor, and those severed each from other with most thin fylmes or
skins, to the end that they should be capable of the Species or kinds of
colors: In the midst of these there is a little ball, (as it were) which we
call the Ball, or Apple of the eye, as it were a certain hole through which the
sight has his passage; by which as through a little window or Casement the
visible spirits of the soul are sent forth to their objects, and also the
Species or kinds of colors are received inward and conveyed to that we call
Sensus communis or the Fantasy (which is seated in the forepart of the
brain) by means of Sinews that do bring sight to the eyes.

God has annexed those two nerves or sinews, as the Wagons of the shapes and
resemblances received into the eyes, to be conveyed to the Fantasy: which
sinews albeit there are two of them annexed to each eye, nevertheless when they
are protracted to the brain, they do join together, and end in one point, for
this end and purpose, that the shapes that were twofold in the two eyes, they
should yet end in one; forasmuch as the conceived shapes are simply of one
color, and that so the Judge of the Sensus communis, or the Fantasy should
not be deceived.

Furthermore he has covered the eyes with lids as it were with folding doors,
both for a defense against harmful objects, and more specially for sleep, that
these being shut, man might take his rest and sleep.

These are the means and instruments of sight, that is to say, of the eyes,
whereof who can attain the knowledge of the exact workmanship of them.

The rest of the before mentioned external instruments, viz. the Nose, Ears,
Mouth, with the Roof and Palate thereof, and the Tongue, I do pass them over,
as not being of any or (at the least) frequent use in Armory, but as they are
parts of the head, and therewith united and conjoined. After the head and parts
thereof, the heart does challenge the chiefest place, as in example.

A Heart proper and a Chief.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Heart, Proper, a Chief, Sable, by
the name of Scambler. If the Heart (according to Homer) does wast and consume
in those that by any accidental occasion are attached with some vehement or
long lingering sickness; much more must the heart waste in those which are
possessed with the fretting canker of envy, against the prosperity of others.
According to that saying; Invidus ipse sibi est long tristissimus hostis; The
envious man is a most deadly foe to himself.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Chief, Argent, three Hearts,
Three Hearts, on a Chief.
Proper, by the name of Heart. The heart (says one) is naturally shaped long,
and not round; to signify, that our thoughts and consultations ought to be
long, deliberate, and not hasty and inconsiderate. This is the Fountain, Seat,
and Treasury of life, where-through the whole body receives the vital
spirits; which are (as it were) certain quickening flames, which by the
ministry of the Arteries and Veins, are dispersed throughout all parts of the
body, giving thereto life and vigor, and enabling the same to the performance
of every action.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, A Fesse between three
hearts vulned.
Gules, between three Hearts vulned, and distilling drops of blood on the
sinister side, Proper, by the name of Tote. These are termed vulned of the
Latin word vulnus, which signifies a wound. This noble Member has Nature
placed in a seat well fitting the dignity thereof, in so much as it may well be
said (according to Aristotle) Natura constituit rem nobiliorem in nobiliori
loco, ut cor in medio; To the best part the best place. This is that which of
all other parts God requires us to reserve for himself, and to his service,
where he says, My son, give me thy heart; and good reason, since he was pleased
to give us his sons heart, to be pierced to the death for our demerits. And
this place may decide their doubt, who make question whether be the more
principal part of a Man, the Brain or the Heart, since God prefers the
heart, as more esteeming the hearty affection of true charity, than a
speculative contemplation void of Christian practice.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Heart between two wings displayed,
A Heart between two wings.
Or, by the name of Henry de Wingham. The Ancients used to hang the figure of
an Heart with a lace or chain from the neck upon the breast of a man,
signifying thereby a man of sincerity, Bishop of London, An. 44. Hen. 3.
and such an one as speaks the truth from the Heart, and is free from all
guile and dissimulation, and is far unlike those that the Psalmist mentions,
saying, They give good words with their lips, but dissemble with their heart.
Too rife are they found in this age, whose tongue and heart go two diverse
ways. Therefore well is that saying verified of these and like persons, which
is usual in the mouths of many men, Mel in ore, verba lactis, fell in cord,
fraus in factis; Honey in the mouth, Gall in the heart, and guile in their
actions,

An Arm.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, an Arm Sinister, issuing out of
the Dexter point, and extended toward the Sinister base in form of a Bend,
Gules, by the name of Cornehill. The Arm is a member of the body ordained by
Nature for labor: and for that purpose she has fortified the same strongly
with Arteries, Muscles, and Sinews: by the Arm therefore is signified a
laborious and industrious man, but that no man should rely on his own or any
other man's power or industry too much, God has forbidden us to trust to the
Arm of flesh.

Three dexter Arms conjoined.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Dexter Arms conjoined at the
Shoulders, and flexed in Triangle, Or, with Fist clenched, Argent. This
Coat Armor pertains to the Family of Iremaine of Colacombe in Devonshire.
These Arms and Hands conjoined and clenched after this manner, may signify a
treble offer of revenge for some notable injury done to the person or fame of
the first bearer, which to an honest man is no less dear than life; Nam honor
and honestas pari pass^ cum vita ambu arent.

A hand extended on a chief.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Chief, Gules, a hand extended and
borne transverse the Chief, Argent, by the name of Mainstone. The Hand is the
pledge of friendship and fidelity, which was in ancient times confirmed by
shaking of hands: but latter times have taken up another fashion, by embracing
with the Arms: but the truth is, a handful of that ancient Amity, is more
worth than a whole armefull of the new; which now every where consists in
words, not in deeds. The hand is the chief working instrument of the body, and
of no less comeliness than use; Quam multarum artium ministrae sunt? says
Zanchius, of how many Arts is the hand the worker? and it is called m^nus
(according to some) a manando, Vel quia ipsa e brachio manat, vel quia ex ea
manant digiti; either for that it proceeds out of the Arm, or for that the
fingers proceed out of it. This member is divided into five parts, whereof each
one has a name appropriate to the particular use thereof: as the thumb is
called Pollex, quod virtute prae caeteris polleat, for the strength of it. The
forefinger is named Index, Quia homo illo digito omnia indica^, for pointing
with it. The next is called of the place, M^dius, the middle finger. The fourth
Annularis, or Ring finger. The fifth Auricul^ris, because men use to pick their
Ear therewith.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, a Cheuron, Sapphire, between three
sinister hands couped at the wrist, Ruby. This is the Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable, William Lord Maynard of Estaines in England, and of Wicklogh in the
Kingdom of Ireland.

In the actions and gestures of the body, of all the members thereof the hand
is (as I may say) the most talkative. For it is an usual thing with the most
sort of men, by the motion of the right hand to crave silence: when we make any
speech or protestation of our selves, we do clap our hands upon our breasts;
When we are moved with admiration, we strike our hand upon our thigh; With the
hand we do beckon and allure unto us, and therewith we do repel and put from
us; When we speak to other men, we do extend our hands toward them. The
apposition of the finger to the mouth, is a note of silence craved, the
striking of the breast with the fist, is a token of sorrow and repentance, the
exalting and shaking of the right hand aloft, is usual with military persons
when they will notify any prosperous success.

The hand, as it is comely in sight, so is it also of singular use, and an
Instrument of many Arts: for by their help there is no invention of man's wit
left unattempted and brought to perfection, and therefore it is of all other
members of man's body, the nimblest and most universal: yet is the same no
longer reckoned a part of man, than it can perform her function, as witnesses
Aristotle Metaph: Manus non semper est pars hominis, nisi quando potest
perficere opus suum.

The clapping of hands is a token of joy and applause, and has been in use not
only with men of modern times, when they would signify their consent and
approbation, but also with those of ancient time, as we may see when Jehoiada
the Priest caused Joash the son of Ahaziah to be crowned King; Then he brought
out the Kings son, and put the Crown upon him, and gave him the Testimony, and
they made him King and anointed him, and they clapped their hands, and said, God
save the King.

Anciently the cutting off of hands and feet was used for a military
punishment, for such as had committed some capital crime meriting death. So we
read that Aufidius Cassius by a new and un-experimented example did punish
diverse fugitive Soldiers, that had abandoned their Captain, by cutting off
their hands and feet, affirming that such punishment was more exemplary and
disciplinable than the putting of them to death: by how much a long and
lingering reproachful life, is worse than death it self, that gives a speedy
end to all lamentable and wretched calamities.

It has been an ancient custom that when a Master requires his servant to
perform for him any matter of importance (and would oblige him by taking of a
solemn oath, to use his best care and diligence for the effectual
accomplishing thereof) to cause his servant to put his hand under his thigh,
and so to take his oath, as we may see Genesis 24.2, 3. Put now thy hand under my
thigh, and I will make thee swear by the Lord God of Heaven, and the God of
earth, that thou shall not take a wife unto my son of the Daughters of the
Canaanites amongst whom I dwell: This Ceremony showed the servants obedience to
his Master, and the Masters power over the servant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, Sable, between four
Dexter hands couped at the wrist, Gules, by the name of Quatermaine. The
Kissing of the hand so much in use with us at this day, may be thought to be an
invention of the latter hatchers; but if we look back into the customs of
ancient times; we shall find that it was in use many ages past, and is by the
revolution of time become new again: For what is new says Solomon that has
not been in former times? Of this custom of skissing the hand, we read as
follows, Many, when a thing was lent them, reckoned it to be found, and put
them to trouble that helped them. Till he has received, he will kiss a man's
hand: Eccle. 29.4.
and concerning the Antiquity of this action of kissing the Hand; you may
further read, Learned Master S^lden in his Titles of Honor. page 40.

Barry of six pieces.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Barrey of six pieces, Or, and Sable, over
all a Pale, Gules, charged with a woman's Dugge, distilling drops of milk
proper, by the name of Dodge. And here because I find in the Office of Arms a
copy of the first Grant of this Coate-Armour, and that very ancient, I think
it convenient to acquaint the Reader with some particulars of the said Patent
as I there find it; whereby appears that James Hedingley then Guyen King of
Arms, after recital made of the loyal and valiant service which Peter Dodge,
borne in the Town of Stopworth in the County of Chester, Gentleman, had done
to King Edward the first, (for as it there appears by the Copy; this
instrument bears date the eighth of April in the 34. year of that Kings
Reign) in diverse battles and sieges, for which the said King had remunerated
him the said Peter, with the gift of a Seignory, or Lordship there mentioned:
He (I say) the said King of Arms, after such recital made, does give and
grant unto the said Peter Dodge, that from thenceforth, Il (understand the said
Peter) porter a son escu d'or and Sables, bar de six pieces and ung Pale de
Gules, auec une mamelle de femme degoullant; for so are the very words and
their Orthographie, in the copy of the Patent, which is in French. Thus much
whereof I thought fit to present to the public view, not doubting but the
Judicious Reader by careful observation thereof may make some good use. The
function of this number is thus taught us, 2 Esdr. 8. For thou have commanded
the members, even the Breast to give milk unto the fruit appointed for the
breasts, that the thing which is created might be nourished for a time, till
thou disposest it to thy mercy.

The earths fountains are made to give water, and the breasts of women are made
to give suck: but Gentlewomen and Citizens wives are said to be troubled with
a perpetual drought in their Breasts, like the gout that haunteth the rich and
wealthy only: By the Teates sometimes are meant the plentiful fields wherewith
men are nourished: as we may read, Esaias 32.12,
Esaias 32.12. Men shall lament for the teates, even the pleasant fields, and for
the fruitful vines: Like as wholesome and plentiful feeding nourishes and
increases milk, so contrary-wise, thin diet, sorrow, and grief of mind or
sickness, dries up, and much wastes the same.

The Prophet Esaias showing the untowardnesse of those that should learn the Word
of God, says, Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to
understand the things that he fears? Them that are weaned from the milk, and
drawn from the Breasts, Esaias 28.9. Whereby he sharply reprehended their
backwardness in Religion, and compares them to babes newly weaned from the
Breasts.

A man's leg Couped.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Man's Leg Couped at the midst of the
Thigh, Azure, by the name of Haddon. The Leg is the member of strength,
stabilitie, expedition, and obedience. It was a custom of the ancient World,
that servants or Children should put their hand under the Thigh of him to whom
they should be obliged by oath* Ancient Custom.
which ceremony (as some take it) they used as well to show the ready obedience
of the servants and children toward their Masters and Parents, as also the
jurisdiction and authority of their Masters and Parents over them, as I have
formerly showed, page 251. So did Abraham cause his servant to do; and the like
oath also did Israel require of his son Joseph.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Man's Leg Erased at the Thigh, A
man's leg Erased.
Sable, by the name of Prime.

In blazoning of Coat Armor consisting of Legs borne after this manner,
Needless mention.
I hold it needless to mention the bearing thereof in pale, because it is
natural for a man's Leg to stand upright: but if the same be borne in any other
sort than thus, then shall you make special mention thereof.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Leg Couped, A leg couped below the
knee.
below the Knee, Argent, by the name of Shrigley of Cheshire. The Leg being the
lowest and lowliest part of the Body, therefore do we use the motion thereof,
to show humility and submission to our Superiors: and of all gestures of the
Leg, it is not more pliable to any, than to that whereby we humble our selves
before God in kneeling and praying, as if Nature had especially framed our
Bodies, as well as our Souls, for that service to him that made us. And in this
sense, God does delight in man's legs, though he does not (as himself says) in
the strength or beauty thereof. And as the Leg cut off from the body, loses
all his former strength, so Man cut off from God, loses all his grace, power,
and felicity, which are only preserved by our Union with him.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXV.
IN the process of our former tracts touching Animals as well Rational as
Irrational, Creatures of exorbitant kind.
we have been very careful to limit every several kind of creatures with his
own Natural and distinct bounds, forms, and proprieties, whereby it happens,
that such other kinds of living creatures, as are any way exorbitant from
Natures general course and intendment, either for qualities or essence (and
therefore wanted a certain place amongst the rest, have been reserved for this
last place. And of these are diverse sorts; as first Amphibia, Amphibia.
such as live sometimes as if they were water creatures, at other times as if
they were land-creatures, as examples here shall show.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Beaver erected, Beaver raping.
Sable* devouring a fish, proper, Armed, Gules. This Coat stands in a glass
window in an Inn of Chancery called New-Inne-Hall without Temple Bar, near
London. The Beaver is like an Otter, and both of them are like slye dissembling
companions, who to make their profit, and feed their own bellies, will closely
keep good quarter with contrary sides, in affection to neither, but only for
their own behoof: therefore I could wish they had one other property of the
Beaver; which is to himself, that so he might escape from his pursuers, who
hunt him for his testickles, which are much used in Physic. This Beaver has
only his tail fish, and therefore keeps that part most in the water: he has
his hinder legs like a Swan, and his foremost like a Dog, and so swimmeth with
the one whilst he preyeth with the other.

Fesse between three Otters.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, between three Otters,
Sable, by the name of Lutterell. Sir John Maundevile in his Discourses,
reports that in the Country of China they use Otters for water-dogs, bred
tame among hem in great number, which so often as they are commanded, go into
the waters and bring forth Fish to their Masters.

Seals feet Erased.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, between three Seals feet
Erected and Erased, Sable. These Arms do pertain to the Town of Yarmouth in
Norfolk. The Fins wherewith this Fish does swim, do serve her turn also as
feet to go withal upon the Land. The milk of this Seal (or Sea Calf) is very
wholesome against the Falling sickness: but she sucketh it out, and spilleth
it of envy, that it should not profit any other. To this head of Amphibia, all
other of like nature are to be reduced.

Bigenera.
The second sort of Natures un-naturall creatures (as I may call them) are
Bigenera, such as are engendered of two distinct kinds of Beasts, against the
prescript of Natures order. Of which prodigious kinds of Beasts, as some have
been procreated by means of man's idle invention, and others by casual
accident; Occasions of unkindly procreations.
so are there sundry sorts of Beasts no less un-naturally engendered, through
careless neglect of the separating each sort of Cattle by themselves, and by
permitting Beasts of distinct kinds, to sort and feed together confusedly in
the time of their heat. Such are those that Vpton calls Musimons, engendered
of a Goat and a Ram; Tytiri, of a Sheep and a Goat; Hybrides, of a wild Boar
and a tame Sow; Castorides, Dogs engendered by a Fox and a Beaver; Lyciscus,
of a Wolf and a Mastiffe, and such like.

These bigenerous beasts (says Vpton) may well beseem the bearing of Abbats
and Abbesses who bear the Miter and the Cross, which are representations of
Pastoral jurisdiction, but have not the actual exercise thereof; as the Mule
and Leopard, having the generative instruments of the Horse and the Lion, yet
have not the natural use of them: though in this property, Abbats and Abbesses
have never been very like them, but for the other respect. Whereupon a certain
Author has this saying.

Mulus and Abbates sunt in honor pares:
Mules, Abbats, and Abbesses are alike;
They bear the Weapons, but cannot strike.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Musimon, Argent. This is a
Bigenerous beast of unkindly procreation (like as the Mule before exemplified
amongst whole-footed beasts) and is engendered between a Goat and a Ram, like as
the Tytirus is engendered between a Sheep and a Buck Goat, as Vpton notes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Leopard passant, Gardant, Or,
Spotted, The shape of the Leopard.
Sable. The shape of the Leopard bewraieth his unkindly birth, forasmuch as he
is in all proportion of body more like the Pardus, as well in respect of the
slenderness of his body, as of his spots, and wants the courage notified by
the plentiful mane wherewith Nature has invested the Lion, being the express
token of his generous and noble spirit. This mis-begotten Beast is naturally
enemy to the Lion, Leopard enemy to the Lion.
and finding his own defect of courage to encounter the Lion in fair fight, he
observes when the Lion makes his walk near to his Den, which (in policy) he
has purposely wrought spacious and wide in the double entrance thereof, and
narrow in the midst, so as himself being much more slender than the Lion, may
easily pass: when he sees the Lion, he makes toward him hastily, as if he
would bid him battle in the open fields; and when he sees the Lion prepared
to encounter him, he betaketh him to his heels, and makes toward his Den
with all celerity, whom the Lion eagerly pursues with full course, dreaming of
no danger by reason of the large entrance into the Den. At length through the
vehemence of his swift course, he becomes so straightened in the narrow passage
in the midst of the Den (by reason he is much bigger bodied than the Leopard)
that he can go neither forwards nor backwards. The Lion being thus distressed,
his enemy passes thorough his Den, and comes behind him, and gnaweth him to
death. Of this Beast, the head is more usually borne in Coat Armor than the
whole, and that in a diverse manner, as by these examples next ensuing may be
seen.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Leopards
heads, Or, by the name of Wentworth of Wentworth-Wood-house in Yorkshire,
where they have flourished for many hundred years, of which Family Thomas
Viscount Wentworth (Son of Sir William Wentworth Baronet) was created Earl of
Strafford, the first of December, in the seventeenth year of the late King,
whose worthy Son William now enjoyes those Titles; from this Family, derives it
self also that of Nettlested, Earl of Cleveland.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Cheuron between three Leopards
heads, Or, by the name of Fitch of Essex.

He bears, Or, a Cheuron between three Leopards heads, Sable, by the name of
Wheeler, and is the Coat of Sir William Wheeler, Knighted by Oliver late Lord
Protector, 26. Aug. 1657.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Leopards heads, Sable, this was the Coat Armor of Sir Richard Newport of
High-Archall in the County of Salop, created Lord Newport the fourteenth of
October, 1642.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, two Bars, Argent, in Chief, three
Leopards Heads, Or. This is the Coat of Sir Henry Wright Baronet, son of that
eminent Physician lately deceased, of which Family was also Nathan Wright of
London, Merchant, lately deceased, Father of Benjamin Wright Esquire, living
1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Pile surmounted by a Fesse,
between four Leopards heads, Gules, by the name of Garway, and is thus borne by
William Garway of Chichester, Esquire, son and heir of Sir Henry Garway, Lord
Mayor of London 1639. William Garway Agent to Persia, and his Brothers, John,
Robert, and Rowland; and also of John, Thomas, and Philip, sons of John, and he
of Richard Garway Governor of Barwick Castle, all descended from Webley in
Hereford-shire.

Leopards heads.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Verrey on a Pale, Gules, three Leopards
Heads, Or, by the name of Ockowld. The Leopard has a name well fitting his
unkindly procreation and double Nature: for being engendered between the
Lioness and the Pardus, is thereupon called a Leopard. It is oftentimes found
in the hot climates, especially in Africa, where, through great scarcity of
waters, many Beasts did often convent together at some River to drink, Occasion
of bigenerous procreations.
of whose commixtion, many monstrous births have been produced; which gave
occasion of that vulgar Proverb, Semper aliquid novi fert Africa: Africa still
yields new Monsters.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sable, a Leopards head, Argent, Jessant, a
flower delis, Or, a Cressant for a difference of the second. This is the
Coat Armor of James Morley, Esquire, one of the Six Clerks of the Kings
Majesty's high Court of Chancery: what Jessant is, I have formerly showed you
in the 15. Chapter of this third Section, page 194. And now I will show you
three Leopards heads Jessant, the like flowers borne in one Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sable, three Leopards heads Jessant,
flowers de lis, Or. This is the Coat Armor of Brampton Gordon of Assington in
the County of Suffolk, Esquire. Some are of opinion that this color Sable, is
the most ancient of colors, and their reason is, for that it appears in Genesis
Chap. 1.2. that darkness was before God made light. Here you see this Sable
Field charged with Or. And what kind of qualified and conditioned Bearer a
Coat Armor of this color and metal befitteth, I have already declared in the
10. Chap. of this third Section, page 145.

Now in the Blazon of this next ensuing Escocheon, I in this present Edition
shall upon better consideration differ from that which I gave it in my former,
Secundae Cogitationes soepe sunt meliores.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Leopards heads, Or, Jessant,
flowers de lis, Leopards heads Jessants Flowers de lis.
Azure, over all a bend engrailed of the third, by the name of Dennis. This is
that ancient Coat Armor of that Family, as appears in the Cathedral Church
of Worcester and Hereford, as also in the Churches of Durham and Auste, and
many other places: nevertheless, some have of late years altered the flowers
de lis into Or, wherein they have much wronged the Bearers, in rejecting the
ancient form, which is both warranted by Antique Monuments, and no way
discommendable, since it is borne in the natural color.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, three Leopards heads reversed,
Leopards heads reversed.
swallowing as many Flowers de lis, Or. This Coat pertains to the Sea of
Hereford. These Leopards heads differ from the former in this, that they are
borne reversed; of which form of bearing you must take special notice in
Blazon, as also of the Flowers de lis, which in these are said to be swallowed,
and not borne.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXVI.
ANother sort there is of exorbitant Animals much more prodigious than all the
former: such are those Creatures formed, or rather deformed with the confused
shapes of Creatures of different kinds and qualities. These (according to some
Authors) are called in Latin Monstra, a Monstrando, for fore-shewing some
strange events. These Monsters (says Saint Augustine) cannot be reckoned
amongst those good Creatures that God created before the transgression of Adam:
for those did God (when he took the survey of them) pronounce to be valde bona,
for they had in them neither access nor defect, but were the perfect
workmanship of Gods creation. And of them Zanchius says, that Eorum deformitas
habet usus, cum and Deo serviant, ad gloriam ipsius illustrandam, and electis
ad salutem promovendam. If Man had not transgressed the Law of his Maker, this
dreadful deformity (in likelihood) had not happened in the procreation of
Animals, which some Philosophers do call Peccata Naturae, Errors in Nature,
Quoniam natura impeditur in horum generatione ne possit quale velit producere
animal. Some examples in this kind here ensue.

A Griffon passant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Griffon Passant, his wings
displayed, Sable, Armed, Gules, by the name of Halton. Leigh in his Blazon of
this Beast, adds this word Sergreant, in regard of his twofold form,
wherein he does (as touching his fore-parts) participate with the Eagle, and
(in the hindmost parts) with the Lion: If that be the cause, then doubtless
that term cannot be said to be peculiar to the Griffon, as he would have it,
but rather common to whatsoever other Animal of double nature: as the Wiverne,
Cockatrice, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Griffon Passant, and a Chief, Or,
by the name of Evelin, a very spreading and worthy Family in Surrey, Hampshire,
London, and other parts.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Griffon, Sergreant, Or, this Coat
is borne by two several Families, not having relation one to the other, viz.
by Sir John Read of Brocket-Hall, in the County of Hartford, created Baronet
the sixteenth of March, 1641. created Baronet again by Oliver Lord Protector,
the twenty fifth of June, 1656. And this Coat is also borne by the name of
Cursellis of London, Merchants, a Family of good account, descended out of
Flanders.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Griffon Rampand, A Griffon Rampand.
with wings displaied, Sable, by the name of Morgan. The erecting of the
forelegs of this Griffon, is an evident testimony of his readiness for action,
which adds a second force to his attempt, and promises a successful event
of his enterprise, by reason he uniteth force and industry together. The
Griffon having attained his full growth, will never be taken alive; wherein he
does Adumbrate or rather lively set forth the property of a valorous Soldier,
The valor of the Griffon.
whose Magnanimity is such as he had rather expose himself to all dangers, and
even to death it self, than to become captive.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Griffon Sergreant, Sable, within a
Bordure, Gules, this is the Coat of Boys of Kent, a Family of worthy note now
flourishing in the persons of Edward Boys of Fredvile, Sir John Boys of
Bonnington, Master Boys of Trapham of Vffington, and many other places in that
Country.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Griffons
heads erased, Argent, this is the Coat of Sir John Cotton of Lanwade in the
County of Cambridge, and of Farningham in Kent, created Baronet July 14. 1641.
he was son of Sir John Cotton, Knight.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Cheuron, between three Griffons
heads Erased, Azure, two Lions counter-passant, of the Field, by the name of
Gardener of Wigan in Lancashire, from whence descended Robert Gardener of
London, Esquire, Father of that hopeful Gentleman William Gardener, and of
Mary Baroness Digby of Geshall in Ireland.

As a Lion Rampand is figured erectus, elevatus, mordax ore, radens pedibus, so
may a Bear, Griffon, or whatsoever other Animal of fierce nature (as
aforesaid) that is shaped in like form and action: For the Lion is not said to
be Rampand, because he represents the shape of a Lion, but in respect of his
fierce and cruel action; so this in like manner using the same actions, may
apertly participate the same terms of Blazon, his double shape notwithstanding,
Similium enim similis est ratio.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, per bend, Or, and Gules, three Griffons
heads erased, counterchanged on a Chief, Argent, a Flowerdeluce between two
Roses of the second, by the name of Rycroft or Roycroft, who from Abivill in
Normandy, planted themselves in Lancashire, from whence are derived the
several Stems in Shropshire, Cheshire, Devonshire, and London; and is borne by
Josiah Rycroft of London, Merchant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Dragons heads erased, Or, a
chief, Argent, by the name of Cutler, this Coat is borne by John Cutler of
London, Esquire.

A Wiverne, his wings displaied.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Wiverne, his wings displaied, and
Tail Nowed, Gules, by the the name of Drakes. This word Nowed, is as much to
say in Latin as Nodatus. This Tail is said to be Nowed, because it is
intricately knotted with diverse infoldings, after the manner of a Frette: Like
as a Griffon does participate of a Foul and a Beast, as aforesaid: so does the
Wiverne partake of a Foul in the Wings and Legs, and with a Snake, Adder, or
such other Serpents (as are not of Gressible kind, but Glide along upon their
Belly) and does resemble a Serpent in the Tail.

The Poets do feign that Dragons do keep, or (according to our English phrase)
sit abrood upon Riches and Treasures, which are therefore committed to their
charge, because of their admirable sharpness of sight, and for that they are
supposed (of all other living things) to be the most valiant. Adag. col. 515.
Whereof Ovid. Metamorph. 7.

Pervigilem superest herbis sopire Draconem. The Dragons are naturally so hot,
that they cannot be cooled by drinking of water, but still gape for the Air to
refresh them, as appears, Jeremiah 14.6. And the wild Asses did stand in the
high places, they snuffed up the wind like Dragons; their eyes did fail
because there was no grass.

A Cockatrice displaied.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cockatrice displaied, Argent,
crested, membred, and jollopped, Gules, by the name of Buggine. The Cockatrice
is called in Latin Regulus* for that he seems to be a little King amongst
Serpents, not in regard of his quantity, but in respect of the infection of his
pestiferous and poysonfull aspect, wherewith he poisoneth the Air. Not unlike
those devilish Witches, that do work the destruction of silly Infants, as also
of the Cattle of such their neighbors, whose prosperous estate is to them a
most grievous eyesore. Of such Virgil in his Bucolicks makes mention, saying,
Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat Agnos.
I know not what wicked eye has bewitched my tender Lambs.


blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Reremouse displaied, A Reremouse
displaied.
Sable, by the name of Bakster. The Egyptians (says Pierius) used to signify
by the Reremouse, a man that having small means and weak power, either of
Nobility, or of Fortune, or yet stored with pregnancy of wit, has
nevertheless stepped up so suddenly, that he might seem not so much to be
supported by the earth, as by a sudden flight to be exalted above the same.
Sometimes you shall find this bird borne in the form of some Ordinary; for so
shall you see them borne displayed in Pale, three of them one above another. As
in the Ensigns of the Kingdom of India, sorted amongst the Coat-Armours of
the innumerous multitude of the great assembly holden at the Council of
Constance, Anno Dom. 1414. This little creature does partake both with beast
and bird, in such nearness of resemblance to either of them, as that it may
(with reason) be doubted, of whether kind he is. By occasion whereof he takes
advantage in the battle between beasts and birds (mentioned in the Fables of
Aesop) to flutter aloft above them to behold the event of that dangerous fight,
with a resolution to incline to the stronger part. Of all Birds (according to
Pliny) this alone brings forth young alive, and none but she has wings made
of panicles or thin skins. So is she the only bird that suckleth her young
with her paps, and gives them milk.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, an Harpey with her wings disclosed,
A Harpey disclosed in her wings.
her Hair flotant, Or, Armed of the same. This Coat stands in Huntington
Church. Of this kind of bird (or rather Monster) Virgil writes in this manner;
Tristius haud illis monstrum, Virgilius.
nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira deum, Stygiis sese extulit undis,
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima vultus
Ingluvies, uncaeque manus and pallida semper
Ora fame. --
Of monsters all, most monstrous this; no greater wrath
God sends amongst men; it comes from depth of pitchy Hell:
And Virgins face, but wombe-like gulf unsatiate has,
Her hands are griping claws, her color pale and fell.


The Harpey displaied.
blazon or coat of arms The Field, Azure, an Harpey displayed, Crined, Crowned,
and Armed, Or. These are the Arms of the noble City of Norenberga, which
according to some Authors, is situate in the very Center of the vast and
spacious Country of Germany. The Harpey (says Vpton) should be given to such
persons as have committed manslaughter, to the end that by the often view of
their Ensigns they might be moved to bewail the foulness of their offense.

A Mermaid.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Mermaid, Gules, Crined, Or,
holding a Mirror in her right hand, and a Comb in her left, by the name of
Ellis.

To these must be added, Montegres, Satyrs, Monk-fishes. As also
Lyons-dragons, Lyons-poisons, and whatsoever other double-shaped Animal of any
two or more of the particular kinds before handled.

SECT. III. CHAP. XXVII.
UNto this will I add some sorts of Animals, which although they be duly
shaped, Of degenerate and monstrous Natures.
and therefore may seem to agree with those of the same kind formerly treated
of, yet do they much differ from them, either in their unnatural postures and
gestures; or else being with some liberty-debarring instrument by man's industry
and invention, restrained of their natural freedom, as by a chain, or the
like; and therefore could not according to Methods strict rule have been
handled promiscuously among the former. Some few examples of this kind of
bearing of Animals of this sort in Coat Armor, I here present unto your view.

A Lion Rampand Regardant.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Lion Rampand, Regardant, Sable,
Armed, Gules, by the name of Gway the Void, sometime Lord of Cardagan in
Wales. This action does manifest an inward and degenerate perturbation of the
mind, which is merely repugnant to the most courageous nature of the Lion,
Cujus natura est imperterrita, according to the saying, Leo fortissimus
bestiarum ad nullius pavebit occursum.

The form of bearing of the Lion Regardant, albeit in respect of his courage
and magnanimity, it be contrary to his natural quality, for that it may be
thought, and is indeed generally holden to be a chief note of timorousness,
which is merely contrary to his generous nature; yet nevertheless it is good
Armory, not only in him, but also in all other Animals of like bearing, so long
as they are borne significantly; and it fitteth our profession, to interpret
all sorts of bearing to the best, that is to say, to the most honor of their
bearers. To the end therefore that I may give some satisfaction touching the
commendable bearing thereof, to such as do hold the contrary, I hold the same
form of bearing to be borne (not only in the Lion, but in whatsoever other
Animals) significantly, and therefore commendably: Forasmuch as such action
betokens a diligent circumspection, or regardfull consideration of
fore-passed events of things, and comparing of them with things present, that
he may give a conjecturall guess of the effects of things yet to come, and
resting in deliberation, which proprieties are peculiar to men that are
careful and considerate of such businesses as they do undertake.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampand, coward, A Lion
Rampand, coward.
Purpure, by the name of Rowch. This is termed a Lion Coward, for that in
cowardly sort he clappeth his tail between his legs, which is proper to all
kind of beasts (having tails) in case of extremity and fear, than which nothing
is more contrary to the magnanimity and noble stomach of the Lion, who will not
shrink or be abashed at any encounter, so valiant and resolute is he of nature.

Other sorts of bearing of Animals there be, whose natural actions are hindered
by reason of the apposition of certain Artificial Impediments. As shall
appear hereafter in these next following Escocheons.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampand, Sable, Gorged with
a Collar and a Chain thereto affixed, A Lion Rampand chained.
reflexing over his back, Or, by the name of Meredith. Such form of bearing
may signify some Bearer thereof to be captivated by such an one as was of
greater power than himself.

No beast can be truly said to be free that is tied about the neck, which
Aristotle observes, saying, Nullum animal tunc est liberum, quando collum suum
vinculis habet solutum.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, a Boar, Argent, Armed, grisled,
Collared and Chained, Or, tied to an Holly bush on a mount in base, both
proper. This was the paternall Coat Armor of George Owen Esquire, deceased, a
singular lover, and an industrious Collector of Antiquities, as learned Master
Camden writes in the description of Pembroke-shire. He was owner of the Barony
of Keimes in the said County, which as the same Master Camden there notes,
consists of twenty Knights fees, and twenty six Parishes, over and above the
three Burroughes of Newport, Fishgard, and Saint Dogmaels. By this Master Owens
industry, the printed Map of the said County, was, as you may see in the said
Master Camdens description, composed.

A Horse passant Spanceled.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Horse passant, Argent, Spanceled
on both legs of the nearer side, Gules, by the name of Percivall. Albeit this
Horse be now Spanceled as you see, yet must you not account him to be of so
base and dejected nature, as that he has been forced to this subjection, but
rather won thereunto by tractable usage: for such is the quality of noble
spirits, as that they are rather brought to conformity by gentleness than by
severity, according to the memorable saying of Seneca, Generosus animus
facilius ducitur quam trahitur. For it is with irrational Animals, as with the
Rational, who are rather drawn by the Ears than by the Cloak: That is, they
are sooner won by persuasion, than forced by compulsary means, which being
taken in this sense, the imposition of this Artificial note of restraint, does
no way derogate from the worth of the Bearer.

In the closing up of this third Section of Irrational Animals, I will note
unto you some few examples (not unworthy your observation) of some other sorts
of bearing than have been hitherto spoken of, for that I would not willingly
omit any thing worthy of note, that may serve for your better information: for
I had rather you were ill furnished at my hands, than that I should leave you
altogether disfurnished. The things that I purpose to note unto you in this
place, are briefly these: to wit, That there are some Coat-Armours, whose
Fields (besides their grand charge) do admit some petite charge to be annexed
to the primer charge. Others there are, wherein the field being freed of such
petty Charges, the same are imposed upon the charge it self. Hence it is, that
we have so many Lions and other living things borne Gutte, Billette,
Escalloppe, Pellette, etc. as by this that ensues in part may be seen.

A Lion between Croslets.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lion Rampand, between eight Cross
Croslets, Fitched, 3.2.2. and 1. Or, charged on the shoulder with a Cressant,
Gules, a chief of the second, by the name of Jordane. A like bearing to this
(the chief excepted) has the Lord Delaware for his second Coat, which is
Gules, crusule botonne fitchee, a Lion Rampand, Argent, by the name of Laware,
which I do note unto you for a further instance of such bearing.

A Lion Rampand, and Croslets.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Diamond, a Lion Rampand between eight
Crosses Croslets, Pearl. This Coat Armor pertains to the Ancient Family of
Long of Wiltshire: whereof that Honorable and virtuous Baronnesse, the Lady
Russell, sometime wife to the late right Honorable and thrice worthy Sir
William Russell, Lord Russell of Thornhaw, deceased, was descended: whose
several virtues deserve to be published by a more skillful pen. Yet can I not,
but show my dutiful affection unto them for those many honorable respects
touching my own particular.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, two Lyoncels passant, Argent,
between nine crosses croslets Fitched, Or, an Inescocheon of the second,
charged with a Sinister hand couped at the wrist as the first, in chief one
Cressant surmounted by another (for a difference of a second Brother of a
second.) This Coat Armor belongs to Sir William Acton Knight and Baronet,
Alderman of the City of London, who is descended of the Actons of Aldenham in
the County of Salop, a Family of good worth and note there. I do here in the
blazon mention nine cross croslets Fitched, although the one of them by reason
of the addition of the superjacent Inescocheon is little discerned, and another
of them is by the Cressants somewhat obscured: A like Blazon of an undiscerned
Charge you may see in the 23. Chap. of this third Section, in the Coat Armor
of Kingscot, page 239.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Lion Rampant, in Chief, three
Escallops, Argent, by the name of Clutterbuck.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Lion Rampant, Sable, Gutte, A
Lion Rampand* Gutte.
Or, by the name Bromwich. As this Charge is borne Gutte, so shall the careful
observer find other Charges borne Billette, Pellette, etc. And so concluding
this third Section, I will hasten to the next.

The end of the third Section.
Felices essent Arts, si de his solummodo Artifices judicarent.
THis Fourth Section treats of Coat-Armours formed of things Artificial,
that is, of such things as are wrought by the Wit, Art, and Endeavor of Man,
for the Use of Man: whether we consider such Artificials as appertain to the
use of Civil Life, as the Ensigns of Dignities, both Temporal and
Ecclesiastical; and of Professions, both Liberal and Mechanical: or else as
they belong to the Life and Actions Military; for Artificials being made for
the behoof and several Uses of Men, they are here proposed according to the
several Actions and Estates of Men.

Scientia non habet inimi um praeter ignorantem. The Table of the Fourth
Section.
Artificials as they are borne in Coat-armours, are considered according to
Men's estates and actions. Civil in regard of Pre-eminence of dignity
Temporal, Supreme, as Emperors, Kings, Free States. and their Ensigns are
Borne by the persons themselves having such dignity, as Crowns Chapeaus, Robes
of Estate, Scepters, Mounds, etc. Borne before them as tokens of such their
dignity, as the Sword of Estate, the Lord Chancellors Purse, the great Mace,
etc.
Subordinate, as Princes, Dukes, Grand-Officers, Magistrates, etc. and their
Ensigns are Borne by the persons themselves having such dignity, as Crowns
Chapeaus, Robes of Estate, Scepters, Mounds, etc. Borne before them as tokens
of such their dignity, as the Sword of Estate, the Lord Chancellors Purse, the
great Mace, etc.


Ecclesiastical. Antichristian, as Pope, Cardinals, etc. and theirs likewise
either Borne or worn by the persons themselves, as the Triple Crown, Cardinals
Hat, Pall, Miter, Croysier. Borne before them, as the Cross, Vierge, etc.

Christian and Apostolical, as Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. and theirs
likewise either Borne or worn by the persons themselves, as the Triple Crown,
Cardinals Hat, Pall, Miter, Croysier. Borne before them, as the Cross, Vierge,
etc.



Professions and Arts. Liberal, which are Cardinal or chief faculties, as
Theology for souls, Physic, for our bodies, to which Surgerie also it
referred. Law for our Fortunes.
Subordinate, as the 7 Sciences, Grammar. Logic. Rhetoric. Geometry. Music.
Arithmetic. Astronomy.

Mechanical. For necessity, and so principal, as Agriculture, pasture,
vine-dressings, etc. Clothing, Tailery, etc. Armature, Architecture,
Carpentry, etc. Navigation. Venation, Hunting. Hawking. Fishing.

For delight only, and so less principal Cookery. Embroidering. Painting.
Carving. Playing. On Stage. At Cards, Dice. Tables, etc.




Military whereof some serve for Order, whereof some are of Show, as Banners,
Pennons, Guidhims, Penonsels, Standards, etc. Sound, as Drum, Trumpet, Fife,
etc.
Execution of Order. Invasive of which some are Miffile, as great Ordnances
with their parts and Appurtenances, Bows, Arrows, Darts, Slings, etc.
Manual, as Swords, Spears, Bills, Partisans, Glaives, etc.
Defensive, serving for Man, and are for Defense only, as Shields, Pavices,
Targets, Bucklers. etc. Defense and habit, as Casks, Helmets, Gauntlets,
Corslets, Curasses, with their parts.
Horse, and are ordained for Defense and Ornament, as the Shafrone, Cranet,
Barde, etc. Common use, as Bits, Bridle, Snaffles, Saddle, Stirrops,
Horse-shooes, etc.







SECTION IV. CHAP. I.
AS all Natural things (of which hitherto we have entreated) were made by the
powerful hand of the Almighty and All-wise God for the use of Mankind, Power
infused into man with a soul.
so did God also endue Man with an admirable power infused into him, with a
Reasonable Soul, whereby every Man might invent ways and means to help
himself, and one Man to help another by the benefit of Arts, for the better use
of those things which God and Nature has provided. In which respects Art is
reputed Naturae Simia, Natures Ape, for imitating those things which Nature her
self has framed, as we see in Painting, Poetry, and the like: but we may go
further (since Art goes further, and add, that Art is also Natura Obstetrix,
Medica, Leno? Natures Midwife, Art natures Midwife, Physician, and Pandor.
in helping her for the safer and better producing of her fruits, as is
Husbandry, etc. Natures Physician, in preserving Natures works, as
Architecture, Armature, and Physic it self. Lastly, Art is Natures Pandor, in
setting her out to the most tempting and pleasing fashion by inventing those
things that tend either to the adorning or delight, so to please the senses and
fancies with those things, which in their own Nature without Art, would not be
so contentfull. And therefore Aristotle yields this reason, of the invention
of Arts, Art wherefore invented.
Quia natura multipliciter est ancilla and multis augustis oppressa, ideo
inventa est Ars, ut suppleat defectum Naturae; Nature is much kept under and
oppressed like a Handmaid, and therefore Arts were invented, to supply those
defects of Nature.

In this place therefore we intend from the works of Nature, Progression from
the works of Nature to those of Art.
to come to the works of Art, so far forth, as they are used in Coat Armor.
And here we must be borne with, if we use the word of Art in his largest
signification, including all Sciences, and Knowledge, whether Contemplative, or
Operative and Practick whatsoever; for so Berk.
one has defined it, Art is the cunning of doing or teaching any thing by
certain Rules [or prescript forms:] And therefore Calep. Art taken in the
largest signification.
some have thought Arts to be ab Arctando, Quia arctis brevibusque praeceptis
concluditur; Because it is comprised in brief and compendious precepts: whereas
those who so call it, quia per Artus operatur, for the work of the lims or
joints, they comprehend only Arts Mechanical by that name. Some more probably
derive it from the Greek word Arete, Definition of Art.
which signifies virtue, because the perfect skill or Art of doing any thing,
is properly the virtue of that Action. In handling these Artificials; I will
follow our prescribed Order, Etymology of Art. Order of the Author.
and begin with the Ensigns of the Actions of Estate Civil, and first with the
Highest and Sovereign, as in example.

A Crown Imperial Mitrall.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, a Crown Mitrall, Imperial, Sol,
garnished and enriched with sundry precious Gems, Proper. These Arms do
pertain to the City of Toledo in Spain. This sort of Crown was devised to
represent a twofold dignity united in one, viz. Sacrificall and Imperial (in
which respect I have given it this new-coyned form of blazon:) for in ancient
times, Emperors and Kings were also Priests, Tanta est Sacerdotalis dignitas,
etc. (says Ch^ssa.) so great is the Priestly dignity, that in the glorious
times of the Romans, no man might be Emperor or King, but he was to be also a
Priest; and thence are they styled in Coins, Imperatores, and Pontifices
Maximi; whence we may see that the original was merely Heathenish of the Popes
usurpation of that title, Pontifex Maximus; surely he could find in his heart
also to style himself Imperator Maximus; for that high command he challenges
over all Emperors and Kings. And though this be now the Ensign of the Empire,
yet it is rather in possession of the usurping Papacy.

A Signification of it elevated.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Mars, A Crown Imperial, Sol. This is
called an Imperial Crown, in regard of the Imperial Jurisdiction and
Prerogatives, that an absolute King (to whom such a Crown is due) has within
his Kingdom. The high rising of the Diad^m, does signify the greatness and
perfection of such a King, from whom there is no appellation, forasmuch as he
acknowledges no earthly Superior, in any thing pertaining to his Royal
Jurisdiction, neither owes he duty, but only to the King of all Kings; of
whom he holds by an Immediate right.

The cause that moved the Egyptians to insert a Crown amongst their sacred or
Hierogliphicall letters, may not impertinently be expressed in this place,
where we are to handle their diverse forms according to the several dignities
and estates, to whom they do appertain: for as Gamesters make but cold sport
when there is no money at stake; so knowledge does oftentimes faint, if it be
not seasoned with the Salt of reason. In this Hierogliphick we may observe the
four causes of the Law: The efficient cause is understood by the head of the
King that is adorned with this Crown. The final cause is conceived by the
Flowers, or by the profitable use of fruit: which how great the same in
(likelihood) will be, may be conjectured by the flowers. The material cause
may be gathered by the context or interlaced form, and workmanship of the
Crown, which carries a resemblance of the people or Subjects. Finally, by the
Orbicular form of the Crown is understood Justice, and amongst Mathematicians
the Sphericall form is reckoned the perfectest and most noble, Farnes. 3.65.

The Prince is to the people the author of all goodness, inasmuch as from him,
as from a plentiful Fountain, does flow a sweet current of plentiful streams
of honor, profit and pleasure. In regard whereof he is reputed to be the
common parent of all his Subjects, in that he affords unto them whatsoever a
Natural parent owes to his Children. The platting of these flowers in the
Crown does represent the end of the Law, which end has his determinate period
in utility, Farnes. 4.66. for that Tree which bears no blossoms, for the
most part produces no fruit at all. Ibid.

Crowns in times past have been of great value, and sumptuously enriched with
precious stones, as we may read, 1 Chro. 20.2. And David took the Crown of
their King from off his head, and found it to weigh a Talent of Gold, and there
were precious stones in it. And it was set on David's head.

In these latter ages the Emperor elected (before his Coronation) does write
himself King of the Romans, as a Title of less esteem and dignity than is the
title of Emperor. But in ancient times the Romans had three degrees of supreme
dignity, that is to say, a King, a Dictator, an Emperor; and of these the
dignity of a King was the chiefest, and next thereto, the dignity of a Dictator
was holden the worthiest. And after the Dictatorship, the estate of an Emperor
held the third place as inferior to both the other. Hereof we have a manifest
proof, in that the Senate and people of Rome minding to give unto Octavian the
Emperor (being a man well deserving of them) some advancement or increase of
honor and dignity, they purposed to make him Dictator, which he (reverently
bowing his knee) refused, for that he reputed the same a Dignity more
ambitious; and of greater esteem, and withal more subjected to spite and envy.
Esteeming the Title of the Emperor to be popular and of small account, in
comparison of the eminency of a Dictatorship. We may easily perceive by this,
that Julius Caesar (that time he was Dictator) did affect to aspire to the
dignity of a King; for which cause he was slain, forasmuch as the Citizens
could not endure that he should exercise Royal authority over them: but well
could they suffer him to use the power of a Dictator as a jurisdiction of less
esteem. Leonard. Aretini Epistolar. Lib. 5.

There can be but one King, at one time, in a Realm, whose power must be
absolute, for the better managing of the estate and affairs thereof; for if
there be more, they will cross and hinder each other in his government, and so
destroy the nature of a King, in that neither of them can sway the whole
weale-publick, but each of them should admit a participation in government.
This do both ancient and modern times manifest unto us by examples: for neither
Numa, nor Hostilius, nor Ancus Martius, nor any other of succeeding Kings of
the Romans, could endure any fellow or copartner in government, the like also
may we observe in Kings of modern times; for neither does England or France
admit more than one King, at once to sway the Sovereign state, but one alone
has the sole government: So that it is a thing merely repugnant to the
natural Royal Jurisdiction, that two persons at one time should exercise
Kingly Authority.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, three Crowns in Pale, 3 Crowns.
Sol. Belinus King of this our Britany, having conquered France, Almaine, all
Italy, and the City of Rome, together with all Greece, he returned into this
land, and assumed unto himself new Arms (as Vpton reports) Tres Coronas
auratas in campo Azoreo, quia ipse fuerat terna vice in divesis Regnis
coronatus, Belinus.
Three Crowns Or, in a Field, Azure, because he was three times Crowned King in
sundry Kingdoms. But this kind of Crown is now held proper to such a King as
owes homage or fealty to some other King, as to his Superior Lord: In which
respect some have given it the name of a Crown Homager.

It is in your choice whether you will term the foresaid Crowns, Or, or not;
for it suffices only to mention their Form, because it is proper to them to
be made of Gold. But when they are found to be borne in other kind of Metals or
Colors, you should in Blazoning make mention whereof they are.

A Scepter Royal.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, a Scepter Royal in Pale,
insigned with an Eye, Sol. This is the second Ensign that is borne by the
person himself that has the exercise of Royal Jurisdiction and authority,
This Coat Armor is of diverse Authors vouched to have been anciently borne by
Orysius surnamed Jupiter, the just son of Cham, the cursed son of Noah. The Eye
betokens Providence in government, Oculus enim est custos corporis; The Eye
is the watchman of the body; and the Scepter signifies Justice.

A Scepter (with many nations) is holden for an especial ensign of Royal
Jurisdiction, and authority, and the extending thereof a special note of the
placability and Royal favor of the King. As we may see Hester 15.14. And he
held up his golden Scepter, and laid it upon her Neck. That the Scepter
betokens jurisdiction and authority, it is manifest by that which is written,
Baruc. 6.13. One holds a Scepter, as if he were a Judge of the Country, yet
can he not slay such as offend him: Which is here spoken of the vanity of the
Idols before mentioned in the same Chapter. Now shall you see in Babylon Gods
of Silver and of Gold, and of wood, borne upon men's shoulders to cause them to
fear.

A Mound.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sol, a Mound, Saturn, environed with a
circle, and insigned with a Cross Avellane, Mars. Bara in his book entitled,
Les Blazonnes des Armories, sets down this for the Coat Armor of one
Chawlas. This kind of Cross is called a Cross Avellane, Cross Avellane, what.
for the resemblance it has of a Philbert Nut, which in Latin is called
Avellana. This also is one of the Ensigns that represents the Sovereign
Majesty and Jurisdiction of a King. By the roundnesse of the Mound, and
insigning thereof with the Cross, is signified, that the Religion and Faith of
Christ ought to be received, and religiously embraced throughout his Dominions,
which high duty is residing in his own Sovereign power, and not to be derived
from any foreign Spiritual Jurisdiction.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sol, a Cap of Maintenance, Mars, turned up,
Ermine. A like Cap did Pope Julius the second send with a Sword to King Henry
the eighth. And after him Pope Leo the Tenth gave him the Title, Defender of
the Faith, for that he had then lately before written a Book against Martin
Luther. The Bull by which this Title was given, is now printed by that worthy
and famous Antiquary, Master Seldom in his Titles of Honor, page 54, 55. of
his last Edition. But howsoever the Cap may seem then and thereof to be first
called a Cap of maintenance, yet certain it is, that the Kings of England did
long before that time declare and profess themselves Defender of the Faith, as
by diverse of their Charters yet extant may easily appear, and for an instance
thereof, you may read in the Book of the Acts and Monuments that King Richard
the second in his commission (which went forth in the sixth Year of his Reign)
used these words, Nos zelo fidei Catholicae cujus sumus and esse volumus
defensores in omnibus (ut tenemur) moti salubriter and inducti, etc. page 441.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Luna, a Mantle of Estate, Mars, doubled,
Ermine, Ouched, Sol, garnished with strings fastened thereunto fretwayes,
dependant, and Tasselled of the same. These Arms do pertain to the Town of
Brecknock. The Mantle is a Robe of Estate peculiar to Emperors, Monarchs,
Kings, and Free estates, and thereof perhaps received his name, as I here
understand the same in the strict construction thereof; but taken in the
largest signification, it may represent as well those kinds of Mantles (that
together with some Dignity or Jurisdiction) Emperors and Kings do communicate
unto such as they advance to some Principality, Dukedom, etc.

Hitherto of Honorary Ensigns, that serve for a Declaration of the Royal
Majesty or function of an Emperor or King: and are worn by the persons
themselves, that do exercise Sovereign Jurisdiction over their Subjects within
their Dominions. To which Ensigns I hold it not impertinent to add these few
Attires or Ornaments following, viz. Garters and Tassels, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, three Garters Buckled and Nowed,
Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to the Family of the Sydemers. The Garter
here demonstrated, has some resemblance to that which is the proper Ensign of
the noble society of the Knights of the most honorable Order of the Garter,
instituted by that Famous King Edward the third: every Knight of which Order is
bound daily to wear (except when he is booted for to ride) on his left leg a
Blew Garter, richly decked with gold, and precious stones, with a Buckle of
gold, having these words upon it, Honi soit qui maly pense: and when he is
booted to ride, it suffices to wear upon the same leg under his boot, a Blew
Riband of silk in signification of the Garter. Of this Honorable Order, diverse
have already largely written, as worthy Sir William Segar Garter Principal
King of Arms, Learned Master Camden, sometimes Clarenceaux; and the before
mentioned judicious Linguist Master Seldom, with others, and for the hidden
mysteries which seem to lurk under his Noble Ensign of the Garter, and of
every circumstance thereof, you may read the Book entitled Catechismus Ordinis
Equitum Periscelidis, long find compiled, but lately printed; wherein the
Author among many other observations of this Order, and of this token or ensign
written, that Sicut la larretiere (he means, Periscelis seu fascia
poplitaria) tenet densam caligam caligaque tensa format tibiam, and tibia
hominem compositum reddit: ita justitia stringit tibiam, id est, conscientiam,
quam ad instar tibiae Deus rectam creavit, page, 9, 10. And now I will show you
an example of three of these borne in Coat Armor dimidiated or divided into
halves.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, the perclose of three Demi Garters
Nowed, Azure, Garnished of the first. This was the Coat Armor of the Family of
the Narboons, for I find that Richard Narboon Richmond, Herald, who lived in
the time of Edward the sixth, and was afterward by the High and Mighty Prince
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England, in the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Crowned and Created Vlster King of Arms of Ireland,
bore this Coat Armor with a Martlet, Sable, in chief, for a difference of a
fourth Brother, and John Narboon Richmond, Herald, who lived in the time of
King Henry the eighth, bore the same Coat Armor also, with a difference of a
Mullet for a third Brother. Though this Garter be dimidiated or severed into
two halves, yet does the most permanent part thereof remain, which is that
Buckled and Nowed part of the same, which detaineth and restrains the Garter
being entire, or howsoever dimidiated from dissolution, inasmuch as the Buckle
and interlacing thereof, and of the pendant, are the chief stay and fastening
thereof, whether the same be whole, dimidiated, or howsoever.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Tassels, Or, by the name of
Wooler. The Mantle of Estate which even now I showed you was Garnished (as you
may remember) with strings Tasseled, which kind of Tasseling is an addition to
diverse other strings or cordons, as those used about the habit of the Prince of
Wales at his creation, and of a Knight of the Garter, when he has the whole
habit on, and to the Prelate of the Garter, and others.

Now of those other Honorary Ensigns that are born before an Emperor or King,
or Persons that do exercise Sovereign Jurisdiction, as their Vicegerents
holding place of Supreme dignity under them, in signification of that their
dignity which (for brevities sake) I will here only name, leaving their
examples to be hereafter observed. Such are the Sword of Estate, the Canopy of
Estate, the Cap of maintenance, the Purse, wherein the great Seal is borne, the
great Mace, etc. All which shall follow hereafter in place convenient.

SECT. IV. CHAP. II.
Ensigns Ecclesiastical.
HAving in the former Chapter discoursed of things Honorary, representing Estate
or Dignity Temporal: Let us now consider of such Ornaments as bear a
representation of Estate or Dignity Ecclesiastical, according to the
distribution thereof, of which sort are these ensuing examples.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, a Papal Insula, A Papal Insula.
Insigned with a Treble Crown and a Cross Patee, Or, two Labels pendant,
Argent. This kind of Insula or Miter, is worn by the Antichristian Prelate of
Rome, to signify the threefold Jurisdiction that he does arrogate to himself
as Christ's Vicar general in Heaven, in Earth, and in his supposed Purgatory.
Guido Duke of Vrbin in Italy, who was elected Knight of the most Honorable
Order of the Garter, An. 13. Hen. 7.
Anno 23. Henry 7. did bear this Coat quartered next to his own. As touching
the installation of this Duke, Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight, Sir Richard Bear
Abbat of Glastenbury, and Doctor Robert Sherbourne Dean of Paul's, being sent
Ambassadors to Rome unto Pope Julius, did bear the Collar and Habit of this
Order unto the Duke; Holinshed, p. 1461.
who receiving the same, sent Balthazar Castalio, Knight (a Mantuan borne) to
the King, which Balthazar was installed in his room according to the usual
Ordinance.

blazon or coat of arms Azure, three Clouds radiated, Proper, each adorned with
a triple Crown, Or, and is the Coat of the Right Worshipful Company of the
Drapers of London, not a little dignified by having Henry Fitz Alwin Knight,
Noble by Birth, a Brother of their Company, who was the first Lord Mayor of
this City, in which Dignity he continued twenty four years and a half, he dyed
1212. aged 72.

blazon or coat of arms Ermines, on a Chief, Gules, three Crowns, Or, with Caps
thereunto of the first, and is the Coat of the Right Worshipful Company of
Skinners. This Company has been highly enobled by six Kings, five Queens, one
Prince, nine Dukes, two Earls, and one Lord, who have desired to be admitted
into the Freedom of this worthy Society.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, a Cardinals Hat, A Cardinals Hat.
with strings pendant and platted in True love, the ends meeting in Base,
^ules, these are the Arms of Sclavonia a Region in the Sea Hadriaticum, and is
commonly called W^ndeshmarke, Anno 1251. Onuph. Veronde Cardinal. Institut. p.
162. Chassa. Cat. G. M. part. 1. Conclus. 4.
Pope Innocentius the fourth, ordained that Cardinals should wear red Hats,
whereby he would signify, that those that entered into that Order ought to be
prepared to expose themselves even to the shedding of their blood, and hazard
of their lives (if need so required) in the defense of the Ecclesiastical
liberty. And this Institution was made (according to Chassa.) at the council
holden at Lions, 1273. But they have ever since so far digressed from it, as
that they have more justly deserved that censure of a learned man, thus:
Semiviros quicunque patres radiante Galero
Conspicis, etc. Cardinals Robes.

Whoever makes our carnal Cardinals Weeds,
Their Hat, and pandant Robe of purple stain;
Believe me, it is no crimson juice which breeds
This sanguine hew, nor costly scarlet grain:
But it is the guiltless blood of martyred Saints,
Wherein their thirsty vestures they have died;
Or else it is blushing, which their Weeds depaints,
As shaming at the shameless beasts they hide.


Arms of the Archbishop of Canturbury.
blazon or coat of arms The Feld is Jupiter, a Staff in Pale, Sol, and
thereupon a Cross Patee, Luna, surmounted of a Pall of the last, charged by 4.
other like Crosses Fitched, Saturn, edged and fringed as the second. This
Coat belongs to the Archiepiscopall See of Canturbury, which has annexed
with it the title of Primate and Metropolitan of all England; Title of
Metropolitan of England.
to whose high place it of right appertains to Crown and Inaugurate the
Sovereign Monarkes of this Kingdom. This Ornament is called in Latin
Pallium, Quia ex eo pleni^udo dignitatis Archiepiscopatus in gestante, palam
fit omnibus. What a Pall is, Chassaneus shows in these words, Pallium est
quoddam ornamentum admodum Stolae Sacerdotalis cum quibusdam crucibus nigris
contextis, quod desertur super alia ornamenta, circundans pectus and humeros,
admodum coronae dependens. In ancient time it was (through the intolerable
pride and tyranny of the Roman Bishop) not lawful for any to take upon him
the title of an Archbishop, Ancient Usage
before he had received from the Pope this Ornament which we call a Pall, and
that was reckoned to be a manifest demonstration of the lawfulness and fullness
of his Archiepiscopall Jurisdiction. Besides, he was to take a Corporal oath,
Corporal oath exacted.
to hold faith and obedience to the Church of Rome, at the receiving of this
Pall. No man ought to lend his Pall to any other, but contrariwise the same to
be buried with the possessor and owner.

Sable, a Bishops Miter Argent.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Miter with two Labels pendant,
Argent, garnished, Or. This Coat stands in S. Thomas Church in Nantwich,
otherwise called Which Mulbanke. Amongst the sundry ornaments ordained for the
illustration of the Bishops dignity, Polydore Virgil reckons the Miter for
one, and affirms the same to have been received from the Hebrews. And as
touching the forked shape thereof, The forked shape thereof.
he writes in this manner, Adduntur bina cornua, quoniam Moses acceptis
tabulis, quibus Mandata Dei inscripta erant, visus est suis cornu^us.

A Lion Rampand with a Bishops Crosier.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, on a Lion Rampand, Argent, a
Bishops Croysier in Bend sinister, Or, borne by Odo Bishop of Bayon, half
brother to William Conqueror, by whom he was created Earl of Kent. This Staff
(according to Polydore Virgil) was given to Bishops to chastise the vices of
the people: and it is called Baculus pastoralis, as given to them in respect of
their Pastoral Charge, and superintendency over their flock, as well for
feeding them with wholesome Doctrine, and for defending them from the violent
incursions of the Woe f, wherein they do imitate the good and watchful
Shepherd, of whose Crook this Croysier has a resemblance. Besides these
Ornaments, the same Author speaks of a Ring given to a Bishop, in
signification of the conjunction or marriage of Christ with his Church, whereof
the Ring is a pledge: and of his Gloves, that betokened cleanness of hands,
free from all contagious corruption: and lastly, his Sandals, that betokened
his industrious vigilance over his Flock: all which are said to have been
instituted by the Decrees of Pope Clement.

In Blazon here you shall not say, debruised or oppressed, both in respect the
Croysier extends not to the extremities of the Escocheon, as also in respect
of the slender substance thereof, whereby it may be intended, the Lion may
easily free himself thereof, if it were extended throughout to the Corners of
the Escocheon. Howsoever most true it is, that those who are advanced to the
calling represented by the Croysier, ought to be like Lions, both for courage
and vigilance, in execution of that great authority and jurisdiction, wherewith
Christ and his Church have honored them, for the repressing of obstinate
offenders, and preservation of the Churches Peace and Discipline.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Vert, between six cross
croslets fitched, Gules, three Croysiers, Or, by the name of Wear, of Wear
Gifford in Com. Devon. And is quartered by Fortescue of Filley. This Coat
stands in a care Church in com. predict.

To this head must be referred all other Ornaments properly pertaining to
persons of Ecclesiastical Dignity or Function. But this is sufficient in this
place to show their use in Coat Armor.

SECT. IV. CHAP. III.
OF things Artificial, borne or worn by Persons in Dignity, Things borne by
other persons.
and represented in Coat-Armours, we have spoken in the two Chapters preceding:
In this shall be delivered examples of such Ornaments, or representations of
Dignity, as are borne before Persons of such Majesty or Dignity, for the more
honor of their place and calling.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, a Sword of Estate in Pale, the
point erected, Ruby, Hil^ed and Pomelled, Topaz, the Scabberd enriched with
stones of diverse kinds, set in Goldsmiths work, Proper. The Sword of Estate.
The manner of bearing this Sword varieth according to the several Estates and
Dignities of the persons for whom they are borne. But the same is not borne
before the Head-Officers of Buroughs and other Towns Corporate (says Leigh)
comparable to the Orderly bearing thereof within his Majesty's Chamber of
London, by reason of the want of judgment therein. It is therefore to be
observed, that when the Sword is borne before our Sovereign Lord the Kings most
excellent Majesty, the Bearer thereof must carry the point thereof direct
upright, The Manner of bearing thereof.
the blade opposite and near to the middle part of the forehead. And as to the
form of bearing the Sword before inferior Estates, as a Duke, Marquess,
Earl, etc. I refer the Reader to the Accidence of Armory.

A Mace of Majesty.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, a Mace of Majesty in Bend, Sol. I
call this a Mace of Majesty, to distinguish the same from the Mace borne by a
common Sergeant, not only in form, but also in use; forasmuch as this is borne
in all solemn assemblies before his Majesty, as also before his Highness
Vice-Royes. In like manner the same is borne before the Lords Chancellor,
Keeper, and Treasurer of England, and the Lords President of Wales, and of the
North parts, and the Speaker of the Parliament House in time of Parliament.

The Bearer hereof is called a Sergeant at Arms: whose office is to attend the
Estates and persons aforesaid, for the execution of their commands, for the
Arrests of Traitors, the Remove of forcible Entries, and the Apprehension of
Malefactors. A man that is under the Arrest of a Sergeant at Arms, is
protected all that time from all other Arrests.

The Chancellors purse.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, a Purse open, the long strings
thereof pendant, Fretted, Nowed, Buttoned, and Tasselled, Mars, all hatched,
Topaz, embroidered all over with the Sovereign Ensigns of his Majesty, ensigned
with a Crown Triumphant, and supported of a Lion Gardant, and an Unicorn,
underneath the same an Escrole. This Purse is borne before the Lord Chancellor
and Lord Keeper, as the peculiar Ensign of his High Magistracy, Peculiar
Ensign. His Office.
whose Office is to mitigate the rigor of the common Laws of the R alme,
according to the Rule of Equity, and by apposition of his Majesty's great Seal,
to ratify and confirm the Gifts and Grants of Dignities, Offices, Franchises,
Privileges, and Immunities, Estates in Fee, for term of life, or for years,
granted by his Majesty: as also to correct: and reform whatsoever seems to
him (in any of those Grants) either prejudicial to his Majesty, his Royal
Dignity, Hon ur, or Profit, before he do confirm the same under the Great Seal.
He is (according to Chassaneus) the Kings Vicar, The Kings Vicar.
for that (in his Majesty's stead) he ordains Provincial Governors,
nominateth Judges without election by V^ices, and appoints other officers of
inferior place and service. He has his name 'a cancellando, of cancelling
things amiss, and rectifying of them by the rules of Equity and a good
conscience. Of whose dignity Policratus has this Tetrast^ib.

Hic est qui Leges Regni cancellat iniquas,
Et mandata pii Principis aequa facit.
Siquid obest populis aut legibus est inimicum,
Quicquid obest, per ^um desinit esse nocens.
Ornaments borne before Ecclesiastical persons.
Of Ornaments representing dignity borne before Ecclesiastical persons, the
chiefest are the Cross before exemplified, and the Vierge, which is borne
before them in Cathedral Churches, within their several Jurisdictions, which
I leave to each man's own Observation.

SECT. IV. CHAP. IV.
Badges of dignity.
TO these Honorary Ensigns, as well Temporal as Ecclesiastical worn by the
persons dignified, and borne before them in token of honor, it shall no
infringe our order, if I add such honorable donations and Badges of dignity,
as have in former Ages been bestowed by Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States
upon their Favorites, and upon such others as they esteemed worthy, in respect
of their merits, to possess some pledges of their favor, as testimonies of
their own worth, in which number are Rings, Chains, Collars, Chaplets, and such
like. That these in former Ages were bestowed upon persons advanced to honor,
appears by many evident testimonies, both of sacred and profane History.
Pharaoh minding to advance Joseph (for that he found by experience that God had
bestowed upon him gifts worthy to be highly honored) put upon his Finger a
Ring, and about his Neck a Chain of Gold; Detrahens Pharaoh (says Moses)
annulum suum e manu sua, induit illum in manum Josephi, jussitque illum induere
vestes xylinas, and apposuit torquem au^eum collo ejus, etc. And as touching
Collars of Gold, Collars bestowed upon such as were of the Blood Royal.
they were bestowed for Rewards upon such as were of the Blood Royal of Kings,
or such as were near of Alliance unto them; as appears in the first Book of
Maccabees: Fuitque ut audivit Alexander Rex sermones istos, ut ampliore honor
Jonathanem afficeret, mittens ei auream fibulam, ut mos est dari cognatis
Regum, etc. Of these last mentioned Ornaments, Rings are most usually borne in
Coat Armor.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Gem Rings, Three Rings
enriched with Turkesses.
Or, enriched with Turkesses, Proper. The Romans having lost three great
Battles to Hannibal, one at Ticinum, another at Trebeia, and the third at
Thrasimene, Mago his brother went to Carthage to make report of his happy
Victories to his Countrymen there: and for approbation thereof, he powered
forth before the Senate (as some report) above a Bushel full, and as others
write, above three Bushels and a half full of Rings, Bushels full of Rings.
which had been taken from the Roman Knights. And though custom and time has
made the Ring a common ornament for every Mechanic hand, yet of right none
should use them but such as either Blood, Wars, Learning, or Office and Dignity
had made capable thereof.

The Lacedaemonians waging battle against the Messeni, a people of Peloponnesus
in Greece, to the end their people that deceased in the Wars, should have
funeral rights, and not be exposed (unburied) to all casualties they had
certain Rings about their Arms, wherein their names were engraven.

When Gideon purposed to make an Ephod to signify his thankfulness unto God
for his victories against the Midianites, he required of the Israelites, that
every man would give him the eare-Ring of his prey, whereto they willingly
consented; the value whereof amounted to the weight of one thousand and seven
hundred shekels of Gold, besides Collars and Jewels, and purple raiment that
was on the Kings of Midian. And besides the chains that were about the Camels
necks, Judges 8.24, etc..

The Ring is a Type or representation of fidelity, as appears in the sacred
writs of the Egyptians, for the ancients did not wear Rings on their fingers,
so much for ornament or ostentation, as for use of Sealing, in regard that the
Seal gave a better approbation than the writing did, concerning the validity
and verity of the charter: therefore in after-ages men used to fortify their
last Wills and Testaments with seven Manual Seals, or Rings Manual of
witnesses called thereto, to signify the verity, and validity thereof. Hereof
came that saying of Cicero, ad Quintum fratrem, Annulus tuus non minister
alienae voluntatis, sed testis tuae.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, on a Bend, Gules, Cottized, Argent,
a Rose, between two Annulets of the Field. This is the Coat of the Right
Honorable Edward Conway, Baron of Ragley in Warwickshire, Viscount Conway of
Conway Castle in Carnarvanshire, and of Kilultagh in Ireland, son of Edward
Viscount Conway, son of another Edward Viscount Conway.

Six Annulets.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, six Annulets, three, two and one,
Or, by the name of Vypount. This Coat is quartered by the right honorable the
Earl of Cumberland. These are called Annulets, in respect of their small
quantity, wherein they differ from the bigger sort, and do thereupon receive
the name of diminution, and are supposed to be the Rings of Maile, which
(according to Leigh) was an Armor of Desence long before the hard temper of
Steel, Annulets what.
and was devised by Missius Massinus, and then called an Habergion, for the
nimblenesse thereof: some others take these to be diminutives of the former
Rings. And so from Examples of Artificials representing Dignities, I proceed to
Artificials annexed to Professions or Arts of all sorts.

SECT. IV. CHAP. V.
WE now come to Coat-armours betokening or borrowed from the Arts Liberal:
which (according to Joh. de Tur. Cremat.) are so denominated for three
respects: First, Quia liberam mentem requirunt, to put a difference between
them, and those Mechanical Sciences, wherein Artificers do more exercise their
limbs, than their minds. Secondly, they are called liberal in regard they are
attained without any impeachment of credit, or cawterize of conscience.
Thirdly, for that in times past, only the Children of noble and free born
persons were admitted to be instructed and trained up in them. Patricius says,
that Arts Liberal are so termed, Quia liberos homines efficient ab omni turpi
and sordido questu, etc. Because they make men to be of liberal and ingenious
minds, free from base and sordid covetousness and sensual delights, ennobling
them with true wisdom (the most noble endowment of mankind) whereby men are as
it were linkt unto God, and made most like unto him.

And this especially is effected, by that high and Heavenly Art, Theology, a
Science not invented by man, but proceeding from the Eternal wisdom of the
Almighty, whereunto all other Arts are but Handmaids, in which respect the
Professors thereof are by right, and also by common assent of best approved
Heralds, to have the precedence of all worldly professions whatsoever, and this
Celestial Science tending to the eternal happiness of the Soul, is
accompanied with two other Faculties of great esteem (though inferior to the
former) which are, Physic, and Law; the one respecting the good of our Body
(and therefore worthily to have the next place after our Souls) the other
tending to our outward estates of fortune, which are not to be neglected of the
wisest. And these three we call the Cardinal Sciences, because of their great
necessity and noble use above the other seven Liberal Sciences.

Man naturally desires knowledge, but is not able to attain the perfection
thereof, no, though he be well read in Natural Histories, in Chronography and
Moral Discipline, as may be seen Eccl. 1.13. And I gave my heart to seek, and
search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are done under the Heavens:
this sore travel has God given to the son of man, to be exercised therewith,
and all is but vexation of the spirit. For in much wisdom is much grief, and
he that increases knowledge increases sorrow, Verse 18. And further, by
these, my son, be admonished, of making many books there is no end, and much
study is a weariness of the flesh. Whereby we are given to understand, that
wisdom and knowledge are not gotten without great travel of body and mind,
and when a man has attained to the highest pitch, yet is his mind never fully
satisfied, wherefore we must depend only upon God, and acknowledge that there
is no true felicity in this life. One example I will give you which shall
comprehend all the Liberal Sciences, jointly, which is this next following.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, a Book expansed in Fesse, A Book
expansed with 3. Crowns.
Luna, garnished, having 7 labels with Seals, Sol, and this inscription,
Sapientia and Felicitate, Saturn, between three Crowns of the third. This
Coat Armor pertains to the Famous University of Oxford; the bearing whereof
appears to be very ancient, by that which is engraven on the top of Saint
Samsons Church in Grekelade, in Gloucestershire, where that University in the
old Britains time (as is thought) was first planted. The Book it self some have
thought to signify that Book mentioned in the Apocalypse, having seven Seals;
but these here are taken rather to be the seven Liberal Sciences, and the
Crowns to be the reward and honor of Learning and Wisdom; and the Triplicity
of the Crowns are taken to represent the three Cardinal Professions or
Faculties before specified. The Inscription I find to vary according to variety
of times: some having Sapientia and Felicitate; Wisdom and Happiness: others
(and that very ancient) Deus illuminatio mea, The Lord is my light: others
this, Veritas liberat, bonitas regnat; True h frees us, Godliness Crowns us:
and others thus, In principio, etc. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God. This one Escocheon may serve for a pattern of all the other
Sciences, yet of some of the rest I will give instance.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, ten Billets, four, three, two and
one, Or, by the name of Cawdrey of Bark-shire. This Billet in Armory is taken
for a paper folded up in form of a Letter, for so I understand by the Author
of that French Manuscript which I have so often cited in this Edition, where he
writes of Billets and Bill^ttee, I will presently in my Lord chief Justice
Heaths Coat Armor, show you the very words; in the mean time I for the easier
understanding of that place of the Manuscript, will observe out of Leigh, page
159. the difference between Billets and Billette, which is this: if the number
of the Billets borne in one Escocheon be ten or under, then you must in Blazon
of such a Coat Armor say, he bears such or such a metal or color, and so
many Billets; as in this present Coat Armor of Cowdrey I have done, but if the
number of the Billets, exceed ten, then you may tell the color or metal of the
Field, and then say Billette, as in this next example is more plainly
demonstrated.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Billette, Sable, by the name of
Belvale. Now I will show you one other Escocheon of this kind, with the
addition of a charge thereunto of another sort: but first give me leave to tell
you that this Billette is by some French Heralds Blazoned, Billets sans nombre.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, ten Billets, Or, a Border engrailed,
Argent, Torteux, and Heurty, this is the Coat of Edward Salter of Rich-Kings in
the County of Buckingham, Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir William Salter Knight,
Cup Bearer to the Queen, son and heir of Sir Edward Salter Knight, Carver in
ordinary to King Charles, and Master of the Chancery.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, Billette, Ruby, a Cross engrailed,
of the second. This is the Paternall Coat Armor of that worthy Judge Sir
Robert Heath, Knight, Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of common
Pleas. And now according to my promise I will show you out of the late
mentioned ancient French Manuscript, the very words of that Author, concerning
the bearing of Billets and Billette in Armory, and their difference and
signification; MS. M. 18. page 126. remanente in Officio Armorum.
Billettes cu Billette sont ung peu plus lyngues, que Quarre, which now thus
orthographed signifies in English apiece.
carres and sont une mesme chose si non pour difference de nom, les Bills ou
Billets se numbernt; and le Billette est sans nombre; and a little after, Et
est Billet senefiance de lettres closes qui sont communement plus longues que
lers (I think he means larges) and en plusurs pais appelles bills, parles
quelles len adiouste foy credence and connoissance servantes a corpse dome, and
senefie que celvi que premier les porta en arms estoit home hault and bien
trenchie de members, a qui lun adionstoit foy creance and connoissance en ses
parolles, and en ses Faits.
fais and segret en ses affairs. The Curious Frenchmen I know will much blame
the orthography, but I in this as elsewhere in the like case, have with all the
care I could, followed the very letter of the Author, punctually; although I
know well that since the time that this Author wrote, the French have much
varied their Orthographical^ form of writing.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Pens, Three Pens.
Argent, by the name of Cowpen. This has affinity with the Art of Grammar, and
is therefore here placed. The wisdom of a Learned man, comes by using well
his vacant time: and he that cease not from his own matters and labor, may
come by wisdom: Eccles. 38.34. In ancient ages, before the invention of
Printing, the only means of preserving good Arts (without which the World had
been overwhelmed in Barbarism) was by this silly instrument, The Pen; whereby
greater matters in the World have been achieved, Great things performed by the
pen.
than ever could be by Sword or great Cannon: and a great Monarch said, that he
more feared one blot or dash of a learned Pen, which might wound his fame
amongst all Posterity, than the Armies of his most powerful enemies.

It is a custom with many men that are slow or dull of apprehension, when they
set themselves to write of any serious matter, long to deliberate with
themselves, how they may best contrive the same, and during all the time of
their meditation, to gnaw or bite their Pen, whereupon it seems the Proverb
grew, Demandere Calamum, which may be applied to them that bestow much time,
and take great pains to accomplish that they undertake. Whom shall he teach
knowledge, and whom shall he make to understand the things that he hears?
them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts, Isaiah 28.9.
For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line
upon line, here a little, and there a little, verse 10.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, a Penner and Inkhorne in Fesse, A
Penner and Inkhorne in Fesse.
Gules, stringed, Azure. These are the badges whereby Novices and practitiones
in Learning are known, and by means whereof many men by long practice and
industrious travel do attain to sundry places of Eminency in the
Weale-publick, to the great benefit of themselves, and good of their Country,
and oftentimes do merit to be highly rewarded by the Sovereign; than which
there cannot be a greater Spur to good endeavors, Spur to well-doing.
or more beneficial for the universal good, for that it returns with
plentiful interest: As a certain Author notes; saying, Professoribus atque
veris bonarum Artium studiosis quicquid tribuitur, etc. Whatsoever is bestowed
upon Professors of Arts, and those that are truly studious, that returns an
hundred fold benefit to the Commonwealth; whilst every man performs the
function whereunto he is called: either by preaching the Word of God, or by
forming some politic course of government, or by curing of the diseased.
Whereas on the contrary part, that which is bestowed upon Counterfeit
Professors, Idle Masse-mongers, and Monks, does turn wholly to common
destruction of the general good. Rightly therefore did Frederick the Emperor
bestow double privilege upon such as employed their time and travel in the
practice of good Arts. Double privilege.


A Cheuron between three Text Tees.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between three Text Tees,
Sable, by the name of Toste. Letters have not had originally any one prescript
form of Character, but have in all Ages and Countries varied their form
according to the conceit of their first deviser. As Bekenhawb notes, saying,
Literae sunt quaedam elementa figuram ad voluntatem instituentis factae, ad
notificandum vota hominum absentium, vel tacentium instituta; Letters were
instituted to make known the thoughts of men absent or silent.

The comfortable letter amongst those of ancient time was A; which signified
absolution or pardon: contrariwise the sad and woeful letter was C; which
betokened condemnation or death, the Text letters are ordained for perspicuity
that they may easily be discerned afar off. In such was that vision written
that was commanded to Habak. to be put in writing, that it might be legible
even to him that beheld the same running. And the Lord answered me and said,
Write the vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may run that reads
it, Habak. 2.2.

Three Text Esses.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Text Esses, Or, by the name of
Kekit-More Commendable was the invention of Artemidorus the Phi^osopher, who
read Philosophy to Octavian Augustus. For when he saw him easily inclined to
anger (to the end he should do nothing rigorously, whereof he should afterward
repent) he did admonish him to rehearse the twenty four Greek Letters, that so
his momentany passion (which according to Horace is a fury for the time) might
by some like intermission of time be delivered, and so vanish away. This letter
S as it has the form of a Serpent, so does it resemble their sound and
hissing. So much for Grammatical Escocheons.

Instruments pertaining to Arts Liberal.
Of demonstrable examples of Instruments pertaining to the Arts Liberal, the
number is not great, unless it be of such as do peculiarly pertain to the Art
of Music. As touching the rest, either they have no material Instruments at
all, for that their attaining and exercise are altogether in Discipline and
Instructions by speech only, as Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, etc. Or if they
have instruments, they are such as are common with them to other professions,
as the Rule and Compass, etc. whereof the Carpenter and Mason have use as well
as the Geometrician. As for Globes, Spheres, Quadrants, and other
Astronomicall Instruments, I find them not usual in Coat Armor, wherefore I
let them pass. The Musical Instruments are of three sorts, whereof some are
wind-Instruments, as are the Organs, Shagbuts, Howboyes, Cornets, Flutes, etc.
Musical Instruments. Wind-Instruments.
The second sort consists in strings, and in the skillful fingring of them as
are Harps, Viols, Rebecks, Virginals, Clari cords, Bandore, Alpharion,
Citterne, etc. The third sort consists in striking, as the Taber, Timbrell,
ordinary Drums, and Kettle Drums, and such others, whereof in another place.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sapphire, two Organ Pipes in Saltire, Two
Organ Pipes.
between four Crosses Patee, Pearl. This Coat Armor pertained sometimes to the
Lord Williams of Tame. As touching the first finding out of Musical
Instruments, it is clear that Jubal the son of Lamech did devise them, as
appears, Genes. 4. where it is said, Nomen autem fratris ejus Jubal, is fuit
author omnium tractantium Cithram and Organov.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Howboies between as many
cross Croslets, Three Howboyes with as many Cross Croslets.
Or, by the name of Bourden. Albeit the Harp or Organs are only named to be
the invention of Jubal, yet we must by them understand him to have been the
first deviser of all other Musical Instruments. For so does Tremel^ius observe
in his Annotations upon that place before alleged, saying, His nominibus
Synecd chice comprehendit omnia Instrumenta Musica quae digitis ventoque
moventur. Of some wind Instruments, as the Fife and Trumpet, we shall speak
among Military Instruments.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, on a Canton, A Harp on a Canton.
Sable, a Harp, Argent, by the name of Fraunces. By the Harp (says Pierius)
men used in old time to signify a man of stayed and of a well composed and
tempered judgment, because therein are conjoined diverse distinct sounds in note
or accent of accord. Which office man seems to perform when he does moderate
and reconcile his discording and repugnant affections unto reason: The
signification of the Harp.
and therefore this Instrument was worthily approved in praying, and praising
of God, and used by the godly King David in his most devout Meditations.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Treble Violents, transposed,
Three Treble violents transposed.
Argent, stringed, Sable, by the name of Sweeting. Diogenes (who for his
taunting and crabbed Quips, did merit the surname of Cynicus) not without cause
used to tax Musicians in this, that they could skilfully tune and accord the
strings of their Instruments, but had the affections of their mind
disproportionable and far out of frame. Under these will I comprehend all other
sorts of stringed Instruments whatsoever. And now I will proceed to
Astronomicall examples.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, on a Bend Sinister, Argent, three
of the celestial Signs, viz. Sagittarius, Scorpio, and Libra, Three Celestial
signs on a Bend.
of the first. This Coat is said to appertain to the King of Spain, in respect
that he found out an unknown climate under which his Indians have their
habitation. But in such conquests, it were to be wished that as well Justice
Balance, as Sagittarius his Arrow, or the Scorpions sting were put in practice.

A quarter of the celestial Zodiac.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, on a Bend, Azure, three of the
Celestial Signs, viz. Gemini, Taurus, and Aries; Or. This (like as the other
last precedent) contains a fourth part of the Zodiac, and has no owner
that may challenge any property in him, but is formed by imitation of the
former, and may (doubtless) be as well borne as that, Quia ab esse ad posse
bonum deducitur argumentum, From that which is, to that which may be, we may
well frame a good Argument: It is borne, therefore it may be borne; but of the
contrary you cannot say, it may be, therefore it is. This is another quarter of
the Celestial Zodiac.

SECT. IV. CHAP. VI.
Differences of Arts Liberal and Mechanical.
THough great be the difference of dignity and esteem betwixt the Noble and
Liberal Professions (before entreated of) and those other which we call
Mechanical and Illiberall, because those are the objects of divine spirits and
understanding minds, whereas these are for the most part but the employments
of an industrious hand; yet in these also, as there is great use for the
necessity of man's life, so is there much reputation for the exquisite varieties
of invention. And albeit they are called Illiberal, Quia libere exerceri non
possunt, sine corporis viribus, because they cannot be freely practiced without
bodily labor; yet in another respect they may be more truly called Liberal,
than the Liberal Sciences themselves, for that commonly they bestow more wealth
on their professors, whiles, as Virtus, so Scientia laudatur and alget. In the
first rank of these Illiberals, reason exacts, that Agriculture should have
precedence, it being the chief Nource of man's life, and has in the times of
the ancient Romans, been esteemed an estate not unbefitting their greatest
Dictators and Princes: and it was devised and put in practice soon after the
Creation, as appears in the Text, where it is said, Habel Pastor Gregis,
K^iin vero Agricola; Worthiness of Agriculture.
for here we understand not only Tillage, but also Pastorage, Vintage, and all
kind of increase of Beasts, or fruits for food; under this name of Husbandry.

After the Deluge God made a covenant with Noah, that from thenceforth he would
never destroy mankind by water, as has been before touched: but that his
first ordinance concerning the fourefold seasons of the year should remain
inviolable unto the worlds end; In assurance of this same infallible promise of
God we do fit our actions according to the several seasons; As our Plowing,
Seeding, Mucking, and Dunging of our land, in planting, pruning, and such like.

That Tillage and Husbandry was the first of all the Mechanical Trades (as we
now call them) it is manifest Genesis 2.15. Then the Lord God took the man, and
put him into the Garden of Eden, that he might dress it, and keep it,
Wherein, (says Zanch.) God would moderate the pleasure and delight that he had
given to Adam, in some kind of Trade or course of life, and honest exercise.
Whereof Tillage is of all other the most ancient and commendable, inasmuch as
it was instituted in Paradise, and that in the time of man's innocence before he
had transgressed.

There is a great difference between the Husbandry that man was initiated unto
before his fall, and after; For after his transgression it was performed with
much labor, pain and sweat, and to supply necessity, such as is the Husbandry
now used: for Husbandmen be forced to till the ground, if they will have
wherewith to sustain life; Therefore God said, Maledicta terra propter te, etc.
Cursed be the Earth for thy sake; In sudore vultus comedes, etc. In the sweat
of thy brows shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life, Genesis 3.17.
Thorns also and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the
herb of the field, verse 18. Before Adams fall he was enjoined to till the
ground only to prevent Idleness; such as is the Husbandry that Noblemen are
delighted withal, and do perform the same with great contentment.

There is a kind of Tillage much differing from this, whereof Petrarch says,
Ager est animus, cultus intentio, semen cura, messis labor, hunc si colas
diligenter uberrimum fructum capies: The mind is the field, intention the
Tillage, care the seed, labor the harvest, if thou Husband the field
diligently, thou shall receive a plentiful harvest.

Sometime ease and quietness becomes restless and troublesome, therefore
ought we evermore to be in action and exercised in some good Arts or Studies,
as often as we find our selves ill affected with sloth and idleness which
cannot abide it self. Many are the Instruments pertaining to Husbandry, I will
make choice of some of the chiefest, and of most frequent use in Coat Armor.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Plough in Fesse, A Plough in Fesse.
Argent, by the name of Kroge. It was the manner in ancient time, when a City
was to be built, to limit out the circuit thereof, by drawing of a furrow with
a Plough, as Alex. ab Alex. notes. So was it in use also, when they intended
the final destruction of a City, to plow it up, Plowing of Cities.
and to sow salt therein: as we read, that Abimelech having taken the City of
Sichem, put the people to the Sword that were therein, destroyed the City, and
sowed salt therein; which was done (as Tremellius notes) in token of
perpetual detestation thereof: but that kind of circuiting their Cities, was
an ominous token of succeeding abundance, and fertility of all things which the
Citizens should stand in need of.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, Harrowes.
three Harrowes conjoined in the Nombrill of the Escocheon, with a wreath,
Argent, and as the second, Toothed, Or, by the name of Harrow, This is an
Instrument of Husbandry, ordained for the breaking of Clods, after the
Husbandman has plowed and seeded his land, for the better preparing of the
Corn to take root, and preservation thereof from the Fowls. Moreover, it has
been used sometime by Conquerors, to torture and torment their enemies withal,
and to put them to death. So we read, that David did execute the Ammonites his
enemies, where it is said, Populum vero qui in ea erat eductum dissecuit serra,
and tribulis ferreis, and securibus; and sic fecit David omnibus Civitatibus
Ammonitarum.

Scithes.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Scithes in Pale, Bar,
Argent, by the name of Kempley. The condition of this kind of men is well set
down, Eccl. 38.25 How can he get wisdom, that holds the Plow, and he that
has pleasure in the goad, and in driving Oxen, and is occupied in their
labors, and talks but of the breed of Tullocks?

He gives his mind to make Furrows, and is diligent to give the Kine fother.

Wheels.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gales, three Wheels, Or. This was the
Coat Armor of Sir Pain Roet Knight, who had a daughter married to the famous
English Poet Sir Gefferey Chaucer, I find in Roman History, of a Husbandman
who was accused before the Magistrate for being an Inchanter, for that his
grounds were fertile, when others were barren: a day being appointed, he
promised to bring forth his Enchantments, and then brought forth his Plowes,
Carts, Oxen, etc. saying, Haec mea incantamenta, These are my conjurings:
meaning that his industrious care made his grounds fertile, which others
neglecting, found the punishment of their Idleness.

Wheels are the Instruments whereby Chariots, Wagons, and such like things are
carried both speedily and with great facility: and they are so behoovefull for
these uses, as that if any one of them happen to fall off, the whole carriage
must either stand still, or at least is forced forward with great difficulty.
As we may see, Exodus 14. where God took off the Wheels of the Chariots of the
Egyptians, that vehemently prosecuted the Israelites, as appears, verse 25.
And he took off their Chariot Wheels, and they drove them with much ado, so
that the Egyptians said, I will fly from the face of Israel, for the Lord
fights for them against the Egyptians.

The Wheel is called in Latin Rota, a rotunditate, or else (as some hold) a
ruendo quia in declive faciliter ^uit, because it rowleth down suddenly from
the steep declining part of the ground.

Other sorts of Wheels there are, which albeit they are not meet for
Husbandry, yet I have held it fit to annex them to these, in respect of their
near resemblance, as in these examples may be seen.

Katharine Wheel.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Bend, Azure, three Katharine
Wheels, Argent, by the name of Rudhall. In the primitive age of the Church,
even children and young Virgins, for the profession of their faith, did
constantly endure most terrible deaths, as did S. Katharine by this kind of
Wheel, wherewith all her tender lims were bruised and rent in pieces. Now men
will scarce be true Christians, when they may be such, not only without
punishment, but both with quietness and commendation also.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cross, Gules, in the first
Quarter, a Katharine Wheel of the second, Cross and Katharine Wheel.
which was sometimes borne by Robert de Stone.

Under this Head may we aptly bestow all other Instruments pertaining either to
Husbandry, or to the several Trades of Shepherds, Vinedressers, Bakers,
Brewers, Vintners, etc. for that these are all grounded upon Agriculture or
Husbandry.

SECT. IV. CHAP. VII.
AGriculture is for mere necessity; clothing is partly for it, and partly for
ornament and decency: but had not Man sinned, he had not needed clothing: which
were worth the considering by those who are so proud of their apparel.

As touching such Arts or Trades, that we call Handycraft or Mechanical
professions, so called, perhaps of Moecha which signifies an Harlot or an
Adulterous person, for that as an Harlot covnterfeiteth the modest behavior of
a modest Matrone, so do Mechanical Artizans labor to resemble the works of
Nature, In quantum possunt: These are not performed so much by wit and
invention (like as the Arts Liberal are) as they be by exercise of the Limbs,
and labor of the body. And hereof they are thought to be called Arts, ab
artubus, which properly do signify the muscles, sinews, or other ligaments of
the Body; but metaphorically it is often taken for the limbs themselves that
are so combined and connected together.

How meanly soever we reckon of these in a Relative comparison to the Arts
Liberal, nevertheless it is clear that these (no less than those) do proceed
from the immediate gift of God, as does plainly appear by B^zaleel and Aholiab,
Exodus 35.3) and are no less behovefull and necessary for man's use, and for the
support of humane traffic and society; as we may see Ecclesiast. 38.31. Where
after he had made mention of the care and diligence the Carpenter, Porter and
Smith, and other men of Trade do use in their several professions, he
concludes thus, All these trust their hands, and every one bestows his
wisdom in his work. Without these cannot the Cities be maintained nor
inhabited; hereby we see the necessity of these Artificial or Mechanical
Trades, or professions.

With little reason may any man contemn the Tokens of Instruments, pertaining
to Mechanical Trades or professions, sithence they are express notes of
Trades, so very behoovefull for the use of man's life, and their exquisite skill,
and knowledge issued out of the plentiful Fountain of Gods abundant Spirit.

In things Artificial, that manner of translation is reckoned the more worthy
from which it is extracted, than that whereunto it is transferred, acording to
that saying, Transmutatio in rebus Artificialibus famosius dicitur esse de
genere ejus ex quo, quam ad quod.

blazon or coat of arms Sable, a Cheuron between three Tuns, Argent. This is
the Coat Armor of the Worshipful Company of Vintners.

Wooll-cards.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Wooll-Cards, Or, by the name
of Cardington. Marcus Varro makes mention, that within the Chapel of Fortune
was kept the very Royal Robe or Mantle of Estate, that Tanaquil the wife of
Tarqui^ius Priscus made with her own hands after the manner of Water-Chamlet in
wave-work, which Servius Tullius used to wear.

Fusiles upon Slippers.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Fusiles upon Slippers, Gules,
by the name of Hobby. These are called Fusiles of the Latin word Fucus, which
signifies a Spindle of Yarne, Marcus Varro reports, that in the Temple of
Sangus, there continued even till the time that he wrote his Book, the Wool
that the Lady C^ia Cecilia did spin, together with her Distaff and Spindle. As
for the Antiquity and necessary use of spinning, we have an undoubted president
in the 35. of Exodus, 25, 26. Where it is said, And all the Women that were
wise-hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun,
both of blew and of purple, and of skarlet and fine linen: And all the Women
whose hearts stirred them up in wisdom, spun Goats hair.

Fusiles transposed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Fusiles upon Slippers
transposed, the points downward, Argent. This Coat is quartered by Knowell of
Sandford. Closter the son of Arachne, taught first the making of the Spindle
for woollen yarne. It was (says Pliny) a fashion and custom at Rome, that
when Maids were to be wedded, there attended upon them one with a Distaffe
dressed and trimmed with kembed Wool, as also a Spindle and Yarne upon it, to
put them in mind, that Huswivery and Wivery were to go together. Fusiles (says
Leigh) are never pierced or voided, but are diversely borne, in respect of
their local position or mutation: and the Frenchmen (says he) take them for
Spindles, we take them for Weavers Shuttles, and the Dutch for Mill pecks.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between three Wharrow
Spindles, Wharrow Spindles.
Sable, by the name of Trefues. This Spindle differs much from those
precedent, in respect of the crook above, and of the Warrow imposed upon the
lower part thereof. This sort of Spindle women do use most commonly to spin
withal, not at the Turn as the former, but at a Distaffe put under their
girdle, so as they oftentimes spin therewith going. The round Ball at the lower
end serves to the fast twisting of the thread, and is called a Wharrow: and
therefore this is called a Wharrow Spindle, where the other are called
Slippers, that pass thorough the Yarne as this does.

blazon or coat of arms Sable, a Cheuron, Ermine, between two Habicks in chief,
and a Tessell in base, proper. This is the bearing of the worshipful Company
of the Cloath-workers.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Weavers Shuttles, Weavers
Shuttles.
Sable, tipped and furnished with Quils of Yarne, the threeds pendant, Or, by
the name of Shuttleworth. Weaving was the invention of the Egyptians, and
Arachne was the first Spinner of Flax thread, the Weaver of Linen and knitter
of Nets, as Pliny notes. But it seems that those Arts were at first learned
by imitation of Silkewormes, Spiders, and the like, whose subtle works no
mortal hand can watch.

Under this Head must be reduced all manner of Tools and Instruments borne in
Coat Armor, and pertaining to the several Trades of Weaving, Fulling, Dying,
Sheering, etc. As also such as do pertain to the several mysteries or
occupations of Embroiderers, Sempsters, and such others. Amongst Artificers and
men of Trade (says Chassaneus) this is a note of observation, that each one is
to be preferred before other according to the dignity of the Stuff whereon he
does exercise his Trade. Hereto we will annex some examples of Taylory.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Topaz, a Maunch Ruby. A Maunch.
This Coat Armor pertained to the honorable Family of Hastings, sometimes
Earls of Pembrook, and is quartered by the right Honorable Henry Gray, now
Earl of Kent. Of things of Antiquity (says Leigh) that are grown out of use,
this is one which has been, and is taken for the Sleeve of a garment. Which
may well be; for you may see in old Arras clothes, garments with Sleeves
wrought not much unlike to this fashion, but now much altered from the same;
for fashion and times do go together. That this is a Sleeve, I will make more
apparent by this next example.

A Dexter Arm with a Maunch.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Dexter Arm habited with a Maunch,
Ermyne, the hand holding a Flower de Lis, Or. This Coat Armor pertains to
William Mohan, alias Sappell, sometime Lord of Dunstore. This word Maunch
seems to be derived from the Latin word Manica, which signifies the sleeve
of a garment. And the same of some Armorists, is termed Manche mal tailee,
Quast manica male talliata, as an ill shapen sleeve. The signification of a
Maunch.
To wear Sleeves unto any sort of Garment, was with some people holden
reproachful, as appears in the exposition of the Epistle of S. Hierome ad
Eustochium, Hieron Epist. ad Eustochium.
in these words Objiciebatur quasi delicatum, apud Maronem quod tunicae
haberent Manicas. The coming of the hand out in this manner does show the same
to be a Sleeve. For (if you observe) you may herein discern the bought of the
Arm in the midst, as also the Elbow opposite thereunto, and the widing
thereof at the shoulder, as if the same were enlarged with a Gusset under the
arme-pit. Also the hanging down of the bag from the Handwrist, does concur with
that form of Sleeve which the women of Galoway in the North part^ of Ireland at
this day do use. The same does the former also express, although in a more
obscure manner, as if you compare one of them with the other, you may easily
perceive.

As touching apparel, we find that though the same be made chiefly to cloth
our nakedness, yet shall we find that they were not only ordained by the
invention of Man, but also allowed (and for some special end) expressly
commanded by God himself to be made and provided, as we^ for glory, as also for
ornament and comeliness, as appears, Exodus 2^ Likewise thou shall embroider
the fine linen coat, and thou shall make the mitre of fine linen, and thou
shall make the girdle of needle work. And for Aarons sons thou shall make
coats, and thou shall make for them girdles, and bonnets shall thou make for
them for glory and for beauty.

Rich Garments and costly Jewels are reckoned ornaments, as appears, 2 Samuel
1.24 Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with
other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. And they be
called Ornaments, because they do illustrate and adorn, or beautify the
person that is garnished with them.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Maunches,
Sable, by the name of Maunsell, of which Sir Thomas Mounsell of M^rgan or
Morgan in the County of Glamorgan was the third Baronet of England, being so
created 22. of May 1611. whose Grandson (as I take it) Sir Edward Maunsell now
enjoyes the title and estate, there is also another Sir Edward Maunsell Baronet
of this Family, also descended from Francis Maunsell of Muddelscombe in the
County of Carmarthen, Baronet, so created 14. July 1621.

To this head may be reduced, all sorts of things whatsoever pertaining to the
adorning, decking, or trimming of the body, as Combs, Glasses, Head-brushes,
Curling-Bedkins, etc. And also Purses, Knives, etc.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Combs, A
Cheuron between three Combs.
Argent, by the name af Tunstall. The Comb is a necessary instrument for
trimming of the Head, and seems (as touching the form thereof) to have been
devised by imitation of the backbone of a Fish: and serves not only for
cleansing the Head from danderuffe and other superfluities; but is of most use
with women for shedding and trimming their hair and head-tires, wherein some
of them bestow more labor for the adorning of them than their whole body is
worth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between three Palmers
Scrips, Sable, the Tassels and Buckles, Or. These are the Arms of Sir Henry
Palmer of Howlets in the Parish of Beak Burn in the County of Kent, Knight,
Controuller of his Majesty's Navy Royal, Son of Sir Henry Palmer of the said
Place Knight, sometime Admiral of the Narrow Seas, and Controller of the Navy
Royal. These Arms, although some part of them allude unto the name, are very
ancient, and were inpaled in Ottford Church in Kent before it was burned, where
this Knights ancestors had some possessions; with the several Coats of the
Torre^ls, Fitzsimonds and Tirells: And in the Chancell at Snodland in Kent
Thomas Palmer that married with the daughter of Eitzsimons, lies buried, of
whom I have read this Epitaph not derogating from the best of versifying in
that Age: Palmers all our Fathers were,
I a Palmer lived here
And traveld still, till worn wud Age
I ended this worlds pilgrimage,
On the Blessed Ascension Day,
In the Cheerful month of May,
A thousand with four hundred Seven,
I took my Journey hence to Heaven.


Sir Thomas Palmer of Leigh near Tunbridge in Kent Knight, Grandfather to the
Elder Sir Henry Palmer Knight, before recited, was owner of the Manors of
Tottington and Eccles in Aylesford and Boxley adjoining to Snodland aforesaid,
which came unto this Family by a match with a daughter of the Lord Poynings:
and Katharine Palmer, this S. Thomas Palmers Sister, was married to Jhon Roe of
Boxley in Kent Gent. Father of Reginald Roe of Leigh aforesaid, Gentleman,
ancestor to Sir Thomas Roe Knight, now living, 1632. whose worthy merit in the
discharge of many Embassages, wherein he has been employed by this state,
deserves to be remembered with an honorable Character.

A Chief with three Beysants.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Argent, on a Chief, Gules, three
Beysants, by the name of Russell (sometime of Durham) in the County of
Gloucester. What Beysants are, and of what form, weight and value they were in
ancient time, and why they were so named, I have already showed in my first
Section, page 30. in the blazon of the bordure of Richard Plantagenet King of
the Romans and Earl of Cornwall; whereto I refer you, for the avoiding of
needless repetition.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, two Bars, Argent, in Chief, three
Plates. This is the Coat of that honorable and ancient Family of Hungerfords,
sometime Barons of this Kingdom, till in Henry the fourths days, the Heir of
Robert Lord Hungerford, Botreux Molins and Moles was married to Edward Lord
Hastings, and had George first Earl of Huntington.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Ermine, on a Fesse, Gules, three Plates.
This Coat Armor pertains to that worthy Gentleman, John Milward, one of the
Captains of the City of London, and first Governor of the Corporation of the
Silk-trade. Some Armorists are of opinion that Beisants and Plates in Armory,
are Emblems of Justice and equal dealing among men.

blazon or coat of arms This was the Coat Armor of that Learned Gentleman Sir
John Brampston Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, late deceased,
and is thus blazoned, Or, on a Fesse, Sable, three Plates.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse Checquie, Argent, and Azure,
between three Bezants, by the name of Pits, and is the Coat of -- Pits Esquire,
who married Lady Jane second Daughter of John Earl Rivers, she having been
first Widow of the Lord Chandos, and secondly of Sir William Sedley, Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Beysants, each charged with a
Crowned King, his Robes, Sable, doubled, Ermine, sustaining a covered cup in
his right hand, and a Sword in his left, of the second. This Coat pertains to
John de Lylde the eighteenth Bishop of Ely.

blazon or coat of arms Gules, a demi Virgin, her hair disheveld, Crowned,
issuing out, and within an Orle of Clouds, all proper. This is the Coat Armor
of the right worshipful Company of Mercers, being the primer Company of the
City of London, as it was most accurately, and lively demonstrated at the
inauguration of the Right Honorable John Dethick, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, in the year of our Lord, 1655.

blazon or coat of arms Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between nine Cloves, Sable.
This is the bearing of the worshipful Company of the Grocers.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, six Plates, Sex Plates.
3.2. and 1. by the name of Punchardon. These are bullions of Silver, having no
manner of impression upon them, but are only prepared ready for the Stamp. In
the Blazoning of this, and of the other last precedents, there is no mention
made of their color; because, as the formore are evermore Gold, so in like
sort, are these always Silver.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Topaz, a Cheuron, Sapphire, between three
Heurts. This is the Coat of Sir John Clepole Knight and Baronet, Clerk of the
Haniper, Father of John Clepole Esquire, Master of the Horse, who married
Elizabeth, second Daughter of Oliver late Lord Protector.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, ten Plates on a Chief, Argent, a
Lion passant of the field, and is the Coat of Sir Orlando, and Sir James
Bridgman, sons of that Reverend Prelate John Bridgman, Lord Bishop of Chester,
so consecrated 1618.

Argent, on a Bend engrailed Sable three Plates.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, on a bend engrailed, Sable, three
Plates. This Coat Armor pertains to the Ancient Family of the Cutts's of
Arkesden in the County of Essex, where in the Parish Church remains a Monument,
whereupon these Arms here demonstrated, as the paternall Coat Armor of this
Family, are portraied: Near unto which Tomb lie interred Richard Cutts
Esquire, and his four sons, viz. Richard Cutts Esquire, eldest son, who erected
that Monument, Sir William Cutts Knight, second son (and lately his only son
and heir Richard Cutts, Esquire) Frances third son, and John the fourth son;
which Frances married Katharine one of the daughters and coheirs of John
Bondivile or Bonvile of Sponton in the County of York, Esquire, who for his
Coat Armor bore Sable, Six Mullets, three, two, and one, Or. Leigh writes in
his Accidens of Armory, page 14, 15. That that Coat Armor whose field
consists of Argent, and the charge of Sable (as you see the Coat of Cutts
does) is the most fair kind of Bearing, and with him agree other Armorists:
Leigh there shows this reason, because Argent or White will be seen in the
darkest place, and Sable or Black in the clearest light; And since these two of
all other Colors may be discerned farthest off, therefore is the Shield thus
borne and charged called the fairest.

Royalty of Coining.
In respecct we are now come to speak of Stamps and Coins; I hold it not
impertinent (by the way) to give some little touch of the Royalty of Coining.
It is therefore to be observed, that the power to Coin money, has been
evermore reckoned to be one of the Prerogatives that in our common Law we do
call Jura Regalia, and pertains to the Sovereigne power amongst many regal
immunities to that supreme jurisdiction peculiarly belonging, and to none
others.

Nevertheless we read that Monarchical Kings and Sovereign States imparted
this prerogative or pre-eminence unto others their inferiors upon special
acceptable service done, or for whatsoever private respect; as we may see 1
Maccab. 15.6. Where amongst many other preheminences granted by Antiochus the
son of Demetrius to Simon the high Priest, which had been formerly granted to
him by the predecessors of Antiochus, he enableth him to coin money, saying, I
give thee leave to coin money of thine own Stamp within thy country.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cheuron, Sable, three Bezants,
by the name of Bond of Cornwall a very ancient family, from whence those of
London are descended.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Peny-yard pence, Proper, by
the name of Spence: these are so named of the place where they were first
coined, which was (as is supposed) in the Castle of Penny-yard near the Market
Town of Rosse, situated upon the River of Wye, in the County of Hereford.

To this head must be reduced all other sorts of Bullion or Coin, and
whatsoever else pertains to Traffic or commerce.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Purse Overte, Gules. This Coat
pertains to the family of Conradus Wittenbergensis Comes, that was first
invested by Henry the fourth, Emperor, to whom he gave faithful aid in his
wars; and did much detest the strife betwixt him, and Rodolph of Swevia, his
competitor to the Empire, whom the Pope had nominated Emperor; he much
labored a pacification of the tumults then stirred up in Germany, as Hemingius
in his Genealogies notes.

By this open Purse, we may understand, a man of a charitable disposition, and
a frank and liberal Steward of the blessings, which God has bestowed upon
him, for the relief of the needy: Of such an one S. Herome has this saying,
Non memini me legisse mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera charitatis
exercuit; habet enim multos intercessores, and impossible est multorum preces
non exaudiri.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron between three Irish
Broges, Or. This Coat pertains to the Family of Arthure of Ireland: There is
another family of the Arthurs in Ireland that bears a Chevron between three
Sufflues, what a Sufflue is Boswell in his Armor of Honor, p. 124. h. shows.
Some call Sufflues, Rests.
the pulling of a man's Shoe (which in Irish is called a Broge) seems to have
been a note of reproach, or infamy, as we may gather by that which Moses has
observed unto us, Deuteronomy. 25. where it is showed, that if a man happen to dye
issulesse, then his next kinsman should marry his wife, and raise up to his
brother a name amongst the Israelites: which if he refused to do, then upon
complaint by her made to the Elders, he was warned before them, if then he
refused to marry her, then came the woman to him in the presence of the Elders,
and pulled off his Shoe, and did spit in his face, and say, So shall it be
done unto the man that will not build up his Brothers house: And his name was
called in Israel, The house of him whose Shoe is pulled off.

Though the Shoe be an habit serving for the foot, which is the most inferior
part of man's body, yet is it not therefore to be contemned; forasmuch as it is
a note of progression, and very behovefull for Travelers: In the Scriptures it
is often taken for expedition, as Psalm. 60. In Idumeam extendam calceamentum
meum; And proceeding to Idumea, I will cast my Shoe over it.

It was an ancient custom amongst the Israelites (in transferring of
possessions) for him that departed therewith to pluck off his Shoe, and to
deliver the same to his neighbor, as now it is with us, to pass livery and
Seizin of Inheritance by the delivery of a Turffe, and Sprigs taken off the
ground, and delivering the same to the purchaser: As appears in the book of
Ruth, where it is said, Now this was the manner before time in Israel
concerning redeeming and changing, for to stablish all things: A man did pluck
off his Shoe and gave it to his neighbor, and this was a sure witness. By
which Ceremony he publicly acknowledged that he had transferred, and put over
his whole right unto the purchasor, Ruth. 4.7, 8, 9.

But in after ages, it seems the Jews passed inheritances by Charters,
sealed and testified by witnesses (a custom of use with us at this day at the
Common Law) as appears in the Prophecy of Jeremiah; Men shall buy fields for
silver, and make writings and seal them, and take witnesses in the Land of
Benjamin, and round about Jerusalem, etc. 3^.44. And again, Jer. 32.25. And
thou have said unto me, O Lord God, buy unto thee a field for silver, and take
witnesses. And I bought the field of Hananeel my Uncles son, that was in
Anathoth, and weighed him the money; even seventeen Sheckles of silver: and I
subscribed the Evidence, and sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed him the
money in the balances, etc.

Now sithence, I am casually fallen upon this argument of sealing of Deeds, I
hold it not amiss, to give some little touch (by the way) of the first coming
in of this custom of Sealing (in this our Nation) which is now of so frequent
use amongst us.

First, it is to be observed, that our Ancestors the Saxons, had not the same
in use, for they used only to subscribe their names, commonly adding the sign
of the Cross: And I need not to prove the same by the testimony of diverse
witnesses, for this custom continued here in England, until the time that this
Realm was conquered by William Duke of Normandy; who together with the state of
government (a thing of commom custom with absolute Conquerours) did alter the
before mentioned custom of testification of deeds, into sealing with wax;
whereupon the Norman custom of Sealing of deeds, at length, prevailed amongst
us. Insomuch that the before mentioned use of the Saxons, therein was utterly
abolished: As witnesses Ingulphus the Abbot of Crowland, saying, the Normans
do change the making of writings, which were wont to be firmed in England with
Crosses of gold, and other holy signs, into printing wax. And they rejected
also the manner of English writing: This change was not effected all at once,
but took place by degrees, So that first the King only, and some few of his
nobility besides, used to Seal; Afterward Noblemen for the most part and none
others.

At this time also as Joh. Ross. notes, they used to grave in their Seals
their own Pictures, and counterfeits covered with a long Coat over their
Armours.

After this Gentlemen of the better sort took up this fashion: And because they
were not all Warriors, they made seals engraven with their several Coats or
Shields of Arms for difference sake, as the same Author reports.

At length, about the time of King Edward the third, Seals became very common:
so as not only those that bear Arms used to Seal, but other men also
fashioned to themselves Signets of their own devising: Some taking the letters
of their own names, some Flowers, some Knots, and flourishes, and other Beasts
and Birds, or some other things, as now we behold daily in use.

SECT. IV. CHAP. VIII.
HAving exemplified such bearings as are borrowed from the two Arts of
nourishing and Clothing our Bodies; the third place may justly be challenged
by that Art, which we call Armature; What understood by Armature.
whereby we are defended from all outward injuries, either of Foes or Weather:
for by Armature: we understand not only those things which appertain to
Military profession, (where of we will speak in it is proper place) but also
those defensive Sciences of Masonry and Carpentry and Metal works, which do
concur to building and other necessary strenghtning for protection of our
weak Carcases. For houses are mansions for our Bodies, as our bodies for our
Souls; and the weakness of the one, must be supplied by the strength of the
other. Escocheons of this kind are these which ensue, as first, for Masonry
and Stone-work

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Pickaxes, Three Pickaxes.
Argent by the name of Pigot. This Coat may compare for Autiquty with any; in
respect that it, or some such Instrument, seems to have been used by the most
Ancient of Mankind, who was appointed to dig and delve in the Garden of Eden.
Where we may see, how little cause any (though of Noblest and Ancientest blood)
has to be proud, if he looked unto the Pit whence he first was dug, being
the very same from whence the meanest also is derived.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, on a Cheuron between three milpecks,
Argent, as many Mulets, Gules, by the name of Mosley of Stafford shire. This is
an instrument of great use, by which the bluntness of the millstone is amended;
the Mill it self, as every one well knows, is very useful in a
commonwealth, for with it corn is grownd and made fit for bread, which is the
staff of humane life.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron, between three Mallets,
Or. this was the Coat of Sis Stephen Some Knight, Mayor of London. A
prayse-worthy and noble Citizen; from whom a hopeful progeny are descended.

Three Mallets.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Mallets, Gules, by the name
of Forte. Touching this and sundry other Instruments, we must observe, that
whereas such Instruments are usually made by one Trade, and used by another,
(as the Smith makes the Axe which the Carpenter does use,) we thought it
fittest to place them under those Arts for whose use they were made (the end
and use of each thing being the perfection thereof) than to refer them to those
Arts which form and make them. Use the perfection of things.


Three Levels with their plummets,
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, thee Levels with their Plummets, Or,
by the name of Colbrand. This Instrument is the Type of Equity and uprightness
in all our Actions, which are to be levelled and rectified by the Rule of
Reason and Justice. For the P^ummet ever falls right, howsoever it be held, and
what ever betide a Virtuous man, his Actions and Conscience will be incorrupt
and uncontrollable.

Reference.
To this head must be reduced all manner of Instruments that do pertain to the
several Trades of Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Pavyers, and such others, whose
work consists of Stone, Lime, or Mortar. So much may suffice for examples
for Masonry. Now we come to Carpentry, as may appear by these next following
Escocheons.

A Cheuron between three Squares.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron between three Carpenters
Squares, Sable, by the name of Atlow. Artificers (says Plutarch) do use their
Squares, their Rules, their Lines, and Levels; they go by measures and
numbers, to the end that in all their works there should not be any thing
found done, either rashly or at adventure: and therefore much more should Men
use the like moderation and rules in the performance of those Actions of virtue
wherein man's happiness does consist; especially those who sit in the Seats of
Justice, which in Moses time were wont to be Men Fearing God, and hating
covetousness, which is the perfect Square which such ought to follow. But
Aristotle writes of a Lesbian Square or Rule, which was made of so flexible a
stuff that it would bend any way the workmen would have it: but most dangerous
is the Estate of that Commonwealth, whose Judges work by such Squares, making
the Laws to bow to their private affections, and sometimes to mean one thing,
another time the contrary, as themselves are disposed to incline.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse between three Hatchets, A
Fesse between three Hatchets.
Argent, by the name of Wrey. This Instrument is also much used in Execution
for beheading of great offenders. In which sense, Jordanus Vrsinus, Viceroy of
Sicily, being imprisoned by his own Son, gave for his Imprese, an Axe, and a
pair of Fetters, with this Motto, Patientia in adversis; to show his
resolution and patience in so great an indignity. Not many years since, there
was a reverend Judge of this Family, with whose function this Coat suited very
aptly, forasmuch as he did execute the Office of Chief Justice of England.

blazon or coat of arms Azure, three Dolphins naiant in Pale, between two pair
of Lucyes Saltier-wayes, proper, crowned, Or, on a Chief, Gules, three couple
of Keys crossed, as the Crowns. This is the Coat Armor of the worshipful
Company of the Fishmongers.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, a Cheuron Ingrailed, between three
Compasses Dilated, Sable. These Arms do pertain to the Company of Carpenters.
Arms of the Company of Carpenters.


Under this head must be comprehended all sorts of Instruments (whereof there
is use in Coat-Armours) pertaining to the several trades, of Joyners,
Milwrights, Cartwrights, Turners, Cowpers, etc. Reference.
and whatsoever other Trades, whose use consists, and is exercised in working
or framing of ^imber, Wainscot, or any sort of Wood. And so from Tools of
Masonry and Carpentry borne in Coat Armor, we come to Instruments of
Metal-work (the other Species of Armature) whether the same be malleable and
wrought by Hammer, or Fusil, and formed by Fire.

blazon or coat of arms Argent, on a Cheuron, Gules, between three Gads or
pieces of Steel, Azure, as many pair of Shackles or Manicles, Or. This is the
Coat Armor of the worshipful Company of the Iron-mongers.

Arms of the Company of Smiths.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sable, a Cheuron between three Hammers,
Argent, crowned, Or. This Coat Armor belongs to the Company of Smiths, whose
trade of life, as it is most laborious, so is it of most behoof for the
strength both of private men's persons, and of Kingdoms: and therefore the Iron
Hammer does well deserve the Crown of Gold on it. Iron it self in respect of
the use being much more precious and necessary for a Common wealth, Necessity
of Iron.
than Gold is: which the Enemies of Gods people knew very well, when they would
not permit a Smith to live amongst the Israelites, as may be seen, 1 Samuel
13.19. where it is said, Then there was no Smith found throughout all the Land
of Israel: for the Philistians said, least the Hebrews make them Swords or
Spears. The Hammer and Anvill are two of the chiefest instruments of this
Trade, for forging and forming of things malleable for necessary use. Of these
does Ecclesiasticus make mention, Chap. 38. v. 28. where speaking of the
laborious travel of the Smith, he says, ^he Smith abides by his Anvill, and
does his diligence to labor the Iron; the vapor of the fire dries his flesh,
and he must fight with the heat of the furnace: the noise of the hammer is ever
in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the thing that he makes: he sets
his mind to make up his work, therefore he watches to polish it perfectly.

The bearing of Nails.
blazon or coat of arms This Coat Armor is borne by the name of Clovell and is
thus blazoned: The Field Argent, two Cheurons, Sable, each charged with five
Nails, Or. The nail has had his use in Military Service, as well as
Domestic Use: for with this did the prudent Lady Jael end the cruel war
betwixt the Caanites and Israelites, by striking a Nail through the temples of
Sisera, who was General of King Jabins Host. As to the domestical use of the
Nail, we see that Householders minding to settle themselves in some house
wherein they mean to make them a settled habitation; do drive Nails into the
Walls, for the more commodious and seemly hanging up and bestowing and
orderly placing of things necessary. Whereof Ezra in his prayer to God takes a
similitude, saying, And now for a little space grace has been showed from the
Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his
holy place, etc. Ezra 9.8.

A Fesse between three pair of Pincers.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse between three pair of
Pincers, Gules. This Coat is quartered by the right honorable and worthy
Gentleman Sir William Russel, Lord Russel of Thornhaw, lately deceased. Though
the Pincers be an instrument peculiar to the Smith that formed the same, yet is
the use thereof communicated unto the professors of diverse other Trades, as
Carpenters, Joyners, Farriers, etc. As touching the first invention of this
Instrument, Pliny says, that Cynira the son of Agrippa devised Pincers,
Hammers, Iron Crows and the Anvill or Stythe.

Next will I speak of such as are formed of Fusible Metals, so called a
fundendo, because they are liquid, and powered forth into the mould wherein they
are to be framed: but one example shall serve.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Plummets, Sable, by the name of Jenings. The Plummet may aptly serve for an
Hieroglyphick of Prudence, in respect that Mariners by the help of this
instrument, fastened to some line of many fadomes, do sound the depth of the
Seas, when by some tempestious storm, or other accident, they are forced upon
an unknown Coast; that so, if necessity require, they may betake them to their
Anchor-hold, or divert their course some other way: whereby we are admonished
to sound the depth of our intentions, before we put them in practice, lest we
hazard our Fortunes or Lives (through want of foresight) upon the shoales of
destruction.

Hitherto I have only given examples of the Instruments of the said Arts: I
will proceed to some examples of the Works and Effects of the same.

SECT. IV. CHAP. IX.
AMongst the sundry Works of the foresaid Artizans, some are fixed and
permanent, as Buildings, either profane, for ordinary use of dwelling; or
sacred, as Temples for Gods service: and some others are moveable, as Tents,
etc. Examples whereof we will now produce.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Tower triple Towred, A Tower
triple Towred, Sable: Munster in Cosmograph.
Sable, chained transverse the Port, Or, by the name of Old-castle. Munster
reports, that Catiphus Governor of the City Susa, had therein a Towerfull of
Gold and Jewels, but for avarice would not disperse his heaped treasures
amongst his Soldiers. Afterward Alan King of the Tartarians surprised this
City, and taking Catiphus, shut him up in his Tower, saying unto him; If thou
had not so greedily walled up thy Treasure, thou had saved thy self and
this City; now therefore eat and drink, and take thy fill of that thou lovedst
so dearly. So died he miserably through the famine in the midst of his
excessive Treasures.

Castles and Towers are Strengths and fences fortified most commonly on the
tops of hills, or other lofty or well-fenced places by nature, as well for
descrying of the Enemy afar off, as for repulsing him upon his approach:
whereupon they are called in Latin, Arces, ab arcendo, of keeping the enemy
aloof, or repulsing or foyling him. And do serve rather for a place of retreat
for the timorous to lurk in, than for the valorous to perform any noble feat
of Martial activity in: according to Petrarch, where he says, Arces scito non
receptacula fortium, sed inertium esse latibula. The greatest valor is showed
in aperto Mart, in the Champain field; therefore the most valiant and resolute
Generals and Commanders, have evermore reckoned it a chief honor to grapple
with the Enemy hand to hand, and do reckon those victories most honorable,
that are achieved with most prodigal effusion of blood, as witnesses the
same Author, saying, Militia nisi largo sanguine magnisque periculis
honestetur, non militiae, sed militaris ignaviae nomen tenet, non Regum modo
judicio, sed vulgi. Castles and Towers have proved many times very pernicious
unto such as have reposed trust in their safety. For there have been many that
living out of Castles or Towers, lived securely and free from danger, who
afterward taking stomach to them upon a conceived safety in their strength,
became turbulent, and betook them to their holds, and have finally perished in
them. And so their adventurous temerity have been there chastised or rather
subdued, where it took beginning.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Tower triple Towred, Sable, on a
Mount, proper. This is the Coat of Sir Richard Chiverton Knight, late Mayor of
London, descended from an ancient Family of that surname in Cornwall.

A Lion Rampand, and a Castle.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, a Lion Rampand, Argent, a Castle
in the Dexter point, Or. These are the Arms of Sir Francis Castilion, of
Benhall Vallence in the County of Berke, Knight, descended of the noble Family
of the Count Castilion in Piemont, near unto Mantua.

The Lion is a magnanimous beast, and of an invincible courage, and is not
daunted with any occurrent, neither (being laid down) will he be rowsed but at
his pleasure, as appears, Genesis 49.9. Judah, As a Lions whelp shall thou come
up from the spoil my son. He shall lie down and couch as a Lion, and as a
Lioness, and who shall stir him? Moreover, of his incomparable strength, and
noble courage, a certain Author says, Leo fortissimus Bestiarum, ad nullius
pavebit occursum: The Lion the strongest of all beasts, fears not the
encounter of any.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Tower triple Towred, and a Chief,
Gules. This is the Coat of Netter of Kent, a Daughter and heir of which Family
was married to John Nower late of Ashford in Kent, by whom she had issue John
Nower Esquire, Justice of Peace, now living.

A Castle triple Towred.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Castle triple Towred, Gules, the Port
displayed of the Field, Leaved, Argent. Note, that when the Architecture or
Masonry extends it self all over the Field, from the one side of the
Escocheon to the other, then must it be named a Castle. But if it be thus
Turretted and environed by the Field, Rule.
then must it be blazoned (as above) a Tower triple-towred, or a Tower with so
many Turrets. The Gate must be conceived to be transparent, so as the Field
does manifestly show it self thorough the same: and all the Port should have
Or, if the conceited shadow representing the thickness thereof did not
extenuate a great part of the same.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Tower, Sable, having a Scaling
Ladder raised against it in Bend Sinister, Or. A Tower and Scaling ladder.
This Coat is quartered by Sir Edward Maunsell Knight. The Ladder thus raised
against the Tower, may put us in mind to stand carefully upon our Guard, who
live in this world as in a Castle continually assailed with our spiritual and
corporal enemies, that cease not evermore to plot, and put in execution
whatsoever tends to our destruction.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cross between four Frets,
Gules, a Tower of the Field, by the name of Bence, of which Family is Alexander
Bence of London, Esquire, the Father of two hopeful Gentlemen, J hn and
Alexander, and one Daughter Anne, wife of Edward Bridgwood of London, Merchant.

After these Buildings of profane and vulgar use, we should annex examples of
Buildings Sacred, as Churches, etc. instead whereof, we will content our selves
with these examples following.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three single Arches, Three Arches.
Argent, their Capitals and Pedestals, Or, by the name of Arches. These are
supposed to be Arches of a Bridge: and Nicolas de Ponte, Duke of Venice, gave a
Bridge for his device, beaten with the waves, with this Motto; Aliis
inserviendo consumor. Pope Xistius the fourth also gave a Bridge, with this
word; Cura rerum publicarum. And it may signify the cares and patient
stability of men in Magistracy, who must endure the assaults, ^aunts, and envy
of the discontented vulgar.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Bridge of three Arches in Fesse,
Gules, masoned, Sable, The streams transfluent, proper, a fane, Argent, by the
name of Trowbridge of Trowbridge. This Coat stands in Kirton Church in the
County of Devon: and it seems to have been given to the first bearer thereof,
as an allusion to this surname Trowbridge, quasi Throwbridge, having respect to
the current and fall of the streams that do pass through the Arches, wherein
the deviser had an ingenious conceit in the fitting thereof to his name, yet so
as it was not so palpably understood of the vulgar sort:

blazon or coat of arms Azure, Apollo in his glory, with Bow in one hand, and
Arrow in the other, bestriding the Serpent Python, all Or. This is the
Coat Armor of the worshipful Company of the Apothecaries.

A Pillar enwrapped with an Adder.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Pillar, enwrapped with an Adder,
Argent, by the name of Myntur. The Adder thus enwrapped about the Pillar, may
signify Prudence conjoined with Constancy, both which being united in men of
high spirits, do greatly avail to the atchieving of noble enterprises.
Farnesius making mention of the chief virtues that ought to be in a Prince,
sets down two in especial; whereof the one is Prudence, whereby the Helm
of the Weal-publick is governed in time of peace; the other, Fortitude, whereby
the attempts of the enemy are frustrated in time of war.

Pillars the Hieroglyphics of fortitude and constancy, were erected for diverse
ends and purposes, sometimes to limit out the bounds of the possessions of
people that bordered one upon another; sometimes for memories of vows made: as
that which was erected by Jacob at Bethel, Genesis 28 18. Sometimes for Ornament,
as those of the Temple, 1 Kings 7.15. Sometimes for Testimonies of Covenants,
as that which was erected by Jacob for a memorial between him and Laban, Genesis
31.44, 45. Sometimes for Monuments to extol the valor, worth and merits of
well-deserving men, as those that were decreed by the Senate and people of Rome
to men of special desert and approved virtue. Sometimes they were set up for
preservation of names of families from oblivion, of which sort is that
mentioned in 2 Samuel 18.18. Now Absalom in his life time had taken and reared up
for himself a Pillar which is in the Kings dale: for he said, I have no son to
keep my name in remembrance: and he called the Pillar after his own name, and
it is called unto this Day Absaloms Place. To these we will add one example of
a Work moveable, as in this next Excocheon.

Tents.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Tents,
Argent, by the name of Tenton. Tabernacles or Tents were the chief habitation
of our Fathers, in the first Age of the World, as we may see Genesis 12.8. Such
kind of habitations did best fit their uses, for the often removing of their
Seats to refresh their cattle with change of pastures, sometimes at hand, and
other-whiles in places remote: which they could not commodiously do, if they
had been still commorant in solid and settled buildings. Such is the manner of
the Tartarians at this day: they have no Cities, Towns, or Villages to inhabit,
but the open and Champian fields, in Tents after the manner of the ancient
Scythians, because they are (in manner) all herdsmen: in the Winter season they
plant themselves in the Plains and Valleys: And in the Summer they live in
Mountainous places, where they may find the rankest and best pasture.

blazon or coat of arms Argent, a Tent Royal between two Parliament Robes,
Gules, lined Ermine, on a Chief, Azure, a Lion Passant, Gardant, Or. This is
the honorable Achievement of the right worshipful the Company of
Merchant-Taylors of the City of London, which Company has been enobled with
eight Kings, eleven Dukes, thirty Earls, and four and forty Lords, who have
esteemed themselves much honored, by being admitted Freemen of this worthy
Society.

Of this sort are the Ships and Boats hereafter to be handled, and all other
navigable Vessels, in respect that during the time that men do undergo any
voyage, they are to them a kind of domestical habitation. Now proceed we to
examples of buildings ordained for sacred use, whereof in these immediately
ensuing.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cross crossed, Cross ^ted up^
Griec^
mounted upon three Grieces, Or. This Coat is quartered by Edward Jones of
Lanuaire in the County of Denbigh. The Cross thus mounted upon three Grieces,
may put us in mind of the means of our Salvation, even Christ Jesus, who in the
fullness of time, thereto appointed by his Father, suffered the ignominious
death of the Cross for our Redemption; whereby he has joined us unto God the
Father, and by that his one Oblation, has purchased us eternal Redemption.
The three Grieces or steps whereby we mount up to Christ crucified, are Faith,
Hope and Charity, the three chief Theological Virtues.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Bells, Three Bells.
Argent, by the name of Porter. This sort of Bells that are cast by the hand of
a Founder, is not of so great Antiquity as some others hereafter handled; yet
their use no less approved, than those: forasmuch as both these and those were
ordained for good uses; these to assemble the people together, to hear divine
Service, the other to move them (being assembled) to attention, when the high
Priest did exercise his office.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Fesse, Ermine, between three Bells,
Argent, by the name of Bell: This was the Coat of Sir Robert Bell Knight, Lord
chief Baron of the Exchequer, who dyed of that pes^iferous sickness at Oxford
1577. together with the other Judge of Assize, Nich. Barham the Queens Attorney,
which Sir Robert by Dorothy, Daughter and sole Heir of Edmund Beaupree of
Beaupree-Hall in Norfolk, had issue Sir Edmund Bell, and Sinolphus Bell,
Esquire. Mary married to Sir Nicholas L' Estrange, Dorothy married to Sir Henry
Hobart Knight and Baronet, Lord chief Justice: and Frances married to Sir
Anthony Dering of Pluckley in Kent Knight.

Because we have here spoken of Buildings and Houses, it will not be much
amiss to add hereunto such Escocheons as are derived from Instruments of
Houshold-use; such are these ensuing.

Three Cushions.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Cushions, Ermine, Buttoned and
Tasselled, Or, by the name of Redman. Howsoever these are now taken for
Cushions, others are of opinion, that they are more truly Pillowes, and given
to some Ancestors of this bearer (if Fame be true) for that by occasion of a
combat challenged upon him by a Stranger, for the performance whereof the day
and place being appointed, this man being more forward than the Challenger,
came very early to the place at the day appointed, and by chance fell on sleep
in his Tent: the people being assembled, and the hour come, the Trumpets
sounded to the battle, whereupon he wakened suddenly, ran furiously upon his
Adversary and slew him.

These and such other Vtensiles, do serve as well for Ornament as Necessity:
whereas others there are which serve for necessity only, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Fesse Humet, between three
Trestles, Argent, by the name of Stratford. More aptly (in my conceit) may this
transverse charge be termed a Table, than a Fesse Humet, for so have I seen the
same anciently blazoned, and so taken, it is a note of special Hospitality and
housekeeping, a thing in this age much commended, but little practiced.

Now in respect we are in hand to speak of hospitality, it shall not be amiss
to give some little touch by the way, of the bountiful hospitality of Kings in
former ages, whereof I find King Solomon to be the most famous president: for
his daily expenses that I read of, wherein he exceeded all others that preceded
or succeeded him, as we may see 1 Kings 4.22. where it is said, And Salomons
vitails for one day were 30 measures of fine flower, and 60 measures of meal;
Ten fat Oxen, and twenty Oxen of the Pastures, and one hundred Sheep, beside
Hearts, and Robucks, and fallow Dear, and fatted Foul.

From King Salomons housekeeping, descend we now to the hospitality of the
ancient Kings of this Land. I find in an ancient manuscript that King Lud
commanded his household officers to have in daily custom, to cover the Tables in
the Hall from seven of the clock in the morning, till seven in the evening. His
daily diet was not much in rare and delicate viands; but that he kept it
constantly with all good cates as could be gotten, and at the four great
Feasts, he caused Proclamations to be made in all Countries, for all manner of
people to come thither.

Moreover the same Author makes mention of a very memorable and most royal
Feast, that Cassibelane made upon his second Triumph over the Roman Emperor,
and forasmuch as it is a chief point to be observed of those that shall cite
authority for any thing that he writes or speaks of, to use the express
words of his Author which he voucheth, I will therefore deliver it, as he
himself relates the same.

Domus Regis Cassibelani stands for a special note, which after his second
triumph upon the Emperor, gave out his Royal commandments to all the Gentiles
of Britany, to come with their wives to magnify his feast: For which he slew
forty thousand Kine, and Oxen, one hundred thousand Sheep, thirty thousand
Dear, and other wild beasts of the wood, besides the diverse kinds of Pullyne,
Conies, wild Foul and tame, of Sea, and Land, with much other purveiance of
vitaile with many disguisings, plai^s, minstrelsie and sports.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Trevet, Sable, A Trevet.
by the name of Trevet. A Trevet seems to be so called of its three feet, or
a Tripode, which in Greek signifies a Stool of so many feet. Amongst the
Heathens, Apollo's Priest was said to give Answers from the Oracle, sitting on
such a Stool, whence he that speaks Oracles, is said to speak, tanquam ex
Tripode.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three flesh pots, Gules, Three fl^
pots.
by the name of Mounbowchier. It appears by History, that the Ancients were
wont to sees their meat in the hides of beasts, which yet is in use in
barbarous Countries, but Art supplyeth that defect. The Fleshpots of Egypt
are objected to the fleshly minded Jews, who were contented to forsake the
hope of blessed Canaan, to enjoy again their belly-cheere: and Esaus mess of
Pottage, is with many of more esteem than the birthright and inheritance of
the heavenly Canaan.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three pair of Bellows, Sable,
Three pair Bellows.
by the name of Scipton. The invention of this Instrument for making of wind,
was much more witty, than that conceit of the Poets of Boreas, his keeping of
Winds in Bottles. The Author of these (as Strabo witnesses) was Anacharsis.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Lamps, Sable, Three Lamps.
a File of three points, Gules, by the name of Lampelaw.

We read of a certain Church dedicated to Venus, wherein was a Lamp that burnt
continually and never went out, but still gave light, yet was not maintained
with any kind of Oil, or other fatty matter or substance, and this was holden
for a special miraculous thing; yet might the same be performed by some other
natural means, as with a certain kind of stone that is found in Arcadia, and
is called Asphestus, which is said to be of that nature, that being once
kindled and set on fire, does never extinguish or go out, neither is it thereby
consumed or wasted, Zan. lib. 4. de potent. demon. chap. 12. page 255.

There are doubtless both in herbs and stones admirable virtues (not manifest)
whereby strange and unwonted effects may be wrought. Therefore men being
ignorant of the efficacy and forcible virtues of things natural, and
apprehending only their effects by sight, do forth with conceive that there is
wrought some strange or great miracle, whereas indeed it is nothing less, but
a matter proceeding merely from some natural cause.

Besides these aforesaid, there are sundry other Instruments, of Household use,
as Mortars, Gridirons, etc. which we leave to observation. And to this may be
referred, Candles, torches, etc. The great Turk Solimannus, gave four Candles
for his Device, one burning, the other three extinct; to signify that other
Religions were nothing light, in respect of his: or that the other parts of the
World should lose their beauty, by the brightness of his glory.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per cheuron, Embateled, Or, and
Gules, three Roses counterchanged, slipped, proper, on a chief of the second,
three Houre-glasses of the first. This Coat pertained to Doctor White
sometimes Bishop of Winchester. Albeit the Sun is the governor and moderator
of time, yet because we cannot aptly express the same to the view, I have made
choice of this Coat to manifest the same thereby, in respect of the
Houre-Glasses placed on the chief thereof: for as the sun is the measure of
time, so is the time also the measurer, not only of public, but also of
private affairs. For who is he that has any business to perform that
desires not to know how he proceeds therein, and whether he be before hand
with time, or that he be belated. And for this end were Dials, Clocks, Watches
and Hour-glasses devised.

Endless is the swift passage of time, which we shall better discern if we
look backwards to the times that have already overslipped us.

The best means we can devise to bridle time is to be evermore well exercised
in some honest virtuous and laudable work, so shall it not escape us
fruitlessely; acording to that saying of Petrarch, Virtute and industria,
bonarumque artium studijs fraenari possunt tempora, non quia fugiant, sed ne
pereant. So shall we be sure to carry a hand over time, and not time over us:
so shall we if not clippe his wings that he glide not from us, yet shall we so
attach him, that he shall not so pass us, but that we shall make some good use
of him, that he pass us not unprofitably.

Time slippeth from us suddenly, and outstrippeth us, which only we ought
greedily to seize upon, and in no case barter or exchange the same for any
costly price or reward, let us (though late, yet not too late) begin to love
and hold time in estimation, which only a man may lawfully and honestly covet.
Let us bethink our selves of the shortness of our time, and our own frailty,
and endeavor our selves to make good use thereof: and let us not then (as
Seneca admonishes us) begin to live when life begins to leave us.

To this place, are Clocks, Watches, and such like Instruments (representing
the swift incessant motion of time) to be referred, wherein we may observe that
every wheel therein, is moved by some other of more swift motion than it self
has; whereby is verified this saying, Quilibet motus mensuratur per velociorem
motum seipso.

SECT. IV. CHAP. X.
The Art of Armature.
NExt to Armature with the appendices thereof, succeeds Navigation, whereunto
pertain all sorts of Ships and Boats, with their several parts, their Huls,
Stem, Stern, Masts, Tops, Tacklings, Sails, Oars, Cables, Anchors, etc.
Whereof diverse are borne in Coat Armor, as shall by these next examples partly
appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three pieces of Masts Couped, Three
pieces of Masts couped.
with their tops, Argent, by the name of Cromer. The invention of the Mast, as
also of the Cross piece whereunto the Sail is fastened, and is thereof called
the Sail-yard, came (says Polydor) from Daedalu^, that excellent Engineer of
Athens, who is famous for making the Artificial Cow, wherein Pasiphae (that
Monster of Mankind) did put her self, and so enjoyed her lust and bestiall
desires with a Bull, with whom she was in love.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Sails, Argent, Three Sai^
by the name of Cavell, alias Locavell. Pliny ascribes the invention of Sails
to Icarus the son of Daedalus, who for this device, is said (by Poets) to have
flowne with Artificial wings. In a natural conflict (says Alex. ab Alex.) to
strike Sail or take down the Flag at the command of another, is a token of
yiedling or submission, which is yet observed by men of Naval profession. There
are three things (says one) which excel all other for beautiful show; a
goodly man at Arms bravely mounted on a Warlike Steed; a Woman of fair and
goodly feature, bearing a great belly; and a goodly Ship in her ruff, and
under full Sail.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse in chief, three Anchors, Or,
by the name of Terne. This Coat is borne by Christopher Terne Doctor in
Physic, Fellow of the College of Physicians in London, Physician to Saint
Bartholomew Hospital, and Reader of Anatomy to the Company of
Barber-Chirurgions, London.

He is second son to Nathaniel Terne of much Wenlock in the County of Salop,
lately deceased, and of Sarah Daughter and Coheir to Edmund Hill, of the Court
of Hill in Tenbury, in the same County, by whom he had also issue William
eldest son, Henry third son, and Nathaniel deceased.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, an Anchor in Pale, Argent, An Anchor.
the Timber or Crosse-peece thereof, Or, by the name of Goodreed. Anacharsis
(says Pliny) made Anchors first with two Hooks. The Anchor signifies succor
in extremities: and therefore the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
resembles Hope to the Anchor, where it is said, Vt spem propositam teneamus,
quam velut animae anchoram habemus tutam and firmam; Because Hope does
establish and confirm our faith against all the tempestious Gusts of adverse
occurrents, Cosmus Medices, Duke of Hetruria gave two Anchors for his impresse,
with this word, DUABUS, meaning, it was good to have two holds to trust to. But
Richard the first, King of England, gave a Sun on two Anchors, with this Motto,
CHRISTO DUCE: a worthy and Princely choice of so heavenly a Pilot.

(...) Ruther of a ^ip.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Ruther or Helm of a Ship, Argent.
By the help of this Helm does the Pilot wield the Ship at will, through the
most violent Seas. Some men are of opinion that the first invention of the
H^lme of a Ship was taken from the observation of a Kite flying, or rather
gliding in the Air, that by turning of his tail one while one way, another
while another way, does guide his course in the Air, whereby it seems that
nature would manifest in the clear Air, what was behovefull to be practiced in
the deep waters. So necessary is the use of this Instrument, as that without it
no shipping can be directed in a certain course, but would be evermore in
peril of splitting upon shoales and Rocks, through the forcible current and
surging waves of the Sea, and the violence of the boisterous winds,
notwithstanding the might of the skillful Pilots or Mariners to their great
hazard and astonishment. As we may see Psalm. 107.25, 26, etc. For at his word
the stormy wind arises, which lifeth up the waves thereof. They are carried up
to Heaven, and down again to the deep, their soul melts away because of the
trouble. They re^le to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at
their wits ends. Other parts of Ships have been borne both in Coat Armor and
Impreses: Horatius Gonsaga gave the Prow of a Ship tied to a Plow-wheele, with
a Laurel over it, signifying his quiet Country life, after his Naval-life. And
Cardinal Raphael Riarius, affecting the Papacy, gave an Oar on the Globe of
the Earth, with this word, HOC OPUS; showing what a Pilot he would be, if he
had the command.

A Lighter boat.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Lighter Boat in Fesse, Gules. This
Coat Armor pertains to the family de Wolfo of Swevland. Like to this was
borne in Devise by the Prince, Jam Bentivolious, who opened his meaning with
this Word, ME VIDEO IN MARI SINE GUBERNATORE: I find my self in the Sea without
a Pilot. Such is the condition of a Commonwealth without a Ruler, or a man
without Reason, tossed with every wave of affection. But in these tossings of
Fortunes waves, wise was the resolution of Vicount Hugo de Melan, whose Device
was a Ship without any Tackling to stay it, with this word, IN SILENTIO ET SPE
FORTITUDO MEA, My strength is in Silence, Patience and Hope.

The Hull of a Ship.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Mars, the Hull of a Ship, having only a
Maine Mast, and a Top without any Tackling, Sol. This is the Coat Armor of the
high and mighty Prince Duke Albertus de Alasco of Polonia, who did bear the
same also for his Crest, with this Motto, DEUS DABIT VELA: God will give
Sails; showing that heavenly guidance is that whereby worldly affairs are
governed, and that we must not altogether rely on humane help.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Ship with three Masts, a Sail, A
Ship with three Masts.
trussed up, and hoisted to the top of the Main Yard, shrouded, Sable, by the
name of Meeres. Andreas Doreo, Admiral of Spain, gave for his Imprese, a Ship
under full Sail, with this heavenly Motto, OMNIA FORTUNAE COMMITTO, I commit
all to Fortune: but another of that Name (Admiral to Charles the fifth) gave
the same Device with a much more Christianlike word, NON DORMIT QUI CUSTODIT;
he that is keeper, is no sleeper.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Galley passing under full sail, A
Galley ^der full S^
Or. This is a Coat of Spanish bearing, which Nation much uses this kind of
Vessel on the Mediterranean and calmer Seas, the Rowers therein being so many
captived Slaves, chained fast to their seat, lest they should rebel against
the ministers of their oppression. The first Ship we read of was made by Noah,
for the preservation of increase of all living creatures in the time of the
general Flood: but Jason first made the Galley, which Sesostris King of Egypt
used after him.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XI.
THE last of the aforesaid Arts we reckoned to be Venation, which Plato
divides into three Species, Hunting, Hawking and Fishing; all which because
they tend to the providing of sustenance for man, Farnesius does therefore
account a Species of Agriculture. The dangerous chases of the Bear, the wild
Boar, Bull, etc. whether the same be performed on horseback or on foot, has
a resemblance of Military practice: for it makes a man provident in
assaulting, as also valorous in sustaining the brunt of the enemy: it makes
them politic for choice of places of advantage, and enableth them to tolerate
hunger, thirst, labor, storms, tempests, etc. all which are most requisite
for such as do profess a military course of life. What valorous commanders
those men have proved, that have been trained up in the Art of Hunting, when
they have come to the administration and managing of Martial Affairs, the
Persians can sufficiently witness unto us; who had no better means to become
expert Soldiers, than their daily exercise of Hunting: As also the History of
Mithridates, King of Pontus, who was so much transported with the love of
Hunting as that (according to Farnesius) by the space of seven years he took
not the benefit of any house, either in City or Country to lie in: by means
whereof, he so enabled and enured his body to sustain all hardness, that
afterward he became a scourge and terror to the Romans. And therefore this
noble kind of Venation is privileged from the title of an Illiberal Art, being
a Princely and Generous Exercise: The privilege of Venation.
but those only who use it for a trade of life, to make gain thereof, are to
be marshalled in the rank of Mechanics and Illiberal Artizans.

As touching the number of examples of things pertaining to this noble exercise
of Hunting, proposed for the first Species of Venation, I purpose to be very
brief, not in respect of their scarcity, but because of the manifold
employments of the workman for the present, that he is not able to furnish me
with more. And having ended with them, I will proceed, according to order, with
the other two Species of Venation, viz. Hawking and Fishing.

^ Bugle or Hunters ^orne.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Bugle or Hunters Horn garnished
and furnished, Argent. This Coat Armor is of very ancient erection in the
Church of Rewardine within the Forest of Deane in Gloucestershire, and
pertained to the Family of Hatheway of the same place.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sable, three Bugle Horns stringed, Or,
garnished, Azure. This is the Paternall Coat Armor of John Thruston of Hoxon
or Hoxne in the County of Suffolk, Esquire. This color Sable is resembled to
the precious stone called Diamond, which signifies in Armory durablenesse, and
the charge of this Escocheon being of the metal Or, is oftentimes in Blazon
described by the Topaz stone, the emblem in Heraldry of a sure messenger, as
Sir John Fern notes.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron, between two Leopards
heads in chief, and a Bugle in base, Argent. This is the Coat of Sir Thomas
Slingsby of Redhouse in the County of York, Baronet, and Colonel Thomas
Slingsby his Uncle, of which Family and Coat Armor, as also diverse other
worthy Gentlemen: This was the Coat of Scriven, whose heir this Family married,
and bore their Coat in the first place, their own ancient Coat being Argent, a
Griffon Sergreant, Sable, suppressed by a Fesse, Gules.

Stags heads and Bugles.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cheuron between three Stags
heads couped, Sable, as many Bugles stringed of the first. This Coat pertains
to Sir George Huntley of Frowcester in the County of Gloucester, Knight. Other
Coats derived from this noble exercise I might produce, as three Dog-hooks
borne by the name of Mertingham, three Leashes or Slips, by the name of
Hayward: but these examples may stand instead of the rest. And hitherto are to
be referred Toils, Hayes, Collars for Greyhounds: of which last sort, I find
an Escocheon erected in the Church of Newent in the Forest of Deane, in Field
Sable, Reference.
three Greyhounds Collars, Argent, Edged, Studded, and Tyretted, Or.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Fesse, Azure, Three Haw^ Bells.
three Hawks bells of the first, by the name of Planke. This sort of Bells is of
no late invention, but of great antiquity, and in use amongst the Hebrews,
whose High Priest had littie Bells at the skirts of his uppermost garment, as
appears, Exodus 28.33. And beneath upon the skirts thereof thou shall make
Pomegranats of blew silk, and purple, and scarlet, round about the skirts
thereof, and bells of gold round about: to show that the attention and devotion
of Gods people must be stirred up by the ministry of this most sacred function.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron, Or, Three
between three Lewres, Argent, by the name of Prenue. This Coat was quartered
by Sir Nicolas Arnold Knight, sometimes of Hyneham in the County of Gloucester.
A like Coat to this, is borne by the name of Lie, and well accords with the
name, for Fawlkners use to deceive their Hawks with casting up of this, as if
it were some Foul, and so they give them a Lie for a Truth. And these two
examples may suffice for the noble Art of Hawking. The next and last is Fishing.

The Skill of Fishing is diversely exercised: viz. sometimes with Nets,
sometimes with Hooks, other whiles with Sammon-spears, or Eele-spears, and
sometimes with Ginnes, with Puttes, Weeles, etc. all which are found borne in
Coat Armor; now first of Nets. These are most usually borne in Arms
piecemeal, or in fragments, which are the same (if I be not deceived) which we
call in Blazon, Frets, because the Frenchmen call a Net, Retz, and we by
intermixture of Language, have added thereunto the letter F. These fragments
are sometimes borne single, and other-whiles manifold, as appears by these
next examples.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, eight Mascles, Or, 5 and 3, by the
name of Preston. The Mascle is taken for the mash of a Net, as I shall
presently show you by good authority: and Nets are in sacred Writ
Hieroglyphics of persuasion, whereby men are induced to virtue and verity, and
so may seem after some sort to be caught. Far diverse from this is that sort of
Net which is in use with many men in this age, to catch and ensnare men of
honest and plain dispositions, entangling them therein, not only to decay of
their bodies, but also to the utter subversion of their estates, for the
enriching of themselves and their posterity: of such the Prophet Habakkuk
speaks, chap. 1.15, 16.

There is also borne, Gules, eight Losenges, Argent, 4.3.1. by the name of
Preston.

^^ree Mascles.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three
Mascles, Argent, by Sir George Belgrave, of Belgrave in the County of
Leicester. These are by some taken to be the same with Losenges. A Mascle in
Armory (says Sir John Fern) is a representation of the Mash of a Net,
signifying the Bearer thereof in a Field, Gules, to have been most prudent, and
politic in the stratagems of Wars, for that the Field is dedicated to Mars.
The bearing of Mascles therefore is of greater honor than many other Charges
are, that in vulgar estimation are more accounted of. Sometimes these are borne
to the number of six, viz. 3. 2. and 1. jointly, without the interposition of
any Ordinary. Otherwhiles they are borne to the number of seven conjunct, as in
this next Escocheon.

Sev^ Mascles con^^nct.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, seven Mascles conjunct; viz. 3. 3.
and 1. Or. a Canton, Ermine. This Coat Armor pertains to Henry Ferrers of
Badsley in the County of Warwick, Esquire, a man very judicious in matters of
honor. Whereas ( Leigh says) that the Mascle ought always to be square,
whether the same be void or whole; I hold, that if they be Mashes of a Net, as
Sir John Fern takes them to be, then can they not in any case be whole, but
must be evermore transparent and void: for if they be solid, they may better be
resembled to Quarrels of Glass, or some other thing of massy and sound
substance, wrought every way square like a Die. From which a Losenge is said to
differ, in that the same is longer one way than another.

A Fret of 8. pieces.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fret of eight pieces, Azure. This
was the Coat Armor of a noble Norman well descended, called Seigneur De Montier
aullier, as is testified by an ancient French Manuscript: if in any Coat of
this bearing there be found more than eight pieces, (then (says Leigh) you
shall not need to number the pieces, but in the Blazon of such Coat-Armours you
shall say, He bears Frette; one example whereof follows.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Emerald, Frette, Topaz, a difference for
a second Brother of the third house. This Coat Armor pertains to George
Whitmore, a few years since Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of London,
descended of the Family of the Whitmores of Whitmore of Shropshire. The elder
Brother of which Sir George was, Sir William Whitmore, Grandfather of Sir
William Whitmore of Apsley in Shropshire, Baronet. And now I will give you an
example of a Fret of eight pieces, each charged in the joints or midst.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fret of eight pieces, Gules, each
charged in the midst with flowers de lis, Or. This Coat pertains to Sir
Lawrence Hamelden Knight, who was one of those Knights that exercised the
Tornament holden at Dunstable, in the second year of King Edward the second;
like as in this Coat you see the Fret charged, and the Field (otherwise) free
from any other charge: so contrariwise you shall find the Frette free, and the
Field charged between, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, Frettee, Gules, semy de Castles of
the second, by the name of Nechur. Now I will show you examples of the bearing
of Frets, which differ from all the former bearings.

blazon or coat of arms This is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Baptist
Nowell, Viscount Camden, and is thus blazoned, Topaz, Fretty, Ruby, a Canton,
Ermine.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, diamond, a Fret, Topaz. This was the
Coat Armor of Henry Lord Maltrevers or Mautrevers (for I find the Orthography
both ways) an ancient Ba^on of this Kingdom, and is now quartered by the
Right Honorable, Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Earl Marshall
of England. When the Fret consists of six pieces, then (says Sir John Fern
in Lacies Nobility, page 69.) we say a Fret, without saying any more, but in
this we differ from the French Heralds, who blaze such a kind of bearing, a
Fret of six pieces; and there he notes further that a Fret cannot be of less
than six pieces, you shall also sometimes find a Fret Ingrailed, as in the next
Escocheon but one.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Sable, a Fret, Argent, by the name of
Harington, a bearing so excellent, that it is generally known by the name of
Haringtons Knot, even to the ignorant in Armory.

Fret Engrai^d.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Fret Engrailed, Ermine, by the
name of Eynefort. If this Fret (says Leigh) be of more pieces than you see
here, then it alters from the same name, and is blazoned Diaper. Of the
manifold sorts of Diapering I have formerly given examples, together with
certain observations thereupon, whereunto I do refer you for satisfaction
therein. These examples may serve for Nets, to show their diverse manner of
bearing, and to minister occasion to the Reader, to make a more strict
observation of such others, as I do here pass over, because I labor to be
brief.

Fishing ^ooks.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Fishing
Hooks, Argent, by the name of Medvile. Not unproperly (says Pierius) do men
signify by this kind of Hook, fraud and guile, Quia decipere est unum
ostentare, and aliud praeter opinionem infer: for the Fisherman under a show
of tendering food to the Fish (having subtly covered the hook all over with
the bait) does give him his deadly bane. And of this trade are more in the
world, than will acknowledge themselves of the Company of fishermen or
fish-mongers.

E^le-spears.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Eele-spears,
Argent, by the name of Stratele. These do Fishermen use for the taking of
Eeles, which being (for the most part) in the mud, cannot be taken with Net or
other Ginne: which gave occasion of the invention of this Instrument, a long
staff being set in the socket thereof, and so to strike into the depth of the
mud, and by means of the Barbes of this Instrument, they detain as many as come
within the danger thereof. And therefore this Engine has a signification of
such an action of desert, wherein both strength and policy are conjoined.

three Weeles.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three
Weeles, their hoops upwards, Vert, by the name of Wylley. And indeed this is
like the insnarings and deceits of wily men; for as this mouth is made broad
and easy for the Fish to enter, but is narrow within, that they cannot get
forth; so crafty Varlets will make fair pretense to draw men into their
dangers, out of which they cannot get forth being once entangled. And this kind
of trade is much more base and Illiberal, than any of the afore-specified: and
with these are to be ranged all those, Quorum lingua venalis est (says Tully)
who sell their tongue, their skill, their conscience, only to get a Fee of
their Clients. And thus much of Arts mechanical of the first and principal
rank.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XII.
ARTS Mechanical of more necessary use for the nourishing and preserving of
Man's body, we have proposed in the preceding examples; there yet rest other
Arts of a second rank, which tend rather to the embellishing and beautifying of
Natures works, than to the necessary supply of humane uses, yea, some of them,
such as are rather boites to please the senses, than means to further man's
good. Yet because the custom of times, and opinion of men, and a certain
curious and affected skill has given esteem and name of Art unto such
superfluous curiosities, we will not utterly pass them by, the rather, because
all of them being used with moderation, by understanding men, and for good
ends, they may deservedly have both approbation and commendation. The first of
these, is the skill of Cookery, for the exquisite pleasing of the Palate: unto
which kind of men, some have been so addicted, that it is storyed of a certain
Prince, that he proposed a great reward, to every man that should invent a new
conceited Dish: And the Sybarites were famous in this kind, who bid their
guests a year before the Feast, and so long were catering for dainties. It is a
Proverb amongst the Jews, Qui multiplicat carnes, multiplicat vermes: and most
true is it, that he that daily feeds his body, is but a Cook to dress meat
for worms. Painting, Carving, and Imbroidering, serve to please another sense,
the Sight, and therefore is a more ingenious delight: and in this kind some
have been so excellent and renowned, as that they have been numbered amongst men
of admirable wisdom; as Apelles, Phidias, Polycletus, and others, whose works
have deserved immortal reputation, and some of their Master-peeces have been
prised beyond belief. All these have sundry Instruments, which may be (and
doubtless have been) borne in Coat Armor; but because they are not usual, I
will refer them to each man's own observation; and will give instance in the
last of this kind of Arts of delight, which we call, playing; which
comprehends either Theatricall recreation, or other Games whatsoever.

And forasmuch as their first institution was good, and that they are in
themselves the commendable exercises, either of the body, or of wit and
invention; and if there be in them any evil, it is not in them per se, but per
accidens, because they are abused by those that do practice and exercise them;
I have thought good to annex them unto the same: such are Tables-playing,
Chesse, Dice, Racket, Balloone, etc. The things wherewith these Games are
practiced, are borne in Coat Armor, as by these examples following may appear.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three pair of Playing-Tables,
Argent, bordured, Or, pointed and garnished within of the first, by the name of
Pegresse. Recreations which are Honest, are as necessary for the mind which is
employed in great affairs, and cares of importance, as meat is for the body
which is exhausted with daily Labor: and therefore of all men living,
Statesmen and Students, are to be borne with, if they are more addicted to the
refreshing of their minds surcharged with meditation, than other sorts of men.
But the play at Tables is not held so fitting for the Female Sex, thereby they
learn to bear a M^n more than they should.

A Fesse be^ween three Chess-rooks.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse between three Chesse-Rooks,
Or, by the name of Bodenham. It seems these were at first called Rookes, for
being the defense of all the rest, and therefore they stand in the uttermost
corners of the Chessboard, as frontier Castles. This is a game of noble
exercise for the mind, as requiring much forecast and understanding. King
William the Conqueror was much addicted to this delight, and lost great
Lordships at this play. And indeed were it not too serious a recreation, and
going beyond the nature of Games, it might well beseem a King, because therein
are comprised all the stratagems of War, or plots of Civil states.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Dice, Sable, each charged with an
Ace, Argent, by the name of Ambesace; as appears by an old Roll late in the
hands of Master Starky deceased. There is no successful event of Dicing, none
prosperous or fortunate, but all ominous and lamentable: for he that loses is
tormented, and he that wins is enticed, and tolled on, until he be
entrapped or ensnared in some wily or dangerous plot.

If a man play at Dice, and depart a Winnor, let him try his fortunes again, he
shall be sure to lose. If a man win, his gains is wasted by giving away here
and there to standers by, and to the Butlers Box, but let him lose never so
much, there is none that will afford him one jot of restitution.

In this kind of play, many men do over-shoot themselves, and commit such
errors for the loss of a little money, as otherwise they would not for great
sums be hired to do.

In this Game all manner of vices, especially those of covetousness and
swearing, do predominate and bear chief sway. Nevertheless many men observing
the casual chance of the Dice, out of a covetous desire of gain, and not being
rightly informed of the use of this our mortal life, do with vehemence
prosecute their insatiable thirst and desire of gain, as if that were the only
scope whereto they ought to direct all their actions of this life; whose folly,
or rather extreme madness is lively expressed in the book of Wisdom, 15.12.
But they counted our life a pastime, and our time here a market for gain: For
(say they) we must be getting every way, though it be by evil means.

To conclude; the Hazard of Dice playing (according to Petrarch) is an huge and
insatiable gulf, a dreadful and sudden Consumption of Patrimonies and
Inheritances; a Tempest of Wind; a Cloud of fame; a Spur to wickedness, and
the road-way to desperation: And howsoever other recreations are sports, yet
this is nothing but mere grief and vexation of mind.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, A Cheuron between three Dice.
a Chevron between three Dice, Sable, each one charged with a Cinque of the
first. This Coat is quartered by Master Fitz-Williams of Malton. This is the
game of Fortune, and Fortunes children. The square, which always falls right
howsoever it be cast, is the Emblem of constancy, but the uncertainty of the
Picks, is the very Type of inconstancy and mutability. He that lays his estate
on the Eyes of these Dice, will leave a small estate for his own Eyes to look
on.

To this chapter may be referred all other games; as the Racket, and that of
Iacobus Medices, General to Charles the fifth, whose Device was a Ball with
two Balloones, with this word, PERCVSSVS ELEVOR, The harder I am stricken, the
higher I mount. And this may serve for conclusion of all Arts and professions
civil, whether Liberal, or Illiberall, necessary or delightful whatsoever.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XIII.
WHat manifold variety of Coate-Armours (consisting of things Artificial) is
borrowed from the several Dignities, Arts, and Exercises of men of civil life
and condition, the foregoing Tracts and Examples have sufficiently declared.
There now remain such Artificials as are in use amongst men of Military
Profession, with which we will shut up this whole Section of things
Artificial. By things Military, I understand all such as do pertain to the
use and exercise of Martial Discipline and Service: whereof some do serve for
Order, some for Execution of Order. Of the first kind are those things which
are for direction in Marchings, Encampings, Arisings, Assaults, Retraits, etc.
and such are the Banner-Royall, the Standard, Guidon, Penon, Cornet, etc. For
albeit it be true, that L^ges silent inter Arma, Laws cannot be heard amongst
clashing of Weapons; yet without certain Laws of Discipline and Order, it is
impossible for any Martial Attempt to be successful. And therefore this is
reckoned as Hannibals highest glory, that being Captain of an Army consisting
of men of so sundry Nations and Conditions, he notwithstanding kept them all
under quiet Discipline: the want whereof has commonly been the cause, when any
great design has proved unprosperous.

The valiant Zisca, being stark blind, yet sitting in the midst of his
Army, whiles they were in any pitched Field with the Enemies, gave such
directions upon all occasions, as that his Army was ever Victorious. And
Caesar was in this kind so fortunate, that he fought fifty pitched Fields with
honor; wherein he alone surpassed the valourous Marcus Marcellus, who is said
to have been forty times save one in the Field. And requisite is it in matters
of so high nature, as are decided by wars, an exqusite care both in directing
and obeying, should be observed, because it has often happened, that the
neglect or mistaking of some one small circumstance has been the overthrow of
whole Armies, and all the States thereon depending.

And sithence we are about to treat of such Artificials as are in use amongst
men of military profession, I hold it not impertinent to discourse a little of
Military laws; and some observations concerning Battles and Armies, beginning
with such military laws and discipline as were divulged to the Israelites, in
the beginning of the second month of the second year, after their coming out
of Egypt.

The all-powerfull and most provident God, and wise disposer of all things;
having made special choice of a people selected out of all the Nations of the
World for his own peculiar service, and minding to exercise them under many
afflictions to prove what was in their hearts (to the end they might have a
feeling sense of his Almighty presence, and ready deliverance at all seasons,
out of all their calamities, that so he might humble them, and make them meet
for himself) he did not presently lead them into the Land of Promise, so soon
as he had brought them out of the Egyptians servitude; but led them to and fro
in the Wilderness, by the space of forty years, keeping them in continual
exercise, to prove their faith, and to bring them out of liking with this
World, and to learn them to depend wholly upon his divine providence; and in
all their necessities to rest solely upon him, and to seek their comfort and
relief from him only.

This most gracious God, having a tender care of these his people, and
foreseeing in his divine providence how needful discipline was, for the
ordering and conducting of so huge and populous a multitude, in a passage so
long, and withal, so full of perils; and knowing that all Civil Discipline
consisted in commanding and obeying, prescribed to his servant Moses a regular
form of government, whereby he might contain them in their several offices and
duties.

First, he commanded Moses to number the Israelites, saying, Take ye the sum
of all the Congregation of the children of Israel, etc. Number. 1.2.

And then, having given Moses and Aaron general directions for the marshalling
and ordering the whole Army of the Israelites, he says, Number. 2.2. Every man of
the children of Israel shall camp by his Standard, and under the ensign of
their fathers house: far off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall
they pitch.

Order for placing the four Standards.
blazon or coat of arms And on the East side toward the rising of the Sun,
shall they of the Standard of the Camp of Judah pitch, throughout their
Armies: and Naashon the son of Amminadab shall be Captain of the Children of
Judah. And his host, and those that were numbered of them were threescore and
fourteen thousand, and six hundred.

The Standard of Judah according to Borhaus.
And those that do pitch next unto him, shall be the Tribe of Issachar: and
Nethaneel the son of Zuar, shall be Captain of the Children of Issachar.

And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and and four
thousand, and four hundred. Then the Tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of
Helon shall be Captain of the children of Zebulun.

And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and seven
thousand and four hundred.

All that were numbered in the Camp of Judah, were an hundred, fourscore and
six thousand and four hundred, throughout their Armies: These shall first set
forth.

blazon or coat of arms On the South side shall be the Standard of the Camp of
Reuben, according to their Armies: 2 The middle ward.
and the Captain of the Children of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.

And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and six
thousand, and five hundred.

And those that pitch by him, shall be the Tribe of Simeon: and the Captain of
the Children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and nine
thousand, and three hundred.

Then the Tribe of Gad: and the Captain of the sons of Gad, shall be Eliasaph
the son of Revel.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and five
thousand, and six hundred and fifty.

And that were numbered in the Camp of Reuben, were an hundred thousand, and
fifty and one thousand, and four hundred and fifty throughout their Armies:
and they set forth in the second rank.

Then the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall set forward, with the Camp of
the Levites, in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set
forward, every man in his place by their Standards.

On the West side shall be the Standard of the Camp of blazon or coat of arms
Ephraim, according to their Armies: The middl^ ward.
and the Captain of the sons of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty thousand and
five hundred.

And by him shall be the Tribe of Manasseh: and the Captain of the Children of
Manasseh, shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two
thousand, and two hundred.

Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the Captain of the sons of Benjamin, shall be
Abidan the son of Gideoni.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and five
thousand, and four hundred.

All that were numbered of the Camp of Ephraim, were an hundred thousand, and
eight thousand and an hundred throughout their Armies: And they shall go
forward in the third rank.

blazon or coat of arms The Standard of the Camp of Dan; The Standard of the
Camp of Dan, according to Borhaus.
shall be on the Northside by their Armies: and the Captain of the children of
Dan, shall be Ahiezur the son of Ammishaddai.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and two
thousand, and seven hundred.

And those that encamp by him, shall be the Tribe of Asher: and the Captain of
the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.

And his host and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one
thousand, and five hundred.

Then the Tribe of Naphtali: and the Captain of the children of Naphtali, shall
be Ahira the son of Enan.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and three
thousand, and four hundred.

All they that were numbered in the Camp of Dan, were an hundred thousand, and
fifty and seven thousand and six hundred: they shall go hindmost with their
Standards.

Here have we in this second Chapter of Numbers, an uncontrollable warrant
pronounced by the mouth of Almighty God, for the use of two sorts of Ensigns,
the one general being in number four, only ordained for the leading and
direction of the four Regiments (as I may so call them.) And the other
particular, serving for the demonstration of the several families and for the
distinguishing of the particular persons of each family for the more commodious
distributing of them into bands: a thing most behovefull for the bestowing and
conducting of so huge a multitude, considering how many thousand of persons,
were comprised in, and under every of the above named Regiments: So as it is
most clear, that those are no less requisite (in their kind) than the former
in theirs, for the more orderly and effectual managing of this military
expedition of so long a continuance, and withal subjected to infinite dangers.

As touching the Tokens or Signs used in the general standards, we have
showed what they were after the opinion of Martinus Borhaus (who differs from
Speed) his very words you may read in the first Chapter, and first Section of
this Book.

^^rticular En^^gnes what.
But sithence here is mention made of signs pertaining to particular families
and persons, it may perhaps be questioned what these Signs were? whereto I
answer, that they must of necessity be Signa existentium in rerum natura,
because there cannot be a representation of things that are not. If then they
consisted of the similitude of the things in Essence, or being, no doubt they
were such as not only the skilfuller sort, but the vulgar also (through
frequent use and custom) did well know by their daily sight and use of them: As
being the express portraictures either of Celestial Bodies, as of the Sun,
Moon, Stars, etc. Or of things Sublunar, as Meteors fiery, Meteors watery,
whereof we have before spoken in their due places: Or else of vegetable, as
Trees, Shrubs, Plants, Fruits, Herbs, Flowers, etc. Or else they were
resemblances of sensitive creatures; As of Man, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes,
Reptiles: Or else of Instruments, or Tools of familiar use in the exercise of
Mechanical Trades, pertaining to life Civil, or Rustic. Which in respect of
their common and ordinary use were best known to men, and therefore served most
fitly for notes or marks, or precise differencing of each particular family and
person from other.

When a King or Prince do enter the field to give battle to their enemies, it
behooves that he be strongly fenced of the Army, both before and behind, and
that he have his being near the great standard, in the heart of the battle,
for the more safety of his person, and that he may the better give directions
upon all occasions to the whole Army, as the necessity of the service shall
require.

The safety of the commander.
It is a thing very dangerous for a King, Prince, or other General, or
whatsoever other their great Commander, to be over-forward or venturous to
encounter his enemy in battle in his own person: It suffices such to command*
and to give direction, and never to hazard their persons in battle. But if he
must needs put his person upon the jeopardy of the uncertain and dangerous
events of a Battle, it behooves that he defer the same to the last conflict;
for that upon the safety of his person, depends the hopeful good success of
the batell, and the safety of the whole Army.

Besides so long as the Chief Commander is in life and safety; albeit he be
foiled and discomfited: yet may he repair his forces, and subdue him by whom
he was foiled: but his person being either slain or surprised, there is no
hope of recovery.

Upon the first Display of the Banner of a King or Prince, Place of a ^^nerall
in ti^ of Battle
or of their general or chief Commander; it behooves that some discreet and
ancient Counselor should make known publicly the cause why those wars were
undertaken, to the intent the same may be known to be grounded upon lawful
cause; and that the King or Prince does not rashly attempt the same, but that
he does it in a lawful quarrel and upon just cause.

Which done, then should he command the chief Herald to unrole and Display the
said Banner, and deliver it to him that is appointed to bear the same (who
before he take the same, must receive the order of Knighthood, if he be not
before Knighted) with a straight charge and command to hold the same fast, and
to maintain the honor thereof, even with the extreme hazard of his life; and
thereupon to advance the same in the Name of God, the sole Author and giver of
all victory.

Like as the laws of Civil Magistracy and government were ordained by God, so
also were military Laws and ordinances grounded upon his express commandment
uttered by the mouth of the Prophets and Priests. As you may see particularly,
for the exhortation of Priests, Deuteronomy. 20.1, 2. and of other Officers, Deuteronomy.
20.5. and Jud. 7.3. besides, military laws for Fight, Number. 21.21. that the
conditions of peace must be offered, Deuteronomy. 20.11, 12, etc. for spoil, 20.19.
and the division thereof, 1 Samuel 30.26, etc. 1 Chronicles. 26.27. Josh. 22.8. 2 Chronicles. 28.15. for Victory; that it is the duty of Captains and their Armies
(after victory obtained) to ascribe the whole glory thereof to God, and with
one heart and one voice to magnify his most glorious Majesty by the example of
Judas Maccabeus. Thus they went home and sung Psalms, and praised the Lord in
Heaven, for he is gracious, ann his mercy endures for ever, 1 Maccab. 4.24.

The skillful managing of military affairs is a kind of Art; neither does the
public profession of the name of a Soldier, nor yet his lofty countenance or
change of habit forthwith make a man a Soldier, it is a matter of greater
consequence, and of no less secrecy; for a Soldier is to be confident in that
he undertaketh, and to wage battle with an assured hope of victory, and to
retire himself and his forces (if the necessity of the cause so require)
without fear of reproach or danger. For as the common proverb says, A more
valorous man is he that wisely flies, than he that foolishly exposes himself
to adventure and hazard, Periti enim bellatoris est non minus scire fugiendi
artem, quam pugnandi; for it is a matter of no great difficulty to draw men on
to fight, but if the Captain in his providence whilst they be in action, shall
discover some unexpected disadvantage or damage that may befall him and his
band, and can wisely retire himself with honor and with safety of his
soldiers, he shows himself both valorous in his encounter, and wise in his
retreat.

The greatest victories have not been gotten by handy-strokes always, but many
times for safeguard of the effusion of blood, either the one part, or the other
devised some witty unexpected sudden policy or Stratagem, to astonish the
adverse part; that so they might suddenly slaughter them, or put them to
shameful flight. Large is the field of Stratagems which every Commander has
by particular invention; neither has there been more victories or trophies
gained by any one means than by these Stratagems. Whatsoever comes beyond
expectation makes a disturbance or amazment in the Enemy: but it must be
wrought with this caution, that it be no disturbance to our selves.

Neither is every slight invention fit to be put in practice, but such only as
have foresight and circumspection annexed to them. He must be Argus that is a
General or chief Commander, he must be eyed, behind, before, in his head, in
his feet; and then shall all things be easily disposed according to Order, and
take good effect, when orderly distribution, and providence, and premeditation,
have made way thereto.

It is not the length of a man's age, or the number of years, that yields the
Art or Skill of managing Military affairs, but a continual meditation, how he
may encounter all occurrents and put them in exercise and practice: for if a
man receive never so many stipends, yet is the unexercised man still but a
freshwater Soldier notwithstanding.

There were in former Ages two sorts of dismission, or discharge from military
service, the one named ignominiosa, that is to say, opprobrious or infamous; as
when a Soldier for some notorious crime was discharged from his service, and
disgracefully put out of pay and place, as for slothfullnesse, cowardice,
forsaking of his Captain or such like, then he was by the Tribune dismissed of
his place, and branded with the mark of infamy and reproach, if he were so by
the Tribune discharged, and deprived of his Military ornaments.

The other was called Causaria missio, as much to say as an occasional
dismission or discharge, grounded upon good and lawful cosiderations: as when
in regard of debility, by reason of Age or Sickness, Wounds or other
infirmities possessing a man; he was licenced to depart to his home, and those
that were thus dismissed, did most commonly dedicate their Shields, Swords and
Armor, Laribus suis, to their houshold-Gods, as the heathen termed them, by
hanging them up upon the Walls in some chief or special place or room of
their house, for a memorial of their service performed in defense of their
friends and Country.

High spirited men subject to violent deaths.
Martial men are evermore in peril and hazard of life, in regard of their
light esteem of the manifold varietyes, casualties and dangerous events of
Wars, whereunto they do evermore expose themselves; for fortune thundereth
not her perils more abundantly upon any sort of men, than upon those that set
her at naught, such are high spirited and valourous men. And not without cause,
for as others do labor to shelter themselves from danger, and do shun the
violence thereof; these contrariwise do lay open themselves to the utmost
hazard that may befall them.

Call to mind the forpassed ages, and examine them to the point, and you shall
find that the valiantest men (for the mast part) have been swallowed up with a
violent death. Victory does oftentimes make men swell with pride, and to insult
over others, and provoke them to their own destruction, as we may see 2 Kings
14.8. Where Amaziah summoned the son of Jehoahaz King of Israel to single
combat, saying, Come let us look one another in the face. Who answered him,
Because thou have smitten Edom, and thine heart has lifted thee up: glory of
this and tarry at home: for why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou
should fall, even thou and Judah with thee?

Some men are of opinion, that such as are vanquished in Battle, Justness of
Law of victory.
ought not to be captivated to such as had subdued them, unless the wars were
just and lawful, as Doctor Casius has observed, but Borreus holds that,
albeit the ground or cause of the wars that are undertaken be unjust; yet is it
not simply unjust, that such as are vanquished in battle, should be subjected
under the power of the vanquisher; Quia legislatoris intentio est, ut v^rius
vincentis sic honoretur: The purpose of the Lawmakers was that the valor of
the vanquisher should be so rewarded. Besides, it is no ignominious thing for a
man to be subdued by a man accounted of valor, according to that saying, Non
tam turpe est vinei, quam contendisse gloriosum; It is not reckoned a matter so
reproachful to be subdued, as it is honorable to have coaped with a
magnanimous and valiant man.

Many men are remunerated for the virtues that are found in them, or for the
external tokens of virtue that are observed in their outward carriage Hereupon
is that law grounded, Quod capti bello victoribus subserviant, not for that the
Conquerors are always the better men, but in regard that in them the signs
and tokens of virtue and valor, are more apparent than in those that are
subdued.

It is a just dominion or superiority, Law milit^
and agreeable to the order of Nature, that the more powerful should
predominate over the weaker sort. And the laws do seem to approve the same,
Cum velint victum captum in bello victoris servum fieri.

It is a Law of perpetuity (says Zenophon) observed amongst men, that when a
Town or City, that held out the Assailants, is surprised, whatsoever is found
therein, is due to them that took the same, as well the persons as their whole
substance, whose opinion herein Aristotle follows Polit. 40. And Saint
Ambrose, lib. 1. de Patriarch, writes, that the prey of the King of Sodom was
in like sort in the power of Abraham that conquered him.

This custom has been also observed, that to ask leave to bury the slain in
the time of open hostility, and whilst men are in Arms in the field, or depart
the Field after battle, is a kind of yielding of victory: for it beseems not
them that wan the Battle to seek any thing of the enemy by way of entreaty.
Like as also the unwillingnesse to join battle, and protraction or delay of
battle was taken for a yiedling of victory.

And now we will begin with examples of bearing such things in Coat Armor,
whereby Martial Discipline and Order, which we have now discoursed of, are
preserved; whereof some are for show, other for sound.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Jupiter, three Banners disvellopped, in
Bend, Sol. Virgilius Solis notes this for the Arms of the Kingdom of
Baldachia. Disvellopping is the proper term for spreading or displaying of this
Martial Ensign, as Wyrley notes, in the life and death of the Capitol de
Bur, saying, With threatening Axe in hand, I was at hand; And my disvellopped
Penon me before, etc.

Very behovefull are these ensigns for every particular band of Foot and troop
of Horse, to the end they may know whither to draw together in expectance of
the command of their Captain for the performance of all occasions; and that
they may by them be directed after any conflict or skirmish, whither to retire
themselves without danger: they also serve for the manifest distinguishing of
Bands and Companies. And by these they are all directed in their services, as a
Ship is guided through the forcible and violent surges of the Seas, by the
benefit of her Helm, and a skillful Pilot guiding the same.

The Ensigns that the Romans anciently used, were of diverse shapes; the Eagle
fixed on the top of a pike or pole, was the chief: but that they had Pennons or
Flags also, appears by Lazius, who says they were called vexilla, a velis
navium, from the Sails of Ships, which they resembled, being so named, tanquam
minus velum, as it were a little Sail.

Sp^es garnishe^ with Peno^ls.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, four Spears in Bend, garnished with
Penoncels dexter-wayes, counterly surmounted of as many other like, Argent.
This Coat is borne quarterly by Lazarus van Schwendi, a Dutchman. These
Penoncels made of certain small pieces of Taffata or Sarcenet, cut after the
form of a Pennon, wherewith Martial men do oftentimes adorn their Spears and
Lances, which albeit of themselves they be things of no moment, yet do they
very often (like as also Banners do) astonish the Enemy through their
continual motion, forasmuch as they are evermore wafting and wavering in the
wind, whereby they do so occupy the enemies eye, as that it breeds a terror
in the mind of their foes, through a conceived opinion that those that come
against them (being all troops of Horsemen that use this kind of Spear) are of
a far greater number than indeed they are, as Wyrley in his said book notes,
saying, To Cockerell ward we light into the way,
Where we beheld the Foe-mates proud display;
So many Banners wafting in the Air,
They seemed twice the number that they were.


These foresaid Instruments serve for direction and order to the eye, and by
show. To these Ensigns thus borne in the Field, in time of battle, either
expected or acted, we may add this known Ensign of premonstration of eminent
hostile invasion, which is the fired Beacon, which gives a sudden warning of
instant intended attempt or invasion of enemies, the notice whereof gives
occasion of the firing of the Beacon, whereupon a Gentleman of good reputation
chose to bear for his Imprese, upon a mount a Beacon fired with this Motto
annexed, Sic periisse juvat; meaning to die for his Countries safety was his
desire. The bearing in Arms of three of these fired Beacons appears in this
next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Beacons fired, Or, the flames
proper, by the name of Dauntre. As touching the name of Beacons, it seems to
be a Saxon word derived from the Saxon word, Becuian, which signifies to call
by sign or to becken, as we use the word at this day, and therefore are they
called Beacons. Before the time of King Edward the third, they were made of
great Stacks of wood, but about the eleventh year of his reign, he ordained
that there should be in the County of Kent, high Standards with their pitch
pans on the top of them. Lamberts perambulation of Kent, page 69. Now I will
present to your view, some examples of the bearing in Coat Armor such Military
instruments, which direct more distinctly by sound.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Drum in Fesse, between three
Drum-sticks erected, Argent. The Drum is of frequent use (with diverse Nations)
in the Field. The Parthians for this purpose have great Kettle Drums, hollow
within, and about them they do hang little Bells and Copper-rings, all which
sounding together do make a noise much like a dead sound mingled with the
braying and bellowing of a wild beast. This Instrument as it serves for
direction, so likewise is it of use in drowning the fearful cries of wounded
and dying men, lest that ghastly noise should daunt the hearts of the
Soldiers. Zisca that renowned Captain of the Bohemians, being sick to death,
willed his Soldiers to pluck off his Skin and to make a Drum of it, assuring
them that when their enemies should hear the sound of it, they would fly
before their face.

There is manifold uses of the Drum, Fife, Trumpet, and other musical
instruments used in martial affairs, in as much as they serve not only for
the direction of Companies and Troops, but also of the whole Army in their
marchings, encampings, risings, assaults, retraits, etc. but also to dead and
drown the cries of the maimed and wounded; and to stir up valor and courage in
the Soldiers to the fierce encountering and assaulting of the Enemy: and for
these ends was the use of them ordained in wars, to which purpose do these
Instruments much avail, Sonus enim cornuum and Tubarum (in preliis) magnam vim
habet ad spiritus, and sanguinem evocandum. For it is not with men, as it is
with beasts, which can stir up courage in themselves, as I have before showed:
for men in respect of fear and faint courage, are hardly provoked to fight,
therefore had they need to be drawn on and provoked thereto.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron engrailed, A Cheuron
engrailed between three Trumpets.
between three Trumpets, Sable, by the name of Thunder. This Coat Armor
stands in a Glass window in Saint Peter's Church in Drogheda in Ireland. God
himself vouch-safed to give direction to Moses for the making of this kind of
Instrument, saying, Make thee two Trumpets of silver, of an whole piece shall
thou make them, that thou may use them for the assembly of the Congregation,
and for the departure of the Camp: Number. 10.12. and Ibid. 14. But if ye blow an
Alarm, then the Camp of them that pitch on the East part shall go forward.
Ibid. 15. If ye blow an Alarm the second time, then the host of them that lie
on the South side shall march, for they shall blow an Alarm when they remove.
So that the sound of the Trumpet, is but as the loud and far-reaching voice of
the General: and though the Trumpet fight not, yet it does more than many
others, because it encourages them to the fight.

blazon or coat of arms This is the Coat Armor of Sir John Greenvile Knight, a
worthy Son of so noble a Father as was Sir Bevill Greenvile: This with the
Arms of Vlster, is likewise the bearing of Sir Richard Greenvile, Knight and
Baronet, and is thus blazoned, He bears Gules, three Clarions, Or. They are
sometime described Rests, but whether they be understood to be the Rudder, or
from the name to be a thing whereon to rest their Lances, I know not, but am
rather induced to believe them instruments used in Battle and Tournaments as
we do Trumpets, for I find Robert Consuls Coat, base Son to H nry the first,
blazoned, Clarions, of these very colors; And in many old Descriptions of
tilting, we find the Knights to come in with Clarions sounding before them.

^e Flutes ^end.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Flutes in Bend, Argent. This
Instrument seems to have been invented, for the quiet settling and composing
the Soldiers minds before the fight: and some such did the L^cedemonians use
who (says Plutarch) being ready to join battle, did first Sacrifice, and then
all adorned with Garlands sung a Martial Song, their King marching with the
whole Army in admirable quiet and composed order. But the Syba^i^es were not so
happy in the use of such music; for themselves being altogether given to
wantonness and pleasure, all their Gentry taught their Horses to dance at the
sound of Musical Instruments; which their enemies having notice of being then
in the Field and ready to join, they commanded a noise of Music in the front
of the Army to sound; whereupon the Sybarites Horses fell all a dancing, and
overthrew their Riders, whereby their enemies departed Conquerors. And thus
much for Instruments of Military Order, either for Eye or Ear.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XIV.
THE next are such things as serve for execution of order, which is the final
end for which Military profession is instituted, viz. propulsation or revenge
of wrong, or for foiling the wrong-doer, refusing to give satisfaction to the
party grieved: and as in the Law politic, so in this Law military, Execution
is reckoned the soul thereof. To the accomplishment of Execution of order,
sundry sorts of weapons are requisite: some Invasive or Offensive, others
defensive; the one to protect our selves, the other to impeach our foes: and of
these Invasives, will we speak in the first place; beginning with those which
we call M^ssilia, such as are cast or forced by strength of hand, or slight of
Ingine, and after we will come to such as are manual, or managed with the hand.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, A Culvering.
a Culvering dismounted in Fesse, Sable, by the name of Leigh. Before the
invention of Guns, many sorts of weapons, as well Invasive as Defensive, were
devised, which (says Munster) by the space of every hundred years have
admitted alteration twice or thrice, like as also the Armor wherewith our
bodies are covered and fenced. But one says that it was the Devil himself who
invented this hellish Instrument for confusion of mankind. Indeed it was a
Monk who first invented Gunpowder: and I have read, that the first founder of
these huge great Pieces, was himself slain with the breaking of one of them. A
certain Captain was wont to call the mouth of the great Gun, Hell-mouth, and
said that he who trembled not when one of them thundered, did fear neither God
nor the Devil.

There are diverse sorts of these kind of Guns, but I shall only show you an
example of bearing of one other sort of them called Chambers; of which you may
here see three borne with an interposition of one ordinary surmounted of
another between them.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, surmounted of
another, Ermine, between three Chambers, Chambers fired.
placed transverse the Escocheon of the second, fired, Proper, by the name of
Chambers.

Whether the invention hereof were behovefull and necessary; or (as others
reckon it) most pernicious and devilish, I will not take upon to dispute, but
refer you to Sebastian Munster lib. 3. of his Cosmography, where he makes
mention of Bertholdus Swartz, the Monk that first devised them, Anno Dom. 1354.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sapphire, three Murdering chain-shots,
Murdering Chain-shot.
Topaz. This Coat Armor is borne by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Cumberland, next to his Pater^all Coat; and it is thought to be an
augmentation. Some have taken these to be the heads of Clubs called Holy Water
sprincles; other suppose them to be Bals of Wildfire; I rather think them to
be some murdering chain-shot. Amadaeus Duke of Savoy gave two Staves topt with
wildfire, with this word, JACTAE CRESCIMUS.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, Sable, three Ogresses,
Ogresses or Pellets.
or Pellets in Chief, proper, by the name of Langley.

There I tell not the Color of these Ogresses or Pellets, because they be
always Sable, as shall be more plainly showed in the conclusion of this fourth
Section.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, Sable, two Pellets in
chief, and one Martlet of the second in Base. This is the Coat Armor of Henry
Lee, one of the Captains of the City of London: how proper it is for a martial
Commander to bear in his Armoriall ensigns such military Instruments, I shall
not need to prove by strength of Argument, Dum res ipsa loquitur.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Fesse, Gules, between two
Matches kindled, Proper, a Martlet, Or. This Coat Armor pertains to the
Family of Leete of Bury Saint Edmonds, in the County of Suffolk. To this head
must be referred all other the Appurtenances of great and small Ordnance, as
Scowpes, Ladles, Spunges, Flasques, Touch-boxes, etc.

A Swepe charged with a Stone.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Swepe, Azure, charged with a
Stone, Or, by the name of Magnall. This was an Engine of war, in fashion
seeming like to that which the Brewers use to draw water withal, and therefore
we call it a Swepe as they do. With this Engine they used in ancient time to
throw great Stones into the Towns and fortifications of the enemy. Some such
Instrument did Vzziah King of Jerusalem use among many others for the defense
of the City against the assaults of the Philistims, as appears where it is
said, And he made very artificial Engines in Jerusalem, to be set upon the
Towers, and upon the Corners, to shoot Arrows and Stones, etc. These are
called Engines for the ingenious and witty inventions of them; wherein former
ages were so exquisite, as that Archimede could draw up the enemies Ships from
the Water.

Battering rams.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, three Battering Rams, Barre-wayes,
Proper, headed, Sapphire, Armed and garnished, Topaz. This is the paternall
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Robert Berty, Earl of Lindsey, Baron
Willoughby of Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council. This Battering Ram was a warlike Instrument much used by the Romans
when they besieged any City or hold, with purpose to surprise them. Such an
Engine (amongst diverse others) did Titus Vespatianus erect against the City of
Jerusalem, which were by Josephus and his associates consumed with fire. Such
is the force of this Engine as that there is no Tower so strong, or circuit of
a City so spacious, but if that they resist the first brunt thereof, through
often use they will be subverted.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, a Crosse-bow, bent in Pale, A
Crosse-bow bent.
Gules, by the name of Arblaster, quasi Arcubalista. This Instrument Military
(says Polydor) was first devised by the Cretians. And in former ages was
called in Latin S orpio, and out of this they used to shoot stones, as
Ammianus Marcellinus notes, saying, Et Scorpiones quocunque manus perite
duxissent, rotundos Lapides evibrabant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Ermine, three long Bows bent in Pale,
Gules, by the name of Bows, and of Sir Thomas Bows. This kind of Bow is
called in Latin Arcus, ab arcendo, of keeping the enemy aloof, and not
permitting him to approach near to us, by darting (as it were) out of the
arrows, whereby we do gall, wound or kill them afar off. This is a Military
Instrument of the missile sort, and that not of the meanest rank, if we
considerately peruse the Histories of former ages, for we shall find more set
battles fought, and famous victories achieved by English men with bows and
arrows, than any Nation of Christendom has obtained by any one Instrument
whatsoever, without exception. But this weapon alone suffices not of it self
to perform any action, but with the Arrows assistance, whereof you have an
example in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Arrows. Or, Feathered and
headed Argent, which is the Coat of that worthy and ancient Family of Hales of
Kent, now flourishing in the persons of that Honorable Gentleman Sir Edward
Hales of Tunstall in Kent, Baronet, Robert Hales of the Court of Chancery, and
others.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three broad Arrows, Argent. The
Arrowe is called in Latin Sagitta (as some do conceit it) quasi satis ictus,
for that it annoyeth and galleth the enemy far enough off, so as he cannot
approach the Archer to endamage him, because by the smart delivery of the Bow,
the enemy is put to hazard a great way off: others would have it called (and
not unaptly) quod Sagax sic ictus ejus: for that the same being directed by the
hand of a cunning and skillful Archer does cleave the pin or mark oftentimes
in two, though the same be but of a small scantling.

The Arrow is reckoned one of the number of weapons destinated to avengement,
as appears, Deuteronomy. 32.42. I will make mine Arrows drunk with blood (and my
sword shall eat flesh) for the blood of the slain, and of the Captains, when I
begin to take vengeance of the Enemy.

Sometimes you shall find both these martial weapons borne together in one
Escocheon, as in this next appears.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sable, two long bows bent in Pale, the
strings counterposed, Or, between as many sheaves of Arrows, Banded, Argent.
This Coat stands in Kirton Church in Devonshire. This sort of bearing may
signify a man resolved to abide the utermost hazard of battle, and to that
end has furnished himself to the full, as well with Instruments of
ejaculation, as also of retention. The Bow and Arrows in former ages, have won
more glory to this Kingdom than any other sort of Soldiery whatsoever, as the
renowned Victories obtained in France do well testify. There is yet another
form of bearing of Arrows diverse from these, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, A Quiver, Gules, banded and
replenished with Arrows, Or, between three Pheons, Sable. This Coat is
quartered by Loyd of Hollyrood Ampney, in the County of Gloucester. It was a
custom amongst the Persians when they went to warfare, every man to cast an
Arrow into a Chest, ordained for that purpose, and placed before the Throne of
their King: and at their return, every one to take his own Shaft, that so by
the number of Arrows remaining, the number of the deceased might be certainly
known.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, two Bars, Sable, on a Canton of
the second, a Pheon of the first. This is the paternall Coat Armor of Sir John
Bingley Knight, in the Reign of King James, Auditor of his then Majesty's
Receipts in the Exchequer.

The Pheon is the head of an Instrument of the Missile sort, which we call a
Dart, the same being a long and light Staff, headed after this manner, and
having a Thong fastened to the midst thereof, for the more sleighty and strong
forcing the same against the enemy, to keep or annoy him afar off. This is
called in Latin Jaculum, quia e longinquo jaciatur: it pierces speedily, and
makes a large wound, by reason of the wide spreading barbs thereof. The
bearing of Pheons is both ancient and commendable.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse between three Pheons,
Sable, by the name of Rowdon, or Raudon (for I find it written both ways, and
that anciently.) This is a Yorkshire Family, and was resident at Rawdon, or
Roudon, as appears by diverse Deeds in the time of Richard the second, Henry
the sixth, and Henry the eighth.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Argent, on a Fesse, Gules, between three
Pheons, Sable, a Lion passant, Or. This is the Coat Armor of Marmaduke Rowdon,
one of the Captains of the City of London. And now this next example will show
you a Charge somewhat like unto this Pheon, yet differs it much from it in
name, and in the fashion also, if you observe it with a curious eye, as it well
becomes a good Blazoner to do.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, on a Cheuron, Argent, three barbed
Arrow-heads, Sable, by the name of Kemis of Wickwick, in Glocestershire.

And hitherto of Missils: we now come to Manuals. Weapons Manual, are so
called, because manu tractantur, they are managed by the hand; when by the use
of them we do assail our foes, or put away proffered wrong, by encountering or
grapling with them at handy strokes. Such are these that follow, and their like.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Sword in Pale, Sable, by the name
of Dymock. The Sword is a Weapon fitted for execution and vengeance; as we may
see Deuteronomy. 32.41. If I whet my glittering Sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that
hate me. Furthermore it is said, Jer. 46.10. For the Sword shall devour, and it
shall be satiated and made drunk with their blood, for the Lord God of Hosts
has a Sacrifice in the North Country by the River Perath.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, three Swords in Pale, Argent, an
Inescocheon of the second, charged with a Sinister hand couped at the wrist as
the first. This is the paternall Coat Armor of Sir Simon Clarke of Salford in
the County of Warwick, Knight, sometimes Cofferer to King James, who deriveth
his descent from Anketell de Wood-Church in the County of Kent.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, Three Swords.
three Swords conjoined at the Pomels in Fesse, their points extended into the
corners of the Escocheon, Argent, by the name of Stapleton. The Galateans,
instead of ordinary Swords, used a kind of two handed or bastard long-sword,
which they fastened with chains to their right sides. A like manner of fastening
our Swords to our right sides was in use with our Horsemen in England in the
time of King Edward the third, as may be seen by the great Seal then used. It
is a reproachful thing for a Knight, to be disarmed of his Sword in battle;
Quia si gladio spoliaretur, omnem perderet honorem militiae and Privilegium.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Swords, one in Pale point
upward, surmounted of the other two, placed Saltire-waies, points downward,
Argent, by the name of Norton. A certain Laconian, when his son found fault
with his Sword, that it was too short, made his answer, Idcirco parvum datur
forti viro ut addat gressum; Therefore is a short Sword given to a man of
courage that he may lengthen the same with a step: meaning thereby that because
his Sword was short, he should approach so much the nearer to his enemy, and so
might he make the same long enough, so may he buckle him hand to hand, and
perhaps wrest the weapon out of the adversaries hand, to his great credit,
Gloriosum enim est victoriae genus, ab eo cum quo dcertas Arma capere, It is a
praiseworthy thing for a man to bereave or despoile his enemy of his Arms or
Weapons: yea, so glorious is it reckoned, as that many men having possessed
themselves with their enemies weapons, either by surprise or slaughter, have
used the same and none other, all the days of their life. As appears (in
part) 1 Maccab. 3 12. So Judas took their spoils, and took also Apolonius
Sword, and fought with it, all his life long.

Which is a good Sword, Seneca shows in these words, Gladium bonum dices, non
cui deauratus est balthaeus, nec cui vagina gemmis distinguitur, sed cui ad
secandum subtilis est acies.

Three Swords in pale.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Swords in Pale, two with their
points downward, and the middlemost upwards, by the name of Rawline. There are
besides these, diverse other forms of bearing of Swords, as three Swords points
in point, in Bend, Bar, etc. I find another Coat of like Charge and Name, but
diversely borne from this. As by example appears in this next Escocheon.

Three Swords their points toward the Dexter.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Sable, three Swords Bar ways, their
points toward the Sinister part of the Escocheon, Argent, the Hilts and
Pomels, Or, a cressant for a difference by the name of Rawlyns. As touching the
invention of Swords, Polydor Virg. says, their use was found out by the
Lacedaemonians. The Romans in their Saturnalian feasts, amongst other exercises
used the game of Sword-playing, to the end that in time of peace, they being
accustomed to behold Fighting, Wounds and Swords, might be the less
discouraged, when they see the Feats of Arms in the Field against the enemy;
and therefore the Chifetain or General of the Host was to exhibit to the
people a game of Fence or Sword-playing.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Swords extended, Barre-wayes,
Argent, the Hilts and Pomels, Or, by the name of Chute, and is the bearing of
Chaloner Chute of Sutton Court in the County of Middlesex, Esquire, a worthy
successor of his Fathers virtues, who was a Gentleman of much Eminence and
Knowledge in his practice of the Laws, and praiseworthy reputation.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Gules, a Cross between four Swords,
Argent, the Pummels and Hilts, Or. This Coat was given to Sir John Philipot
Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of London (and used with his ancient Arms which
are, Sable, a Bend, Ermine) for a Coat of Augmentation; for this Sir John
Philipott at his own charges set forth a fleet of Ships in the year 1378.
(which was in the second year of King Richard the second) and scoured the Seas,
at that time so sorely infested with Pirates, that the Merchant ships could not
traffic in safety. Master Camden in his Brittannia sets forth, that he like a
good patriot of his Country, surprised John Mercer a Scottish Rover, and all
the Rabble of his adherents, besides fifteen sail of Spanish Ships, richly
freighted with Merchandise, which they had taken as prize, whereof he made no
other use, but to give supply to his Sovereign, for he maintained one thousand
men in the Kings wars in France, and performed many pious and laudable works in
his life time, and ordained many more by his last will extant in the Registers
of the Hoysting London. King Richard the second rewarded his good service with
a grant of forty pounds of yearly revenew of land escheated to the Crown, yet
in the possession of Sir John Philipott his next heir in Philpot Lane in
London; and made him Knight in Smithfield, when he rewarded Sir William
Walworth Mayor of London, with that order at the same time, when he vanquished
that arch Rebel of Kent, Wat Tyler. He builded a fair Chapel at his Manor
of Granch in Gillingham in Kent, which Manor is a member of the Cinqueports
which he bequeathed to his second son, Captain Thomas Philipott a valiant
Gentleman.
from whom descended Captain Thomas Philipott that valiantly maintained a
challenge in the Low Countries against Captain Debee that had wickedly depraved
our late Queen Elizabeth, and slew the said Debee in single combat. And from
another son of Sir John Philipott is descended Captain Thomas Philipot of
Apston-Hall in Hertfort-shire not far from Woodhall Filpots, the ancient seat
of this family who (by following the wars in Queen Elizabeth's days at an
expensive rate) was constrained to alienate those lands. Sir John Philipot now
one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in Ireland, but borne in Kent, is
branched from those of Gillingham aforesaid. I have seen some evidences which
do persuade me to believe that the lands now belonging to Sir John Philipot,
the chief of this house at Stepney nigh Lon. came to his Ancestors by marriage
with the Sister of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury. The Swords are the
truest Emblems of Military honor, and should incite the Bearers to a just and
generous pursuit of Honor and Virtue in Warlike-wayes, especially when they
intend the defense of the Christian Faith, denoted sufficiently in the Cross,
as here in this Coat. Much might be spoken here of the bearing of the Sword; it
being an Emblem of Government and Justice, and borne before the King, GODS
Leivetenant, and in other places to honor Lievetenants to the Kings Majesty:
but of a bearing so apt to be displayed, I need say no more.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Curtelasse in Bend, Proper,
garnished, Or. This Coat pertains to the Family of Tatnall in the County of
Chester. The old Britans our Ancestors were wont to wear a short and broad
Sword; so did the Spartanes also, whom when one of their Enemies mocked for so
curted a weapon, it was replied, that it was not so short but it could reach
into their hearts, as often as they met in Field.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Lances in Bend, Or, Armed,
Argent, by the name of Carlow. It was a custom amongst the Romans when they did
undertake any lawful wars, after denial of restitution demanded of things
unlawfully taken, or satisfaction for wrongs offered, that the King of Arms (to
whom the denouncing of battle and defiance did properly appertain) should
amongst other ceremonies, throw a Spear headed with Iron, imbrued with blood,
and scorched with fire, into the Soil of that people against whom such war was
denounced; to notify unto them that they would severely prosecute them with
fire and force for the wrong by them committed.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Barrey of six, Argent and Gules, three
Cressants, Ermine, on a Chief of the second, two Lances in saltire, their
heads broken off, Or. This was the Coat Armor of William Watson Esquire,
sometime Keeper of the store of the Ordnance, as well of those in the Tower of
London, as of these belonging to the Navy; who was Grandfather to those five
brothers, viz. William Watson of Frendesbury in the County of Kent. John Watson
of Wolpett in Suffolk, Richard and Norton Watson, both of London; and Thomas
Watson, one of the Clerks of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a quarter, Gules, a Spear in
Bend, Or, by the name of Knight, Hybern. It was the manner of the Romans to
bestow Spears upon the valiant and well-deserving Soldiers in recompense of
their acceptable service performed. To this end and purpose (as Festus Pompeius
supposes) because the Spear is the perfection of Martial affairs, and
Imperial jurisdiction: and for that it was a custom to make sale of captives
under the same; as also to make them and such Soldiers as had transgressed the
Military discipline (whereupon they were disarmed of their Military Belt, and
received the ignominious name of Discincti) to pass the yoke, the first for
that they were brought into subjection by force; the other, for transgression
of the Laws Military.

This Yoke consists of three Spears, whereof two were pitched upright, and
the third was bound crosse-wayes to them both; under this Yoke were both
enforced to pass, that their reproach might be the greater.

Before a man shall go about to buckle with his enemies, it behooves that the
Army be fully furnished, and provided with all sorts of Military provisions,
both defensive and offensive, by the example of Vzziah King Judah: of whom it
is said,

Vzziah had also an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands,
according to the count of their number, under the hand of Jeiel, etc.

And Vzziah prepared them throughout all the host Shields, and Spears, and
Helmets, and Briggandines, and bows and stones to sling, 2 Chronicles. 26.11.14.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Spears heads, Gules, a Chief,
Azure. This Coat Armor belongs to Robert Reyce of Preston in the County of
Suffolk, Esquire, a worthy Gentleman, whose great charge and care in collecting
and preserving the Antiquities of that County, merits a large Encomium. The
Spears heads being apt and ready to pierce according to the opinion of some
Authors, betokens a dexterity and nimblenesse of wit, to penetrate and
understand matters of highest consequence.

As concerning the quantity or weight of Spears heads, we find in them in all
Ages, answerable to the strength of the persons that were to manage them: So we
read that the Speare-head of Golias that encountered with David, weighed six
hundred sheckles of Iron, which was correspondent to his spear, that was
resembled for bigness to a Weavers beam; as also to the hugeness of his
stature which was six cubits and a hands breadth, 1 Samuel 17.4. Also we read of
Ishbibenob the son of Haraphah (of the race of the Giants) whose head of his
spear weighed three hundred sheckles of brass, even he being girded with a
new Sword, thought to have slain David.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, A Cheuron between three Spears heads.
a Cheuron between three Spears heads, Argent, three points embrued, Proper, by
the name of Morgan. Alexander the great, compared an Army without a good
Captain to a Spear without a strong head, for that as the shaft of the Spear
could have little force without the head, though it be much larger than it, so
the greatest Army can little avail without the fore-guidance of a valiant
Leader.

Now, I shall I hope without any great breach of Method, demonstrate the
bearing in Armory of some part of a Tilt-speare or Tilt-stave, call it which
you please, which kind of weapon or instrument, although it be not of any use
in the wars, yet the well-managing thereof makes a man the more expert for
military service on horseback, and therefore may challenge to be ranked among
martial weapons managed with the hand.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three
Cronels of a Tilt-speare, Argent, by the name of Wiseman. These Cro^els or
Coronets (for I find them called by both these names) are the Iron heads of
Tilt-spears, or Tilt-staves, which usually have six or eight Mournes (for so
are those little piked things called, which are on the top or head of this
Cronell or Coronet) three of which appear in each of these, the other three
which are not here seen, cannot be demonstrated by the Art of Cutting or
Painting: some have termed, or rather mis-termed these Cronells, Burres; for
the confutation of which Error I have caused the true figure of a Tilt-staffe
or Tilt-speare to be here presented unto your view without the vamplet.

diagram of spear, labelling its various parts

A shows unto you the Burre, which is a broad ring of Iron behind the hand,
or place made for the hand, which Burre is brought unto the Rest when the
Tilter charge his Spear or Staff. B shows the hand, or place for the hand
C demonstrateth the Cronell, Cronett, or Coronett; which occasioneth this
discourse, and this next figure makes plain unto you what the vamplet of a
Tilt-speare or Tilt-staffe is.

diagram of spear, labelling its various parts

This vamplet demonstrated by the letter D is of steel, and is used for the
safeguard of the Tilters hand, and is taken off and put on to the staff or
spear at pleasure.

And for the further clearing of this point it is expressed in the Charge, from
the Master of the Armory, to the Yeoman of the Tilt-staves thus, Tilt-staves
with Coronets and Burres Serviceable. -- Unserviceable. --
Vamplets Serviceable. -- To be repaired. Unserviceable. --



Expressing the particular numbers of every of them.

Alphabet. L. 1.
And in an ancient Book remaining in the Office of Arms, I find Wisemans Coat
Blazoned, a Cheuron between three Cronels.

I could here if it would suit with my intended brevity, enter into a large
discourse of the Noble and Knightlike exercise of Tilting, which is the School
of Chivalry and Horsemanship, without the knowledge whereof, the Horseman in
the wars can do little good service.

Tilting is called Hippomachia from the Greek words, (...) i. Equus, and (...)
i. pugna, it is also called by the Latins Ludus militaris, or Ludus Troiae,
for Troy was the place where it was first invented as some are of opinion.

Diverse Statutes and Ordinances have been made by the Commandments of former
Kings of this Realm concerning Royal Justs and Tiltings within this Kingdom,
Ordin. Stat. and Rules of Joh. Lord Tiptoft Earl of Worc. constable. of England,
dated 29 Maii 6^ Edward 4.
which do sufficiently prove their former use to have been more frequent than
now they are, and it is much to be wished that this Royal and honorable
exercise might be more frequently practiced, to which none are to be admitted
as actors by the ancient Ordinances, but such as are well known unto the King
of Arms, of that Province where it is to be performed, to be Gentlemen of
Coat Armor, Blood and descent: but no more of this at this time, which
deserves rather a Volume than a Page, for setting out its due Commendation and
Antiquity.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Bills in Pale, Sable, by the
name of Gibbes. These are taken by some to be Danish Hatchets. To this head
must be referred all Glaves, Partisans, Clubs, Polaxes, and whatsoever other
weapons of like kind, wherewith we do either assail or repulse our enemies by
encountering them at handy-strokes. The brown Bill is a notable weapon for
execution, and has been of great use in Military services, but now near
antiquated, if not altogether, since the Musket and Caliver have come in use.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Scaling Ladders in Bend, Three
scaling Ladders.
Argent, by the name of Shipstowe.

To this head must all other Martial Instruments of these natures (not
hitherto handled) be reduced, whether they pertain to order and direction, or
else to Execution; and bestowed under their particular Heads, according to
their propriety of their several kinds.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XV.
OF weapons Invasive or offensive we have formerly discoursed: Now come we to
the handling of the other member, comprehending weapons defensive, borne in
Coat Armor. Of these some do serve for defense only, others serve both for
defense and habit also: of the former sort are such as next ensue and their
like.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Escocheons, Sable. This was
the Coat Armor of Sir John de Loudham or Lowdham Knight, owner of the Manor
of Lowdham in Suffolk in the time of Edward the third; it is now quartered by
the before mentioned Samuel Bleverhasset Esquire, now Lord of the same Manor.
Unto Dame Joane the relict of this Sir John Loudham, did Sir Edmond de Vfford
Knight, brother of Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk, Sir Robert Bacon Knight,
and Robert de Prestone, by their deed with their several seals of their Arms
thereunto affixed, release in the forty second year of Edward the third, their
right in certain lands, etc. in Herkesteed, Holbroke, Wolferston, and other
Towns in Suffolk.

Three Escocheons.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Barrulet between two bars Gemewes,
Gules, three Escocheons, Verrey, by the name of Gamolle. This was the
Coat Armor of Alanus de Gamoll Knight, that lived about the time of Edward the
third King of England. By occasion of which name I am put in mind of a
Gentleman of the same name, but of diverse Family, as may appear by his
Coat Armor, the same being Or, three Mallets, Sable; of whom I find mention in
an Inquisition taken in the County of Chester, Anno 13. Edward. 3. in haec
verba; Compertum est, quod Henricus Filipnham de Gamul tenet dimidium unius
feodi militis in Storton, etc. From whom is descended Edmond Gamull Esquire,
one of the Aldermen of the City of Chester: whose endeavors and furtherance to
the Commonwealth, there, deserves a memorable recordation, as well in respect
of his particular actions, as the good examples he shall leave to after-comers
of like merit.

Three Escocheons Barrey.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, three Escocheons, Barrey of six, Verrey
and Gules, by the name of Mounchensey. A Lacedemonian Dame, having a son
entering into Military profession, at his departure gave him a Shield, and
therewithal used these words, Fili aut hunc, aut super hunc. Thereby
admonishing him briefly, so to bear himself in battle, that either he should
return with victory, bringing his Shield with him, or should valiantly dye, and
so be brought home dead upon the same. Touching signs in ancient times
depicted upon Shields, Vegetius has these words: Ne Milites aliquando in
tumultu praelii a contubernalibus aberrarent, diversis Cohortibus diversa in
scutis signa pingebant, quae ipsi nominabant digmata, sicut etiam nunc moris
est: Praeterea in adverso scuto uniuscujusque Militis literis erat nomen
adscriptum, addito ex qua esset Cohorte, quave Centuria. These Shields are
merely for defense.

Touching the variety of Shields or defensible weapons, and their uses, we read
that the Roman Captains or Leaders, had their light harnessed Soldiers on
foot, armed only with Sword and Target, and were called Rorarii; whose office
was with a light skirmish to give the first onset on the enemy, to see if they
could force them to remove their first Station, and so make way for the
Horesemen, sicut Ros ante gelu, as the Dew or moist goes before the Frost.
Alex. genesis dierum. lib. 6. page 369.

This sort of Soldiers were highly rewarded of Kings, in regard of their bold
adventure in bearing the first brunt of the battle. Of these some were called
Peltati, because they were Armed with a kind of Shield or Target, like to a
half moon; some Cetrati, for that they were armed with light Targets or
Bucklers after the Spanish or Africa fashion.

Caius Marius did prohibit his Soldiers the bearing of slight and small
Targets, in regard of their unserviceable use.

After that Romulus had made a league with Tatius King of the Sabines, the
Romans laying aside the Grecian Shield (which formerly they used) assumed the
Sabine Shield; and Romulus did interchange Armours with the Sabines, and
continued the use of them. It is a thing that has been of some men holden for
an infallible observation, that all Nations do change (if not the form of
Martial discipline) their military weapons at the least, once in the space of
an hundred years, upon some one occasion or other.

Among the Germans it was holden a thing so ignominious for a man to lose his
Shield in fight, as nothing could be more reproachful; Insomuch as he that was
found culpable therein, was excluded from all sacred Rites, and common
Councels; yea, so odious was it holden amongst them, as that many (having
escaped the battle) were branded with this public infamy, and being unable to
sustain so great reproach, have hanged themselves.

Amongst the Romans it was in use oftentimes to lay their children new born in
Shields instead of Cradles; because they held it a presage of future fortitude
and valor in the Child: So we read that Hercules, who exceeded all other of
that Age in fortitude, was rocked in a Shield.

A certain Lacedemonian skirmishing with his Enemy, and having his Sword drawn,
and spying some advantage thereto, was minded to have run him through therewith
instantly, the sign of retreat was given, whereupon he forbear; and being
demanded why he slew not his enemy when it was in his power; he answered,
melius est parere Imperatori, quam hostem occidere.

Moreover as touching the Shield, we read that it was usual to hang them up in
Churches instead of Epitaphs, as is the use here amongst us at this day, though
not to that end, as is gathered by the words of Trebellius Pollio in the
History of Claudius Caesar, where he says, Claudium principem loquor, cujus
vita, probitas and omnia quae in Repub. gessit tantam posteris famam dedere, ut
Senatus populusque Romanus, novis eum honoribus post mortem affecerit. Illi
Clipeus aureus, vel ut Grammatici loquntur, Clipeum aureum Senatus totius
Judicio in Romana Curia collatum est, ut etiam nunc videtur expressa thorace
vultus Imago. Lazius lib. 9. 936.

Like as the Shield served in the battle for a defense and safeguard of the
Body of Soldiers against blows and wounds; even so in time of peace, the same
being hanged up, it did shield and defend the owner against the malevolent
detractions of the envious sort, who do labor to deprave men's best actions,
they themselves never endeavoring any that were laudable; whereby they do
verify in themselves that most true, and no less approved saying of Lipsius,
livor and invidia bonorum operum sunt impedimenta, aut venena: for if they
cannot hinder them from passing, they will labor to corrode them with their
venomous teeth of detraction after they be passed. Besides these Shields which
we call Arms suspense, do (withal) not only possess, but also beautify the
room with a military Ornament: wherein each man's particular Arms are expressed
at this day, and the Helmets and Crests, consisting of Crowns, horns, and wings
of fowls affixed upon them, are placed above the Shields. Lazius lib. 9. 934.

Now will we exemplify such as are for defense and habit also.

A close Helmet.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Close Helmet, Gules, by the name
of Kingley. It was the manner of the Romans in their warfare to cover the
Habergions and Head-peeces of those that were called, Levis armaturae milites,
or Light harnessed Soldiers (whether they were horse or foot) with the skins
of Bears: like as it was of the ancient Grecians to cover their heads with
Otters skins instead of Helmets; and both of them to one end; namely that
thereby they should seem to be more terrible and ghastly in the sight of their
enemies, and their enemies eye being occupied in admiration of the strangeness
of such habits, they might be the less able to attend their fight, and so
(with more facility and less danger to themselves) be the more easily
overcome.

Three Hel^ets with their bevers ^pen.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Helmets with their Bevers
open, Sable, by the name of Miniet. The bearing of the Helmets after these
several manners (to wit) sometimes close Bevered, and other whiles with their
Bevers open, have their several intendments; those of Action, and these of
Cessation. So much briefly of their diverse bearing, as for the present may
suffice. Of the reasons of such their bearings, I shall have occasion to speak
hereafter more fitly, when I shall treat of the Achievements of the particular
state of dignities.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Gules, a Helmet in the
dexter point, Or, by the name of Trayton. The Helmet thus placed, and being a
chief part of military habit; may rather seem to be a reward for service, than
an ordinary charge, and of it self may betoken wisdom as well as valor, as we
may gather by the statue or image of Minerva, whom the Poets do feign to be the
goddess of wisdom, and all good Arts and Sciences; which statue is evermore
found to be adorned with an Helmet on her head, which does represent to our
understanding, not so much the safeguard and defense of the head from violence,
as also that the same is inwardly fraught with wisdom, policy and reason, and
is impenetrable by force, or guilefull practice. The head so armed is securely
fortified against invasions, and prepared for answering of all questions: It
well fitteth martial men to discourse and sing of battles and victories, of
armor, horses, and military exercises, as the Romans were accustomed to
relate, and sing of victories, and the memorable exploits of worthy warriors,
according to that saying, Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat Arator,
Enumerat miles vulnera, pastor Oves.


The true Ornaments of Martial men, are a shattered Shield, a dented Helmet, a
blunted Sword, and a wounded face, all received in battle.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Diamond, a Lion passant, gardant, Topaz,
between three Helmets, Pearl. This is the Coat of the noble Family of Compton,
of which an eminent Ornament is the right honorable James Earl of Northampton.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, a Cheuron, Ruby, between three
Morions or Steel Caps, Sapphire. This is the paternall Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Brudenell of Stouton. This Morion, Steele-cap or Scull
was the ancient armor for the head of a footman that served in the wars, it
is called a Morion, quia Mauri hujusmodi utebantur casside. I confess this
Morion here demonstrated, differs in form from that which is now in use: and
because no bearing in Coat Armor of a modern fashioned Morion at this present
occurs unto my memory, I have caused one of them to be cut, as in this next
figure you may see.

The Morion now in use.
hemlet

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Sapphire, three left hand Gauntlets, Three
left Gauntlets Panormitan.
Topaz. This is the paternall Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Mildmay Fane,
Earl of Westmerland, Baron Le de Spencer and Burghurst, Knight of the Bath.
Panormitanus makes mention of one Duke Reynard, who by a Herald sent a
Gauntlet unto Alphonsus King of Aragon, and withal denounced him battle;
Baron le Despencer and Burghurst.
who willingly accepted the same, and demanded of the Herald whether he
challenged him to fight with his Army, or in single combat: who answered, Not
with his Army. Whereupon Alphonsus assigned a day and place for the purpose,
and came at the prefixed time, but the Duke failed. Such is the Law of Arms,
in case of single combat, that the party defendant shall appoint the time and
place, for the performance thereof, Honor and Arms, page 73. M. S. Lordre and
form de la Bataille devant le Connestable and marschall Gloss. Dom. Hen.
Spelman.
as witnesses Spigellius in these words: Jure belli licet provocato diem and
locum Prelii dicere.

This is to be understood in private challenges; for otherwise it is where the
Combatants are sentenced by the public magistrate to fight, in which case with
us in England, the time, place, and weapons are to be appointed by Judges of
that Court, before whom the matter depends.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Dexter Arms vambraced and
Proper, by the name of Armestrong. Well do these Arms thus fenced, agree with
the name of the bearer, for then are the Arms best fitted for the performance
of high enterprises, when they are thus fortified and made strong against all
violent encounters: for by means thereof, the Soldiers are so emboldned, as
that nothing can daunt them: in which respect men of former ages reckoned
Armor the members of Soldiers, for that the use thereof is no less
behovefull for military persons, than are their natural members.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, a Bar compony, Argent and Azure,
between three Curasses of the second; on a Chief as the same, as many fermailes
or buckles, like the third, by the name of Baldberny of Scotland. The Curasse
is that part of Armor, that serves to secure the breasts, bowels and
intrailes of man, against all force and violence whatsoever, from the gullet of
the throat, to his loins, whereupon they do chiefly rest. Damaratus a noble
Captain of the Lacedaemonians, being demanded why it was lawful for the
Spartanes in coaping with their enemy to forsake their Helmets and Curasses,
but in no case to forgo their Swords: he made answer that these were to guard
their private persons, but their swords served to secure the weale-publick: a
man may expose himself to danger or to death, but may not in any case leave his
Religion, Prince, and Country void of succor.

Concerning the defensive furniture of man's body, we read that anciently they
were made of linen cloth, of exceeding high proof: Such was that much
famoused linen Brigandine of Amasis King of Egypt, whereof every thread
consisted of three hundred and sixty other threads, wherein were portrayed and
set forth the forms and shapes of manifold sorts of Animals (that he used to
prosecute in his accustomed exercise of hunting) in gold, and diverse colored
yarne. And not only the furniture ordained for the safety of man's body, were
made of linen in those days, but also the furniture of the Horses (of such as
were called Cataphracti Equites) as their bardings and Caparisons, were also
made of linen, artificially wrought with bars of Iron after the manner of
feathers, and both of them so curiously intermixed, and platted together, as
that (in fine) it becomes a defense of impenetrable resistance against any
sort of weapons: which kind of furniture was in use with the Romans, not only
for the safeguard of the Horses, but also for the safety and preservation of
the Cataphracti, or such as we term men of Arms completely furnished a Cape a
pee (as the French phrase is) to withstand and sustain the shock or brunt of
the enemy, by whom also the discomfited forces have been often repaired.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Ruby, three Legs, Armed, Proper, conjoined
in Fesse at the upper part of the Thigh, flexed in Triangle, garnished and
spurred, Topaz. This Coat is quartered by the Right honorable the now Earl of
Derby. In ancient time Soldiers that either had sold or otherwise lost their
Armor by negligence, were (by a Military Law) punished with death, as he, that
runs from his Captain. Thus far of Military furniture of defense, pertaining
to men. Now shall be touched such things as belong to Horses of service for the
field; though some of them are in common for other Horses.

Of the first sort, are the Shafron, the Cranet, and the Bard, whereof I find
no particular examples of Bearing single and apart, but as they are borne
conjunct in the total furniture of Horses for the Field, as shall hereafter in
their due place be showed. I will here therefore set forth such as are of
ordinary and common use, as they are severally borne in Escocheons as follows.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Saddles stirropped, Sable.
Three Saddles.
The Saddle is of great use for all sorts of horsemen, as well for ease in
journying, as for sure fitting, but most behovefull is the same for Martial
men, that serve on horseback in the Field; for that by the means thereof, and
of the Stirrops thereto affixed, they may be able to sustain the shock of their
adversary, as also the more forcibly to encounter him.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Cheuron, Sable, five
Horse-shooes, Or. This is the Coat Armor of Nicolas Crispe, one of the
Captains of the City of London. The Bearing of Horse-shooes in Armory is very
ancient as the Arms of Robert Ferrars, Earl Ferras, testifies, who lived in
the time of King Stephen, and bore for his Arms, Argent, six Horse-shooes,
Sable.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a bend, Sable, Three Horse-shooes on a
Bend.
charged with three Horse-shooes, Argent, by the name of Shoyswell of Sussex.

To these may be added whatsoever other parts of the furniture of Horses
fitting for the wars: As Snaffles, Bits, Bridles, and such other like tokens,
whereby is signified restraint of liberty, or servile subjection, as appears
where it is said, After this now David smote the Philistims and subdued them,
and he took the bridle of bondage out of the hand of the Philistims.

A barded Horse.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, a barded Hose passant, furnished at
all points for the Field, Argent.

A Horse thus furnished, is fitted and prepared for the use of a Soldier of
that sort which we call Cataphracti milites, or men at Arms, of whom I shall
make mention in the next Escocheon. Not much unlike this is the Caparison
wherewith we use to set out our horses prepared for the Tilt, in our joyful
triumphs of peace. I read that it was a custom amongst the Romans (as well in
their lesser as greater Triumphs) that no man (but such as by prerogative,
either in respect of some honorable or eminent place, or special merit, were
thereto privileged) might meet or accompany him that triumphed on horseback,
but altogether on foot, which custom was of long time observed amongst them.

A Chevalier Armed at All points.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is Gules, a Chevalier armed at all points, a
cape a pee, brandishing his sword aloft, Argent, garnished, Or, mounted on a
barded Courser furnished throughout of, and as the second. This Coat Armor
(according to Bara) pertains to the Duchy of Lithuania.

These were those Soldiers strongly armed in steel called Cataphracti
Equites, which I lately spoke of, they were habited with Habergions, which were
either Coats of Maile or of Plate, and differed much from those that we call
Levis Armaturae milites, in respect of the ponderous weight of their furniture,
whereby both themselves and their Horses were the better enabled to receive the
shock and strong encounter of their enemy. Whose Armor were a Sallad or
Headpiece, their Shield, Graves and Brigantines, all of Brass, their
Bassenets or Sculls, Spears and Swords, like those in use with footmen. Such
was the force of these Cataphracti milites (or as we call them, men mounted
upon Barded Horses) as that they were able to endure the brunt of the enemies,
and did oftentimes repair the forces of the trembling and distrustful Armies.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XVI.
HAving in the two former Chapters handled Artificials military, both invasive
and defensive; I think it not much amiss now a little to treat of Trophies and
tokens of Martial victory, and to show you some emblems of rewards for victory
obtained, borne in Coat Armor, since victory and the hope thereof sweetneth
all those dangerous Travels, and intolerable labors, which the brave Martial
man joyfully runs through; yea, even to the hazard of his life. Trophies
(says Lazius) are spoils forced from the conquered enemy, all embrewed with
blood, and hanged up as they were upon the next tree that could be found to fit
that purpose; or else the Conquering Soldiers brought them home to their
houses where they hanged them up upon some Pole or Tree called Gentilitia
arbor, for a monument of the increase of Glory that they had achieved to the
family by their valor. The like custom (says Wolf. Laz.) do we not only read
of in Thucydides: but my self have seen and observed represented in Ancient
Coins, an Oak having the limbs cut off, and upon the snags thereof were
hanged a Germain cloak made of Badgers skins (or such other like) called
Lacerna Germanica, two Shields, a Barbaria Pipe, and a Germain Ensign.

There was also another sort of Trophee, when a man had subdued his enemies,
the manner was to express the memory of the victory achieved (as it was
acted) in letters engraved and cut in stone, together with the names of the
People and Kings that were vanquished; and this was usually set up in some
public place for the perpetuating of the memory of such their famous conquest
to all posterities. To this purpose is that which Cicero mentions, ad Heren.
Hic in Macedonia Trophaea posuit, eaque que bellicae laudis victoriaeque omnes
gentes Insignia and monumenta esse voluerunt. And so is that place of Pliny,
lib. 37. cap. 2. where he writes that Pompey the great, caused an Inscription
of a Trophee to be erected in the Pyrenean mountains. Wolf. Lazius lib. 9. 898.

The ancient rewards for victory obtained in the field, borne in Arms, are
Garlands, which the Armorists call Chaplets, and in Latin they were anciently
called Coronae militum: and of these there then were diverse sorts, which were
conferred on the victours, and were significant demonstrations of the manner of
the victory obtained; for the Ancient bearers, horsemen, Captains, and
Leivetenants, of Cities, Towns, and Ports, which had valorously sustained and
endured the siege of their enemies, and were delivered from them, were
guerdoned in ancient times with a Garland of Grass, called in Latin, Corona
Graminea sive obsidionaria; which although it were made of grass (being the
only herb that can be supposed to be found in a place long besieged) yet is the
same Garland Gramine, as ( Pliny witnesses) most honorable and noble, and to
be esteemed above all others; Gold, Pearl, Olive, Laurel, Palm, Oak and Ivy,
giving place to common Grass, that royal herb of dignity.

He also that could prudently delay his enemy, and preserve the Army committed
to his charge from loss without giving battle, was wont to be rewarded with
this kind of Gramine Garland: such an one was Fabius Maximus, Qui corona
Graminea donatus fuit ab universa Italia; quandoquidem non pugnando sed cavendo
rem Romanam restituisset and exercitum sibi creditum conservasset.

There was another sort of Chaplet called Corona Civica, which among the Romans
was in esteem next to the Corona Graminea. And it was made of Oken leaves and
branches, with the fruit of Acorns hanging on it. This Garland or Chaplet was
given to him that had saved a Citizen when his life was in extreme peril,
killing his enemy, and making good the place where the danger happened: and
Pliny makes mention that this sort of Chaplet was to be given to one who slew
the first enemy, that mounted on the walls of a City or Fortress, being
defended by, or for the Romans: and I read that Hostius the Grandfather of the
Roman King Hostilius, for his prowess was the first that was remunerated by
Romulus with a Chaplet, called Corona frondea, and this was quod Fidenam
irrupisset: it was Anno Mundi, 3295.

The Triumphall Chaplet, was first made of Laurel, and such an one did
Tiberius Caesar use. The Athenian victors had their Chaplets or Garlands of
Olive-leaves; and these Chaplets were rewards also as well for Mercuriall or
Martial deeds, some of which at first made of leaves, were afterward altered
and composed of Gold; Pliny writes of the Rose, the Lily and the Violet, be
the flowers wherewith the Chaplets or Garlands of Noble men ought to be
adorned, I confess he there uses the Latin word Corona, but I think under
favor there that word Corona cannot be taken for a Crown, I mean such an one
as is in use with us at this day made of gold, but rather for a chaplet or
garland.

I find also that chaplets are sometimes made of other herbs, as of Rue, as
that which is borne bend-wise upon the bars of the Coat Armor of the
Dukedom of Saxony: which as learned Master Seldom out of Krantzeus has noted,
was at the time of the Creation of Bernard (son of Albert Vrse, Marquess of
Brandeburg, and brother to Otho the then Marquess, and to Sifride Archbishop
of Breme) Duke of Saxony, granted to the said Bernard by the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, upon the request of the said Bernard to difference his Arms from
his brothers; Tunc Imperator (are the words as Master Seldom cites them) ut
erat coronatus per aestum Ruteam Coronam injecit ex obliquo supplicantis
clypeo: which was afterward borne so on their Coat, being before Barrey, Sable
and Or.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken of chaplets; now come we to show some
examples of bearing them in Coat-Armours.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three chaplets, Vert, by the name
of Richardson of Shropshire. As these are here borne as the sole charge of the
Field, so may you also find some Ordinary interposed between them as in this
next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, a Fesse, Sable, between three chaplets,
Vert. I read that Hercules first made himself Garlands of the herb called in
Latin Aptum, which is so called quia ex eo apex, id est, Caput antiquorum
triumphantium coronabatur: this herb is always green, as Theophraste observed,
it is called in English Merche.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Or, on a Chief, Gules, three Chaplets of
the first. This was the Coat Armor of Sir Charles Morison of Cashio-bury, in
the County of Hartford, deceased, diverse others there be that bear these
Chaplets in their Coat-Armours, but these here showed may suffice to make known
unto Students in Armory how to blazon such a charge when they meet with it.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, parted per Fesse, Argent and Azure, three
Chaplets counter-changed, by name of Duke of Devonshire and Kent, now
flourishing in the last of those, in the persons of two worthy Gentlemen,
George Duke and Richard Duke, Esquires, both of Mai^stone.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XVII.
UNto these before mentioned remunerations of joyful victory, I will add such
artificial things wherewith the victorious Martial man does commonly deprive
of liberty those whom the fortune of the wars have given him as Captives and
Prisoners; such be Prisoners Gifts Fetters and Shackles, or prison Boults,
which are all notes of subjection and captivity, of the bearing of some of
these in Coat Armor, I will show you some examples.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Shackbolt, Sable, by the name of
Nuthall in the County of Chester. Some call this a Prisoners Boult: he that by
his valor shall in the wars take his enemy and retain him as his prisoner, may
well for such his good service be guerdoned with such a kind of bearing as is
here demonstrated; which is an honorable bearing in Armory, in regard it does
sufficiently to an Artist declare the first occasion thereof.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, two single Shackbolts, and one
double, Argent, by the name of Anderton. These kind of Arms may also well be
given to such a brave spirit, who by his prowess can fetch off with strength,
or by his charity redeem any of his fellow Soldiers in captivity.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XVIII.
TO these Martial Armorials we may add as an Appendix of necessary use in
warlike businesses, the Water-bowgets, which in ancient times were used to
carry and conserve in the Camp that useful element of Water. In such vessels
some suppose that David's three worthies, which brake into the Host of the
Philistimes, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, brought to their King
that water he so much longed for. These three mighty men deserved to have been
remunerated with such Armorall marks in their Coat-Armours for their valor.

The usual depicting of these Water-bowgets in Escocheons of our present age,
if we shall compare them with those of former times, we shall find these and
them much differing in form, as by these three next Escocheons, the first being
according to our modern form, and the other two agreeing with the ancient,
evidently appears.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Ruby, three Water-bowgets, Pearl. This
was the Coat Armor of Sir William Roos, a Baron of this Kingdom, who lived in
the time of our two first Edwards after tne Conquest.

blazon or coat of arms These Water-bowgets were anciently depicted and
portraied in Coat Armor according to the form in this present Escocheon
demonstrated, witness old Rolls of Arms and Monuments of stone. The Ancients
themselves did some what differ in the portraiture of this Water-bowget, for I
find in a very ancient Roll in the custody of the before mentioned Sir Richard
St. George Clarenceux (who I must with a thankful acknowledgment confess has
been very free in communicating such his collections to the furtherance of this
present second Edition) that Robert de Roos, son of the late mentioned William
de Roos, did bear these Water-bowgets depicted, as in this next Escocheon,
with a File of five lambeaux or points.

blazon or coat of arms This is the true figure both of the Escocheon and
charge, as they be in the said Roll, which is written in a hand of that time or
very near; and these examples may suffice for Water-bowgets of the ancient
form, now I will show you another Escocheon with a Cross Engrailed between
four of these Water-bowgets of the modern form, yet are the Arms very ancient.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, a Cross Engrailed, Ruby, between
four Water-bowgets, Diamond. This was the Paternal Coat Armor of that
Honorable family of the Bourchiers, sometimes Earls of Ew in Normandy, from
whom are descended the Bourchiers Earls of Bathe. And that truly noble Knight
Sir Henry Bourchier, a careful and diligent searcher out of the hidden
Antiquities not only of this Kingdom but of Ireland also. Leigh in his Accidens
of Armory, p. 127. calls these Water-bowgets, and pa. 176. he terms this
kind of Charge a Gorge.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Fesse, Varry, Or, and Gules,
between three Water-bowgets, Sable, by the name of Dethick, of which family is
Sir John Dethick Knight, late Lord Mayor, as also those two ingenious
Gentlemen, Thomas Dethick who has long resided at Ligorne, and Henry Dethick
of Poylers near London, sons of Henry Dethick, son of Sir William Dethick
Knight, son of Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, both principal Kings of Arms, by
the Title of Garter.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Fesse between three Water-bowgets,
Ermine, by the name of Meeres of Lincolnshire, a very ancient family of which
is Master Meeres who lately married the Daughter of Sir Erasmus de la Fountain.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Cheuron, between three
Water-bowgets, Sable, by the name of Hill, and is borne by those two
accomplished Ornaments to this City, Abraham and Thomas Hill, sons of John Hill
Esquire, sometimes Alderman of London, living 1659. descended from an ancient
Family of this surname at Shilston in Devonshire, which Abraham Hill not long
since married Anne Daughter of Bulstrode Whitlock (Commissioner of the great
Seal) by Frances Daughter of William Lord Willoughby of Parham.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Chief, Sable, three covered
Cups, Or. This is the Coat of Sir Oliver Butler or Botiler of Teston in Kent,
Baronet.

SECT. IV. CHAP. XIX.
SIthence there be some things borne in Arms, which have a near resemblance
among themselves, yet do really differ each from other in name, of which we
have not hitherto given any rule: I hope with the readers courteous leave, I may
gather such here together, which otherwise according to strict Method, should
have been ranked far asunder, by which means the Student in Armory (for whose
benefit only this work is compiled) may with more facility observe the nice
differences of such charges, which are differenced, and consequently change
their names, only from their

Distinction of their Colors or Forms.


Of the first sort are Roundles, of which Leigh gives examples of nine sundry,
each differing from other in name and Blazon, according to their different
Colors, as for example.

If they be 1 Or 2 Argent 3 Vert 4 Light-blew 5 Sable 6 Purpure 7 Ten 8
Sanguine 9 Gules Then we call them 1 Besants. 2 Plates. 3 Pomeis. 4 Hurts. 5
Pellets or Ograsses. 6 Golpes. 7 Orenges. 8 Guzes. 9 Torteauxes.

Of some of these, viz. Besants, Plates, Hurts and Pellets, I have given
examples formerly in this Book; examples of Besants and Plates you may see page
292, 293. of Hurts, page 138. of Pellets, page 329.

It is not requisite in Blazon to name the Colors of any of these nine
Roundles, except they be the counter-changed charge of a field transmuted, as
in Abtots Coat, of which you shall find the Blazon in the fifth Section and
second Chapter; and in such a case they are called Roundles, and by no other
name. But otherwise it is sufficient to say, he bears Argent, on a Chief,
Gules, three Besants, as I have done in the blazon of Russels Coat Armor, p.
292. without telling of the color of the Besants; the like you may observe in
Captain Lees Arms, pa. 330. which I have blazoned without telling the color
of the Pellets: as for the word Proper used in the blazon of the Hurts, p. 138.
and of the Pellets in Langleyes Coat, p. 329. they are faults I must confess
escaped me in the correcting of this Edition, therefore I do entreat the
courteous Reader with his pen in those two places to put out the word proper;
yet I cannot deny but that in ancient blazon I have seen the Colors of some of
these Roundles named, yea, and some are of opinion that one or two sorts of
these differ their names in the quantity of their figure and not in color: but
of latter times amongst our English Blazoners, it is accounted a great fault to
tell their colors, except where they are found counter-changed in a Field
Transmuted, as I have formerly said.

If you find above the number of eight Besants borne in one single Coat,
according to some Authors you are not then to tell their number, but to say
Besantee, for they give concerning this point this Rule, both for Besants and
Torteauxes, besanae numerantur usque ad octo, quem numerum si excedant,
dicentur Besantee, and Tortellae numerantur sicut Besanae, and Chassaneus is of
the same opinion, Chass. Cato. 1. Glor. mundi pars conclus. 75.

Leigh says that the Roundle called a Guze, is resembled to the Ball of the
eye, and Golpes are in signification wounds, Accidens of Arms, page 151.
Pomeis are taken for Apples without their stalks: what Besants, Plates,
Pellets and Hurts be, I have formerly in their due places showed.

Now I will show some examples of the Bearing of some of these Roundles, viz.
Torteauxes in Coat Armor.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Topaz, three Torteauxes. This is the Coat
of that truly noble and ancient family of Courtney of Devonshire, particularly
of Ponderham, of which is Sir William Courtney, descended in a direct male line
from Hugh Courtney second of that name, Earl of Devonshire in the time of King
Edward the third; the elder Family being in possession of that honor till the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth, diverse of which were also Dukes of Exeter.
Anciently Blazoners did use to tell the manner of the position of a charge,
consisting of three things of one sort or kind placed in triangle, as you see
these here are, by saying three Torteauxes, Plates, Mullets, Cressans, or the
like, in triangle, or two and one; but it is now observed as a general rule,
that when the number three is rehearsed in Arms, without further declaration
of the location or position of the charge demonstrated by that number, then are
they always placed in the fashion that is showed in this present Escocheon;
but if they have their location in any other form, then you must always tell
how and in what manner, as in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, three Torteauxes in Bend, between
two Cotizes, Sable, by the name of Ince of Lancashire, and Juys bears,
Argent, three Torteauxes, between two Bends, some say Cotizes, Gules. These
says Leigh, page 156. have been by old Blazoners called Wastels, which are
Cakes of bread, but must be named by none other name than Torteauxes.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken of such Charges, as are differenced
only from their distinction of their Colors, and consequently change their
names; all which you may observe to be composed of a Circular figure, now it
remains, that I treat of those other, which have a near resemblance among
themselves, yet vary their names only from their distinction of form.

Of this sort are Fusils. Losenges. Mascles.


The Geometrician calls the kind of figure whereof every of these is
composed, Rhombus, which Keckerman says, Keckerm. Element. Geome. p. 123.
is Parallelogrammum obliquangulum and equilaterum; for in truth every one of
these consist of four Geometrical lines of equal length, yet these are
differently by Armorists, as I shall presently show you. But I think it first
necessary to demonstrate unto you the figure of every of these, as in example.

The Fusill.
The Losenge.
The Mascle.
diagram labelling parts of heraldic bearings

The Fusill is longer than the Loseng, having its upper and lower part more
acute and sharp than the other two collateral middle parts, which acuteness is
occasioned by the short distance of the space between the two collateral or
middle parts in the figure demonstrated unto you by the letters BB, which space
if the Fusil^ be rightly made is always shorter than any of the four
Geometrical lines whereof it is composed, as you may observe in the figure
thereof: in which you find that the distance between the two Angles
demonstrated by the letters A and B, is longer than that which is between the
two collateral or middle Angles marked with B and B, but all this is to be
understood of Fusils of the modern figure or form, for anciently they were
depicted in another shape; and Chassaneus shows a Fusill somewhat near to
the ancient in proportion thus.

A Fusill according to Chassa. pars 1. Conclusio 75.
outmoded form of heraldic bearing

In this figure you may observe, the sides be not Anguled, but rather round. He
there thus describes Fusils, Fusae sunt acutae in superiori and inferiori
partibus, and rotundae ex utroque latere.

A Losenge how it differs from a Fusill.
A Losenge differs from a Fusill in that the space between its two collateral
or middle Angles, equals the length of any of the four Geometrical lines
whereof it is composed, as its figure before more plainly manifests, where
the space between the Angles demonstrated by the figures 3 and 3, and 1 and 3.
are of equal length. I confess sometimes you may find in things made for
losenges, the distance here demonstrated by the figures 3 and 3 to be a little
longer than that from 1 to 3, but it can never be shorter, for then it is a
Fusill.

A Mascle differs From both the Fusill and Losenge; first, because the Mascle
is always voided, that is, part of the field is transparent through it: I
confess in this I dissent from Leighs opinion, who in his Accidens of Armory,
page, 157. b. seems to grant that a Mascle may be whole, but of this I have
formerly showed my opinion and my reason for the same, p. 314. next, a Mascle,
differs from a Fusill and a Losenge in the proportion of space, which is
evidently demonstrated in the Mascles figure by the letters C and D, which
shows a Mascle to be as long as it is broad.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, three Fusils in Fesse, Ruby. This
was the paternall Coat Armor of William Montagu Earl of Salisbury. I know
well that Mr. Brook, York-Herald, in his Catalogue of the Earls of Salisbury,
has blazoned these Losenges: but old Rolls of Arms with their blazon in French
do testify, that these be Fusils, for it is thus written in one of them, Mons.
de Montagu Count de Sarum port d'argent a trois Fusilles, etc. This Roll now at
this present remains in the custody of Sir Henry St. George, Knight,
Richmond-Herald; whose industrious collections of such Antiquities, and his
willingness in affording the view of them for the forwarding of this present
Edition, cannot without a manifest note of ingratitude be here over-passed in
silence. These Fusils may also be borne in Bend or Triangle, as Leigh writes,
page 157. b.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, three Fusils, Ermine. This is the
Coat Armor of Sir John Denham, Knight, one of the Barons of this Majesty's
Exchequer, a good and able Justicer. The Fusill is never pierced or voyded, as
Leigh notes, what a Fusill represents in Armory, and how the English, French
and Dutch vary in their opinions about it, I have formerly showed unto you out
of the Accidens of Armory, in pa. 288. of this Book. Now I will show an example
of bearing of Losenges in Arms.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, three Losenges in Fesse, Ermine, by
the name of Gifford, a family of long continuance at Halsworth in Devon, from
whence descended that judicious Gentleman, and ingenious Collectour of choice
Rarities and Antiquities, Master Humphry Gifford of the Poultry, London.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Azure, three Losenges, Or. Azure, three
Losenges, Or. This is Freemans Coat.
Losenges are thus described by Chassaneus, Losangiae factae sunt ad modum
Lozangiarum quae ponuntur in vitrinis sub forma quadranguli, sed superior and
inferior parts plus tendunt in acutum quam aliae duae collaterales seu mediae,
and sic plus longae sunt quam largae, Chassaneus pars, 1. a conclusio. 75.

To these charges that thus resemble each other, yet change their names from
their nice differing forms, may be referred the Quarter and the Canton, the
Delfe and the Billet, and such other like: examples of the bearing of every of
which I have formerly given, leaving the student in this way to learn their
differences by his careful observation, to which Leigh in his Accidens of
Armory has given great light.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Sable, three Mascles of
the field, by the name of Carleton, a Family of ancient note.

Thus have I in this one Section run over this whole Chaos of things
Artificial; which I have so compendiously set down, considering the infinite
variety of things incident unto Arts of all sorts, as that any judicious Reader
will rather approve my brevity therein, than concur in judgment with that rash
and unadvised Censurer of this Book who (before it was in Press) sought to lay
this aspersion on it, that it was wholly stuffed with Superficials of things
Mechanical, etc. Which calumny needs no other refutation, than the view of
that which here presents it self to all men's scanning.

The End of the fourth Section.
Simplicitas formae Antiquitatis nota*
THE Fifth Section comprehends Examples of Coat-armours, having no Tincture
predominating in them showing withal their sundry forms of Partition, as also
of the Transmutations or Counter-changings, that are occasioned by reason of
those Lines of Partition.

The Table of the Fifth Section.
Fields of Coat-armours wherein there is no Tincture predominating, etc. are
Abstracted from Some of the Ordinaries by a derivation. Manifest, as Gyronie,
Pale-wayes, Bendy, etc. and are borne Simply of themselves. After a compound
sort, viz. charged In part, viz. with some Chief, Canton, Quarter, etc. All
over with some other Ordinary or Common charge.

Obscure, of which sorts some do Keep their Names, as Paly, Bendy, Barry,
Bendy, etc. Lose their name, as Checkie.

Some Common Charge: Such are those as we term in Blazon Fusely, Losengy,
Masculy, etc. Of Fusils, Losenges, Mascles, etc. whereof they bear the forms or
representations.
Composed of Lines of partition only. Plain, as those before mentioned in the
first Section, which are carried evenly without rising or falling. These being
charged do constitute a form of bearing called Transmuting or
Counter-changeing. Bunched or Cornered, whereof are created a kind of bearing,
which we call in Blazon Messiles, because of their mutual intermixture one
with another.


Those of manifest derivation have their denomination from some of the
ordinaries whose forms they do represent: whose names also they do still retain
as a Memorial of their particular derivations. As Party per Pale, per Bend,
per Fesse, per Cheuron, per Saltire, etc. Others though abstracted from
Ordinaries, do lose their names.

And both these sorts last mentioned are no less subject to be charged in part
or all over: with charges both ordinary and common, than any other before
mentioned, wherein Tincture is said to predominate.

SECTION V. CHAP. I.
Of Coat-armours having ^o Tincture in them predo^inating.
HAving finished the former Section treating of Coat-Armours formed of things
Artificial, in which there is tincture (that is to say, Metal, Color or
Furre) predominating: I will now ( secundis velis) proceed to give Examples of
Coat-Armours having no Tincture predominating in them; these are formed of
sundry sorts of lines of partition, occasioning oftentimes Transmutation and
Counter-changing.

What they be.
Coat-Armours having no Tincture predominating in them, are such as are so
composed and commixt of two colors, as that neither of them do surmount other.
Such are these that follow and the like, which are formed of lines of Partition
only.

Order of their examples.
In giving Examples of these forms of Bearing, it is requisite that I begin with
those which consist of single lines of Partition. And then proceed to such
sorts as are formed of manifold lines, as in example.

Parted per pale.
blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pale, Argent and Gules, by the
name of Walgrave Suff. a right ancient family, of which family is Sir Henry son
of Sir Edward Walgrave, Baronet.

Parted Coats Ancient.
Such Coat-armours as are formed only of lines of Partition, do (generally)
yield testimony of an ancient family, as Hieronymus Hennings in his Genealogies
notes (upon the Coat Armor of the noble race of the Ransouii, which is borne
parted after this manner, though of different colors) in this Distichon: Forma
quid haec simplex? simplex fuit ipsa vetustas:
Simplicitas formae stemmata prisca notat.
Hiero. Henning. What means so plain a Coat? times Ancient plain did go:
Such Ancient plainness, Ancient race does plainly show.


Note.
After this manner may two Coat-armours of distinct families be conjoined into
one Escocheon as shall be showed hereafter in place convenient.

Parted per Fesse.
blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per Fesse, Or and Azure. These Arms
do pertain to the family of Zusto of Venice. After this manner also (says
Leigh) may several Coats of distinct families be borne jointly in one
Escocheon. The consideration whereof shall appear hereafter in the last Section
of this Book, where I shall treat of Marshalling diverse Coat-Armours together.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, parted per bend, embatteled, Pearl and
Ruby. This is the Coat of the right honorable and excellently accomplished
Gentleman, Tam Mart quam Mercurio, Roger Boil, Baron of Broghill President of
the Counsel in Scotland, Brother to the Right Honorable the Earl of Cork,
whose Coat it is, ensigned with a Crown.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, parted per Bend, Or and Vert, Parted per
Bend.
by the name of Hawley. In this and the former I give the preheminency in
Blazon to the metal, not in respect of the dignity thereof, but for that it
occupies the more eminent and honorable part of the Escocheon which is the
Chief; for otherwise the Right side having precedence of the Left might have
challenged the first place in Blazon, as in Coat-armours parted per pale, it
does.

A Gentleman of blood, being a younger brother, before apt differences of
Coat Armor were devised, used to take two of his nearest Coats, and to
marshall them together in one shield, parted per Cheuron, after the manner
expressed in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per Cheuron, Sable and Argent, Parted
per Cheuron.
by the name of Aston, a Family of long continuance and worth in Cheshire, of
which is Sir Thomas Aston created Baronet, 1628. These foresaid Coats thus half
in Tincture, are of much better esteem, than the apparel worn by those
brethren in Flanders, who having a peasant to their Father, and a noble Lady to
their Mother, did wear their upper garment one half of Country Russet, the
other of cloth of gold, for a monument of their mothers matchless match. So
much of Arms consisting of single lines of Partition, both perpendicular and
transverse. Now follow Examples of such as are formed of a mixed kind.

blazon or coat of arms Per Cheuron, Azure and Gules, three covered Salts, Or,
sprinkling, Argent. This is the bearing of the worshipful Company of Salters.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules and Argent. This Coat Armor
pertains to Sir Henry Cock of Bruxborne in the County of Hertford, Knight,
late Cofferer to his Majesty.

Leigh holds that this sort of bearing is not otherwise blazoned than
quarterly. But (some Blazoners are of opinion that) when this composition
consists merely of metals and color, or of any the before mentioned furs
and color, without any charge occupying the quarters of the Escocheon, such
bearing is more aptly blazoned parted per Cross, but if they be charged, then
they hold it best blazoned quarterly.

blazon or coat of arms Quarterly, Gules and Azure, in the first and fourth a
Leopards head, Or, in the second and third a Cup covered between two buckles of
the last. This is the bearing of the worshipful Company of Goldsmiths.

Parted per Pile.
blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pyle in Point, Or and Sable.
Only the Pyle part of this Coat may be charged (says Leigh) and no other part
thereof, and that (says he) may be used as one only Coat. And if it be
charged, you shall leave the field untold. In this Coat the Pyle has the
pre-eminence: for if the Escocheon were made after the antique fashion, you
shall see very little of the Field.

Two other sorts of parted per pile I find, which for their rare use I have
thought fit to insert into this place, whereof the first is, as in this next
Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pyle traverse, Argent and Gules.
Were it not that these lines had their beginnings from the exact points of the
Chief and Base sinister, and so extend to the extreme line in the Fesse point
on the dexter side, I should then hold it to be a charge and no partition; and
then should it be said to be a Pile, and not a partition per pile. This Coat
pertains to the Family of Rathlowe in Holsatia: As touching the plainness
of this Coat, Jonas ab Elvet has these verses; Forma quid haec simplex? fuit
ipsa vetustas
Simplex; est etiam simplicitatis honor.


The other sort of partition per pyle, takes beginning from the two base
points, Dexter and Sinister, and do meet in the exact middle chief point of the
Escocheon, as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pyle transposed, Or, Gules and
Sable. This kind of bearing is rare, as well in regard of the transposition
thereof, for that the natural and accustomed bearing of Piles is with the
points downwards; as also in respect that thereby the field is divided into
three distinct colors or Tinctures. This Coat is proper to the Family of
Meinstorpe, or Menidorpe in Holsatia. Jonas ab Elvet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per Saltire, Ermine and Gules, Parted
per Saltire.
by the name of Restwold. This (according to Leigh) may be good Armory, if all
the four pieces be charged with some thing quick or dead; but it is better
(says he) if it be charged but with two things of one kind, and that
especially upon the Gules: but best of all it is to have but one only quick
thing all over the field. An example of which last bearing, shall be given
hereafter in his due place.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, quarterly, Ermine and Gules, by the name of
Stanhope, and is the Coat of that accomplished Gentleman Philip Stanhope, Baron
of Shelford, and Earl of Chesterfield.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gyronny of six pieces, Ermine and Azure.
Gyronny.
The most usual manner of blazon is to begin at the dexter corner of the
Escocheon; but in this Coat I begin with the middle part, not for that medium
est locust honoris, but in respect that the Ermine does occupy the most part of
the Chief; and the Azure but the Cantels thereof; some blazon this Coat, Parted
per Gyron of six pieces. Gyrons may be borne to the number of twelve, as
hereafter shall be showed.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pale and base, Gules, Argent,
Sable. This bearing is no less strange than unaccustomed with us, whose rare
use has occasioned me to insert the same here: This coat armor pertains to
Jo. a Panowitz that was (amongst infinite others) present at the royal
exercises on horseback, and on foot performed without the City of Vienna, Anno
Dom. 1560. Proceed we now to coats of this kind charged in part, as in these
next.

Parted per Fesse.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, parted per Fesse, Gules, and Ermine, a File
of five points, Argent, by the name of Betfield. Of these forms of bearing I
will not produce many examples, because their use is common: only I purpose by
a few to make known my meaning, touching the different manner of charging of
Coat-armours in part and all over, that so they may be manifestly discerned to
be of different kinds, and likewise avoid their confused mixture.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, parted per Fesse, Argent, and Vert, in Chief,
a Lion saliant, Sable, in base, three Stars of the Field, by the name of
Adrian, alias Hulton, and is thus borne by that worthy Gentleman John Adrian of
London, Merchant.

Quarterly.
blazon or coat of arms He bears quarterly, Gules and Or, a Cross flory on
the Dexter quarter, Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to Middleton of
Middleton-hall in Lancashire, who married Anne sister to Thomas Green, Esquire
for the body to King Henry the seventh, by whom he had a daughter married to
John Harewell of Wotten, Esquire, whose daughter Anne was wife to James
Clifford of Frampton upon Severne, Esquire, Grandfather to James Clifford
Esquire, living 1612.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, quarterly, Gules and Or, a Flowerdeluce in
the first quarter, Argent, and is the Coat of that accomplished Gentleman, and
lover of Arts, and cherisher of Industry and Ingenuity, Elias Ashmole of the
Middle Temple, Esquire.

A Gyronny of six pieces.
blazon or coat of arms The Bearer hereof, has for his Armoriall Ensigns,
Gyronny of eight pieces, Azure and Or, a Canton, Ermine. This Coat Armor
pertains to the Family of Okton. Besides these examples of Gyrons formerly
given, you shall find others that do bear Gyronny of ten pieces: as in the Coat
of Crolly, who bears Gyronny of ten pieces, Argent and Sable. And that of
Busingborne which bears Gyronny of twelve pieces, Verrey and Gules.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Gyronny of six pieces, Or and Sable, A
Gyronny of six pieces, with three Nigroes heads.
three Nigroes heads couped, Proper, by the name of Callarde. Otherwise may you
blazon it thus: Gyronny of six, Or and Sable, three Nigroes heads couped of the
second. Coats consisting of Gyronnes are of old Blazoners termed
counter-coyned, for that the Coins or corners of their contrary or different
colors, do all meet in the center of the Shield. Therefore coat-armours of
this form of bearing were anciently thus blazoned, Portat Arma contra
contraconata.

As touching such coat armor of partition as are charged all over, these few
examples may suffice.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is parted per pale, Ruby and Sapphire, Three
Eaglets.
three Eaglets displayed, Pearl. This coat armor pertains to Sir Edward
Cook, Knight, sometime Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of the Kings
Bench.

I do blazon this coat armor by precious stones in respect the Bearer hereof
is enoblished by his rare virtues, and approved loyal services done to Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, and to the Kings Majesty late deceased; as also in
regard of his so many learned and judicious works publicly manifested in
sundry volumes extant, and approved by men of best judgment in that kind.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, per Pale, Gules and Azure, an Eagle
displayed with two necks, Or, and is thus borne by Edward and Thomas Mitton,
sons of Peter Mitton of London, Merchant, son of Richard Mitton, Lord of
Haberley, Holston and Moothy, in the County of Salop, which Lordships are in
the present possession of Richard Mitton Esquire, Heir male of this Family.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per bend Sinister, Ermine and
Ermines, over all a Lion Rampant, within a Bordure Engrailed, Or. This
coat armor pertains to Edward Jones of Gorthkenan in the Parish of Llanvaire
Diffrincloyd, in the County of Denbigh, as the Paternall coat of that Family.

Quarterly.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is quarterly, Topaz and Ruby, over all a
Bend, Verrey. This Coat Armor pertains to the Right honorable Family of the
Sackviles, Earls of Dorset, and Barons Buckhersts of Buckherst.

blazon or coat of arms He bears quarterly, Gules and Verrey, over all a
Bend, Or. This is the Coat Armor of the Ancient and Knightly Family of
Constable of Flamborough in the County of York.

Parted per Saltire.
blazon or coat of arms He bears party per Saltire, Sable and Ermine, a Lion
Rampant, Or. Armed and Langued, Gules, by the name of Grafton. In the blazon of
Coat-armours of this kind, having no Tincture predominating, I think it fit to
give pre-eminence to that Metal, Furre, or Color, which occupies the Chief,
or the greatest part thereof; as you may observe I have done in the blazon of
Hawleys and Restwolds Coats, and the like, in this present Chapter: Master
Boswell gives Graftons Coat the same blazon that I do here, beginning with the
color Sable. Johannes Peronus, Nauclerus, Paradine, Vlpian, Gerrard Leigh, and
others, both ancient and modern writers, altogether allow the blazon of this
Coat Armor to be party per saltire, as before. Some others (whose conceit
herein I utterly dislike) whether nicely or ignorantly, have endeavored to
blazon this Coat, Gyronny of four, or of four pieces. But mine opinion is
confirmed with that of the said former writers, alleged to be the seventh
partition, per saltire, without any term of Gyronny at all. The ancestors of
this Gentleman enjoyed a large revenue in Lands in the City of Worcester, and
in Grafton, Fliford, and Pendock in the County of Worcester, as other Lands in
the County of Stafford, as appears by a Deed (which I have seen) dated in
June, Anno 29. Henrici 8. but at this day dispersed into strange hands.
Nevertheless, I wish virtue her due reward; then shall not this bearer (a true
lover of Arms) depart empty handed.

As these last mentioned Coats are framed of strait lines of partition, so
shall you find others composed of sundry lines before spoken of, in the
beginning of the second Section of this Book, as well of those sorts that I
call cornered lines, as of those that are bunched. And as these last handled do
utterly exclude all mixture of the Tinctures whereof they are formed, by reason
of the straightness of the lines wherewith they be divided: so contrariwse
those Arms that do consist of those other sorts of lines, do admit
participation and intermixture, of one color with another, for which cause
they are of Leigh termed Missils, a miscendo of mingling; to whom I will refer
you, touching Coats of that kind, for that he has exemplified them at large in
his Accidens of Armory.

SECT. V. CHAP. II.
IN the former chapter are comprehended such Coat-armours as consist of single
and manifold lines, as well charged as simple. Other kind of bearing o^
partition.
Now shall be handled such other kinds of bearing, which albeit they consist of
lines of Partition as the last spoken of do, yet (by reason of the variable
apposition of some one or more lines of partition) they do constitute another
form of bearing, and receive also a diverse denomination, being called coats
counter-changed or transmuted. All which shall briefly, yet plainly, appear by
the few examples following.

Counter-changing, Counterch^ged what. Resemblanc^
or Transmutation is an intermixture of several metalls or colors, both in
field and charge, occasioned by the apposition of some one or more lines of
partition. Such coat-armours may be fitly resembled to the party colored
Garments, so much esteemed in ancent time, 2 Samuel 13.4
as they were h^ld meet for the daughters of Kings during the time of their
virginity. So we read of Thamar, the daughter of king David: Erat induta tunica
versicolore, sic enim vestiebantur filiae Regis virgins pallis: Genesis 7.3.
and so we read that Joseph, the special beloved son of Israel, was by his
father clad in a coat of diverse colors. Touching the high estimation of which
kind of Garments, Judge. 5.30.
we find, where the mother of Sisera, discoursing with her Ladies, touching her
sons overlong stay after the battle against the Israelites, said, Partiuntur
praedam, puellam unam, imo duas, in personam quamcunque: praeda versicolorum
est Siserae, praeda versicolorum Phrygionicum opus, etc. Bends, (says Sir John
Fern) or any other principal charges Ordinary, may be parted of two colors
or more.

And such bearing is no novelty in Arms, but are as ancient as the Norman
conquest, and before, so as they are both honorable and Ancient. Of which sort
of bearing you shall in part see in these next ensuing Escocheons.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is parted per pale, Topaz and Ruby, Three
Roundles counter-changed.
three Roundels counter-changed. This was the Coat Armor of Abto^ Earl of
Worcester, that lived in the time of King William Rufus. Such bearing does
signify a stout resolution of the Bearer to undergo with patience and manly
courage, the bitterness of all times, and the sharpness of all darts, Fern
page 203.
be they never so pungitive, or full of change: as he says; Diversorum in
Scuto colorum transmutatio, designat latorem omnem telorum ac temporum
amaritudinem cum magnanimitate perferre voluisse.

12 Guts counter-changed.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is parted per pale, Or and Vert, 12 Guts or
Drops in Pale, counter-changed, by the name of Grindoure. Whose Family has
been of ancient continuance within the Forest of Deane, and County of
Gloucester, and were men of great possessions in the same Forest. Their
Patrimony is now transferred into the generous Family of Baynam of Clorewall,
who now quartereth this coat by the match of the heir general. As touching the
blazon of this coat armor, it is in your election, whether you will give it
the blazon above mentioned, or attribute unto them their proper terms
(according to that which has been formerly delivered, touching this sort of
charge) saying, ^te.
The field is parted per pale, Or and Vert, six Guts de Olive, and as many de
Or, Pale-wayes.

(...) bend coun^r-changed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pale, Argent and Gules, a Bend
counter-changed. This Coat pertains to the famous and learned Poet Geffrey
Chaucer Esquire, whom Leiland and others suppose to have been born at Woodstock
in Oxfordshire; but some gather by ^is words in the Testament of love, that he
was born in the City of London, though his education and aboade were in Oxford
and Woodstock, in the eighth year of King Richard the second. This Prince of
English Poets was Comptroler of the Custom-house in London, as Thomas Speght in
his Additions to the works of Chaucer, notes: and to this most learned of
Poets, the most learned of Antiquaries applies those verses; -- Hic ille est,
cujus de gurgite Sacro, etc.
Lo this is he, from whose abundant stream divine,
Our Poets drink their fits, and draw their fancies fine.
And being now to high Parnassus top aspired,
He laughs to see the Rout below with clyming tired.


Sometimes you shall find coat-armours parted per pale, Indented and
counter-changed, as in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Barrey of six, parted per pale, indented,
Argent and Gules, counter-changed, by the name of Peyto of Warwickshire. And
as these are borne parted per pale, plain and indented, as in these Examples;
so shall you by observation see this partition per pale of sundry other forms
of lines before mentioned, Sect. 2. Chap. 3. As in part may be seen in this
next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per pale, Nebule, Azure and Or, six
Martlets counter-changed. This Coat is borne by Sir Miles Fleetwood, knight,
Receiver of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per fesse, Gules and Argent, a pale
counter-changed, by the name of Lavider. Sometime this kind of bearing has
another Charge added unto it, as in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms Per fesse, Argent and Vert, a Pale counter-changed,
three Lions heads erased, Gules, by the name of Argall. a Family of good
account in Kent, Norfolk, and elsewhere, of which Doctor Sam. Argall* Doctor of
Physic, one of the members of the College of Physicians of London, third son
of John Argall Esquire, of East-Sutton in Kent, now living in Saint Martins
Lane, 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per fesse, Azure and Or, a pale
counter-changed, three buckles of the second, by the name of Spalding, some
Blazon this thus, He bears, Azure, and Or, counter-coloured in six quarters,
three buckles of the second, in the first: others thus, Azure and Or, party per
fesse, a pale counter-changed in every piece, of the first, a Buckle of the
second.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Paly of six, Argent and Gules, on a chief,
as the Field, as many cressants all counter-changed. This is an Italian Coat of
rare use, which I thought fit to add to these former, it is borne by the name
of Sileto.

Three Panthers heads counter-changed.
blazon or coat of arms He bears parted per cheuron unde, Sable and Or, three
Panthers heads erased, counter-changed, by the name of Smith, of Old Buckenham
in Norfolk. Some Authors are of opinion that there are no Panthers bred in
Europe, but in Arfrica, Libya and Mauritania, they are plentiful. The Panther
is a beast of beautiful aspect, by reason of the manifold variety of his
diverse colored spots wherewith his body is overspread. As a Lion does in most
things resemble the nature of a man, so after a sort does the Panther of a
woman, for it is a beautiful beast, and fierce, yet very natural and loving
to their young ones, and will defend them with the hazard of their own lives,
and if they miss them, they bewail their loss with loud and miserable
howling.

blazon or coat of arms Argent, three Bucks trippant, regardant, Gules. This is
the Coat Armor of the worshipful Company of Leather-sellers.

SECT. V. CHAP. III.
Arms abstracted from Ordinaries.
THere are certain other kinds of bearing of Arms, having no color
predominating, and are named of the several things from whence they are
derived, for such are abstracted either from charges ordinary or common. Of the
first sort are such, as being derived from some of the Ordinaries entreated of
formerly, have their derivation either manifest, and do keep their name, or
else Obscure, and do lose their name.

Those are said to have a manifest derivation, whose Original is apparently
discerned to be abstracted from some of the said Ordinaries, as from Pale,
Bend, Fesse, Bar, etc. Such are these that follow and their like.

Paly of six pieces.
blazon or coat of arms He bears Paly of six pieces, Or and Azure, by the
name of Curnay. Were it that some of the lines of Partition before mentioned
were added unto Coat-Armours of these kinds you shall see a strange
Metamorphosis ensue thereupon, if withal you do vary the colors counterly.
For so much will they differ from themselves, as that they may be thought
fitter to be ranged with those last handled, than with these. Hereof I will
give you one example for all, viz, paly of six, parted per fesse, all
counter-changed by the name of Symbarbe: but this Escocheon is not cut.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Barry of six pieces, Or, and Azure, Barry of
six pieces.
by the name of Constable. These were anciently the Arms of one Fulco de Oyry,
a Noble Baron of this Realm, whose Daughter and Heir, the Ancestor of these
Constables had married, and bore the Arms of the said Fulk, according to the
usual custom of that age.

Sometimes you shall find a coat armor composed of more then of six of these
pieces, as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Barry of twelve pieces, Argent and Gules.
This is the coat armor of Sir Randolph Manwaring of Peuer in the County of
Chester, Knight: In the blazon of an Escocheon of this kind of bearing the
pieces of which it is composed, are always of an even number; for if they
consist of an odd number, then such a coat must be blazoned otherwise: as
where the Field is Argent, three bars, Gules, which consist of seven pieces,
and the like is to be observed in coats of the like composition, always well
remembering the true quantity of every such Ordinary, or its derivative
wherewith the Field is charged: concerning which quantities, you may receive
sufficient satisfaction by the reading of the 3, 4, 5, and 6. Chapters of the
second Section.

blazon or coat of arms Barry Nebulee of six, Argent and Azure, on a bend a
Lion of England. This is the coat armor of the Worshipful Company of
Haberdashers.

blazon or coat of arms He bears bendy of six, Azure and Argent, Bendy of six
pieces.
by the name of John de Saint Philibert; he was a Noble Knight, and lived in
the time of King Edward the third. This is an ancient Family in the County of
Norfolk, and have matched with diverse Houses of good note, as well in the same
County, as elsewhere.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Bendy wavie of six, Argent and Azure. This
is the ancient Coat Armor of Playters of Sotterley in the County of Suffolk,
as appears by diverse seals of old Deeds, and many ancient Monunuments of that
Family yet to be seen in the Parish Church of Sotterley aforesaid. The chief of
which Family is Sir Thomas Playters, Knight and Boronet, now Lord Proprietary
of the said Town.

Note, that these and such others, are no less subject to charging both in part
and over, then those last exemplified, as by the ensuing examples is apparent.

Paly on a Canton.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Paly of six, Or and Azure, a Canton,
Ermine, by the name of Shirley, a very ancient Gentleman of this kingdom, and
descended from Henry, son of Sewallus, that lived in the time of king Henry the
first, and held of him five knights fees in the County of Darby, from whom in a
direct Line is descended, Sir Charles and Sir Robert Shirley lately deceased,
Baronets; and that most accomplished and industrious collector and cherisher of
Antiquities, Sir Thomas Shirley, Knight, their Uncle.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Paly of six, Argent and Gules, a Cheuron,
Or. This is the Coat of Sir Edward Barkham of Southacre in Norfolk, and of
Tottenham Highcross in Middlesex, Knight and Baronet, and of Sir Robert
Barkham, Knight, his brother, of Tottenham also.

Barrey on a Bend.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, barrey of six pieces, Or and Azure, a Bend,
Gules, by the name of Gaunt. These were the Arms of Gilbert de Gaunt, Earl of
Lincoln, a very Noble and Worthy Family, which came in with William the
Conqueror to aid him, being his wives kinsman, and descended from the ancient
Earls of Flanders.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Paly of six pieces, Argent and Azure, on a
bend, Sable, a Sword of the first, by the name of Sanderson of Biddick, within
the Bishopric of Durham, which is as much to say, as filius Alexandri. A like
coat armor I do find born by the same name, which is thus blazoned, Palewayes
of six, Argent and Azure, a bend, Gules, charged with three Mullets, of the
first.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Paly of six, Pearl and Sapphire, on a Bend,
Diamond, three Annulets, Topaz. This is the Coat of the Right Honorable, the
Lord Sanderson, Viscount Castleton.

Without that charge, this is the coat of another Family of this name, of which
is that eminent Divine, and Excellent Antiquary, Doctor Sanderson of the
Country of Lincoln.

SECT. V. CHAP. IV.
HAving given Examples of Coats abstracted from Ordinaries by a manifest
derivation: Of such as derived a^^ an obscure manner.
now follows in order, to speak of such as have their derivation from them
after a more obscure manner, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Paly Bendy, Topaz and Diamond, Paly Bendy.
Here you see, that this coat armor is composed of a kind of mixture of two
Ordinaries of several kinds, to wit, of pales and of bends, borne one
overthwart the other, for which cause the same is termed paly-bendy, a name not
unfitly appropried to such bearing, in respect that the participation thereof
is no less significantly expressed thereby, then by the self demonstration of
the Coat.

Now I will show you a coat armor, which although it be of this kind, yet does
it much differ from the former.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Barry of six, Argent, and Sable, indented,
the one in the other. This coat armor is born by the name of Gise. Some others
blazon this barry bendy losengie, Argent and Sable, counter-changed; Sir John
Fern gives this same coat the same blazon that I do; but there is no doubt,
but that one and the self-same coat armor may receive two manner of blazons,
yet both good.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Barry bendy, Argent and Sable. This
coat armor, as you may observe, consists of a mixture of bars and bends, even
as the first Escocheon in this fourth Chapter does of pale^ and bends; and
therefore I give it this blazon, for similium similis est ratio. I confess,
Leigh in his Accidens of Armory, page 156. demonstrateth this next Escocheon,
and Blazons it barry bendy: and sath, it consists continually of eight
pieces, and is properly so called without any other name; but it is by other
Blazoners thought to be better blazoned, barry pily of so many pieces. And so I
shall, under correction of Master Leigh, now blazon it.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Barry Pily of eight pieces, Gules and Or. I
doubt not, if the courteous Reader well consider the form of the Pyle used in
Armory, and the manner of the position of the charge of this Escocheon, that he
will not much condemn this new blazon given to this coat armor. As for the
blazon of Hoyland or Hollands coat of Lincolnshire, I take it to be parted per
Pale indented, Gules and Or.

This shall suffice for coat-armours, having an obscure derivation from some of
the Ordinaries, and do keep their name. Of such as do lose the name of their
Ordinaries whereof they are composed, I find only one sort, which is checkie.
And this form of bearing is also chargeable both in part and all over, as shall
appear by these next examples, wherein I do omit to exemplify the single sort
of bearing, A^iden. Arm. 1^.
because the same is manifestly and universally known, but will explain the
compound only, as follows.

blazon or coat of arms He bears checkie, Or and Gules, a chief, Varry. This
is the Coat of the Lord Viscount Chichester of Canckefergus in Ireland, and of
Sir Jo. Chichester of Ragley, in Com. Dovon. Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears checkie, Or and Azure, on a chief Gules,
three Estrich Feathers in Plume, issuant, of the first, by the name of Drax,
and is borne by Sir James Drax of London.

Checkie with a Chief.
blazon or coat of arms He bears checkie, Argent and Azure, a chief, Gules,
by the name of Palmer. This sort of composition (if you do well observe it) is
abstracted from Pallets and Barulets commixt, yet does it not participate
either of the one name or the other, but is termed in blazon, checkie. As this
coat is charged in part, so are there others also of the same kind that are
charged all over, as in this next example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears checkie, Or, and Azure, on a bend, Checkie
charged all over.
Gules, three Lioncels Rampand of the first. This coat pertains to the worthy
Family of Clifford of Frampton upon Severn in the County of Gloucester, being a
branch of the Right Noble Stem of the Earls of Cumberland.

Concerning coat-armous, having no color predominating, and are derived from
Ordinaries, that which has been spoken is sufficient: I will now conclude with
one example of such as are abstracted for common charges, viz. for Fusils,
Mascles and Losenges, which being born all over the Field, are termed in
blazon, Fusely, Losengie, Masculy, that is, Fusil-ways, Losenge-ways,
Mascle-wayes. These also are found charged, and that all over, as in this
example.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Fusil, Ermine and Sable, on a chief of the
second, three Lilies, Argent. These Arms are belonging to Magdalene College in
Oxford, which was founded by William Waineflete, Anno, 1456. sometimes Bishop
of Winchester.

Jo. Buddenus (in Wainflets life) affirms his name to be Patten, of which
Family this is the Paternall coat. And that he honored the same with this
chief, to acknowledge his education in the College of Eaton, to which the
Lilies do belong. His words are these, A parentibus (says he) accepit hujus
vitae usuram, a collegio decus and dignitatem, utrique pro eo ac debuit
respondendum fuit. Gessit idcirco in eodem clypeo utriusque insignia, Rombos
cum liliis.

And thus briefly concluding this fifth Section, comprehending examples of
Coat-Armours having no Tincture predominating in them; and withal showing
their sundry forms of Partition, Transmutation, and counter-changings; I will
address my self to the sixth and last Section.

The End of the fifth Section.
Artis progressio velocius clauditur quam inchoatur.
THis sixth and last Section does demonstrate the manner of Marshalling diverse
Coat-Armours (pertaining to distinct Families) in one Escocheon, as well of
those that by occasion of some adventitious Accident, are annexed to the
Paternall Coat of any Gentleman, as of those that by reason of entermarriage of
persons descended of several Families, are therein to be conjoined.

The Table of the Sixth Section.
Marshalling is an orderly bestowing of things, Within the Escocheon by a
disposition of Coat-armours of distinct Families, Manifest betokening, blazon
or coat of arms Marriage, Single, as when two Coat-Armours of distinct Families
are conjoined in one Escocheon, palewayes in one Escocheon, which we may call
Baron and Fem. Hereditary, signified by Bearing the Coat of the Femme. Upon an
Inescocheon by the Baron after issue received. Quarterly by their Heir.

Gift of the Sovereign, in respect of Special favor. Remuneration of service.

Obscure, as when persons of distinct Families conjoined in Marriage, have
their Coat-Armours so marshalled, as that they cannot be conceived, thereby to
signify a Matrimonial conjunction.
Without the Escocheon, to wit, Above the Escocheon, such as are the Helm,
Mantle, Crown, Chapeau, Wreath, or Torce, and Crest. About ^he Escocheon, such
are the several orders founded by persons of Majesty, as Emperors, Monarchs,
Kings. Such are the most Honorable Orders of the Garter, of Saint Michael,
Saint Esprite, etc. Inferior Dignity, as the Orders of the golden Fleece, and
of the Annunciation.
blazon or coat of arms In some place near to the Escocheon On the sides of the
Escocheon, which being Living things, the Arms are said to be supported by
them. Dead things, the Arms are properly said to be cottised, of or with such
things.
Underneath the Escocheon, such are the compartments or Escrole, containing the
Motto, Conceit, or word of the Bears.



SECTION VI. CHAP. I.
FRom our first ingress in this Book, What has been hitherto handled.
hitherto has been handled at large the first part of the Division of this
whole Work, under the general Head of Blazoning; wherein have been confined
and illustrated Examples of the diverse and variable kinds of bearing of all
manner of Coat-Armours, of whatsoever substance, form or quality consisting,
together with the general and particular rules in their proper places, for the
better instruction of the regardfull Reader. What now to be handled.
It now succeeds in order to explain that our general Head (being the second
part of the first Division) termed Marshalling. Which term I am not ignorant of
how far extent it is, not only in ordering the parts of an Army, but also for
disposing of all persons and things in all solemnities and celebrations, as
Coronations, Interviews, Marriages, Funerals, Triumphs, and the like, The large
signification of the word Marshalling.
in which the office of an Herald is of principal use for direction of others,
and therefore his learning, judgment and experience, ought to be able to
direct himself in so weighty affairs. But that noble part of marshalling is so
absolutely already performed by the industrious Pen of the judicious Sir
William Segar, Knight, now Garter and principal King at Arms, Honor Military
and Civil.
in his Book of Honor military and civil, The scope of the Author.
as that it were but arrogance joined with ignorance for me to intermeddle, in
an argument so exactly handled: neither is here my purpose other, then to
confine my self to Armoury only, Marshalling, what.
and so far only to speak of Marshalling as it concerns Coat-Armours. This
marshalling therefore is an orderly disposing of sundry Coat-Armours pertaining
to distinct Families; and of their contingent ornaments, with their parts and
appurtenances in their proper places. Of these things, some have their place
within the Escocheon, some without; and of those within the Escocheon, some
have their occasions obscure, other some manifest, as are those whose
marshalling (according to ancient and prescript forms) do apparently either
betoken marriage, or some gift of the Sovereign. Such as betoken marriage, do
represent either a match single or hereditary: By a single match, I mean the
conjoyning the Coat Armor of a man and a woman, descended of distinct Families
in one Escocheon Pale-ways: as by examples following shall appear. Impaling
diverse.
And this form of impaling is diverse according to the several functions of
persons, whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal. Such as have a function
Ecclesiastical, and are preferred to the high honor of Pastoral jurisdiction,
are reckoned to be knit in nuptial bands of love and tender care to Cathedral
Churches, whereof they are superintendents, insomuch as when a Bishop
deceaseth, ejus Ecclesia dicitur viduata. Paternal coat on the left side.
And therefore their Paternal Coat is evermore marshalled on the left side of
the Escocheon, giving the pre-eminence of the right side to the Arms of their
Sea, ob reverentiam dignitatis Ecclesiae, for the honor due to Ecclesiastical
dignity: as also in respect that the Arms of such several Sees, Baron and
Femme Ecclesiastical.
have in them a kind of perpetuity; for that they belong to a Political body,
which never dies. An example of such impaling is this which follows; and
this manner of bearing, we may aptly call Baron and Femme.

blazon or coat of arms The Reverend Father in God, James Mountague, deceased,
when he was Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel
royal, bore two coats impaled, viz. Azure, a Saltire quarterly quartered, Or,
and Argent, for the Arms appropriated to his then Episcopal See, conjoined
with his Paternall coat, viz. Argent, three Fusiles in Fesse, Gules, within a
bordure, Sable. Rule
Which worthy and Learned Prelate, was after translated to the Sea of
Wincherster, and consequently made Prelate of the most Noble order of the
Garter. This form of bearing, with some others before expressed, does serve
fitly to exemplify the Rule formerly delivered, touching bordures, viz. that a
bordure must give place to impaled coats, Quarters, Cantons, Chiefs, etc. I
will to this former, add one other example of this kind of impaling.

The most Reverend Father in God, Doctor William Lawde, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all England and Metropolitan, Chancellor of
the University of Oxford, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council.

blazon or coat of arms He bears these two coats impaled, viz. The Field is,
Jupiter, a Staff in Pale Sol, and thereupon a Cross Patee Luna, surmounted of a
Pall of the last, charged by four other like Crosses Fitched, Saturn, edged and
fringed as the second; This Coat belongs to the Archiepiscopal See of
Canterbury conjoined with his Lordships own Arms, viz. Sable, on a cheuron, Or,
between three Stars, as many crosses Patee Fitchee, Gules, Here by the way you
may observe, that in this blazon, I neither tell the number of the points of
the Stars, they being six, nor their color, it being Proper, which is, Or,
lest I should break the two Rules given, page 105.

To these, with the Readers patience, shall be added one other example, which
in regard it is environed with the Garter of the Order, merits observation.

blazon or coat of arms The Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews
deceased, when he was Lord Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the most Noble
Order of the Garter (which Office always pertains to the said See) bore two
coats impaled, viz. Gules, two Keys endorsed, the bows interlaced in bend, the
uppermost Argent, the other, Or, a sword interposed between them in bend
sinister of the second, Pomell and Hilts of the third, being the Arms belonging
to the said See, conjoined with his Paternal coat, viz. Argent, on a Bend
engrailed between two cotizes, Sable, three mullets, Or: both coats within the
Garter (for so does the Prelate of the said Order always bear his Arms.) The
Works of this Right Reverend Bishop, lately published, do give sufficient
testimony of his worth and Learning.

Now, because the Kings of Arms do sometimes in like manner (as Bishops use)
impale the Arms peculiar to their several Offices together with their own
Paternall coats, as Baron and Femme, but always in such case marshalling the
Paternall on the left side, I will insert one of their impalements, as in
example.

blazon or coat of arms That worthy Knight, Sir William Segar, Garter
principal King of Arms, thus impaleth the Arms pertaining to his Office of
Garter with his own: the coat that is peculiar to his Office, is thus blazoned,
Argent, a cross, Gules, on a chief, Azure, a Crown environed with a Garter,
buckled and nowed, between a Lion passant gardant, crowned, and a Flower de
lis, all Or; conjoined in pale with his own proper coats, which are two
quarterly; the first is, Azure, a cross Moline, Argent, by the name of Segar,
the second, Or, a cheuron between three Mullets, Azure, by the name of
Cakenthorp: the third as the second, the fourth as the first. In like manner do
Master Clarenceaux and Master Norroy, the other two Kings of Arms, marshall
their coat-armours belonging to their several Offices with their own Paternall
Armorial Ensigns, which for brevity sake I here omit.

To the end it may be the better conceived what is meant by the right and left
sides of an Escocheon or Coat Armor born impaled after this manner, you may
imagine a man to be standing before you, invested in a coat depicted with the
Arms of two several Families thus conjoined in pale: and then that part that
does cover his right side, will answer to your left: So then accounting the
coat to be his that wears it, you cannot err in your judgment touching the
true distinction of the dexter side of the Escocheon, that is due to the man as
to the more worthy, from the sinister part that is allotted to the woman, or
the inferior.

The manner of such impaling of coat-armours of distinct Families (as Baron and
Femme) by persons Temporal, is diverse from this before mentioned; for they do
evermore give the pre-eminence (of the dexter side) to the man, leaving the
sinister to the woman, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms The Shield is parted per pale, Baron and Femme: The
first is Argent, on a Fesse between three cocks heads erased, Sable, crested,
Beaked and Jellopped, Or, a Miter of the third, borne by the name of Shelleto.
The second is Sable, a cheuron between three bulls heads truncked, Or,
cabossed, Argent, by the name of Bulkley. This coat armor thus impaled,
belongs to George Shelleto of Heth in the County of York, Esquire, one of his
Majesty's Justices for the conservation of the peace within that County, who
married with Elizabeth, one of the daughters of Sir Richard Bulkley of
Beaumarish in Anglesey, knight, and of Mary his wife, one of the daughters of
the right honorable William Lord Burgh deceased.

Baron and Feme secular.
blazon or coat of arms This Shield is parted per pale, baron and femme; the
first, Argent, a Lion Rampand, Ermines, gorged with a collar, Or, Langued and
Armed, Gules, and is borne by the name of Guillim, The second is Pale-wayes of
six, Argent and Sable, on a bend, Or, three Pheons heads of the second, by the
name of Hatheway.

If these were not hereditary coat-armours, yet should they have this form of
Marshalling and none other, because the same is common as well to single
marriages having no hereditary possessions, as to those that be hereditary.
Prerogative of hereditary Coats.
Only in this these have a prerogative, which the other have not, that, the
baron having received issue by his Femme, it is in his choice whether he will
still bear her coat in this sort, or else in an inescocheon upon his own,
because he pretends (God giving life to such his issue) to bear the same coat
of his Wife to him and to his heirs: for which cause this Escocheon thus borne,
Escocheon of pretense why so called.
is called an Escocheon of pretense. Moreover, the heir of these two
inheritors, shall bear these two hereditary coats of his Father and Mother, to
himself and his heirs quarterly; to show, that the inheritance as well of the
possessions, as of the coat-armours, are invested in them and their posterity;
whereas, if the Wife be no heir, neither her husband nor child shall have
further to do with her coat, than to set up the same in their house,
Pale-wayes, after the foresaid manner, so to continue the memorial of the
fathers match with such a family. Example whereof behold in this Escocheon
following.

Example of hereditary Coat Armor.
blazon or coat of arms Here you see the bearing of hereditary coat-armours,
(both of the Father and Mother) by the son; and this Coat Armor must be
blazoned after this manner.

He bears, two coats quarterly, as follows. The first is Argent, a Lion
Rampand, Ermines, gorged with a collar, Or, langued and armed, Gules, by the
name of Guillim. The second is Pale-wayes of six, Argent and Sable, on a bend,
Or, three Pheons of the second, the third as the second, the fourth as the
first, by the name of Hatheway. And in this manner shall you blazon all coats
of like bearing, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per Pale, Baron and Feme, the first Ermine on
a Fesse, Gules, three Escallops, Or, by the name of Ingram. The second, Gules,
an Inescocheon, Argent, within an Orle of Cinquefoyles, Or, by the name of
Chamberlain, which first was the Coat of John Ingram, who left Robert and
Arthur Ingram, which Arthur married -- Daughter of Thomas Chamberlayn Esquire,
a worthy member of this City.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats quarterly; Another example of like
bearing.
whereof the first is Sable, Platee, two Flaunches, Argent, the second is,
Gules, a chief, Ermine, the third as the second, the fourth as the first. These
Coat-armours thus marshalled are borne by Sir Henry Spelman Knight, a man very
studious, a favourer of Learning, and a careful preserver of Antiquities.

blazon or coat of arms Bears divided by Saint Georges Cross and Cheuron, a
Lion of England, in the first and fourth quarter, Sable, a Cheuron between
three Fleames, Argent, in the second and third per Pale, Argent and Vert, a
Rose, Gules, crowned and seeded Or. This is the bearing of the worshipful
Company of Barber Chirurgions.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats quarterly, viz. first Barry of six,
Ermine, and Gules, by the name of Hussy, secondly, Or, a Cross, Vert, by the
same name and Family also. This (through a series of many Ages) was the Coat of
Thomas Hussy late of London, Esquire, Father of Thomas and Peter Hussy now
living.

Sir Thomas Hussy of Hemington in Com. Lin. Baronet, bears these Coats, but
the Cross commonly in the first place.

Sir William Hussy Justice of the Kings Bench temp. Edw. 4. bare both Coats
Alternatim: he was Father of the Lord John Hussy, and of Sir Giles Hussy,
from whom these are descended.

And sometimes you shall find four several Coats borne quarterly, for the
reason aforesaid, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears four Coats quarterly; whereof the first is,
Sable, a Fesse, Or, betwnen three Asses passant, Argent, by the name of
Ascough. The second is, Or, a Bend, Azure, by the name of Cathrope: The third
is Argent, a Saltire, Gules, on a Chief of the second three Escalops of the
first, a Cressant for a difference by the name of Talboys: The fourth is,
Gules, three Mullets, Argent, by the name of Hansard. These Coat-Armours thus
marshalled, belong unto Sir Edward Ascough of the County of Lincoln Knight.

This form of bearing diverse Coats marshalled together in one Escocheon
impaled, as aforesaid* was in use near hand within a thousand years sithence
within the Realm of France as appears by Frances de Rosiers, lib. Stemmatum
Lotharingiae; Fran. Rosiers in Exempl. diplomat. diverse. Caesar. Reg. and
Princ. fo. 2.
where amongst many Trnascripts of Kings Charters made to religious Houses,
under their Seals of Arms, he mentions one made by Dagoberi King of France,
to Modoaldus, Archbishop of Trevers for the Cell of Saint Maurice of Toledo in
Spain; which Charter was sealed with three Seals. Anno Dom. 622.
His words are thse; Hoc diploma tribus sigillis firmatum est, primo aureo
Dagoberti, which was (as he had formerly described it) habens insculptum scutum
liliis plenum, secundo cereo Cuniberti, tertio etiam cereo Clodulphi; in quo
est scutum partitum impressum, prior pars decorata cruce, ac Escarbocle, seu
Carbunculo; altera fascia; Dat. Kal. Maii, Anno Dominicae incarnationis, 622.

Bearing of many Coat-Armours.
Concerning the orderly bearing of such Coat-Armours Paleways in one Eschocheon;
note that Gerard Leigh, making mention of the marshalling of diverse Femmes with
one Baron, says, If a man do mary two wives, they shall be both placed on the
left side in the same Escocheon with him, as parted per pale. The first wives
Coat shall stand on the Chief part, and the second on the Base, Or, he may set
them both in pale with his own, the first wives Coat next to himself, and his
second uttermost. And if he have three wives, then the two first matches shall
stand on the Chief part, and the third shall have the whole Base. And if he
have a fourth wife, she must participate the one half of the Base, with the
third wife; and so will they seem to be so many Coats quartered. But here you
must observe, that those forms of impalings are meant of hereditary Coats,
whereby the Husband stood in expectancy of advancing his Family, through the
possibility of reciving issue, that so those hereditary possessions of his wife
might be united to his own Patrimony.

It was an ancient way of impaling, to take half the Husbands Coat, and with
that to join as much of the wives, as appears in an old Roll, wherein the
three Lions being the Arms of England, are dimidiated and impaled with half the
Pales of Arragon. The like has also been practiced with quartered Coats by
leaving out half of them, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms Dering hving married the Daughter and Heir of Haut.
Their Grandchilde, leaving out the left half of his Shield, did in that place
impale his wives Arms whereof are many examples. This being of the age of Henry
the sevenths time is both carved on Monuments and colored in glass; and is in
this manner blazoned. He bears per pale, Baron and Femme: The first of two
Coats per Fesse, Or, a Saltire, Sable, by the name of Dering; The second, Or, a
Cross engrailed, Gules, differenced with a Cressant, Argent, by the name of
Haut, matched with Azure, a Lion Rampant, Or, crowned, Argent, by the name of
Darel. This was thus born by John Dering of Surenden Dering in the County of
Kent Esquire, whose Grandmother was the coheir of Haut, and his wife the sister
of Sir John Darel of Calehil in the said County, Knight. The heir of which
Family and Manor of Surrenden Dering, is at this present, that excellently
accomplished Gent. Sir Edward Dering, Baronet, from whose modesty (though he be
the exact pattern of virtuous qualities for the young Gentry of this Kingdom to
admire and imitate) I am to fear a check for this too brief Eulogie: from the
other coheir of the said Haut, is descended by Goldwel Sir Thomas Roe, Knight,
mentioned before, page 292. whose deserts in public service have made him
famous: of the same nature is this next ensuing impalement; as it has been
observed out of an old Roll, which receive the like Blazon. From the aforesaid
Sir John Darel (of the ancient Family of Sezay in Yorkshire,) did directly
descend Sir Robert Darel of Calehil, Knight, who by Jane, daughter and heir of
Christopher Tolderby Esquire, left issue four sons, whereof the three eldest
survive, viz. Sir John Darel Knight, (who married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
Edward, and sister to the abovesaid Sir Edward Dering; secondly Bridget,
daughter of Thomas Den Esquire) Edward Darel, Christopher Darel, and James
darel, and a daughter Mary, married to Francis Clerk, de quo, 214.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per pale, Baron and Femme? the first of the
two Coats, Luna, a Lion Rampand, Saturn, as King of Leons: The second Mars, a
Castle, Sol, as King of Castile, impaled with Luna, three harrs, Jupiter, a
Bordure, Mars, being the Arms of the Earl of Pontife, whose daughter the King
of Leons and Castile married.

blazon or coat of arms Thus also the Arms of France and England are impaled
for the French King, Lewis the twelfth, and Mary his wife, sister to our King,
Henry the eighth, as is apparent by Escocheons in colors of the same age
whilst they lived.

And for the antiquity of bearing diverse coats quartered in one Eschocheon, the
same Author, Quarterly bearing misliked.
Francis de Rosiers, recites a Charter of Renate, King of Angiers, Sicilie,
and Jerusalem, etc. Concerning his receiving of the brethren of the Monastery
named Belprey, into his protection, Actum Nanceii, Anno 1435. adding in the end
thereof these words, Arma Aragoniae, Siciliae, Jerusalem, Andes. Whereby (if I
mistake him not) he gives us to understand, that his Seal of Arms did
comprehend all these coats born togother quarterly in one Escocheon; because he
holds the same form of description of Seals of that kind throughout all his
collection of Charters.

As touching this quarterly bearing of many coats pertaining to sundry Families
together in one Escocheon, William Wicley does utterly mislike it, Antiquity of
quartering.
holding the same to be better befitting a Pedigree, to be locked up in a
Chest, as an evidence serving for approbation of the alliances of Families or
inducements to title of Lands; rather then multitudes of them should be heaped
together in or upon any thing ordained for military use. For Banners,
Standards, and other like martial Ensigns were ordained for no other use, but
for a Commander to lead or be known by in the field: to which purpose these
marks should be made apparent and easy to be discerned, which cannot be where
many coats are thronged together, and so become unfit to the field, and
therefore to be abolished of Commanders.

In what case the same is admitted.
Only he holds it expedient, that a Prince, or Noble man, having title to some
Country, for the obtaining whereof he is enforced to make war, should show
forth his Standard of the Arms of that Country quartered with his own, amongst
those people, which in right and conscience do owe him obedience; that they may
be thereby induced the sooner to submit themselves to him, as to their true and
lawful Sovereign, or Lord. So did Edward the third, King of England, when he
set on foot his Title to the Kingdom of France, showing forth the Arms of
France quartered in his royal Banner with the Arms of England. But for such
persons as are but Commanders under them, it is very absurd, since thereof ensue
oftentimes many dangerous errors: Et irrecuperabilis est error qui violentia
Martis committitur. Having before made mention of an Inescocheon, and of the
bearing of the Arms of the Femme by the Baron after issue received by her, An
inescocheon.
she being an inheretrix; I will now here give you an example, as well to show
the occasion of such bearing, as also the manner and situation thereof.

blazon or coat of arms The Field is Pearl, a cross, raguled and trunked,
Diamond, the paternall Coat of the Lord Sands, thereon an Ineschocheon of two
Coats born quarterly; the first is Pearl, a cheueron between three Eagles legs,
erased a laquise, Diamond. The second, Verrey, three Bends, Ruby, both which
are born by the name of Bray. This Coat-armor thus marshalled, was boon by
William Lord Sands, that was Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the eighth, (by
whom he was advanced to that dignity) and took to wife, Margaret Bray, daughter
and heir of Jo. Bray and also Niece and heir to Reginald Bray, a famous
Baneret. This William Lord Sands, was father to Thomas Lord Sands, and
Grandfather to William Baron Sands: and having issue by the said Margaret, did
thereupon assume the bearing of her Arms upon his own in an Inescocheon on this
manner, which he could not have done, unless she had been an heir, for
otherwise he must have born the same still impaled, and not otherwise,
notwithstanding the issue received by her. One other example of which kind of
bearing is demonstrated unto you in this next Escocheon.

blazon or coat of arms He bears four Coats quarterly, with an Ineschocheon
of pretense, viz. The first is Argent, three Cornish Choughs, Proper, by the
name of Penneston; The second is, Gules, a Fesse between six Billets, Or, by
the name of Beuchampe of Holt: The third is Gules, a Lion Rampand, Argent,
differenced with a Cressant, by the name of Mowbray: The fourth is quarterly,
Or, and Gules, a Bend, of the second, by the name of Beauchampe, Baron of
Bedford. The Inescocheon is Argent, a Fesse Gules, in chief three crosses
bottoney of the second, by the name of Watson, all which, amongst many other
quarterings do appertain to Sir Thom. Penneston of Halsted in Kent Knight, and
Baronet, whose wife Elizabeth, was daughter and sole heir of Sir Thomas Watson
Knight (relict of Sir William Pope, Knight, eldest son to the Earl of Down,)
by whom he the said Sir Thomas Penneston has issue; by reason whereof he
bears her Coat Armor in the Inescocheon: I have omitted to blazon his
Baronets mark, because it is not cut in the Escocheon.

As for the antiquity of bearing of Inescocheons; Antiquity of Inescocheons.
I find them very anciently used a long time by the Emperors of Germany; for
they always placed an Inescocheon of their Paternall coat on the breast of the
Imperial Eagle. And also diverse Noble and Worthy Families of this Land used
the like bearing in several Reigns of sundry of our Kings, viz. In the time of
Richard the second, Simon Burley bare in an Inescocheon the Arms of Husly. In
the time of Henry the fifth, Richard Beauchamp, the great Earl of Warwick, bare
the Arms of Spenser and Clare, quarterly in an Inescocheon over his own
Paternal coat armor, and many other in like sort.

Concerning the bearing of the wives coat armor by the husband Impaled, or
otherwise; there are some that do boldly affirm, Of the wives Coat Armor born
by the Husband.
that it is not permitted by Law, but only tolerated through custom: and do
(with Chassaneus) allege for proof thereof, Quod Arma non transeunt ad
cognatos and affines, Toleration through custom.
quia cognati descendentes ex femina non sunt de familia: because by reason of
her marriage she renounceth the name of the Family whereof she is descended,
and assumeth the name of her Husbands Family, as we formerly showed, where we
entreated of differences which are not permitted to the Females. And an
especial reason thereof may be this, Quia agnationis dignitas semper debet
esse salva: the Agnation (which is of the Fathers side) must be preserved
entire, and therefore the Honor or Arms of it, not to be carried into another
Family.

Now, because some, misunderstanding the Rule given in the sixth Chapter of the
first Section, where it is said, that to daughters never were any differences
allowed, do hold, that the husband in the impaling of his wives coat armor
with his own, may omit such difference as her father (admitting him to be a
younger brother, or descended of a younger brother) bore to distinguish him
from the elder brother; I think it not amiss here to observe unto the young
Student in Armory, that every Gentleman of coat armor, which marries a
Gentlewoman, whose father did bear any difference in his coat, ought in the
Impalement of his wives Arms to retain the same difference which her father
bore, as in example.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, two Lions, between three Croslets
Fitchee, Sable, by the name of Garth, an Inescocheoan, or Scocheon of Pretense
of the Arms of Carleton, viz. Argent, on a bend, Sable, three Mascles of the
Field, This is the bearing of George Garth of Moreden in Surrey, Esquire, who
married first sister and coheir of Sir George Carleton Baronet, Son and Heir of
Sir John Carleton of Holcombe, in Com. Ox. created Baronet, 28. May, 1627.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two coats quarterly, with an Inescocheon of
pretense, viz. The first, per bend nebulee, Or and Sable, a Lion Rampant
counterchained, by the name of Sympson; The second, Argent, a Fesse, Gules,
between three Merlions, or Sparhawks, Sable, beaks and legs, Or, by the name of
Oneslow: The third as the second, the fourth as the first. The Inescocheon,
Azure, a Pile, Ermine, by the name of Wiche, which is the bearing of Dr. John
Sympson of Charterhouse-yard, London, son and heir as well to his father, Mr.
John Sympson of Polton in the County of Bedford, as to his mother, Martha,
daughter and heir of George Oneslow of Oneslow, in the County of Salop; he
married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Richard Wiche, eldest brother to Sir
Peter. This coat was also born by Edward Sympson of Estling in Kent, Dr. of
Divinity, Author of the excellent Chronicon-Catholicum, who left a daughter and
sole heir, Jane, late wife of Dr. Israel Tongue.

blazon or coat of arms This Escocheon is parted per Pale, Baron and Femme. The
first is, Or, on a Fesse between three cross Croslets, Sable, as many Escallop
shells of the first, by the name of Huggen. The seond is Argent, on a bend,
Gules, between two Cotizes Sable, three pair of Wings joined in lewer as the
first, in chief, a Flower de lis, for a difference, by the name of Wingfield.
The husbands name, whose Arms are here domonstrated, was Alexander Huggen, who
took to wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Humphrey Wingfield of Brantham in Suffolk,
Esquire, and of Elizabeth his wife, daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Nevil
knight, younger son of Richard Nevil, Lord Latimer, which Humphrey Wingfield
being descended of Sir Humphrey Wingfield knight, a younger brother of the
ancient Family of the Wingfields of Letheringham in the said County, bore his
coat-armor so differenced with the Flower de lis. Sir Richard Wingfield,
twelfth son of Sir John Wingfield of Letheringham in the County of Suffolk
knight, married first Katherine, daughter of Richard Earl Rivers, widow of
Henry Duke of Buckingham, upon whose attainder, H. 8. gave him Kimbolton Castle
in the County of Huntingdon. His second wife was Bridget, daughter and heir of
Sir John Wiltshire, knight, in whose right he was Lord of Stone-castle in Kent;
he was Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to
H. 8. one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and knight of the
most noble Order of the Garter, and died Lord Ambassador at Toledo in Spain,
and there was most sumptuously entombed, from whom W. B. is lineally descended.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, per Pale, Baron and Femme; the first, Argent,
a cheuron between three Boats Heads coupee, Sable, by the name of Bethel; the
second, Gules, a cheuron between two Leopards Heads, and a Hutchet, or Hunters
horn, Argent, which is born by the ancient Family of Slingsby, and in the first
place, though it be not their own Paternal coat, but of Scriven, whose Heir
they long since married, and ever since bore this in the first place. These two
Coats were thus born impaled by Sir Walter Bethel of Alne in Yorkshire
(descended from the ap Ichels of North Wales,) he marrying Mary, daughter of
Sir Henry Slingsby, Knight, sister of Sir Henry Slingsby, Knight and Baronet,
who suffered at Tower Hill, 1658. by whom he had issue male yet living, 1659.
Sir Hugh Bethel, Knight, Henry the second son, Slingsby the third son, Walter
the fourth son, William the fifth son, and Nicolas Bethel the sixth son.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats impaled, the first being Argent,
three Mascles, on a chief, Sable, as many Lions Rampant of the Field, the
second Argent, a cheuron between three Cressants, Azure, by the name of Norton.
These Arms, as they are here demonstrated, are born by the worthy Citizen,
Robert Hanson, Deputy of (...) Ward, who took to wife, Barbarah, daughter of
George Norton, Citizen and Grocer of London, descended from Great Chart in Kent.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per pale, Baron and Femme, first, Sable, a
Cross, ingrailed, Argent, by the name of Paget, secondly, Sable, a Lion
Rampant, Argent, by the name of Cromwell, and is the bearing of that Learned
Gentleman, and judicious Physician, Doctor Nicholas Paget, who married
Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Cromwell, brother of Sir Oliver Cromwell, Knight of
the Bath.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Ermine, three Wolves Heads, couped and
vulned in the neck, all proper, by the name of Milner, impaled with Sherman,
viz. Or, a Lion Rampant, Sable, between three Oken leaves proper, and is thus
born by John Milner of London, Gentleman, son of Richard, son of Edward Milner,
Purveyor to Queen Elizabeth, which John Milner married Anne, daughter of
William Sherman, descended from Suffolk.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per pale, Baron and Feme, viz. first, Gules,
a Lion Rampant, Argent, crowned between, three crescents, Or, by the name of
Salisbury: secondy, Argent, on a Bend, Vert, three Wolves Heads erased of the
Field, by the name of Middleton, which was the bearing of Sir Henry Salisbury,
of Lleweney in Denbyshire, created Baronet, 1619. He married the daughter of
Sir Thomas Middleton, Lord Mayor, Progenitour of a hopeful, though oppressed
Family, and was (by his son, Sir Thomas) Grandfather of Sir Thomas Salisbury,
Baronet, who died unmarried, and Sir John Salisbury, Baronet, now living. Of
which Family, is also William Salisbury of London, Clerk of Diers Hall.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, per Pale, Baron and Femme, viz. first, Or,
a Pile engrailed, Sable, by the name of Waterhouse, the second, Or, three Stars
issuant from as many Cressants, Gules, by the name of Bateman, which two Coats
are thus borne by Edward Waterhouse of Greneford, in the County Middlesex,
Esquire, who married Elizabeth, sole Daughter, and Heir of Richard Bateman
(eldest Son of Robert Bateman Esquire, Chamberlain of London) by Christian,
daughter of William Stone of London, which Elizabeth was Relict of Robert
Hawkins of Lions in Essex, Esquire, by whom she had one only child living,
Christian, his daughter and heir, and by Edward Waterhouse aforesaid her
second Husband, three children, Edward her only son, Elizabeth and Bridget her
daughters, all now living, 1659.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per Pale, Baron and Femme, in the first,
Sable, a Cheuron, Argent, between three Croslets, Fitchee, Or, which by the
name of Strut, in the second place or side, three Coats barwayes, viz. first,
Argent, a Fesse, Vert, between three Torteuxes, by the name of Stanesmore, the
second, Sable, a Cheuron, between three Cinquefoyles, Ermine, by the name of
Woodhouse; the third per Cheuron, Argent, and Gules, a Cressant counterchanged,
being the Coat of Chapman, which is the bearing of Sir Denner Strut of little
Warley in Essex, Baronet, who married first Dorothy, daughter of Francis
Stanesmore, of Frowlesworth in Com. Leicester, Esquire; secondly Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir Thomas Woodhouse, of Kimberley in Norfolk, Knight and Baronet;
thirdly, Mary, daughter of Thomas Chapman of London, and has issue by his
second Lady, Thomas Strut, only son, Blanch and Anne.

But now, to return to marshalling: If a Coat Armor that is bordured be born
sole of it self, then shall the bordure inviron the Coat round; but if such a
coat be marshalled Paleways, with another, as a Marriage, then must that part
of the bordure which respects the coat annexed, give place thereunto, whether
the coat bordured be marshalled on the dexter part of the Escocheon, or the
sinister, as in Example.

Parted per Pale Baron and Femme
blazon or coat of arms This Escocheon is parted per Pale, Baron and Femme. The
first is quarterly, Or, and Gules, a bordure, Sable, charged with Escalop
shells, Argent, by the name of Henningham. The second, checkie, Or, and Azure,
a Fesse, Ermine, by the name of Calthrop. Here you see that part of the bordure
exempted, that is next to the impaled coat: so should it also have been if the
same had been marshalled on the sinister side.

By occasion of this Bordure, I will show you in like manner, how if a
Coat Armor bordured be honored with a Canton quarter, etc. the bordure must
in like manner give place unto them, as in these next examples may be seen.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, a Cheuron between three Lions paws,
erected and erased within a bordure, Argent, on a Chief of the second, an Eagle
displayed, Sable, by the name of Brown. Here you see the bordure gives place
unto the chief. Though this Coat may seem to be overmuch charged (to be good)
yet the occasion of the addition of the chief and Eagle thereupon being duly
weighed, it is both good and commendable bearing, for that it was given for
some special service performed by the first bearer hereof in Embassage to the
Emperor.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Canton, Gules, Gilt Spurs fit
for Knights.
a Spurr with the Rowel downwards, Leathered, Or, a bordure, Sable, by the name
of Knight. As the bordure does here give place to the canton, so must it also
to a Quarter, etc. Tilliet, making mention of a Spur, says, that guilt spurs,
were fit for the dignity of a Knight, and white spurs for an Esquire; both
spurs and bridles are necessary for men of command; yet with that caution
wherewith Phoebus admonished young Phaeton in guiding the Horses of the Sun.

Parce puer stimulis, and fortius utere loris.
Ovid. Be sparing of thy spurs, but bridle strongly use.
Note, that if a bordured Coat be to be Marshalled amongst other coats
quarterly, then shall no part of the bordure be omitted, but the bordure shall
environ the same round (except it be honored with a chief, canton, quarter,
etc. as aforesaid) even as it were born alone of it self.

SECT. VI. CHAP. II.
FRom such Marshallings as do betoken Marriage, Of Marshallings betokening the
gift of the Sovereign.
I come to such as betoken a Gift of the Sovereign by way of augmentation.
These are bestowed either for favor or merit; though the very winning of
favor with Sovereign Princes must be also reputed merit, because, Principibus
placuisse viris non ultima laus est: To win great Princes love, great praise it
merits.

Of the first sort are all those Armoriall signs which the Sovereign (to honor
the Bearer, and to dignifie his Coat Armor) does annex to the Paternal coat of
some especial favorites, imparting unto them some parcel of his Royal Ensigns
or Badges, that so he may transfer to posterities some monument of his gracious
favor; and of those, some are marshalled paleways, and others otherways.

Of the first sort are the next Escocheons; and their like, wherein the
propriety of place is due to those of free gift, which must be marshalled on
the dexter side of the Escocheon, before the Paternal coat, Ob reverentiam
munificentiae Regalis, As in Example.

Lady J^ne Seymor.
blazon or coat of arms The Lady Jane Seymor, afterward wife to King Henry the
eighth, and mother to the most Noble Prince, King Edward the sixth; received as
an augmentation of Honor to her Family, by the gift of the said King her
Husband, these Arms born on the dexter side of the Escocheon, viz. Sol, on a
Pile, Mars, between six Flowers de lis, Jupiter, three Lions passant gardant,
of the first: impaled with her Paternal Coat, viz. Mars, two Angels wings,
paleways inverted, Sol.

Lady Katharine Howard.
blazon or coat of arms Upon like consideration, the said King Henry the
eighth, gave unto the Lady Katharine Howard his fourth wife, in token of
special favor, and as an augmentation of Honor, these Arms on the dexter
part of this Escocheon, which for like respect were preferred before her
Paternall Coat, viz. Jupiter, three Flowers de lis in pale, Sol, between two
Flanches, Ermine, each charged with a Rose, Mars, conjoined with her Paternal
Coat, viz. Mars, a Bend between six cross Croslets Fitchee, Luna.

Lady Katharine Parre.
blazon or coat of arms Moreover, the said King Henry the eighth, for the
respect aforesaid, gave unto his sixth and last wife, the Lady Katharine Parre,
as an increase of Honor to her and to her Family, these Arms on the dexter side
of the Escocheon, viz. Sol, on a Pile between six Roses, Mars, three others,
Luna; annexed to her Paternall Coat, scil. Luna, two Bars, Jupiter, a Bordure
Ingrailed, Saturn.

Other sorts of bearing.
These may serve sufficiently to exemplify the bearing of augmentations or
additions of Honor annexed to Paternall Coat-Armours Paleways. Now shall
follow such as are Marshalled with them after some other manner, for in some of
them there is annexed, a part in a part; in other some, the whole in a part. By
a part in a part, I mean, the annexing of a parcel of the Royal Ensigns or
Badges of the Sovereign, in or upon some one portion of the Escocheon, A part
in a part, what.
as in or upon a Canton, Chief, Quarter, etc. as follows in these next
examples.

Nicolas de Moline.
blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, the Wheel of a Water-mill, Or. This
was the coat armor of that worthy Gentleman, Nicolas de Moline, a Noble
Senator of the Magnificent State of Venice, who being employed by the most
Noble Duke and the State in Embassage to the sacred Majesty of our late dread
Sovereign, King James, upon acceptable service by him performed, both to his
then Majesty, and to the said State, it pleased his Highness, not only
graciously to remunerate him with the dignity of Knighthood in an honorable
assembly of many noble Peers, Ladies, Knights and Gentlemen; but also for a
further honor by his Highness Letters Patents under his great Seal of England,
to ennoblish the Coat Armor of the said Nicolas de Moline, by way of
augmentation, with a Canton, Argent, the charge whereof does participate of the
Royal badges of the several Kingdoms of England and Scotland, viz. of the red
Rose of England, and Thistle of Scotland, conjoined pale-wayes; as by the said
Letters Patents appears in these words: An. R. Jacob. 3.
Eundem Dominum Nicholaum de Moline in frequenti Procerum nostrorum praesentia,
Equitem auratum merito creavimus. Et insuper equestri huic dignitati in honoris
accessionem adjecimus, ut in avito Clypeo gentilitio Cantonem gestet argenteum,
cum Angliae Rosa rubente partita and Scotiae Carduo virente conjunctum: Quae ex
Insignibus nostris Regiis speciali nostra gratia discerpsimus, ut virtuti been
merenti suus constaret honor: Et nostrae in tantum virum benevolentiae
testimonium in perpetuum extaret.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, a Chief, Azure, over all a Lion
Rampant, Gules, Crowned, Or. This is the Coat Armor of Sir Henry, St. George,
Knight, Richmond Herald, who being employed by the Sacred Majesty of our dread
Sovereign King Charles, to Gustavus Adolphus King of Swethland, Anno Dom.
1627. When the order of the Garter was sent to that King, was not only
remunerated by the said King of Swethland, with the dignity of Knighthood, but
also by Letters Patents under the Kings great Seal, had his Coat Armor by way
of augmentation, adorned with a Canton, Or, charged with the Arms of the
Kingdom of Swethland, viz. In an Escocheon Azure, three Crowns, as by the said
Letters Patents bearing date the 26. day of September, in the year of our Lord
God, 1627. appears. This kind of Augmentation agreeing in nature with the
former, I thought not amiss to insert here. These Arms thus marshalled, as in
the Escocheon is demonstrated may receive this blazon, He bears, Argent, a
Chief, Azure, over all a Lion Rampant, Gules, Crowned, Or, on a Canton of the
fourth, an Escocheon as the second, charged with three Crowns. Here in this
Blazon I tell not the color of the Crowns, it being Or, for the reason given,
page 272. And here I think it not impertinent to the matter here handled, to
treat of such Augmentations as our late Sovereign King James, of happy memory
granted to Baronets of this Kingdom, who for certain disbursements toward the
Plantation in Vlster, in the Kingdom of Ireland, created diverse into this
dignity, and made it hereditary. To which Baronets his said Majesty by decree
granted, that they and their descendants shall and may bear either in a Canton
in their Coat of Arms, or in an Inescocheon at their election, in a Field,
Argent, a hand, Gules, examples of which bearing by Baronets, you may find in
diverse places of this present Book. But here I cannot but give a Caveat to
those worthy personages who have been created into this dignity, that they
should be more careful than many of them have formerly been, in bearing of
this worthy Augmentation, for there are some of these who being mis-instructed
by some pretenders to the knowledge of Armory, have very incongruously and
contrary to the Rules of Heraldry, without consultation had with any Officer of
Arms marshalled this Augmentation with their own Arms in places improper.

Sometimes these Augmentations are found to be borne upon the Chief of the
Escocheon, above the Paternall Coat, as in this next example.

The Earl of Rutland.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Topaz, two Bars, Sapphire, a Chief
quarterly, Jupiter and Mars, on the first two Flowers de lis, Sol; the second
charged with one Lion passant gardant of the last, the third as the second, the
fourth as the first. This Coat belongs to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Rutland, Lord Rose of Hamlake, Trusbut and Belvoire, which was given in
augmentation to this Family, they being descended of the blood Royal from King
Edward the fourth. This also is a form of bearing of a part in a part: for here
is abated one Flower de lis of the Arms of France, and two Lions of the Arms of
England, and born on the chief part of the Escocheon.

Whole in a part, what.
Now, in the next place, by the whole in a part, I mean, the bearing of the
Royal Ensigns of the Sovereign wholly in some part of the Escocheon, as in
example.

The Earl of Worcester.
blazon or coat of arms The Field is, Topaze, a Fesse of the Sovereign Ensigns
within a bordure Gobonated, Pearl and Sapphire. This coat armor appertained to
the most Noble and truly Honorable, Edward Somerset, late Earl of Worcester,
etc. deceased, a Noble Peer, whose great virtues were every way correspondent
to the greatness of his place and Honor.

Thus much for tokens of the Sovereigns favor: which kind of gifts, though
they proceed also from high merit (for the most part) in the receivers, yet we
rather entitle them favors then merits, because their gratitude is the
greater, by whom such Princely regards are rather imputed to their Sovereigns
mere bounty, then to their own desert.

SECT. VI. CHAP. III.
Of augmentations of merit.
IN the precedent Chapter, enough has been said of augmentations, or additions
of Honor, bestowed by the Sovereign in token of Princely favor: Now of such
as he gives in remuneration of merit, either immediately by himself, or
mediately by his General or Vicegerent, either in requital of acceptable
service performed, or for encouragement to future honorable attempts, which is
then chiefly effected when virtue is duly rewarded. Such remunerations are
conferred upon men employed either in warfare, (be it secular or spiritual) or
in affairs civil.

Spiritual Knighthoods.
Of the first sort were those that were professed in the several orders of
spiritual Knighthood of late use in this Land, but now abolished, viz. the
Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, and Knights Templers; of which the first is
the chiefest, whose beginning, says Sir John Fern, was in the time of Godfrey
first Christian King of Jerusalem.

Knights Templers.
The profession of this order, was to fight for Gods Honor against the
Infidels, and (as they were taught by the Romish Synagogue) for holy S. John.
This order was begun in the year of grace, 1120. Their habit was a long Gown,
or Robe of black, with a white cross upon the breast. The Ensign Armoriall of
their Order, Their Ensign.
was an Escocheon, Gules, a plain cross, Argent. And this is now known for the
Arms of Savoy, by reason that the first Amadeus or Amy, Earl of Savoy, being in
Arms with the brethren of this spiritual Knighthood at the siege of Acres,
after that their Grand-master was slain by the Saracens, lest the Infidels
should thereupon take a greater confidence of victory by knowledge of his
death, at their request, he did put on the Armor of their slain General, and
the long robe of black cloth, with the Arms of the said order, and then
deameaned himself with such valor in battle, that after he had slain the
Admiral of the Saracens with his own hand, he sunk and put to flight the most
part of their Foists, Ships and Galleys, and, in fine, redeemed the City of
Acres from a perilous Navall siege.

For which benefit done to Religion, The occasion of assumption of this Coat.
the Knights of the said Order requested the said Earl of Savoy to advance for
his coat armor this Ensign here mentioned. Sithence which time all those that
entered the said Order, have also had their Paternall coat armor ensigned with
this Cross on the chief of their Paternal coat, as follows.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats quarterly, The Earl of Savoys Coat.
the first is parted per Fesse undee, Sable and Azure, a castle with four
Towers, Argent. The second is, Or, on a cheuron, Vert, three Ravens heads
erased, Argent, the third as the second, the fourth as the first, ensigned all
over with a chief, Gules, and thereon a cross of the third. This coat armor
thus marshalled, was born by the name of Rawson, Knight of this Order, and
sometime Lord Prior of the late dissolved Priory of Kylmaneham, situated near
to the City of Dublin within the Realm of Ireland. Of secular remunerations.
Such remunerations as are bestowed upon Military persons secular, are these
that follow, and their like.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Gules, Sir William
Clarks Coat.
between three Pellets, as many Swans, Proper, rewarded with a canton sinister,
Azure, thereupon a Demi Ram mounting, Argent, armed, Or, between two Flowers de
lis, of the last, over all, a Batune dexterways, as the second in the canton.
Here you may note by the way, that it is no fault to repeat any word in the
blazon of this canton which was used in the blazon of the Paternal coat, this
canton being upon the occasion here declared added to the Paternal coat. This
coat armor thus marshalled pertained to Sir William Clark, Knight, deceased,
by hereditary descent from Sir John Clark his Grandfather, who took in lawful
wars, Lewis de Orleans Duke of Longevile and Marquess of Rotueline prisoner, at
the journey of Bomy by Terovane, the 16. day of August, An. Hen. 8. 5. In
memory of which service the coat armor of the Duke was given him, marshalled
on a canton sinister, in this manner, by special commandment from the King, who
sent his Warrant to the Heralds, willing and requiring them to publish the same
Authentically under their hands and seals, for continuance of the memory
thereof to Posterity ensuing; which was performed accordingly: the substance
and effect whereof, together with this Coat, is expressed upon the Monument of
the said Sir John Clark in the Church of Tame, in the County of Oxford. In this
coat is confirmed my Assertion formerly set down, touching as well the use, as
the dignity of the canton sinister, Canton sinister.
which in worth is equal to the dexter canton, though not so usually born.

Of Arms Assumptive.
To these donative augmentations of Arms, I will add certain Arms Assumptive,
which are such as a man of his proper right may assume as the guerdon of his
valorous service, with the approbation of his Sovereign, and of the Herald: As
if a man being no Gentleman of Blood or Coat Armor, or else being a Gentlman
of Blood and coat armor, shall captivate, or take prisoner in any lawful wars
any Gentleman, great Lord or Prince (as says Sir John Fern) he may bear the
shield of that prisoner and enjoy it to him and his heirs for ever. Sir John
Fern.
If the same be not by like infortune regained, be he Christian or Pagan, for
that is but a vain and frivolous distinction. These are such as the bearers or
some of their Ancestors have forced from the enemy, either in compelling him to
slight, and so to forsake his Arms or ensigns, Forced from the enemy.
or by strong hand surprise him prisoner, in justo bello, or having slain him,
so gained to himself ( jure gentium) an absolute interest in the ensigns of his
conquered foe. And in this sense may that assertion of Bertolus be verified,
where he says, Et jam populares propria authoritate, arma sibi assumere
possunt, Cessa. Catot. conclus. 28. part.
but not otherwise, because the base sort of men having no generous blood in
them, are not capable of Armoriall ensigns, which are the badges of noble
disposition or generous birth, and therefore they ought not to be bestowed upon
such persons, Quia entia nolunt male disponi: Arist. Met. But in this sense it
may be understood that he that is not descended of gentle blood, is holden
worthy to bear the coat armor that he has gained, Arist. Metaph. 12.
for the apparent tokens of virtue and valor that are found in him. That the
vanquisher may bear the Arms of the vanquished, I shall make apparent by this
next example.

Pet. Balthazar.
blazon or coat of arms The field is Topaz, a Lion Rampand, Diamond, langued
and armed, Ruby. Peter Balthazar in his Book of the descents of the Forresters
and Earls of Flanders, says, that the Arms now borne by the Earls of that
Country were won by Philip of Alsace the sixth Earl thereof, about the year of
Redemption, 192. (what time he made his voyage into the holy land) from
Nobilion King of Albania, a Turk, whom he had put to flight and slain with his
own hands in a battle. And this is the justice of the law Military; Quia
dominium rerum justo bello captarum in victorem transfertur, Ayala de jure
belli, lib. 1.
as Ayala observes. Yet this is of many men holden a thing very injurious, for
that oftentimes the more valorous man by mere casualty falls into the hands
of the less valiant, and the most worthy is often surprised by him that in
comparison is of no worth at all. Nevertheless the law whereupon this Custom
is grounded, is equal and just, albeit the event thereof falls out
oftentimes very hardly, as notes Cassius, saying, Meliores in bello victi
quandoque deterioribus parere compelli videntur. Lawmakers.
For the lawmakers did providently ordain for encouragement of men of action,
that the victor shall be rewarded on this manner: For albeit the faculties and
inward indowments of the mind can by no means be discovered, whereby each man
ought to receive remuneration answerable to the true measure of his worth and
valor, yet did they prudently provide for the rewarding of them: Balthazar
Ayala de jure belli.
In quibus vestigia quaedam and quasi expressae imagines verae fortitudinis and
magnanimitatis apparent. And Balthazar Ayala says, Quod dicunt justo bello
capta fieri capientium, non solum in rebus sed etiam personis liberis jure
gentium and civili receptum fuit, ut mancipia fierent capientium. If then the
persons of the vanquished be subject to this Law, it were an absurd thing to
think that the possessarie things of the vanquished should be more privileged
then their owners that are interessed in them.

SECT. VI. CHAP. IV.
COncerning Coat-Armours, marshalled within the Escocheon, Marshalling less
manifest.
whereof the occasions are manifest, we have hitherto entreated: now of such as
have their occasions less manifest. Those are such as being hereditary
Coat-Armours are so obscurely marshalled in one Escocheon, as that thereby the
beholder can yield no reason, or yet conjecturall probability of such their
union, nor may well discern them to be distinct coats: So as it often falls
out, that they are mistaken for some new coined coat, rather then two coats of
distinct Families; and so reckoned to be a Coat too bad to be born. And such
marshalling is either one above another, or one upon another. Of the first sort
may we reckon the coat armor of Brown before exemplified, as also this next
following and their like.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, an Eagle displayed, Or, Mynors of
Triago.
on a chief, Azure, bordured, Argent, a cheuron between two cressants above,
and a Rose below, Or, by the name of Mynors. This form of marshalling of diverse
coats, does Vpton approve, Approbation by Upton.
in case where a man has large Possessions by his mother, and small Patrimony
from his father, then he may bear his mothers Arms wholly on the nether part of
the Shield, and his fathers on a Chief, in this manner. And for the better
approbation hereof, he sets down an exemplary Coat, which he blazoneth after
this manner: Portat unum signum capitale de nigro, and tres Rosas rubeas in
campo aureo, cum uno capite rubeo, and tribus talentis in eodem. Upon some such
like consideration it may seem that these, being formerly the coat-armours of
two distinct Families, were conjoined as in this Escocheon appears, but now
being both thus united, and withal invested in the blood of the bearer,
through custom and tract of time concurring, reckoned but one coat, and born by
one name.

Another form of bearing of diverse coats (upon like occasion) much different
from this, does the same Author commend; that is to say, the bearing of the
mothers Arms upon the fathers (by the heir) in a Bend: And this does he reckon
to be the best manner of bearing such Arms, saying, The mothers Coat upon the
fathers.
Optimus certe modus portandi diversa arma in uno scuto habetur in istis
bendis, quia habens patrimonium a suo patre dimissum, and alias certas terras
per matrem sibi provenientes, quibus quidem terris maternis certa appropriantur
arma ab antiquo, ut forte quia ipsa arma materna sortiuntur nomen progeniei
suae; Tunc ipse haeres, si voluerit, potest portare Arma integra sui patris in
scuto plano and in tali Benda potest portare Arma materna. Of this form of
bearing you may see a demonstration in this next Escocheon.

Distinct Coat Armor Marshalled in one Escocheon.
blazon or coat of arms He bears. Gules, a Cross flurte, Or, on a Bend,
Azure, three Flowers de lis, of the second, by the name of Latimer. The first
and undermost of these, was of it self a perfect Coat, and born by the name of
Latimer, before the bend thus charged was annexed. And that this Coat born on
the bend, is also a perfect coat, you shall perceive, if by Vptons direction
you reduce the bend into the form of an Escocheon, and place the three Flowers
de lis in the corners of the same. I see not, but a man may as well say, that
the bearing of Arms of the husband or of the wife, one upon another on a Fesse,
Conceited forms of marshalling.
were as good and lawful, as upon a Bend, Quia similium similis est ratio. But
these may seem rather to be conceited forms, then received grounds of
Marshalling; otherwise their use would have been more frequent. But the most
approved sorts of Marshalling with us, are those before mentioned, viz.
Impaling, Quartering, and bearing in an Inescocheon.

Obscurely marshalled.
Not unaptly may these Coats be said to be obscurely Marshalled, when the
occasion thereof cannot be either certainly discerned, or yet probably
conjectured, neither can it be with reason conceived, whether the Superior be
born for the Fathers Coat, or for the Mothers, And thus much shall suffice
concerning Coat-Armours Marshalled within the Escocheon.

SECT. VI. CHAP. V.
Marshalling without the Escocheon.
IN the former Chapters has been treated of such Coat-Armours as are marshalled
within the Escocheon; In order it now succeeds to speak of Marshalling
without the Escocheon.

External ornaments.
These are certain Ornaments externally annexed to the Coat Armor of any
Gentleman, by reason of his advancement to some Honor, or place of eminency by
the gracious favor of the Sovereign, as an Honorable addition to his generous
birth. Of these there are diverse particulars, which being conjoined and annexed
to a Coat Armor do constitute an Atchievment.

Atchievment, what.
An Atchievment, acccording to Leigh, is the Arms of every Gentleman, well
Marshalled with the supporters, Helmet, Wreath, and Crests with Mantles and
Words, which of Heralds is properly called in Blazon, Heawme and Timbre. Heawme
and Timbre, what.
The French word Heulme, which we call in English an Helmet, seems to have
given derivation to that word Heawme. And the word Timmer, to our Timbre, for
that in the Almain tongue, is the same that we in Latin call Apex, or Summitas
acuminata, and betokens the Crest, that is usually born upon the Helmet. For
so does Kilianus Dufflene expound it, calling it, Timbe ost Timber van Den
Helm, which is as much to say, as Crista galeae, Conus galeae, Summus Apex.

Restraint of words general.
Note, that the general words used by Leigh, in his said description of an
Atchievment, must be restrained only to those particular persons to whom
supporters (either by Law, or by Custom) are properly due: for that none under
the degree of a knight banneret, may bear his arms supported. And in some
Countries (as by name in Burgundy, says Chassaneus) it is not permitted to
persons inferior to the degree of a Knight, Chassa. conclus. 49. part 1.
to Timber their Arms, that is to say, to adorn them with Helmet, Mantle,
Crest, etc. as Chassaneus notes, saying, Nulli licitum est, nec solet quis
Tymbrare Arma sua, nisi sit saltem Eques militaris, Vulgo Chevalier. But with
us the custom is otherwise; for in bearing of Arms each particular Country has
something peculiar to it self, and has her proper customs which have the
vigor of a Law, Quia consuetudo, ubi Lex scripta non est, Justin. Instit. Lib.
1.
valet quantum Lex ubi scripta est. Therefore herein the custom of each Country
is to be respected: Specialis enim consuetudo vincit legem in eo loco ubi est
consuetudo, dummodo post legem fuerit inducta, alias vincitur a lege
superveniente. But it may seem that such bearing is rather tolerated through
custom, then allowed in the strict construction of the Law of Arms.

Now, that the things so externally annexed to Coat Armor, Order of external
Ornaments.
and also the order of their placing may the better be conceived, I will handle
each part by it self, wherein I will ensue that course of Natures method, which
Zanchius says, was by Moses observed in the History of the Creation, which is,
a principiis componentibus ad res compositas. The parts compounding are those
before mentioned; viz. the Helmet, Mantle, Crest* etc. Zanchius.
Of which some have place above the Escocheon; some under it; some round about
it; some on each side of it.

Of the first sort, are the Helmet, Mantle, Escroule, Wreath, Crown, Cap, etc.
and for as much as with us, the Nobles are divided into Nobiles majores,
Cambden. Brit. de Ordinibus Anglica.
as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons and Bannerets: and into
Nobiles minores, as Knights, Esquires, and ordinary Gentlemen: and that to
these particular degrees, there are allotted sundry forms of Helmets, whereby
their several states are discerned: I will exemplify their diverse fashions,
beginning with the Inferior sort, (for that is the progress proper to degrees
or steps) and so ascend to the highest; as in example.

helmet This form of Helmet, placed sidelong, and close, Esquire, or Gentleman's
Helmet.
does Ger. Leigh attribute to the dignity of a ^night, but in mine
understanding, it fitteth better the calling of an Esquire, whom we do call in
Latin, Scutifer, and homo ad arma. Of these, each Knight, (in time past) had
two to attend him in the Wars, Cambden. in Brit.
whithersoever he went, who bare his Helmet and Shield before him; for as much
as they did hold certain Lands of him in Scutage, as the Knight did hold of the
King by Military service. And they were called, Scutiferi (says the Learned
Clarenceux) a Scuto ferendo; ut olim scutarii Romany dicti, qui vel a Clypeis
gentilitiis, quos in nobilitatis Insignia gestabant, vel quia Principibus and
Majoribus illis Nobilibus ad Armis erant, nomen traxerunt.

This kind of service is exceeding ancient, as we may see of Abimelech, of whom
it is said, Quare inclamans celeriter puerum Armigerum edixit ei; Judges 9.
stringe gladiam tuum, and morti trade me, ne dicant de me, mulier interfecit
me. Also, 1 Samuel 17.7. it is said, Et qui scutum ferebat, antecedebat eum: 1 Samuel 17.7.
And a little after, Verse 41. Viro illo, qui ferebat scutum praecedente eo.
Sithence then the Office of these Esquires or Pages, as some do name them,
Scutage ancient.
was to precede their Commander upon whom they attended, bearing those his
Military Habiliments, it fitteth well the respective care that they ought to
have for the execution of his directions, oftentimes with a regardfull Eye, and
attentive Ear, to observe and listen what he will prescribe them: and therefore
the Helmet, born thus sidelong, (if I err not in my understanding) does denote
unto us, Signification of the sidelong Helmet.
Attention and Obedience, and therefore is properly attributed to the Dignity
of a Knight, to whom (among those that we call Nobiles minores) it appertains
in Martial affairs, to give, and not attend directions.

Helmet due to a Knight.
helmet This form of Helmet (in my conceit) does best quadrate with the dignity
of a Knight, though Leigh improperly uses the same; the same, (I say) in
regard of the direct standing thereof, but diverse in this, that the Bever of
that is close, and this open. For he assigns this to the degree of an
Esquire: wherein I altogether dissent, as well for that the full-faced Helmet
does signify direction or command, like as the former presents attention and
obedience, as also for that it is a greater honor to bear the Beaver open then
close; the close bearing signifying a buckling on of it, as a preparation to
the battle, and the open Beaver betokens a return from battle with glory of
Victory. 1 Reg. 10.11.
So said Ahab King of Israel to the messenger that he sent to Benhadad, King of
Syria; Tell him, Let not him that girdeth his harness boast himself, as he that
puts it off: which Tremellius thus interprets; Qui induit arma pugnaturus,
ne ita gloriator ac si victoria parta illa deponeret; that is, according to the
vulgar saying, We must not triumph before the victory. And for a further proof,
that this form is more agreeable to the dignity of a Knight then the former;
you must observe, that if among Nobiles majores, or their Superiors (having
Sovereign jurisdiction) it be reckoned a chief token of honor to bear their
peculiar Helmets full-faced and open; then doubtless, amongst Nobiles minores,
it is no less honor for Knights (who amongst them have a kind of superiority)
to bear their Helmets after the same manner: Illud enim est melius, quod optimo
est propinquius; and in eodem casu idem Jus statuendum est.

Sidelong Helmet.
helmet This fashion of sidelong Helmet, and open faced, with gardevisure over
the sight, is common to all persons of Nobility under the degree of a Duke,
whereof a Baron (says Leigh) is the lowest, that may bear the same on this
manner. And of these each one is subordinate unto other, as well in
Jurisdiction, as in rank of Nobility; Subordinate ranks of Nobility.
as Chassaneus notes, saying, Sicut Rex debet habere sub se december Duces, ita
Dux debet habere december Comites, seu Marchiones; and Comes seu Marchio december
Barons, and Baro december Feudatores. And for these respects, if I be not
deceived, do they all bear their Helmets sidelong, for that each of them
attends the directions of the other, to whose Jurisdiction they are subjected.

The word Gardevisure, corruptly imprinted Gardeinsure, is a French term,
devised for the more apert expressing of the use thereof, for as much as they
do serve for the safeguard and defense of the face; for so may we lawfully
invent words, in case we want apt terms to express the nature and use of
things, as Lipsius well notes, saying, Datur venia novitati verborum rerum
abscuritatibus inservienti.

Moreover, there are more things in the world, then there are names for them;
according to the saying of the Philosopher, Nomina sunt finita, res autem
infinitae, ideo unum nomen plura significat; which saying is by a certain, (or
rather uncertain) Author approved. Multis speciebus non sunt nomina: Idcirco
necessarium est nomina fingere, si nullum ante erit nomen impositum.

helmet This kind of Helmet is proper to persons exercising Sovereign power
over their subjects, and inferiors, This Helmet is for Sovereigns and free
States.
as Emperors, Monarchs, Kings, Princes, and Dukes, and such as do by an
absolute Jurisdiction, manage the Government of free States or Countries. And a
Duke (according to Leigh) is the lowest that may bear his Helmet on this
fashion. As the first and third sort of Helmets before expressed do signify
attention and observance (for the reasons formerly delivered) in their several
degrees: so contrariwise the second and this fourth sort in theirs, do betoken
authority, direction, and Command; for so do all Sovereigns; as also all
Generals, Captains, and Commanders in Martial affairs, and Magistrates and
Governors in the managing of civil Government, in prescribing of Orders and
Directions to the multitude, use a steady and set countenance, fixing their
Eyes directly on those to whom they address their Counsels or Commands; and
such a gesture beseems men of such place, for that it represents a kind of
Majesty. This property is observed to be naturally in the Frog, Ed. Spenser in
his Eglogues.
whereof Spenser the Poet making mention, terms it, The Lording of Frogs,
because in their sitting, they hold their heads steady; looking directly in a
kind of gravity of State, without any motion at all.

Now, the bearing of the Helmet in Achievement, is sometimes single,
Atchievments born single.
sometimes manifold. It is said to be born single, when the Atchievment is
adorned with one only Helmet, as in those hereafter ensuing shall be seen.

I call that a manifold bearing, Atchievments born manifold.
when for the garnishing and setting forth of an Atchievment, two Helmets or
more are placed upon the Shield or Escocheon, because sometimes for beautifying
the Atchievment of some great Personage of Noble birth, or Eminent place, three
Helmets are placed jointly upon the Shield.

Touching the manner of placing diverse Helmets upon one Shield, Rules for
placing diverse Helmets on one Shield.
these Rules following are to be observed; viz. If you will place two for the
respects aforesaid, then must they be so set, as the Beaver of the one may be
opposite to the other, as if they were worn by two persons aspecting, or
beholding each other. Rule.
But if you place three helmets for any of these respects above remembered,
then must you place the middle standing directly forwards, and the other two
upon the sides, after a sidelong manner, with their Beavers turned toward the
middlemost, in representation of two persons aspecting the third.

The next in order of these Exterior parts of an Atchievment, Mantle.
is the Mantle, so named of the French word Manteau, which with us is taken for
a long Robe. This was a Military habit used in ancient time of great Commanders
in the Field, as well to manifest their high place, as also (being cast over
their Armor) to repel the extremity of wet, cold and li^t, and withal to
preserve their Armor from rust, so to continue thereby the glittering luster
thereof.

Sir Geffrey Chaucer.
Of this kind of habit the famous, Sir Geffery Chaucer makes mention in the
Knights Tale; where treating of the adventures of Palemon and Arcite for the
love of Emely the Dukes daughter of Athens, he describes the habits and
ornaments of the Kings that accompanied them to the lists of the Combat; where
of Demetrius King of India, he says, that he Came riding like the God of Arms
Mars,
His Coat Armor was of cloth of Thrace,
Couched with Pearl white round and great,
His Saddle was of burnisht gold newly beat.
A Mantle on his shoulders hanging,
Beat full of Rubies red as fire sparkling.


Where I collect, that this Mantle here mentioned, was worn for the purposes
formerly spoken, and that in the hanging thereof from the shoulders of
Demetrius it did cast it self into many plaits (as naturally all garments of
large size do) which form of plaiting in the Art of Painting, is termed
Drapery. Wolfang. Lazius, speaking of this kind of habit, calls the same
Chlamys mantuelis, saying, Chlamys mantuelis recensetur itidem a Tribellio
inter dona militaria a Galieno Claudio, qui post fuit Angustus, data. Zanchius
ait, De nostris Parthicis paria tria, singilones Dalmatenses december, Chlamydem
Dardaniam Mantuelem unam. Wolf. Lazius, lib comet. Republ. Romans 8.
This sort of habit have some Authors called, Toga Militaris, and other
Lacerna: Ego vero, (says Lazius) togam militarem eandem cum Lacerna extitisse
autumo. As we showed a difference of Helmets used in the garnishing of
Atchievments of persons of different estate and dignity, so it may seem there
has been in ancient time, a diverse form of Mantling used for the difference
betwixt Nobiles majores and minores. For Franc. Franc. de Ros. Lib. stem.
Lotharing. fol. 17.
de Rosiers, mentioning the Charter of Charles the second, Duke of Lorrain to
the Abbey of Belprey, 1420. he says, concerning the Seal thereof, Portat in
Tymbre Aquilam cum paludamento Ducali, whereby we may probably gather, that
Dukes in those days, and in that place, had a different form of mantleing, from
persons of inferior degrees: But in these things, each Nation, for the most
part, has some custom peculiar to it self.

Rodolph, Duke of Lorrain, son of Frederick the third, was the first that bare
his Arms Tymbered, as the same Author affirms, saying, Hic Princeps fuit
Primus qui portavit Arma cum. Galea Tymbrata, ut patet in literis ejus and
aliorum ducum: But I suppose the generality of these words must be restrained
to that particular place. For Wolf. Lazius seems to affirm that such a form
of bearing has been anciently used amongst the Romans; where he says, Wolf.
Lazius lib. 9.
Atque hactenus de Christis quae in majorum nostrorum insignibus magis ad
Romanum similitudinem accedere arbitror, sic ea cum pictura nostra in
frontispicio operis contuleris.

Neither has this habit escaped Transformation, but has passed through the
forge of phanaticall conceit, (as well as those Helmets before handled) in so
much as (besides the bare name) there remains neither shape or shadow of a
Mantle: For how can it be imagined that a piece of cloth, or of whatsoever
other stuff, that is jagged and frownced, after the manner of our now common
received Mantleings used for the adoring of Atchievments, being imposed upon
the shoulders of a man, should serve him to any of the purposes for which
Mantles were ordained? So that these being compared with those, may be more
fitly termed, flourishings then mantlings.

But as they are used in Atchievments, whether you call them mantles, Habits in
blazon called doublings.
or flourishings, they are evermore said in Blazon to be doubled, that is,
lined throughout with some one of the Furs before handled in the first Section
of this Work, as well of those Furs that do consist of more colors then one,
as of those that be single and unmixt. For so the Romans used to wear their
cloaks or mantles lined throughout, sometimes with one colored fur, and other
whiles with furs of variable colors, whereof they were called, Robes furred
with diverse colors.
Depictae penulae: of which latter sort, Alex. ab Alex. speaks, saying,
Tametsi legamus Caligulam depictas penulas saepe induisse; and Lazius, Alex ab
Alex. lib. 5. Genesis dier. Wolf. Lazius lib. 8. in comment. Rei. Romans Why called
penulae pictae.
Penula picta loscivioris vitae imperatoribus in usu fuit: whereof he gives an
instance out of Tranquillus, who says of Caligula, that he was saepe depictis
gemmatissque penulis indutus.

These were called depictae penulae, because of the variety of the colored
skins wherewith they were furred or lined, which made a show as if those
doublings or linings had been painted. Some of those doublings are of rare use
at these days, which have been more frequent in former times, as I find in the
Church of Gravenest in the County of Bedford, in a window, a mantle Sable
doubled Verrey.

Next to the Mantle the Cognizance does arrogate the highest place, Cognizance
how placed.
and is seated upon the most eminent part of the Helmet, but yet so as that it
admits an interposition of some Escroll, Wreath, Chapeau, Crown, etc. And it
is called a Cognizance, a cognoscendo, because by them, such persons as do wear
them are manifestly known whose servants they are. They are also called crests
of the Latin word Crista, which signifies a comb or tuft, Whereof called
cristae.
such as many birds have upon their heads, as the Peacock, Lapwing, Lark,
Hethcock, Feasant, Rust-cock, etc. And as those do occupy the highest part of
the heads of these fowls; so do these cognisances or crests hold the most
perspicuous place of the Helmet, as by the examples following shall appear in
their due place.

Concerning the use of these cognisances or crests amongst the Romans,
Wolfang. Lazius Comment. Reipub. Romans lib. 9 page 35.
Lazius (having spoken of shields, and the garnishing of them with portraitures
of living things,) has these words: Hactenus de clypeorum pictura, sive
sculptura Romanae Reipub. celebrata, unde nimirum and nostras caelaturas in his
clypeis, quas Wappas dicunt, profectas credendum est. Jam enim Galeas illa
quoque atque coronas supra positas cum cristis atque avium alis representabat.

But that the wearing of such crests was common to other Nations as well as the
Romans, Alex. ab Alex. shows, Variety of crests.
affirming that the Almaines and the Cymbrians used helmets wrought about with
shapes of hideous gaping Animals. The Carians had Rust-cocks for their crests.
Alexander Magnus did inviron his helmet with a gallant Plume of purest white.

The Galathians bare sometimes horns, The Galatians Trojans, Mysians, Thracians.
and other whiles the shapes of living things. The Trojanes, Mysians, and
Thracians bare upon their brazen helmets, the ears and horns of an Ox. Amongst
the rest (says he) that of Covidius the Centurion, which he used in the battle
that he had against the Mysians, was holden to be admirable; that he bare upon
his helmet a cup, that one while did flash out flames of fire, and other whiles
would suck them in. Many more examples could I give to prove as well the
antiquity as the general use of crests; but holding this to be sufficient, I
will now proceed to give examples of things that are interposed between the
mantle and the crest, beginning with those of the inferior reckoning, and so
to those of better worth and estimation.

Crest upon an Escroll.
escroll It may seem an inveterate and overworn fashion in this age to bear a
Crest upon an Escroll made of this or some other like manner; but how obsolete
soever the same may be thought, Ger. Leigh does confidently affirm, that both
in the time of King Henry the fifth, and long after, no man had his Badge set
on a Wreath under the degree of a Knight: But howsoever time and usurpation
concurring with prescription, has so much prevailed, that it will be a matter
of great difficulty to reduce men to that form of bearing so long neglected,
yet may you observe that our most Noble Prince of Wales himself, to this day,
thus bears his Badge.

wreath This is an ancient Ornament of the head, and much in use with the Turks
and Saracens, Amongst all the interpositions before mentioned that are placed
between the Mantle and the crest, there is none of so frequent use as this;
which sometimes is called in Blazon a Wreath, because it is made of two
colored silks, or more, wreathed together; sometimes also a Torce, for the
same cause: Nempe quia torquetur, because it is woond or twisted. The mixture
of the colors of this Wreath, is most usually taken from the metal or colors
contained in the Paternall Coat of the bearer. Rule.
For the orderly making of this Wreath, Leigh ascribes this Rule, viz. That
you must evermore begin with the Metal, and end with the color.

Cap of Dignity.
cap This kind of Head-tire is called a Cap of dignity; which cap (says
Chassaneus) Dukes accustomed to wear in token of Excellency, because they had a
more worthy government then other Subjects. Also they used to wear the same in
token of Freedom: Quia debent esse magis liberi apud Principem supremum quam
alii. This Cap must be of scarlet color, and the lining or doubling thereof
Ermine. Some do boldly affirm, (says Sir John Fern) that as well the Earl and
Marquess, as a Duke, may adorn his Head with this Chapeau or Cap, even by the
same reason and custom that they do challenge to wear their coronets, because
this cap, as also their crowns are allowed them, not only for a declaration of
their Princely dignities and degrees, but withal for tokens and testimonies of
Triumph and Victory. For the wearing of the cap had a beginning from the Duke
or General of an Army, who having gotten victory, caused the chiefest of the
subdued enemies, whom he led captive, to follow him in his Triumph, bearing his
Cap, or Hat after him, in token of subjection and captivity.

Other sorts of Crowns.
crown Albeit there are diverse other sorts of Crowns more usually born,
interposed between the Mantle and the crest; yet because this is sometimes put
to like use, and that it is of all the rest the chiefest, I have selected this
as an example of Crowns put to such use; the rather, because I willingly
comprehend all those of less esteem under it. That the Romans did bear Crowns
upon their Helmets after this manner, it is clear by the testimony of Wolfang.
Lazius, as well in that I have formerly alleged where I have spoken of the use
of Crests: as also by his confirmation thereof, where he says, Caetera
Coronarum genera in universum, quae vel Galeis in Armis suspensis ob virtutem
donatae militibus, vel capitibus hominum vel Sacerdotum aut Emeritorum
imponebantur octodecim invenio. Quarum, exceptis Aurea and Argentea, reliquae
omnes ex plantis passim and herbis conficiebantur. The prerogative or
pre-eminence of wearing of Crowns, belongs not only to such as have received
the same for a remuneration of virtue, but also to persons, to whom the
exercise of Sovereign Jurisdiction does appertain, as the same Author
witnesses, saying, Praerogativam vero Coronas ferendi non hi solum habebant,
quibus hoc erat minus ex virtute concessum, verum etiam quibus ex officio
licebat, Imperatoribus, Regibus, Sacerdotibus, etc. Touching sundry other forms
of Crowns, I refer you to the judicious writings of Sir William Segar now
Garter, principal King gf Arms.

HAving omitted in the former Sections, some bearings of signal Note and
Augmentations of honor bestowed for eminent service, and some Presidents of
bearing. I have thought fit here to insert them, though not in so good Method
as I could wish, and first I shall take notice of an eminent Addition, the
original Patent being lately in my hands.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Or, on a Fesse between two Cheurons, Sable,
three Crosses, Formee, of the Field, a Canton, Gules, charged with a Lion of
England, being the Coat of Sir John Walpoole Knight, Cornet to the late King in
his own Troop, to memorize whose prudence and courage in his Majesty's service,
particularly at Croplady-Bridge, Letithiel, the first Newbery, Rowton, Naseby,
and other places, his Majesty by Sir Edward Walker, his King of Arms conferd
this Canton for an Augmentation, and for his Crestan Arm holding the Cornet
Royal, therein the Kings Motto, Dieu and mon Droit.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, per Pale, indented, Argent and Sable, a
Cheuron, Gules, Fretty, Or, by the name of Mackworth, of which Family is Sir
Thomas Macworth Baronet, whose Grandfather Sir Thomas was so created, June 4.
1619. which Coat also appertains to Colonel Humphrey Mackworth, Governor of
Shrewsbury. This Cheuron (as I am informed from a judicious person, and it
seems very probable) was given as an Augmentation about the time of Richard the
second to one of this Family by an eminent person an Audley (being his own
bearing) to whom the said Mackworth did then belong.

I shall in the next place show you an example of a Gentleman bearing the
Coat Armor of the Company he is free of, impaled with his own; wherein note
that were he not of that quality, yet he might bear the Coat of his Company in
Seal, Escocheon, or otherwise.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats impaled, first Barry-Nebulee, Argent
and Azure, a chief quarterly, Or and Gules, in the first and third, two Roses
of the second, in the other a Lion of England, which is the Coat of the
Merchant-Adventurers of London. The second is, per Pale, Argent and Gules, a
Rose counter-changed, by the name of Nightingall. I am not ignorant, that
sometimes we say seeded, Or, and barbed, Vert, but I think it merely needless,
because we always paint them so, some also will object that the first part of
the Field ought to be Ermine, it is true, there is of this Family that give it
so, but as a distinction, and it was anciently thus, and takes the Eye with the
similitude of the York and Lancastrian Badges interwoven or conjoined. These
Coats may thus be borne by Geofrey Nightingall, Merchant-Adventurer, third
Brother of Sir Thomas Nightingall of Newport Pond in Essex, Baronet, who with
their brother Robert Nightingall of London, Mercer, are Grandchildren of Sir
Thomas Nightingall, created Baronet 1628.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats impaled, first Azure, three Ships
under sail, Argent, on a Chief, Or, as many Roses, Gules, a Pale thereon
quarterly, of the first and fourth charged with a Flower de lis of France, and
a Lion of England, alternatim, which is the Arms of the East-Indy Company. The
second Coat, Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three Oxen passant, Sable,
Armed, Or, by the name of Oxinden, though there be a clause in this Book to the
disrepute of castrated Beasts and Fowls, yet the Athenian Ox is famous in
History, and Capenhursts Coat is ancient: This Coat was borne by Solomon
Oxinden, who lived Anno 4. Ed. 3. from whom is descended Henry Oxinden of Deane
in Kent, Esquire, George and Christopher, Merchants of East-Indy, who may bear
their Coats as above depicted, sons of Sir James Oxinden Knight. Another Branch
of this Family is seated at Maydekin in Barham, existing in the person of that
ingenious Gentleman Henry Oxinden, who married Anne eldest Daughter of Sir
Samuel Peyton, Knight and Baronet: This Family took its surname from a place
called Oxinden in the Borough of Wolwich, in the Parish of Nonington in Kent.

blazon or coat of arms Sable, a Cheuron Engrailed, between three Madder-bags,
Argent, banded or corded, Or, which is the bearing of the Company of Dyers of
London, being the first Company after the twelve, and incorporated in the time
of King Henry the sixth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Gules, on a Fesse, Ermine, between three
Annulets, Or, a Lion Passant, Azure, a croslet, Argent, for a difference, being
the Coat of an eminent and spreading Family of this City and parts adjacent, by
the name of Underwood.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Chief, Sable, two Boars heads
coupee, of the field, by the name of Tailor, which is the Coat of that
Ingenious Gentleman and Student in matters of Antiquity, Thomas Tailor of
Kinsted and Shadoxhurst in the County of Kent, Esquire, Son and heir of Thomas
Tailor Esquire by Anne Sister of Sir Thomas Henley Knight.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fesse embatteled, between six
Estoiles, Or, by the name of Tryon, and appertains to Sir Samuel Tryon of Layer
Marney in the County of Essex, Baronet, Peter Tryon of Edmunton in the County
of Middlesex, Esquire, and Francis Tryon of London, Merchant, a Gentleman not
to be forgotten for his judgment in Painting, and diligence in collecting (to
his no small cost) rarities of several sorts.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Vert, three Mullets of six points, pierced,
Or, which Coat is borne by the reverend Divine Doctor Spurstow of Hackney, in
the County of Middlesex: and his Brother Henry Spurstow of London, Merchant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats quarterly. First, Sable, a Lion
passant, Argent, an Annulet, Or, for a difference by the name of Tailor.
Secondly, Sable, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three Rams heads erased, Argent,
Armed, Or, by the name of Ramsey, which Coats thus marshalled belong to Thomas
Tailor of Bradley in the County of Southampton, Esquire son of Thomas Tailor of
Battersey in Surry, son of John Tailor of Rodmorton in the County of Gloucester,
by the Sister and sole heir of Sir Thomas Ramsey Knight, sometime Lord Mayor of
London, which John was descended from Carlisle in Cumberland.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, on a Fesse, between six Arrows
Bend-waies, Or, Feathered and Armed, Argent, three Mores heads, proper: this
Coat belongs to that Ingenious Gentleman Captain William Wats of London, an
eminent Merchant, a great promoter and incourager of Traffic and English
Plantations abroad, descended from an ancient Family of this surname in the
County of Somerset, and Wiltshire.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Argent, on a Bend, engrailed, Sable, three
Rams heads cabossed, of the Field, Armed, Or, which Coat Armor belongs to the
Family of Lampen now of Padreda, and Lampen in Cornwall, which latter took name
from the by-travailing River, and probably gave a surname to this Family, its
ancient Lords, from whom in an unbroken chayn of many Generations, it is now
part of the possession of John Lampen of Padreda, Esquire: This name may
without strayning the sense or letters, seem to have taken its rise from some
Colony of the Romans (who left diverse surnames in this Isle) for Plutarch in
his Apothegmes makes mention of an eminent man of this name of Lampen.

I shall here not think it unnecessary to give you an account of the four Innes
of Court or Collegia Juris consultorum, being the head or chief of the residue
which are called Innes of Chancery, of whose Original suppression, opulency,
and other matters of moment I refer you to the survey of London, Wevers
funeral Monuments, and others, I shall only give you an account of their
Symbols or Arms, and first of the two Temples, of whom briefly thus, It was an
house of the Templarii or Knights Templars, and after their suppression their
other Lands were conferd on the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, after
called Knights of Rhodes, and this house came to the hands of Thomas
Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster, on whose attainder it was by the Crown invested
on Hugh Le Despencer Earl of Gloucester, after to Aymer de Valence Earl of
Penbrook. In Edward the thirds time the Students of the Law obtained a long
Lease of it for the yearly Rent of ten pound, a third part of this came through
many hands to the late Earls of Essex, by the Sister and coheir of the last
Earl and possessour, whereof it came to the possession of that worthy Gentleman
William Marquess of Hartford, Lord Beauchampe the instant Proprietor: The Arms
of another third part of which House called the Middle Temple, are thus blazond.

blazon or coat of arms Argent, a Cross, Gules, thereon a holy Lamb, bearing a
Banner, proper, which is the Arms of Middle Temple. If I had only blazoned
this Coat thus, The bearing is, on the Cross of England, a holy Lamb; any man
of judgment would have understood the colors sufficiently.

blazon or coat of arms Azure, a Pegasus, the wings expanded, Argent, which is
the Coat of the House of the Inner Temple, London.

blazon or coat of arms Azure, fifteen Terdemoulins, Or, on a Canton of the
second, a Lion Rampant, purpure, which is the Coat belonging to the third Inn
of Court called Lincolnes Inn, which was anciently, viz. in the time of King
Henry the third, the Mansion of Will. de Haverhall the Kings Treasurer, on whose
attainder, from the Crown it came by gift to Ralph Nevill Chancellor of
England, and Bishop of Chichester. Afterward it came to Henry de Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, from whom it took its denomination, then it was in the possession of
Justice Sulyard, one of whose posterity Sir William Sulyard in Queen Elizabeth's
time sold it to the Benchers and Students there for many years before residing.
Sir Thomas Lovell was a good Benefactor about Henry the sevenths time, whose
Arms stand over the Gate House: It has been lately beautified by a stately
Chapel, adorned with the Arms of the Benefactors.

blazon or coat of arms The fourth Inn (in Juniority) for in Situation or
magnitude it gives place to none of the other, is Grayes Inn, which was
sometimes the Ostery or Mansion of the said noble Family.

In the time of King Edward the third, as is confidently averd, Gentlemen
Students took a grant of this house from the Lord Gray then Proprietor, which
Honorable Society bear for their Coat, Sable, a Griffon Sergeant or Rampant,
Or.

blazon or coat of arms That Honorable City and Metropolis of England bears
for its Coat Armor in a Field, Argent, Saint Georges Cross, or the Cross of
England, in the dexter Canton a Dagger, Gules, the Coat was (as is generally
believed) borne plain as the Mistress or chief City of England, till Richard
the second for the gallant, and eminent Act of Justice done by Sir William
Walworth (in killing that arch Rebel, Watt Tyler, and dispersing his whole
Army) conferd the Augmentation of the Dagger, which City has been the Nursery
of many worthy persons, who have been eminent both in Court, Camp, and City,
from whence also that late famous Queen Elizabeth sprunge, a City for all
manner of Civility comparable, if not exceeding all the Cities in the World.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per Bend, Sinister, Ermine and Ermines, a
Lion Rampand, Or, Armed and Langued, Gules, and is borne by the worthy Family
of the Trevors, the chiefest Ornaments of which are the truly noble for all
virtues and piety, Sir Thomas Trevor of Lemington Hastings in the County of
Warwick, Knight and Baronet, only son of that noble Judge Sir Thomas Trevor,
one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer to the late King Charles, and Sir
Jo. Trevor of Trevallen in the County of Denby, and Jo. Trevor Esquire, his son
and heir apparent, Custos Brevium, of the Court of Common Pleas, and also that
worthy Gentleman Arthur Trevor of the Inner Temple, Esquire, and many other
persons of much worth and quality, both in England and Ireland.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, two Swans, Argent, between as many
Flanches, Ermine, which is the Coat Armor of the ancient Family of Mellish,
who for many descents have had their residence, and been of considerable
quality in the City of London, from one of which, viz. John M^^lish Merchant,
living 1560. by his son Edward Mellish, are descended John Mellish of London,
Merchant-Taylor, Robert Mellish of Ragnell in Nottinghamshire, second Son, and
William Mel^ish of Doncaster in York shire, third son, all living 1660 blessed in
a hopeful issue and fair estates: the said John had also George his second
son of Sandersted in Surrey, late deceased. This Family derives their rise from
the County of Surrey, about Ognersh and Shalford, where they had large estates,
and from thence are those also of this name in the Isle of Wight. This Name
has been (as many other) variously written as Mellish Mellis, Mellersh
Mellisham, which is so small a distinction as we may rationally gather Sir
Peter Mellis Knight, to have been of this Family, who with Dame Anne his wife,
and Dame Dunne his Mother ly buried in the Blackfriars at Dunwich in Suffolk,
See Wever 721 We find also in Record of that County of Surrey whence this
Family is, Petrus de M^l^isham, 7. Hen. 2. 1161. held one Knights fee in Surrey
and paid Escuage, ad duas Marcas pro exercitu de Tholosae, scilicet, quando Rex
obsedit Tholasam and fuit commune scutagium.

I shall give you a President of a choice singularity, viz. the Coat Armor of
the Honorable Sir Gervas Clifton, of Clifton in the County of Nottingham,
Knight and Baronet, marshalled with his seven wives, which are thus described
or blazoned.

blazon or coat of arms He bears a Baron or Man impaled, or in pale, between
his seven Femmes or Wives, four on the dexter side, and three on the sinister,
all barwaies, and first in the middle, Sable, semy de Cinquefoyles, a Lion
Rampant, Argent, by the name of Clifton: then in the chief dexter, Ruby, a
Cheuron between three Crosses botony, Topaz, being the Coat of the Lady
Penelope Rich, first wife of the said Sir Gervas, Daughter of the right
Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick. Secondly, on the same side checky, Topaz and
Sapphire, a Fesse, Ruby, being the Coat of the Lady Frances Clifford, Daughter
of the right Honorable Francis Earl of Cumberland, second wife of the said Sir
Gervas. Thirdly, per Pale, Azure and Argent, a Griffon passant,
counter-changed, by the name of Egioke third wife. Fourthly, in the base
dexter, Gules, three Cheurons, Argent, by the name of Meek fourth wife.
Fifthly, in the chief Sinister, Argent, two Bars, Gules, in chief, a Mullet,
Sable, by the name of South, fifth wife. Sixthly, Argent, on a Cheuron, Sable,
three Caterfoyles, Or, by the name of Air, being sixth wife. Seventhly, Pearl,
a Manch, Diamond, which is the Coat of the Lady Alice, Daughter of the right
Honorable Henry Hastings Earl of Hu^tington the seventh and present wife of
the said Sir Gervas.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Bulls head coupee at the neck,
Argent, Winged and Armed, Or, which is the Coat of that eminent Citizen Derick
Host of London, Merchant.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, three Dolphins Hauriant, Or, being the
Coat Armor of Peter Vandeput of London, Merchant, living 1659. and Giles
Vandeput his Brother, lately deceased.

Gules, on a Cheuron, Argent, between three pair of Garbes Saltire-waies, Or,
three Tuns, or Barrels, Sable, which is the Coat of the Company of Brewers of
London, who were incorporated by the said King Henry the sixth.

blazon or coat of arms He bears Argent, a Bend between two Cottizes Engrailed,
Sable, a Martlet for the difference of a fourth Brother, which belongs to
John Whitfield of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire, eldest son of John
Whitfield, descended from a fourth house of the Family of Whitfield in
Northumberland.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per Pale, Baron and Femme, first Gules, a
Fesse, Argent, between three Plates, by the name of Minors, impaled, with Or,
two Bars, Gules, in Chief, three Torteuxes, by the name of Wake, and is thus
borne by Richard Minors of London, Merchant, who married Elizabeth Daughter of
Sir John Wake of Clevedon in the County of Somerset, Baronet.

blazon or coat of arms He bears per Pale, Baron and Femme, the fir^ Argent,
five Palets, Sable, by the name of Kendrick, secondly, Argent, a Cheuron
between three Ravens heads Erased, Sable, by the name of Bradine, and is thus
borne by that ingenious honest Gentleman Thomas Kendrick, son of John Kendrick
Alderman of London, Lord Mayor 1651.

blazon or coat of arms He bears two Coats impaled, Baron and Femme, the first
Argent, on a Bend, Cottized, Sable, three Lozenges, Ermine, by the name of
Ryves, secondly, Argent, three Bulls heads cabossed, Sable, Armed, Or, by the
name of Walrond, and might be borne by any of the three following Gentlemen.

1. Sir William Ryves Attorney General for the Kingdom of Ireland, who married
Dorothy Daughter of Sir Richard Waldron or Walrond Knight.

2 Sir Thomas Rives the Kings Advocate married Elizabeth daughter of the said
Sir Richard Walrond.

3 Brune Rives Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Chichester married Katherine
Daughter of the same Sir Richard Walrond Knight.

Of this Family is also that worthy Citizen Richard Rives of London Merchant,
Deputy of Dowgate Ward, and his brother J^hn Rives Merchant, being all desce
ded from the ancient Family of this surname at Damerey court near Blandford in
the County of Dorcet.

blazon or coat of arms Now I shall give you an example of the bearing of a
woman not being under Covert Baron, and I can no where find a more illustrious
president then that great and virtuous Lady, Christian, Countess Dowager of
Devon, Widow of William Cavendish, Baron of Hardwicke, and Earl of Devonshire,
deceased, and Moth^r of the Right Honorable William now Earl of Devon:
Daughter of Edward Lord Bruce, and Sister of Thomas Earl of Elgin, which
Ladies Arms are thus emblazoned. She bears as a Widow (viz) in a Lozenge two
Coats impaled: First Diamond, three Bucks heads pearl, Attired, Topaz, by the
name of Cavendish.

The second Topaz, a Saltier and chief, Ruby, by the name of Bruc. I shall for
the better illustration of this give you another example or two of Widows, and
then treat of Maids.

blazon or coat of arms She bears in a Lozenge per pale, Baron and Femme, the
first of two Coats per F^sse, wherefore the former is Ermine, a Flower-de-Lis,
and on a chief, Sable, a Mullet, Or, by the name of Gaire. The other Ruby, a
Cheuron between three Crosses, Boton, Topaz, a Labell for a difference, by the
name of Rich; And on the sinister side pearl, a Ch^veron Diamond, in the
dexter point, a Cinquefoyle, Ruby, by the name of Ricard, which said Coats
belong to the Right Honorable the Lady Kensington, only child of Andrew
Ricard Alderman of London, who was first married to John Gair Esquire eldest son of
Sir John Gaire Knight, Lord Major, and since his decease to Henry Lo^d Rich of
Kensington, Heir apparent to the Earldome of Holland, by whose deplored death
she became a second time a Widow.

And in this manner are those bearings to be marshalled, where the woman being
a Widow, will make use of both her Husbands Coats.

Some may perhaps object that the Label should have been in chief, and extended
to the sides of the Escocheon; but let them know it is a grand error to draw or
paint them so: These Labels as in Prideaux, Barington, Hellesby, etc. being a
charge and part of the Coat, nor is there any reason we should make the eldest
brothers difference so large, when we always draw the differences of the
younger brothers as small as may be, that of Labels being a very ancient
bearing, but these distinctions for brother's a new (though necessary)
invention.

blazon or coat of arms She bears two Coats impaled, the first Gules,
semy-de-Mullets, Or, three swords barwayes, proper, the middlemost encountering
the other two: A canton per Fesse, Argent and Vert, thereon, a Lion of England
by the name of Chute. The second Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three
Flower-De-Lis Sable by the name of Dixwel; Which Coats are borne thus empaled
by Elizabeth, daughter of Mark Dixwel of Brom in Barham in Kent, Esquire,
late wife, now widow of Edward Chute of Surrenden in Bethersden in the said
County, a very hopeful Gentleman, descended from Philip Chute, Captain of
Camber Castle, and Standard bearer to the men of Arms of the Kings band at the
siege of Bulloigne, where for his valiant service King Henry the 8. gave him
the Canton for an augmentation or badge of honor, whose eldest son was
Father of Sir George Chute of Bristow-Causey in Surry, Knight, Father of George
Chute Esquire now there residing, 1659.

Thus much for the bearing of Widows, who may on no pretense whatsoever bear
either their paternall Coat or their Husbands Coat simple, or alone; for if in
an Escocheon or Shield, then all people take it for the bearing of a man; If in
a Lozenge, then is it the bearing proper only to a Maid, as the following
examples will demonstrate.

blazon or coat of arms She bears (in a Lozenge as the bearing of a Maiden
Lady) two Coats quarterly: First, Gules, two wings conjoined or impaled Or. by
the name of Seymor. The second Or. a Fesse engrailed, Azure, between three
Escallops Gules, by the name of Prinne, the third as the second, the fourth as
the first.

This is the proper Coat of Frances Seymor, daughter of Francis Lord Seymor of
Trowbridge, by Frances daughter and Co-heire of Sir Gilbert Prinne Knight. I
shall double this example in a Cousin German of this Ladies.

blazon or coat of arms She bears in a Lozenge, two Coats quarterly, viz.
Hastings and Prin: First Argent, a Manch, Sable, secondly, Or, a Fesse
engrailed, Azure, between three Escallops, Gules, the third as the second, the
fourth as the first, thus borne by Katharine Hastings, Daughter and Co-heire of
Sir George Hastings, brother of Henry Earl of Huntington, and of Seymour
Daughter and coheir of Sir Gilbert Prin, Knight. This manner of bearing in
Lozenges by unmarryed women, may seem to take its rise or original from tne
Fusill or spindle of Yarne, single women being called spinsters, Nunquam a
Lancea transibat ad fusum, says Favine, speaking of Salique Land, it never
past from the Lance to the Fusill, Lozenge, or Spindle: But lets find a much
more noble and ancient derivation or ground, and this is it; Plutarch tells us
in the life of Theseus, that in the City of Megara (in his time) were the
Tombs of Stone, wherein their Bodies (speaking of the Amazones) were interred,
which were cut in the form or fashion of a Lozenge, in imitation of their
Sheilds, according to the manner of Greece.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Sable, a Cheuron between three Flower de
lis, Argent. This is the Coat Armor of diverse Ancient and Worshipful Families
in Carnarvanshire, and other Counties in North Wales, principally by the name
of Elis Bodvell, and Bodurda, descended of Collwyn, one of the Princes or Heads
of the fifteen Tribes of Gwynedd, Vidz. North Wales.

blazon or coat of arms He bears, Azure, a Fish springing Bend-wayes, Argent,
on a chief of the second, a Rose, Gules, between two Torteauxes, and was borne
by Henry Robinson, sometimes Provost of Queens College in Oxford, esteemed a
second Founder there, he was afterward Bishop of Carlisle, a Pious, Reverend,
and Learned man, and much honored there, being his Native place, where his
Grandfather and Grandmother lived there so long in Wedlock, till they did see
above three hundred proceed from their Loins. This is recorded by his Nephew
Humphrey Robinson, that the memory of so eminent a person might not be buried
in Oblivion.

SECT. VI. CHAP. VI.
Peculiar Ornaments.
THus far have I touched things placed above the Escocheon: now I will proceed
to such as are placed elsewhere; of which some are Peculiar, some more
General.

By such as are peculiar, I mean those that are appropriate to persons having
Sovereign Jurisdicton, and to such as we called Nobiles Majores, of which Rank
a Banneret, or (as some call them) a Baronet is the lowest. These have their
name of a Banner: for unto them it was granted in remuneration of their
approved valor in Military services to bear a square Banner after the custom
of Barons; and therefore are called Knights Bannerets: as Master Camden has
noted, saying, Baneretti, qui allis Baronetti cum valvasorum nomen jam
desierat, a Baronibus secundi erant, quibus inditum nomen a vexillo, concessum
enim erat illis militaris virtutis ergo quadrato vexillo perinde ac Barons
uti, unde and Equites vexillarii a nonnullis vocantur, etc. This order of
Knighthood, was much esteemed for the honor received in the Field for
Military service, with great solemnity under the banner Royal displayed in the
presence of the Sovereign: and this has been reputed a middle degree between
Nobiles majores and minores: but of this dignity none has been known alive in
England, since Sir Ralph Sadler, etc. But amongst the particular Ornaments
belonging to the Coat-armours of persons having either Supreme or Inferior
dignity, there are some that do environ the Coat Armor round about, and do
chiefly belong to persons exercising Sovereign Jurisdiction, and to such others
as they out of their special favor shall communicate the same unto, by
associating them into the fellowship of their Orders. Such are the most
honorable Order of the Garter, the Orders of the Golden fleece, of Saint
Michael, of the Annunciation: of all which Sir William Segar now Garter, King
at Arms, has written so learnedly, that to his Works I must again refer the
Reader for satisfaction therein; the discourse thereof being altogether
impertinent to my intended purpose in this present Work.

Yet here you must observe, that a man being admitted into the Society and
Fraternity of any two of the Honorable Orders before mentioned, he may in
setting forth his Achievement adorn the same with the chief Ornaments or
Collars of both these Orders, whereof he is elected and admitted a fellow and
companion, by placing one of the Ornaments next to his Shield, and the other
without the same. Thomas Duke of Norfolk.
In such manner did the most high and mighty Lord Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and
Earl Marshall of England, bear the chief Ornaments of the Orders of the Garter
and of Saint Michael.

But leaving those peculiar Ornaments of Sovereigns or others, I return to
those that are communicable (by a certain right) as well to those called
Nobiles majores, as to Sovereigns. Such are those which are said to be placed
on the sides of the Achievements representing sometimes things living and
sometimes dead.

But these of some Blazoners are termed Supporters, Supporters
whose conceit therein I can hardly approve, Quia diversorum diversa est ratio:
and therefore the Blazon that I would give unto things so different in Nature
is; Blazon of Supporters.
that if things be living and seize upon the Shield, then shall they be called
properly Supporters; but if they are Inanimate and touch not the Escocheon,
then shall such Arms be said to be (not supported, but) Cotised, Cotised.
of such and such things: For, how can those be properly said to support that
touch not the thing said to be supported by them? Therefore, Nomina sunt
aptanda rebus secundum rationis normam.

To persons under the degree of a Knight Banneret, Who may bear their Arms
supported. Cotises whence derived.
it is not permitted to bear their Arms supported, that honor being peculiar
to those that are called Nobiles majores.

And these Cotises have their name agreeable to the thing whose quality they
represent, and are so called (as we elsewhere showed) of Costa, the Rib, either
of Man or Beast: for it is proper to the Rib to enclose the Entrails of things
Animal, and to add form and fashion to the body; in like manner do these
enclose the Coat Armor whereunto they are annexed, and do give a comely grace
and ornament to the same.

Motto.
Another ornament there is externally annexed to Coat Armor, and that is the
Motto, or Word which is the Invention or Conceit of the Bearer, succinctly and
significantly contrived (for the most part) in three or four Words, which are
set in some Scrole or Compartment, placed usually at the foot of the Escocheon:
and as it holds the lowest place, so is it the last in blazoning. Abra.
Franc. lib. 2. page 57.
Of this word Abra. Franc. writes in this manner, Quod a recentiorius verba
quaedam ipsis Armis subjiciantur, videtur id nuper inventum ad imitationem
eorumquae Symbola a nobis appellantur. And indeed the Motto should express
something intended in the Achievement, though use has now received whatsoever
fancy of the deviser: and this Motto is of universal use to all Gentry and
Nobility, of what rank soever.

Blazon of Achievements.
Now as touching the Blazoning of these Ornaments exteriorly annexed to any
Coat Armor, it is to be considered that we are not tied to that strict
observation in them as in the blazoning of things borne within the Escocheon;
for these are the Essential parts of Coats, and those merely Accidental. For
the Crest or Timber, Wreath, Mantle, Helm, etc. (says Fern) are no part of
the Coat Armor, but Additions to Achievements added not many hundred years
ago to the Coats of Gentry. And therefore when you hay aptly set forth all
the Fields and Charges, and their colors contained within the Escocheon, your
Blazon is done: so that when we shall describe any of those exterior
Ornaments, we stand at liberty for naming of our colors, and in those it is
held no fault to name one color twice.

Order in setting forth Achievements.
Having thus set down all the parts of Achievements, I will now represent them
conjoined to your view: and for the order prescribed to my self, in setting
forth of the same according to the several sorts before spoken of; I will
begin with those that are accounted Nobiles minores (of which a Gentleman is
the lowest) and so proceed in order to the highest: Quasi a rivulis ad fontem:
As in examples following shall appear.

LOYAL AV MORT achievement

THis is the Achievement of that industrious Gentleman Belchier late of
Gilsborough in the County of Northampton, a man very complete in all
Gentleman-like qualities; a lover of Arts, and a diligent searcher after
matters pertaining to Honor and Antiquity: It is thus blazoned, He bears in
a Shield quarterly of four, as follows. The first is Or, three Pallets,
Gules, a Chief, Varrey, which he bears as his Paternall Coat, by the name of
Belchier. The second is Sable, a Cheuron between three crosses croslets
fitched, Argent, and is borne by the name of Rand. The third as the second, the
fourth as the first, Insigned with an helmet fitting his degree, and thereupon
a Mantle of Antique form, Gules, doubled, Argent, above the same a Torce, Or,
and Gules, therein a Greyhounds head, collered, Gules, garnished, Or, his
ears, Azure. in an Es^r^le underneath his Motto, or Device, viz. LOYAL AU
MORT, that is, Faithful to the death. A word well fitting his honest mind, and
his assured constancy to those whom he professed love unto; in regard of which
his virtuous disposition, I have thought good to honor him after his death
with this poor remembrance, for many particular respects. In this you may
observe the form of the helmet, The temple of honor.
befitting the degree of a Gentleman. The Temple of honor (amongst the Ancient
Romans) had before it a stately Porch dedicated to virtue: to notify, that in
that commonwealth there was no hope to attain to place of dignity, but by
treading the path of desert. Doubtless this was the best policy that could be
to uphold a State: for so, places of importance were best discharged, and
persons well affected were most encouraged to deserve well: and out of
question, such was the reason of the advancing of noble families in most
States: whose first raisers were honored for their good services, with titles
of dignity, as badges of their worth; and therefore if their offspring vaunt
of their Lineage or titular dignity, and want their virtues, they are but like
base serving men, who carry on their sleeves the badge of some Noble Family,
yet are they themselves but ignoble persons. Four parts of Nobility.
In which respect Aristotle discoursing of nobility, makes four parts thereof;
the first of Riches, the second of Blood, the third of Learning, the fourth of
Virtue: and to the two last he ascribes the first place of true Gentry;
because Boores may be rich, and Rake-hels may be of ancient blood, but virtue
and knowledge cannot harbor but where God and nature has left their noble
endowments. Which made Bartholus to say that good men and wise men were nobles
in Gods sight, as rich men and great men were nobles in men's eyes. Threefold
Nobility according to Bartho.
Yet the same Bartholus ascribes the due honor unto each kind of Nobility,
which he makes to be threefold, Theological, Natural, Political: the first
and chief consists in Piety and virtues of grace, the second in the noble
qualities of Nature, the third in the degrees of estimation in the
Commonwealth. This last is it we here chiefly meddle with; not that we reject
the two former, but that we suppose we live in such a State where the two first
kinds of Nobility are rewarded with the last kind, and thereby made more
illustrious. The common phrase of foreign Nations is different from ours,
Different phrase of Nations.
concerning the Titles of men of reputation: they esteeming every man Noble,
which has any excellency remarkable, above others; (so says Iodocus
Clicthovius, Nobilitas est generis, vel alterius rei excellentia ac dignitas:)
whereas we English, repute none noble under the degree of a Baron, and with
them Generosus is a greater title than Nobilis, whereas with us it is much
inferior. The truth is, that the two titles of Nobility and Gentry are of
equal esteem in the use of Heraldry, though custom has equally divided them,
and applied the first to Gentry of the highest degree, and the latter to Nobles
of the lowest rank. Distinct orders of Gentry.
And amongst these Gentlemen of low note there are also sundry Orders, as some
by blood, some by office, some by possessions, some by sacred Academicall
dignity; all which come not within the verge of this our purpose, till the
State has honored them with the bearing of Coat-Armours, as the Ensigns of
their worth.

CONCILII NVTRIX TACI TVRNIAS achievement The Achievement of a Gentleman.
HE bears two Coats quarterly, first Argent, a Fesse, Ermine, cottised,
Sable, by the name of Harlstone, secondly, Sable, a Cheuron between three
Leopards heads, Or, by the name of Wentworth; and for his Crest on a Helmet,
befitting his degree, mantled, Gules, doubled, Argent, out of a Crown, Or, a
Stags Head, Ermine, attired, Or, bearing a Hawthorne bush with berries, proper:
And for his Motto, Concilii nutrix taciturnitas. This is the Achievement or
Bearing of Robert Harlestone (now Secretary to the Right Honorable William
Lenthall Esquire, Master of the Rolls, and Speaker of the Parliament begun the
third of November, 1640.) second Son of John Harlestone of South Osindon in the
County of Essex; and of Jane Daughter and Coheire of Philip Wentworth, a
younger Brother of the Lord Wentworth of Netlested: Of this Family have been
diverse eminent persons, as Sir John Harl ston Governor of Hauure-du-grace in
the time of Edward the fourth. Richard Harleston Valectus de Camera, to the
King, and conquered for the Crown of England the Islands of Garnesey and Jersey.

COLENS DEVM ET REGEM achievement

The Achievement of an Esquire.
HE bears two Coats impaled, Baron and Femme, the first, Gules on a Bend, Or,
three Martlets, Sable, by the name of Collins, the second, Azure, a Fesse
between three Chesse-rooks, Or, by the name of Bodenham, ensigned with Helmets
befitting the persons quality, on Wreaths of the Colors of the Coats: on the
first, a demi Griffon, Or, collered, Argent, the second, a Dragons head erased,
Sable. The Motto, Colens deum and regem. This is the bearing of Samuel Collins
Doctor in Physic, late Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, only Son of
John Collins, late Parson of Retherfield in Sussex, descended from the ancient
Family of the Collins of the Counties of Somerset and Devon, which Doctor
married Anne eldest Daughter of John Bodenham Esquire, lineally descended from
the Knightly and ancient Family of the Bodenhams of Wiltshire and
Herefordshire, allied to diverse of the ancient Families of the Nobility and
Gentry. The Dignity of an Esquire is the second degree of Gentry, the reason of
whose denomination we gave elsewhere. As in the first rank of Gentry, so in
this there are sundry kinds according to the custom of this Kingdom, concerning
which point you may read learned Master Cambden in his Britannia, and by the
custom of England, Doctors, whether of Divinity, Civil Law, or Physic, are
esteemed Esquires.

achievement

HE bears two Coats quarterly, viz. First, Argent, three Bears heads erased,
Sable, musled, Or, by the name of Langham. Secondly, Ermine, a Cheuron, Gules,
within a Bordure engrailed, Sable, by the name of Revel; the Creast on a Helmet
befitting his quality, and Wreath of his Colors, a Bears head erased, Sable,
musled, Or, mantled, Gules, doubled, Argent, which is the bearing of that
worthy Gentleman John Langham of London and Cottesbrook in the County of
Northampton, Esquire, descended in a direct male line from Henry de Langham,
who probably took the denomination derived to his posterity from Langham in the
County of Rutland, for his son William de Langham held three Caracuts of Land
in Langham in that County, who (by his son William) was Grandfather of Robert
Langham, living the forty fourth of Edward the third, who married Margaret,
Daughter and Heir of Sir John Revell of Newbold in Warwickshire, relict of Sir
Stephen Mallory of Leicestershire, Knight; which John Langham by Elizabeth his
wife, 30. Ed. 1.
Daughter of James Bunce Esquire, is the happy Father of a hopeful and
accomplished issue, viz. James Langham Esquire, William, Stephen, and Thomas
Langham, and as many daughters, Elizabeth lately deceased wife of Philip
Botiler of Woodhall in Hertford-shire, Esquire, Anne wife of Sir Martin Lumley
Baronet, Rebecca and Sarah unmarried, 1659.

FE MID UN BVEN HIDALGO achievement The Achievement of a Knight.
HE bears eighteen Coats quartered: The first, Azure, a Fesse between three
Chesse-rooks, Or, by the name of Bodenham. Second, Or, on a Fesse, Sable, a
Lion passant, Argent, by the name of Huish. Third, Gules, three Bars gobony,
Argent and Sable, by the name of Delabau. Fourth, Sable, a Bucks head cabossed,
Or, by the name of Wells. Fifth, Or, a Lion Rampant, Vert, a la double queve by
the name of Dudley. Sixth, Argent, a quarter, Sable, a Cressent, Gules, by the
name of Sutten. Seventh, Or, two Lions passant, Azure, by the name of Somery.
Eighth, Azure, a Cross patee, Argent, by the name of Lexington. Ninth, Sable,
three Garbes, Argent, banded, Gules, by the name of (...) Tenth, Gules, a
Cinque-foyle, Ermine, Bellamont. Eleventh, Argent, three Bars embattilee,
Gules, Barry. Twelfth, Or, on a Fesse, Gules, three Waterbougets, Argent,
Bingham. Thirteenth, Argent, a Cross patee, Azure, M^lpas. Fourteenth, Sable,
three Saltiers engrailed, Argent, Lexington. Fifteenth, Argent, on a Cross,
Gules, five Mullets, Sable, Bodenham. Sixteenth, Sable, three Pick-axes,
Argent, Pigot. Seventeenth, Argent, a Cross patee* Azure, a Label, Gules,
Bevercote. Over all in an Escocheon of pretense, France, a Lion Rampant, Or, a
Cressent for a difference by the name of Beaumont. Hereon three Crests, first
on a Wreath or Torce, Or and Azure, a Dragons head erased, Sable, mantled as
the Wreath. Secondly, or middlemost, a plume of Feathers, Argent and Sable, on
a Wreath, Argent and Azure, mantled, Azure, doubled, Argent. Thirdly, a Foxes
head erased, Gules, on a Wreath, Argent and Sable, mantled, Sable, doubled,
Argent, set on three open Helmets befitting the degree of a Knight, Motto, Fe
mid un buen hidalgo, being an Anagram of his name thus englished, Faith
measures a good Cavalier. This is the Achievement of Sir Wingfield Bodenham,
son of Sir Francis Bodenham, son of Sir William Bodenham of Ryhall in the
County of Rutland, Knights, descended of a younger son of Sir John Bodenham of
Nonington in the County of Hereford, Knight.

Here you may observe the difference betwixt the Helmet of an Esquire and a
Knight, being the third degree of Gentry.

OMNIA DESVPER achievement

THe next in order and degree of precedence is an hereditary honor entitled,
Baronets, quasi Petit Barons, of whose creation, privileges and other
concernments you may be more fully satisfied in a supplement to this Book,
being a peculiar account of this Order.

He bears two Coats quarterly, First, Or, two Lions Passant, Gardant, Gules.
Secondly, Or, a Fesse, Varry, between three Cinquefoyles, Gules, and are both
borne by the name of Ducy. An Inescocheon with the Arms of Vlster or Tyrone,
viz. Argent, a sinister hand coupee, Gules, the Crest on a Helmet befitting a
Baronet, a Chapeau, Gules, lined Ermine, thereon an Estrich rowsant, Or,
Mantled, Gules, doubled, Argent, which is the bearing of the Honorable Sir
William Ducy of Tortworth in the County of Gloucester, Baronet, heir to his
Brother Sir Richard Ducy Baronet, deceased, sons of Sir Robert Ducy Lord Mayor
of London 1630. created Baronet 1629. Nov. 28. Knighted 1631. who by his wife
Elizabeth Daughter of Richard Pyot Alderman of London, had issue beside the
said Sir Richard, and Sir William Ducy, Robert third son, Hugh Ducy fourth Son,
and John Ducy fifth Son, deceased.

DE BON VOVLOIR SERVIR LE ROY achievement

THis is the Achievement of the Right Honorable William Gray, Baron Gray of
Warke in the County of Northumberland, who was by King James created Baronet
June 15. 1619. Son of Sir Ralph Gray of Chillingham in the said County, Knight,
extracted from a long continuation of Knights of eminence and large estates in
that County, one of whom Sir John Gray was by King Henry the fifth for his good
service in France, created Earl of Tanquerville there, see Vincent. This Noble
Gentleman was by the said King created Lord Gray of Warke to him and his heirs
males, 11. Feb. 1623. and is living 1660. he married the virtuous Lady Cecilia
eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir John Wentworth of Costiel in Suffolk,
Knighted 1603. created Baronet 1611. (by Katharine Daughter of Sir Moyle Finch,
and Elizabeth Countess of Winchelsey) by whom he has issue living, the
Honorable Thomas Gray, Esquire, eldest son, Ralph second son, and two
Daughters, Elizabeth and Katharine.

He bears, Ruby, a Lion Rampant within a Bordure engrailed, Pearl, by the
name of Gray: a Scocheon of pretense, Diamond, a Cheuron between three Leopards
heads, Topaz, by the name of Wentworth. For his Creast on a Barons Helmet, and
Wreath of his colors, a Scaling Ladder, Topaz, the Grapple or iron Hooks,
Sapphire, his Supporter on the dexter side, a Lion gardant, Purple, purfled and
crowned, Topaz, on the sinister side a Cat-a-mountain, Proper, viz. greyish,
erect on a Scroll therein, his Lordships Motto, De bon Vouloir Servir Le Roy.

DIEV DEFEND LE DROIT achievement

THis was the Achievement of the Right Honorable Sir Robert Spenser Knight,
Baron Spenser of Wormeleiton in the County of Warwick, deceased, father of
William now Baron Spenser, which Robert Lord Spenser was most worthily advanced
to that degree by our late Sovereign Lord King James, Anno regni sui primo, in
regard of his Lordships many Noble virtues be fitting that Dignity, who bare
eight Coats marshalled in one Shield, as follows, viz. First quarterly Pearl
and Ruby, the second and third charged with a Fret, Topaz, over all on a Bend,
Diamond, three Escalops, of the first, being the ancient Coat belonging to this
noble Family, as a branch descended from the Spensers, Earls of Gloucester and
Winchester. The second is, Sapphire, a Fesse, Ermine, between six Seamewes heads
erased* Pearl, born also by the name of Spenser. The third is Ruby, three
Stirrops leathered in Pale, Topaz, by the name of Deverell. The fourth is
Topaz, on a Cross, Ruby, five Stars, Pearl, by the name of Lincoln. The fifth
is, Pearl, a Cheuron between three Cinquefoiles pierced, Ruby, by the name of
Warsteede. The sixth is, Ermine, on a Cheuron, Ruby, five Beisants, a Cressant
in chief of the second, by the name of Grant. The seventh is Pearl, on a bend
between two Lions Rampand, a Wiverne with the wings overt of the first, by the
name of Rudings. The eighth and last is party per Cheuron, Sapphire and Topaz,
three Lyoncels passant, gardant, counter-changed, a chief, Pearl, by the name
of Catlyn, all within the Escocheon. And above the same, upon a Helmet fitting
the degree of a Baron, a Mantle, Ruby, doubled, Pearl, thereupon within a
Crown, Topaz, a Griffons head with wings displayed, Pearl, gorged with a Gemew,
Ruby. And for his Supporters on the Dexter side a Griffon parted per fesse,
Pearl and Topaz, gorged with a Collar, Diamond, charged with three Escalops,
Pearl, whereunto is affixed a Chain reflected over his loins, Diamond, Armed,
Ruby. And on the Sinister side a Wiverne, Pearl, gorged also with a Collar,
whereunto is affixed a Chain reflexed over the hinder parts, Diamond. His
Motto, DIEV DEFEND LE DROIT, God defend the right; being a worthy testimony
both of his own honorable affection to right and equity, and also of his
Lordships repose and confidence, not in the assistance of earthly honor and
wealth, but in the only providence of the all-righteous and all-righting God.
This noble Lord was a president and pattern of all honorable virtues,
munificence, and affection to Heroic profession and knowledge; I (out of the
obligation of my devoted mind) thought it best to produce his Coat Armor, as
^e pattern of all other Achievements of that degree.

Of Barons.
THe reason of the name of Barons is not so well known in England, as is their
greatness. Some derive it from a Greek word, Baru, signifying, Gravity, as
being men whose presence should represent that which their Title does imply.
The French Heralds take Barons to be Par-homines, Peers, or men of equal
dignity; the Germans, Banner-hires, as being Commanders, displaying Banners of
their own in the Field. These the Saxons called Laford, (whence our Word Lord)
and the Danes call them Thanes.

In ancient times the name of Barons was very large, Citizens of chief Cities,
and Gentlemen of certain possessions enjoying that Title; and about those times
every Earl had a certain number of Barons under them, as every Baron had
Capitaneos under him. But times have altered the limits of this Honor; Barons
being now reputed no less absolute Lords, though lower than Earls: and as a
Gentleman is the first and lowest degree of Nobilitas Minor; so now with us a
Baron is reputed the First step of Nobilitas Major.

In which respect some have thought that in Achievements, none under a Baron,
may use Supporters; but by ancient examples, you shall find that Knights
Bannerets also had that Ornament allowed them, and therefore though a Banneret
has a middle place betwixt ordinary Knights and Barons; yet I have omitted his
Atchiemement, the difference being so little betwixt it and the Barons.
Banneret (or Baronet as some will have it) by some is derived from Banner-rent,
because in their creation, after certain Ceremonies, the top of their Pennons
is rent or cut off, and so reduced into the form of a little Banner, which they
may display as Barons do. But it is more probable that the Germane word,
Banner-hires, was the original both of Barons and Bannerets; which matter
skilleth not much, since this order (as before we touched) is now quite ceased
in this Land.

The Achievement of a Vicount.
LOYAL AV MORT achievement

THis Achievement belongs to the Right Honorable Sir Adam Loftus, Knight,
Viscount Loftus of Ely within the Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Chancellor of the
said Realm, and one of his Majesty's Justices of that Kingdom: who bears,
Diamond, a Cheuron engrailed, Ermine, between three Treefoyl is slipped, Pearl,
and above the same upon an Helm fitting the degree of a Viscount, a Mantle,
Ruby, doubled, Ermine: next above which is placed on a Torce, Pearl and
Diamond, a Boares head erased and erected, Pearl, Armed, Topaz: supported with
two Rain Dear, Ermine, Attired, Or, and for his Motto in a Scrole, LOYAL AV
MORT, expressing his Lordships loyal obedience to his Sovereign.

This Noble Lord was for his many virtues befitting such a dignity worthily
advanced to this degree of Viscount, by our late Sovereign King James in the
twentieth year of his Reign.

TOVT BIEN OV RIEN

THis is the Achievement of the Right Honorable Baptist Noel, Viscount
Cambden, Baron Noel of Ridlington, and Hickes of Ilmington, son and heir to Sir
Edward Noel of Brook in the County of Rutland, Knight, created Baronet 1611.
and afterward Baron of Ridlington, to whom by virtue of the Intaile descended
the Title of Viscount Cambden, conferd on Sir Baptist Hickes who was created
Viscount Hickes of Cambden in the County of Gloucester in the fourth of his
reign, which Baptist Viscount Cambden has issue by his third Lady, Hester
second Daughter and Coheir of Thomas Lord Wotton deceased, the Honorable
Edward Noel Esquire, son and heir, a very hopeful and excellently accomplished
young Gentleman (of whose qualities I am not a more just admirer, then to his
civilities a debtor) now in foreign parts.

He bears two Coats quarterly, First, Topaz, Fretty, Ruby, a Canton, Ermine, by
the name of Noel. Secondly, Ruby, a Fesse, Wavy, between three Flowers de lis,
Topaz, by the name of Hickes, the third as the second, the fourth as the first,
a Scocheon of pretense, Pearl, a Cross formed fitchee at the foot, Diamond, by
the name of Wotton: The Crest on a Wreath of his colors, a Stag passant,
Pearl, Attired, Or, placed on a Viscounts Helmet and Crown supported by two
Bulls, Pearl, Armed and Crined, Diamond, Mantled, Ruby, doubled, Ermines. This
Family derives it self from the ancient Family of this surname at Dalby in
Leicestershire, Hilcot Staffordshire, and Newbold in Derby-shire.

Of a Viscount.
A Viscount is a degree of dignity between a Baron and an Earl; and began
first to be honorary here in England, in the time of our King Henry the sixth,
who by Patent in Parliament made John of Beaumont Viscount of Beaumont.

Here in this Achievement you may observe that the Viscounts Coat Armor is
adorned with a Chaplet of sleighter making than the Coronet which beautifieth
the Earls Escocheon.

NEC ELATA NEC DE IECTA achievement

THis is the Achievement of the Right Honorable Heneage Earl of Winchelsey,
and is thus blazoned. He bears four Coats quarterly. First, Pearl, a Cheuron
between three Griffons passant, Diamond, by the name of Finch. Secondly, Ruby,
three Lions rampant, Topaz, by the name of Fitzherbert. Thirdly, Ruby, a Mule
passant within a Bordure, Pearl, by the name of Moyle. Fourthly, Topaz, a
Greyhound current, Diamond, between three Leopards heads, Sapphire, a Bordure
engrailed, Ruby, by the name of Heneage, and for his Crest on a Wreath of his
colors, a Pegasus current, Pearl, gorged with a Crown, winged and crined,
Topaz, Mantled, Ruby, doubled, Ermine, supported by a Pegasus, as the Crest on
the dexter side, and on the sinister a Griffon, Sable, erected on a Scrole, the
Motto, Nec elata nec dejecta. I could say much of the Antiquity and Eminence of
this Family, but I should seem only to repeat what is obvious in Master
Philpots Kent, and elsewhere, only thus, They are descended in a direct male
line from Henry Fitzherbert Chamberlain to King Henry the first (common
Ancestour also to the Herberts Earls of Penbrook.) And after many Generations
in the time of King Edward the first, from the Manor of Finches in Lidde were
written Fitzherbert alias Fynch, sometimes Herbert dictus Fynch, and since
only Finch, from whence in a continued line of persons eminent in their
Country, descended Sir Moyle Finch Knighted in the time of Queen Elizabeth,
created Baronet 1611. who married Elizabeth Daughter and sole Heir of Sir
Thomas Heneage Vice Chamberlain, Treasurer of the Chamber, Chancellor of the
Duchy, and one of the Privy Council to Queen Eliz. of a very ancient Family of
that surname at Haynton in the County of Lincoln, which Lady in her Widow-hood
was by King James in the one and twentieth year of his reign, created
Viscountess Maidstone, and by K. Chapter in the fourth of his reign, created
Countess of Winchelsey in Sussex, to her and her heirs male. She dying 1634.
the honor fell to her (then) eldest son: Sir Thomas Finch Knight and Baronet,
Earl of Winchelsey, and Viscount Maidstone: who in the year 1639. left his
honor and estate to the succession of his son Heneage now Earl of Winchelsey
1660. who, by his second wife the Lady Mary Daughter of the right Honorable
William Marquess of Hartford, has issue William Viscount Maydstone: Heneage
second son, etc. The said Lady Elizabeth Countess of Winchelsey had diverse
other sons, of whom no issue continues, except from her fourth son Sir Heneage
Finch Knight, Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of London, who (by Frances Daughter
of Sir Edmund Bell) left issue three sons, Gentlemen of signal
accomplishments, Heneage Finch Esquire of the Inner Temple, London, first son,
a Person of eminent abilities and candid integrity: Francis Finch of the same
House, Barrester at Law, second Son, and John Finch third son, hopeful and
ingenious branches of this Noble Family.

Of this Family is also Sir John Finch Knight, sometime Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England, created Lord Finch of Fordwich the sixteenth of King
Charles, living 1659. son of Sir Henry Finch Knight, second Brother of Sir
Moyle above mentioned.

The Achievement of an Earl.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE VIRTVTIS LAVS ACTIO achievement

THis Achievement thus marshalled is here set forth for the peculiar Ensigns
of the Right Noble and truly Honorable Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundell and
Surrey, Primier Earl of England, Earl Marshall of the same Kingdom, Lord
Howard, Mowbray, Segrave, Brus of Gower, Fitz-Alan; Clun, Oswaldstre and
Mautravers, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, and one of the Lords
of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council; which noble Lord bears
Quarterly eight Coats: The first whereof is Ruby, on a Bend between six cross
croslets fitchee, Pearl, an Escocheon, Topaz, thereon a demi Lion pierced
through the mouth with an Arrow within a double Tressure, counter-flowred of
the first, and is the paternall Coat of the noble flourishing Family of the
Howards. The second is, Ruby, Three Lions passant, gardant, Topaz, in chief, a
File of three points, Pearl, which was the Coat Armor of the Lord Thomas of
Brotherton fifth son of King Edward the first, and Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk.
The third is Checkey, Topaz and Sapphire, which was the peculiar Armoriall
Ensigns of the Earls of Warren. The fourth is Ruby, a Lion Rampand, Pearl,
Armed and Langued, Sapphire, by the name of Mowbray. The fifth is Ruby, a Lion
Rampand, Or, Armed and Langued of the first, by the name of Albaney. The sixth
is Pearl, a Chief, Sapphire, by the name of Clun. The seventh is Diamond, a
Fret, Topaz, by the name of Mautravers. The eighth is, Pearl, a Fesse and
Canton, Ruby, by the name Woodvile; all within the Garter: And above the same
upon an Helm a mantle, Ruby, doubled, Ermine, next upon which is placed on a
mount, Emerald, within a Torce, Topaz and Ruby, a Horse passant, Pearl, holding
in his mouth a slip of an Oak fructed, Proper, supported on the dexter side
with a Lion, and on the sinister with an Horse, both Pearl, the last holding in
his mouth an Oaken slip fructed, Proper. And for his Motto to make the same
Achievement absolute, these words in a Scrole, VIRTUTIS LAUS ACTIO.

This Achievement is here proposed as instar Omnium, for a pattern of the
Coat-Armours of Earls, of which this Noble Lord is the Primier of England, and
therefore is his Lordships Achievement the fittest to be here demonstrated:
besides, whose Coat Armor could more properly challenge a due place in a work
of this nature than his who is not only by his office of Earl Marshall, proper
Judge of Honor and Arms, but also in his affection the most Honored Maecenas
and Noble Patron as of all learning in general, so more particularly of this
of Armory: which Earl some years since deceasing, left these honors to Henry
his eldest son, who by Elizabeth Sister of James Stuart late Duke of Richmond,
and Lennox, has left a hopeful issue, viz. Thomas Earl of Arundel, etc. Henry
second son, in whom are concentred the Loyalty, Courage, Learning, Generosity,
and what has else exalted the reputation of his Ancestors in the Kingdom,
Philip third son, Charles fourth son, Edward fifth son, Francis sixth son, and
Bernard seventh son, all living, 1660.

Of Earls.
The Title of an Earl is very ancient, the dignity very honorable, their
calling being in sign of their greatness adorned with the luster of a Coronet,
and themselves enobled with the style of Princes. Comites among the Ancient
Romans were Counselors and near Adherents to their highest Commanders, which
honor and Title being then but temporary and for life, The flowers and points
of a Marquess his Coronet are of even height. The pearled points of the Earls
Coronet are much longer than the intermixed flowers thereof.
is since by tract of time made perpetual and hereditary. The Saxons called
them Ealdermen, the Danes, Earls; they being (as may seem) at first selected
out of the rest of the Nobility for commendation of their Gravity, Wisdom, and
Experience.

The next degree above an Earl is a Marquess, whose Achievement I have omitted
in respect that the same is chiefly differenced from that of an Earls in this,
that the Marquess his Coronet is Meslee, that is, part flowred, and part
Pyramidall pearled, the flowers and points of equal height: and the Earls is
Pyramidall, pointed and pearled, having flowers intermixed, but much shorter
than the pearled points.

PIE REPONE TE
achievement

THis is the Achievement of the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester,
Earl of Kingston upon Hull, Viscount Newarke, Lord Pierrepont, and Maunvers,
and Herris, and is thus blazoned: His Lordship bears eight Coats quarterly:
First, Pearl, semy de Cinquefoiles, Ruby, a Lion Rampant, Diamond, by the name
of the Lord Pierrepont: Secondly Pearl, six Annulets, Diamond, by the name of
the Lord Maunvers. Thirdly Sapphire, three Hedg-hoggs Topaz, by the name of the
Lord Herris. Fourthly Diamond, a Lion Rampant Pearl, Crowned Topaz, which is
the bearing of Lord Segrave. Fifthly Ruby, a Lion within a bordure Engrailed,
Topaz, by the name of Rees ap Teuder Prince of South Wales. Sixthly Diamond,
three garbes Pearl, being the Coat of the King of Lemster. Seventhly Ruby,
three wheat sheaves Topaz, a bordure of Scotland, by the name of Coming Earl
of Northumberland. Eighthly Ruby, a lion rampant a la double queve Pearl, by
the name of the Lord Mantfort Earl of Lycester, for his Crest on a helmet
placed on a Marquesses crown, a Torce or Wreath of his colors, thereon a Fox
passant Ruby, supported by two Lions, Diamond, mantled Ruby, doubled Ermine,
his motto PIE: REPONE: TE. This noble Person not more illustrious by his
quality then by the Advantages of nature and industry, the great assertor of
Learning in this Nation, decended from a noble family of signal eminence out
of which is Robert de Petraponte sive Pierpont, who was called by writ among the
Peers of England to the Parliament by King Edw. 3. and afterward in process of
time, Robert Pierpont was Created Viscount Newarke and Lord Pierpont,
afterward Created Earl of Kingston upon Hull, after whose death, our
Sovereign King Charles conferd the honor of Marquess of Dorchester, on Henry
Earl of Kingston his Son, the present Inheritor of these Titles, ennobled also
by his Mother, who was Gertrude, Daughter and Coheir of Henry Talbot, Son of
George, and brother to Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury: Lord Talbot, Strange,
Furnivall, Verdon, and Lovetoft.

FOY POVR DEVOIR
achievement

THis is the Achievement of the Right Honorable William Seymour, Marquess and
Earl of Hartford, Baron Seymour, and Beauchamp invested in the Title of
Marquess Hartford, by King Charles June the third, 1641. in the seventeenth
year of his reign, Grandchild and Heir to Edward (created Earl of Hartford in
the first year of Queen Elizabeth) by Katharine Daughter and Heir of Henry Gray
Duke of Suffolk, and Frances his Wife, eldest Daughter and Coheir of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary his Wife, Queen Dowager of France, second
Sister, and (at last) Coheir of King Henry the eighth, which Earl Edward was
Son of Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset, etc. Brother to Queen Jane, Mother of
King Edward 6. to whom he was Protector. He bears six Coats quarterly. First,
Topaz, on a Pile, Ruby, between six Flowers de lis, Sapphire, three Lions of
England, which was an Agumentation of King Henry the eighth. Secondly, Ruby,
two wings impaled, Topaz, ( Milles calls them two wings volant, Brook two wings
conjoynd in Fesse, and another two wings in Lure) by the name of Seymour.
Thirdly, Varry, by the name of Beauchampe. Fourthly, Pearl, three demi Lions
Rampant, Ruby. Fifthly, per Bend, Pearl and Ruby, three Roses counter-changed.
Sixthly and lastly, Pearl, on a Bend, Ruby, three Leopards heads, Topaz, on
which a Marquesses Crown, thereon a Helmet of the same quality, then for his
Crest out of a Crown a Phoenix sacrificing her self, all proper, Mantled, Ruby,
doubled, Ermine, Supported on the dexter side by an Unicorn Pearl, gorged with
a Crown, chained, Armed and Crined, Topaz, on the sinister side by a Bull,
Sapphire, gorged with a Crown and String reflexed, Armed and Crined, Topaz, his
Motto, Foy pour devoir, these have been the ancient quarterings of this noble
Family, and are continued, though they have the same right as above appears to
Gray, Brandon, and the Arms of England also with a due difference.

FIDEI COTICVLA CRVX achievement

THis is the Achievement of the High and Mighty Prince George, Duke, Marquess,
and Earl of Buckingham, Earl of Coventry, Viscount Villiers, and Baron of
Whaddon, whose Family were of signal note in Leicestershire for many hundred
years: whose Marshallings are thus blazoned. He bears six Coats quarterly.
First, Pearl, on a Cross, Ruby, five Escallops, Topaz, which was an
Augmentation (as I am informed) conferd upon one of this Family for service in
the holy Land, as appears by the bearing. Secondly, Diamond, a Fesse between
three Cinquefoyles, Pearl, by the name of Villiers. Thirdly, Topaz, two Bars,
Sapphire, a Chief, quarterly, two Flowers de lis of France, and a Lion of
England, by the name of Manors. Fourthly, Ruby, three Waterbougets, Pearl.
Fifthly, Sapphire, a Catherne Wheel, Topaz. Sixthly, Topaz, two Cheurons, and a
Border, Ruby, by the name of Trusbut, a Martlet for a difference, which four
last Coats are borne by his grace as the principal of many he may quarter in
right of his Mother Katharine Daughter and sole heir of Francis Manors sixth
Earl of Rutland, Lord Roos of Hamelake, Belvoir and Trusbut, etc. And for his
Crest on a Crown Ducall, and Helmet befitting that degree, a Lion Rampant,
Pearl, Crowned, Topaz, standing on a Wreath or Torce of his colors, Mantled,
Ruby, and Ermine, supported by a Horse on the dexter side, daple Gray, and on
the sinister by a Stag, Pearl, Attired, Proper, his Motto, Fidei coticula Crux.

The chief Attributes of God are, his Power, Wisdom, Goodness; in all which
the nearer any King comes to the imitation of that prime Idea, the more truly
does he deserve that glorious name, and express the noble nature of a King.
Which all Countries (in part) have showed by the several Titles given to their
Sovereigns: most Nations calling them, Reges, for government, which cannot be
as it should be, without the said three Regal properties; and the Saxons (our
ancestors) call them Kings, of Cynning, a word signifying both cunning or
wisdom, and also Power, whereby all Kings can do much more than good Kings
will do.

The beginning of Kingly power was from the first created man, who was made an
absolute (but fatherly) Sovereign over all; and the necessity of such a Chief,
was so great even in the eye of Nature, that as there are no flocks or herds
of beasts but have one leader of their own kind, so there is no Nation so
brutish or barbarous, but have found the necessity and use of having a King
over them, to rule them and administer justice to them, which is the prime
office of a King: and that such has always been the office of Kings of this
our Island, our own ancient and learned Lawyers testify: For Rex (says
Bracton) non alius debet judicare, si solus ad id sufficere posset, etc. Whence
a latter learned Lawyer gathers most truly, that though the King substitute
other to minister justice under him, yet himself is not discharged of that
authority, when himself please (as often as our Kings have done) in person to
sit and take notice of causes; and likewise the Royal Oath at his Coronation
runs, Facies, fieri in omnibus judiciis tuis aequam and certam justitiam,
etc. And that such was the Kings absolute Jurisdiction in this Kingdom before
the Conquest also, the same Author so copiously proves, that it is ignorance
to deny it, and folly to enlarge the proof of it. And yet says Aeneas Silvius.
It is the manner of Kings in writing to use the plural number, as Mandamus,
Volumus, Facimus, etc. As appears, Epist. 105. where he says, Reges cum
scribunt, etsi dominatum habent ut quicquid placet, Legis vigorem habeat; ea
tamen moderatione utuntur cum scribunt, ut aliquid praecipientes non se solos
videri velint fecisse, sed cum aliorum consilio. They do temper their Sovereign
Jurisdiction with such moderation, that it may appear they prescribe and
command not without counsel and advice of others.

Touching the greatness of the Kings of this Island and precedence before any
other Kings, these are two main reasons: First, that, the King of this Land
Lucius, was the first Christian King of the world, as also Constantine the
first Emperor, publicly planting Christianity. Secondly, for that of all
Kings Christian the King of Britain is the most (and indeed only) absolute
Monarch, he being no way subordinate to any Potentate, Spiritual or Temporal,
in causes either Ecclesiastical or Civil, as other Kings are, through their
own default.

Moreover the King of England is both Anointed, as no other King is, but only
the French, of Sicilie, and of Jerusalem: and he is also crowned, which honor
the Kings of Spain, Portugal, Arragon, Navarre, and many other Princes have
not. God grant that as our Country has been blessed with prerogatives above
all other Kingdoms, and with the blessing both of all earthly felicities and
Heavenly graces, beyond any other, and with more puissant, victorious, learned,
religious Kings than all the people whatsoever (as the world sees at this day)
so we may go beyond all Nations in thankfulness to so merciful a God, and in
dutifulness to so gracious a Sovereign; whose Crown let it flourish on his
Royal head, and on his Posterities till the Heavens leave to move, and Time be
no more. Amen.

FINIS.
To the Generous Reader.
My Task is past, my Care is but begun;
My pains must suffer censures for reward:
Yet hope I have, now my great pains are done,
That gentle Spirits will quite them with regard.
For whom my love to Gentry here they find.
My love with love they must requite by kind.
But if th'ungentle Brood of Envies Grooms,
Misdoom my pains, no force, they do their kind.
And I Will do mine which is to scorn their Dooms,
That use unkindly a kind wel-willing mind.
Thus I resolve: Look now who will hereon,
My Task is past, and all my Care is gone.
A Conclusion.
BUt He alone, that is free from all defect,
And only cannot err (true Wisdoms Sire)
Can, without error, all in All effect:
But weak are men in acting their desire.
This Work is filde; but not without a flaw;
Yet filde with Pain, Care, Cost, and all in all:
But (as it were by force of Natures Law)
It has some faults, which on the Printers fall.
No Book so blessed that ever escaped the Press
(For ought I ever read, or heard) without;
Correctors fulst of Art, and Carefullnesse,
Cannot prevent it; Faults will flee about.
But here is not many: so, the easier may
Each gentle Reader rub away their stains:
Then (when the verdall Blots were done away)
I hope their profit will exceed their pains.
Besides it may be thought a fault in me,
To have omitted some few differences
Of Coronets of highest and low'st degree;
But this I may not well a fault confess:
For, twixt a Duke and Marquess Coronets
Is so small But (now) in Mr. Garters Book of honor Military and Civil, the
difference (such as it is) does appear: to which I refer the Reader.
ods as it is scarce discerned,
As here in the Earl and Vicounts frontilets
May by judicious Artists now be learned.
Then these are faults that Reason does excuse;
And were committed wilfully, because
Where is no difference there is no abuse,
To Grace, Arms, Nature, order, or their Laws.
This breaks no rule of Order, though there be
An Order in Degrees concerning This:
If Order were infringed; then should I flee
From my chief purpose, and my Mark should miss.
ORDER is Natures beauty: and the way
To Order is by Rules that Art has found:
Defect and excess in those Rules bewray,
Order's defective, Nature's much deformed.
But ORDER is the Center of that GOD
That is unbounded, and All circumscribes;
Then, if this Work has any likelihood
Of the least good, the good to it ascribes.
In Truth, Grace, Order, or in any wise
That tends to Honor, Virtue, Goodness, Grace;
I have mine ends: and then it shall suffice,
If with my Work I end my vital Race.
And, with the Silke-worme, work me in my Tomb,
As having done my duty in my Room.
Finis Coronat Opus.
JOH. GVVILLIM.

Errata.
PAge 60. l. 27. read of John Highlord. p. 71. l. 9. r. Azure on 2 bars, Or. 6
Martlets Gules. p. 81. l. 22. r. Alleyn. p. 84. l. 1. and 11. r. Croslets. p.
84. l. 17. r. Theobalds. p. 86. l. 1. Cromwell. p. 114. l. 10. r. chief indented
Sable. p. 120. and 121. the cut of Bacon and St. John are one mistaken for the
other. p. 134. l. 22. r. Agincourt. p. 183. the cut in L'estranges Coat should
be with the Lions passant. and not gardant. p. 186. l. 9. omitted which, r. by
John Churchill of Grays Inn Esquire and also of Winston Churchill of Mintern in
Com. Dorcet, Esquire p. 188. l. 6. r. Parliament sitting. p. 188. l. 32. r. Henry.
p. 189. l. 27. r. Edmond. p. 190. l. 2. r. armed and langued, Gules. p. 351. l.
6. r. Poplers. p. 379. l. 18. r. Cheveron. p. 381. l. 9. r. for this brief to
brief. p. 386, l. 8. r. Sole daughter and Coheir. p. 386. l. 22. and 28, r.
Staresmore.

FINIS.
AN EXACT REGISTER Of all the KNIGHTS of the GARTER (together with the Blazons
of their several Coats) from the first Installment to the last.

AS ALSO An Account or Register of the Names and Arms of all the BARONETS OF
ENGLAND, From the first Institution to the last.

TO The most illustrious and truly noble, the Right Honorable ALGERNON PERCY,
Earl of Northumberland, Lord PERCY, LUCY, POININGS, FITZPAYN, BRYAN, and
LATIMER, Companion of the noble Order of the Garter, formerly Lord high
Admiral of ENGLAND, General of all the Forces in the Expedition 1640. and one
of the Privy Council to his late Majesty, etc.
This view of the Names and Arms of all the Knights of that Noble Order, (in
whose Registers your Lordships Ancestors have been so eminent, and are so
frequently Recorded) is humbly dedicated to your Honors acceptance, by,

my Lord, Your most humble Servant Richard Blome.

THE Fellowship of the Order of the Garter is of all others by far the most
honorable, making Knights, and sometime those of the lesser Nobility, not
only equal to Noble men at home, but Companions to Kings themselves, and
Emperors: A fellowship of all the Orders of the Christian World most ancient
and famous; Encircling all Titles and Degrees of Nobility from the Throne
downward, as will appear by the following account, which Order was first
established by that victorious Prince King Edward the third, in the 23 year of
his reign, and by him called the blue Garter, but commonly the Garter,
appointing his successors the Kings of England as chief, and 25 Knights which
he called Fellows or Companions of the Order of the Garter, or St. George,
whose day, viz. 23. April, was by them celebrated with much grandeur and
magnificence, at Windsore, the birthplace of that great Prince. To omit their
Rights and Ceremonies, their Statutes and Habits, I shall only note, beside
their grand Collar, they on ordinary days are distinguished and known by a blue
Garter, whereto on their breast is affixt the figure of Saint George and the
Dragon, and about their left leg they wear a blue Garter or Band, with studs,
buckles, and these French words of Gold, HONI SOIT QVI MALY PENSE Much may be
said in honor of this great Dignity, but let the worth and estimation it had
in Europe appear in the following Register, by the eminence of the Companions
of this great Order. An account of whose names and Coat-Armours I shall
adventure to give the world, as faithfully as I can, although there be many
whose abilities and name would have been more advantageous to the Work, then

Fr. Nower.

AN EXACT REGISTER OF All the KNIGHTS of the GARTER.
1. EDWARD the third King of England and France Quarterly France and England,
viz. Azure, semy de Flower de lis, Or, and Gules, three Lions passant gardant,
Or. 2 Henry Plantaginet, surnamed of Monmouth, Duke of Lancaster, and the first
Duke that ever was created in England, England, a Label of France. 3 Peter de
Foix, Captain Bouche quarterly of Foix and Bearne, viz. Or, 3 Pallets Gules.
Secondly, Or, two Cowes passant, Gules, with collars and bells Azure. 4 William
Mountacute Earl Salisbury, etc. Argent, 3 Lozenges in Fesse Gules. 5 John de
L^sle Gules, a Lion passant gardant, Or, crowned Argent. 6 Sir John Beauchamp
Knight, Gules, a Fesse between six Martlets Or 7 Sir Hugh Courtney Knight, Or,
three Torteauxes. 8 Sir John Gray of Codnor Knight, Barry of 6 Argent, and
Azure, in chief three Torteauxes. 9 Sir Miles Stapylton Knight, Argent, a Lion
Rampant Sable. 10 Sir Hugh Wrotesely, Or, three Piles Sable, a Canton Ermine.
11 Sir John Chandois, Or, a pile Gules. 12 Sir Otho Holland Knight, Azure, semy
de Flower de lis, a Lion Rampant gardant Argent. 13 Sir Sanchy Dampredicourt,
Knight, Gules, three bars humet Argent. 14 Edward Prince of Wales, called the
Black Prince, Quarterly France and England, a Label Argent. 15 Thomas Beauchamp
Earl of Warwick, Gules, a Fesse between six Croslets Or. 16 Ralph Stafford
Earl of Stafford. Or, a Cheuron Gules. 17 Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Barry
of 6. Or, and Azure, on a chief of the second, a pale between two Esquires,
Base dexter and sinister of the first, an ^nescocheon Argent. 18 Sir
Bartholomew de Burgherst, or Burwash. Knight, Gules, a Lion Remp^nt with two
tayls Or. 19 John Lord Mohun Gules, a M^^nch Ermine, the Hand proper holding a
Flower de lis, Or. 20 Sir Thomas Holland Knight, after Earl of Kent, vide 12.
21 Sir Richard Fitz-Simon Knight, Azure, a Lion Rampant Ermine. 22 Sir Thomas
Wale Knight, Or, a Lion Rampant Gules. 23 Sir Neele Loringe Knight, quarterly
Argent and Gules, a bend of the second. 24 Sir James Audeley Knight, Gules, a
Fret, Or, a border Argent. 25 Sir Henry E^me Knight, Or, a bar and demi Lion
issuant, Gules. 26 Sir Walter Paveley, Barry of 6. Or, and Sable, a bend
Argent.
The founders being many of them dead, others were elected in their rooms.
27 RIchard of Bourdeaux after King of England, by the name of King Richard the
second, France and England quarterly. 28 Lionel of Antwerp, Duke of Clarence
Earl of Vlster, second son of King Edward the third, France and England,
quarterly, a Label of three points, Argent, as many Cantons Gules. 29 John
called of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, etc. third son to King Edward, France and
England quarterly, a Label Ermine. 30 Edmond of Langley 4th. son to King Edward
the third, Earl of Cambridge, and Duke of York. Quarterly France and England,
a Label Argent, charged with nine Torteauxes. 31 John Montfort (the valiant)
Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond. Checky, Or, and Azure, a border of
England, a Canton, Ermine. 32 Humprey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Azure, a bend
inter two Cottizes, and six Lions rampant, Or. 33 William de Bohun Earl of
Northampton, brother to Humphrey, Azure on a Bend cottized, between six Lions
rampant, Or, 3. Mullets, Sable. 34 John Hastings Earl of Pembrook. Or, a Maunch
Gules. 34 Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, vide 15. 35 Richard Fitzallan Earl
of Arundell. Gules, a Lion Rampant, Or. 36 Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk.
Sable, a Cross engrailed, Or. 37 Hugh Stafford Earl of Stafford, bears as 16.
38 Ingeram de Coucy, Earl of Bedford and Soisons. Barry of 6. Varry and Gules.
39 Guiscard d'Angolesm, Earl of Huntington. Or, billetty, a Lion Rampant,
Azure. 40 Edward Lord Spencer. Quarterly Argent and Gules, in the second and
third a Fret, Or, over all a bend Sable. 41 William Baron Latimer. Gules, a
Cross patee, Or. 42 Reginold Baron Cobham of Sterborow. Gules, on a cheuron,
Or, 3 Estoils, Sable. 43 John Lord Nevill of Raby. Gules, a Saltier, Argent. 44
Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton. Or, 3. Piles, Gules a Canton, Ermine. 45 Sir
Walter Manny Knight, Banneret, Sable, a Cross voided, Argent. 46 Sir Thomas
Vfford, Knight. Sable, a Cross engrail'd, Or. 47 Sir Thomas Felton Knight.
Gules, two Lions passant, Ermine. 48 Sir Francis Van-Hall Knight. Azure, a Bend
Crenelle, Argent. 49 Sir Allan Boxhull, Knight. Or, a Lion Rampant, double
Quevee, Azure, Fretty, Argent. 50 Sir Richard Pembruge, Knight. Argent, a
Chief, Azure, a Bend Fusillee, Gules, Sur le tout. 51 Sir Thomas Vtred, Knight.
Or, on a Cross Flory, Gules; three Escallops of the Field. 52 Sir Thomas
Banester Knight. Argent, a Cross Patee, Sable. 53 Sir Richard la Vache,
Knight. Atgent, 3. Bulls heads cabossed Sable. 54 Sir Guy de Bryan. Or, three
Piles Azure.
Richard the second, King of England began his Reign.
55 THomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, 4th. son to King Edward the third.
France and England, a Border, Argent. 56 Henry of Bolinbrook, Earl of Derby,
Duke of Hereford, Lancaster, after King of England, vide 29. 57 William Duke of
Guelderland. Azure, a Lion Rampant, Or. 58 Will: of Henault Duke of Holland,
and Henault, and Zealand. Quarterly, the first fourth, Or a Lion Rampant,
Sable; the second and third, Or, a Lion Rampant, Gules. 59 Thomas Holland, Earl
of Kent, whose Grandfather, vide 20. bears, England a Border Argent. York made
him bear Edw: the Confessors Arms impaled with these. 60 John Holland, Earl of
Huntington, and Duke of Exeter, Uncle to the above named Thomas, half brother
to King Richard the 2d. England a Border of France. 61 Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, Earl of Nottingham. Gules, a Lion Rampant Argent. 62 Edward
Plantaginet, Earl of Rutland, and Cork, Duke of Albemart, and after Duke of
York. See his father No 30. 63 Michael De la-poool, Earl of Suffolk, bears,
Azure a Fesse between three Leopards heads, Or. 64 William Scroop Earl of
Wiltshire, Azure, a Bend, Or. 65 William Beauchamp, Lord Abergaveny. Gules, a
Fesse inter six Croslets, Or. 66 John Lord Beaumont. France, a Lion Rampant,
Or. 67 William Lord Willoughby. Or, Fretty, Azure. 68 Richard Lord Gray. Barry
of 6 Argent and Azure, in chief 3 Torteauxes, a Label, Ermine. 69 Nicholas
Sarnesfield Knight. Azure, an Eagle displayed, Argent, Crowned Or. 70 Philip de
la Vache. Argent, 3 Testes de Vaches Sable, as 53. 71. Sir Robert Knolles
Knight. Azure, Crusulee, a Cross Moline, Voided, Or. 72 Guy de Bryan Comme 54.
73 Sir Simon Burley Knight, Or, three Bars, Sable, in chief, two Pallets of the
second, an Inescocheon, Barry, Or and Gules. 74 John Devereux Knight, Argent, a
Fesse, Gules, in chief three Torteauxes. 75 Brian Stapleton, vide 8. 76 Richard
Burley, as 73. 77 Peter Courtney, as 7. 78 John Burley, as the 73. 79 John
Bourchier, Argent, a Cross engrailed, Gules, between four Waterbougets, Sable.
80 Thomas Grandson, Paly of six, Argent and Azure, on a Bend, Gules, three
Escallops, Or. 81 Lewis Clifford, Checky, Or and Azure, a Fesse, Gules. 82
Robert Dunstavill. 83 Robert of Namur, Or, a Lion Rampant, Sable, suppressed by
a batune, Gules.
Henry the fourth began his reign, of whom see.
84 HEnry Prince of Wales after King by the name of Henry the fifth, France and
England, quarterly. 85 Thomas of Lancaster, Duke of Clarence, second son,
France and England, a Label of three points, Ermine, on each point a Canton,
Gules. 86 John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, third son, France and
England, and a Label of five points, per Pale, Ermine, of France. 87 Humphrey
Duke of Gloucester, fourth Son, Quarterly, France and England, a Border, Argent.
88 Thomas Beauford, Duke of Exeter, son of John of Gaunt, France and England,
Quarterly, a Border gobony, Argent and Azure. 89 Robert Count Palatine, Duke of
Bavaria, Quarterly, Sable, a Lion Rampant, Crowned, Or, and Paly Bendy, Argent
and Azure. 90 John Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, comme son friar 88. 91 Thomas
Fitz-Allan Earl of Arundell, Gules, a Lion Rampant, Or. 92 Edmund Stafford,
Earl of Stafford, Or, a Cheuron, Gules. 93 Edmund Holland, Earl of Kent,
England, a Border, Argent, 20. and 60. 94 R^lf Nevill, Earl of Westmerland,
Gules, a Saltier, Argent.
Barons.
95 GIlbert Lord Talbot, Gules, a Lion Rampant, within a Border engrailed, Or.
96 Gilbert Lord Roos, Gules, three Waterbougets, Argent. 97 Thomas Lord Morley,
Argent, a Lion Rampant, Sable, Crowned, Or. 98 Edward Lord Powis, Or, a Lions
Gambe or Paw coupee, in Bend, Gules. 99 John Lord Lovell. Barry, Nebulee of
six, Or and Gules. 100 Hugh Lord Burnell, Argent, a Lion Rampant, Sable,
Crowned, Or. 101 John Cornwall Knight, Lord Fanhope. Argent, a Lion Rampant,
Gules, Crowned, Or, a Border, Sable, Beazanty. 102 William of Arundell Knight,
Gules, a Lion Rampant, Or. 103 Sir John Stanley Steward and great Master of the
household, Argent on a Bend, Azure, three Bucks heads cabossed, Or. 103 Robert
Vmfreville, Gules, Crusilee, patee, a Cinquefoyle, Or. 104 Sir Thomas Ramston
Constable of the Tower, Gules, three Rams heads, Argent. 105 Sir Thomas
Erpingham, Vert, an Inescocheon within an Orle of Martlets, Argent. 106 Sir
John Sulby, Ermine, four Bars, Gules.
Henry the fifth began his reign, 1412.
107 SIgismund King of Hungaria, Bohemia, Marquess of Bradenburg, King of
Romans, Quarterly, Hungary and Bohemy, an Escocheon of Pretense of Bradenburg.
108 John King of Portugal, Argent, five Escocheons in Cross, Azure, each
charged with five Besants Salter-wise, a Border, Gules, thereon eight Castles,
Or. 109 Christien King of Denmark, Or, semy de men's hearts, Gules, three Lions
passant gardant, Azure, crowned of the first. 110 Philip Le bon, second of the
name Duke of Burgundy, quarterly, the first Austria modern, viz. Gules, a
Fesse, Argent, the second France, a Border gobony, Argent and Gules, being
Burgundy modern, the third Burgundy ancient, Bendy, Or and Azure, the fourth
Brabant, Sable, a Lion Rampant, Or, over all Flanders, Or, a Lion Rampant,
Sable. 111 John Holland Earl of Huntington, Duke of Exeter, England, a Border
of France. 112 William de la Poole Earl, after Marquess, lastly Duke of
Suffolk. Azure, a Fesse, between three Leopards heads, Or. 113 John Mowbray,
Earl Marshall, after Duke of Norfolk. Gules, a Lion Rampant, Argent. 114 Thomas
Montague, Earl of Salisbury. Argent, three Lozenges in Fesse, Gules. 115
Richard de Vere, Earl of Oxford. Quarterly, Gules and Or, in the first, a
Mullet, Argent. 116 Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick Gules, a Fesse between
six Croslets, Or. 117 Thomas Lord Camoys. Or, on a Chief, Gules, three
Beasants. 118 John Lord Clifford. Checky, Or and Azure, a Fesse, Gules. 119
Robert Lord Willoughby. Or, Fretty, Azure. 120 William Philip, Lord Bardolfe.
Azure, three Cinque^oyles, Or. 121 Henry Lord Fitzhugh. Azure, three Cheurons
interlac'd. Or. 122 Lewis Robsart, Lord Bourchier. Vert, a Lion Rampant, Or,
vulned in the shoulder. 123 Hugh-Stafford, Lord Bourchier. Or, a Cheuron,
Gules, a Border engrailed, Sable. 124 Walter Lord Hungerford. Sable, two Bars
in chief three Rondels, Argent. 125 Sir Simon Felbridge. Or, a Lion Rampant,
alibi saliant, Gules. 126 Sir John Gray, Knight. Barry of six, Argent and
Azure, in chief, three Torteauxes. 127 Sir John Dabrigcourt. Ermine, three Bars
humer, Gules. 128 Sir John Robsart, as above. 129 Franck Van Clux, a German
Lord. Quarterly, per Fesse, embatteled, Gules and Or, in the second and third,
a Branch, Vert. 130 Sir William Harington. Sable, a Fret, Argent. 131 Sir John
Blount, Knight. Barry, Nebulee, Or and Sable. 132 King Henry the sixth began
his reign 1422. Quarterly, France and England. 133 ALbert Duke of Austria, etc.
after Emperor, Gules, a Fesse, Argent. 134 Frederick, Duke of Austria,
Emperor, his brother, Gules, a Fesse, Argent. 134. Edward King of Portugal, as
above 108. 135 Alphonsus King of Arragon. Or, 4. Pales, Gules. 136 Casimir King
of Poland. Quarterly, the 1. and 4. Gules, an Eagle, Argent. The second and
third Gules, a Lithuanian horsman Proper. An Inescocheon of Sweden, Azure, 3
Crowns, Or. 137 Edward Prince of Wales, only child to King Henry the sixth.
Quarterly, France and England, a Label, Argent. 138 Peter of Portugal, Duke of
Combre, son of King John, as above. 139 Henry of Portugal, Duke of Visco, as
his brother Peter. 140 Conrad Duke of Brunswick. Quarterly, Gules, two Lions
passant, gardant, Or, and Or, a Lion Rampant, Azure, an Orle of men's hearts,
Gules. 141 Richard Duke of York. Quarterly, France and England, a Label,
Gules, charged with nine Torteauxes. 142 John Beaufort, Earl, after Duke of
Somerset. Quarterly France and England, a Border, gobony, Argent and Azure. 143
Edmund his brother, Earl of Moriton in Normandy, after Duke of Somerset. 144
Jasper Earl of Penbrook, Duke of Bedford. Quarterly France and England, a
Border, Azure, Martlette, Or. 145 John Moubray, Duke of Norfolk. Gules, a Lion
Rampant, Argent. 146 Humphrey Earl of Stafford, after Duke of Buckingham. Or, a
Cheuron, Gules. 147 Gaston de Foix, Earl of Longueville, quarterly Foix and
Bearn. The first, Argent, two Cowes passant, Gules, Armed, and with bells about
their necks, Or, the second Or, 3 Pallets, Gules, a Label (over all) Sable,
charged with 15 Escallops, Argent. 148 John de Foix, Earl of Candalia, alibi
Kendall, bears as his brother. 149 Alvarus d'Almada, Count of Aurange. Or, a
Cross, Gules, a Border compony, Argent, and the second. He also bare Azure on
a Bend, Gules, between 2 Eagles Sable, three Croslets Fitchee, Or. 150 John
Fitz-Allan, sixth Earl of Arundell of that surname. Gules, a Lion rampant, Or.
151 Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury. Gules, a Saltier, Argent, a Label,
gobony, Argent and Azure. 152 Richard Nevill, called Make-King, or the great
Earl of Warwick, son of Richard Earl of Salisbury, as his Father. 153 John
Lord Talbot, after Earl of Shrewsbury. Gules, a Lion Rampant, within a Border
engrailed, Or. 154 John Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, his son. 155 James
Butler, Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond. Or, a chief indented, Azure. 156 William
Nevill (younger son of Ralph, first Earl of Westmerland) Lord Falconbride,
afterward Earl of Kent. Gules, a Saltier, Argent, a Mullet, Sable. 157 Richard
Woodvile, Earl Rivers. Argent, a Fesse and Canton, Gules. 158 Henry, Viscount
Bourchier, after Earl of Essex. Argent, a Cross engrailed Gules, between four
waterbougets, Sable. 159 John Beaumont, Viscount Beaumont, France, and Lion
Rampant, Or. 160 John Sutton, Lord Dudly: Or, a Lion Rampant, with two tayls,
Vert. 161 Thomas Lord Scales. Gules, 6. Escallops, Argent. 3. 2. 1. 162 John
Lord Gray of Ruthin, Barry of 6. Argent and Azure, in chief, three Torteauxes.
163 Ralph, Lord Butler of Sudely. Gules, a Fesse Checky, Argent and Sable,
between six Croslets, Or. 164 Lionell Lord Wells. Or, a Lion Rampant double
quevee, Sable. 165 John Bourchier, Lord Berners, bears as 158. 166 Thomas Lord
Stanly. Argent, on a Bend, Azure, three Bucks heads caboshed, Or. 167 William
Lord Bonvill. Sable, six Mullets, Argent, 3. 2. 1. 168 John Lord Wenlocke.
Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Blackamores heads erased, Sable. 169 John Lord
Beauchamp of Powiche. Gules, a Fesse between six Croslets, Or. 170 Thomas Lord
Hoo. Quarterly, Sable and Argent. 171 Sir John Ratcliffe. Argent, a Bend
engrailed, Sable. 172 Sir John Fastolfe. Quarterly, Or, and Azure, on a Bend,
Gules, 3 Croslets, Argent. 173 Thomas Kiriel, or Cryol: Or, two Cheurons and a
Canton, Gules. 174 Edward Hall: Argent, a Cheuron engrailed between 3 Talbots
heads erased, Sable. 175 King Edward the fourth began his Reign 1460. Quarterly
France and England. 176 FErdinand, King of Sicily and Naples. Or, four Pales,
Gules, a Batune Sinister, Argent. 177 John King of Portugal: Comme, 108. 178
Charles Duke of Burgundy: Vide 110. 179 Francis Sfortia, Duke of Millane:
Argent, a Serpent palewayes, or erect, devouring an Infant issuant, Proper. 180
Hercules d'Esti, Duke of Ferrara: Quarterly the first and 4th. Or, an Eagle,
Sable, the second and third Bendy, Or, and Azure. 181 Richard Duke of York,
the Kings second son: Quarterly France and England, a Label, Argent, thereon 9
Torteauxes. 182 Richard Duke of Gloucester, afterward King, quarterly of France
and England, a Label, Ermine, charged with 3 Cantons, Gules. A certain French
Author, and diverse catalogues English, bring in George Duke of Clarence, but I
think them mistaken. 183 John Moubray Duke of Norfolk: Gules, a Lion Rampant,
Argent. 184 John Lord Howard, after Duke of Norfolk: Gules, a bend between
six Croslets, Fitchee, Argent. 185 John de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk: Azure, a
Fesse between 3 Leopards heads, Or. 186 Humphrey Stafford, Duke of Buckingham:
Or, a Cheuron, Gules. 187 John Nevill, Marque Mountacute: as his father, with a
Cressent, vide 152. 188 Thomas Gray, Marq. Dorcet. Barry of 6. Argent and
Azure, in Chief 3 Torteauxes, a Label, Ermine. 189 James Douglas, Earl Douglas,
in Scotland: Azure, a Lion Rampant, Argent, crowned, Or. 190 William
Fitz-Allan, 8th. Earl of Arundell: Comme son Friar. 150. 191 Thomas Lord
Maltravers (his son) after ninth Earl of Arundel. 192 Anthony Lord Scale, after
Earl Rivers: Comme son pere. 157. 193 William Lord Herbert, after Earl of
Penbrook: Per pale, Azure and Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Argent. 194 John Stafford
Earl of Wiltshire, younger son of Humphrey Duke of Bucks: Comme son pere. 186.
195 Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland: Or, a Lion rampant, Azure, quartered
with Gules, 3 Lucyes hauriant, Argent. 196 John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester:
Argent, a Saltier engrailed, Gules. 197 Galliard Duras. Or, a Lion rampant,
Azure, over all a Bendlet, Argent. 198 John Lord Scroop of Bolton. Or, a Bend,
Azure. 199 Walter Devereux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley. 200 Walter Blount, Lord
Mountjoy, Barry Nebulee: Or, and Sable. 201 William Lord Hastings: Argent, a
Maunch, Sable. 202 Sir John Astly: Azure, a Cinquefoyl, Argent, a Border
engrailed, Or. 203. Sir William Chamberlain: Gules, a Cheuron between 3
Escallops, Or. 204 Sir William Parr: Argent, 2 Bars, Azure, a Border engrailed,
Sable. 205 Sir Robert Harecourt. Gules, two Bars, Or. 206 Sir Thomas
Montgomery. Gules, a Cheuron between 3 Flowerdeluces, Or.
207 Edward the fifth began his Reign (we cannot say came to the Crown) which
continued 40 days only, or thereabout, under whom no Knights of the Garter
were made. France and England quarterly.
207 Richard the third, King of England, began his Reign, June 22. 1483. France
and England quarterly. 208 THomas Howard, Earl of Surry, after Duke of
Norfolk, as his Father. 184. 209 Thomas Lord Stanly, after Earl of Derby. 166.
210 Francis Viscount Lovel. Barry Nebulee, Or, and Gules. 211 Sir John Coniers:
Azure, a Maunch, Or. 212 Sir Richard Ratcliff, Knight: Arg. a Bend engrailed,
Sable. 213 Sir Thomas Burgh: Azure, three Flowerdelis, Ermine. 214 Sir Richard
Tunstall. Sable, three Combs, Argent.
215 Henry the seventh began his reign, 1485. France and England, Quarterly.
216 MAximilian King of the Romans, after Emperor: Or, an Eagle with two head^,
Sable, on the breast an Inescocheon, Gules, charged with a Fesse, Argent. 217
John King of Portugal, comme. 108. 218 John King of Denmark, comme 109. 219
Philip King of Castile, and son to the Emperor. Quarterly, Castile and Leon.
220 Alphonsus, Duke of Calabria and Naples, King of Sicily and Jerusalem.
Quarterly the first Auragon, the 2d. Calabria, viz. Argent, a Cross potent,
Sable. 221 Arthur Prince of Wales. France and England, a Label Argent. 222
Henry Duke of York: Comme son friar, with 9 Torteauxes. 223 Vibaldus, or
Hubault, Count of Montferrat, Duke of Vrbin. 224 Edward Stafford, Duke of
Buckingham: Comme son Pere 186. 225 Thomas Gray, Marquess of Dorcet: Comme son
Pere 188. 226 John Vere, the 13th. vel 14th. Earl of Oxford. Quarterly, Gules
and Or, in the first a Mullet, Argent. 227 Henry Piercy, Earl of
Northumberland: Comme son Pere 195. 228 George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury: Comme
154. 229 Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex: Comme 158. 230 Richard Gray, Earl of
Kent: Comme 162. 231 Edward Courtney, Earl of Devonshire. Or, 3 Torteauxes. 232
Henry Lord Stafford, after Earl of Wiltshire: Comme son Friar 224. 233 Edmund
de la Pool, Earl of Suffolk: Comme son Pere 185. 234 Charles Somerset, Knight
Banneret, after Earl of Worcester. Quarterly, France and England, a Border
gobony, Argent and Azure, a Batune, Sinister, Argent. 235 Gerald Fitzgerald,
Earl of Kildare. Argent, a Saltire, Gules.
Viscounts.
236 John Wells, Viscount Wells: Comme 164.
Barons.
237 George Stanley, Lord Strange: Comme son pere 209. 238 William Stanley,
Lord Chamberlain de Mesme. 239 John Lord Dynham. Gules, a Fesse, Lozengy,
Ermine. 240 Robert Willoughby, Lord Brook. Sable, a Cross engariled, Or.
Knights.
241 GIles D'anbeny. Argent, a Fesse, Lozengy, Gules. 242 Edward Poynings.
Barry of 6. Or, and vert, a Bend, Gules. 243 Edward Woodvil: Comme 157. 244
George Talbot: Comme 228. 245 John Cheney. Azure, six Lions Rampant, Argent,
and Canton, Ermine, and Ermine, on a Bend, Sable, three Martlets, Or. 246
Richard Guildford. Or, a Saltier enter 4 Martlets, Sable, on a Canton, Argent,
a Pomgranate Proper. 247 Thomas Lovell. Argent, a Cheuron Azure, between 3
Squirrels seiant, Gules. 248 Thomas Brandon. Barry of ten, Argent and Gules,
a Lion Rampant, Or, crowned per pale, of the first and second. 249 Reynold
Bray. Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Eagles legs erased, Sable. 250 Sir Ryce ap
Thomas. Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between three Cornish Choughes, Proper. 251
John Savage. Argent, six Lions Rampant, Sable. 252 Richard Pool. Per pale, Or,
and Sable, a Saltire engrailed; counterchanged. 253 Henry the Eighth began his
Reign, 1509. France and England, Quarterly.
Sovereign Princes.
254 CHarles the fifth, Emperor, the German Eagle, with a Scucheon of Pretense
of Leon, Castile, Austria, and Burgundy. 255 Ferdinand King of the Romans,
after Emperor: Comme son friar 107. 256 Francis King of France. France. 257
Emanuel King of Portugal: Comme. 108. 258 James the fifth, King of Scots. Or, a
Lion Rampant within a double Trescheur, Gules.
Dukes.
259 HEnry Fitz-Roy, son to the King, Duke of Richmond and Somerset. France and
England, a Border, quarterly, Ermine, and compony, Argent, and Azure, a Batune
Sinister of the second, an Inescocheon, quarterly, Gules, and Varry, Or, and
Vert, a Lion Rampant, Argent, on a Chief, Azure, a Castle between two Bucks
head caboshed, Argent. 260 Julian de Medicis, brother to Pope Leo the tenth.
Or, 8 Roundles in Orle, that in chief of France, the other 7 Gules. 261 Edward
Seymor Earl of, after Duke of Somerset. Gules, two Wings impaled, Or. 262
Thomas Howard Earl of Surry, after Duke of Norfolk: Comme son pere 208. 263
Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk: Comme son pere 248. 264 John Sutton, called
Dudley, Viscount L'isle, after Duke of Northumberland. Or, a Lion Rampant with
two tayls, Vert. 265 Anne Duke of Mont-morency. Or, a Crosle, Gules, between
16. Eagles, Azure.
Marquesses.
266 HEnry Courtney, Earl of Devon, Marquess of Exeter. Or, three Torteauxes.
267 William Parre, Earl of Essex, Marquess of Northampton, comme 204. 268
William Paulet, Lord Saint John, afterward Earl of Wiltshire, and Marquess of
Winchester. Sable, three Swords in point, Argent.
Earls.
269 HEnry Howard, Earl of Surrey, comme son pere, 262. 270 Thomas Bullen, Earl
of Wiltshire and Ormond. Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between three Bulls heads
coupee, Sable. 271 William Fitz Allan, Earl of Arundel, comme son pere, 190.
272 John Vert, fifteenth Earl of Oxford, comme 115. 273 Henry Percy, Earl of
Northumberland, comme son pere, 227. 274 Ralf Nevill, Earl of Westmerland,
Gules, a Saltier, Argent. 275 Francis Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, comme son
pere, 228. 276 Philip Chabot, Earl of Newblanc, Admiral of France. Or, three
Chabots, chubs or chevin fish, Gules. 277 Henry Fitz-Allen, Lord Maltravers,
comme son pere, 271. 278 Thomas Monros, Lord Rosse, after Earl of Rutland Or,
two Bars, Azure, a Chief, quarterly, two Flowers de lis of France, and a Lion
of England. 279 Robert Radcliffe, Viscount Fitz-Walter, afterward Earl of
Sussex, comme 212. 280 Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland, vide 118. 281
William Fitz-William, Earl of Southampton. Lozengy, Argent and Gules. 282
Thomas Lord Cromwell, after Earl of Essex. Azure, on a Fesse, between three
Lions Rampant, Or, a Rose, Gules, between two Choughs, Proper. 283 John Lord
Russell, after Earl of Bedford. Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules, on a Chief,
Sable, three Escallops of the first. 284 Thomas Lord Wriothesley, afterward
Earl of Southampton. Azure, a Cross, Or, between four Falcons, Argent.
Viscounts.
285 ARthur Plantaginet, Viscount Lisle, son of King Edward the fourth.
Quarterly, the first, France and England, the second and third, Vlster, viz.
Or, a Cross, Gules, the fourth Mortimer, vide 16. a Batune, Azure, an
Inescocheon, an Inescocheon of Gray, Valence, Quincy, Talbot, Beauchampe, and
L' Isle, quartered with a Label, Argent. 286 Walter Devoreux, Lord Ferrers,
Viscount, Hereford, Argent, a Fesse, Gules, in chief, three Torteauxes. 287
Edward Howard, Admiral of England, comme son pere, 208. 288 George Nevill,
Lord Abergaveney, Gules, on a Saltier, Argent, a Rose of the first.
Barons.
289 THomas West, Lord De-la-ware, Argent, a Fesse indented, Sable. 290 Thomas
Lord Dacrees of Gilsland. Gules, 3 Escallops, Argent. 291 Thomas Lord Darcy.
Azure, crusuly, 3 Cinquefoyls, Argent. 292 Edward Sutton, Lord Dudly. Or, a
Lion Rampant with two tayls, Vert. 293 William Blound, Lord Mountjoy. Barry
Nebulee of six, Or, and Sable. 294 Edward Stanley, Lord Mounteagle: comme 209.
with a Crescent. 295 William Lord Sands. Argent, a Cross raguly, Sable. 296
Henry Lord Marney. Gules, a Lion Rampant, Gardant, Argent. 297 Thomas Lord
Audely of Walden. Quarterly, per Fesse, indented, Or, and Azure, in each of the
last an Eagle, Or, a Bend of the second, charged with a Fret between two
Martlets of the first.
Knights.
298 JOhn Gage, Comptroller of the Household. Gyronny of 4. Azure and Argent, a
Saltire, Gules. 299 Henry Guilford, Master of the horse, comme 246. 300
Nicholas Carew, Master of the horse. Or, 3 Lions passant (in pale) Sable. 301
Anthony Brown. Sable, 3 Lions passant in Bend, double cotised, Argent. 302
Thomas Cheney, Warden of the Cinque Ports: Comme 245. 303 Richard Wingfield.
Argent, on a Bend, Gules, cottises, Sable, 3 pair of wings impaled of the
first, an Estoil of 16 rays. 304 Sir Anthony Wingfield. De mesne sanz
Difference. 305 Anthony St. Ledger, Deputy of Ireland. Azure, Fretty, Argent, a
Chief, Or. 306 John Wallop, Captain of Guismes. Argent, a Bend wavy, Sable. 307
Edward the sixth began his Reign, 1546. Quarterly France and England.
Sovereign Prince.
308 HEenry the second King of France.
Duke.
309 HEnry Gray, Marquess Dorcet after Duke of Suffolk, 188.
Earls.
310 HEnry Nevil Earl of Westmerland. Gules, a Saltire, Argent. 311 Edward
Stanly Earl of Derby, vide 209. 312 Francis Hastings, Earl of Huntington.
Argent, a Maunch, Sable. 313 William Herbert, Earl of Penbrook. Per pale, Azure
and Gules, 3 Lions rampant, Argent, a Border gobony, Or, and the second
bezanty.
Barons.
314 THomas Seymour, Baron Sudele: Comme son friar, 261. with a Creicent. 315
Thomas West, Lord De-la-ware: Comme, 289. 316 George Brook, Lord Cobham. Gules,
on a Cheuron, Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable, crowned, Or. 317 Edward Lord
Clinton, after Earl of Lincoln. Argent, 6 Croslets Fitchee, Sable, on a Chief.
Azure, 2 Mullets, Or. 318 William Paget, Lord Beudesert. Sable, on a Cross
engrailed between four Eagles, Argent, five Lions passant of the first. 319
Thomas Lord Darcy of Chich. Arg. 3 Cinquefoyls, Gules.
Knight.
320 ANdrew Sutton, alias Dudley Knight. Or, a Lion rampant with a double tail,
Vert, a Crescent. 321 Mary Queen of England Sovereign of the Garter, began her
Reign, 1553. France and England, quarterly, on the Sinister side, and on the
Dexter.
Sovereign Princes.
322 PHilip 2d. King of Spain. Quarterly, the first Castile and Leon quarterly.
323 Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy. Vide fol.
Earls.
324 Henry Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex: Comme son pere 279. 325 Anthony Brown,
Viscount Mountague: Comme son pere 301. 326 William Howard, Lord Effingham:
Comme son pere 208. with a Mullet, Sable. 327 William Gray, Baron of Wilton.
Barry of 6. Argent and Azure, in Chief, 3 Torteauxes, a Label of five points,
Argent. 328 Edward Hastings, Lord Loughborough: Comme son friar 312. 329 Robert
Rochester Knight, dyed before the Instalment. 330 Queen Eliz. began her happy
Reign, 1558. and was Sovereign Lady of the Garter. France and England
quarterly.
Sovereign Princes.
331 MAximilian the Emperor: Comme 216. 332 Charles the 9th. King of France:
Comme son pere. 333 Henry the 3d. King of France, Demesne. 334 Frederick King
of Denmark: Comme 109. 335 Adolph Duke of Holstatia, De mesn, with a Label. 336
John Cassimire, Count Palatine of the Rhine. Quarterly the 1. and 4 Sable, a
Lion Rampant, Or, the 2d. and 3d. Paly, Bendy, Argent and Azure.
Dukes.
337 FRancis Duke of Mon morency: Comme 265. 338 Thomas Howard, last Duke of
Norfolk: Comme son pere 269. 339 Frederick Duke of Wittenberg. Or, three Stags
horns placed barways, Sable.
Marquess.
340 William Parr, Marquess of Northampton, 267.
Earls.
341 THomas Piercy Earl of Northumberland, 273. 342 George Talbot, Earl of
Shrewsbury: Comme son pere 275. 343 Henry Stanly Earl of Derby: Comme son pere
311. 344 William Somerset Earl of Worcester. Or, on a Fesse, France and
England, quarterly, bordered gobony, Argent and Azure. 345 Henry Manors, Earl
of Rutland: Comme son pere 278. 346 Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington: Comme
son pere 312. 347 Ambrose Sutton, alias Dudly Earl of Warwick: Comme son pere
264. 348 Francis Russell Earl of Bedford, as his father, 283. 349 Henry Herbert
Earl of Penbrook Comme son pere 313. 350 Robert Dudly Earl of Leicester: comme
son Friar, Ambrose, 347. 351 Walter Devereux Earl of Essex: Comme son pere
286. 352 Edward Manors Earl of Rutland: Comme son friar 345. 353 Henry
Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex, brother and heir of Thomas, who is also said to be
Knight of the Garter, also sons of Henry de quo 324. 354 Robert Devereux Earl
of Essex: Comme son pere 286. 355 Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewbury: Comme son
pere 228. 356 George Clifford Earl of Cumberland. Checky or and Azure, a Fesse,
Gules. 357 Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland: Comme son friar 341. 358 Edward
Somerset Earl of Worcester. France and England, quarterly, within a Border
gobony, Argent and Azure. 359 Robert Ratchiffe Earl of Sussex: Comme son pere
353. 360 William Stanly Earl of Derby: Com. son pere 343.
Barons.
361 ARthur Gray, Baron of Wilton: Comme 327. 362 Charles Howard, Lord
Effingham: Comme son pere 326. 363 Edmund Bruges, Lord Chandos. Argent, on a
Cross, Sable, a Leopards head, Or. 364 Henry Carry, Lord Hunsdon. Argent, on a
Bend Sable, 3 Roses of the field. 365 William Cecil, Lord Burleigh Barry of 10.
Argent and Azure on 6 Escocheons, Sable, as many Lions rampant of the first.
366 William Brook, Lord Cobham. Vide 316. 367 Henry Scroop, Lord Bolton. Azure,
a Bend, Or. 368 Thomas Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst. Quarterly, Or, and Gules, a
bend Varry. 369 Thomas Lord Burgh. Azure, three Flowerdelis, Ermine. 370 Edmund
Lord Sheffield. Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Garbs, Gules. 371 Thomas Howard,
Lord Walden, Earl of Suffolk afterward: Comme son pere 362. with a Cressent.
372 George Carry, Lord Hunsdon: Comme 364. 373 Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy,
after Earl of Devon. Vide 293 374 Henry Brook, Lord Cobham. Vide 366. 375
Thomas Cecil Lord Burleigh: Comme son pere 365.
Knights.
376 HEnry Sidney. Or, a Pheon, Azure. 377 Christopher Hatton. Azure, a Cheuron
between 3 Garbs, Or. 378 Francis Knolles. Azure, Crusuly, a Cross moline,
voided, Or. 379 Henry Lee. Argent, a Fesse between 3 Cressents, Sable. 380
James the first of England, and sixth of Scotland, began his Reign, 1603.
Quarterly the first and last. FRance and England the 2d. Or, a Lion Rampant
within a double Tressure, Gules, for Scotland. The third. For Ireland, Azure, a
Harp, Or. stringed, Argent. 382 Henry Prince of Wales, de mesne, a Label,
Argent. 383 Lewis Duke of Lennox, and after of Richmond. Quarterly the first
and fourth. France a Border, Gules, semy de Femoulx Or, the second and third,
Or, a Fesse Checky Argent and Azure, a Border engrailed, Gules. an Inescocheon,
Argent, a Saltire engrailed, between 4 Cinquefoyls Gules. 384 Henry
Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton. Vide 284. 385 John Erskin Earl of Mar.
Argent, a Pale, Sable. 386 William Herbert Earl of Pembrook. Per pale, Azure
and Gules, 3 Lions rampant, Argent. 387 Vlricke Duke of Alsatia. 388 Henry
Howard Earl of Northampton: Comme son pere 272. a Cressent. 389 Robert Cecil
Earl of Salisbury: Comme son pere 365. 390 Thomas Howard, Viscount Binden,
second son of Thomas, third Duke of Norfolk. 262. 391 George Hume Earl of
Dunbar. Vert and Lion rampant, Argent. 392 Philip Herbert Earl of Montgomery,
afterward Earl of Penbrook: Comme son pere 386. 393 Thomas Howard Earl of
Arundel. Gules, on a Bend, between 6 Croslets, Argent, an Inescocheon. Or,
charged with a demi Lion within a double Tressure vulned in the mouth with an
Arrow, Gules. 394 Thomas Erskin, Viscount Fenton. Vide 385. 395 Robert Carr,
Viscount Rochester, after Earl of Somerset. Gules, on a Cheuron, Argent, 3
Mullets Sable, a Lion of England. 396 William Knolls, Viscount Wallingeford,
after Earl of Banbury: Comme son pere 378. 397 Francis Earl of Rutland: Vide
346. 398 George Villiers, afterward Duke of Buckingham. Argent, on a Cross,
Gules, 5 Escallops, Or. 399 Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle, after Earl of
Leicester: Comme son pere 376. 400 James Hamilton, Marquess Hamilton, Earl of
Cambridge. Gules, 3. Cinquefoyles pierced, Ermine. 401 Christierne, Duke of
Brunswick. Quarterly, the first Gules, 2 Lions passant, gardant, Or, the
second, Or, semy de men's hearts, Gules, a Lion Rampant, Azure. The third Azure,
a Lion Rampant, Argent, 4th. Gules, a Lion Rampant, Or, a Border compony,
Argent and Azure. 402 Claudius of Lorrain, Duke of Chereceuse. Or, on a Bend,
Gules, three Doves, Argent. 403 William Lord Burleigh, Earl of Exeter: Comme
son pere 365. 404 Edward Sackvil, Earl of Dorcet: Comme 368. 405 Henry Rich,
Earl of Holland. Gules, a Cheuron between 3 Crosses botony, Or, a Crescent,
Sable. 406 Thomas Howard Earl of Barkshire: 2d. Comme son pere 375. with
another Crescent. 407 Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden. Azure, 3 Crowns, Or.
408 Henry of Nassau, Prince of Orange. Quarterly, the first Sable, Bilettee, a
Lion Rampant, Or. The second, Or, a Lion Rampant, gardant, Gules, crowned,
Azure. 409 James Marquess Hamilton: Comme son pere 400. 410 Theophilus Howard
Earl of Suffolk: Comme son pere 371. 411 Richard Weston Earl of Portland. Or,
an Eagle regardant, Sable. 412 Robert Bertue, Earl of Lindsey. Argent, 3
battering Rams barways in pale, Azure, garnished, Or. 413 William Cecil Earl of
Salisbury: Comme son pere 389. 414 Henry Danvers Earl of Danby. Gules, a
Cheuron between 3 Mullets of six points, Or. 415 James Duke of Richmond and
Lenox: Comme 383. 416 William Douglas. Argent, on a Chief, Sable, two Mullets
of the first. 417 Algernon Piercy Earl of Northumberland, 273.
TO The Honorable (and truly Noble) Sir EDMOND BACON of Redgrave in the County
of Suffolk, BARONET.
SIR,
YOu being so much concerned in the subsequent Catalogue of those Baronets, who
were invested with that Dignity and Title by the Royal Munificence of our late
Monarchs, I did believe that there was an Obligation incumbent upon me to offer
up this Register to your Patronage; and that enforced from these two Reasons.

First, The Antiquity and Nobleness of your Extraction did invite it.

Secondly, You being the premier Baronet that leads up the Van of those worthy
persons that have been formerly dignified with that honorary Title, did appear
almost to exact this Dedication, which I hope will by you be as benignly
received, as it is really consecrated to your Name,

By Sir, Your most humble Servant, RICHARD BLOME.

AN ACCOUNT OR REGISTER Of the NAMES and ARMS of all the BARONETS of ENGLAND.
IT will not be necessary to say much of this Dignity, because herewith we
imprint a precedent of their Patent, as also Instructions by King James (their
Founder) to the Commissioners by him appointed for taking notice of the
qualifications of the persons so advanced, which were at the first precisely
observed, the said King promised not to increase the number above two hundred,
which he exceeded by four only, ending at Sir Thomas Playters the 204th. Of
which before that Kings death, and since, there are removed to a higher dignity
or extinct for want of Issue-male, 46. or 47. most of which I have taken notice
of by the way.

There are some few, eight or ten, whereof two Dutchmen at the latter end,
whose Coats I thought better omitted, then to have inserted upon uncertain
grounds, the printed Catalogue being defective as to their place of Habitation,
or County, which in some I have supplied: And the Heralds at Oxford not keeping
so punctual an account of them in the hurry of a Civil War, as formerly.

Fr. Nower.

By the KING. The INSTRUCTIONS within mentioned to be observed by Our
COMMISSIONERS within named.
FOrasmuch, as We have been pleased to authorize you to Treat and conclude with
a certain number of Knights and Esquires, as they shall present themselves unto
you with such offers of assistance for the service of Ireland, and under such
Conditions as are contained in these Presents, wherein We do repose great trust
and confidence in your discretions and integrities, knowing well, that in such
cases, there are so many circumstances incident, as require a choice care and
consideration. We do hereby require you to take such course as may make known
abroad both Our purpose, and the Authority given unto you, That by the more
public notice thereof, those persons who are disposed to advance so good a
work, may in time understand where, and to whom to address themselves for the
same; For which purpose We require you to appoint some certain place and times
for their Access: which We think fittest to be at the Council Chamber at
Whitehall, upon Wednesdays and Fridays in the afternoon, where you shall make
known to them (as they come) that those who desire to be admitted into the
dignity of Baronets, must maintain the number of 30. foot Soldiers in Ireland,
for three years, after the rate of eight pence sterling Money of England by the
day; And the wages of one whole year to be paid into Our Receipt, upon the
passing of the Patent.

Provided always, that you proceed with none, except it shall appear unto you
upon good proof, that they are men for quality, state of living, and good
reputation worthy of the same; And that they are at the least descended of a
Grandfather by the Fathers side that bare Arms, And have also of certain
yearly revenue in Lands of inheritance in possession, one Thousand pounds per
Annum de claro; Or lands of the old Rent, as good (in account) as one Thousand
pounds per Annum of improved Rents, Or at the least two parts in three parts to
be divided of Lands, to the said values in possession, and the other third part
in reversion, expectant upon one life only, holding by Dower, or in Jointure.

And for the Order to be observed in ranking those that shall receive the
dignity of a Baronet, although it is to be wished, that those Knights which
have now place before other Knights (in respect of the time of their Creation)
may be ranked before others, (Caeteris paribus) yet because this is a Dignity,
which shall be Hereditary, wherein diverse circumstances are more considerable,
then such a Mark as is but Temporary, (that is to say of being now a Knight,
in time before another) Our pleasure is, you shall not be so precise, in
placing those that shall receive this Dignity, but that an Esquire of great
Antiquity, and extraordinary living, may be ranked in this choice before some
Knights. And so (of Knights) a man of greater living, more Remarkable for his
house, years, or calling in the Commonwealth, may be now preferred in this
Degree, before one that was made a Knight before him.

Next, because there is nothing of Honor, or of value, which is known to be
sought or desired (be the Motives never so good) but may receive scandal from
some, who (wanting the same good affection to the public) or being in other
considerations incapable, can be contented out of envy to those that are so
preferred, to cast aspersions, and imputations upon them; As if they came by
this dignity for any other consideration, but that which concerns this so
public and memorable a work, You shall take order, That the party who shall
receive this dignity, may take his Oath, that neither he (nor any for him) has
directly or indirectly given any more for attaining the degree, or any
precedence in it, then that which is necessary for the maintenance of the
number of Soldiers, in such sort, as aforesaid, saving the charges of passing
his Patent.

And because We are not ignorant, that in the distribution of all Honors, most
men will be desirous to attain to so high a place as they may, in the Judgment
whereof (being matter of dignity) there cannot be too great caution used to
avoid the interruption, that private partialities may breed in so worthy a
Competition.

Forasmuch as it is well known, that it can concern no other person so much to
prevent all such inconveniences, as it must do Our self, from whom all Honor
and Dignity (either Temporary, or Hereditary) has his only root and
beginning, You shall publish and declare to all whom it may concern, That for
the better warrant of your own Actions, in this matter of Precedence (wherein
We find you so desirous to avoid all just exceptions) We are determined upon
view of all those Patents, which shall be subscribed by you, before the same
pass Our great Seal, to take the especial care upon Us, to order and rank
every man in his due place; And therein always to use the particular counsel
and advice, that you Our Commissioners shall give Us, of whose integrity and
circumspection, We have so good experience, and are so well persuaded, as We
assure Our self, you will use all the best means you may to inform your own
Judgments in cases doubtful, before you deliver Us any such opinion as may
lead Us in a case of this Nature, wherein Our intention is (by due
consideration of all necessary circumstances) to give every man that
satisfaction, which stands with Honor and Reason.

Lastly, having now directed you, how, and with what caution you are to
entertain the Offers of such as shall present themselves for this dignity, We
do also require you to observe these two things. The one, That every such
person as shall be admitted, do enter into sufficient Bond or Recognizance, to
Our use, for the payment of that portion, which shall be remaining after the
first payment is made, which you are to see paid upon delivery of the Letters
Patents; The other, That seeing this Contribution for so public an Action, is
the motive of this dignity, And that the greatest good which may be expected
upon this Plantation, will depend upon the certain payment of those Forces
which shall be fit to be maintained in that Kingdom, until the same be well
established, the charge whereof will be born with the greater difficulty, if We
be not eased by some such extraordinary means; we require you Our Treasurer of
England, so to order this Receipt, as no part thereof be mixed with Our other
Treasure, but kept apart by it self, to be wholly converted to that use, to
which it is given, and intended, And in regard thereof, that you assign it to
be received, and the Bonds to be kept by some such particular person, as you
shall think good to appoint, who upon the payment of every several portion,
shall both deliver out the Bonds, and give his Acquittance for the same. For
which this shall be yours, and his the said Receivers sufficient Warrant in
that behalf.

THE PRECEDENT OF THE PATENT of Creation of BARONETS.
REx omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Cum inter alias Imperij nostri gerendi
curas, quibus animus noster assidue exercetur, illa non minima sit, nec minimi
momenti, de Plantatione Regni nostri HIBERNIAE, ac potissimum Vltoniae, amplae
and percelebris ejusdem Regni Provinciae, quam nostris jam auipiciis atque
armis, foeliciter sub obsequii jugum redactam, ita constabilire elaboramus, ut
tanta Provincia, non solum sincero Religionis cultu, humanitate civili,
morumque probitate, verum etiam opum affluentia, atque omnium rerum copia, quae
statum Reipublicae ornare vel bear possit, magis magisque efflorescat, Opus
sane, quod nulli progenitorum nostrorum praestare and perficere licuit, quamvis
id ipsum multa sanguinis and opum profusione saepius tentaverint; In quo opere,
sollicitudo nostra Regia, non solum ad hoc excubare debet, ut Plantatio ipsa
strenue promoveatur, oppida co^dantur, aedes and castra extruantur, agri
colantur, and id genus alia; Sed etiam prospiciendum imprimis, ut universus
hujusmodi rerum civilium apparatus, manu armata, praesidiis videlicet and
cohortibus, protegatur and communiatur, ne qua aut vis hostilis, aut defectio
intestina, rem disturbet aut impediat: Cumque nobis intimatum sit, ex part
quorunda^ ex fidelibus nostris subditis, quod ipsi paratissimi sint, ad hoc
Regnu^ nostrum inceptum, tam corporibus, qua^ fortunis suis promovendu^: Nos
commoti operis tam sancti ac salutaris intuitu, atque gratos habentes hujusmodi
generosos affectus, atque propensas in obsequium nostrum and bonum publicum
voluntates, Statuimus apud nos ipsos nulli rei deesse, quae subditorum
nostrorum studia praefata renumerare, aut aliorum animos atque alacritatem, ad
operas suas praestandas, aut impensas in hac part facie^das, excitare possit;
Itaque nobiscum perpendentes atque reputantes, virtutem and industriam, nulla
alia re magis quam honor ali atque acui, omnemque honoris and dignitatis
splendore^, and amplitudine^, a Rege tanquam a font, originem and incrementu^
ducere, ad cujus culmen and fastigium proprie spectat, novos honorum and
dignitatum titulos erigere atque instituere, utpote a quo antiqui illi
fluxerint; consentaneum duximus (postulante usu Reipublicae atque temporu^
ratione) nova merita, novis dignitatum insignibus rependere: Ac propterea, ex
certa scientia and mero motu nostris, Ordinavimus, ereximus, constituimus, and
creavimus, quendam statum, gradum, dignitatem, nomen and titulum Baronetti
(Anglice of a Baronet) infra hoc Regnum nostrum Angliae perpetuis temporibus
duraturum. SCIATIS modo, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostris, ereximus, praefecimus and creavimus, ac per
praese^tes pro nobis, Haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, erigimus,
praeficimus, and creamus dilectum nostrum (...) de (...) in comitatu (...)
virum, familia, patrimonio, censu, and morum probitate spectatum (qui nobis
auxilium and subsidium satis amplum, generoso and liberali animo dedit and
praestit, ad manutenendum and supportandum triginta viros in cohortibus nostris
pedestribus in dicto Regno nostro Hiberniae, per tres annos integros pro
defensione dicti Regni nostri, and praecipue pro securitate plantationis dictae
provinciae Vltoniae) ad, and in dignitatem, statum, and gradum Baronetti
(Anglice of a Baronet) Ipsumque (...) Baronettum pro nobis, haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris, praeficimus, constituimus and creamus per praesentes,
habendum sibi, and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo legitime procreatis
imperpetuu^. VOLUMUS etiam and per praesentes de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex
certa scientia and mero motu nostris, pro nobis, Heredibus, and successoribus
nostris concedimus praefato (...) and Haeredibus masculis de corpore suo
legitime procreatis, Quod ipse idem (...) and Haeredes sui masculi praedicti
habeant, gaudeant, teneant, and capiant locum atque Praecedentiam, virtute
dignitatis Baronetti praedicti, and Vigore praesentium, tam in omnibus
Commissionibus, brevibus, literis patentibus, scriptis, appellationibus,
nominationibus, and directionibus, quam in omnibus Sessionibus Conventibus,
Caetibus and locis quibuscunque prae omnibus militibus, tam de Balneo (Aglice
of the Bathe) quam militibus Baccalaureis (Anglice Bachelors) ac etiam prae
omnibus militibus Bannerettis (Anglice Bannerets jam creatis, vel imposterum
creandis (Illis militibus Bannerettis tantummodo exceptis, quos sub vexillis
regiis, in exercitu regali, in aperto bello, and ipso Rege personaliter
praesente, explicatis, and non aliter creari contigerit. Quodque uxores dicti
(...) and Haeredum masculorum suorum praedictorum, virtute dictae dignitatis
maritorum suorum praedictorum, habeant, teneant, gaudeant, and capiant locum
and praecedentiam, prae uxoribus omnium aliorum quorumcunque prae quibus mariti
hujusmodi uxoru^, vigore praesentiu^ habere debent locum and praecedentiam;
Atque quod promogenitus filius, ac ceteri omnes filij and eorum uxores, and
filiae ejusdem (...) and haeredum suorum praedictorum respective, habeant, and
capiant locum and praecedentiam, ante primogenitos filios, ac alios filios et
eorum uxores, et filias omnium quorumcunque respective, prae quibus patres
hujusmodi filiorum progenitoru^, and aliorum filiorum, and eorum uxores, and
filiarum, vigore praesentium habere debent locum and praecedentia^. VOLUMUS
etiam, and per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, de
gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris concedimus,
quod dictus (...) nominetur, appelletur, nuncupetur, placitet and implacitetur,
per nomen (...) Baronetti; Et quod stilus and additio Baronetti apponatur in
fine nominis ejusdem (...) and haeredum masculorum suorum praedictoru^, in
omnibus Literis Patentibus, Commissionibus, and brevibus nostris, atque omnibus
alijs Chartis, factis, atque literis, virtute praesentium, ut vera, legitima,
and necessaria additio dignitatis. Volumus etiam, and per praesentes pro nobis,
haeredibus, et successoribus nostris ordinamus, quod nomini dicti (...) et
Haeredum masculorum suorum praedictorum, in sermon Anglicano, et omnibus
scriptis Anglicanis, praeponatur haec additio, videlicet Anglice (Sir:) Et
similiter quod uxores ejusdem (...) et Haeredum masculorum suorum praedictorum,
habeant, utantur, et gaudeant hac appellatione, videlicet Anglice (Lady, Madam,
and Dame) respective, secundum usum loque^di. Habendum, tenendum, utendum, et
gaudendum, eadem, statum, gradum, dignitatem, stilum, titulum, nomen, locum, et
praecedentiam, cum omnibus et singulis Privilegijs, et caeteris praemissis,
praefat. (...) et ha redibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus imperpetuum.
Volentes et per Praesentes concedentes, pro Nobis Haeredibus et Successoribus
Nostris, quod praedictus (...) et haeredes sui masculi praedicti, nomen,
statum, gradum, stilum, dignitatem, titulum, locum, et praecedentiam
praedictam, cum omnibus et singulis Privilegiis, et caeteris praemissis
successive, gerant and habeant, et eorum quilibet gerat et habeat, quodque idem
(...) Et Haeredes sui Masculi praedicti successive Baronetti in omnibus
teneantur, Et ut Baronetti tractentur and reputentur, Et eorum quilibet
teneatur, tractetur and reputetur. Et ulterius de uberiori gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris Co^cessimus, ac per
praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris concedimus praefato
(...) Et Haeredibus suis masculis praedictis, quod numerus Baronettoru^ hujus
Regni Angliae nunqua^ posthac excedet in toto, in aliquo uno tempore, numerum
ducentorum Baronettoru^: and quod dicti Baronetti, and eorum Haeredes masculi
praedicti respective, de tempore in tempus in perpetuu^, habebunt, tenebu^t and
gaudebunt locos and praecede^tias suas inter se, videlicet, quilibet eorum
secundum prioritatem and senioritate^ Creationis suae Baronetti praedicti;
quotquot autem creati sunt, vel creabu^tur Baronetti per literas nostras
Patentes, gerentes Datas uno and eodem die, and haeredes sui praedicti,
gaudebunt locis and praecedentijs suis inter se secundu^ prioritatem, quae
cuilibet eorum dabitur, per alias literas nostras patentes in ea part primo
conficiendas, sine impedimento, and non aliter, nec alio modo. Et insuper de
abundantiori gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris
concessimus, ac per praesentes, pro nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris
concedimus praefato (...) and haeredibus suis masculis praedictis, quod nec
Nos, nec Haeredes vel Successores Nostri, de caetero in posterum erigemus,
ordinabimus, constituemus, aut creabimus infra hoc Regnum nostrum Angliae
aliquem alium gradum, ordinem, nomen, titulum, dignitatem, sive statum sub vel
infra gradum, dignitatem, sive statum Baronum, hujus Regni nostri Angliae, qui
erit vel esse possit superior, vel aequalis gradui and dignitati Baronettorum
praedictoru^, sed quod tam dictus (...) and Haeredes sui Masculi praedicti,
quam uxores, filij, uxores filiorum and filiae ejusdem (...) and haeredum
masculoru^ suorum praedictoru^, de caetero in perpetuu^ libere and quiet
habeant, teneant, and gaudea^t, dignitates, locos and praecedentias suas
praedictas prae omnibus, qui erunt de talibus gradibus, statibus, dignitatibus
vel ordinibus in posterum, ut praefertur creandi respective secundum veram
intentionem praesentiu^ absque impedimento nostro, haeredum, vel successorum
nostroru^, vel aliorum quorumcunque Et ulterius per praesentes declaramus, and
significamus benepla^citum and voluntatem nostram in hac part fore and esse,
Et sic nobiscum statuimus and decrevimus, quod si postqua^ nos praedict.
numerum ducentorum Baronettoru^ hujus Regni Angliae compleverimus and
perfecerimus, Contigerit aliquem, vel aliquos eorunde^ Baronettorum ab hac vita
discedere, absque haerede masculo de corpore vel corporibus hujusmodi Baronetti
vel Baronettorum procreato, quod tunc nos non creabimus, vel praeficiemus
aliquam aliam personam, vel personas in Baronettum, vel Baronettos Regni Nostri
Angliae, sed quod numerus dictorum Ducentorum Baronettorum ea ratione de
tempore in tempus diminuetur, and in minorem numeru^ cedet and redigetur;
Denique volumus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus
nostris de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu nostris
concedimus praefato (...) and Haeredibus suis masculis praedictis, quod hae
literae nostrae Patentes erunt in omnibus, and per omnia firmae, validae,
bonae, sufficientes and effectuales in lege, tam contra nos, haeredes, and
successores nostros, quam contra omnes alios quoscunque secundum veram
intentionem earundem, tam in omnibus curiis nostris, quam alibi ubicunque Non
obstante aliqua lege, consuetudine, praescriptione, usu, ordinatione, sive
constitutione quacunque ante hac aedita, habita, usitata, ordinata, sive
provisa, vel in posteru^ aedenda, habenda, usitanda, ordinanda, vel providenda:
Et non obstante aliqua alia re, causa vel materia quacunque Volumus etiam, etc.
Absque fine in Hanaperio, etc. Eo quod expressa mentio, etc. In cujus rei, etc.
Test, etc.

Anno 9. JACOBI Regis, 1611.
1. SIR Nicholas Bacon of Regrave in the County of Suffolk, Knight, created
Baronet, May 22. 1611. Bears Gules, on a chief, Argent, two Mullets pierced,
Sable. Note that the following 17. were all created on the same day with Sir
Nicholas Bacon. 2 Sir Richard Molineux of Sephtston in Com: Lancaster, Knight,
created Baronet, test ut supra. Azure, a Cross Moline, Or. 3 Sir Thomas
Maunsel of Mergan in the County of Glamorgan, Knight. Argent, a Cheuron between
3 Maunches, Sable. 4 George Shirley of Staunton in Com. Leicest. Esquire. Or,
Paly of 6. Argent and Azure, a Canton, Ermine. 5 Sir John Stradling of St.
Donates in the County of Glamorgan, Knight. Paly of 6. Argent and Azure on a
Bend, Gules, three Cinquefoyls, Or. 6 Sir Francis Leak of Sutton in Com. Derby,
Knight, since a Baron. Argent, on a Saltire engrailed, Sable, nine Annulets,
Or. 7 Thomas Pelham of Laughton in Com. Sussex Esquire. Azure, 3 Pelicans,
Argent, vulning themselves proper. 8 Sir Richard Houghton, of Houghton Tower in
Com. Lancaster. Sable, three bars, Argent. 9 Sir Henry Hobart of Intewood, in
Com. Norfolk, Knight. Sable, an Estoil of eight Rays, Or, between two
Flanches, Ermine. 10 Sir George Booth of Dunham Massey in Com. Chester, Knight.
Argent, 3 Boars heads erected and erased, Sable, tusked, Or. 11 Sir John Peyton
of Iselham in Com. Cambridge, Knight. Sable, a Cross engrailed, Or, in the
first quarter a Mullet, Argent. 12 Lionel Talmache of Helmingham in Com.
Suffolk, Esquire. Argent, a Fret, Sable. 13 Sir Gervase Clifton of Clifton in
Com. Nottingh. Knight. Sable, semy de Cinquefoyls, a Lion Rampant, Argent. 14
Sir Thomas Gerrard of Bryn in Com. Lancaster, Knight. Argent, a Saltire, Gules.
15 Sir Walter Aston of Tixhall in Com. Stafford Knight, since a Baron of
Scotland. Argent, a Fesse in chief, three Lozenges, Sable. 16 Philip Knevet of
Bucknam in Com. Norfolk, Esquire. Argent, a Bend Sable, within a border
engrailed of the same. 17 Sir John Saint John of Lydiard Tregoz in Com. Wilts.
Argent, on a Chief, Gules, two Mullets, Or. 18 John Shelly of Michelgrove in
Com. Sussex, Esquire. Sable, a Fesse engrailed between 3 Periwinckle shells or
Welks, Or.
June 9. 1611. 9. Jacobi.
19 SIr John Savage of Rock-savage, in Com. Chester, Knight, created Baronet,
June 29. 1611. Since Earl Rivers. Argent, six Lions Rampant, Sable. 20 Sir
Francis Barington of Barington Hall, in Com. Essex, Knight Argent, three
Cheurons, Gules, a Label, Azure. 21 Henry Berkley of Wymonaham in Co:
Leicester, Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron between ten Cinquefoyls, Argent. 22
William Wentworth of Wentworth-VVoodhouse in Com. Ebor. Esquire, since Earl of
Strafford. Sable, a Cheuron between 3 Leopards heads, Or. 23 Richard Mulgrave
of Hartly Castle in Com: Westmerland, Esquire. Azure, 6 Annulets, Or. 24 Edward
Seymour of Bury Castle, in Com: Devon, Esquire. Gules, two Wings displayed, or
in lure, Or. 25 Sir Moyle Finch of Eastwell in the County of Kent, Knight,
since Earl of Winchelsey. Argent, a Cheuron between three Griffons passant,
Sable. 26 Sir Anthony Cope of Hanwell in Com: Oxford, Knight. Argent, on a
Cheuron, Azure, between 3 Roses, Gules, slipped Vert, as many Flowers de lis,
Or. 27 Sir Thomas Mounson of Carlton in Com: Lincoln, Knight. Or, two Cheurons,
Gules. 28 George Gresley of Drakelow in Com: Derby, Esquire Varry, Ermine and
Gules. 29 Paul Tracy of Stanway in Com: Gloucester, Esquire. Or, two Bendlets,
Gules, between them an Escallop, Sable. 30 Sir John Wentworth of Gosfield in
Co: Essex, Knight, Ext. Sable, a Cheuron between 3 Leopards heads, Or, a
Crescent. 31 Sir Henry Bellasis of Newborough in Com: Ebor. Knight, after
Baron, and since Viscount Faulconbridg. Argent, a Cheuron Gules, between 3
Flower de lis, Azure. 32 William Constable of Flamborough in Com: Ebor.
Esquire. Quarterly, Gules and Varry, a bend, Or. 33 Sir Thomas Leigh of
Stoneley in Com: Warwick, Knight, since Baron of Stoneley, 1643. Gules, a
Cross engrailed, in the first quarter, a Lozenge, Or. 34 Sir Edward Noel of
Brook in Com: Rutland, Knight, since Viscount Campden. Or, Fretty, Gules, a
Canton, Ermine. 35 Sir Robert Cotton of Conington in Com: Huntington, Knight.
Azure, an Eagle displayed, Argent. 36 Robert Cholmondleigh of Cholmondleigh in
Com: Chester, Esquire, After Viscount of Ireland, and since Earl of Lemster.
Gules, two Helmets in Chief, and a Garb in base Proper. 37 John Molineux of
Tevershalt in Com: Nottingham, Esquire. Azure, a Cross moline, Or, a border,
Argent. 38 Sir Francis Wortley of Wortley, in Com: York, Knight. Argent, on a
Bend, Gules, three Bezants between six Martlets of the second. 39 Sir Geerge
Savill Senior of Thornhill, in Com Ebor. Knight. Argent, on a bend engrailed,
Sable, 3 Owls, Argent. 40 William Kniveton of Mircaston in Com: Derby,
Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron Vair, Argent and Sable. 41 Sir Philip VVoodhouse of
VVilberly Hall in Com: Norfolk, Knight. Sable, a Cheuron between 3
Cinquefoyls, Ermine. Olim, the Cheuron, Or, Guttee de sang. 42 Sir William
Pope of VVilcott in Com: Oxon, Knight; now Earl of Down in Ireland. Per pale,
Or, and Azure, on a Cheuron between 3 Griffons heads erased, four Flowerde lis
all counterchanged. 43 Sir James Harington of Ridlington in Com: Rutland
Knight, Sable, a Fret, Argent. 44 Sir Henry Savile of Methely in Com: Ebor.
Knight, Ext. Argent, on a bend, Sable, 3 Owls, of the first. 45 Henry
Willoughby of Risley in Com: Derby, Esquire. Or, on two bars Gules, 3
Waterbougets, Argent. Ext. 46 Lewis Tresham of Rushton in Com: Northampton,
Esquire. Per Saltire, Sable and Or, 6 Trefoyls of the last. 47 Thomas Brudenell
of Dean in Com: Northampton, Esquire, now Baron of Stoughton Northamp. Argent, a
Cheuron, Gules, between 3 Morions, or steel Caps proper. 48 Sir George St Paul
of Snarsford in Com: Lincoln, Knight. Argent a Lion rampant, Gules, crowned,
Or. 49 Sir Philip Tirwhit of Stainfield in Com: Lincoln, Knight, Gules, 3
Lapwings, Or. 50 Sir Roger Dalison of Loughton in Com: Lincoln, Knight. Gules,
3 Crescents, Or, a Canton, Ermine. 51 Sir Edward Carre of Sleford in Com:
Lincoln, Knight. Gules, on a Cheuron, Argent, 3 Mullets of 6 points, Sable. 52
Sir Edward Hussy of Henington in Com: Lincoln, Knight. Or, a Cross, Vert. 53
Le strange Mordant of Massinghamparva in Com: Norfolk, Esquire. Argent, a
Cheuron engrailed between three Stars, Sable. 54 Thomas Bendish of
Steeple-Bumsted in Com: Essex, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between 3
Rams heads erased, Azure, Armed, Or. 55 Sir John Win of Gwidder in Com:
Carnarvan, Knight. Vert, 3 Eagles displayed in Fesse, Or. 56 Sir William
Throckmorton of Tortworth in Com: Gloucester, Knight. Gules, on a Cheuron,
Argent, 3 bars gemels Sable. 57 Sir Richard Worsley of Apledercombe in the
County of Southampton, Knight. Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between 3 Cornish
Choughes, Proper. 58 Richard Fleetwood of Keckwich, or Cakewish in the County
of Stafford, Esquire. Per pale Nebulee, Or, and Azure, 6 Martlets
counterchanged. 59 Thomas Spencer of Yarington in the County of Oxford,
Esquire. Quarterly, Argent and Gules, Fretty, Or, on a Bend, Sable, 3 Escallops
of the first, a Crescent for a difference. 60 Sir John Tufton of Hothfield in
the County of Kent, Knight, since Earl of Thanet. Sable, an Eagle displayed,
Ermine, a boder, Argent. 61 Sir Samuel Peyton of Knolton in Com: Kent, Knight.
Sable, a Cross engrailed Or, in the first quarter a Mullet, Argent, a Crescent
for a d fference. 62 Sir Charles Morrison of Caishobury in Com: Hartford,
Knight. Or, on a Chief, Gules, 3 Chaplets of the Field Ext. 63 Sir Henry Baker
of Sissinghurst in Com: Kent, Knight. Azure, on a Fesse ingrailed between three
Swans heads erased, Or, gorged with Crowns and beaks, Gules, as many
Cinquefoyls of the last. It was altered to, Azure, a plain Fesse, Or, between
3. Swans heads erased, Argent, their beaks Gules. 64 Roger Apleton of
South-Bemfleet, or South hamsted in Com. Essex, Esquire. Argent, a Fesse
engrailed, Sable, between three Apples slipped, Proper 65 Sir William Sedley of
Ailesford and Southfleet in Com: Kent, Knight. Azure, a Fesse wavy between 3.
Goats heads erased, Argent, attired, Or. 66 Sir William Twisden of Royden-hall
in East Peckham in Com: Kent, Knight. Gyronny of 4. Argent and Gules, a Saltire
between as many Croslets counterchanged. 67 Sir Edward Hales of Woodchurch, now
of Tunstall in the County of Kent, Knight. Gules, 3 Arrows, Or, headed and
feathered, Argent. 68 William Monins of Walwarsher, in Com: Kent, Esquire.
Gules, 3 Crescents, Or. 69 Thomas Mildmay of Mulsham, in Com: Essex, Esquire.
Argent, 3 Lions rampant, Azure. 70 Sir William Maynard of Faston parva in Com:
Essex, Knight. now a Baron of England and Ireland. Argent, a Cheuron, Azure,
between 3 dexter hands erect coupee, Gules. 71 Henry Lee of Quarendon in Com:
Bucks. Esquire. Argent, a Fesse between 3 Crescents, Sable.
Anno 10. Jacobi 1612. Nov. 25.
72 SIr John Portman of Orchard in Com: Somerset, Knight. Or, a Flowerdeluce,
Azure. 73 Sir Nicholas Saunderson of Saxby in Com: Lincoln, Knight, now
Viscount Castleton in Ireland. Paly of 6. Argent and Azure on a Bend Sable, 3
Annulets, Or. 74 Sir Miles Sandys of Wimbleton in the Isle of Ely, Knight. Or,
a Fesse dancy between 3 Croslets, Gules. 75 William Gostwicke of Willington in
the County of Bedford, Esquire. Argent, a bend Gules, between 3. Choughes
Proper, on a Chief, Azure, 3. Mullets. Or. 76 Thomas Puckering of Weston in
Com: Hartford, Esquire Extinct. Sable, a Bend fusily Lozengy, cottized, Argent.
77 William Wray of Glentworth in Com: Lincoln Esquire. Azure, on a chief, 3
Martlets, Gules. 78 Sir Will: Aylofte of Braxsted Magna in the County of Essex
Knight. Sable, a Lion Rampant between 3 Croslets, Or.
November. 25. 1612.
79 Sir Marmaduke Wivell of Custable Burton in the County of York, Knight.
Gules, 3 Cheurons braced, Varry, a chief, Or. 80 John Peshall of Horsley in
the County of Stafford, Esquire Argent, a Cross Formee, Fleuty, Sable, on a
Canton, Gules, a Wolves head erased of the field. 81 Francis Englefield of
Wotton Basset in the County of Wilts, Esquire. Barry of 6. Gules and Argent,
on a chief, a Lion Rampant, Azure. 82 Sir Thomas Ridgeway of Torre in the
County of Devon, Knight, since an Earl of Ireland. Sable, two Wings rising, Or,
volant, Argent. 83 William Essex of Beucot in the County of Berk: Esquire Argent,
an U^le, Gules. 84 Sir Edward Gorges of Langford in the County of Wilts:
Knight, a Baron of Ireland. He bears a Whirlpool Proper, some blazon it a Mear,
but I conclude otherwise from the name. 85 Edward Devereux of Castle-bramwith
in the County of Warwick, Esquire since which the Vicounty of Hereford fell to
them. Argent, a Fesse in chief, 3 Rondels, Gules. 86 Reginald Mohun of
Buckonnock in the County of Cornwall, Esquire, since a Baron of England. Or, a
Cross engrailed, Sable. 87 Sir Harbotle Grimston of Bradfield in the County of
Essex, Knight. Argent, on a Fesse, Sable, 3 Mullets of six points, Or. 88 Sir
Thomas Holt of Aston-juxta Burmingham in the County of Warwick, Knight. Azure,
two Bars in chief, a Cross formee, fitchee, Or.
September. 24.
89 Sir Robert Naper, alias Sandy of Lewton How in the County of Bedford,
Knight. Argent, a Saltire engrailed, between four Cinquefoyls, Gules. 90 Paul
Banning of Bently-Parva in the County of Essex, Esquire, since Viscount of
England. Or, on two Bars, Sable, 3 Escallops of the field. 91 Sir Thomas Temple
of Stow in the County of Buckingham, Knight. Argent, on two Bars, Sable, 6
Martlets, Or. 92 Thomas Penystone of Leigh in the County of Sussex, Esquire.
Argent, 3 Cornish Choughes. Proper.
June 8. 1615.
93 Thomas Blackstone of Blackestone, in the County of Durham. Ext. Argent, two
Bars in chief, 3 Cocks, Gules. 94 Sir Robert Do^mer of Wing in the County of
Buckingham, Knight, since Earl of Carnarvan. Azure, 10 Billets on a chief, Or,
a demi Lion issuant, Sable.
April 5. 1617.
95 Sir Rouland Egerton of Egerton in the County of Chester, Knight. Argent, a
Lion Rampant, Gules, between three Pheons, Sable, 96 Roger Townsend of Rainham
in the County of Norfolk, Esquire. Azure, a Cheuron, Ermine, between 3
Escallops, Argent.
May 1.
97 Simon Clarke of Salford in the County of Warwick, Esquire. Gules, 3 Swords
in Fesse, the points erect, Proper. 98 Edward Fitton of Houseworth in the
County of Chester, Esquire Argent, a Canton, Gules, over all on a Bend, Azure, 3
Garbes, Or.
March 11.
99 Sir Richard Lucy of Broxborn in the County of Hertford, Knight. Gules,
Crusuly, Or, 3 Lucies or Pikes hauriant, Argent.
May 25. 1618.
100 Sir Matthew Bointon of Barmston in the County of York, Knight. Or, a
Fesse between 3 Crescents, Gules.
July 25.
101 Thomas Littleton of Frankley in the County of Worcester, Esquire. Argent,
a Cheuron between 3 Escallops, Sable.
December. 24.
102 Sir Francis Leigh of Newnham in the County of Warwick, Knight, since a
Baron, and after an Earl of England. Gules, a Cross engrailed, in the first
quarter a Lozenge, Argent, a Crescent for a difference. 103 Thomas Burdet of
Bramcot in the County of Warwick, Esquire Azure, two Bars, Or, on each 3 Martlets,
Gules.
March 1.
104 George Morton of St. Andrews Milborn in the County of Dorcet, Esquire
Quarterly, Gules and Ermine, in the first and fourth a Goats head erased,
Argent.
May 31. 1619.
105 Sir William Harvy, Knight, since a Baron of England and Ireland, Ext.
Gules, on a Bend, Argent, 3 Trefoyls, Vert.
June 4.
106 Thomas Mackworth of Normanton in the County of Rutland, Esquire. Per pale
indented, Ermine and Sable, a Cheuron; Gules, Fretty, Or,
June 15.
107 William Gray of Chillingham in the County of Northumberland, Esquire, now
Baron of VVarke. Gules, a Lion Rampant within a Border engrailed, Argent.
July 19.
108 William Villiers of Brooksby in the County of Leicester, Esquire. Argent,
on a Cross, Gules, 5 Escallops, Or.
July 20.
109 Sir James Ley of VVestbury, in the County of Wilts, Knight, since Earl of
Marlborough. Argent, a Cheuron between three Bears heads bendways, couped,
Sable.
July 21.
110 William Hicks of Beverston in the County of Gloucester, Esquire. Gules, a
Fesse wavy between 3 Flowers de lis, Or.
September. 17.
111 Sir Thomas Beaumont of Coleorton in the County of Leicester, Knight, since
a Viscount of Ireland. France, a Lion Rampant, Or.
Nov. 10.
112 Henry Salisbury of Leweney in the County of Denbigh, Esquire. Gules, a
Lion Rampant, Argent, crowned, bewteen three Crescents, Or.
November. 16.
113 Erasmus Driden of Canon's Ashby in the County of Northampton, Esquire Azure, a
Lion Rampant in chief, a Globe between 2 Stars, Or.
November. 28.
114 William Armine in the County of Lincoln, Esquire. Ermine, a Saltire
engrailed, and chief, Gules, thereon a Lion passant, Or.
December. 1.
115 Sir William Bamburg of Howson in the County of York, Knight. Extinct,
Argent, a Pheon on a chief, Sable, a Lion passant, of the first.
December. 2.
116 Edward Hartop of Freathby in the County of Leicester, Esquire. Sable, a
Cheuron, Ermine, between 3 Otters, passant, Argent.
December. 31.
117 John Mill of Cannons Court in the County of Sussex, Esquire Per Fesse, Argent
and Sable, a Pale counterchang'd, 3 Bears saliant of the last, musled, Or.
January 31.
118 Francis Ratcliffe of Darentwater in the County of Cumberland, Esquire.
Argent, a Bend engrailed, Sable, a Label and Crescent.
Febr. 6.
119 Sir David Foulis of Ingleby in the County of York, Knight. Argent, 3
Bayleaves, Vert.
Febr. 16.
120 Thomas Philips of Barington in the County of Somerset, Esquire. Argent, a
Cheuron between 3 Roses, Gules.
March 7.
121 Sir Claudius Foster of Bramburg Castle in the County of Northumberland,
Knight. Argent, a Cheuron, Vert between 3 Hunters horns, Sable, garnished, Or.
March 23.
122 Anthony Chester of Chichley in the County of Buckingham, Esquire. Per
pale, Argent and Sable, a Cheuron between three Rams heads erased (armed Or)
within a Border engrail'd, roundelly, all counterchang'd.
March 28.
123 Sir Samuel Tryon of Lair Marney in Com: Essex, Knight. Azure, a Fesse
embattel'd between six Stars, Or.
April 2. 1620.
124 Adam Newton of Charlton in the County of Kent, Esquire. Azure, two Estrich
feathers in Saltier between three Boars heads and necks couped, Argent. Newton
alias Puckering, vide 76. 125. Apr. 2. Sir John Botiler of Hatfield Woodhall in
Com: Hartford, Knight, since a Baron of England. Gules, a Fesse checky, Argent
and Sable between 6 Crosses, formed and Fitchee of the second. 126 Apr. 3.
Gilbert Gerrard of Harrow super Montem in Com: Middlesex, Esquire. Quarterly,
the first and 4th. Argent, a Saltier, Gules, the second and third Azure, a Lion
Rampant, Ermine, crowned, Or. 127 May 3. Humphrey Lee of Langley in the County
of Salop, Esquire. Gules, Billettee, a Fesse checky, Or and Azure. 128 May 5.
Richard Berney of Parkhall in Redham in Com: Norfolk, Esquire Per pale, Gules and
Ermine, a cross engrailed, Ermine. 129 May 20. Humphrey Foster of Aldermaston
in the County of Berks, Esquire. Sable, a Cheuron engrailed between three
Arrows, Argent. 130 May 29. Thomas Bigs of Lenchwick in the County of
Worcester, Esquire Extinct. Argent, on a Fesse between 3 Ravens Sable, as many
Annulets of the field. 131 May 30. Henry Bellingham of Helsington in the County
of Westmerland, Esquire Extinct. Argent, three Bugle horns Sable, stringed and
garnisht, Or. 132 May 31. William Yelverton of Rougham in the County of
Norfolk, Esqure. Extinct. Argent, three Lions Rampant, and a Chief, Gules. 133
June 1. John Scudamore of Home lacy in Com: Hereford, Esquire, Viscount of
Ireland. Gules, three Stirrups with Leathers, Or. 134 June 2. Sir Thomas Gore
of Stitnam in the County of York, Knight. Barry of 8. Argent and Gules, a
cross pattee, Sable. 135 June 22. John Packington of Alisbury in Com:
Buckingham, Esquire per Cheuron, Sable and Argent, in chief 3 Mullets, Or. In Base
as many Garbs, Gules. 136 June 28. Ralph Ashton of Lever in the County of
Lancaster, Esquire. Argent, a Mullet, Sable. 137 July 1. Sir Baptist Hicks of
Cambden in Com: Gloucester, Knight, a Viscount of England. Ext. Gules, a Fesse
wavy between 3 Flowerdelis, Or, a Crescent for a difference. 138 July 3. Sir
Thomas Roberts of Glassenbury in the County of Kent, Knight, Azure, on a
Cheuron, Argent, three Mullets, Sable. 139 July 8. John Hanmer of Hanmer in the
County of Flint, Esquire. Argent, two Lions passant gardant, Azure. 140 July
13. Edward Osborn of Keeton in the County of York, Esquire. Quarterly Ermine
and Azure, a Cross, Or. 141 July 20. Henry Felton of Playford in the County of
Suffolk, Esquire. Gules, two Lions passant, Ermine, crowned, Or. 142 July 21.
Willaim Challouer of Gisborow in the county of York, Esquire, Extinct. Sable, a
Cheuron between 3 Cherubs, Or. 143 July 22. Edward Friar of Water-Eaton in the
county of Oxford, Esquire Gules, two Flanches, Or, three Wheat ears erect in Fesse,
counterchang'd. 144 July 24. Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham in the county of
Sussex, Knight. Argent, on a Bend cottised, Gules, three Bezants. 145 July 26.
Sir Francis Vincent of Stock-d'Abernon in the county of Surrey, Knight. Azure,
3 Quarterfoyls, Argent. 146 Feb. 27. Sir Henry Clare of Ormsby in the county of
Norfolk, Knight. Argent on a Fesse, Azure, 3 Eagles displayed, Or. Ext. 147
Mar. 8. Sir Benjamine Tichborn of Tichborn in the county of Southampton,
Knight. Varry, a Chief, Or.
May 5. 1621.
148 Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey, in the county of Chester, Knight.
Argent, 3 Bendlets wavy, Azure. 149 May 8. Sir Thomas Delves of Puddington in
the county of Chester, Knight. Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, Fretty, Or, between 3
Delves or spits of Earth, Sable. 150 June 22. Sir Lewis Watson of Rockingham
Castle in the county of Northampton Knight, since a Baron. Argent, on a Cheuron
engrailed, Azure, between 3 Martlets, Sable, as many Crescents, Or. 151 June
29. Sir Tho: Palmer of Wingham in the county of Kent, Knight. Or, two bars,
Gules, on each 3 Trefoyls, Argent, in chief, a Greyhound current, Sable,
collered, of the first. 152 July 3. Sir Richard Roberts of Truro in Co: Cornwall
Knight. since a Baron of England. Azure, 3 Stars, and a chief, wavy, Or. 153 July
19. John Rivers of Chafford in the county of Kent, Esquire. Argent, 2. Bars
Dauncettee, Azure, in chief, three Bezants. 154 Aug. 16. Henry Jernegan of
Cossey in the county of Norfolk, Esquire. Argent, 3 Buckles, Gules. 155 Sept.
6. Thomas Darnell of Heiling in Com: Lincoln, Esquire. Azure, two bars, and six
Mascles, Or, 3. 2. and 1. 156 Sept. 14. Sir Isaac Sedley of great Chart, since
of St. Cleres in Com: Kent, Knight. Azure, a Fesse wavy between 3. Goats heads
erased, Argent, attired, Or. 157 Sept. 21. Robert Brown of Walcot in Com:
Northampton. Azure, a Cheuron between 3 Escallops, Or. 158 October. 11. John
Hewit of Headly Hall in the county of York, Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron between 3
Owls, Argent. 159 Nov. 8. Sir Nicholas Hide of Albury in the county of
Hertford, Knight. Or, a Cheuron between 3. Lozenges, Azure, on a chief, Gules,
an Eagle, Or. 160 Nov. 9. John Philips of Picton in the county of Pembrook,
Esquire. Argent, a Lion Rampant, Sable, collered, Gules, chained, Or. 161 Nov.
24. Sir John Stepney of Prendergast in the county of Pembrook, Knight. Gules, a
Fesse cheeky, Or, and Azure, between 3 Owls, Argent: 162 December. 5. Baldwin
Wake of Cleredon in the county of Somerset, Esquire. Or, two bars, Gules, in
chief, 3 Torteauxes. 163 December. 19. William Masham of Highlaver in the county
of Essex, Esquire. Or, a Fesse Humet, Gules, between 2 Lions passant, Sable.
164 December. 21. John Colebrond of Botham in the county of Sussex, Esquire Azure, 3
Levels with Plummets, Or. 165 Jan. 4. Sir John Hotham of Scarborough in the
county of York, Knight. Or, on a Bend, Sable, 3 Mullets, Argent. 166 Jan. 14.
Francis Mansell of Muddlescomb in the county of Carmarthen, Esquire Argent, a
Cheuron between 3 Maunches Sable, a Crescent for a difference. 167 Jan. 18.
Edward Powell of Penkelly in the county of Hereford, Esquire. Or, a Cheuron
between 3 Lions gambes or paws erased, Gules. 168 Feb. 16. Sir John Gerrard,
or Garrard of Lamer in Com: Hertf. a Fess, Sable, a Lion passant of the first.
169 Feb. 23. Sir Richard Grosvenour of Eaton in Co: Chester, Knight. Azure, a Garb,
Or. 170 March 11. Sir Henry Mody of Garesdon in Com: Wiltsh. Knight. Gules, a
Fesse engrailed between 3 Harpyes, Argent, crined, Or. 171 Mar. 17. John Barker
of Grimston Hall in Trimley in Suffolk, Esquire. Per Fesse, embattel'd, Or,
and Azure, 3 Martlets counterchang'd. 172 Mar. 18. Sir William Button of Alcon
in the county of Wilts: Knight. Erm. a Fesse, Gules.
March 26. 1622.
123 John Gage of Forle in the county of Sussex. Gyronny of 4. Argent and
Azure, a Saltier, Gules. 174 May 14. William Goring of Burton in Com: Sussex,
Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron between 3. Annulets, Gules. 175 May 18. Peter
Courteen of Aldington in the county of Worcester. Or, a Tabot passant, Sable.
176 May 23. Sir Richard Norton of Rotherfield in the county of Southampt.
Knight. Vert, a Lion Rampant, Or, alibi Argent. 177 May 30. Sir John Leventhorp
of Shingle Hall in Com: Hartford, Knight. Argent, a Bend gobony, Sable, and
Gules, cottized, of the last. 178 June 3. Capell Bedell of Hamerton in the
county of Huntington Esquire, Gules, a Cheuron engrailed between three
Escallops, Argent. 179 June 13. John Darell of Westwoodhey in the county of
Berks. Extinct. Azure, a Lion Rampant, Or, crowned, Argent, a Crescent for a
difference. 180 June 15. William Williams of Veynol in the county of Carnarvan,
Esquire Gules, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three men's heads coupee, Proper, crined,
Or. 181 June 18. Sir Francis Ashby of Hartfield in Com: Middlesex. Azure, a
Cheuron between 3 Eagles with two heads, Or. 182 July 3. Sir Anthony Ashley of
Saint Giles Winborn in the county of Dorcet Knight. Ext. Azure, a Cinquefoyl,
Ermine, a border engrailed, Or. 183 July 4. John Cooper of Rockbourn in the
county of Southampton. Gules, a Bend engrailed between 6 Lions Rampant Or. 184
July 17. Edmund Prideaux of Netherton in Com: Devon. Argent, a Cheuron Sable, a
Label, Gules. 185 July 21. Sir Thomas Haselrig of Nousley in the county of
Leicester, Knight. Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Hasle leaves, Vert. 186 July 22.
Sir Thomas Burton of Stockerstone in the county of Leicester. Sable, a Cheuron
between 3 Owls, Argent, crowned, Or. 187 July 24. Francis Foliamb of Walton in
Com: Derby, Esquire Sable, a Bend between six Escallops, Or. 188 July 30.
Edward Yate of Buckland in Com: Berks, Esquire. Per Fesse embattel'd, Argent
and Sable, 3 Yates counterchang'd. 189 Aug. 1. George Chudley of Ashton in Com:
Devon, Esquire. Ermine, three Lions Rampant, Gules. 190 Aug. 13. Will: Meredith
of Stansty in Com: Denbigh, Esquire, now of Leeds in Com: Cantij. Azure, a Lion
Rampant, Or. 191 Aug. 20. Francis Drake of Buckland in Com: Devon, Esquire.
Argent, a Wivern, Gules. 192 October. 22. Hugh Midleton of Ruthin in Com:
Denbigh, Esquire. Argent, on a Pile, Vert, three Wolves heads erased of the
field. 193 Nov. 12. Gifford Thornhurst of Agne Court, Kent. Ermine, on a chief,
Gules, two Leopards heads, Or. 194 Nov. 16. Percy Herbert of Redcastle in Com:
Montgomery, Esquire. Per pale, Azure and Gules, three Lions Rampant, Argent.
195 December. 7. Sir Robert Fisher of Packington in Com: Warwick, Knight.
Argent, a Cheuron Varry between 3 demi Lions Rampant, Gules. 196 December. 18.
Hardolph Wastneys of Hendon in the county of Nottingham, Esquire Sable, a Lion
Rampant with two tayls, Argent, collered, Gules. 197 December, 20. Sir Henry
Skipwith of Prestwould in the county of Lincoln, Knight. Barry of 6. Gules, and
on a chief, Argent, a Greyhound current, Sable. 198 December. 22. Tho: Harris or
Herris of Boreatton in the county of Salop, Esquire. Or, 3 Hedghogs, or
Urchins, Azure. 199 December. 23. Nicholas Tempest of Stella in the Bishopric of
Durham, Esquire. Argent, a Bend between six Martlets, Sable. 200 Feb: 16.
Francis Cottington of Hanworth in Com: Middlesex, Esquire, since a Baron.
Azure, on a Fesse between 3 Roses, Or, as many Hunters horns, Sable. The bugles
have since been left out.
April 12. 1623.
201 Thomas Harris of Tongue Castle in the county of Salop, Esquire Ext. Barry of 8.
Ermine and Azure, 3 Annulets, Or. 202 June 28. Edw. Barkham of Southacre in
Com: Norfolk, Esquire. Paly of six, Argent and gules, a Cheuron, Or. 203 July
4. John Corbet of Sprouston in Com: Norfolk, Esquire. Or, a Raven Proper, a
Cinquefoyle, Gules, for a difference. 204 Aug. 13. Sir Thomas Playters of
Sotterley in the county of Suffolk, Bendy wavy of 6. Argent and Azure.
King CHARLES.
July 27. 1626.
205 SIr John Ashfield of Netherhall in the county of Suffolk. Sable, a Fesse
engrailed between 3. Flowers-deluce, Argent. 206 Sept. 8. Henry Harpur of S.
Calke in the county of Derby, Esquire. Argent, a Lion Rampant within a Border
engrailed, Sable. 207 December. 20. Edward Seabright of Befford in Com:
Worcester, Esquire. Argent, 3 Cinquefoyls, Sable. 208 Jan. 29. John Beaumont of
Gracedieu in Com: Leicester. France, a Lion Rampant, Or. 209 Feb. 1. Sir Edward
Dering of Surrenden Dering in Com: Kent. Or, a Saltier, Sable. 210 Feb. 5.
George Kempe of Pentlow in Com: Essex, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron engrailed,
Gules, between 3 Estoils, Azure. 211 Mar. 10. Will: Brereton of Hanford in Com:
Chester, Esquire Argent, 2 Bars, Sable, over all a Cross formee, floury, Gules,
charged with five Besants. 212 Mar. 12. Patricke Curwen of Workington in Com:
Cumberland, Esquire, created Baronet, Argent, Fretty, Gules, a Chief, Azure.
213 Sir William Russel of Whitley in Co: Worcester. Argent, a Cheuron, Azure,
between 3 Croslets, Sable. 214 Mar. 14. John Spencer of Offley in Com.
Hertford. Quarterly, Argent and Gules, Fretty, Or, on a Bend, Sable, three
Flowerdelis of the first. 215 Mar. 17. Sir Giles Escourte of Newton in Com:
Wilts, Knight. Ermine, on a chief, Gules, 3 Stars, Or.
April 19 1627.
216 Thomas Alisbury, Mr. of Requests. Azure, a cross, Argent. 217 April 21.
Thomas Style of Wateringbury in Com: Kent, Esquire. Sable, a Fesse ingrailed,
fretty of the field between 3 Flowerdelis, Or, a border of the second. 218
Frederick Cornwallis of Bramhall in Com: Suffolk, Esquire. Sable, Guttee,
Argent, on a Fesse, Or, three Choughes proper. 219 Drue Drury in Com: Norfolk,
Esquire Argent on a chief, Vert, the letter T between two Mullets, Or. 220 William
Skevington of Fisherwike in Com: St^fford, Esquire Argent, 3 Bulls heads erased,
Sable. 221 Sir Robert Crane of Chilton in Com: Suffolk, Knight. Extinct.
Argent, a Fesse between 3 Croslets, Gules. 222 May 17. Anthony Wingfield of
Goodwine in Com: Suffolk, Esquire. Argent, on a Bend, Gules, cottised, Sable, 3
pair of Wings of the first. 223 William Colepeper of Preston Hall in Com: Kent.
Argent, a Bend engrailed, Gules. 224 Giles Bruges of Wilton in Com: Hereford,
Esquire. Argent, on a Cross, Sable, a Leopards head, Or. 225 John Kirle of
Much-marele in Com: Hereford, Esquire. Vert, a Cheur. between 3 Flower de lis,
Or. 226 May 20. Sir Humphrey Style of Becknam in Com: Kent. Sable, a Fesse
engrailed, Fretty, of the Field, between three Flower de lis, Or. 227 May 21.
Henry Moor of Falley in Com: Berks, Esquire. Argent, a Morecock, Sable. 228 May
28. Thomas Heal of Fleet in Com: Devon, Esquire. Argent, 5 Lozenges in Pale,
Gules, on the middlemost a Leopards head, Or. 229 May 28. John Charlton of
Holcumb in Com: Oxford, Esquire. Argent, on a Bend Sable, 3 Mascles of the
field. 230 May 30. Thomas Maples of Stow in Com: Huntington, Esquire. Azure, a
Cheuron quarterly, Or, and Argent, between 3 Flowerdelis of the second. 231 Sir
John Isham of Lamport in Com: Northampton, Knight. Gules. 3 Piles, surmounted
by a Fesse, all wavy, Argent. 232 Henry Bagot of Blithfield in the County of
Stafford, Esquire. Ermine, three Cheurons, Azure. 233 May 31. Lewis Pollard of
Kings-Nimph in the County of Devon, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron, Gules, between
3 Mullets, Sable. 234 June 1. Francis Mannock of Giffords Hall in Stoke, near
Neyland, in the County of Suffolk, Esquire. Sable, a Cross formee flory,
Argent. 235 June 7. Henry Griffith of Agnes Burton in the County of York, Esquire
Gules, on a Fesse, Argent, between 6 Lions Rampant, Or, 3 Martlets, Sable. 236
June 8. Lodowick Dyer of Staughton in the County of Huntington, Esquire. Or, a
Chief indented, Gules. 237 June 9. Sir Hugh Stewkly of Hinton in the County of
Southamp. Knight. Azure, 3 Pears, Or. 238 June 26. Edward Stanly of Biggarstaff
in the county of Lancaster, Esquire Argent, on a Bend, Azure, 3 Stags heads
cabossed, Or, a Crescent for a difference. 239 June 28. Edward Littleton of
Pileton Hall in the County of Stafford, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron between 3
Escallops, Sable. 240 July 7. Ambrose Brown of Bestworth Castle in the County
of Surry, Esquire Sable in Bend, double cottized, 3 Lions passant, Argent. 241 July
8. Sackvile Crow of Lanherm in the County of Carmarthen, Esquire Gules, a Cheuron,
Or, between 3 Cocks, Argent. 242 July 11. Michael Livesey of East-Church in the
Isle of Shippey in Com: Kent, Esquire Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules, between 3
Trefoyls, Vert. 243 July 17. Simon Bennet of Benhampton in Com: Buckingham,
Esquire. Gules, Bezant between 3 demi Lions Rampant, Argent. 244 July 19. Sir
Thomas Fisher of the Parish of Saint Giles in Com: Middlesex, Knight. Or, 3
demi Lions Rampant, a chief indented, Gules. 245 July 23. Thomas Bowyer of
Legthorn in Com: Surry, Esquire. Or, a Bend Varry, cottized, Sable. 246 July
29. Buts Bacon of Mildenhall in Com: Suffolk, Esquire. Gules, on a chief,
Argent, two Mullets, Sable, pierced, a Crescent for a difference. 247 Sept. 19.
John Corbet of Stoke in the county of Salop, Esquire. Or, 2 Ravens in Pale
proper, a Border engrailed, Gules.
1627. October. 31.
248 Sir Edward Tirrill of Thornton in the county of Buckingham, Knight.
Argent, 2 cheurons, Azure, a Border engrailed, Gules, a Crescent. 249 Feb. 28.
Basil Dixwel of Folkeston in Com: Kent, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron, Gules,
between 3 Flowerdelis, Sable. 250 Mar. 10. Sir Richard Young Knight. Per Bend,
Ermine and Ermines, a Lion rampant, Or. 251 May 6. William Pennyman Junior, of
Mask in Com York, Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron, Ermine, between 3 Spear heads,
Argent. 252 May 7. William Stonehouse of Radley in Com: Berks, Esquire. Argent,
on a Fesse, Sable, between three Falcons volant, Azure, a Leopards head and two
Mullets, Or. 253 May 21. Sir Thomas Fowler of Islington in Com: Middlesex,
Knight. Azure, on a Cheuron, Argent, between 3 Herns, Or, as many Crosses
formee, Gules. 254 June 9. Sir John Fenwicke of Fenwicke in Com:
Northumberland, Knight. Per Fesse, Gules and Argent, 6 Martlets counterchang'd.
255 June 30. Sir Will: Wray of Trebitch in Com: Cornwall, Knight. Sable, a
Cheuron between 3 Hatchets, Argent, handed, Gules. 256 July 1. John Trelawney
of Trelaney in Com: Cornwall, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron Sable, between three
Laurel leaves, Vert. 257 July 14. John Conyers of Norden in the Bishopric of
Durham, Gent. Azure, a Maunch, Or. 258 July 24. John Bolls of Scrampton in the
county of Lincoln, Esquire Azure, 3 Bolles Or, out of each a Boars head erected,
Argent. 259 July 25. Thomas Aston of Aston in Com: Chester, Esquire Per Cheuron,
Sable and Argent. 260 July 30. Kenhelm Jenour of Much-Dunmore in the county of
Essex, Esquire. Azure, a Cross patee between 3 Flowerdelis, Or. 261 Aug. 15.
Sir John Price of Newtown in Com: Montgomery, Knight. Gules, a Lion Rampant
regardant. 262 Aug. 19. Sir Richard Beaumont of Whitley in Com: York, Knight.
Gules, cressenty, a Lion rampant, Argent. 263 William Wiseman of Canfield Hall
in the County of Essex, Esquire Sable, a Cheuron between 3 Cronels or Burs for
Spears, Argent. 264 Septem. 1. Thomas Nightingale of Newport Pond in Com:
Essex, Esquire. Per pale, Argent and Gules, a Rose counterchang'd. 265 Sept. 2.
John Jaques in Com: Middlesex, Esquire Argent, on a Fess engrailed, Sable, 3
Escallops of the field. 266 Sept. 6. Robert Dillington of the Isle of Wight in
the county of Southampton, Esquire a Lion Rampant, Or. 267 Sept. 12, Francis Pile
of Compton in the county of Berks, Esquire. Sable, a Cross between 4 Nails,
Gules. 268 John Pole of Shur in Com: Devon. Esquire. Azure, Floury, Or, a Lion
Rampant, Argent. 269 Sept. 14. Wil^iam Lewis of Langors in the county of
Brecknocke, Esquire Sable, a Cheuron, Ermine, between three Spearheads. 270
September. 20. William Culpeper of Wakehurst in the county of Sussex, Esquire.
Argent, a Bend engrailed, Gules, a Crescent. 371 Nov. 3. Peter Vanlore of
Tylehurst in the county of Berks, Esquire. Or, a Garland or Orle of Woodbine or
Honysuckles proper. 272 October. 9. Sir John Lawrence of Iver in the County of
Buckingham, Knight. Argent, a Cross Raguly, on a chief, Gules, a Lion of
England. 273 October. 23. Anthony Slingsby of Screvin in the county of York,
Esquire. Quarterly, the first and 4th. Gules, a Cheuron between 2 Leopards
heads, and a Hutchet or bugle, Argent. The 2d. and 3d. Argent, a Griffon
surgeant, Sable, suppressed by a Fess, Gules. 274 October. 24. Thomas Vavasor of
Haslewood in the County of York, Esquire. Or, a Fesse dauncette, Sable. 275
Nov. 24. Robert Woolsley of Woolsley in the county of Stafford, Esquire Argent, a
Talbot passant, Gules. 276 December. 8. Rice Rudd of Aberglainey in Com:
Carmarthen, Esquire Azure, a Lion Rampant and Canton, Or. 277 Dec. 18. Rich:
Wiseman of Thundersley in Com: Lincoln, Esquire. Sable, a Cheuron between 3
Cronels or Spears burs, Argent. 278 Dec. 19. Henry Ferrers of Skellingthorp in
the county of Lincoln, Esquire. Argent, on a Bend, Gules, cottized, Sable, 3
Horshoes, Argent. 279 Jan. 3. John Anderson of St. Ives in the County of
Huntington, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron between three Crosses formee, Sable. 280
Jan. 19. Sir William Russel of Chippenham in the County of Cambridg, Knight.
Argent, a Lion Rampant, Gules, on a chief, Sable, 3 Roses, Argent. 281 Jan. 29.
Richard Everard of much Waltham in the county of Essex, Esquire. Gules, a Fesse
undee between three Stars, Argent. 282 Thomas Powel of Barkenhead in the county
of Chester, Esquire. Sable, 3 Roses, Argent. 283 Mar. 2. William Luckin of
Waltham in the County of Essex, Esquire. Sable, a Fess indented, Argent,
between 2 Leopards heads, Or. 284 Mar. 29. Richard Graham of Esk in the County
of Cumberland, Esquire Sable, a Cross patee, Argent. 285 Apr. 2. George Twisleton
of Barley in the county of York, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron between three
Wants or Moles, Sable. 286 May 30. William Acton of the City of London,
Esquire. Gules, Crusuly Fitchee, Or, two Lions passant, Argent. 287 June 1.
Nicholas Le-strange of Hunstanton in the county of Norfolk, Esquire Gules, 2 Lions
passant Argent. 288 June 15. John Holland of Quindenham in the county of
Norfolk, Esquire. Azure, Flory, a Lion Rampant, gardant and Border, Argent.
289 June 28. Edward Alleyn of Hatfield in the county of Essex, Esquire. Sable,
a Cross potent, Or. 290 July 2. Richard Earl of Craglethorp in the county of
Lincoln, Esquire Gules, 3 Escallops, a Border engrailed. Argent. 291 Novem. 28.
Robert Ducy Alderman of London. Or, a Fesse varry between Cinquefoyls, Gules,
since altered to Or. 2 Lions passant, Gules. 292 Sir Richard Greenvile, Knight,
and Colonel. Gules, three Rests, Or, vel clarions. 293 July 10. Edward Moseley
of Rowleston in the county of Stafford, Esquire. Sable, a Cheuron between 3
Pickaxes, Argent. 294 Jan. 8. Martin Lumley of great Bradfield in Com: Essex,
Esquire Or, a chief, Gules. 295 Feb. 15 William Dalston of Dalston in Com:
Cumberland, Esquire Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Ravens or Daws heads, Sable, bills,
Or. 296 Feb. 19. Henry Fletcher of Hutton in Com: Cumberland, Esquire. Argent,
a Saltier engrailed between four Roundels, Argent, each charged with a Pheon of
the field. 297 March 4. Nicholas Cole of Brampeth in the County of Durham,
Esquire. Argent, a Fesse engrailed between 3 Scorpions or Crabs, Sable. 298
Aug. 23. Edmund Pie of Leckhamsted in the County of Buckingham, Esquire. Or, on
a Pile, Azure, three Escallops of the field. 299 May 26. Simon Every of
Eggington in Com: Derby, Esquire. Or, 4 Cheurons, Gules. 300 May 29. Will.
Langley of Higham-Golein in Com: Bedford. Paly o 6. Argent, and Vert. 301 June
8. William Paston of Oxnead, in Com: Norfolk, Esquire Argent, 6 Flowerdelis,
Azure, a chief indented, Or. 302 June 11. James Stonehouse of Amerdon Hall in
Com: Essex, Esquire. Argent, on a Fesse, Sable, between 3 Falcons volant,
Azure, a Leopards head, and two Mullets, Or. 303 June 24. John Palgrave of
Norwood Barningham in Com: Norfolk, Esquire Azure, a Lion rampant gardant, Argent.
304 June 25. Gerrard Napper of Middlema^sh Hall in Com: Dorcet, Esquire.
Argent, a Saltier, Sable, between 4 Roses, Gules. 305 June 28. Thomas Whitmore
of Appley in Com: Salop, Esquire. Vert, Fretty, O^. 306 June 29 John Maney of
Linton in the County of Kent, Esquire. Per pale, Argent and Sable, 3 Cheurons
between as many Cinquefoyls, counterchang'd. 307 June 30. Sir Thomas Cave of
Stanford in Com: Northampton, Knight. Azure, Fretty, Argent. 308 Sir
Christopher Yelverton of Easton Manduit in Com: Norfolk, Knight. Argent, three
Lions rampant, and a Chief, Gules. 309 July 3. William Bottiler of Teston in
Com: Kent, Esquire. Argent, on a Chief, Sable, 3 Cups covered, Or. 310 July 5.
Sir Thomas Hatton of Longstanton in the County of Cambridge, Knight. Azure, a
Cheuron between three Garbs, Or. 311 July 7. Thomas Abd, of Felxhall in the
county of Essex, Esquire Or, 2 Cheurons between 3 Cinquefoys, Sable. 312 July 14.
John Bampfield of Poltmore in Com: Devon, Esquire Or, on a Bend, Gules, 3 Mullets,
Argent. 313 Sir John Cotton of Landwade in the the County of Cambridge, Knight.
Sable, a Cheuron between 3 Griffons heads erased, Argent. 314 July 15. Sir
Simon de Ewes of Stowhall in Com: Suffolk, Knight. Or, 3 Caterfoyls, Gules. 315
Henry Frederick Thin of Caurse Castle in Com: Salop, Esquire. Barry of ten,
Or, and Sable. 316 John Burgoin of Sutton, in Com: Bedford, Esquire. Gules, a
Cheuron, Or, between 3 Talbots on chief, embatteld, Argent, as many Martlets,
Sable. 317 July 16. John Northcote of Hain in Com: Devon, Esquire. Quarterly,
Argent, a Fesse between 3 Cross molines, Sable, and Argent, 3 Croslets in bend,
Sable. 318 July 17. Sir William Drake of Sherdelowes in Com: Buckingham,
Knight. Argent, a Wivern, Gules. 319 July 23. Thomas Rous of Rousleuch in the
county of Worcester, Esquire. Sable, 2 Bars engrailed, Argent. 320 Radus Hare
of Stow Bardolph in Co: Norfolk, Esquire. Gules, 2 Bars, and a chief indented,
Or. 321 July 24. Sir John Norwich of Brompton in Com: Northampton, Knight. Per
pale, Gules, and Azure, a Lion Rampant, Ermine. 322 July 26. John Brownlow of
Belton prope-Grantham in the County of Lincoln, Esqu Or, an Inescocheon and
Orle of Martlets, Sable. 323 July 27. Will: Brownlow of Humby in Com: Lincoln,
Esquire. Comme son friar, a Crescent for a difference. 324 July 28. John
Sidenham of Brimpton in the county of Somerset, Esquire. Argent, 3 Rams
passant, Sable. 325 Henry Prat of Coleshall in Com: Berks, Esquire. Argent, on
a Cheuron, Sable, between three Pellets, each charged with a Martlet of the
field, as many Mascles, Or. 326 Francis Nicols of Hardwicke in Co: Northampton,
Esquire. Argent, 3 Pheons and a Canton, Sable. 327 July 30. Sir William
Strickland of Boynton in the county of York, Knight. Gules, a Cheuron, Or,
between 3 Crosses formee, Argent, on a Canton, Ermine, a Bucks head eraced,
Sable. 328 August. 4. Sir Thomas Woolrich of Dudmaston in Com: Salop, Knight.
Azure, a Cheuron between 3 Wild Ducks volant, Argent, alias Owls. 329 Thomas
Mawleverer of Allerton Mawleverer in the county of York, Esquire. Gules, 3
Greyhounds current in pale, Argent. 330 Will: Boughton of Lawford-parva in the
county of Warwick, Esquire Sable, three Crescents, Or. 331 John Chichester of
Raleigh in Com: Devon. Esquire. Checky, Or, and Gules, a chief, Varry. 332
Norton Knatchbul of Mershamhatch in the county of Kent, Esquire. Azure, 3.
three Croslets Fitchee between 2 Bendlets, Or. 333 Hugh Windham of Pilsden
Court in Com: Dorcet Esquire. Azure, a Cheuron between 3 Lions heads erased,
Or. 334 Aug. 9. Richard Carew of Antony in the county of Cornwall, Esquire Or, 3
Lions passant, Sable. 335 William Castleton of St. Edmonds Bury in the county
of Suffolk, Esquire. Azure, on a Bend, Or, three Snakes of the field. 336
Richard Price of Gogerthan in Com: Cardigan, Esquire. Or, a Lion rampant
regardant, Sable. 337 Aug. 10. Hugh Cholmley of VVhitby in the county of York,
Esquire. Gules, 2 Helmets in chief, Argent, in base a Garb, Or. 338 Aug. 11.
William Spring of Packenham in Com: Suffolk, Esquire. Argent, on a cheuron
between 3 Mascles, Gules, as many Cinquefoyls of the field. 339 Thomas Trever
of Enfield in Com: Middles. Esquire Per bend Sinister, Ermine and Ermines, a Lion
rampant, Or. 340 John Curson of Kedliston in Com: Derby, Baronet of Scotland.
Argent, on a Bend Sable, three Popinjayes, Or, collered, Vert. 341 Hugh Owen of
Orelton in Com: Pembrook, Esquire Gules, on a Mount proper, a Bore, Argent,
collered and chained, Or, tied to a tree proper. 342 Aug. 12. Mo^ton Briggs of
Haughton in Com: Salop, Esquire. Gules, two Bars gemels, Or, on a Canton,
Sable, a Crescent, Or. 343 Henry Heyman of Somerfield in Com: Kent. Argent, on
a Cheuron engrailed, Azure, between 3 Martlets, Sable, as many Cinquefoyls, Or.
344 Thomas Sandford of Howgill Castle in Com: Westmerland, Esquire Per Cheuron,
Sable, and Ermine in chief, two Boars heads coupee, Or. 345 Aug. 14. Sir
Francis Rhodes of Balbrough in Com. Derby, Knight. Argent, a Lion passant
bendwayes, Gules, cottized, Ermine, between 2 Acorns, Azure. 346 Richard
Sprignell of Coppenthorp in Com. York, Esquire. Gules, 2 Bars gemels, in chief
a Lion of England. 347 Sir John Pots of Mannington in Com. Norfolk, Knight.
Azure, two Bars and a Bend, Or. 348 Sir John Goodrick of Ribston in Com. York,
Knight. Or, on a Fesse, Gules, between two Lions passant gardant, Sable, a
Flowerdeluce and 2 Cressents, Or. 349 Aug. 16. Robert Bindloss of Borwicke in
Com: Lancaster, Esquire. Quarterly per Fesse, indented, Gules, and on a bend
Or, a Cinquefoyl between two Seapies, Azure. 350 William Walter of Sarsden in
Com. Oxford, Esquire Azure, a Fesse indented, Or, between 3 Eagles, Argent, quaere.
351 Thomas Lawley of St. Powel in Com. Salop. Esquire. Argent, a Cross formee
throughout, or extended to the sides, Or, and Sable. 352 Sept. 6. William
Farmer of Easton-Neston in Com. Northampton, Esquire. Argent, a Fess, Sable,
between 3 Lions heads erased, Gules. 353 Septem. 9. John Davy of Creedy in Com:
Devon, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron, Sable, between three Mullets, Gules,
pierced. 354 Septem. 23. Thomas Petus of Rackheath in Com. Norfolk, Esquire.
Gules, a Fesse, Argent, between three Annulets, Or. 355 Dec. 11. William Andrew
of Denton in Com. Northampton. Esquire. Gules, a Cross, Or, surmounted of
another, Vert. 356 John Meux of the Isle of Wight in Com: Southampton, Esquire.
Paly of 6. Or and Azure, on a chief, Gules, 3 Crosses formee, Or. 357 December.
14. Sir Richard Gurney, Lord Mayor of the City of London, Knight. Paly
counter-paly of 6 pieces, per Fesse, Or, and Azure. 358 Dec. 15. Thomas Willis
of Fenditton in Com: Cambridge, Esquire. Per Fesse, Gules, and Argent, three
Lions Rampant, counterchanged, a Border, Ermine. 359 Francis Armitage of
Kirkles in Com: York, Esquire. Azure, a Lions head erased between 3 Croslets,
Or. 360 Dec. 18. Richard Halford of Wistow in Com. Leicest. Esquire. Argent, a
Greyhound passant, on a chief, Sable, 3 Flowerde lis of the field. 361 Dec. 24.
Sir Humphrey Tufton of Mote in Parochia Maidston in Kent, Knight. Sable, an Eagle
displayed, Ermine, a Border, Argent. 362 Dec. 30. Edward Cook of Langford, in
Com. Derby, Esquire Gules, 3 Crescents, and a Canton, Or. 363 June 25. John Read of
Brochet Hall in the County of Hertford, Esquire; Azure, a Griffon surgeant, Or*
His patent renewed by Oliver, Lord Protector.
The succeeding Baronets were made since the fourth of January, 1641. January
21. 1621.
364 ISaac Astley of Melton Constable in Com. Norfolk, Esquire. Azure, a
Cinquefoyl, Ermines, a Border engrailed, Or. 365 Janu. 22. Sir David
Conningham, Baronet of Nova Scotia. Argent, a Pall between 2 Castles, Sable.
366 Jan. 29. Sir John Rainey of Wrotham in the County of Kent, Baronet of Nova
Scotia. Gules, two Wings conjoined, Ermins. 367 Jan. 29. Rivet Eldred of
Saxham-Magna in Com. Suffolk, Esquire. Or, on a bend Raguly, Sable, 3 Bezants.
368 Jan. 29. John Gell of Hopton in Com: Derby, Esquire Per bend, Or, and Azure,
three Mullets of six points bendwayes, counterchang'd. 369 Jan. 29. Sir Vincent
Corbet of Morton-Corbet in Com: Salop, Knight. Or, a Raven, Sable. 370 Feb. 4. Sir
John Kay of Woodsom in Com. York, Knight. Argent, two Bendlets, Sable. 371 Feb.
5. Thomas Trollop of Casewick in Com. Lincoln, Esquire. Vert, three Stags
trippant, a border, Argent. 372 Mar. 3. Edw. Thomas of Michaels Town in Com.
Glamorgan. 373 Mar. 4. Sir William Cooper of Rattling Court in Kent, Baronet of
Nova Scotia. Argent, three Martlets on a chief engrailed, Gules, as many
Annulets, Or. 374 Mar. 5. Denner Strutt of little Worley in Com: Essex,
Esquire. Sable, a Cheuron, Argent, between 3 Croslets Fitchee, Or. 375 Marc. 8.
William St. Quintin of Horpan in Com: York, Esquire. Or, a Cheuron, Gules, a
Chief, Varry. 376 Mar. 14. Sir Robert Kemp of Gissing in Com: Norfolk, Knight.
Gules, 3 Garbs within a Border engrail'd, Or.
April 9. 1642.
377 James Ennion of Flower in Com: Northampton, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron
between 3 Ravens, Sable. 378 April. 19. Edmund Williams of Marle Hall in Com:
Dorcet, Esquire. 379 Apr. 22. John Williams of Minster Court in the Isle of
Thanet in the County of Kent, Esquire Vert, 3 Eagles displayed in fesse, Or. 380
Apr. 29. Sir George Winter of Huddington in the County of Worcester, Knight.
Sable, a Fesse, Ermins. 381 May 4. John Borlace of Hockmer in the County of
Buckingham, Esquire Ermine, on on a bend, Sable, out of 2 Clouds radiant, as many
Arms and Hands proper, rending a Horshoe, Argent. 382 May 6. Henry Knowlis of
Grove place in the County of Southampton. Azure, Crusuly, a Cross moline
through voided, Or, a Crescent. 383 May 11. John Hamilton of the City of
London, Esquire. 384 May 12 Edw. Morgan of Lanterran in the County of Monmouth.
Or, a Griffon segreant, Sable. 385 May 13. Nich: Kemeys of Kevenmabley in Com:
Glamorgan, Esquire Vert, on a Cheuron, Or, 3 Pheons, Sable. 286 May 14. Trevour
Williams of Llangibby in the County of Monmouth, Esquire. 387 May 16. John
Reresby of Tribergh in the County of York, Esquire. Gules, on a Bend, Argent,
3 Crosses patee, Sable. 388 May 18. Poy^^ngs Moor of Loseley in the County of
Surry, Esquire Azure, on a Cross, Argent, 5 Martlets, Sable. 389 May 19.
Christopher Dawny of Cowicke in the County of York, Esquire Argent, on a Bend
cottised, Sable, 3 Annulets of the first. 390 May 27. William Ingleby of Ripley
in Com: York, Esquire. Sable, a Star Argent. 391 June 3. Thomas Hampson of
Toplow in the County of Bucks. Argent, three Flax brakes, Sable. 392 June 3.
Thomas Williamson of Eastmarkham in the County of Nottingham. Or, a Cheuron,
Gules, between three Trefoyls, Sable. 393 June 3. William Coney of Gillingham
in Com: Norfolk. Sable, a Fess cottized, between 3 Coneys current, Argent. 394
June 3. Richard Hardress of Hardress in Com: Kent, Esquire. Gules, a Lion
Rampant, Ermine, suppressed by a Cheuron, Or. 395 June 11. Christopher Lowther,
Esquire Or, 6 Annulets, Sable. 396 June 13. Thomas Alston of Odhill in Com:
Bedford, Esquire. Azure, ten Stars, Or. 397 June 20. Edward Corbet of Leyton in
Com: Montgom. Esquire. Or, 2 Ravens, a Border engrailed, Gules, a Crescent. 398
June 24. George Midleton of in Com: Lancaster, Esquire Argent, a Saltier engrailed,
Sable. 399 June 27. Edward Pailer of (...) in Com: York, Esquire Gules, 3 Lions
passant, gardant, Argent, over all a Bend, Or, thereon as many Mullets, Sable.
400 July 20. Sir William Widrington of (...) in Com: Northumberland. Quarterly,
Argent and Gules, a Bend, Sable. 401 Matthew VValkenburgh of (...) in Com:
York, Esquire. 402 July 20. Philip Constable of (...) in Com: York, Esquire.
Quarterly, Gules, and Varry, a bend, Or. 403 July 8. Sir Edward VViddrington of
Carington in Com: Northumb. Quarterly, Argent and Gules, a bend, Sable. 404
Aug. 15. Sir Steven Leonard of West Wickham in Com: Kent. Or, on a Fess, Gules,
3 Flowerdelis of the field. 405 Aug. 15. Robert Markham of in Com. Lincoln,
Esquire. Azure, on a chief, Or, a demi Lion issuant, Gules. 406 Aug. 15. Philip
Hungate of (...) in Com: York Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron engrailed between 3.
Talbots seiant, Argent. 407 Aug. 24. Sir William Thorold (...) Lincoln. Sable,
3 Goats saliant, Argent. 408 Aug. 29. Walter Rudston of (...) in Com. York.
Argent, 3 Bulls heads erased, Sable, armed, Or. 409 Aug. 30. Ralph Blackestone
of (...) Durham. Argent, 2 bars in chief, 3 Cocks, Gules, a border engrailed,
Azure. 410 Aug. 30. Walter Wrotesley of Wrotesley in Stafford descended, in a
direct male line from Sir Hugh, one of the founders of the Order of the Garter,
Or, 3 Piles Sable, a Canton, Ermine. 411 Septem. 1. Robert Throckmorton of
(...) in Com. York. Gules, on a Cheuron, Argent, 3 bars gemels, Sable. 412
Sept. 10. Will: Halton of (...) in Com. Essex. Esquire Per pale, Azure and Gules, a
Lion Rampant, Or. 413 Brocket Spencer of (...) in Com. Hartford, Esquire Quarterly,
Argent and Gules, Fretty, Or, on a Bend, Sable, three Flowerdelis of the first,
a Crescent. 414 Sept. 27. Edward Golding of (...) in Com: Nottingh. Esquire.
Gules, a Cheuron, Or, between 3 Bezants. 415 Sept. 27. William Smith of (...)
in Com: Cornwall, Esquire. Azure, a Saltier between 4 Martlets, Argent. 416
October. 1. Henry Hen of (...) in Com: Berks, Esquire Vert, a Cheuron in chief,
3 Lions Rampant, Or. 417 Octo. 5. Walter Blount of (...) in Com: Worcester,
Esquire. Barry nebulee, Or and Sable, a Crescent. 418 Oct. 14. Adam Litleton of
(...) in Com: Salop, Esquire. Argent, a Cheuron between 3 Escallops, Sable. 419
October. 15. Sir Thomas Haggerston of Haggeston, in Com: Northum. Azure, on a
Bend cottized, Argent, 3 Garbs of the first. 420 Nov. 2. Thomas Liddel of (...)
in the County of Durham, Esquire. Argent, Fretty on a chief, Gules, 3 Leopards
heads, Or. 421 Nov. 9. Richard Lawdy of Exeter, Esquire. 442 Febr. 4. Thomas
Chamberlain of (...) in Com: Oxon. Gules, an Inescocheon, Argent, an Orle of
Mullets, Or. 423 Feb. 28. Henry Hunlocke of (...) in the County of Derby,
Esquire. Azure on a Fesse between 3 Tigers heads erased, Or, as many mullets of
the field. 424 Feb. 28. Thomas Baud of Cayme in the County of Southapton,
Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron, Argent, between 2 other, Or. 425 Mar. 20. Richard
Crane of (...) in the county of Norfolk, Esquire Gules, on a Fess between 3
Crosses formee, fitchee, Or, as many Annulets, Azure. 426 Mar. 21. Samuel
Danvers of Culworth in Com: Northamp. Esquire. Gules, a Cheuron between 3
Mullets of six points, Or. Extinct.
July 17. 1643.
427 William Vavasour (...) York. Or, a Fess indented, Sable, a Crescent. 428
Aug. 1. Sir Edward Walgrave of Hever in Kent, Knight. Per pale, Argent and
Gules. 429 Aug. 26. Sir Henry Jones of Abermarle in Com: Carmarthen, Knight.
430 October. 28. John Pate of (...) in Com: Leicest. Argent, 3 Text R Sable. 431
Nov. 16. Willoughby Hickman of (...) in Com: Lincoln. Per pale indented, Argent
and Azure. 432 December. 7. Sir George Bottiler of (...) in Com: Hartford. 433
Jan. 17. Edw. Acton of (...) in Com: Salop, Esquire Gules, Crusuly, fitchee, Or, 2
Lions passant, Argent. 434 March. 14. Sir Francis Hawly of (...) in Com:
Somerset, since Lord Hawley. Vert, a Saltier engrailed, Or.
April 1. 1644.
435 John Preston of (...) Lancaster, Esquire. Argent, two bars on a Canton,
Gules, a Cinquefoyl, Or. 436 Apr. 25. Tho: Prestwich of (...) in Com: Lanc.
Vert, a Mermaid proper, alibi' the field Gules. 437 June 14. Robert Therold of
Hough in Com: Lincoln. Sable, 3 Goats saliant, Argent. 438 June 14. Gervas
Lucos of (...) in Com: Lancaster, Esquire 439 October. 8. Henry Bard of (...) in Com:
Middlesex, Esquire, after a Viscount. Sable, on a Cheuron between ten Martlets,
Argent, five Pellets. 440 Henry Williams of Gurnevit in Brecknock, Esquire. 3
Cocks. 441 Feb. 28. William Vancoster. 442 Mar. 22. William de Boreel 443
Novem. 25. Thomas Windebanck of (...) Wiltshire, Esquire. Vert, on a Cheuron,
between 3 Pigeons volant, Or, as many Tretoyls of the first. 444 Edward
Charlton of (...) Northumberland.
May 9. 1645.
445 George Carter of (...) 446 Feb: 7. Benjamin Wright of (...) in the county
of Suffolk, Esquire. Azure, 2 bars, Argent, in chief, 3 Leopards heads, Or.
447 Jan. 11. Richard Willis of (...) in the county of Cambridge, Esquire Per Fesse,
Gules and Argent, 3 Lions rampant, counterchang'd, a Border, Ermine, a
Crescent. 448 Sir Evan Lloyd of Yale in the county of Denbigh.
An exact Alphabetical Table of the names of those Gentlemen who are made
patterns of bearings in this Display of Heraldry, there being diverse other
Coats Blazoned to show the several ways of the said Art, having no names, are
omitted.
Note that all the names that have figures under 40. are in the Register of the
Knights of the Garter, or Baronets.

A.
ABdy, Page. 146 32. Abington, Page. 214 Abrahall, Page. 207 Abtot, Page. 365
Achilles, Page. 191 Acton, Page. 265. 31. 36 Adams, Page. 202 Adolph, Page. 12
Adolphus, Page. 14 Adrian, Page. 362 Albany Page. 428 Albert Page. 7 Aldam
Page. 74. 109 Alleyn Page. 82. 31 Alisbury Page. 29 Alphonsus Page. 7. 9 Alston
Page. 107. 35 Amades Page. 132 Ambes-Ace Page. 318 Anderson Page. 31 Anderton
Page. 349 Andrew Page. 33 Andrews Page. 377 Apleton Page. 24 Apothecaries Page.
304 Arblaster Page. 331 Arches Page. 298 Argall Page. 367 Armestrong Page. 344
Armine Page. 184 25 Armitage Page. 195. 34 Arnest Page. 134 Arthure Page. 295.
9 Arundel Page. 6 Ashby Page. 28 Ashcouch Page. 380 Ashfield Page. 145. 29
Ashmole Page. 362 Askew Page. 162 Ashley Page. 28 Ashley Cooper Page. 192
Ashton Page. 26 Astly Page. 9 34 Aston Page. 85 359. 22. 30 Atlow Page. 298
Audeley Page. 4. 11 Audyn Page. 183 Ayloffe Page. 189. 24
B.
Bacon Page. 120. 22. 30 Bagot Page. 30 Baines Page. 153 Baker Page. 164. 24
Bakster Page. 261 Baldbernay Page. 344 Bamburg Page. 25 Bampfield Page. 32
Banester Page. 5 Banning Page. 24 Barbers chirurgions, Page. 379 Bard Page. 36
Barinton Page. 67. 22 Barker Page. 27 Barkham Page. 370 28 Barkley Page. 80.
148 Barliffe Page. 189 Barnham Page. 115 Barnadistone Page. 84 Barnard Page.
199 Baskervile Page. 138 Basset Page. 5 Bateman Page. 112. 386 Bavaria Page. 6
Baud Page. 35 Baynham Page. 164. 431 Beauchamp Page. 382. 432 45. 5. 7. 8
Beaufort Page. 6, 7 Beaumont Page. 416 5. 8 25. 29. 30 Beddingfield Page. 214
Bedell Page. 28 Bedford Page. 5. 6 Belchier Page. 409 Bell Page. 305 Bellamount
Page. 416 Bellasis Page. 23 Belgrave Page. 314 Bellingham Page. 26 Belvale
Page. 280 Belvoir Page. 435 Bence Page. 303 Bendish Page. 177. 23 Bennet Page.
30 Berchen Page. 88 Berkley Page. 22 Berney Page. 26 Bertram Page. 77 Bertue
Page. 14 Berty Page. 330 Betfield Page. 362 Bethell Page. 384 Bevercote Page.
416 Beverly Page. 137 Besvill Page. 163 Bidalph Page. 214 Bigs Page. 26
Bindloss Page. 33 Bingham Page. 416 Bingley Page. 333 Bish Page. 137 Bishop
Page. 27 Blackamore Page. 274 Blacksmiths Page. 300 Blackstocke Page. 132
Blackstone Page. 25. 35 Bleverhasset Page. 235 Blount Page. 126. 7, 9, 11. 13
Bodenham Page. 318. 415 Bodvell Page. 406 Bodurda Page. 406 Bointon Page. 25
Bolles Page. 177. 30 Bohun Page. 5 Bolingbrook Page. 5 Bond Page. 295 Bonnell
Page. 190 Bonvill Page. 8 Booth Page. 177. 22 Borgoign Page. 201 Borlace Page.
34 Borough Page. 131 Boterewx Page. 206 Botiler Page. 315. 26. 32. 36 Boughton
Page. 33 Bourchier Page. 350. 6, 8, 9 Bourdeaux Page. 4 Bows Page. 331 Bowet
Page. 174 Bowthby Page. 197 Box Page. 184 Boxhull Page. 5 Boyer Page. 61. 30
Boil Page. 359 Boys Page. 159 Bradford Page. 173 Bradine Page. 403 Brandon
Page. 10 Bradstone Page. 138 Brampston Page. 292 Bray Page. 382. 10 Brereton
Page. 29 Brewers Page. 403 Bridger Page. 238 Bridgman Page. 294 Brigges Page.
33 Brograve Page. 161 Brook Page. 11. 13 Bromfield Page. 181 Broomwich Page.
265 Brotherton Page. 428 Broughill Page. 359 Brown Page. 38^. 11, 12, 27 30
Brownlow Page. 228. 32 Brudenel Page. 343, 23 Bruges Page. 13. 29 Brugh Page.
13 Bruise Page. 93. 404 Bryan Page. 33 Buggine Page. 260 Bullen Page. 164. 10
Burdet Page. 71. 25 Burgh Page. 9 Burgoin Page. 32 Burgundy Page. 8 Burleigh
Page. 14 Burley Page. 6 Burnell Page. 6 Burton Page. 202. 28 Burwash Page. 4
Butler Page. 351. 8 Button Page. 27 Butvillain Page. 113 Buxton Page. 186 Bye
Page. 230
C.
Cadwallader K. Page. 82 Callarde Page. 363 Calthrope Page. 386 Came Page. 225
Camel Page. 176 Camoys Page. 7 Canhanser Page. 221 Capenhurst Page. 229
Carbery Page. 186 Cardington Page. 288 Carew Page. 191. 11. 33 Carington Page.
232 Carleton Page. 356 Carlow Page. 336 Carpenters Page. 299 Carr Page. 13. 23
Carricke Page. 292 Carselake Page. 163 Carter Page. 36 Carry Page. 13 Cassimere
Page. 7. 12 Castile Page. 381. 9 Castleton Page. 33 Castilion Page. 302
Cathrope Page. 380 Catline Page. 421 Cave Page. 32 Cavell Page. 309 Cavendish
Page. 172. 404 Cawdrey Page. 279 Cecill Page. 13, 14 Caesar Page. 137 Chabot
Page. 10 Chalbot Page. 236 Chaloner Page. 99. 26 Chamberben Page. 107
Chamberlain Page. 9. 35 Chambers Page. 392 Chandos Page. 73. 4 Chancer Page.
366 Chapman Page. 386 Charles Emp. Page. 10. 12 Charlton Page. 29. 36 Cheyney
Page. 10, 11 Chester Page. 26 Chichest. Page. 188. 372. 33 Child Page. 219
Chiverton Page. 302 Cholmley Page. 33 Cholmondleigh Page. 23 Chorley Page. 147
Christierne Page. 14 Christmas Page. 228 Chudley Page. 28 Churchill Page. 186
Chute Page. 335. 405 Clare Page. 27 Clarence Page. 4 Clarenden Page. 120 Clarke
Page. 333. 25 Claudius Page. 14 Clearke Page. 214. 391 Clear Page. 109 Clepole
Page. 293 Clifford Page. 329. 373. 6, 7 11, 12 Clifton Page. 190. 402. 22
Clinton Page. 12 Clopton Page. 89 Clothworkers Page. 289 Clovell Page. 300 Clun
Page. 428 Clutterbuck Page. 265 Cobham Page. 5 Cocks Page. 174 Cole Page. 210.
32 Colebrand Page. 298 Colebrond Page. 27 Coleman Page. 188 Colepeper Page. 59.
31. 29 Collins Page. 412 Colston Page. 235 Comb Page. 182 Compton Page. 343
Coney Page. 35 Coniers Page. 9 Conisby Page. 204 Conningham Page. 34 Conrad
Page. 7 Conradus Page. 295 Constable Page. 269. 364 23. 35 Conway Page. 278
Conyers Page. 30 Cook Page. 363. 34 Cooper Page. 205. 28. 34 Cope Page. 22
Corbet Page. 225. 28. 30, 34, 35 Cork Page. 197 Cornhill Page. 250 Cornwall
Page. 6 Cornwallis Page. 29 Corselis Page. 258 Cottingham Page. 172 Cottington
Page. 28 Cotton Page. 217. 259. 23 32 Covell Page. 187 Covert Page. 228
Courteen Page. 28 Courtny Page. 353. 4, 6, 9, 10 Cowpen Page. 281 Cradocke
Page. 171 Crane Page. 19. 35 Cryall Page. 8 Crispe Page. 304 Cromer Page. 309
Cromwell Page. 389. 11 Crow Page. 30 Crowch Page. 92 Curson Page. 33 Curwen
Page. 29 Cutler Page. 260 Cuts Page. 294
D.
Dabringcourt Page. 7 Dacres Page. 11 Dalison Page. 23 Dalston Page. 32
Dampredicourt Page. 4 Danet Page. 152 Danvers Page. 35. 14 Darcy Page. 11, 12
Darell Page. ^80. 28 Darnell Page. 26 Davy Page. 33 Dauntre Page. 326 Dawny
Page. 34 D'aubeny Page. 10 D'almada Page. 7 Deane Page. 92 De Borell Page. 36
De Bryan Page. 5, 6 D'esty Page. 8 d'ewes Page. 32 De Foix Page. 47 De-la-baw
Page. 416 De-la-bere Page. 227 De-la-Fountain Page. 147 De-la-Hay Page. 104
De-la luna Page. 111 De-la mere Page. 91 De-la-pool Page. 5, 7, 8, 9
De-la-vache Page. 5 Delves Page. 27 Denham Page. 355 Denmark K. Page. 6. 9
Dennis Page. 257 Dering Page. 173. 380. 29 Descus Page. 111 Dethicke Page. 351
De-vere Page. 7 Deverell Page. 420 Devereux Page. 6. 9. 11, 12 24 Digby Page.
143 Dillington Page. 31 Dixton Page. 97 Dixwell Page. 144. 405. 30 Dodge Page.
252 Dolphine Page. 235 Dormer Page. 25 Douglas Page. 8. 14 Down Page. 200
Downs Page. 88 Doyle Page. 89 Drake Page. 107. 28. 32 Drakes Page. 260 Drapers
Page. 273 Drax Page. 372 Driden Page. 25 Drury Page. 29 Ducy Page. 181. 417. 31
Duckenfield Page. 81 Dudley Page. 69. 416. 12 Duffield Page. 66 Duke Page. 349
Dunstavill Page. 6 Duras Page. 9 Dymocke Page. 333 Dyer Page. 30 Dyers Page.
402 Dynham Page. 9
E.
Earl Page. 31 East-Indy Company Page. 402 Edward K. Page. 8, 9, 11 Egber
Page. 83 Egerton Page. 25 Egicke Page. 402 Eldred Page. 34 Elis Page. 406 Ellis
Page. 262. 234 Elmes Page. 133 Elphinston Page. 159 Emme Page. 192 Eneford
Page. 316 England Page. 4. 12. 12, 13 Englefield Page. 24 English Page. 182
Erpingham Page. 6 Erskin Page. 13 Escot Page. 239 Escourt Page. 106. 29 Esme
Page. 4 Essex Page. 24 Estanton Page. 72 Etheldred Page. 82 Evelin Page. 258
Everad Page. 107. 31 Every Page. 67. 32 Eunion Page. 34 Eyce Page. 402
F.
Fairfax Page. 186 Faldo Page. 137. 173 Fane Page. 343 Fanshaw Page. 143
Farington Page. 176 Farmer Page. 195. 33 Fastolfe Page. 8 Felbridge Page. 184.
7 Felton Page. 5. 26 Fenn Page. 239 Fenwicke Page. 30 Ferdinand Page. 8. 10
Feria Page. 133 Ferrers Page. 314. 31 Finch Page. 425. 22 Fines Page. 192
Fisher Page. 193. 28. 30 Fishmongers Page. 299 Fitch Page. 256 Fitton Page. 25
Fitz Page. 151 Fitz-Allan Page. 5, 6, 7, 8. 10 Fitzgerald Page. 9 Fitz-Herbert
Page. 422 Fitzhugh Page. 94. 7 Fitz-Roy Page. 10 Fitz-Simon Page. 4
Fitz-walter Page. 59 Fitz-Williams Page. 319. 11 Fleetwood Page. 367. 23
Fletcher Page. 32 Flint Page. 127 Foliamb Page. 28 Fontibus Page. 113 Foot
Page. 68 Fort Page. 298 Fortescue Page. 89 Foster Page. 26 Foulis Page. 26
Fountain Page. 160 Fowler Page. 30 Fowlke Page. 143 Frampton Page. 196 France
Page. 381. 10 Frederick Page. 229. 7. 12 32 Fretchvile Page. 239 Friar Page. 27
Fuller Page. 92 Furnivall Page. 429
G.
Gage Page. 11. 27 Gaire Page. 143. 44 Gomboa Page. 133 Gardener Page. 259
Garth Page. 383 Garway Page. 256 Garzony Page. 139 Gascoin Page. 236 Gaunt
Page. 370. 4 Gaudy Page. 204 Gell Page. 29 Gerrard Page. 85. 22. 26, 27 Gibbs
Page. 339 Gibson Page. 216 Gifford Page. 255 Gise Page. 307 Gissing Page. 34
Glegy Page. 183 Gloucester Page. 6. 8 Goddard Page. 217 Gold Page. 188 Golding
Page. 35 Goldsmiths Page. 360 Goodred Page. 309 Goodrick Page. 33 Goodyere
Page. 51 Gore Page. 84. 26 Gordon Page. 257 Gorges Page. 24 Goring Page. 28
Gostwicke Page. 24 Gotley Page. 164 Govis Page. 194 Graham Page. 31 Grayes Inn
Page. 402 Grangorge Page. 139 Grandson Page. 6 Grant Page. 421 Graston Page.
364 Gravenor Page. 140 Gray Page. 187. 418. 4. 7 Green Page. 171 Grenevile
Page. 328. 31 Gresby Page. 140 Gresly Page. 51. 23 Gray Page. 5. 8, 9, 11, 12,
13 25 Griffith Page. 30 Grilla Page. 237 Grimstone Page. 122. 24 Grindour Page.
366 Grocers Page. 293 Grosvenour Page. 27 Gubney Page. 33 Guelderland Page. 5
Guildford Page. 10. 11 Guillim Page. 378 Gurnay Page. 368
H.
Haberdashers Page. 396 Haddon Page. 252 Haget Page. 89 Haggerston Page. 35
Haldress Page. 25 Hales Page. 331. 24 Halford Page. 34 Hall Page. 187. 8 Halton
Page. 258. 35 Hamlake Page. 435 Hamelden Page. 315 Hamilton Page. 14. 34
Hampson Page. 35 Hanmer Page. 26 Hanson Page. 385 Hardbeane Page. 142 Hardwicke
Page. 32 Hare Page. 94. 32 Harecourt Page. 9 Harewell Page. 204 Harelwine Page.
136 Harling Page. 175 Harlston Page. 410 Harman Page. 177 Harpur Page. 29
Harrington Page. 315. 7. 23 Harris Page. 28 Harrow Page. 285 Harthill Page. 169
Hartope Page. 26 Harvy Page. 114. 25 Hastings Page. 194. 208 402. 406. 5. 9.
11, 12 Hathway Page. 312. 378 Hatton Page. 141. 13. 32 Hawes Page. 183 Hawkings
Page. 145 Hawking terms Page. 222 Hawley Page. 359. 36 Haynes Page. 115 Heal
Page. 29 Heart Page. 249 Heath Page. 208 Hemelden Page. 315 Henault Page. 5
Henley Page. 18^ Hen Page. 3^^ Hennage Page. 141. 42^ Henningham Page. 38^
Henry K. Page. 9, 10, 11, 1^ Herbert Page. 8. 11, 12, 13. 28^ Hereford Page.
257 Herondon Page. 24^ Herris Page. 429. 2^ Hewit Page. 27 Heyman Page. 33
Hicks Page. 144. 424. 25, 26 Hide Page. 27 Highlord Page. 60 Hill Page. 141.
184. 309 351 Host Page. 402 Hobart Page. 106. 22 Hocknel Page. 162 Holford
Page. 201 Holland Page. 4, 5, 6, 6. 31 Holme Page. 170 Holt Page. 24 Hoo Page.
8 Hopton Page. 122 Hoskings Page. 197 Hotham Page. 27 Houghton Page. 22 Howard
Page. 388. 428. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 Huggen Page. 384 Huish Page. 416
Hullets Page. 74 Humble Page. 170 Hume Page. 13 Hungaria K. Page. 6 Hungate
Page. 35 Hungerford Page. 292. 7 Hunlocke Page. 35 Hunt Page. 86 Huntley Page.
312 Hunting terms Page. 168 Huntington Page. 5 Hussy Page. 379. 23
I.
James K. Page. 10 Jaques Page. 31 Jennings Page. 301 Jenour Page. 30 Jernegan
Page. 27 Jervis Page. 221 Ince Page. 353 Ingleby Page. 104. 34 Ingoldsby Page.
86 Ingram Page. 379 Inwine Page. 134 Jones Page. 69. 170. 305 363. 36 Jordan
Page. 164. 218 ^orney Page. 147 ^^ron-Mongers Page. 299 ^^ves Page. 246 ^ulian
Page. 10
K.
Kadrod-hard Page. 202 Kay Page. 29 Keate Page. 203 Kekit-more Page. 282 Kemeys
Page. 34 Kemis Page. 333 Kempe Page. 29 Kempley Page. 286 Kendrick Page. 403
Kilbourn Page. 214 Kinardsley Page. 190 King Page. 188 Kingley Page. 342
Kingscot Page. 239 Kirle Page. 29 Knatchbul Page. 89. 33 Knevet Page. 22 Knight
Page. 336. 387 Kniveton Page. 23 Knolles Page. 81. 5. 13 Knowel Page. 288
Knowlis Page. 29
L.
Lacy Page. 214 Lampell Page. 402 Lamplaw Page. 307 Lamport Page. 29 Lancaster
Page. 6 Langham Page. 414 Langley Page. 329. 4. 32 Latimer Page. 394. 5 Latton
Page. 86 Lavider Page. 367 Lawdy Page. 35 Lawley Page. 33 Lawrence Page. 83. 31
Leake Page. 22 Leathersellers Page. 368 Le Bon Page. 6 Lee Page. 115. 13. 24.
26 Leet Page. 230 Leigh Page. 329. 23, 25 Leonard Page. 35 Leson Page. 109
L'estrange Page. 183. 31 Leventhorp Page. 28 Leverton Page. 106 Leveson Page.
133 Levise Page. 189 Lewis Page. 146. 13, 31 Lexington Page. 416 Ley Page. 25
Liddle Page. 35 Lilde Page. 293 Lincoln Page. 420 Lincolns Inn Page. 402 Lisle
Page. 93 192. 4 Lister Page. 122 Littleton Page. 25. 30, 35 Livesey Page. 189.
30 Loftus Page. 422 London Page. 402 Loringe Page. 4 Lovell Page. 203. 6, 9, 10
Lovetoft Page. 4^0 Low Page. 200 Lowdham Page. 235. 339 Lowther Page. 35 Lloyd
Page. 332. 36 Luckin Page. 31 Lucos Page. 36 Lucy Page. 114. 25 Lumley Page.
56. 31 Lutterell Page. 254 Lylde Page. 293
M.
Mabb Page. 198 Mackloyd Page. 118 Mackworth Page. 401. 25 Magnall Page. 330
Mainstone Page. 250 Malherbe Page. 134 Mallory Page. 193 Malpas Page. 416
Malton Page. 87 Maltrevers Page. 315. 8 Man Page. 164 Maney Page. 32 Mannocke
Page. 30 Manny Page. 5 Manors Page. 436. 10, 12 Mansell Page. 27 Manwaring
Page. 369 Maples Page. 29 Markham Page. 194. 35 Marney Page. 11 Maroley Page.
136 Marsh Page. 161 Martin Page. 60 Masham Page. 27 Maunsell Page. 290. 303 22
Maunvers Page. 429 Maure Page. 155 Mautrevers Page. 428 Mawleverer Page. 3^
Mawley Page. 58 Maximilian Page. 9. 12 Maynard Page. 250. 24 Mayres Page. 351
Medvile Page. 316 Meeres Page. 311 Meek Page. 402 Melish Page. 214. 402
Menstrope Page. 361 Merchant-Adventurers 402 Merchan-Taylors Page. 305 Mercers
Page. 293 Meredith Page. 263. 28 Meux Page. 33 Mico Page. 246 Middleton Page.
72. 362 385. 28, 35 Mildmay Page. 192. 24 Milketfield Page. 153 Mill Page. 26
Milner Page. 385 Milward Page. 292 Miniet Page. 342 Minors Page. 393. 403
Minshall Page. 115 Mitton Page. 363 Mody Page. 27 Mohan Page. 290 Mohun Page.
4. 24 Moile Page. 161 Moline Page. 388 Molines Page. 24 Molineux Page. 84, 85.
22, 23 Moncke Page. 195 Montague Page. 355. 4, 7 Montfort Page. 5 Montgomery
Page. 9 Montjoy Page. 125 Mont-morency Page. 16. 12 Moor Page. 214. 29, 34
Mordant Page. 23 Morgan Page. 137. 258. 34 Morley Page. 257. 6 Morison Page.
348. 24 Morris Page. 85. 91 Mortimer Page. 4 Morton Page. 25 Mosley Page. 297.
31 Mounchensey Page. 340 Mounson Page. 67. 22 Mowbray Page. 428. 185 382. 5, 7,
7, 8 Moyle Page. 425 Musgrave Page. 22 Musterton Page. 175 Mydhope Page. 184
Myntur Page. 304
N.
Namur Page. 6 Nangothan Page. 207 Naper Page. 24. 32 Nathiley Page. 200 Nechur
Page. 315 Needham Page. 173 Nergith Page. 244 Netter Page. 302 Nevill Page.
226. 5, 6, 7, 8 10, 11 Newdigate Page. 196 Newport Page. 256 Newton Page. 154.
26 Nickman Page. 36 Nightingall Page. 402. 31 Noell Page. 23 Northcote Page. 32
Norton Page. 334. 385, 28 Norwich Page. 32 Norwood Page. 81 Nowell Page. 315.
424 Nowers Page. 114 Nuthall Page. 349
O.
Ockton Page. 362 Ockwold Page. 256 Odo Page. 273 Oldcastle Page. 301 Oldsworth
Page. 184 Oneslow Page. 226. 384 Orange Page. 14 Osborn Page. 26 Owen Page.
263. 33 Oxinden Page. 402
P.
Packington Page. 26 Paget Page. 385. 12 Pailer Page. 35 Pale Page. 36 Palgrave
Page. 32 Palmer Page. 145 201. 2^^ 372. 27 Parker Page. 174 Parre Page. 388. 9,
10, 12 Paston Page. 145. 32 Paveley Page. 4 Paulet Page. 10 Pawn Page. 229
Pegress Page. 317 Pierpoint Page. 190. 429 Pelham Page. 22 Pell Page. 61
Pembrook Page. 7 Pembruge Page. 5 Penarth Page. 199 Penneston Page. 382
Pennyman Page. 30 Penruddocke Page. 132 Penthar Page. 93 Penystone Page. 25
Perivall Page. 264 Peshall Page. 24 Petus Page. 33 Peyto Page. 366 Peyton Page.
81. 22, 23 Philbert Page. 369 Philibert Page. 12 Philip Page. 7 Philips Page.
26 27 Philpot Page. 335 Piercy Page. 8, 9, 10, 12, 13 14 Pigot Page. 297. 416
Pile Page. 31 Pindar Page. 195 Pine Page. 125. 131 Pirton Page. 131 Pits Page.
292 Planke Page. 313 Plantagenet Page. 126. 4, 5 11 Playters Page. 370. 28
Pollard Page. 30 Pope Page. 23 Porter Page. 220. 305 Portman Page. 24 Portugal
K. Page. 6, 7, 8, 9 10 Pots Page. 33 Powel Page. 27 31 Powis Page. 6 Poynings
Page. 10 Prat Page. 160. 32 Prelate Page. 238 Prenue Page. 313 Prescot Page.
224 Preston Page. 113. 313. 36 Prestwich Page. 36 Price Page. 30. 33 Prideaux
Page. 28 Prime Page. 253. 405, 406 Puckering Page. 24 Punchardon Page. 293 Pie
Page. 32
R.
Rainey Page. 34 Rand Page. 409 Randall Page. 121 Ramsey Page. 177. 402 Ramston
Page. 6 Ratcliffe Page. 8. 9, 10. 12 13, 26 Rawline Page. 334 Rawlins Page. 334
Rawson Page. 391 Raincourt Page. 142 Read Page. 258. 34 Reddenham Page. 318
Redman Page. 306 Redmere Page. 144 Reresby Page. 34 Restwood Page. 361 Retowre
Page. 132 Revell Page. 414 Reyce Page. 337 Rhodes Page. 33 Richards Page. 147.
404 Rich Page. 404. 14 Richard, K. Page. 9 Richardson Page. 194 348 Richmond
Page. 14 Rider Page. 114 Ridgeway Page. 24 Rigmaiden Page. 172 Rivers Page. 27
Roberts Page. 26, 27 Robertson Page. 171, 172 Robinson Page. 406 Robsart Page.
7 Rochester Page. 12 Roet Page. 286 Rolls Page. 193 Roos Page. 350. 436, 6
Rous Page. 32 Row Page. 146. 178 Rowch Page. 263 Rowdon Page. 332 Roydenhall
Page. 152 Roydon Page. 333 Rudd Page. 31 Rudhall Page. 286 Rudings Page. 420
Rudston Page. 35 Russell Page. 137. 238. 292 300. 29. 31. 11, 12 Rutland Page.
13 Ryce Page. 140 Rycroft Page. 260 Ryncester Page. 56 Ryves Page. 403
S.
Saint George Page. 389 Saint John Page. 121. 22 Saint Ledger Page. 11 Saint
Owen Page. 93 Saint Paul Page. 23 Saint Quintin Page. 34 Sackvile Page. 364.
13, 14 Sadler Page. 187 Salisbury Page. 385. 8, 25 Salmon Page. 235 Salter
Page. 280 Salters Page. 359 Samford Page. 90 Saunders Page. 160 Sanderson Page.
370, 371 24 Sandford Page. 33 Sands Page. 382. 11 Sandys Page. 24 Sanesfield
Page. 5 Savage Page. 10. 22 Savile Page. 23 Savill Page. 224. 23 Sault Page.
123 Saunders Page. 160 Scal Page. 8 Scales Page. 8 Scambler Page. 248 Scipton
Page. 307 Scriven Page. 312 Scroop Page. 5. 9. 13 Scudamore Page. 26 Sea, Page.
or, Atsea Page. 237 Seabright Page. 29 Securades Page. 118 Sedley Page. 24. 27.
165 Segar Page. 377 Seymor Page. 388. 405. 431 10, 11, 22 Sheffield Page. 141.
13 Sheleto Page. 377 Shelley Page. 176. 220. 240 22 Shelton Page. 78 Sherman
Page. 189. 385 Shipstowe Page. 339 Shirley Page. 370. 22 Shoyswel Page. 345
Shur Page. 31 Shurstab Page. 118 Shuttleworth Page. 289 Sidenham Page. 32
Sidney Page. 13 Skevington Page. 29 Skinners Page. 273 Skipwith Page. 28 Sleigh
Page. 225 Slingsby Page. 312. 384. 31 Smyth Page. 144. 230 368 35 Soames Page.
297 Soles Page. 234 Somerset Page. 390 7. 9, 12 13 Somery Page. 416 Sonds Page.
247 South Page. 402 Spain, K. Page. 119 12 Spalding Page. 367 Spelman Page. 379
Spence Page. 295 Spencer Page. 420. 5. 23. 29 35 Sprignall Page. 193 Spring
Spurston Page. 4^ Squire Page. 2^ Stafford Page. 68 6, ^ Stainesmore Page. 38
Stafford Page. 4. 5, 7, 8, 9 Stamp Page. 16^ Stanhope Page. 36 Stanley Page.
6. 8. 9 9 12, 13, 3^ Stapleton Page. 18^. 333 4. 6 Starkey Page. 214 Steel
Page. 193 Stepney Page. 27 Stewkely Page. 31 Stonehouse Page. 30. 32 Stradling
Page. 22 Strange Page. 429 Stratford Page. 306 Stratle Page. 316 Strikland Page.
32 Strood Page. 204 Strut Page. 386. 34 Stukeley Page. 135 Sturton Page. 118
Style Page. 29 Salby Page. 6 Sutton Page. 416. 8. 10, 11 12, 12 Swallow Page.
228 Sweeting Page. 288 Sydmeres Page. 271 Symmes Page. 111 Sympson Page. 384
T.
Talbot Page. 429. 6, 8, 9, 10 12 Talmache Page. 22 Tatnall Page. 366 Tailor
Page. 402. 402 Tempest Page. 28 Temple Page. 25 Temples Page. 402 Tenton Page.
304 Term Page. 309 Theme Page. 133 Thomas Page. 10. 34 Thompson Page. 112
Thornhurst Page. 28 Thorold Page. 35, 36 Thorpe Page. 146 Throkmorto^ Page. 91.
23. 35 Thunder Page. 327 Thurston Page. 224. 312 Tichborn Page. 27 Tiptoft
Page. 8 Tirrill Page. 30 Tirwhit Page. 23 ^^fte Page. 282 ^^ote Page. 249
^ownsend Page. 238. 25 ^racy Page. 23 Trayton Page. 342 Trefues Page. 289
^regarthicke Page. 237 ^relawhey Page. 30 ^remaine Page. 250 Tresham Page. 23
Trever Page. 402. 33 Trevet Page. 307 Trewarthen Page. 176 Trollop Page. 34
Trowbridge Page. 303 Trowtbecke Page. 236 Trusbut Page. 435 Try Page. 174 Tryon
Page. 402. 26 Tufton Page. 23. 34 Tunstall Page. 291. 9 Twisden Page. 87. 24
Twisleton Page. 207. 31
V.
Van Clux Page. 7 Vancoster Page. 36 Vandeput Page. 402 Van hall Page. 5
Vanlore Page. 31 Vavasor Page. 68. 31. 36 Vaughan Page. 186. 247 Veale Page.
163 Verdon Page. 430 Vere Page. 9, 10 Vernon Page. 141 Vfford Page. 5 Vibaldus
Page. 9 Villers Page. 436 Vi iers Page. 25 Vincent Page. 147. 27 Vinor Page.
226 Vintners Page. 188 Vlricke Page. 13 Vmfreville Page. 6 Underwood Page. 402
Usher Page. 197 Vtred Page. 5
W.
Wake Page. 403. 27 Wale Page. 4 Walgrave Page. 36 Wales Page. 4. 6, 7, 13
Walkenburgh Page. 35 Waller Page. 134 Walley Page. 316 Walleyes Page. 60 Wallop
Page. 60. 11 Walpool Page. 40^ Walrond Page. 40^ Walter Page. 33 Ward Page. 83
Warren Page. 428 Warsteed Page. 420 Wastneys Page. 28 Waterhouse Page. 73. 384
Wats Page. 402 Watson Page. 336. 27 Watton Page. 220 Wear Page. 277 We Will
Page. 223 Wells Page. 416. 8, 9 Welsh Page. 120 Wenlocke Page. 8 Wentworth
Page. 255, 410 22, 23 West Page. 11 Weston Page. 14 Wheler Page. 256 White
Page. 142 308 Whitfield Page. 403 Whitlocke Page. 224 Whitmore Page. 314. 32
Which Page. 73. 384 Widrington Page. 35 Wilbraham Page. 90. 27 VVilcocks Page.
188 VVilde Page. 228 Williams Page. 85. 283. 28 34. 36 Williamson Page. 35
VVillington Page. 86 Willis Page. 33. 36 Willoughby Page. 7. 23. 5, 9 Wilmer
Page. 218 Windebancke Page. 36 Windham Page. 33 Wingfield Page. 384. 11. 29
Wingham Page. 249 Win Page. 218 Winter Page. 34 Wiseman Page. 338. 31 Withers
Page. 115 Wivell Page. 24 Woodhouse Page. 386. 23 Woodnoth Page. 83 Woodstock
Page. 5 Woodvile Page. 92. 428. 8, 10 VVolfo Page. 310 VVollaston Page. 120
VVooler Page. 272 VVoolrich Page. 33 VVoolsley Page. 31 VVork^sly Page. 55
VVorsley Page. 23 VVortley Page. 23 Wray Page. 228. 24. 30 VVrey Page. 299
Wright Page. 256. 36 Wriothesley Page. 11. 13. 35 Wrotesly Page. 4 Wroth
Page. 420 VVycombe Page. 191 Win Page. 23
Y.
Yate Page. 28 Yelverton Page. 188. 26. 32 York Page. 5, 7, 8, 9 Young Page.
30.
Errata in the Register of the Baronets. Number 1.
For Regrave r. Redgrave. 4 raze out the word Or. 76 for Fusilly Lozengy, r.
Fusilly, or Lozengy. 77. for on a chief, 3 Martlets, Gules, r. on a chief, Or,
3 Martlets, Gules. 79 for Custable r. Constable 114. r. Will: Armine of Osgodby
in Com. Lincoln. 128. r. Gules and Azure. 168. r. Argent on a Fesse, Sable, a
Lion passant of the first. 206. raze out the S. 221. r. 3 Croslets fitchee. 229
r. Carlton. 240 r. Betsworth Castle. 258 r. Sc^ampton 261 r. Gules, a Lion
rampant regardant, Or. 266 r. Azure, a Lion rampant, Or. 269 r. between 3
Spears heads, Argent. 279 r. crosses patee, Sable. 284 add the date of the year
1629 292. add the date 1630. 293. add the date 1640. 298 r. April 23. 1641.

FINIS.

