LOVES ENTERCOVRS BETWEEN The Lamb and his Bride, Christ and his Church. OR, A
clear Explication and Application of the Song of Solomon.

By WILLIAM GUILD, D. D. and Preacher of God's Word.

Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great Mystery; I speak concerning Christ and his
Church.

Revel. 21. 2. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from
God our of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Bible in Cornhill. 1658. 7

To the right Honorable, Andrew Ramsey, Provost of Edinburgh, Archbald Sydserf,
Robert Murray, Archbald Ker, and Alexander Helleburton, Balies, David Wilkie
deane of Gild, Frances Kinloch Treasurer, and to the remanant of the Honorable
Council of that City.
Right Honorable,
IT is a wonderful love that the Lord has ever carried toward Man (passing
by the fallen Angels) not only electing him before time, creating him in time,
redeeming him in the fullness of time, and preparing glory for him after all
time; but likewise in the manifestation of this his matchless love, dealing
therein so indulgently, that he unfolds to us the highest mysteries that may
be, for our consolation, in the lowliest terms and resemblances that can be,
for our instruction; stooping down so to us that we may step up to him, and
making earth to be (as it were) Heavens trenchman; and that conjugall chaste
love that is between the bridegroom and bride, or the loving spouse and his
dearly beloved, to point and paint out in some measure that cordial and
matchless affection, that without measure Christ carries to his Church: so
that the Lord demits himself so to our capacities, for our easier admission to
his heavenly mysteries, that if sense have any power on the soul, the same
cannot want many constant instructers, as if things below were made by divine
providence, beyond their ordinary use or course, to speak out things above, and
to be like the steps of that Ladder which Jacob saw at Bethel, by which from
the earth the soul may mount to Heaven; or like that Vessel full of all variety
which in a Vision was let down to Peter, that by things terrestrial the same
may be instructed in things that are celestial.

A clear instance whereof we have in this notable Song of Songs, or sublime
book of the Canticles, wherein that great Lord and King of whom David speaks,
Psalm. 45. and his glorious Spouse and Queen are to the life described,
together with that mutual holy and chaste love which each one of them bears to
another. The serious and sanctified meditation whereof as it requires an
elevated and heavenly disposed mind: so it cannot likewise but ravish such a
soul with spiritual joy and comfort, and inflame the same with a holy fervor
of heavenly affection, and a suitable care to express the same by a
correspondent obedience of practical action, to be wished as the disposition
of all faithful Christians, and for excitation whereunto I have taken these
pains in unfolding (as the Lord has enabled me) the sublime Mystery of this
heavenly and mutual intercourse of love, communion and communication between
Christ Jesus and his bride or spouse, in her estate here by grace, till at last
she come to the full and uninterrupted fruition of himself in glory, when all
tears shall be wiped from her eyes, and she shall enjoy that plenitude of joy,
and perpetuity of pleasures for ever, whereof the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 16.
11. And which I shall wish to be the Lot of every faithful Christian.

These pains then, which I have taken in the unfoldingof this great and
sublime mystery, I have dedicated to your honors: which as it is a Song of
Love, so it may be a sign and signification of my Love and respect to
yourselves, and to that place the most eminent City of our Kingdom, whose
prosperity and daily increase of all saving Knowledge, and believing on that
blessed bridegroom he described, and of your spiritual union with him as his
beloved (wherein only stands true happiness) shall be the hearty and earnest
wish of

Your affectionated servant in Christ,

An Exposition of the Song of Songs, which is SOLOMON'S.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. The Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.
THis Book of holy Scripture has for the penman thereof, (we see) Solomon, the
wisest of Kings; for the matter, the worthiest subject, the mutual love
between Christ and his Church; for the style, the most sublime and pleasant,
being amorous and a song; and for the speakers therein, the most heavenly and
excellent, Christ Jesus and his Spouse.

The cause wherefore the holy Ghost represents this love and union between
these two, in all this Song, by the similitude of matrimonial conjunction, is,
because in all other Londs of love or friendship, there is not either so sacred
a ground of so holy and particular entire affection, nor such a communion of so
dear things, as hearts, bodies, and goods, nor so strait a conjunction of
parties, becoming thereby one flesh, not so durable for time, being
dissolvable only by death, and the effect rather divine then humane, God using
men thereby but as instruments to propagate his Church. Therefore the Holy
Ghost being to represent unto us that which is otherwise in it self
unconceiveable, could choose no fitter similitude then this affection and union
matrimonial: Therefore also it is, that in other places of Scripture the
Church is called the Bride and the Lamb's wife. Rev. 21. 9. and Ioh. 3. 29. our
Savior is called the bridegroom, and the Church his bride; whereby is evident,
though this Bride and bridegroom be not named by any proper names in all this
Song, yet that it is without all controversy, that Christ and his Church are
meant; these things being attributed in this song to both, to wit such beauty,
glory, and excellency, as far surmounts all other beauty, glory and excellency
in the world, and to represent in like manner, the spiritual and heavenly
ornaments and gifts which he bestows on her, and the fruits of her love
again which she rendereth to him for the same, here are reckoned up all the
sweetest, richest, and most precious things that are in the world.

This book then in general is a continued amorous conference between Christ
and his Church for the most part, wherein either they speak by way of a
love-dialogue each to other, or else encomiastickly and by way of commendation
one of another.

And in particular to come to this Chapter. 1 We have therein the general
title or inscription of the whole book contained in the first verse. 2. We have
the three several parts of the chapter; the first, wherein the church speaks,
and which is supplicatory, the first six verses after the second, wherein
Christ speaks, and which is directorie. ver. 8. and the last, where both
speak, which is mutually laudatorie, in the last verses of the chapter.

In the general title then, and inscription of the whole book, we have first
the Title it self, or sort of writing, to wit, a Song. 2 The excellency
thereof, a Song of Songs, so called after the Hebrew phrayse, as one would say,
A song that excels all other songs, as our Savior is called, Rev. 19. 16.
the King of kings and Lord of lords. 3. The Author, or rather penman thereof,
which is Solomon's

First then it is called A song and men use to sing for joy, as we see Jam 5.
13. and Ephesians. 5. 18. Exodus 15. 1. Judge. 5. 1. etc. And indeed the ground of
the greatest joy that a christian soul can have, is this, that Christ Jesus
has vouchsafed to be joined in such a straight and spiritual Union with man,
that he has married himself to his Church, she to be his Bride, and he her
Bridegroom; and wherefrom flows such a communion of good things to her, which
the heart cannot conceive enough, nor the tongue express.

Next, it is called for excellency, a Song of Songs, as excelling all others,
so that it may be said of it, as is said of the virtuous woman, Many daughters
have done worthily, but thou exceeds them all: the same being of the most
excellent subject, the most excellent persons, and the most excellent and
pleasant manner of Setting down the same.

Thirdly, the author or rather penman, is Solomon who was a type of Christ and
whose marriage with his Queen, spoken of Psalm 45. was a type of this spoken of
here between Christ and his Church, and who wrote this song as he was a
Prophet, and as Peter shows us, not of the will of man, but as he was moved by
the holy Ghost 2 Pet. 1. 21. and therefore is not carnally to be understood,
but in a spiritual and a holy manner.

Observations.
1. Seeing that this Song is so highly praised, as to be called the Song of
Songs, Let us have the greater care to attain to the true understanding
thereof, digging as it were in this excellent field to find out the treasure of
true comfort and wisdom that lies hid therein.

2. Seeing that it was written by Solomon as a Prophet, and penman only of
Gods Holy spirit, and therefore is not the word or wisdom of man, but of God;
therefore let us reverence and receive it accordingly.

Verse 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better
then wine.
HEre the Church begins the Dialogue, In which words is 1. her petition to her
beloved, and 2. the reason thereof subjoyned thereto. Her petition then is, Let
Him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, according to that allegory under
which the whole song is written, as betrothed lovers do by kisses express
their love one to another, even so here the Church betrothed to Christ, as a
bride desires his comfortable fellowship, and expression or assurance to her
soul of his tender affection.

As for kisses we read of sundry, for sundry ends, and signifiing sundry
things in Scripture: for 1. there is a kiss of Salutation 1. Sam. 20. 41. 2
There is a kiss of Valediction. Ruth. 2. 9. 3 There is a kiss of
reconciliation 2 Samuel 14. 33. and Luke. 15. 20. 4 There is a kiss of
subjection. Psalm. 2. 12. 5 There is a kiss of religious adoration. 1. King.
19. 18. 6 There is a kiss of approbation. Pro. 20. 24. 26. And 7. there is a
kiss of love and affection, as, Genesis 45. 15. Seeing therefore that she speaks
here of kisses in the plural number, the kisses that she means are these two
specially, of Reconciliation and Affection, to the which may be added the third
of Approbation which is the sweetest of all, when he shall say, Come faithful
servant, and enter into thy masters joy; And of this kiss is she most
desirous, as we may see, Rev. 22. 17.

In like manner, we must understand that there is mention made here of kisses
in the plural, to show that she had need not only of one act of mercy in
pardoning and being reconciled, or kything his free love to her, but of many
acts of his mercy and love, because of her many times and daily sinning against
him, and of many new supplies of his grace to her soul in respect of her
spiritual and many decays and necessities, whereby when she has gotten faith
and the like saving graces, she has need to pray and confess, Lord I believe,
but Lord increase my faith, and when she has gotten ^ood to her soul, to say,
as they said John 6. Lord evermore give us this bread.

Neither is it superfluously added [with the kisses of his mouth.] 1. Because
by his mouth opened in holy Scripture, he gives as it were this kiss of
reconciliation, while as to every penitent sinner and believer 1. In respect of
Pronunciation
in the blood of Christ, absolution from their sins, and reconciliation unto
God is pronounced, and as it were by the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the
same which was shut before against them is now opened unto them. 2. Because by
his mouth likewise opened in holy Scripture, Faith is begotten in the heart,
(as the 2. Of Application.
Apostle says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing is of the word,) by which
says the comfortable promises of remission and reconciliation are applied to
the soul of every penitent believer, as it were Christ's lips kissing their
souls, and whereby he speaks peace to his Saints, as Isay 57. 19. and seals
what is said in his word, and says to their souls that he is their salvation.
And 3. because by the Sacraments annexed to the Word, and by the testimony of
his Spirit, the remission of sins and reconciliation 3. Of Obsignation.
with God through Christ and his singular love to us is sealed up and assured,
as the Apostle tells us, till the day of our full redemption. Ephesians. 4. 30.

But before we get these kisses of his mouth, Bernard tells us that, with Mary
Magdalen, we must begin at the kisses of his feet, and bedewing them with our
tears, we must expect his bedewing our souls with the word of Comfort. And
thereafter also when we have gotten the kisses of his mouth (as Joseph's brethren
got, when he discovered himself to them, Genesis 45. 15.) We must also kiss the
Son as we are exhorted, Psalm. 2. with the kisses of homage and subjection,
and not suffer any other ever to Lord it over us. But, without naming him, Why
says she, let him kiss me? I answer, after an usual phrase of scripture
speaking of persons supposed to be notably known, as Psalm. 87. 1. and John.
20. 15. she shows you that Christ, being a common Savior to all, Luke. 2. 10,
therefore she presuppones that he should be known by all.

Observations.
1. Out of this holy and Heavenly desire of here is, while she is on earth, yet
having her heart on him and the desire of his love, and Love Tokens who is in
Heaven, we see what is the disposition of the godly, like Jacobs, Genesis 32.
Moses, Heb. 11. David's, Psalm. 4. or others. And how contrary the same is to
worldlings who have their portion in this life, which is their Non ultra, and
sing a requirem to their souls, when their barns are full, which they think to
enjoy many years when they have not perhaps many hours to remain therewith.

2. Seeing more particularly, the gift of reconciliation, and sense of Gods
love to her thereby, and with a nearer union, is her desire above all things;
Let us try, if we be true members of Christ's Church, if this be our's in like
manner. Else if we be not like to her in her desires and delights, it is a
token that we are no true members of that mystical body.

3. Seeing the spiritual benefits which we receive do come to us by his Word
and ministry thereof, as the kisses of his mouth; Let us highly esteem of the
same, as that man did, (Matthew. 13. 44.) of the Field wherein the rich treasure
was: and as David professes, Psalm. 19 and 119. which if we do not, but
vilify his mouth, we will also vilify the kisses of his mouth.

4. But how comes it, that she so boldly and familiarly talks with Christ,
(let him kiss me)? Should not fervor of affection have with it humility of
reverence? To this Bernard answers, saying, Ne causemimi praesumptionem, ubi
affectio urget; reclamat pudor sed urget Amor, qui nec consilio temperatur, nec
pudore fraenatur. Whence we observe that if our souls tell us truly that we
love Christ, we may boldly come to the throne of grace, and find loves speech
graciously accepted.

For thy loves etc. This is the reason of her so great desire of the kisses of
his mouth as the evidence of his love toward her, because his love is so sweet
and comfortable, that it is beyond all comparison; and therefore is not only
like, but better nor wine. Which being the principal thing that is used in
banquets to make the heart cheerful, is therefore put here for all the most
comfortable, delicate and delightful dainties which are used at most royal
banquets, as we see Esth. 1. the sweetness of whose love (which she so
commends) sweetens the most bitter things that the godly can suffer for him
even death it self, and makes all other things which were sweet to flesh and
blood before and offensive to him, to be most bitter and disgustfull, as we see
in all true converts.

This love of Christ, is twofold toward his Church; or there are two sorts
thereof: the first is called amor been placiti seu benevolentiae, or the love
of his good pleasure the other is called amor complacentiae, or the love of his
good liking: the love of good pleasure is before man was and eternal, and is
that whereby from before all beginning in that decree of his election he chose
so many as the freely loved unto eternal salvation the love of his good
likeing is in time, when man is, and walking in the ways of the Lord's
obedience, the Lord is well pleased with him.

This love of Christ toward his Church has these properties ensuing.

1. It is a love whereby he loves us first, as we have it Ezekiel. 16. and 1 John
4. 19.

2. It is a free love, without either foreseen merit against the Papist or for
foreseen faith, against the Arminian, and as we have it, Hos. 14. 4.

3. It is a servent and great love, as is shown us Joh. 10. 15. that he gave
his life for us, especially being his enemies: and which is so great that the
Apostle tells us, it passes all knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. as Augustine says, quod
tantus, tantillos, et tales, tantum dilexerit.

4. It is an eternal love, as we see Joh. 15. 9. both a priori in beneplacito,
and therefore our salvation being grounded thereon is sure, and a posteriori
because it shall continue toward us for ever.

5. It is a matchles and incomparable love, so that the love of Jacob to
Rachel, or Jonathan's to David or a mother's to a child cannot be compared
thereto. And therefore, as is said of Christ's sorrow Lam. 1. 12. so may it be
said of his love, Behold and see, if ever the like love was, as is my love, or
as the Jews said of his love to Lazarus, so may we with admiration say, Ecce
quam amavit.

6. Lastly, it is an Immutable love, Joh. 13. 1. To. 8. 35. so that though we
sin, by Note, a difference between the godly and wicked. Romans 8. 1.
falling (but not walking therein) he may correctus with the rods of men, but
his loving kindness he will never take from us.

But why speaks he of loves in the plural number? I answer 1. this is to
show, not only the plentiful and super abundant measure of this love, which
I may rather call unmeasureable, and, as the Apostle speaks, passing all
knowledge; but likewise, 2. to show the diversity of the manner of
manifestation of the same, and how from this inexhaustible and large Ocean so
many lovely streams do flow, as election, vocation justification,
Sanctification, and, in end, glorification; all which proceed from Christ's free
love to us, and are as so many loves, or love tokens of his.

Now this love is compared and preferred to wine, 1. Because as wine is
pleasant and delectable as we see Pro. 23. 31. so there is nothing so pleasant
and delectable to the christian soul at all times and in all estates, as
Christ's love and the meditation and persuasion thereof. 2. As wine rejoices the
heart, and therefore is called a cheering liquor, Psalm. 104. 15. See Pro. 31.
6. so nothing rejoices the heart of a true Christian so much as Christ's love,
though one enjoyed all the honors and pleasures of the whole world, and
although the whole world should hate him, yet he cares not, if he have the love
of God and of Christ Jesus his Lord, 3. Wine is medicinal, as we see, Luke 10.
34. And so is the love of God both in the effects, and assurance thereof to a
wounded spirit, or sick soul longing for cure and comfort as the spouse does,
Cant. 2. 5. 4 It stirs up courage in hostlie encounters, and so does Christ's
love (the meditation and persuasion thereof) against all our spiritual
enemies, yea and death it self, Romans 8. 35. Psalm. 23. 4. 5 It refreshes and
repaires (like Jonathan's honey comb) decayed strength in fainting; and so does
the contemplation of Christ's love, when the soul begins to faint in trouble
or temptation. 6. Solomon says, Pro. 31. 7. that wine makes a man forget his
misery, and so does the love of Christ and the assurance thereof, whatsoever
misery or hard estate he be in, in this present life, because he looks over
all that: and, as the people did in the wilderness on the brazen serpent, so
he fixes his eye upon the love of Christ, and the sweet fruit thereof, which
he shall enjoy at last. 7. Wine was used likewise in legal sacrifices, as we
see Number. 15. 5. And so in all our spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise, a
main ingredient to stir up our devotion, and to thank the Lord therefore, is,
his love toward us: This also is an encouragement giving us confidence to be
heard, and accepted; and this should be (as the Apostle uses it, Romans 12. 1.) a
maine motive, to offer up our bodies as an acceptable, holy, and living
sacrifice to God.

Observations.
1. We see that the Church takes the kisses of Christ's mouth, which are the
assurance to her soul of her reconciliation with God and such spiritual gifts,
as the only sure testimonies of his love toward her; and therefore how far
is she different in judgment from the worldlings, who measure gods love to
themselves by temporal things and worldly prosperity? which thing, like that
woman, Rev. 12. 1. she treads upon in affection, seeking quae supra, and with
Jacob the birthright and blessing; or with David, Psalm. 4. 6. the light of Gods
countenance.

2. We see, the cause why so earnestly she suits these tokens of Christ's love,
and consequently his love it self, is, her due and right valuation of the same,
better nor wine, or the most pleasant and comfortable thing in nature:
therefore till we learn spiritually to discern, and accordingly highly to
value spiritual things, like Jacob who valued the birthright and blessing
otherwise then Esau; Or the wise merchant, Matthew. 13. that valued the pearl
otherwise than did Esop's Cock, we will never earnestly seek after such things,
but as most men do, we will vilisie and despise them and seek after other
things busily with Martha, which we most account of, neglecting this one thing
which is most necessary of all; yea after sin, and sinful pleasures which
should be bitter and most disgustfull to us.

3. As due valuation of spiritual things makes earnestness of seeking after
such; so, till the soul be endued with spiritual senses, that she may taste
and see how good the Lord is, and thereby find in Christ's love and the pledges
thereof a surpassing sweetness beyond that which is in any other thing
whatsoever, she will never value aright the same, and consequently seek after
the same earnestly, and therefore we should all seek these spiritual senses,
and not marvel to see worldlings who are dead in sin, to want the same
altogether.

4. Seeing Christ's love is so excellent, surpassing all the excellency of
earthly things, and that he has so freely bestowed the same on us, worthless
and wretched worms, how dearly should we love him again, and not set our love
on any other object, in or of this World; and much less on sin, the
Cutthroat of our Soul and crucifier of Christ.

Verse. 3. Because of the savor of thy good Ointment powered forth, therefore
do the Virgins love thee.
In this verse the Church renders the reason wherefore her heart is so set
upon her beloved, which is drawn from his excellency and bounty, he being
like a Vessel full of sweet Ointments and heavenly graces, the fulness
whereof is not in Christ for himself only, but, for his Churches good, are
powered out to delight, sweeten, and perfume her; God having given him the
spirit without measure, and anointed him with the Oil of gladness above his
fellows, Heb. 1. 9. that not only in him (as says the Apostle) all fullness
should dwell, Col. 1. 19. but (as it is written) that out of his fullness we
might all receive grace for grace, John. 3. 34. and which therefore was typed
by that precious Ointment spoken of, Psalm. 133. 1. which was powered on Aarons
head, and drencht down his whole body to the skirts of his garments; and like
that costly Ointment which Mary Magdalen powered out of her Box on our Saviors
head, while he sat at table, Mark. 14. 3 with the sweet savor whereof the
whole house was filled, John. 12. 3. And by reason of the savor in like manner
of this sweet Ointment here spoken of, his name, or the preaching of the
Gospel, whereby Christ crucified as the Savior of the World is made known,
and, with his merit and all saving graces, exhibited unto al believers, is as a
sweet smelling Ointment powered out, and becomes the savor of life unto life to
all those who believe.

And by reason of the fragrant smell of those saving graces that are in Christ
as the head fully, and from him are graciously dispensed and bestowed on his
Church and members as also because of the comfortable ministry of the Word and
Sacraments whereby they are conveyed to the believing soul. Therefore the
Spouse of Christ and all the true members of his Church, who are like chaste
Virgins, do love and effect him.

In this verse then wherein she renders a reason of her love, to her well
beloved, we have to consider, 1. What is meant by these ointments spoken of, 2.
How are they called his 3. the properties thereof, that they are good and
savory, 4. The twofold fruit of their good savor or fragrancy, the one whereof
is, that his name is as Ointment powered out, wherein we have to consideragaine,
1. What is meant by his name 2. How it is powered out as Ointment: The other
fruit is that therefore the virgins love him. Wherein likewise we have to
consider, 1. Who are these virgins, and why so called, 2. Of what sort their
love is, 3. The object thereof. And 4. The motive.

First then, by these Ointments, no other thing is meant but the saving graces
of the holy ghost; which out of Christ's fullness, according to the Lords
promise, Isai. 44. 3. and Joel 2. 28. are powered upon the Elect, and whereof
the Apostle speaks, 1 John 2. 20. which graces are compared to Ointment.

1. Because of the preciousness and great worth thereof, as its called, Psalm.
133. 2. and Matthew. 26. 7. Even so is grace, whereof it may be said, as it is of
the virtuous woman, Prove. 31. 10. for its price is far above Rubies, and in
regard whereof the godly are called the Lords Jewels; and by David, the
excellent ones of the earth.

2. Ointment is delectable in smell, as we see here, and Canticles. 4. 10. Even
so is grace to a renewed soul, and makes the same in like manner delectable in
smell to the Lords Nostrils, John. 12. 2. as Esau's garment on Jacob's back was
to old Isaac, whereas on the contrary the sinful soul that is destitute
thereof, is before God as a filthy puddle, or most loathsome carcass:

3. It rejoices the heart, Prove. 27. 9. therefore called the Oil of joy and
gladness, Isa. 61. 3. and for that cause not used in mourning, Dan. 10. 3. but
feasting, Psalm. 23. 5. Even so, nothing more rejoices the heart of the godly
than the sense of saving grace; the same being the pledge of glory, and of that
fullness of joy that is in God's presence for ever, Psalm. 84. 11.

4. Ointment does mollify, as we see, Isai. 1. 6. even so does saving grace
the heart; and makes it so an acceptable sacrifice to the Lord, Psalm. 51. 17:
and pliable to have his law written in the tables thereof.

5. It was used in purification and preparing of Virgins for their Husbands,
Esther. 2. 12 Even so by grace is the soul purified, and prepared as a chaste
Virgin for Christ her heavenly Husband, Rev. 21. 2.

6. Likewise it was used for consecration of kings and Priests especially; as
we see, 1 Samuel 9. 16. Exodus 28. 41. and as Levit. 8. 12. it is said for
sanctifying them, even so is saving grace that unction of the spirit: wherefore
truly we are called Christians, and are consecrate to the Lord as a royal
priesthood, Rev. 1. 6.

7. Ointments were for preservation from rotting or putrefaction, Math. 26. 12.
Mark. 16. 1. and Luke. 23. 56. and therefore as we see in these places, the
same was used for annoynting dead bodies unto burials; even so it is saving
grace, that is the best preservative to the soul against the corruption of
sin, and for mortifying that natural corruption that is in every one of us.

Secondly, these Ointments are called his Ointments: 1. Because He is the full
fountain where from they flow, therefore said the Baptist of him, And of his
fullness we have all received grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. as likewise says he
to the Church of Laodicea, I counsel thee that thou buy of me Gold tried in
the fire that thou may be rich, Rev. 3. 18. 2 They are called his, because as
they are from him; so they should be for him, that is, for his glory and his
Churches good, in their employment, as of the Talents whereby the faithful
servants gained to their Master.

Thirdly, they are called (good) 1. in respect of themselves and their
Fountain where from they spring, who is not only good, but goodness it self,
and from whom every good gift comes as from the Father of lights, 2. In
respect of their operation and effect, which is, that the riches of grace makes
all those who have them to be good, whereas other riches oftentimes produce the
contrary effect.

Next, they are said to be savory, 1. to the sensible soul, to which nothing is
so savory and odoriferous as saving grace, and therefore they have not only
such an eager desire after the same, and sweet contentment therein, but
likewise such a delight in the very means thereof, that the same (as David
testifies) is sweeter to them than the Honey, and the honey Comb, Psalm. 19. and
119. and the savor of the knowledge of Christ (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
2. 14. when it is made manifest inlarges their hearts and mouths with joy to
give praise to the Lord, 2. These saving graces are savory, and (like Noah's
Sacrifice which he offered) are sweet smelling to God, to whom nothing can make
our selves, or our actions so pleasing and acceptable (like Abel's Sacrifice
and himself) as true grace, whereby the soul is, like Ester, purified and
perfumed to make her lovely to her heavenly King. So that of grace it may be
said, as it is, Psalm. 133. 1. of brotherly unity, How good and how pleasant a
thing is grace.

Fourthly, follows the fruit or effect of the fragrancie of these good
Ointments, and 1. that the same is so delectable and sweet, that the very
means whereby they are gotten and procured are so sweet and pleasant, that
they are like Ointment powered out that gives a fragrant smell, and fills the
house therewith, and this is signified by these words Thy Name is as Ointment
powered out. Where we have to consider 1. what is meant by his name. 2. What is
meant by the pouring out of the same.

First then, omitting the diverse acceptions of this word (name): by his name
is here understood the gospel, or word of God, whereunto is annexed the
administration of the holy Sacraments, as the same is taken, Acts. 9. 15.
whereby as a man is made known by his name* so is our Savior and what he has
done for us, by his word: that so thereby knowing him we may love him, loving
him we may seek after him, seeking after him we may find him, and finding him
we may enjoy him, and all good things by him, even eternal life; and therefore
this knowledge is called so, because it is the means that leads thereunto.

Next, this name of Christ is said to be like Ointment powered out, by which
pouring out is meant, the preaching of the Gospel, or as the Apostle calls it,
2 Cor. 2. 14. the manifestation of the savor of the knowledge of Christ, and
work of man's redemption by his death and passion, which before time was kept up
as it were in the unclosed Vessel of Gods secret and hid Decree, but there
after revealed more and more clearly by mystical promises, typical ordinances
and prophetical predictions, till at last it was fully manifested under the
clear light of the Gospel; that light and pouring out of this ointment which
was before and under the Law, being but dim and by drops, as it were; but
this under the Gospel being both plain and plentiful.

The other fruit or effect of the savor of his sweet ointments, is the love of
the virgins spoken of here: Where we have, 1. who they are and why so called,
2. what is this love of theirs, and the object thereof.

First then, these virgins are all the chaste worshippers of God, who worship
him in spirit and truth and keep themselves from the pollutions of this present
world, the collective number of which is that chaste spouse of Christ, who in
the singular number is called a chaste virgin, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor.
11. 2. This title the true members of Christ's mystical body receive, both in
the Historical, doctrinall and prophetical parts of the New testament. In the
Historical, where they are likned and compared to wise virgins, Matthew. 25. 1.
In the doctrinall part, where they are called a chaste virgin, 2. Cor. 11. 2.
And in the prophetical part, Revel. 14. 4. where they are called undefiled
virgins who follow the Lamb.

The reason why they are so called, is, there are two things whereby one is
polluted, the one is error in opinion or the mind, in matters intellectual
which are conversant about Verum et falsum, or truth and falsehood: the other is
error in action, or life and conversation, in things moral, which are
conversant about bonum et malum, good and evil: from both these sorts of
pollution, they labor to keep themselves pure and free, 1. worshipping the
Lord according to the truth revealed in his word, without being seduced by
heretical pravity or drawn to Idolatry which is spiritual whoredom, and, 2.
Living holily and not being wedded to any sin, worldly Mammon, or carnal
concupiscence.

Secondly, the love of these virgins here spoken of toward their welbeloved,
is not a natural or carnal love which comes of flesh and blood, (for as our
Savior said of Peter's confession, Flesh and blood reveals no such love,) but
it is a holy, heavenly, and spiritual Love, coming from above, and is an
effect of the love of God wherewith he first loved us, and which love is the
Christians tribute due to his God; who says, My son give me thy heart: and
may be the Lords questionary trial to every soul to know if it be his, as our
Savior said to Peter, Love thou me, and, If any man love not the Lord Jesus
(says the Apostle) let him be accursed, 1. Cor. 16. 22.

Of this love we have to consider, 1. what it is, or quid sit, 2. The sorts
thereof, or quotuplex sit, 3. The properties of it, or qualis sit, 4. The marks
or tokens thereof, 5. The fruits and effects of it: and Lastly, the motives or
persuasions thereto.

First then, this love, is a holy affection of the heart wrought in the elect
by the holy spirit, whereby out of the sense of his love to them, and of that
excellency that is in him, they love him with a holy, fervent and constant
affection.

Secondly, this Love to Christ is twofold, intensive and appreciative, 1. The
intensive is that whereby the soul in a full bensell (as it were) is carried to
love Christ, which notwithstanding may sometimes in temptation be seen to
slacken and to fail in the fruit thereof, as we see in the falls of the
Saints, 2. The appreciative, is that whereby the soul still esteems the Lord
and his favor, and values the same with David above all things, Psalm. 4. 6.

Thirdly, the properties of this love are these;

1. It is a fervent love, and not like that Laodicean-zeale, Rev. 3. 16. but
like that of Jacob's to Rachel, which therefore facilitates their service and
obedience to him, and makes his yoke light.

2. It is faithful, like that of Jonathan's to David, in adversity for Christ,
as well as in peace and prosperity from Christ.

3. It is fruitful, like that tree spoken of in the first Psalm, and so not
in word only, but as the Apostle shows, 1. Joh. 3. 18. real and indeed:
therefore says our savior to Peter, and in him to all pastors; Peter, love
thou me? then feed my sheep. And in like manner to all Christians, if ye love
me, then keep my commandments.

4. It must be transcendent, above the love that we carry to whatsoever is
dearest to us, even our own life, therefore says our Savior, he who loves
father or mother better nor me, is not worthy of me. As it is said then of the
virtuous woman, Many daughters have done worthily but thou surpassest them all;
so, what ever love we carry to other things, this must surpass all in like
manner.

5. It must be constant, as his love is to us, Joh. 13. 1. and therefore not
like Amnon's to Tamar, but as our Savior says to the Church of Smyrna, Rev.
2. 10. be thou faithful unto death and I will give unto thee the crown of
life.

Fourthly, the marks and tokens of this love are these;

1. To have him often in our mind and mouth, the first by Heavenly meditation,
the second by holy communication, both by speaking of him, and speaking to him:

2. To delight in his speech to us by the Ministry of his word; for which cause
we see that David says, Psalm. 119. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste,
yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth: and the spouse, Gant. 5. 16. and 13. says;
His mouth is most sweet, and his lips like lillies, dropping sweet smelling
Mirrh.

3. To esteem highly of his love tokens, to wit, the graces of his holy
spirit, both in account and valuation, and care of their right use and
conservation; and therefore neither to greeve nor quench the spirit of God.

4. To rejoice in his presence above all things, in whose presence at last is
fullness of joy, and (like the Solsequium) to be sad for his absence, as we see
was David's querimony Psalm. 22. 1. and the churches sad condition, Cant. 3. 1.

5. To obey and please him, therefore, Exodus 20. 6. the loving of him, and
keeping of his commandments are joined, as we see our savior does in like
manner, Joh. 14. 23. And specially to do this in the upright discharge of our
particular callings, therefore said our Savior to Peter, Love thou me? then
feed my sheep.

6. To love those whom he love^* or whatsoever has a near relation to him, as
his friends, his cause, his image, (which every true Christian is) and his poor
members. For we know that the usual proverb is, He that loves me, will love my
dog.

7. To study an assimilation of manners, or complying to him, in being holy as
he is holy, and learning of him to be humble and meek. For we know that this
procures greatly, increases, and conserves friendship, as we see in the example
of Jonathan and David.

8. Impatience to see him wronged, as we see in Moses and Phinea's zeal.
Therefore where this Love is, there will be a hatred and rebuking of sin, as
we see, Ephesians. 5. 11. and Christ's quarrel will be a common quarrel, as we use
to say, If we dearly love a man, we will party him and never ask his quarrel.

9. Where one loves, he lives, as we say, (anima est potius ubi amat, qudm ubi
animat,) therefore the drunkard lives where his cups and Companions are,
because he loves them, and so does avaricious person where his Gold is which he
makes his God and where his heart is: even so the godly soul his life is, where
Christ is, in the Heavens, because his love is there and his heart is where his
treasure is, above.

10. Where love is, there is longing for a full fruition of the thing loved, as
the Bride of the Bridegroom; even so where the love of Christ is, there is a
longing till we get that full fruition of him in glory, spoken of by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 16. 11. when as the spouse speaks, Cant. 2. 17. that joyful
day shall break, and the shadows that are here shall then flee away, therefore
is the Churches prayer, Rev. 22. 20. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Fifthly, the fruits and effects which this love we carry to God produces are
these,

1. Prospering, therefore it is said Ps. 122. 6. they shall prosper who love
thee, this being the best and surest way to thrive whereas the want of the
Lords love has bin the cause of decay and destruction to Kingdoms, Cities,
great families and persons.

2. Protection, therefore it is said, Psalm. 105. 20. the Lord preserves them
who love him; for which cause Satan acknowledged, Joh. 1. 10. that the Lord had
hedged Joh. about, as he promises, Psalm. 84. 11. to be unto all such a sun
and a shield.

3. If any thing fall out cross unto them, according as the Apostle says, Romans
8. 28. he makes all things work together for their best, as we see in Joseph's
selling by his brethren, and the Princes of the Philistines their causing Achish
through unjust suspicion to dismiss David, 1 Samuel 29. 4.

4. This love which is carried to Christ, as Moses rod devoured the Rod of the
Egyptians ^orcerers when they were turned into Serpents; even so it mortifies
in us that selflove which is an enemy to salvation, and the love to sin; to
the Mammon of iniquity, and all the inordinate affections which by the Apostle
we are commanded to mortify, Colos. 3. 5.

5. As this love to Christ procures so many good things to the Elect while they
are here, so likewise (as we see 1 Cor. 2. 9.) it procures unto them such good
things hereafter, as the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither entered
into the heart of man, which God has prepared (says the Apostle) for them that
love him.

6. As this love which these Virgin-worshippers carries to Christ, procures
such good things both temporal, spiritual and eternal to themselves; so in
like manner, the Lord himself declares what thereby they procure to their
posterity, to it as he says, Exodus 20. 6. mercy to thousands of them that
love him and keep his Commandments.

Last of all, we have to speak of the Motives which may the more forceably
induce and persuade to this love of Christ, which are these;

1. Equity, therefore says the Apostle, 1. Joh. 4. 19. we love him because he
has first loved us, and that with such a matchless love, as justly there may
be put upon it, that (non sicut) which is upon Christ's sufferings, Lam. 1. 12.
so that we may now say, if we ow our selves to him because he not only gave us
to our selves in the first work of creation but being lost thereafter he
restored us in the work of redemption: being therefore so given, and thereafter
restored, we ow our selves to him by a double Obligation, but in respect that
he not only restored us, but also gave himself for us, What can we render to
him for that benefit, for although, we should be able a thousand times for that
benefit to give our selves, yet what are we to our Lord?

2. Necessity should persuade us; for else he that loves no Christ incurres
that curse whereof the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 16. 22. so that (as he says) a
necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I preach not the Gospel; so may one
justly say, a necessity is laid upon me, and woe to me if I love not my Savior.

3. The excellency of him whom we love, should move our hearts thereto, in whom
there is 1. beauty unspeakable as the spouse shows and sets it forth, Cant. 5.
or what is most pleasant to the Eye of Faith, and spiritual senses of the soul
(...). Unspeakable bounty in re et spe, or what is profitable for this life, or
the life to come.

4. The sweet savor of his Ointments which come from him, whereof we have
spoken, which makes the Virgins love him, and shows the difference between
Gods love to us and our love to him, he loves us as Hose^ speaks, freely, Hos.
14. 5. and not for any thing in us, or can proceed from us, as Ezekiel shows,
Ezekiel. 16. But we do not so love him, for our love is procured by that which we
find in him, as in Sampsons dead Lion, Honey was found; and for that which comes
to us from him, as the cure that came by the diseased woman of a bloody issue
from our Savior Christ.

Observations.
1. Where ever Christ is, he is not alone without sweet Ointments. Which, (as
has bin said) are the graces of his holy Spirit, which he bestows on that Soul
wherein he comes to dwell, and which by that unction he makes a Royal Priest
wherefore let us try our selves hereby, if ever Christ yet came to our Souls,
or that Salvation, (as to Zacheus) came to our houses if we have gotten of
these sweet Ointments, and that grace be most savoury to us; else if the Spirit
of Christ be not so in us, we cannot plead but that we are reprobates.

2. These Ointments are called (his) for the reasons forenamed, which teach us,
1. from whom in our spiritual wants we should seek, as he teaches the Church
of Laodicea 2. in what humility we should possess any gifts or graces that God
has bestowed upon us, remembering that of the Apostle what have thou which thou
have not received? And 3. the sanctified use which we ought to make of them to
wit to God's glory who is the giver, and his Churches good, like the faithful
servants who gained with their Talents.

3. Where ever these good Ointments are, they give a delightful and fragrant
smell both to those who have them and to others (like Mary Magdalen's box of
Ointment that perfumed the whole house) who see our light to be shining will
glorify God our Heavenly father; and as a good smell draws to it, so the good
smell of a Holy life will draw others to the love of our profession, besides
that it will seal up to our selves our own Election, and make us smell sweetly
in the Lord's Nostrils.

4. Where ever true grace is in the soul, there is a high Estimation of the
means of grace or ministry of the Word, the preaching whereof is like Ointment
poured out, fragrant and Odoriferous: for how sweet is it to a Soul sensible of
its own misery and God's mercy, to hear of Christ natures, offices, merits, and
benefits, even as God's word was to David, sweeter than Honey and the Honey comb.
Wherefore let us try if we have true grace by our love, account of, and
careful resort to the means thereof.

5. The sweetness that the Elect soul finds in Christ and his graces, makes
them to love him again, So that where a soul loves not Christ with such a love
as has bin spoken of, it is a Token that it never tasted of true saving grace,
nor is it marvel that those that savor only the World, and delight in the
unclean lusts of the flesh or to be ever wallowing in the filthy puddle of
sin, that they smell not the sweetness of these good Ointments, nor for the
savor thereof that they love not Christ.

6. These who love Christ here, as the true members of his Church are called
Virgins, because of their worshipping him (as is said) purely according to his
word; and keeping themselves free both of the spiritual whoredom of
superstition and Idolatry, as also from the uncleanness of a wicked life and
conversation; of which whosoever are guilty, brag or presume as they will, as
the Romanist do, they are not the true Church and Virgin spouse of Christ.

7. If the Virgin-spouse of Christ love him so for the savor of his good
Ointments here on earth, which are but the earnest, and first fruits of what
she is to receive hereafter in the Heavens; O what cause shall they have to
love him more dearly and fervently when after grace here, they shall be
translated to glory, and fulness of joy, hereafter.

Verse. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee, the King has brought me into his
Chambers, we will be glad, and rejoice in thee; we will remember thy Love more
then Wine, the upright love thee.
After the Church's profession of her love to Christ, because of the savor of
his good ointments, and comfortable graces, as the nature of love is to be
where its object is; so she desires to be in a holy society and fellowship with
him, and insisting in his steps of a holy life by a holy imitation to follow
after him, as the Apostle did, 1. Cor. 11. 1. which to perform being conscious
to her own weakness and inability of her self therefore she craves his
powerful aid and inabling help to draw her; and so she promises to run
after him in the practice of a ready and cheerful obedience.

In these words then we have to consider, 1. what she suits, and, 2. to what
end. And in her suit, we have to consider, 1. the action and quality thereof,
2. the reason and cause thereof, and, 3. the cords whereby the Lord draws his
elect. Again, in the second, to wit for what end, (which comprehends the
duty,) we have, 1. The persons who promises the performance of this duty, 2.
The duty it self, or the thing promised, and, 3. the rule of the performance of
this duty.

First then, that which she suits, is (draw me) which is not meant, 1. Of a
corporal but of a spiritual drawing, 2. Neither is it of a violent drawing,
as sometimes this word imports, as Act. 8. 3. and 21. 30. but a voluntary
action, with desire (as here) and delight, as sweet music is said to draw the
ear to it, and the fame of a Skillful Physician is said to draw many to him,
or as the loadstone by a secret virtue and power draws the iron to it, and as
is said by the poet, trahit sua quemqualut voluptas.

By this drawing then, man's will suffers no Manichean coaction, but by a
heavenly influence and inflexion is sweetly bowed, and made to comply to the
Lords obedience, and; by the power of saving grace of nilling before, is made
to be willing. There being in the text it self two strong arguments against any
violent or Manichean coaction, 1. because she desires to be drawn, and such a
desire proceeds not from compulsion, but from a willing mind, 2. upon obtaining
her desire, she promises to run after him, which shows a cheerful alacrity
in doing what she promises.

2. The reason and cause why she desires to be drawn, is threefold.

1. Because of the way, which is an ascent, as the Psalmist shows Psalm. 24. 3.
and therefore laborious and difficult to climb, whereas of sin it may be said
with the Poet, facilis descensus Avern^. And as it is an ascent, so is it a
narrow and rough way, needing therefore not only help to draw us up, but also
a good guide, and watchful attending.

2. Because of our weakness, which in the best of Gods, saints has kythed, fra
once the hand of divine grace (whereof the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 73. 23.) has
left them never so little to themselves, as we see in David's fall, and Peter's
denial, etc.

3. Because also of that weight that hangs on, whereof the Apostle speaks, Heb.
12. 1. and so sore complains, Romans 7. 24. as a draw-back, and therefore shows
what need we have of divine grace to be drawn forward.

3. The cords by which he draws his Church, or any true member thereof, in
general Hosea tell us, Hos. 1. 4. that they are the cords of love. Therefore
also says the Lord in Jeremiah, 31. 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. And in particular,
these cords are;

1. By his Word, as the Lord did Abraham, when he called him from Vr to go
where he should direct him, or as our Savior drew his disciples from their
nets and receipt of custom to follow him.

2. By his Spirit concurring with the Ministry of his word whereby at once,
Act. 2. he drew three thousand to believ and follow after him; and which
drawing is a fruit of Christ's assension, and evidence of his eternal love.

3. By his example of a holy life, and by the example of his Saints conform:
therefore, Heb. 12. 2. We are willed to look to Jesus the author and finisher
of our faith, etc. making him our parterne of imitation on earth, as he is our
patron for mediation in heaven: therefore also for example of his Saints, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Follow me, as I follow Christ.

4. By his benefits which he renewes evening and morning, as his providence for
us, his protection of us, his long suffering patience, and the like: beside his
creating us, redeeming us, and calling us to the hope of glory, etc. all these
being love-cords by which he labors to draw us.

5. In the promise which she makes to run after him upon his drawing of her,
which comprehends her duty, we have, 1. The persons who promise this duty, and
performance, thereof, set down in the plural, (We) and so the singular, in
the petition (draw Me) in the promise of performance is changed into the
plural number, (and we will run after thee) which is done to show,

1. That though the Church be one in a cumulative consideration, as one
mystical body; yet it consists of many members in respect either of national
Churches, or individual members: all which wheresoever they be, are obliged to
this duty, cheerfully and willingly to run after Christ by a holy submission
to the draught of his spirit, and the imitation of his holy life.

2. This is to show the efficacy of good example, and the godlies excitation
one of another to spiritual duties, as if she should say, Draw me, and not
only I, will run after thee, but others also by my example and incitation
shall run after thee: as David says, Psalm. 51. 13. when I shall know thy
mercies, I shall instruct others therein, and men who are brought low as I am,
by my example shall ^lee sin. So says our savior to Peter, thou being
converted, confirm thy brethren, Luke 22. 31. therefore also the Apostle,
exhorts the Corinthians, that as, he followed Christ so they should follow his
example therein, 1. Cor. 11. 1.

2. The duty it self or thing promised is, running after Christ, a Christian
life being therefore called a running in a race, Gal. 2. 2. Phil. 3. 14. and 2.
Tim. 4. 7. recommended to all in God's word, 1. Cor. 9. 24. saying, So run
that ye may obtain; promised by David, Psalm. 119. 32. (as by the spouse here)
saying, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou have enlarged my
heart; and practiced by the godly ever, as Paul professes of himself, Philip.
3. and 2. Tim. 4.

Which word of running, in obedience to God's commandments as the way, by his
grace as our strength, after his spirit as our guide, and unto glory as the
prize, it has, or does employ these properties.

1. That we must do the same cheerfully, willingly, and diligently or with
alacrity, as the Angels do God's commandments; therefore we pray, Let thy will
be done on earth, as it is in heaven,

2. We must perform our obedience zealously and with all our might, even as
those who run a race bend the whole force and strength of their bodies to
advance themselves forward, as the Apostle professes of himself, Philip. 3. 14.
And as David stirs up his soul and all that was within him, to praise the
Lord, Psalm. 103. 1.

3. Patiently, as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 12. 1. Till the Lord call us to his
eternal rest, looking on Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, and never
fainting or giving over for any terror or temptation, danger or discouragement,
cross or calamity; but patiently enduring what may occur in our way, and to
wait upon the Lord always, to whom this promise is made, Isai. 40. 31. But
they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up
with wings like Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk
and not faint.

4. Constantly, that is, as, 1 Cor. 9. 24. and Gal. 2. 2. So to run, as we
may obtain the prize, being faithful to the death that we obtain the Crown of
life, as we are exhorted Rev. 2. 10. This being the praise of Joshua and Caleb.
The promise that David makes, Psalm. 119. 33. And the Apostles practice, 2 Timothy
4. 7.

3ly. The Rule of our performance of this duty, or He after whom she promises
to run, is, after Christ, the precepts of his word for direction, and the
example of his life for imitation. Therefore the Apostle would not simply say,
Follow me, but with this restricton, as I follow Christ, he being only our
absolute and perfect pattern. Therefore as Gideon said to his soldiers, As
ye see me do, so do ye: so says he to all his, As ye see how I have gone
before you, so follow ye: for I am the way, the verity, and the life, the way
to walk in, the truth to walk by, and the life to walk unto: which way if we
keep, we shall be safe from straying; which truth if we believe, we shall be
free from erring; and which life if we walk unto, we shall be free from
perishing.

Neither must this following after Christ be only in active obedience, but
passive; suffering as he did, innocently, patiently, and persevering to the
end, as we are told, Luke 9. 23. And Heb. 12. 1.

Observations.
1. The Church first desires to be kissed with the kisses of his mouth, and now
she desires more, to wit, to be drawn that she may run after him, whereby we
see the disposition of a Godly soul, to be still covering more and more of the
Lord's gracious favors toward the same, thirsting and hungring after more and
more grace, till at last her vessel be full in glory: therefore it is said of
the godly, Psalm. 84. 7. That they go from strength to strength, till they see
God in Sion, and with the Apostle, Philip. 3. 13. Forgetting those things that
are behind, they reach unto those things which are before, and never can say of
grace, as Esau said of his goods, Genesis 33. 9. I have enough.

2. We see the Churches humble acknowledgment of her own weakness and
inability to run after Christ except she be first drawn by him, as if she
should say, teque volens cursu non tamen apta sequi: as our Savior speaks,
Math. 20. 41. The spirit being ready, but the flesh being weak, which made that
great Apostle confess of himself, Romans 7. 18. that to will was present with
him, but how to perform that which was good, he found not; and which much
more, may all others most truly and humbly confess.

3. Notwithstanding of the sense of her own weakness and inability to follow or
run after Christ, yet she faints not, nor therefore gives over, but by prayer
to him who accepts the will for the deed, and who gives both the will and deed,
she desires to be drawn by him, teaching us when we find or feel our own wants,
and weakness to perform any spiritual duty, commanded, or saving grace, never
to stay in that sight or sense, but to go to him who is the full and over
flowing fountain of all grace, and is both able and willing to supply all our
wants, and support our weakness.

4. In that she says, draw me, we see the efficacy of saving grace, as in
Manasseth, Paul's conversion, and of those three thousand at one draught as it
were of the Net of the Gospel by Peter, Acts. 2. Which serves both to try the
truth of Grace in our selves, which if it be true, it will draw us from our
former sins to the contrary practice of holiness. As also this teaches us to
despair of no man's conversion in Gods own time, who can be soon drawn to God
when ever the Lords saving Grace comes to the soul, as Christ came to the house
of Zacheus, and as he drew Paul.

5. In her promise to run after him, we see that grace is not given to his
Saints in vain, as David shows, Psalm 119. 32. but for practical use,
cheerfully and diligently to do the duties both of our general and particular
callings.

6. We see likewise that our life here on Earth is a Race as the Apostle shows,
Philip. 3. 12. Wherein having turned from sin, and entered in the way of the
Lords testimonies, we must cheerfully run our Race till we come to the end
without fainting, or giving over, or so much as looking back, like Lots Wife;
Gods Spirit being our guide; men and Angels spectators, God our Judge, and the
prize the Crown of Righteousness.

7. We see that saying (after thee) that the right way then to run this Race
is to follow after Christ, and then we may be assured to come to Christ by
grace in glory: but if we nor not after him on Earth, following the direction
of his precepts, and example of his practice, we shall never come to him in
Heaven.

8. Lastly, We see that the greatest perfection of a Christian on Earth, is,
Christum sequi conatu et desiderio sed non assequi perfectione et facto: as the
Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Phil. 3. 12. As also, she contents not with the
kisses of his mouth, or to have her share and lay hold on the sweet promises of
his word, but also she desires in the performance of all holy duties to be
drawn after him, and to be enabled to practice the precepts of his word; and
what is recommended to her in the pattern of his holy life, far contrary to the
custom of many who would be kissed with the kisses of his mouth, but regard
not, so as they ought, the draught of grace with the word, and the follovving
of him in a holy practice of life and good works.

The King brought me into his Chambers, etc.

From petitioning of favors to be received, she comes to the acknovvledgment
of favors already received, and what good use she should still make thereof,
that the thankful acknovvledgment for these, and use made of these might move
the Lord in mercy to a gracious bestovving of the other.

The speech is borrowed from the manner of men, who when they are betrothed
to any, do kindly invite and bring them into their best Rooms and furnished
Chambers, there to show them what goods and Riches they have whereof they are
to make them partakers whom they mind to espouse, thereby the more to gladden
them, confirm and inflame their affection, even so the Lord Jesus having
betroathed unto himself his Church, he brings her into his Chambers, when he
reveals unto her soul his Heavenly mystery here whereof the Apostle speaks,
and what Treasures, Riches, and glory, he has laid up for her in the Heavens
hereafter, Col. 2. 2. 3. the assurance whereof so rejoices the believing soul,
and inflames her love to him who has so loved her, that as the Baptist leaped
for joy in his mothers Womb, so the Soul leaps for joy in the body, and is
almost amazed thereat, as Jacob was at the nevvs of Joseph's being alive, and
of his preferment.

In which words we have to consider, 1. What are these Chambers, 2. What
means this bringing-in, of her into them: and 3. How he is styled who is the
in-bringer.

First then, Chambers are inner Rooms, wherein usually things are laid up, and
especially in Kings Chambers (whereof here is mention) the Rich Ornaments and
honor of Royal Majesty is to be seen: and therefore every one gets not
access to such places, who otherwise are permitted to enter in at the
Court-gates and outer Rooms; but only these who find more special favor and
nearer access: even so these Chambers here meant, are the heavenly mysteries
of the Gospel, and as Ephesians. 3. 8. the unsearchable Riches of Christ manifested
and laid open to us thereby, not only to know by a fleeting knowledge in the
brain, but to feel the power of the Gospel, as the power of God unto
salvation to every true believer, and working a holy change, as the words of
Christ wrought on those that he called to follow him; and on Paul when he
was converted: yea reviving them that are dead with Lazarus, to arise up from
the dead that he may give them light: which sanctifying renewing and
changing, power is not felt, nor this saving knowledge revealed to every one
who come to the external hearing of the Word, which is as it were the
admission to the utter Court or more common Rooms, but only to souls espoused
to him as here, and who is said therefore to be brought into his inner
Chambers, and know, as David says, the secret of the Lord Psalm. 25. 14. That
is, besides the knowledge of his heavenly mysteries, the secret piercing and
changing power thereof unto their sanctification, and thereby the secret
witnessing of Gods spirit to theirs, that they are the sons of God and heirs
of salvation.

Next he speaks not of one Chamber, but of Chambers in the Plural, as it were
bringing her from one to another, to shovv, 1. The degrees he uses of revealing
and manifesting himself and his heavenly mysteries to his Church and true
members thereof, not all at once, or in such a measure, as afterward it
pleases him to reveal: and therefore making them grow from grace to grace, and
from knowledge to knowledge, as the blind man that was cured saw by degrees,
or as the light grows ever cleerer from the davvning to the bright day, and,
2. To shovv his diverse dispensation under the Law and Gospel, being before
and under the Law, as it were led into some Chambers, where she saw indeed
the King's Royal and Rich Furniture prepared for his spouse and all such as
fear him, but with a dim and glimmering light: but under the Gospel, she
was led into more lightsome Rooms, where more clearly she might see his
glory riches and Royal Furniture, and what was before folded up, was then
unfolded and laid open to her view. And yet their remains another third
Chamber and Mansion-place wherein she shall be brought at the solemnization of
that glorious marriage between him and her, wherein she shall see cleerest of
all, and enjoy with him those Riches of his Kingdom, which the mortal Eye
never saw, nor could it enter into the heart to conceive sufficiently thereof;
and this Chamber may well be called his Chamber of Presence, or bedchamber,
where there shall be rest from her labors and she shall enjoy his presence
for ever; wherein there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures
for evermore.

The second thing is, the Bringing of her into these Chambers, (which we must
understand to be spiritual for the manner, and done by Gods spirit as the
agent) is, by the ordinary ministry of the Word whereby both he gives her the
Eye of Faith whereby she may behold in the Gospel these heavenly Riches and
treasure thereof in Christ; as also he lays open these things by his inward
revelation to her view, which God has prepared for them that love him, as the
Apostle shovvs, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. and which are hid from all those who perish.

The third thing is, who brought her in, and how is he styled? He is here said
to be a King, which is the first of Christ's three Offices, who is King,
Priest, and Prophet; a King for dignity, a Priest for Piety, and a Prophet for
Heavenly Wisdom and prudence, and all these three transcendent, and therefore
the King of kings, the true and sole high Priest, and that great prophet of his
Church, authorized from heaven that all men should hear him. Ruling us as King,
having offered himself as a sacrifice for us, and interceding as Priest, and
instructing us by his Word and Spirit as he is our prophet, and who only has
made us a Royal Priesthood to his Father.

This style then of King he frequently gets in Scripture, as Psalm. 2. 6. Jer.
33. 5. and Zech. 9. 9. who has all these properties, 1. He is a good King, as
he is also called, the good Shepherd, John. 10. 11. discharging to the full all
the offices of a good king to his subjects, both in government and protection,
2. He is a great King, as Mal. 1. 14. 1. Both in power in it self, being
almighty; and over all persons, their souls, as well as their bodies, and great
also in respect of the extent of his dominion over Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and
so only catholic, 3. He is also a gracious king, 1. In patent access at all
times, and to all who in-call upon him, 2. In ready and bountiful granting
their petitions, 3. In taking notice of the love, loyalty and obedience of
every one of his subjects; and, 4. In rewarding every one who is such, with
blessing here and a kingdom hereafter: and Lastly he is a glorious King, or
the king of glory, as the Psalmist styles him, Psalm. 24. 7. Whose glory is not
earthly shaddovvish and transitory, but Heavenly, solid and Eternal, Psalm.
24. 7.

As this blessed bridegroom of his Church is a King, so he has a threefold
Kingdom, of power, grace, and glory, 1. His kingdom of power is his supreme
sovereignty, whereby, as David speaks, He rules and raigness as Head over all,
1. Chron. 29. 11. 2 His kingdom of grace is that, whereby he rules in a
special manner by the sweet influence of grace in the hearts of his elect, and
erects there his throne, 3. His kingdom of glory is that which is the
inheritance of his Saints in Heaven, prepared for them before the beginning of
the world, which is called, the kingdom of God and the father, Mark. 10 14. a
donatitione, therefore says our savior, fear not little flock, etc. Luke 12.
32. And sometimes the kingdom of Christ, ab acquisitione Ephesians. 5. 5. Therefore
the thief said, Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom Luke 23.
42.

Follows, the fruits or effects of this introduction, to wit, 1. spiritual
joy and gladness (whereof, Psalm. 45. 15.) Which this chaste vergin the Lambs
bride conceaveth of this introduction of her into these Chambers) and view of
these heavenly riches and glory that is laid up for her, 2. a fervent and
sincere affection arising from the remembrance of that Matchless love wherewith
he has loved her, and which cheereth her heart more then the cheering liquor of
the most delicious wine, To speak then of the first fruit, or duty, which upon
this introduction the Church performs.

Then we have first to remark (as in the beginning of this verse) the Number
altered from the singular the King brought me in, etc. into the plural, we
will be glad, etc. for the same reasons as before. As also this 1. The
commonnesse of his joy
shows that the gladness and rejoicing which arises from the glad* tidings of
salvation in the Gospel, is common to all the godly, although never so base or
mean otherwise. Neither is it, in the gifts or graces 2. The right object,
themselves that are bestowed on them, as the worldlings rejoice in their
abundance of corn and oil as David shows, and we see in the rich fool; but
they rejoice in the Lord, who is the full fountain and giver, Psalm. 32. 11.
Commanded, and Psalm. 9. 2. Practiced, with a far more solid and surpassing
greater joy, yea in the Lord when they suffer for him, Act. 5. 41. and 16. 25.
So that the godly are not as the world takes them to be, a sullen and
melancholious sort of people, but are more joyful and glad then they can
perceive: to whom they may justly say as our savior said to his disciples, I
have meat that ye know not of, so that they have gladness and joy which the
wicked nor worldlings know not ^ly. The ground
of, to wit, spiritual joy, or the joy of the Holy Ghost, better grounded nor
the worldlings joy; which like Belthassar's is suddenly often times blasted
marred and ends in endless sorrow, whereas the joy of the godly, to wit that
joy which is grounded on that sweet assurance of their adoption through Christ
which is a pledge and forerunner of that fullness of joy and pleasures for
evermore, where of the Psalmist speaks which David calls the joy of his
salvation, Psalm 51. Psalm. 16. and that whereof the Prophet Isay also says, my
soul shall be joyful in my God, Isay. 61. 10. Because he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robes of righteousness, as a
bridgroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with
her Jewels, all other rejoicing and glorying in any other things, like
Nebuchadnezars, Haman's, and the rich fool's in the Gospel, being altogether
prohibit and unlawful, as the Lord in, Jer. 9. 23. says, Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty in his might, or the rich man glory in his
riches, but let him that glories, glory in this that he understands and knows
me, says the Lord.

We have then in these words, 1. A rejoicing, arising upon the former
introduction, 2. Who rejoices, 3. wherein they rejoice.

[1. A holy remembrance] Follows, the next duty the Church performs, upon
this forenamed introduction, to wit, the comfortable remembrance of the Lords
love, which cheereth the soul more then wine does the body. Therefore did
David stir up his soul and all that was within him, to remember the Lords
benefits bestowed upon him, and not to forget them Psalm. 103. 3. Because we are
all prone so to do. Which remembrance of the Lords love and benefits, in a
thankful manner, 1. Procures him in mercy still to continue manifest more and
more his love, and the tokens thereof toward us. 2. As Joseph reasoned with
his Masters Wife from his love and preferment to him, that he would not sin
against him; so this remembrance of the Lords love, will restrain likewise
from sinning against him: therefore it is said, There is mercy with thee O
Lord, that thou may be feared: and, 3. In the time of adversity, this
remembrance of the Lord's love toward us will sweeten all Marah waters, and
assure us that all shall cooperate to our best, because he loves us, and that
all proceeds from his love, Heb. 12. 6.

[2. Whereof] But it is spoken of Loves in the plural, because of the several
manifestations thereof, in Election before time, creation in time, redeeming in
the fullness of time, effectual vocation, free justification, powerful
sanctification, and future glorification, etc.

[3. How] Also the effect of his remembrance, or quality thereof, is expressed
by comparing it to Wine; and it is also said, more then wine, to show that wine
cannot in the use thereof be so comfortable, delightful, and cheering to the
body, as the remembrance of the Lords love, is to a sensible Soul; nor, is it
in the natural quality thereof, so operative upon the body, as his remembrance
is upon such a soul, in moving the same uprightly and sincerely to love Christ
again.

[4. The retaliation] Therefore it is subjoyned, that the upright love him.
Where we have, 1. Who loves: and, 2. Whom they love. As for the love and the
object thereof, having already spoken, we have now only to speak of them who
love, and how they are called, to wit, recti, Now there is a fivefold
rectitude, 1. Judicii, 2. Sinceritatis, 3. Desiderii, 4. Locutionis. 5. Operum:
Or, in a world, uprightness of heart, and righteousness in life: and how it is
commanded, commended, and the excellent fruits thereof.

Observations.
1. She had been seeking favors before, and now she thankfully acknowledges
favors already received, which teaches us all the like duty, and not to be
like the 9. ungrate lepers: for hereby we procure in mercy the continuance of
gifts and graces already received, and the Lords giving unto us the sanctified
use of his benefits, as also this is a powerful motive to the Lord, to bestow
more favors, and to have our confidence strengthened in the granting of what we
ask, because we have found by experience the Lords goodness in bygone
favors bestowed upon us.

2. Out of the style of King, we see first, the Churches dignity, whereunto by
grace she is advanced: her blessed bridegroom, who has freely loved her as
Hosea speaks, Hos. 14. 5. and espoused her to himself as Ezekiel shows Ezekiel.
16. Not being one of a low degree, but royal dignity, and* as Assuerus did
poor captive Esther, promoting her to be his Queen, as she is called by the
Psalmist, Ps. 45. 9, Gloriously crowned and richly clothed, as she is described
both by Ezekiel in the old Testament, and John, in the new Rev. 12. 1.

3. Is Christ our King? then, as this shows the Churches dignity, so it shows
our duty, as it is said, Psalm. 45. 11. He is thy Lord and honor thou him, so
let us therefore reverence Him as our King, obey Him as our king, and love Him
as our King.

4. This bringing of her in, into his Chambers, has been shown to be by the
conduct of his spirit, which teaches us when ever we come to the place of his
Public Worship to hear his sacred Word and the Mysteries of the kingdom of
Heaven opened unto us, that sense and sanctified knowledge may be wrought
thereby, Let us implore the aid of his blessed Spirit, and that eye salve
spoken of, Rev. 3. that by his Spirit we who otherwise are unable to enter may
be so brought in, into these privy Chambers of his, and admitted to that
access, which none are admitted to, but such as are so brought in by him. And
let us not marvel that others that hear as well as we, yet know not the power
of the Gospel, nor are taken with such love and admiration; but remember, Quis
te discrevit.

5. Whereas it is said, We will be glad and rejoyce^, we see that Gods people
are not a sullen and Melancholious people, but a joyful company; yea having
more joy then the joy of worldlings, and greater or better cause to be joyful
then they: As also can rejoice in that wherein they cannot, to wit in the midst
of mourning, and of trembling, as Psalm. 2. and of sharpest persecution, as
Acts. 5. 41. and in the flames of fire, as the Martyrs have done, and the three
Children; and therefore are much mistaken by the blind worldlings.

6. The Churches rejoicing is in her Savior, in te laetabimur; then neither do
the godly rejoice in things worldly, whereon she tramples, Rev. 12. and suffers
them not to ascend to her heart; nor yet in her own merits, or such like, but
only in the Lord.

7. That which she professes she will remember, is, his love; wherein we learn
the best and sanctified use of our memory, is our sins, as Psalm. 51. and
Christ's love delivering us from them. O then, if they were so exercised!

8. The comfortable fruit of this remembrance, is far greater cheerfulness
to the soul then that of the most delicious Wine can be to the body: all other
things in the day of temptation chiefly, death, or distress, in comparison of
this remembrance, and assurance of this love, being but like Job's comforters.

9. Where the Lord's love, which is remembered, is first; and then it is said,
that the upright (by way of retaliation as it were) love him, we see that the
Lords love is productive of ours, and the greatest assurance we can have: that
he loves us, is that we love him. Let us then labor to have the Lords love
settled in our hearts, and when we find it, ascribe it to the right original.

10. If the upright only love Christ, then where there is no uprightness in
the heart, nor righteousness in the life, but hypocrisy and crooked walking,
pretend what they list, there is no love of Christ there,

Verse. 5. I am black but comely, (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the tents of
Kedar, as the Curta^nes of Solomon.
Hitherto has bin the Churches first speech to Christ testifying her faith and
love to him, now follows her Apologetick speech to her fellow members, the
daughters of Jerusalem, against the scandal which they either had taken, or
might take by reason of her affliction or infirmities, whereunto she is subject
in this life, and whereby, like one scorched with the Sun, she was somewhat
black, and therefore it might seem strange or improbable that so great and
glorious a King, should espouse to himself so black a Bride and show such an
affection toward her, whereof lately she had spoken. To which Objection she
answers, that though she was blackish (for so signifies the Word in the
original) being a diminutive, yet she was comely, her blackness being only in
the color of her skin, and accidental by reason of her Sun-burning, or her
external estate under persecution; but her comelyness was native, in the
lineaments of Gods image drawn on her Soul, and proportion of the New man,
which she has by her new birth in Christ, and whereby, like the Kings
daughter, she is all glorious within: which inward comeliness and spiritual
beauty, is that which they should more look upon, and regard rather, then her
external afflicted estate, or her infirmities whereby she seems to be blackish.

Thereafter she uses two comparisons, the one to show how she is black, the
other how she is comely: the first is like the tents of Kedar, the other is as
the Curtains of Solomon: of both which we shall speak hereafter.

The Words then contain these three things, 1. To whom she speaks, 2. What she
speaks, and 3. How she illustrates her speech. First then, these to whom she
speaks are called daughters of Jerusalem, by which is meant the Catholic
Church, which the Apostle, Gal. 4. 26. calls the Mother of us all. In respect
whereof, and relation whereto, all particular or national Churches are
daughters, and amongst themselves, Sisters, as they are called, Cant. 8. 8. Yea
are all individual true members, though weak, and (like these) ready to be
scandalized, are brethren or Sisters amongst themselves in like manner.

First, then we may have to consider wherefore the Church both here, and
frequently else where, is called and compared to Jerusalem, Isa. 62. 6. Revel.
21. 2.

1. In regard of Signification, for it signifies as much, as to say a vision of
peace: and indeed this is only to be seen within the bosom of the Church, to
wit, peace with God, peace of conscience, peace with the Creatures, and peace
amongst themselves who are the true members thereof, for which every one should
pray, as Psalm. 122. 7. and make their practice conform, as we see was that of
Abraham's, Genesis 13. 8. and as is recommended to us, Psalm. 133. 1.

2. In respect of Separation and Election, for the Lord made special choice of
it beyond all other places, there to dwell, as we see, Psalm. 132. 13. being
before, a City of the Cananites, idolatrous (as Abraham was in Vr) and profane
and accursed, (as the Amorit and Hittite, spoken of by Ezekiel. c. 16. 3. Even
so the Lord of his free grace out of the corrupted and accursed mass of
mankind has separate and chosen a select number to be his Church, to dwell in
the midst of them by a peculiar and constant presence of grace here, and to
advance them at last to dwell with him, in eternal glory hereafter.

3. In respect of Situation, firmly founded upon a Mount that cannot be
removed, as we see, Psalm. 125. 1. but abides for ever: even so is the Church
of God built upon a sure foundation, the Rock Christ Jesus, against which the
gates of Hell shall no-wise prevail.

4. In respect of defense and fortification, with Mountains round about, Walls
and Watch-Tovvers, as we see, Psalm. 125. 2. Isai. 62 6. and Ezekiel. 33 3.
Even so as the mountains are round about Jerusalem: so the Lord is round about
his people (says the Psalmist,) from hence forth even for ever, Psalm. 125. 2.
and 84. 11.

5. In respect of compact structure, for commodious habitation, as we see,
Psalm. 122. 3. Even so is Christ's Church conpactly built, Ephesians. 2. 21. and
firmly joined together by a three fold conjunction; 1. Of unity in faith, 2. Of
external profession in the truth: and 3. Of love and affection.

6. In respect of Gods true worship and adoration which was there established,
and therefore there was the Temple the Lords Priests and sacrifices; even so in
Christ's Church there is the true worship of God in like manner established; for
which cause it is called, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Pillar and stable place of truth,
and no where but there, is the voice of the great Shepherd Christ Jesus to be
heard, nor does he walk but in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks.

7. In respect of her many privileges and peculiar donations, as to be called
the City of the great King, the Lords dwelling place, and glory of the Earth,
and in respect whereof, Psalm 87. 3. it is said, Glorious things are spoken of
thee, O City of God. Even so great and many are the Prerogatives of the Church
of Christ, as to be the spouse of the King of Kings, clothed with the Sun,
crowned with stars, trampling on the Moon, attended on by Angels, having heaven
her inheritance, and all things to be hers Rev. 12. 1.

This Jerusalem here, is said to have daughters, therefore (as we see, Gal. 4.
26.) She is a mother, yea such a mother to her Children, as the mother of her
head and Husband was to Christ, to wit, a virgin mother, in whose womb the
godly are conceived through the operation of the holy Ghost, by the immortal
seed of the Word, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And borne again by that new birth whereof our
Savior speaks to Nicodemus, John. 3. 3. And upon whose breasts they are fed
and nourished by that sincere milk of the Word, whereof Peter speaks 1 Pet. 2. 2.

Having then spoken of those, to whom she speaks, follows next what it is, that
she speaks, to wit, I am black (says she) but comely: which speech of hers is
by way of concession, granting that which they might object unto her concerning
her blackness, but withal showing them that she was comely, which blackness,
(or rather blackishness) howsoever it may be said to befall her because of the
infirmities whereunto she is subject in this life, so long as flesh and spirit
are in her like Rebecca's twins wrestling; yet specially this blackness is said
to befall her (as she shows in the next verse) because of persecution and much
affliction, whereunto she is subject and all such who will live godly in this
present World; which persecution, in the next Verse, she calls the Suns looking
upon her, and which our Savior, Mat. 13. 6. expounds to be such, and wherewith
the Lord wisely suffers his Church to be exercised for these reasons following.

1. To purge her, as in a furnace from her dross, and so to further her
mortification, therefore called a Fiery trial, which the Godly should not think
strange to be amongst them.

2. To Weane her affection from this World, that it may be the more settled on
him and that life to come; and to make death and her entry into her rest, the
more welcome when it comes.

3. For exercise of her holy gifts and graces, as her patience, humility, love,
constancy and courage, etc.

4. For detecting of Hypocrites and Temporizers, who in the hour of temptation,
like chafe, will not abide with the solid grain.

5. For manifesting his mighty power, to the disappoyntment of Satan, and
comfort of his own, in preserving his Church in the midst of hottest
persecution, as the bush was where Moses saw the fire, or the three Children in
the fiery furnace: see also Cant. 2: 2.

6. Making this also a mean of propagating the Gospel, which Satan and his
Instruments thereby would impede, as a Vine by cutting the same, becomes more
fr^itfull: hence Sanguis martyrum semen ecclesiae; and by the dispersion of the
Disciples, the preaching of the Gospel was the farther spread.

7. Hereby likewise the body is conformed to the Head, by bearing the Cross
here, that she may come to the Crown hereafter: for all which former respects,
the godly have rejoiced in their sufferings, and, as Philip. 1. 29. counted it
a gift or benefit, and an honor given them, that they were found worthy to
suffer with Christ.

Thus we see the difference between the troubles of the godly, especially for
righteousness, and these of the wicked, 1. In their nature, 2. In the ground
wherefrom they come, even the Lords great love, 3. In their fruit, to wit of
righteousness. And 4. In their end.

The next thing whereof he speaks, by way of Apology, is, that she is comely,
where we have to consider, 1. What this comeliness, is and wherein it
consists, 2. From whom she has it: And 3. Before whom, or in whose sight and
estimation, she is so.

But first this would seem to be contrary to a Virgins modesty chiefly, to
praise her self, and say that she was comely; and to that humility, whereof
Solomon speaks, saying, Let anotherman praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a
stranger and not thine own lips, Prove. 27. 2. But hereunto it may be answered,
that without violation of that precept of Solomon's, this may be done in two
cases, Vel quando ad imitationem requirit hoc utilitas audientis, vel ad justam
defensionem necessitas loquentis, both which we may see in Paul: The first,
Acts. 20. 18. and 35. and again, 1 Cor. 11. 1. The second in two whole
Chapters, 2 Cor. 11. and 12,

To come then to the first point to be handled of her comeliness to wit, what it
is, and wherein it consists. It is nothing else but that spiritual and inward
beauty of Holiness, so called, Psalm. 29. 2. and 110. 3. which (as is said,
Ezekiel. 16. 14.) is that comeliness which the Lord put upon Her, and whereby (as
the Psalmist Speaks, Psalm. 45. 13.) The kings daughter is all glorious within,
so that, like the cloud which stood between the Israelites and Egyptians though
she have one side black, she has another side bright and beautiful, and her
worst is her outside, being in outward show like her Head, who because of his
abasement in this world, and being a man of sorrows, there was no beauty in
Him) that we should desire him; but her inside (like his, by inhabitation of
the deity) is glorious: and so she is contrary to Hypocrites whose outside
(like painted Tombs) is the fairest, but inwardly they are foul, and full of
corruption.

Next, having spoken what this comeliness is, we have to show wherein it
consists, first then it consists in her justification, being clad with the
righteousness of Christ, which is made here is, as it is said, and she shall be
called, the Lord our righteousness, for which cause she is described, Revel.
12. 1. A woman clad with the Sun, in the robe of whose righteousness, (as
Jacoh clad in Esau's garment) she gets from her Heavenly father gracious
acceptance, and that blessing whereof David speaks, Psalm. 32. 1.

Secondly, this comeliness of here is stands likewise in her sanctification, or
re-impression of that image of God, whereunto man was first created, which is
called her new birth, or new creation, consisting in mortification and
vivification, the Lineaments of which image no art can draw, but only the hand
of that great God who first stamped the same upon the soul, as his own image
and superscription, by illumination of the mind, purification of the heart,
inflexion of the will, sanctification of the affections, and renouvation of the
life, begun in Baptism, having its progress in our life, and its perfection
after death, and which, Ezekiel 16. 13. is called that perfect beauty or
comeliness that the Lord, put upon her, not by any perfection of degrees, but
of parts, as hereafter he shows, to wit, v. 10. that her neck is comely by
bearing of Christ's yoke, her cheeks also are comely by blushing at sin; and
specially, as c. 2. v. 14. when they are bedewed and run down with tears of
true repentance, like those of Mary Magdalen's, also she is comely in her eyes,
as, c. 4. 1. being like dove's eyes, both meek and mournful: likewise in her
lips, as, v. 3. by her gracious speeches, both to God and of God; which she has
from him, and which she uses for him. And she is comely also in her goings, c.
7. 1. Walking in the path of righteousness, or holiness and humility. Thus
thou art all fair my love (says the spouse to her welbeloved, c. 4. 7.)

The second point which we have to consider concerning this comeliness of
the spouse of Christ, is, From whom she has the same, seeing she has it not by
nature. Therefore this comeliness she has only from her blessed bridgroom, who
found her not so in the time of love, when he looked upon her, any wise
comely, but a deformed wretch by sin and transgression; and, as Ezekiel
shows, Ezekiel. 16. 3. a filthy abject and object, lying in her blood; or, as
our Savior speaks of the Church of Laodicea, vvretched and miserable and poor
and blind and naked. Rev. 3. 17. But what others cannot do to any whom they
choose to be their spouse, he did to her, that is, he made her of a foul and
deformed wretch, a comely and beautiful spouse, by his beauty and comeliness
which he put upon her, as he testifies by the forenamed Prophet, 2 v. 14.
saying, Thy renown went out among the heathen for thy beauty, for it was
perfect through my comeliness which I put upon thee. So, that from him alone
she has her comeliness, as the moon has her splendour from the Sun, or Moses
face had it shining, from being with the Lord. Therefore says our Savior to
Laodica, I counsel thee, Buy of me gold and white raiment etc. And the Apostle
asks, saying, What have thou, O man, but what thou have received, from him?
Then we should ask this beauty of Holiness of him, and to him only we should
give due praise for the same.

The third point which we are to consider concerning this comeliness of the
spouse of Christ, is, as, from whom he has the same, so in whose eyes and
estimation she is so comely and beautiful, and this is in His eyes specially
who made her so comely: and herein stands chiefly her joy and contentment, that
how vile and contemptible soever she be in the sight or estimation of the blind
world, as her Head and Savior was, of whom it is said, that when Herod saw
him, (...). He counted him at naught: and as Isay says, He was despised and
rejected of men, Isay. 53. 3. Yet she is beautiful and comely in his sight who
is her head and Husband, from whom only she seeks approbation. Next, she is
comely and beautiful in the sight of his holy Angels, who become unto her
ministering Spirits sent out for her good, to be her guard here, and her guide
to eternal bliss hereafter. And lastly she is comely and beautiful likewise
in the sight of all the truly godly, as David testifies, who because of this
comeliness counted and pronounced her true members, to be the only honorable
and excellent ones of the earth, Psalm. 16. 3. And 15. 4.

(As the Tents of Kedar, etc.) Follows now the illustration of her former
speech, Whereby she compares her blackness to the Tents of Kedar, and her
comeliness to the curtains of Solomon, by which may be understood either the
Tents or curtains themselves, or those who dwelt under the Tents of Kedar, or
in the Court of Solomon, by a figurative form of speech. These Tents then
spoken of, were the Tents of those men who were descended of Kedar the Son of
Ishmael, as we see, Genesis 25. 13. Of whom thereafter his Offspring kept their
denomination, as the Israelites did from Israel their progenitor: whose
employment was to keep and feed Cattle in the hot Countries of Arabia, where
they had their residence, and where, because of their removing from place to
place, they dwelt in Tents or pavillions, which either were artificially made
black or else otherwise became of a blackish color and they themselves
likewise, because of their living in such a hot Country, were of the same
color.

Again, her comeliness here is compared to the curtains of Solomon, who as he
was the richest of all Princes in his time, so were the curtains or hangings
within his Court and Chambers, the richest and most glorious of any: as
likewise his Servants who attended Him, and were of his Court. To these
therefore is her comeliness compared, to show, 1. That there is no beauty or
comeliness comparable to that of true Holiness, it being the greatest and most
glorious of any, and which the poorest and outwardly most deformed Lazarus may
have: all the praise whereof is due to the true Solomon Christ Jesus, who is
greater then Solomon, 2. To show that as the riches and glory of these Curtains
was not seen by every one, or such as were without, as the blackness of the
forenamed Tents was, but by such as were within Solomon's Court and Palace or
Chambers thereof: So the Churches comeliness and Spiritual beauty is not
externally seen or by the eye of a carnal mind, who is without the true
Church; but by these who are spiritual themselves, and can spiritually
discern, with David, that excellency beyond others that is in the Godly.

Observations.
1. The Church we see is compared to Jerusalem, called in Scripture the holy
City: and a City we know is little in respect of a kingdom, and far less in
comparison with the world; even so Christ's Church is but a little Flock, as
Christ calls it, a few in an Arc that is to be saved, one Lilly amongst many
thorns, and though many be called yet few are chosen, and of which few number
we should try if our selves be.

2. All particular Churches are daughters only of this catholic church of
Christ, therefore no particular church, as Rome unjustly claims, can be the
catholic Mother Church and mistress over all others, but at the best were but
a Sister Church, if it were pure and orthodox.

3. Seeing daughters of one Mother or fellow sisters should Love one another,
and keep peace one with another, without variance as Abraham said to Lot, even
so should all Christians who are children of this common Mother keep the unity
of Love in the band of peace, as they are commanded, Joh. 15. 12. And as it is
commended, Ps. 133. 1. And is Suitable to the signification of the name
Jerusalem, a vision of peace.

4. Seeing the Church acknowledges that she is somewhat black, the word in the
original (as is said) being a diminutive, and denotating a mixture between
two, as the dawning is between light and darkness: we see, 1. The churches
ingenuity and humble disposition, acknowledging her infirmity and manifold
defects: and, 2. The difference between the wicked and her, she is somewhat
black because of flesh and Spirit, but the wicked are altogether black, because
all flesh and no Spirit: and though she be black yet she is comely; but they are
black wholly, without any comeliness.

5. Seeing the church of Christ is said to be black, because of her own
infirmities partly, and partly because of persecution of her by her Enemies,
therefore neither let any dream of perfection here without infirmities, nor (if
they will love godly) resolve otherwise but to suffer persecution.

6. We see the worst that persecution can do, it may well be a noisome
scorching or Sunne-burning, as that was of Jonas, and alter the external
luster of the Church, but cannot mar her comeliness eclipsing the external
beauty of her solemn assemblies, or goodly order which is seen in her
government the time of peace, but, though like the Moon she be a while under
cloud, or like the Sun which is said to have been darkened by the smoke that
arose out of the bottom less Pit, Rev. 9. 3. her external beauty be, as it
were, obfuscat, yet her native splendour which she has by her new birth is
never a whit diminished nor ceasses her glory to the full described, Rev. 12.
1. Though for a short time, she be driven to the wilderness.

7. This comeliness of hers, is, as has been said, her beauty of holiness which
she has from her Lord, and which makes her so lovely and acceptable to him:
therefore all her true members should labor for holiness, without which none
shall see God, beg it from him, and that by it through Christ Jesus they may
find favor and acceptance in his sight.

8. If this her comeliness be so glorious, in the time of her imperfection and
frailty on earth, that it is comparable to Solomon in all his royalty, and to
the richest and most glorious Hangings of his Court, how glorious shall her
shining beauty be, when she shall be freed of all spot or blemish, trouble or
temptation in the highest Heavens.

Verse. 6. Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked
upon me: my Mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but my own vineyard have I not kept.
In these words follows her exhortation to these forenamed daughters of
Jerusalem, that for her blackness they would not therefore look upon her with
disdain, as either to forsake her, or think her forsaken.

1. Because this her blackness is not native or perpetual, but accidental
and for a time only, through the scorching or S^nne burning of persecution, and
so she declares this to be the cause thereof, 2. From whom this her persecution
proceeded, her Mothers children, 3. In what disposition, anger: and 4. What
effect the force of persecution on their part, and weakness on her part
produced, to wit, the keeping of their Vines, and neglect of her own.

First then, she assimilats her persecution which she suffered to the scorching
or burning of the Sun, as we see it likewise compared, Matthew. 13. 6. 1.
Because as the same is grievous to the body through the great and vehement heat
thereof, which oftines causes fainting and complaint, as we see in Jonas, even
so persecution and trouble is grievous to flesh and blood and through the
raging violence thereof, has caused many to faint and complain, even of Gods
dearest servants why they should be so dealt with, as we see, Ps. 73. and else
where, 2. This scorching affects only the body but no more; even so does the
rage of persecution, it may kill the body, but no more: therefore says our
Savior, Fear not them that can kill the body, and no more, but fear Him that
can kill both soul and body. 3. The scorching heat of the Sun, it is but for
a short time in the height of the day, but thereafter comes the cool of the
evening; even so persecution lasts but for a short time, for the Lord will not
suffer the rod of the wicked to lie still upon the back of the righteous, nor
the storm ever to continue, as we see Math. 8. But will send delivery to his
own Sion, and to Israel out of all his troubles, 4. In the time of the hort
scorching of the Sun men use to betake themselves to some shadow, or
covering place, even so does the Church to some Lurking places, as we see in
Elias time, and of the Primitive church; but chiefly they betake themselves to
the shadow and protection of the Almighty, as the dove to the clefts of the
rock, which, unlike Jonas gourd, never fails them; under the coverture whereof
they rest and are refreshed till the storm pass over. 5. In relation to
vegetable things, as Matthew. 13. 6. Persecution is so compared, to show what it
does to carnal professors and temporizing Hypocrites, who wither as it were
thereby, and make final defection.

Secondly, she shows that this Persecution proceeds from her Mothers children,
that is, such as pretended to be members of the catholic Church as well as
she, of one Mother, and under one common Ensign of the true worship or
religion, and therefore these her Persecutors were not open and avowed enemies
to the Church, nor infidells and disclaimers of the profession of the true
Religion.

But as the Jews in the most corrupt times claimed and cried, The Temple of
the Lord: so they, that they were the Children of the true Church, even when
they were with hot and fiery persecution afflicting them who were the true
Church. In a word then, these sons, were, as the Apostle calls them,
falsebrethren, Act. 20. 30. Where we have here to advert, that she calls them
not her father's children, because, as our faviour said to the Jews, howsoever
they called Abraham their father, yet he was not, but the devil whose works
they did: even so, howsoever they pretended and claimed to the true catholic
Church to be their mother, yet they were not that truly, but by usurpation of
that name; because they who have her truly to be their Mother, have God to be
their Father, and his children they were not, because they did not his words
but rather the devils in persecuting her, who was the true church.

But seeing the true Church speaks here, who is her self the mother, how
speaks she of her self as a person distinct from her Mother, or rather as a
daughter to this mother, and of these her persecutors, as her Mothers children?
I answer. It is the manner of the Hebrew Tongue to call the whole the Mother,
and the parts of the whole catholic Church, daughters, and sisters, and
children Then. remark this, that although there be but one universal Church,
yet because the same is never whole in the world at one time, therefore the
true Church of the present time, may be called a daughter to the true Church
that preceded her in former times, and these her persecutors pretended children
of that Mother, as she may be called a Mother to the true Church that
succeeds her in future or after times, and of the sincere individual
worshippers in the present time.

Thirdly she se^ts down what was their disposition toward her, and this is,
they were angry with her: where she uses this similitude, As if a beautiful
Virgin dwelling in her Mothers house had churlish and untoward brethron who
dealt roughly with her and thrust her out of doors, to keep their vines,
whereby she is compelled to be in the sun, or Sunne-burnt, and to neglect her
own proper task which her mother enjoined her.

This anger of theirs was like that of Joseph's brethren, an unjust anger, or
like Cain's against Abel; or the dragons against the woman in the Revelation,
whom he persecuted and made to ^lee, of whom it is said that he was wroth with
her, and made war with the remnant of her seed, Rev. 12. 17. So that she
might justly say of them, as David says of his onemies, they hated him without
a cause.

Lastly, the progress of their anger and rage against her is set down, or the
effect thereof; which is thus far, that they made her the keeper of their
Vines, with the neglect of her own: which words of their Vines, and her Vine
are set down by way of opposition, their's being Vines of another quality then
here is. For there are diverse sorts of Vines spoken of in the Scripture* to wit,
a Vine which is called the Vine of Sodom, whose grapes are grapes of Gall, and
their Clusters bitter, Deuteronomy 32, 32. Also, there is a Vine which is called an
empty Vine, Hos. 10. 1. Also, a Vine which is called a Noble Vine, and a right
seed, Jer. 2. 21. also a goodly Vine, Ezekiel. 17. 8. and a fruitful, Psalm. 80.
9. Ezekiel. 19, 10. and this is the vine which is called her Vine: in like manner
there is another, whereof Jeremy speaks, Jer. 2. 21. and the Lord calls a
degenerate plant, of a strange Vine to him, even as it is said Isai. 1. that
the faithful City was become a Harlot, and this is the sort of these Vines
which are called their Vines, who were themselves degenerate and
bastard-children of the Church, and such only who usurped the name of true
professor's, but had degenerate from the truth of God to humane traditions,
like the Pharisees in Christ's time; and to gross corruption in Religion.

These Sons then of her mother, or false brethren, they seek to draw her to
this corruption in religion with themselves, and to observe humane traditions
which is the keeping of their Vines, forsaking the purity and sincerity of the
true worship of God, and the keeping of her own Vine, or else to undergo their
wrath and cruel persecution, wherein through the force of their persecution on
the one hand, and her own weakness and frailty on the other, she is made for
the most part, to swerve from her former sincerity, and, like the servants that
slept while the tares were sown, to neglect the performance of the Charge and
duty that was committed unto her. I say for the most part, lest this defectiion
should be thought total, as, to the eyes of the very Prophet Elias, it seemed
to be, in the days of Achab and persecuting Jesabel: but yet it was not, the
Lord having his prophets hid in Caves by fifties and good Obediah, and 7000.
that had not kissed nor bovved their knees to Ba^^.

Observations.
1. This place sorveth to direct us in our judging and estimation of Christ's
Church aright, and not to despise her, or take offense and forsake her (as many
have done) because of her blackness, that is, want of external beauty, and
worldly luster or glory (for so was her Head on earth) and that she is under
much and many sufferings (for so it behooves her with her Savior by the Cross
to come to the Crown,) but we should look to her inward beauty by a spiritual
discerning eye, and to that perfection of glorious beauty to which she shall
come, when it shall be said unto her; Thouart all fair, my love, and there is
no spot nor wrinkle in thee; and when she shall be rid of all her Enemies, and
no Canaanite shall be in the Land. The erring in which point of right
judgment, has bin the cause of the ruin of many, who both for the base
condition of her Head, when He was on Earth, despised Him; and who likewise for
the like condition of his true Church (like the two witnesses, Revel. 11.
clothed in sackcloath and under much suffering,) did forsake the same, and in
respect of the outward pompous and worldly luster of the Antichristian Church
on the contrary followed the Beast.

2. Seeing the Lot of Christ's Church here on earth, is to be subject to
persecution and trouble, which is compared to the scorching of the Sun,
therefore in time thereof, let us do as those who are so scorched in hot
Countries, that is, as Jonas had his recourse to his gourd, so let us have our
recourse chiefly to the coverture and shadow of the Lords protection, by a holy
confidence, and to the refreshing cooling and comfort of the promises of his
word, and the witnessing within us with Job of a good conscience; submitting
our selves to his good will and pleasure who gives us that cup to drink of as
our Savior by his example taught us in his agony, and labor to be well
rooted and established by grace, that having the moisture thereof in our souls,
(like the Oil of the wise Virgins which they had in their Lamps,) we be not
like that seed spoken of, Math. 13. 5, 6.

3. We see that the Church has not only open and avowed Enemies, but domestic
and intestine, like these false brethren here mentioned, who claimed to be
Children of the same Mother as well as she: of which sort the Apostle
forewarnes the Church, Act. 20. 30. And the beloved disciple, Rev. 13. 11.

4. These were angry at their Virgin-sister, which shows us the wicked
disposition of such false brethren, who though they be under one name and
common ensign with true professors, and lay claim to the true Church as much
as any, yet as Cain waxed wroth against Abel unjustly, and Esau in like manner
against his brother Jacob, so do they for the truths sake, against the true
worshippers; as the Dragon was wrath with the Woman, Rev. 12. 17. and went to
make War with the remnant of her seed.

5. Where she says, that they made her the keeper of their Vineyards, but her
own she did not keep, we see. 1. the weakness of many true professors, and
dearest of Gods Saints that through fear and force of persecution, they have
been sometimes drawn, as Peter denied his Master, to do that which thereafter
with many tears and humble confession they have (with the Church here) to Gods
glory and their own shame acknowledged. And therefore this teaches us ever to
suspect our own strength, and to beg courage and constancy from God; that so he
who stands may take heed lest he fall, et ut majoris ruina sit minoris cautela.

6. Next in her humble confession and acknowledgement of her infirmity, fault,
and negligence, we see the laudable disposition of the godly, in the humble
acknowledgement of their sins that God might get glory, and others by their
example may be aware, as we may see in Moses, David, Jonas, Paul, and many
others; far contrary to the contrary disposition of the wicked, who seek to
deny, exte^ate, or cloak and cover their sins, as our first Parents did their
fall, or as Achan hid the accursed thing.

Verse. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves,) where thou feedest? Where thou
make thy Flock to rest at Noone? for why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy Companions?
Having before acknowledged how in her weaker members throw infirmity and
force of persecution she was driven and drawn to the observation of humane
ordinances, and neglect of her own calling, in the duties thereof are committed
unto her. In these words, she turns her speech again to her wellbeloved,
praying him most earnestly for his direction of her in time-comming, that she
may more constantly adhere to his truth, and feed only on that green pasture
spoken of, Psalm. 23. As also for his grace and protection that she fail not,
nor fall away because of persecution which is compared to the scorching heat of
the Sun at Noon day. And this she does in Allegorical terms borrowed from
a shepherd and his flock, and therefore she desires her beloved as the
Shepherd of his Sheep, that for direction he will show her where he feeds, and
for refreshing, cooling, and protection, where he causes his Flock to lie down
at Noon day, that so she turn not aside (being otherwise destitute of these)
from him and his Flock, to the Flocks of others, who are seducers, and are here
called his Companions.

These words then divide themselves into a petition and a reason; the one set
down by a pathetick expression, the other by a pithy interrogation. In the
petition again, we have 1. How she styles him to whom she puts up her
petition, 2. Whereunto she assimilates or compares him; and 3. what are the two
things that she petitions from him, to wit, 1. Where he feeds, and 2. Where he
makes his Flook to rest at Noon day.

First then she styles him thus. Oh thou whom [my soul] loves, showing thereby
the nature of the love which she carries to her Well-beloved, to wit, that it
is not a carnal love, but a more supernatural and spiritual love, even that
which the spiritual part of man, or the soul carries to him who will be
worshipped in spirit and truth, And blessed is that Soul which is inflamed
therewith.

Secondly, she assimilats him to a shepherd, as he is frequently so called in
Scripture, Psalm. 23. 1. and 80. 1, Ezekiel. 34. 23. and Matthew. 18. 12. with these
adjections, that good Shepherd, Joh, 10, 11. and the great Shepherd, Heb. 13.
20. and by Peter, the chief Shepherd of our Souls, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Who only can
call all the sheep, his Sheep, and is only and truly Universal.

The Reasons of this assimilation are these.

1. As a Shepherd knows his Sheep, Joh. 10. 14. so does Christ Jesus his Elect
not only by a general knowledge as he is omniscient, but by a special
knowledge of particular inspection, and gracious approbation.

2. As a Shepherd puts a mark upon his Sheep whereby they are known to be his:
even so the Lord Jesus marks those that are his Elect, as we see, Ezekiel. 9. and
Rev. 7. Which mark, is specially his own image; that as Caesar's Coin was known
by his Image and superscription, so hereby they may be in like manner known to
be his.

3. As a Shepherd feeds his sheep, as we see in this verse and Ps. 23. 3. even
so does Christ Jesus feed his sheep, in the ordinary exercise of the ministry,
as he said to Peter, Feed my sheep, and by the green pasture of the wholesome
food of his word, Ezekiel. 34. 2.

4. As a Shepherd leads out his sheep, going before, himself, Joh. 10. 4. and
they follow him: even so the Lord Jesus he leads his sheep by the conduct of
his counsel, till he bring them to glory; and goes before them in that holy
example of life which he showed on Earth, and left registrate in his Word for
our imitation, that we should learn of him to be humble and meek.

5. As the shepherd guids his Sheep, so he guards and defends them from their
ravenous enemies, as we see David did from the Lion and Bear: even so does our
Savior Christ Jesus, guard and defend his own elect from all their spiritual
and ravening enemies, that they prevail not over them and therefore, Ps. 84.
11. He is said to be both a Sun and a shield unto them: so that as David
professes, Psalm. 33. 4. though they should walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, they need not fear any evil.

6. As the Shepherd seeks any of his sheep who are gone astray and seems to be
lost, to find and bring the same back again as we see in that parable, Matthew.
18. 12 and Ezekiel. 34. 16. So has Christ Jesus come from the Heaven to the earth
to seek and find out his lost sheep; And daily seeks and follows after them in
the ministry of his Word to reclaim them from their sinful and dangerous
straying away from him.

7. As a shepherd heals the diseased and sick amongst his sheep, and binds up
that which is broken amongst them, as we see, Ezekiel. 34. 4. Even so was our
Savior, the Lord Jesus sent, as he declares, Isay. 61. 1. to bind up the
broken hearted and proclaim liberty to the captives; and, as he promises,
Ezekiel. 34. 16. He will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which
was sick, for he is that Heavenly Physician who is able, to cure all diseases,
Psalm. 103. 3. and more loving then that Samaritan who out of his tender
compassion toward our wounded souls, suffered himself so to be wounded and
pierced both in soul and body, that of his precious blood a sovereign plaster
might be made for us to apply by faith to our sick souls.

8. As a shepherd tenderly deals with the weak and young, Genesis 33. 11. Even
so is it said of Christ Jesus, Isay. 40. 11. That he shall gather his Lambs
with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead them that
are with young, which the Psalmist expresles, Psalm. 103. 13. Saying, like as a
father pittyeth his children: so the Lord pittyeth them that fear him, for he
knows our-frame, and remembers that we. are but dust: He lays no more upon
them nor they may bear, yea he helps them secretly to bear, and wisely mixes
their cup, and makes his grace to be sufficient for them.

9. As the shepherd separates from his flock, the goats, or such as are not
his own; So, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 34. 17. Behold I judge between cattle and
cattle, between the rams and the Hee-goats: and will separate at the last
day his own sheep who heard his voice and followed Him here, from the wicked
that are none of His, but petulant goats, setting the one at his right hand,
unto Eternal life, and the other as his left hand unto eternal destruction.

But here is a great difference between other shepherds, and this shepherd
spoken of here, for

1. Others may lose some of their sheep, but not so he: therefore says he to
his father, Joh. 17. 12. These that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of
them is lost, neither is any one able to take them out of his hand.

2. His sheep are the workmanship of his hands; but other shepherds though they
feed their sheep, yet they may not say, that they made their sheep.

3. Other shepherds make gain of their sheep, and kill some of them for their
own food, but no gain redounds to this shepherd by his sheep, their goodness
not extending to him, as David says, Psalm. 16. 2. And for, saving of his sheep
from death, he was killed, and gave himself to the death for them.

Thirdly, she assimilats all the true members of Christ's church to sheep,
calling them His flock even as our Savior also calls them, his little flock
for whom the Father has prepaired a kingdom: which style of a flock of sheep,
is frequently ascribed to them in Scripture, Ezekiel. 34. 2. To remember them, 1.
Of their infirmity for their humiliation, Joh. 10. 2. 21. 16. 2 Of their duty
for their instruction: and, 3. Of the care that is had of them, for their
consolation, 1 Pet. 5. 2.

1. Their infirmity then is this, that like sheep, they are of themselves ready
and prone to stray, as we see it told us, Isay 53. 6. And in that parable,
Matthew. 18. 12. both by reason of external temptation, and that bosome-enemy
which we have of our own corruption, as we see in the parable of the prodigal
son, and in the examples of Gods dearest saints, as David and Peter, etc,
Ezekiel 34. 6.

1. For admonishing them of their duty, 1. Christ's flock being of sheep, they
are therefore neither of wild beasts, as Tigers or Lions, Foxes or Wolves; nor
yet are they of unclean beasts, as dogs, and swine, or the like: but of such
as are ^amed from all such ferity, and purged from impurity by the power of God
and his sovereign grace, yea in a manner metamorphosed from such like as they
were before by nature, as we see in the examples of Manasseh, Mary Magdalen,
and Paul.

2. As sheep are simple, and not like crafty foxes as Cant. 2. 15. and as
Christ called Herod; so are the godly by a Holy simplicity and sincerity, yet
mixed with serpentime prudence, and are like Nathaniel, Behold a true Israelite
in whom there is no guile.

3. They are meek and harmless, and so are the godly, having learned that
Lesson of their Master, and being ready to do good to all, but not to requite
evil with evil at the hands of any: this meekness and quietness of spirit,
(as Peter tells us) being of great price in the sight of God, 1. Pet. 3. 4.

4. Sheep are patient in suffering; therefore it is said of our Savior that as
a Lamb to the slaughter and as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, Isay. 53. 7.
so he opened not his mouth. Even so are the godly, patient in suffering, either
Immediately what is laid upon them for their sins, or trial by the Hand of
God; or what is done unto them mediatly by the Hand of man, as we see in the
examples of Job, David, Joseph, Stephen, and others.

5. Sheep as they are patient, so they are profitable, both in their lives, and
by their death, for man's food and clothing: even so are the godly profitable,
many ways, both for their company, as we see in Joseph's being in Po^iphars
house, Jacob in Labans, and if ten righteous had been in Sodom: as also by
their conversation and holy example, both in word and deed, making their light
shine before men, that men seeing their good works may glorify God their
Heavenly father. And as they are profitable many ways in their life, so are
they likewise in their holy deaths and comfortable departure, wherein a man may
see a strange change of the nature of death in them, and a great difference
between them and the ungodly therein.

6. Sheep are obedient and follow whither the shepherd leads them; even so, as
our Savior shows, Joh. 10. 4. his sheep they hear his voice, and they follow
Him, making his precepts to be the directory of their life, and his practice
their pattern for imitation, as we see in Paul, who said to the Corinthians,
Follow me as I follow Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 1.

7. Sheep after they have fed in green pasture, they thereafter ruminate and
do chew their cud; even so when Christ's sheep has read or heard His word,
which is that pasture spoken of, Psalm. 23. 2. With David, Psalm. 1. and 119.
they meditate thereon, apply the same, and lay it up in their heart, that they
sin not against God, Psalm. 119. 11.

Lastly, As great is the care that the good and faithful shepherd has of his
sheep, in feeding guiding and guarding them, reducing the strayers, curing the
diseased, caring for the weak, and watching over all, as we see in the examples
of Jacob, David, and the shepherds of Bethleem, Luke 2. 8. Even so, great is
the care that Christ Jesus has of his own elect, in doing the like offices
toward them for his glory and their good and comfort.

And albeit the silly sheep, (whose safety stands only in the care of the
shepherd) has many enemies, as Dogs, Foxes, Woolvs, Bears and Lions, and are
killed daily also for the use of man, yet mightily beyond any other, increase:
even so, although the godly may say, as we have it, Romans 8. 36. We are killed
all the day long, and are counted as sheep for the slaughter, yet maugre all
their enemies the Lord makes his flock multiply, as Israel did under Pharoah's
heaviest pressure, and the blood of Martyrs to be the seed of his Church.

Fourthly, the actions attributed to this shepherd in this text are two, 1.
feeding as we see it attributed to him, Ezekiel. 34. 23. which he does, partly
externally, meditately, and ministerially, by the preaching of the word, as he
said to Peter, Feed my sheep: and partly internally, immediately, and as the
principal agent; without whose concurrence and cooperation Paul's planting,
nor Apollos watering, will produce no increase.

The next action is cooling, refreshing, making his Flock to rest at Noon, in
some reposing and shadowish resting place, alluding so to the manner of
Shepherds in hot Countries who in the hear of the day (which is, most at
Noontide) lead their Sheep to some cooling resting place, where they might
repose and refresh themselves, and chew their cud; and being saved from the
vehemency of the scorching Sun, might with the greater alacrity thereafter
return to their pasture. Even so in the very greatest heat of persecution, our
Savior Christ makes his own to find comfortable refreshment, shelter of
preservation, and such inward rest of peace of conscience, and joy in the holy
ghost, that they may say with David in greatest commotions, My heart is fixed,
and cry out with the Apostle, Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? [For why should I be?]

Follows the reason of her petition, wherein we have 1. The manner of the
proponing it, to wit, by way of interrogation. 2 What is meant by these, whom
she calls his companions. 3. What is meant by her turning aside to the flocks
of these: the substance of all which is, the incommodity that will fall out, if
he tell her not where he feeds, to wit, that by her frailty and force of
temptation, she may be made to decline aside from the way of truth, and join
to false worshippes which will be neither to his honor, nor her good.

First then, the manner of the proponing this Reason by way of interrogation,
is to show, 1. her earnest detestation of any declyning though, never so
little, from the truth of Christ, in time-comming, as Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim is
brought in, saying, What have I to do any more with Idols? who before c. 14. v.
17. ere she was converted, is said to have been joined or married with such,
and which holy indignation is in every one that is truly converted against that
sin they were formerly given to, no less then Amnom detested Tamar, 2. This
implies a firm resolution not to turn afide, as that interrogation, Nehem. 6.
11. Should such a man as I flee?

2. These whom she calls companions, she styles so not thereby to ascribe to
them any such dignity in truth, which were blasphemy, but to show what bold
usurpers heretics are, and especially that grand Antichrist, who ascribes to
himself infallibility, that he may be the only great Master and teacher of
Christ's Catholic Church on earth, and therefore equals his doctrines and
decretalls in authority, with Canonick Scripture, while as Christ, is the only
great shepherd, and teacher of his Church, and who only has no Companion nor
Vicar one earth.

3. By turning side to the flocks of these, is meant, the swarving from the
truth and purity thereof, to the society of false worshippers and suffering her
self to be seduced, by such as S. Paul speaks of, who were deceivers, and
should enter in after his departure, and draw disciples after them, as Absalom
made many to follow him in his rebellious course, who did so in the simplicity
of their hearts, or as the whole world is said to have been by deceit drawn out
of the right way of truth to follow the beast.

Observations.
1. The Church here in her weaker members being sensible of her former errors
and having acknowledged the same, she now desires to be so directed, and
established by her beloved, that she never deflect nor swerve any more from the
purity of his worship, and for this her direction goes only to him, who is the
way and the truth, so that we see though the godly fall, yet they are not like
the wicked who lie and live in sin, but they rise again, by humble
acknowledgement, prayer, detestation of sin and resolution to eschew the same
in all time-comming; all which we see in this her practice.

2. Out of her compellation of him, we see though through weakness and force
of temptation she fell, yet his love never went out of her heart, as we may see
in Peter, who though he fell foulely, yet he could say to Christ when he asked
him, Love thou me, Lord thou know that I love thee: so that although Satan
Fidem concussit, amorem tamen non excussit, cujus actum et si intermisit,
habitum tamen non amisit, which also we may see in David's fall, and others of
Gods Saints, whom he has permitted to fall, but never suffered to fall away,
because of that seed of his love, that still notwithstanding remained in their
heart to him, and flows from this, that his love to us is immutable, and ours
to him is an effect of his love to us, O then, labor to keep Gods love
evermore.

3. This compellation she uses now when she goos about prayer to him or
invocation, as being a great motive to him to hear, and ground of confidence to
her that he would do so. Let us try then, if we find the love of God in our
hearts, and then we may be assured to have the like confidence.

4. Whereas she says, tell me, etc. desiring to be instructed aright, and that
by his word only, which is now registrate in Scripture, we see, 1. Her humble
acknowledgement of her natural ignorance needing information. And O happy
soul, who comes to this sight and acknowledgement of their own wants, and is
not like Laodicea, Rev. 3. and 2. for right direction either in faith or
manners. Let us go to Christ's mouth, opened in holy Scripture, and there say
to him, Tell me, and give me resolution.

5. The two things whereof she desires to be instructed, are where he feeds,
and makes his Flock to rest at Noonday, where we observe that the Church
depends not only upon Christ for food, or wholesome green pasture, rejecting
all humane traditions or doctrines of men, but in the midst of hottest
persecutions, When the Sun scorches sorest, as at Noonday, to be refreshed
by him: as the Church and her true members has found when tyrants have most
raged against her, which has made them to find shelter from the bosom of their
enemies, as Moses from Pharaoh's daughter, and the true prophet from Ahabs
Court, and to have such inward rejoicing and courageous resolution in the very
midst of their sufferings as the Apostles and Martyrs have kythed, that the
World have admired the same, and themselves have found their estate to be, as
is said here, like Sheep after feeding resting at Noonday.

6. Christ's people are here called his Flock, and compared to Sheep, as Joh.
10. and elsewhere. Then if we would know if we belong to this Flock, try if we
have the properties of the Sheep formerly set down, and then we may be well
assured of all the comforts and care that can arise from a faithful and loving
Shepherd.

7. In the manner of setting down the reason subjoyned, which (as is said)
shows her detestation of turning aside from Christ and his Flock to any other,
we are taught, That this is a property of the true members of Christ's Church,
to hate and detest sin, and the^r the more easily we shall eschew the
practice thereof, and more hardly be tempted therewith, and that it is a mark
of a true penitent especially, to detest that sin most in time-comming
wherein they have fallen in times bygone.

8. Where she speaks of one flock which is Christ's in respect of the unity of
faith, but of many flocks of his companions in respect of the diversity of
profession one from another unto which flocks, she says, she will not turn
aside, We see. 1. that there is but one true Church, and which Christ calls but
a little flock, but there are many false Churches, and sects of heresies, man's
nature, besides Satan's sedulity having more power to follow lies then truth.
Therefore such should teach us to beware of seduction. and 2. That we should
not follow the multitude in sinning, or turning aside and swerving never so
little from verity and piety: Neither is the multitude a note of the true
Church.

9. Where she craves his instruction and aid, implying this to be the danger,
if the same be not granted her, that she will otherwise be easily drawn to
turn aside from Christ and his truth to error and defection, we learn, If the
Lord leave us never so little, and assist us not by his direction and grace,
how soon and foully we may fall: so that when Satan seeks to sift us, it is
Christ's mediation for us that our Faith fail not; and his Grace which is
sufficient for us, as he said to Paul, that makes us to stand.

10. Lastly, where false teachers are called Christ's Companions, we see not
only their proud usurpation and arrogance (as has been formerly said) in
broaching doctrines of their own, and obtruding on Gods Church tanquam socii
non servi, or fellow Masters, and not faithful Ministers, but also this shows
us their dissimulation and hypocrisy, giving out themselves to be socii, for
and with Christ (companion being a term of friendship and familiarity) while
as they are indeed foes and against Christ, imitating herein Satan, whose
emissaries they are; who when he would bring in greatest darkness transforms
himself into an Angel of lighr; or that beast and Antichrist spoken of in the
Revelations and whose supposts they are, who is said to be horned like the
Lamb, but speaks like the Dragon.

Verse. 8. If thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by
the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds Tents.
The speeches of the Bride seeking after her Beloved, are past in the former
part of this Chapter: now follows what he says to her, in the next Verse, and
then, How each one commends another by course, to the end. Her last request
was, that he would show her, Where he fed, etc. And unto this he answers in a
sweet and loving manner, thus, If thou know not, etc. In which answer we
have, 1. How he styles her, 2. What he says to her, the first part of which is
Hypothetick; and the second, directory.

In this style which he gives her, we have, 1. Wherefore he praises her, to
wit, for fairness or beauty, 2. In what degree, to wit, the superlative, 3.
Among whom, to wit, women.

First then, it is from beauty or fairness that he praises and styles Her,
whereof we have already spoken, v. 5. Only here let us pray with the Psalmist,
Let this thy beauty be upon us, O Lord, Ps. 90. 17. Not but that the Church and
members thereof has many spots and blemishes, but he beholds the beauty of his
spouse so far as she is regenerat, and beautified with Heavenly graces, which
are his beauty that He has put upon her, as he speaks in Ezekiel; and his love
covers all her other infirmities, as it is said, he sees no iniquity in Jacob,
nor beholds any perverseness in Israel, Number. 23. 21. she is so then in his eyes
by acceptance being justified and sanctified.

2. She is called not only fair, but fairest, or most fair, to show that the
beauty of grace, surpasses all other beauty, as it is said of the virtuous
woman, Many has done virtuously, but thou surmounts them all, therefore the
Church is so described, Ps. 45. and, Rev. 12. and this her beauty, sickness age
nor nothing can deface.

3. She is said to be fairest amongst women, 1. Because their beauty is
greatest, and here is is greater then their's of that Sex, 2. To show the
Churches excellency beyond all other societies, and therefore compared to a
Lilly amongst thorns.

Next to her Compellation to come to his Speech, and first to the Hypothetick
part thereof, If thou know not etc. Which form of speech would seem to
import, that it is a strange thing that His church should not know, where he
feeds his flock, for from the beginning he has ever fed his flock, so as his
Church has known how, where, and whereby: but yet false Teachers have
oftentimes so far prevailed, and so confidently challenged to themselves the
name and Title of the true Church, and the knowledge of Gods pure worship like
the Sun and air in the Revelation, has been oft-times so obfuscat and
darkened, that the simple and poor sheep of Christ have not known almost what
way to turn them, till in the end they have had here with the spouse their
refuge to Christ, to be taught and resolved by him.

The next part of his speech to her, is directory, directing her where to go,
to wit, by the steps of the flock. But seeing it is the church which makes this
request, that He would show her where He feeds, what flock does he feed beside
His Church? Is not she His only flock? What other flock is this then, whose
steps she must trace to find Him, and where he feeds? Indeed the Church is but
one in respect of the unity of faith and charity, and Christ feeds no other
flock beside Her. But in respect of the diversity of times and places, she may
be diversely considered, and may be said to be diverse flocks: and therefore we
must observe here, that this is the prayer of the Church ever on earth
militant, and there be who were upon earth in former time, that are now in
Heaven, triumphant, whose steps notwithstanding in sacred History yet may be
seen, and what truth they professed, and how they worshipped God. It is this
flock then, that He means, of true and faithful worshippers and whose steps
he wills Her to follow, as the Apostle yet calls to all, saying, Follow me, as
I follow Christ. Also it is to be noted that He bids her go forth, Leaving
nature, the practice of sin, the society of seducers, the suggestion of flesh
and blood. And Next, he bids her feed her kids by the shepherds Tents: where we
have, 1. What is meant by Her kids, 2. What by the shepherds and their Tents,
First then, by kids are meant young and tender Christians, for the goats whose
young ones kids are, being indeed sometime opposed to sheep signify the
wicked, yet usually also they figured in the Law the godly offered up by
mortification as sacrifices to God, Romans 12. 1. And Christ Himself was
signified by goats and kids by the Apostles exposition, Heb. 9. 12. Kids
likewise they are called, or young goats to show what they are by nature when
they are at first brought to Christ, and to feed on the green pasture of His
word, to wit goatish and petulant, till the change by grace and the means
thereof be wrought upon them, from goats to be Christ's sheep appointed for his
right Hand, kids also for tender age denoting that even from our younger years
we should be a ccustomed, according to Timotheus's commondation, with the
pasture of Gods word to be fed thereby.

Next, by these shepherds spoken of, who fed and guided these anicent flocks,
are meant, the Holy Prophets and Apostles, to whom as Christ said to Peter,
passce oves meas, Christ committed his sheep to feed, and upon whose doctrine
as the only true foundation, St. Paul declares the whole house of God, which is
his Church, to be built: and by their Tents, is meant, their writings or the
displayed and firm doctrine of the truth which they fully and faithfully
preached and left unto all posterity registrate in Scripture.

Observations.
1. We see, How readily he answers her petition, From which we observe the
Lords promptitude in answering the petitions of his own, specially craving
spiritual things, as He shows us, Luke 11. 11.

2. Out of the style he gives her, of being fairest among women, we see the
difference between the judgment of the blind world and Christ's, who not seeing
the spiritual beauty of Christ's church, Rev. 12. 1. but looking on Her outward
base and afflicted condition, vilifies her, while as her members are the Lords
Jewels, and she is most beautiful being justified and sanctified in him, to
her Heavenly husband.

3. We see here also a great comfort to every godly soul in temptation, when
Satan upbraides unto them their filthiness and pollution by sin, and
therefore how can so pure and Holy a God delight in them, or count them fair or
beautiful? To whom such may reply, that though they be so by sin, yet being
washed and sanctified, they are beautiful in His eyes, who sees no Iniquity in
Jacob, but whose blood has cleansed them, his spirit renewed them, and whose
love has covered the multitude of their infirmities.

4. As we see the difference between the judgment of the blind world and
Christ's concerning his Church, so also between Her own Judgment of her self,
and Christ's: she said of her self before, I am black; and He says here, that
she is most beautiful, to reach us to be vile in our own eyes and humble, like
the publican, and then the Lord will the more highly esteem of us, and exalt
us.

5. Whereas in such a meek manner (without rebuking her for her ignorance) He
tells her what to do, to wit, to go forth by the footsteps of the flock, and
besides the Tents of the shepherds, we see a true and sure directory in his
words in the matter of Religion, to wit, to insist in the steps of the
profession and practice of Gods true people who have gone before us, as we find
them clearly set before our eyes in the writings of the faithful shepherds of
his Church, to wit the Prophets and Holy Apostles.

6. We see how the godly they not only do good in their life time, but also by
their good example, registrate in Holy Scripture which they left behind them,
being dead, they do good in like manner: therefore, Heb. 11. 4. by that
oblation of Abel's, and his faith manifested therein, being dead he is said yet
to speak, and instruct others, how to worship good in like faith and sincerity.

7. Lastly, we see, 1. How will these agree, to wit, the flock's footsteps
with the shepherds Tents, a holy practice in people with sound doctrine of
pastors: and, 2. That hereby Christ's flock may be known to be his true flock,
to wit, by insisting in the profession of prophetical and apostlicall truth,
which is the Tents of these here spoken of.

Verse. 9. and 10. I have compared thee (O my Love) to a company of Horses in
Pharoah's charets, thy cheeks are comely with rows of Jewels, thy neck with
chains of Gold.
After our Saviors direction of his Church according to her petition, follows
to the end of the Chapter, the mutual commendation one of another: and, 1. His
of her, wherein we have, 1. How he styles her, 2. Whereto he compares her,
First then he styles her his love, in the original, My fellow friend, 1. Who
delights in my company, 2. Eats and drinks with me: and. 3. Who is ready to
participate in weal and woe. This love of his is she, whom he loves, not with
a general love as he does all his creatures, as they are his workmanship, and
as he saw them good at the beginning; but with a special love, which is
twofold, benevolentiae, whereby he elected his Church, and complacentiae,
whereby he dedelights in her, and in her obedience or beauty of holiness.

This special love which he has to his Church, has these properties, 1. It
is, First, 2. Free, 3. Real, 4. Admirable, cum non essemus: and 5. Immutable
(as has been before on v. 2.) and eternal. Whence we see the high dignity of
the church and every true member thereof, she is Christ's love, who is King of
kings, and therefore, 1. He will protect her from her enemies: 2. as Sampson to
Dalilah, will reveal to her His secrets: 3. as Assuerus to Esther, will refuse
no suit of hers: 4. though absent in body, is still mindful of her; sending
her, his love Letters and tokens: 5. Will at last give himself to her, and
assume her to be with himself.

Next we have, whereto he compares her, even as Zech. 10. 3. 1. To goodly
horses for battle and, 2. To a Troop of such, 3. Belonging to a mighty king:
and, 4. Accordingly royally furnished, as the manner of the Egyptians was, with
precious stones on their bridles, and chains of gold, about their neck and so
making a goodly sight to behold.

1. Then, she is compared to warrelike horses in chariots, as, Exodus 14. 7. 9.
To warn her of her estate here on earth militant, and that no sooner shall any
follow his former direction in adjoining themselves to her, and the profession
of the truth; but as soon they must expect a spiritual warrfare, and to
suffer persecution.

2. She is compared to Horses of the best sort, and not to ordinary and common
servile ones, but for royal service and employment; to show the excellency of
the Church and godly, (as Ps. 16. 3. they are called,) who are appointed for
his service, who is King of kings, and not for the base servitude of Sin or
Satan; and therefore should not walk as the ordinary sort of the world, being
ad meliora renati.

3. Such horses, as were in Pharaoh's Chariots were strong, nimble, swift,
courageous, and ready to war: even so the godly have spiritual strength,
agility and swiftness, as Psalm. 119. 32. Courage for the truth and against
spiritual enemies, and are ready fitted for their spiritual warrfare, as we
see, Ephesians. 6.

4. She is compared to Horses belonging to a mighty king: even so does the
Church belong to the King of kings, who ownes her by creation, redemption,
confoederation, and matrimonial Union, and therefore is her only Lord, over
whom no other should Lord at all.

5. She is said to be like a troop of horses, not loose and running at random,
but coupled and fitted for royal service, in the Chariots of Pharaoh: even so
is the Church, a troop or company, not set at carnal liberty, that because
grace does abound, therefore sin should abound, but put under the easy and
light yoke of Christ, and taught to obey his lore, in the liberty of the
Spirit, and holy service of his blessed Majesty.

6. She is compared to a troop of Horses, so danted and tamed, that they are
not only fitted for service, but made peaceable amongst themselves, and orderly
placed; each one keeps their own station: even so is the church a company of
Persons, though first like wild colts by nature, yet so tamed and mortified by
grace, that they are not only fitted for the Lords service, but keep unity
amongst themselves, and keep every one the station and Calling, where the Lord
has placed them, whether in Church or Commonwealth.

7. Her checks are richly decked with precious stones, and chains: even so are
the true members of Christs-church richly decked and adorned with the precious
and saving graces of Gods holy spirit; as we see, Pro. 1. 9. and, Ezekiel. 16. 11.
Whereby the kings daughter is glorious within, Ps. 45. 14. and beautiful with
the beauty of holiness in the sight of her welbelo^d, and whereby they are a
goodly sight in the eyes of all beholders of their godly life and shining
light, who are thereby moved to glorify God their heavenly father.

Observations.
1. If therefore our estate here be militant like horses prepared for battle,
then let no Christian sing a requiem to himself here, but be armed as Ephesians. 6.
and be still on his watch and guard that he be not surprised by Satan or the
tentations of sin, but resist him valiantly, and constantly that he may say
with the Apostle in the end, I have fought a good fight, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 7.

2. Although our estate here be a continual warfare, with outward and in ward
enemies, so that we may say with Jacob, Our days are few and evil, yet here
is comfort, 1. That belonging to so mighty, yea an almighty King, who has
vanquished our enemies, he will have a care of us, and will not suffer one of
his to perish, 2. He will do that which no king or captain can do to his
soldiers, or horses for service, He will furnish us with courage, strength,
wisdom, agility and skill, as he did David, to overcome G^liah.

3. Seeing the church is compared to a troop of Horses, not wild, but tamed,
fitted for the owners service, and like horse placed in Chariots, keeping their
own stations, Let all Christians learn that they are not, nor should not be,
like wild beasts, as Tigers or Lions, but such as are tamed, as service-Horses
or sheep, mortifying daily their wild and savage nature, and bringing it under
subjection to the Lords service, and keeping every one their own station
therein, to glorify god; and in a holy unity, as under one yoke, by mutual
help one of another, to profit and promote the good of Christ's church and
kingdom.

4. Her cheeks are said to be richly decked and adorned: which should make us
to try our selves by the furniture of saving graces, if we be the true spouse
of Christ, as by repentance, faith, humility, and charity, etc. Whereof if we
be destitute, it is not a name that we live, like Sardis, Rev. 3. 1. or verbal
profession that will avail, or prove us to be the true members of Christ's
church.

5. These graces, wherewith a true Christian is adorned, are called or compared
to, Jewels and chains of gold, to show, 1. That, as they are so in themselves,
so how every true godly soul should esteem of grace, and, if they really have
the ^ame, will esteem thereof: as we see, Matthew 13. 44, 45. etc. And of the
means thereof, Ps. 19. and 119. And therefore. let us try by our estimation of
grace and means thereof, and by the care we have to attain thereto, as to
Jewels, or precious treasure, if we have true grace, or be the true members of
Christ's church,

2. To show that as Jewels wherewith one is decked are not of and sort, figure
or form; even so neither are the gi^ts and graces whereby Christ decketh and
adorneth his Church, but diverse, and of a diverse measure; all to the
edification of the body in common, and to the salvation of each member in
particular, 1 Cor. 12.

3. As in a chain there is a concatenation of the diverse lincks one with
another; even so is it with Christian virtues for which cause we are exhorted,
2. Pet. 1. 5, 6. and with true Christian obedience, as we see, Ps. 119 6. and
Luke 1. 6. And therefore we should labor to have all saving graces, and to
obey all God commandments.

6. These Jewels, and chains wherewith her cheeks are decked, she has not from
her self, but from Her beloved, to teach us Humility when we are never so
richly adorned with the variety of edifying gifts for others, or saving graces
for our selves: these talents are not ours, and what have we but that which we
have received, and as all this decking of Pharaoh's Horses was for the
magnificence of their Master, so is all the decking of Christ's church with
such gifts and graces, for the magnificence and glory of his blessed Majesty,
which should be the ultimate aim of all our actions or endeavors.

7. But we must remarke: When are these Jewels and chains put upon her cheeks
and neck? never, till her cheeks be bedewed with tears for her sins, and
that her neck shake off the yoke of Satan's slavery, as the Prodigals beggarly
rags were first laid aside, before he was clothed with that garment which his
father put upon him. And the Church in Ezekiel. 16. was first washed from her
filthiness, before she was richly clothed and adorned with Jewels. Therefore
the Church is thus exhorted in Isay. 52. 1, 2. Put on thy beautyfull garments,
O Jerusalem the holy City, but withal first, Shake thy self from the dust,
arise and loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Sion
therefore, if we in like manner would be decked and adorned, as mortality
cannot be clothed upon by Immor^ality, so neither can a soul continuing in
sin and impenitency, be adorned with the rich graces of Gods spirit; or such
precious liquor be put in such old, nasty, and rotten vessels.

8. He speaks of the adorning the most conspicuous parts of the body, to wit,
the cheeks and neck, to teach us, that although the graces of Sanctification be
seated chiefly inwardly to and invisibly in the heart, and hidden man thereof,
which makes it be said, as Ps. 45. 13. yet in their exercise they must be
visible as in the face, or neck: and therefore says our Savior, So let your
light shine, that men seeing your good works may gloryfie God your heavenly
father.

Verse. 11. We will make thee borders of Gold with studs of Silver.
According to his Promise, Habenti dabitur; So here is a promise to the Church
of the increase of his graces, and that useing these well which He had
bestowed, she should receive more, as we see in the parable of the Talents,
and of him who was faithful in little set over much: wherein we have 1.
who is the promiser, and what is meant by (we) and 2. what is promised.

First then, by we is understood the Trinity, as we have the like, Genesis 1. 26.
for it is only the work of God: grace in the soul, and these eminent works,
according to the thelogicall Rule, are indivisible, hovvever in respect of
order, in a special manner they are particularly attribute to the several
persons, as creation to the Father, redemption to the Son, and sanctification
to the holy Ghost.

2. The thing promised, is borders of Gold, whereby is meant a new supply of
grace, compared to Gold: 1. to show the preciousnesse and excellency of grace,
as Gold is the most precious and excellent metal above all others: 2. as Gold
inriches, as Rev. 3. 18. so does grace only enrich the soul, or truly make
rich: 3. as Gold is durable, so is grace only: and 4. as Gold is delectable, so
is grace both to God, and the truly godly; and 5. as borders or lace of Gold
decks and decores most, so does grace the soul.

Next unto borders of Gold he adds, studs of Silver, whereby is meant the
variety of Gods graces, which, like Gold and Silver wrought together, set
forth each other, for the mutual help comfort and delight of the Saints, as we
see like speeches, Prove. 25. 11. Psalm. 119. 72.

Observations.
1. We see, that the thing which he promises to his Church in testimony of his
love to her is not worldly trash, like Esau's portion, and the wicked's, Psalm.
73. but saving grace and the growth thereof, and therefore let us take this
only, like Jacobs blessing, to be a sure work of Gods favor, and with David to
seek after the same, Psalm. 119.

2. He promises more grace to his Church and to her members, using those well
which he had already bestowed (for this is to be understood), and therefore if
we would have more grace, Joh. 1. 16. or the grouth thereof, we must labor to
use that well which we have already gotten, and stir up the same in us by
prayer, all ordinary means, and exercise of the same.

3. Seeing he says, we will make thee Borders of Gold etc. thereby showing
that all grace comes from him, and is his work in our souls, therefore from him
only we should seek the same, and when we find it wrought in us, to reverence
the means, and the external instruments, but to give the glory of the work
unto him, who is the only worker.

4. Here is a great encouragement to seek Christ, and to come un^o him, for
they who do so, shall find a treasure of grace in him, like that Honey that was
in Sampsons Lion, and he shall never be weary in bestowing more and more rich
Jewels of grace upon them, and costly ornaments still, till at last he perfect
grace in the estate of glory, as Psalm. 84. 11.

Verse. 12. While the King sits at his Table, my spikenard sends forth the
smell thereof.
Here the Church speaks of the fruits of Christ's former graces under a new
comparison, and how in her and from her so endowed by her Beloved, the sweet
fragrant smell of these graces as of a precious Ointment flowed forth and
spread abroad to the delight of her self and others* which smell her spikenard
sends forth, as she says, while the King did sit at his table, whereby is
understood that sweet fellowship and spiritual communion between Christ and
his Church by mutual banqueting as it were, as we see Rev. 3. 20. and at
which times annoynting was used, as we see, Psalm. 23. 5. and Math. 26. 7. and
bringing also of things that gave or sent forth sweet smells to perfume the
place, and please or delight the banquetters.

1. First then, we see the style that she gives her Beloved, which is that same
whereof we have spoken, v. 12.

2. Secondly by his banqueting, or his sitting at table, we have shown what is
understood; which banqueting is either spiritual as here, or caelestiall in
heaven, whereof Psalm. 36. 8. and Luke 22. 30. And again this which is
spiritual, is either whereby he feasts, and feeds us, in the ministry of his
Word and Sacraments, or whereby we feast him with his own graces and
delightful fruits thereof, as Mary Magdalen did with her tears of true
repentance, and expressions of her holy love, and (which is strange) the feast
that he most delights in, is our hungring and thi^ng after righteousness; and
such he mutually invites to feast with him, Isai. 54. 1. but alas we feast him
rather with Wormwood and Gall, and with such grapes as are spoken of Isai. 5.

3. Thirdly, we have to consider. 1. What this Spikenard is. 2. How called
hers. 3. How it sends forth the smell thereof. First then spikenard is a very
precious and odoriferous Ointment, as we see Mark. 14. 3. and Joh. 12. 3. and
by which is meant, the precious and savory or fragrant graces of Gods Spirit
coming from our head of Christ, and powered down upon his members like that,
Psalm. 133. 1. which is that Unction whereof John speaks, and whereby all true
Christians are spiritually anointed to be a Royal Priesthood unto God.

2. This Spikenard is called hers, 1. by donation, as it is said quid habes,
quod non accepisti? 2. by inhesion, because it is gratia gratis data, quae
nobis inhaeret, being sown and rooted in such, who are ingraft truly, and
rooted in Christ; but is not ours, as if it were either from our selves, or
like Christ's Righteousness which is imputed to us, and is like Esau's vesture,
that sweet smelling garment, wherewith being clothed we get our fathers
blessing.

3. This Spikenard is said to send forth the smell thereof when these graces
manifest themselves by the fruits, or effects, and operation thereof in that
new obedience which becomes Christians, expressing the virtue of Christ's
death and resurrection, the truth of their conversion, the liveliness of their
faith, the fervencie of their zeal, and the reality of their charity, and the
like; the smell whereof, like that Joh. 12. 3. fills every place where it is
sent forth, ascending upwards to God, like that of Noah's sacrifice, or
Cornelius alms deeds, and pleasing him, reflecting inward to the conscience,
rejoicing the same, and giving an assurance of our election by welldoing, and
extending to others: as, Psalm. 16. 2. who seeing our good works, and getting
good thereby do glorify God our heavenly Father.

Observations.
1. We see the great love of Christ to his Church, not only in bestowing gifts
and graces upon her, but likewise familiarly banqueting with her, as he says
Rev. 3. 20. If any man will open unto m^ I will sup with him, and he shall sup
with me: therefore also. c. 2. verse 4. it is said, he brought me, into his
banqueting house, and his banner over me was love: which should teach us to
walk worthy of such a favor and ever to have on the banqueting Garment of
holiness, unspotted with the flesh.

2. By her Spikenard its sending sorth the smell thereof, we see that there is
no better way to entertain him, than with the fruits, and fragrant smell of his
own saving graces; and therefore it is said, c 4. v. 16, Let my Beloved come
into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits, so that as it is said of the
virtuous woman, Prove. 31. 31. give her of the fruit of her own hands, and let
her own works praise her; Or, as David said to the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. of
thine own have we given thee: even so, give the Lord of the fruit of his own
graces planted in thy heart, and let his own work thereof praise him. But alas
the smell we send forth is as that of a filthy puddle which displeases the Lord
and provokes him to wrath.

3. We see likewise here, that what edifying gifts we get from God, like so
many talents, we ought not to keep them close as that improfitable servant did,
or hiding our light as it were under a bushel, but we should do as Mary
Magdalen did with her Box of Spiknard, precious and costly, power it out for
the benefit of others, even upon Christ's feet, Math. 26. and lowest or meanest
members of his body; even as that Psalm. 133. 2. costly ointment, that was
povvred on Aarons head, drenched down to the lowest skirts of his Garment.

Verse. 13. A bundle of mirrh is my well be loved unto me, He shall lie all
night betwixt my breasts.
Here the Church profestes her spiritual comfort which she had in Christ and
of his death and resurrection; the feeling whereof is like a sweet odor to a
believing soul, and which she would be so careful to conserve, and apply in
all estates, unto her self by the work of faith, that all the night time of
his life, or of affliction and tentation (noted, by a dark time) she would make
Him her continual joy and comfort, solacing her self in him, and that he
should lie between her breasts, and constantly dwell in her heart, by Faith and
true affection.

She compares him then to a bundle of Mirrhe, or Nosegay, such as is usually
made of most pleasant and sweet Flowers, for delighting sight and smell, and
which Maidens did set in their bosoms between their breast, that so they might
have the sweet savor thereof always in their nose.

In which word we have 1. how she calls him, 2. Whereunto she compares him, to
wit, to myrrh and a bundle of myrrh, 3. to whom he is so, to wit, to her 4.
where she places him, between her Breasts, and 5. How long shall he lie there,
to wit, all the Night.

First then, she calls him her beloved (whereof v. 7.) whom for power and
authority before she called, a King, v. 12. and whose power should confound
her, if his love did not comfort her; and to whom she again as a King, owes
loyalty and subjection, and as her blessed bridegoom she professes to him love
and affection.

Next, she compares him to Myrrh, which was one of the gifts wherewith the wise
men of the East honored Christ at his birth, Math. 2. and with which and aloes
his body also was imbalmed after his death, Joh. 19. 39. and which likewise was
the first and special ingredient of the holy anointing oil, that was
appointed to be made, for annoynting Aaron and the Tabernacle with the
pertinents thereof, being of a svveet and odoriferous smell, as the rest of the
sweet spices were of that conposition, and whereby is signified the sweet
comfort that the Christian soul, endued with spiritual senses, finds in Christ
crucisied, to whom sin is first sour, Exodus 30. 23.

Neither contents she her self to compare Him only to Myrrh, but to a bundle of
Myrrh, to show unto us 1. the abundance of that spiritual comfort that comes
from him to a believing soul, as a greater smell is yielded by a bundle of
sweet flovvers or spices, than comes from a single flovver or a grain of
spice. As likewise to shovv 2. that as from every flovver in a bundle, there
comes a svveet smell; even so from every thing considerable in Christ there
arises comfort whether we consider his natures or offices, his birth and
conception, his holy life, death, burial, resurrection, and ascension, and now
his intercession at his Fathers right hand til he come again to judgment. So
that as the carcass of Sampsons dead Lion was so full of Honey, that Sampson did
not only eat abundantly thereof himself, but gave thereof also to others,
Judge. 14. 9. so is Christ Jesus so full of comfort, that the believing soul
may not only have enough to it self, but to impart by instruction for the
comfort of others. 3 to show that the Church and every true elect soul cannot
be content with a little of Christ, but to enjoy much of him, and the power of
his death and resurrection, till they fully enjoy him in glory, as Psalm. 17. 15.

Thirdly, we have to consider, to whom is Christ a bundle of svveet and
fragrant myrrh, It is to his Church and every godly soul, therefore says she,
by a speech of faith and application, he shall be to me a bundle of myrrh:
wherein we see. 1. the Churches holy resolution, that let others (as it is
said by Isaiah) and contemn them as they please Isa. 53. 3. not knovving his
vvorth, being as Aesop's Cock: but as for her, (as Joshua protested what he
would do, Josua 24. 15.) she should hold him in singular estimation, so that
he should be to her as a bundle of Myrrh, which she should place betvveen her
breasts.

2. We see what is the proper act of faith, to wit, as Thomas said, my God
and my Lord; even so by a particular application of Christ as her Savior to
her soul, she says He shall be to me, etc. and herein indeed stands the very
true comfort of a Christian, as in the locks of Sampsons hair consisted his
strength, without which particular application (like old Simeons embracing of
Christ in his arms,) the soul could have no comfort at all, more then the
devils, who knew him and confesses that he is a Savior, but not to them: and
therefore the prophet says, For unto us a Child is born, etc. Isai. 9. 6. And
the Angel in like manner said at his birth, For unto you is born a Savior
which is Christ the Lord.

3. We see, that although Christ be full of fragrant sweetness, yet he is not
so to every one, especially whose souls are stuffed with gross humors, or
delight with the filthy swine in the stinking smell and puddle of fleshly
lusts but he is so only to his own church and true members thereof, who being
renewed in the inner man, have their senses otherwise exercised, to detest
all sort of sin, and sinful pleasures as a most noisesome and stinking
hemlock, and to esteem Christ only and the graces thot flow from him, most
fragrant ann delightful.

Fourthly, the part wherein she places him, it is, He shall lie between her
Breasts, or to be laid at, or, to her very heart: and indeed justly may and
should he be laid there. 1. because He is the only true cordial to a Christian
or sick soul: and, 2. because, whereas other bundles of svveet Flovvers or
nosegayes are so kept in the breast, by being placed betvveen them; He shall be
the keeper and guardian of the heart, being placed on or in the heart, and so
shall be ornamentum pectoris, as a pleasant nosegay, et munimentum cordis, like
a breast plate of proof, Psalm. 84. 11. a decking of the one and a defense of
the other, from evil suggestions, and Satan's wicked temptations, or, as the
Psalmist speaks, both a Sun and a shield.

She says likewise, that she will lay him between her breasts, 1. for
remembrance and contemplation that she may have him still in remembrance and
before her eyes, to look upon; as Israel did upon the brazen Serpent; or as
the names of the twelve tribes were on the high Priests brestplate: 2. for
delight and consolation, as for that end, to delight the eye by color, and
comfort the brain by smell, maids use to put nosegayes between their breasts:
and therefore also for spiritual delight, as the most beautiful object the
eye of faith can look upon, and for the most pleasant and sweet smelling or
savor to the soul, Cant. 2. 1. He is compared to the Rose of the Field, and to
the Lilly of the Vallyes: 3. for care and conservation, as they put such
things which they would keep and not lose, in their breast or bosom; for which
end said David, that he hid Gods word in his heart, Psalm. 119. 11. and the
Virgin Mary, that she laid up her Sons words in her heart, to wit, that they
might not be lost or forgotten: 4. for ornament and decoration, for which end
we are bidden to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, He being the most beautiful
ornament that ever was put on the soul, and whereby the Kings daughter is said
to be beautiful within, Psalm. 45. and perfect through my comeliness (says
the Lord) which I put upon thee, Ezekiel. 16. 14.

Fifthly, she shows how long He shall lie there, to wit, all night: now by
night is understood in Scripture, 1. the time of affliction and trouble, as
Isai. 21. 12: 2. the day of death, as Joh. 9. 4: and 3. the time of our life
here on earth, as it is specially to be understood here, so called or compared,
1. as the night is dark, and therefore they who walk in the nightime have a
Lantern carried before them; so in this lifetime there is darkness of
ignorance, and no light have we to direct our walking that we stumble not or
fall into sin and damnation, but the Lantern of Gods Word, as the Psalmist
shows us. 2. The night is the most dangerous time for surprising or robbing by
enemies, and therefore they vvatch in the night time; even so this lifetime is
most dangerous for surprising by our spiritual enemy, and robbing us of Gods
favor and graces: and therefore we are exhorted ever to watch and pray that we
enter not into temptation, 3. The night time is melancholious; and so is our
life, wherein we sow in tears, 4. The stars shine in the night; and so
should our Christian virtues shine. And 5. as after the nightime the Sun
arises, and then follows the lightsome day; even so after the night time of
this life to the godly shall the Sun of righteousness arise, and be clearly
seen and then shall follow an eternal day, that never shall have an end.

Observations.
1. We see, by the Church in comparing Christ to pure mirrhe, as it is called,
Exodus. 30. 23. which was very costly, and precious, as may be seen, Matthew.
2. 11. the high esteem that the Church and every true member has of Christ,
counting nothing so worthy and of such sweetness and excellency as Christ,
which made the Apostle to say, as 1 Cor. 2. 2. and that in comparison of him,
he counted all things loss and dung.

2. As the Church esteems him highly, so sutably she places him highly, to
wit, in her heart, and between her breasts the seat of affection and repose;
which we will never do, till we learn to esteem him highly, and which is the
cause why some place the world, the honor, profit, and pleasures thereof in
their hearts, and not as Rev. 12. 1. because they esteem more highly of those
things than of Christ.

As the heart is Christ's proper place, and the Christian's duty, so likewise
thereby we may see the Christian's dignity, he is verus Christopher, and bears
Christ in a more excellent manner, then the vigin Mary, quae non tam in utero
portando, quam in anima credendo beata fuit. And therefore to whom that honor
is not granted which was to her, yet this is not denied, to bear him in our
breast; and if our breasts gave him not suck, yet let them give him harbor;
neither let us misplace him, as many do, some in the ear only, and some in
their tongue by pra^ling, yea and some treading him under foot.

4. We see, that we must not harbor him as a guest for a short time, but he
must lie all the night time of this life between our breasts, and as the
prophet Zechary speaks he must dvvell with us, Zech. 8. 3. or as himself
speaks, he must make abode with us, Joh. 14. 23. joining with piety
perseverance: for he only that continues faithful to the death shall receive
the Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10.

5. Not only in the whole time of our life generally, but specially, in the
gloomy night of affliction, and shadowish black night of death, (as it is
called, Psalm. 23. 4.) we see how and in whom to find the sweetness of
comfort, even from Christ all averly, who bore the Cross before us, and by his
death has triumphed over death, and made it stingless and a shadowish valley
only, to us.

Verse. 14. My beloved is unto me as a cluster of Camphire, in the vineyards of
Engedi.
Still she insists in his praise as not being able to commend him enough, in
whom she found such abundance and store of all comfort and sweetness, wherein
1. we have to consider, what is this Camphire to a cluster, whereof she
compares him: and 2. what is this Engedi, in the vineyards whereof this
Camphire grew. First then Camphire, (or as some expound it, Cypress,) is a
white and aromaticke Flower, which from the stem grows forth in a Cluster as
the wine grapes do from the Vine, wherein we have 1. the color representing
Christ's innocence; wherefore he is likewise compared to a Lilly; and 2. the
fragrant smell which it yields representing the sweet comforts that flow from
him abundantly to every believing soul, as likewise the acceptablenesse of his
sacrifice of himself to his father, wherein as in Noah's oblation, he smelled
a sweet savor of rest and acquiescing. Whence also the Hebrew name copher,
signifies propitiation or redemption, according to which the holy Ghost seems
here to have reference to the work and fruit of Christ's death, whereby he
became a cluster of abounding consolation; and also of redemption for the sins
of the whole world; 1 John 2. 2. and like the brazen Serpent has cured us of
the biting of the fiery serpents; as Pliny reports, that Camphir has this
property; to cure the stinging of serpents, Lib. 21. c. 18.

Likewise Engedi is the name of a place or City in the Land of Canaan, which
fell to the tribe of Judah, of whom Christ came: and being near the dead sea,
was fruitful for gardens and vineyards, whereof we read Josua. 15. 62. Situate
(as Adrichomius shows) in the mountains, and called the City of Palme-trees,
and of Balm, wherewith the vineyards thereof did abound, as of other
odoriferous herbs and flowers li^^ Camphire here spoken of.

Observations.
1. We see that a godly soul that finds the plenty and variety of sweetness
that is in Christ Jesus can never enough or by any one thing express the same;
but that whatsoever sweetness and excellency is in any other thing severally,
is in the highest measure and eminent manner in him copulatively: so that those
who are sparing in acknowledging this and praising of him therefore, it is a
token that they never trasted how good the Lord is, and therefore cannot
acknowledge or tell what he has done to their souls.

2. Seeing Christ Jesus smells so sweetly and fragrantly to every true
Christian, here then is a rule whereby each one may try himself, whether he be
a true Christian or not, to wit, See what smells best to thee, whether Christ
and heavenly things, or the world and wickedness; and if it be not Christ it is
not for defect of abundant sweetness in Him, but because thou have a dead
soul, and wants the spiritual sense of discerning, like a blind man that
cannot see the Sun, or because thou art of a swinish nature gruntling in the
earth, and to whom nothing but what is base and filthy, smells well, as it is
said, Sus quod habet sapit hoc, sapit hoc quod stercore sorpsit.

3. This cluster of Camphir is to be found in the vineyards of Engedi, which
are the Lords Ordinances, or Assemblies of his Saints, Isai. 5. 7. Ps. 80. 15.
Even as he is said in like manner to be in the midst of the golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. and according to his promise, I will be with you to
the end of the world: whereby we see, if we would find the sweetness that is in
Christ, we must have our recourse and delight in the means whereby as by
conduit pipes this sweetness is conveyed unto us; for faith comes by Hearing,
Romans 10. 17. and God's word must be to us as, Ps. 19. 10. and therefore no
marvel that these men feel no sweetness in Christ, nor any power for
mortification, or quickening virtue, who feel no sweetness in the lovely oracles
of God, which is the power of God to salvation to every true believer.

Verse. 15. Behold, thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair, thou have
doves eyes.
Here, he mutually praises his bride, which shows the mutual delight that each
has in another, and which concertation of love makes the marriage-knot between
espoused parties to be solatious and sure.

In which commendation we have, 1. How he styles her, whereof we have spoken,
v. 9. 2 Wherefore he commends her, both in general, and from her eyes in
particular, 3. How he prefixes unto his praising of her, an Ecce; and 4. Why he
ingeminates his praising of her.

First then, he commends her from her beauty in general, whereof we have
spoken, v. 8. Which consists, 1. In forsaking her old corruption, Ps. 45. 10.
11. 2. In her practice of new obedience, being justified in Christ; which is
that beauty which the Psalmist prays for, may be upon all the Israel of God,
Psalm. 90. 17.

But seeing, v. 8. he had already praised her from her beauty, why repeats he
it here? I answer, as it is the whole desire of the Church to be fair and
beautiful in the eyes of her blessed Bridegroom, let others think of her as
they please, (as v. 5.) so it is her greatest joy and comfort to have the
assurance thereof sealed up to her soul, by the frequent witnessing of the
spirit, and voice of her beloved, saying to her soul that she is so to Him, and
that he is her salvation; and therefore he no^ once, but often commends her
from her beauty.

And seeing the whole church, and all the members thereof make up but one
homogeneous body, look what he speaks to the whole, he speaks to every
faithful soul, in whom if there be Repentance, faith, love, zeal, humility,
meekekness, etc. though there be remanent corruption and a mixture of diverse
infirmities, yet that soul is fair in Christ's eyes. Let us then find out these
graces in our selves, and though they be not perfect, yet being in truth, we
may be assured of acceptance, and rejoice in his love.

Next as he praises her from her beauty in general, so from the comeliness of
her eyes in particular, wherein we have to consider, 1. What they are; and, 2.
Why so compared, Job. 29. 15. First then, some* understand by the eyes of the
church her Pastors, and Overseers, so called, 1. Because of inspection,
counsel and right direction, in which sense it is spoken, Numb. 10. 31. and
Matthew. 6. 22. And therefore the Prophets of old were called Seers; and, 2. In
respect of vigilant watching for fore-warning of any danger, or invasion, a we
see, Ezekiel. 33. and Heb. 13. 20. and who most specially o^ any should have the
properties of Doves eyes, as is to be after mentioned.

Others understand, not these former, who may be called the eyes over the
Church, but the eyes in the Church and every faithful member thereof; and this
is, the eye of faith, which looks, like the stinged Israelites, on Christ
crucified only for cure and comfort; and without which, the soul is as blind as
a mole. And therefore are so called and compared, 1. Because the eye of the
body is the light of the body, and so is faith the light of the soul, 2. As the
eye cannot ^f it self, without the Sun or benefit of external light; so n^er
can the eye of the soul without illumination from the Sun of righteousness,
and of his Holy word by which faith comes, 3. As the eye delights in light, and
pleasant objects; so does the eye of the soul in the light and promises of Gods
word, and in Christ crucified, which is the most beautiful object that the eye
of faith can fix upon, and who, in the word, is set forth, and (as it were)
painted before our eyes, Gal. 3. 1. 4. As by the eye we are guided in our
walking, and made to eschew stumbling, falling, or such like dangers, so by
faith and the saving knowledge of Christ in his Word, we are guided in our
spiritual walking and made to eschew stumbling and falling in sin and
temptations, and such spiritual dangers.

Next, her eyes are compared to Doves eyes, 1. Because as a Dove's eyes are
cleear and sharp-sighted; so is the eye of faith piercing within the veil of
Christ's flesh, while He was on earth and beholding his Deity, and piercing now
into the Heavens, where he sits at his fathers right Hand, and into such divine
mysteries and the truth thereof, whereunto the blind eye of nature, nor no
other can or ever could yet reach.

2. The eye of the Dove is chaste, and chastity is much commended in virgins;
even so, that which our Savior so much commends in his Church by this
comparison, who is a pure virgin to Him, is her spiritual chastity opposite to
spiritual whordome, so much complained on and condemned in scripture, and
whereby, without doting on any other, she keeps her faith, confidence, and
affection whole and entire toward him alone, from whom alone she looks for
life and salvation.

3. The doves eyes are meek, and not cruel, fiery, or furious; representing
thereby that disposition of a Christian soul which is recommended unto the same
by him who said, Learn of me for I am humble and meek.

4. The doves eyes are humble, contrary to such lofty eyes as are spoken of,
Pro. 30. 13. And so is the disposition of a Christian soul endowed with true
faith, though never so fruitful in godliness and good works.

5. The doves eyes delights in cleanness, and therefore resorts to white places,
and to clear waters; even so does the soul that has true faith in it, loathing
all uncleanness of sin and worldly lusts, and knowing that no unclean thing
shall enter into that heavenly Jerusalem.

Thirdly we see here, that unto this commendation of her beauty and comeliness
he prefixes, an Ecce, or behold, which word is used in Scripture, 1. As an Ecce
of admiration, (as, Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a child.) 2. As an
Ecce, of demonstration, as, Behold the Lamb of God, etc. 3. As an Ecce, of
consideration, as, Lam. 1. 12. Behold and see if ever there was sorrow like to
my sorrow, etc. Also when he would stir up the mind to remark and observe,
some rare, excellent and wonderful matter, and which is also sure and evident;
even so hereby the Lord would have it observed, 1. That the beauty of his
Church is a rare beauty, as we see the same described, Ps. 45. and Rev. 12. 2.
An excellent beauty also, being spiritual, and not subject to fading, 3. A
wonderful beauty likewise (considering her former deformity) put upon her by
her bridgroom, who has made her so as, Ezekiel. 16. 14. And 4. Which is so sure
and permanent that death it self shall not deface it, but rather be the mean
of perfecting the same in glory.

Last of all, he redoubles this commendation of her beauty, saying; Thou art
fair, thou art fair.

1. Showing thereby the excellency of her beauty, as when we say good, good; or
excellent and very good by a usual Hebraism, the doubling of the word
expressing the superlative degree.

2. To show the assurance that He would give her for her comfort, and against
all doubting in the contrary, that she was fair and beautiful in His eyes,
think of her self in humility, or let others think of her, as they list.

3. That she is wholly beautiful, both in soul and body, or in the whole man;
or that her beauty is twofold, inward in soul, and outward in conversation, as
the kings daughter, Ps. 45. 13. is said not only to be glorious within, but
also in her raiment without. Also, she has another double beauty; the one of
justification, the other of sanctification: both which the Lord joins, therefore
let no man separate them.

Observations.
1. Seeing our Savior declares that his Church and her true members are fair
by the beauty of Holiness spoken of, Ps. 110. Then let not those who would be
so accounted, live like filthy dogs and swine, or delight in any impurity,
whereby their beauty may be marred.

2. He says, My love thou art fair, to show unto us wherefrom our beauty
proceeds, not of our selves that we are so, or from any mer^ us that we are so
in his eyes, but from his free and undeserved Love, as he shows, Ezekiel. 16. 8.
And the way to have the assurance of this love sealed up to our consciences for
our joy and peace, is to study holiness by which we only come to happiness.

3. Seeing he specially looks unto, and delights in faith, which is to the soul
like the eyes of the dove, Let us seek after it earnestly and for the increase
thereof; both in the Christian and conscionable use of the means, and by
servency of prayer, etc.

Verse. 16. Behold thou art fair my beloved, yea pleasam; also our bed is
green.
Here the church returns the praise of beauty to him who had in the former
verse ascribed it to her, as if she would say, that he is rather only worthy so
to be called, being so, 1. Originally and from himself, 2. Effentially, whose
effence, is holiness, 3. Perfectly, without any defect and, 4. Unchangably,
from eternity to eternity: and, 5. Eminently above all without match, and
infinitely beyond all without any measure.

Next, not contented to call him fair, she calls him also pleasant or comely, as
having seemly proportion with the brightness of color, which makes up the
perfection of beauty, which perfection our Savior has, 1. In respect of his
divine nature, in that regard being beauty and holiness it self, 2. In respect
of his Humane nature, Ps. 45. 2. as fairest amongst men, 3. In respect of his
perfect Innocence without all spot, 4. In regard of infused graces without any
measure on earth; and, 5. In respect of the fullness of glory above all
creature, which he has in the heavens, unto which praise he prefixes an Ecce,
to show that this his beauty is such as it invites in a manner all men and
creatures to behold the same.

Thereafter she subjoynes the praise of his Bed next to his Person, where we
have to consider. 1. What It is, and consequently what she is, 2. Whose it is;
and, 3. Of what quality it is.

First then, the bed between the bride and bridgroom is the place of
procreation, and whereby is shown, that although the Church be a pure Virgin,
yet she is also a mother, (as the virgin Mary was both) and, as she is expressly
called. Gal. 4. 26. and described so to be, Rev. 12. 2. ^ringing forth children
to her Heavenly husband procreated by the Immortal seed of his Word, and
nourished upon her breasts of the new and old testament by that sincere milk of
the word, whereof Peter speaks, unto eternal life.

2. This bed is called by her, (our bed) signifying thereby, that by her
communion with Christ she became fruitful, both in progeny of children by the
new birth of regeneration, and by the practice of good works and fruits of
sanctification. As also that in the forenamed work of spiritual procreation,
with her external Ministry, the Lord must ever concur and cooperate by his
divine Efficacy; for Paul plants and Apollos waters, but the Lord gives the
increass, as we may see, Act. 16. 14.

3. The quality of this bed is this, that it is called, green whereby is
signified the flourishing in all ages, and ever fresh springing up of these
goodly olive plants, and children, spoken of both by the Psalmist Ps. 92. 13.
and Prophet, Isay. 61. 4. which she brings forth to her Heavenly husband, of
whom she may say, as Leah said of Gad, in every age, that a troop comes; and
of whom also it may be spoken as, Ps. 92: 14. That she shall still bring forth
fruit in her old age to the worlds end, and shall be fat and flourishing.

Observations.
1. Here we see the Churches Retribution of praise to him of Heavenly beauty,
to whom only and most properly the praise thereof is due, and this she does in
token of true thankfulness: which for every gift and assurance of Gods favor
we should not cease in like manner to offer to him daily to whom the same is
due.

2. We see that this bed of Christ and his bride is ever green, and shall be to
the worlds end: like Moses bush, fruitful in all ages and therefore shall
never fade, nor the ports of Hell shall never prevail against it, to hinder
the birth of that man-child, Rev. 12. or production of those who are endued
with Masculine strength, to resist Satan and stand for the truth.

Verse. 17. The beams of our house are Cedars, and our rafters of Err.
Before was the praise of the place of procreation of Gods children; follows
now the praise of Gods house, the place of their education: where we have to
consider, 1. What is meant by this house, and why the Church is so called, 2.
What are the parts thereof here mentioned; and, 3. What is the matter thereof,
from which it is commended; and, 4. Why she calls it our house.

First then; by this house is meant the Church, called Gods House expressly, 1.
Tim. 3. 15. Heb. 3. 6. Ephesians. 2. 22. and, 1 Pet. 2. 5. For these ensuing reasons;

1. For inhabitation, because there the Lord dwells, as he promised, Ero
vobiscum, And we see, Rev. 2. 1. Numb. 5. 3. Psalm. 80. 1. 9. 11. Joh. 14. 17.
Ephesians. 3. 17. Rev. 18. 9. 11. 2* Tim. 1. 14. and 1 Ioh. 2. 17.

2. For decoration, with saving graces, and diversity of edifying gifts, as a
man adornes his House, with sundry sorts of ornaments.

3. For delectation, whence he gives his Church here so many goodly titles
importing the same.

4. For domination, in a special and gracious manner ruling therein.

But herein is a great disparity between His house and others.

1. He is both owner and builder of this, 2. He is both builder and buyer, 3.
The stones whereof this house is built are living, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 4 As he is the
builder, so himself is both foundation and cornerstone, 5. Himself is the
indweller, and no other by elocation, as some are. 6. He is ever present in,
and with his House; and, 7. No time can make this house decay, no fire consume
it, nor storm overthrow the same.

Secondly, the parts of this House here mentioned, are beams which are strong
and laid in walls, as we see ordinarily in buildings, and rafters which are
less in quantity, and for another use; and whereby are understood the diverse
office-bearers, and other members of the Church of Christ: Some stronger, as
those, Gal. 2. 9. who are called pillars, and upon whom the weighty burden is
incumbent in church or commonwealth. And others again weaker gifted or
graced, and in meaner and more private stations, as we see in the parable of
the talents, some having more, some fewer, and some but one talent, and who had
most, having most to count for, and who ought not despise those, who had fewer
neither those who had the fewest, to envy with an ill eye such as had most, but
to be careful to gain proportionally.

Next, as the beams are made strong, not for themselves, but for the
supportation of other parts of the house, as the floores and such like; even so
the stronger in Christ's church have their strength not only for their own
stability, or standing, but for the good of those who are weaker: as it was
said to Peter, tu conversus confirma fratres.

Moreover as beams and rafters, and such other parts in a Material house
although diverse in strength and for diverse places and uses in the fabric, yet
have all a firm connection amongst themselves to make up one complete
structure: even so in Christ's church though there be diverse members, diversely
gifted, and placed, as we see in the members of the body natural, 1. Cor. 12.
14. Yet, as the Apostle there shows, v. 25. there should be no schism in the
body, but such a conjunction of love, that the members should have the same
care one of another, as they have of themselves, and a holy sympathy in
suffering or rejoysing.

Thirdly the matter whereof those parts are, and from which they are so
commended, is, that the beams are of Cedar, and the rafters, (or as Some
expound, the galleries or walks) of fur, alluding, as seems, to that of
Solomon's Temple, 1 King. 6. 15. where both these sorts of timber are
mentioned, whereof that Temple was built, and both grew in Lebanon, 2 King. 19.
23. and were of greatest account. And first the Cedar, in that same place, and
Ezech. 17. 22. is commended, 1. From tallness, or growing high; and so do the
godly grow in grace, reaching in their affections upward, quaerendo quae supra.
2. The Cedar is said to cast forth his roots sure, for withstanding rooting up
by any wind or violence, Hos. 14. 5. denotating thereby, the stability of God's
Saints, who build upon the rock. 3. The Cedar is called Excellent, Cant. 5. 15.
and so are the godly called, Psalm. 16. 3. in respect of grace, and their new
birth. 4. The Cedar-wood was most durable, and therefore the Ark, and orher
parts of the Tabernacle, was made thereof; and so are the godly by grace,
against prevailing corruption here, and fitted for eternal glory hereafter. 5.
The Cedar-tree was such a one, as brought forth fruit, as we see, Ezech. 17.
23. and so are the godly, fruitful in holiness and good works.

Next, her rafters, or galleries for walks, are said to be of Fur; which,
besides that it is likewise a tall, straight, and durable sort of tree, it has
these two properties: 1. It is always green in winter, as in summer; and so
are the godly, in steadfast confidence by grace, always vigorous, without
decaying or falling away from Christ and his truth, as well in adversity as
prosperity. 2. The firre-tree is a fat, savoury, and well-smelling tree,
through the abundance of ^ap and rosen that it has in it; even so are the
godly, fat with the fatness of spiritual grace, spoken of, Esa. 25. 6. and
savoury not only through Christ to God, but sending forth a good smell, of a
holy life, and conversation, to allure and delight others: And therefore says
the Lord of his people, Hos. 14. 6. that their smell should be as the smell of
Lebanon.

But it may be asked, why she speaks of the beams and rafters, and not of the
walls of this house? I answer, If these parts made of timber or wood, be so
firm and durable, then the firmity, durablenesse, and strength of the rest, as
the walls, which are made of stone, is out of all question; and so this house,
in all the parts thereof, is so durable and strongly built, that the very gates
of hell shall never prevail against it.

Last of all, seeing the Church speaks here, how says she, (Our house) being
her self God's house? I answer, She speaks this, in the person of the mother of
the family of God's children, who make up this house; and as Christ's Spouse,
who by that mystical and matrimonial union with him, has likewise a
communion with him in all which is his, as there is a threefold communion
between married persons, of hearts in affection, of bodies in fruition, and of
goods in possession. And therefore in this respect, she said in the preceding
verse, Our bed, as in this verse, Our house.

Or else, the Catholic Church speaks here, of particulat, national, and other
Churches, of which she is made up; and therefore the word in the original
Hebrew, is Bathenu, or Houses, in the plural number.

Observations.
1. Seeing there is such diversity of parts, and diversely gifted members in
Christ's house, what ever be the Lord's dispensation to us, or others, let us
reverence the same, and be content with our own measure and station, if it were
to be but snuffers, or snuff-dishes, in the Sanctuary, or, as David said, a
doorkeeper in in the Lord's house; and labor to glorify God in our place,
and by our gift to benefit the body.

2. Seeing the parts of this house are commended from the marter whereof they
are made, excellent, durable, and savoury, etc. Therefore if we be the true
parts and members of this house of God, let us examine our selves, if we have
this true excellency of grace, and durable riches thereof, whereby we send
forth a sweet smell, of a holy and good example to others; or, if we send forth
only a noisome scandalous stink, savouring of corruption and much filthiness
within.

3. In respect of the Churches desponsation to Christ her husband, seeing she
calls and claims to all that is his, to be hers likewise, as, Our b^d; and, Our
house; Therefore let us get Christ first, and espouse our souls to him, that we
may say, as, Cant. 6. 3. My beloved is mine, and I am his. And then having
right to him, we have right to all good things in him; as, right to his
righteousness and obedience, right to his merits and satisfaction, and right
to his purchase and possession But if we want him, we want all, and like
Laodicea, think what we will, wear but poor, miserable, and wretched.

Finis primi capitis.
Soli Deo gloria.
CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the valleys.
HEre Christ expresses his own excellency by comparisons, for our capacity, to
allure and enamour the souls of his Elect, to seek, affect, and long after him,
as he calls himself elsewhere, the Bread of life, the Light of the world, the
true Vine, the Truth, the Way, and the Life, etc. And this he may do, because
he is the fountain of all goodness and excellency; whereas it is not comely for
others, so to set forth their own praise, as Prove. 17. 2. because they have all
which is praiseworthy from him, to whom only the praise and glory thereof is
due.

First then, he is compared to a Rose, and then to a Lilly; a Rose of Sharon,
or the field, and a Lilly of the Valleys.

This Sharon was a very fruitful and fair field of pasture* whereof we read, 1 Chronicles. 27. 29. and when the Lord threaneth desolation to the Land, he says of
Sharon, as of the most fruitful part thereof, Esa. 33. 9. that Sharon shall be
as a wilderness. And on the contrary, when he promises to bless the Land, to
the comfort of his People, that sought him, he says, as Esa. 65. 10. that
Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor, a place for herds to
lie in.

Which flowers, whereunto he is compared, we will consider conjunctly and more
generally; next, severally, and more particularly. First then, as flowers have
coelum and solum pro parentibus; so had he a heavenly Father, and an earthly
Mother, that so he might be Emmanuel. 2. As flowers spring, fade, and spring up
again the next year; so Christ nativitate floruit, passione exaruit, sed
resurrectione nunquam amplius moriturus refloruit. 3. Their several colors
red and white joined, make up perfect beaut^, Cant. 5. 9, 10. which was only
in Christ, the beauty of holiness. Psalm. 110. 3. 4 These are delightful to
the eye, and so is Christ crucified, the most delightful object that can be to
the humbled soul, Cant. 5. 10. 5. They are also fragrant and sweet to the
smell, and so is Christ, in the means of grace, to the believing and hungring
soul.

Next to consider them severally, 1. The redness of the Rose may signify to us
(as we see also, Isay 63. 1, 2.) the blood shed of Christ in his passion, which
he shed violently, frequently, universally and abundantly to purge us, and
purchase to us an eternal inheritance, 2. The Rose has many prickles with it;
and so, many are the troubles of the godly who are in Christ and get him, but
he delivers them out of them all in the end, 3. Roses distilled afford a most
sweet and cooling liquor; so does Christ crucified, and meditated upon, in the
soul, most sweet comfort, and cooling to a weary and scorched conscience, 4.
As, being conserved and otherwise made use of, and applied, it is very cordial
and medicinal even so is Christ, laid hold on by faith, applied, and kept: in
the soul, the most sovereign cordial thereof, and medicinal to the sickness
of the same.

Now he is called the Rose of Sharon, or of the field, to show;

1. As flowers, and such specially, are the beauty of the field; so is Christ
the beauty of mankind, and glory thereof, beyond the Angelical nature, by
assuming our nature in his person, and seating it in glory at the right hand of
the father, 2. As such Roses that grow in fields are not planted by man, so
neither was Christ planted as it were, by man in the womb of the virgin, but
conceived by the Holy Ghost, 3. As the Rose in the fields is open to winds,
plucking, treading on, and such like; so was Christ on earth to many sorts of
sufferings, as Isay. 53. 4 As there is patent access for any to such Roses, so
is there to Christ to any humble and believing soul, being like Manna, and the
brazen Serpent, 5. As the Roses of Sharon were counted the fairest and most
fragrant or excellent, so is Christ Jesus the most excellent fragrant and
fairest amongst men; and, 6. As Sharon was a place of pasture, so in such
places Christ is to be found, as we may see, Cant. 1. 7. Joh. 10. Rev. 2. 1.
etc.

Secondly he is called a Lill^, which is of white color, (1.) To denotate his
holiness, which in him is otherwise then in in his Church as, v. 2. To wit, 1.
Original, 2. Essential, 3. Perfect and, 4. Communicative, and Holiness it
self, and no other so, (2.) As a Lilly is soft and smooth, so was Christ meck
and merciful to the most bruised reed etc. (3.) It is for diverse uses
medicinal, both mollifying and mundifying, etc. And so is Christ, by his blood
and spirit.

Next he is called a Lilly in the vallyes, 1. To denotate his own humiliation
of himself from the highest Heavens to the valley, as it were, of lowest
humiliation in his birth, life, death and burial, 2. To show us where he is to
be found, to wit, in the vallyes of humble hearts, Isay. 57. 15.

Observations.
1. If Christ be so delightful, fragrant, and excellent, Let us not despise
him, preferring the seeking of vain and worthless trifles of this world far
before him, and being like Martha or Esau, Matthew. 13. 44, 45. but not as Mary,
or Jacob. Far less by our wicked lives, let us not tread upon him, and on his
blood that he has shed for us.

2. Christ is called a Rose of Sharon to show that in the pasture places where
his true word is taught and holy Sacraments ministered he is to be found, and
therefore to such places we should conscionably and with delight resort, as
David said, I rejoiced when they said, Let us go up to the house of the Lord,
that there, we may find Christ in the use of his means, as Joseph and Mary
found him in the Temple.

3. Seeing he is also called a Lilly of the valleys, in respect of his
dwelling in a humble Heart, therefore we should labor to subdue our natural
pride of Heart, and learn of him Humility, that so for conformity of
disposition he may delight to dwell in us here, and bring us to dwell with him
for ever hereafter.

Verse. 2. As a Lilly among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.
1. Here he sets out the praise of his Church, where we have, 1. How he calls
her, 2. Whereto he compares her, and her present condition, First then he
calls her His love, whereof we have spoken, v. 9. of the 1. Chapter. Next he
says, among the daughters, by which is meant the whole corrupt race of mankind
that are daughters all to one father, the first Adam; and by nature she was no
better then the rest of these daughters, of whom she was one, as we see, Ezekiel.
16. And is made to differ from them only by free love and grace, without any
motive or merit on her part, that thereby looking on the rest of her sisters,
and in what a base and wretched ^state she was by nature like unto them, she
may learn to be humble, and considering also such a high preferment (like
Ester who was a poor Orphant captive) whereto she is advanced from so base a
condition as may be seen also in that place of Ezekiel, she may never be
unthankful to so gracious a husband.

2. Follows after, the style he gives her, whereto he compares her, which is
to a Lilly among thorns. She is then compared to a Lilly, 1. For her
conformity to her head, called so, v. 1. Especially in these properties, to
wit, holiness or purity, Rev. 7. 9. 14. and 2. In meekness and mercy, or
charity, his members not being unsuteable, like those of Nebuchadnezars Image,
unto the head thereof. 2. To show that as the Lords clothes the Lillies of the
field, so does he care for his Church and clothes her with his righteousness
and garment of Sanctification.

It is to be remarked also, that he speaks but of one Lilly, but many thorns;
not only thereby to show the unity of his Church, though being many members,
yet making up but one mystical body, but also the paucity of the godly in
respect of the wicked; for which cause our Savior says that many are called
but few chosen, and that his flock is but a little flock.

3. Thirdly, this Lilly is said to be among thorns, whereby is shown unto us,
1. Not only her present condition on earth, but likewise, 2. Her excellency
beyond all other societies, as far as a pleasant and fragrant Lilly excelles
base and hurtful thorns, whereunto we find the wicked frequently compared in
Scripture, Ezekiel. 28. 24. Isay. 9. 18. 19. and 10. 17.

1. Because of their present condition, how happy soever seeming to the world,
yet they are but a cursed brood of the earth, as thorns are said to be, Genesis 3.
18.

2. Because of their personal disposition, 1. In respect of themselves, as
thorns are shelters to serpents and other vermin; so are their hearts a
sheltering or nestling to Satan and all wickedness. 2. In respect of others, as
thorns pricks and hurts, so they prick and molest the godly; partly, by their
ill life, as Psalm. 119. 136. and 2. Pet. 2. 7. And partly by their
persecutions, being like the Gananit, Jos. 23. 17.

3. Because of their future expectation, like thorns, to be burnt in Eternal
fire, as fuel thereof, Ps. 58. 9.

Observations.
1. Seeing Christ shows that his Church is like a Lilly, let every one
therefore try himself, if he be a true member thereof by the conformity of
holiness, humility and meekness which he should have with his head who is so
likewise likened, v. 1. Which if he have not, but be impure and filthy like
dogs and swine he is none of Christ's flock at all.

2. Seeing her estate here on earth, is among thorns, and mixed with the wicked,
as the good seed and tares in the field, till the day of Reaping come, or as
wheat and chafe till the day of winnowing come, etc. Therefore, 1. We should
walk the more warily and watchfully, that we be not hurt by their evil
example, and being compast with such, 1. with watching join prayer that we
enter not into temptation, 2. We should the less fear, but rejoice at the
coming of death and welcome the same, that rids us altogether of such grieving
and molesting thorns, as to David were the Tents of Kedar, and to Rebecca were
the daughters of Heth.

3. We see the Lords protection of his Church wonderfully, that notwithstanding
she is compast about with so many hard and prickling thorns, yet she is made
like a soft and tender Lilly to grow up amongst the midst of them safely; as
Israel multiplied in Egypt notwithstanding of Pharaoh's cruelty; the bush
continued green notwithstanding of the fire that Moses saw in it; and many
thousands were joined to the Church after Christ's ascension, notwithstanding of
Herod's and the Jewish, or others their persecution.

4. We see what should be the constant disposition of the godly,
notwithstanding that they be among thorns, which is to continue holy like the
white Lilly, and not be drawn away by the wicked to be thorns like them, or
change their nature thereby (as it were) or to be like the fishes who are fresh
though they be in the salt Sea, as Noah did, and Lot, Joseph, Obadiah, the 3.
children, Daniel, and others, who neither for ill example, nor hardest
affliction, left their integrity, but, with Job, continued constant.

Verse. 3. As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons: I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste.
As He set forth her praise that She excelled all the daughters, as far as
the Lilly did the thorns; so she sets forth his here, that he excelled all the
sons of men as far as the apple tree excells all the rest of the common
trees of the forest. Which allegory she prosecutes showing what worthy
benefits she received from his goodly apple tree, including them all under
these two, 1. His shadow, the quality whereof was so delightful, that she sat
down under the same; and, 2. Fruit, the quality whereof in like manner was so
sweet unto her Mouth, that she did taste thereof and eat of the same.

She had before, c. 1. v. 13, 14. compared him to a bundle of sweet Mirrh, and
a cluster of odoriferous Camphir, both excellent in smell, but had not fruit
nor shadow, and therefore now she compares him to an Apple Tree that afforded
unto her both these, thereby showing unto us that the excellency of Christ is
so great, through the plenty and variety of all grace and comfort that are
treasured up in Him, that no one thing or few, whereon we can fix our
consideration, though never so good or excellent, can sufficiently or fully
represent that all sufficiency and full store that is in him, but what ever is
good, delightful, or praise worthy in every thing, is all collectively and in
the highest degree or measure, and in the most excellent manner, to be found in
Him.

First then she compares him to a Tree, planted by the hand of that Heavenly
husbandman, Joh. 15. 1. in the earth of our Humane nature, who brought forth
much sweet and comfortable fruit in his life time, Joh. 21. 25. And therefore
(as trees in the winter season seem to be dead) he in his passion being
destitute as it were of leaf and fruit, gave up the Ghost and died, but yet,
as trees in the spring revive, so did he after his lying a few days in the
grave revive and rise gloriously, and ascend to the Heavens thereafter
conspicuously, where he sits at the right hand of the Father, as that Tree of
life in the heavenly Jerusalem spoken of, Rev. 22. 2. whose leaf and fruit is
medicinal.

And more particularly she compares him to an apple tree commended in Scripture
by three things specially, 1. Pleasant fruit, 2. Comfortable shadow: and, 3.
Sweet smelling. And in this place particularly praised from Shadow, which did
delight her, and Fruit which was sweet to her, to show unto us thereby, that
even so Christ Jesus excells all others whatsoever, who are but as wild trees,
as wanting culture or dressing, 1. in heavenly beauty of grace and glory, 2. in
sweet and well smelling fruit of obedience and merit; and 3. In comfortable
shadow, of refreshing consolation and powerful protection.

Secondly, having compared Christ to an apple tree, she prosecutes the
allegory, showing what excellent benefits she received from him; which she
comprehends under these two, to wit, his shadow which did delight her; his
fruit which did refresh her; under the one whereof she sat, and of the
sweetness of the other she did taste.

First then we will speak of this His shadow, 2. Of the Churches sitting
under it; and, 3. Of her delight in it.

First then we read of a twofold shadow, the one is, worldly, the other is
divine and heavenly: the worldly is that under which worldlings do shelter
themselves, as confidence in earthly things with the rich fool, and that
whereof Job makes mention, Job. 20. 5. as of a thing speedily evanishing,
short, and but for a moment: therefore it was said to that fool, This night thy
soul shall be taken from thee. The like whereof we see in Balthazar, Haman,
Pharaoh, and Herod, etc. And which therefore is like to Jonas gourd of very
small continuance, and affording more grief in end, than contentment before: so
that they are like Jobs friends, miserable comforters, whether confidence in
earthly riches, honors, or arm of flesh, etc. The other shadow, is divine
and heavenly, under which for comfortable refreshment, (whereof Job speaks,
Job. 7. 2.) or for protection and defense, (whereof Isay speaks, Isay. 25. 4.)
the godly shelter themselves, as we may see, Ps. 91. 1. and 57. 1. applied to
God, and as David professes.

Of this shadow therefore of divine refreshment and protection does the Church
speak, which has these three properties, 1. It is a covering shadow from the
scorching heat of Gods wrath, and the evil of all storms, as we see, Isay. 4.
6. and Ps. 61. 4. 2 It is a cooling shadow, or refreshing, such as is spoken
of, Job. 7. 2. Or like that of Jonas gourd wherein he so delighted, and which
the cloudy pillar afforded to Israel in the wilderness by day, when any heat of
persecution or calamities comes, whereof is mention, Psalm. 57. 1. any fiery
tentation of concupisence assaults, or any scorching is of an accusing
conscience. 3. It is a curing shadow; therefore says the Angel, that the
leaves of the Tree of life* Rev. 22. 2. were for healing, and no marvel that
the shadow of Christ should be such, when the shadow of his Apostles, (as we
read, Act. 5. 15.) was so sovereign for cure.

Next, she says that she sat down under this shadow, which signifies her
resting and acquiescing there, or her making abode under the same, as is said,
Psalm. 91. 1. Without going further, or else where, and showing hereby that the
godly find in Christ and his death and satisfaction, such a treasure and
sufficiency of comfort in any trouble, or distress outward or inward, that
they seek no further, to any creature in Heaven or Earth, more then Naaman did
to any other water than Jordan, to be cleansed of his leprosy; and therefore
are not like foolish Idolaters, who will not rest in Christ's merits or
Satisfaction, but will join their own or others; and not invocate him alone,
but Saints and Angels, nor rely upon the purging virtue of his blood allaverly
but will imagine to themselves another fiery purgatory; and so as the Psalmist
says, Ps. 16. they multiply their own sorrows, and continue stinged with
these scorpion's tails mentioned Rev. 9. 5. And having wearied themselves in
such labyrinths can never find solid ease or comfort, till they come to this
shadow and sit down there and rest under the same, as he invites all weary
sinners to do, Matthew. 11. 28, etc.

Lastly, she says, she sat down with delight, and with a great delight, under
this his shadow, which delight of hers was not carnal or sinful, such as
the delight is of the wicked or worldlings, but a holy and a spiritual
delight, like the joy, whereof David speaks, Psalm. 4. 7. Or like his delight
that he had in Gods Law, Psalm. 1. 2. and 119. 70. Also in doing his will, Psalm.
40. 8. and in the comforts of his word, Psalm. 94. 19. and 119. 92. Which like a
shadow refresh't his soul.

This delight is, 1. A sure and well grounded delight not on a sandy
foundation, 2. This delight comes not from flesh or blood, but from a higher
source, 3. This delight is a great delight, because of the greatness of the
benefit which the soul receives, 4. This delight is durable, and as the abode
is under the shadow of the Almighty, Ps. 91. 1. So abides the delight; and, 5.
This delight is the pledge and forerunner of that full and eternal delight
which the soul shall have in Heaven, Ps. 16. 11.

Having spoken of her sitting under his shadow with great delight, follows to
speak of his fruit, and the quality or sweetness thereof to her taste. Of
which fruit we have to consider, 1. What the same is and the variety thereof,
2. The abundance or plenty; and, 3. The dureableness or perpetuity.

2. Next, we have to speak of the sweetness and quality of this fruit, and, 3.
To whose taste it is so Sweet, to wit, unto hers only, who is the spouse of
Christ.

First then by his fruit is understood no other thing but the sweet comforts
which we find in him, as the honey which Sampson found in his dead Lion, and
which is only to be had in, and from this Lion of the tribe of Judah. Which
fruits are, 1. Of such variety, as that the meditation of his nature, his
offices, conception, birth, life, death, burial, resurrection, ascension,
sitting at the right hand of his Father, and coming again to Judgment, all
afford unto us store of sweet comfort; likewise his poverty, his meekness, his
pity, his charity, his readiness to cure all that came unto him, his access,
his affability, and all his holy virtues yield unto us not only fruit of
example for imitation, but of sweet comfort and consolation.

2. The plenty of this fruit is so great, that he is like that tree spoken of
by Daniel, Dan. 4. 12. whereof it is said, that all flesh fed thereof:
therefore does the Prophet invite all who have a spiritual appetite to be
partakers of the good things of Christ, Isay. 55. 1. And himself says, Come
to me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will refresh you, There is then
plenty of sweet fruit in him to all the world to be found, and (as of the five
loaves and two fishes) abundance to leave over, so that the deficiency may be
on our part, as it was in the widows vessels for receiving more oil, that we
in like manner want the hand of faith and the vessels of prepared hearts, but
there is no deficiency on the part of Christ.

3. The durableness and perpetuity of this fruit, is such that, 1. This tree
never ceases, as is shown, Rev. 22. to bring forth the same, and to yield the
same to us, as well in the winter season of sharp adversity and in greatest
plenty, as in the summer season of peace and prosperity. 2. As also, the
perpetuity of this fruit is such, that it endures unto life everlasting; and
therefore it may be said of it, as our Savior speaks to the Samaritan woman,
Joh. 4. 14. Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up into eternal life.

Next, this fruit of his is called sweet, both because it is so of it self,
like Jonathan's and Sampson's honey, whereof each of them tasted. And 2.
because it sweetens also unto us all bitter things, which would be so
otherwise, like that Tree which was cast into the waters of Marah; even all our
best actions, to make them of a sweet relish and savoury to God, which would be
otherwise but counted sour grapes, and menstruous clouts; and all crosses and
calamities, which are bitter to flesh and blood, yea death it self, and the
grave; all which it sweetens unto Gods children.

Last of all, to whom, or to whose taste is this fruit sweet? surely to none
but to the godly; therefore she says, that his fruit was sweet unto her taste.
It is therefore sweet unto her for these reasons: 1. Because of the sweetness
that it has in it self, as honey, sugar, and the like. 2. In respect of the
great desire, and spiritual appetite, that she has toward the same, which
makes even that which is very coorse, and has some bitterness, or no taste at
all, sweet to one that is hungry; where on the contrary, to a cloyed stomach,
even Manna it self was disgustfull. 3. In respect of the spiritual sense of
tasting how good the Lord is, which those that are carnal and unregenerate
have not, being dead in their sins, and not endued with the new life of grace,
and therefore has not the new senses of the soul, which the godly have.

Observations.
1. Christ is here as an Apple Tree presented to the eye of faith, that as our
first Parents, by eating of the Tree which was in the midst of the garden, and
was forbidden, did fall, and incur death and damnation; even so their Posterity
may, by the eating of the fruit of this Tree, which is in the midst of the
garden of his Church, and whereof we are bidden to eat, Ioh. 6. 50. may rise
again, and attain to life and salvation; for, of this Tree it is only true,
which is spoken of that other, Genesis 3. 6. that it is good for food, and
pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one wise. And therefore
mad fools are they, who will not come to this Tree of life, to which the way is
now made so patent, that they may eat thereof, and live for evermore.

2. The fruit of this Tree is not only, 1. profitable for spiritual food; as
also, 2. (as it is said of the Tree of life, Genesis 3. 22.) to attain thereby to
life everlasting; but, 3. seeing likewise that it is so sweet and delectable,
to such as have the spiritual sense of tasting, and an appetite after the
same; Therefore let us earnestly beg at God's hands, who is only able to give
the same, this spiritual sense and appetite, that hungring and thirsting after
righteousness, we may be truly blessed, and get that comfortable satisfaction
promised, Matthew. 5. 6. and Psalm. 61. 5. And as a distempered palate in a
feavour, counts every sweet thing bitter, that even so, through the distemper
and sickness of our souls by sin, we count not that bitter and disgustfull to
us, which others find in Christ so sweet, and is communicated to them in the
means of grace.

3. Seeing there is not only sweet fruit to be had in Christ, but such
delightful shadow, that the Church takes pleasure to sit down under the same,
and therein puts as it were her non ultra; therefore if we be the true members
of this Church, let us in like manner set up our rest in Christ Jesus, and his
merits only, for spiritual refreshment to our souls both in life and death;
and, under the coverture of his only satisfaction and protection, let us
shelter our selves from the storm of Gods wrath, and all other evil, in
calling on his Name, and confiding in him allaverly: and whosoever they be that
do otherwise, (as Romanists do) herein they vary from the practice of Christ's
Church, and are no true membrs thereof.

Verse. 4. He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
love.
Here is shown a further favor by Christ to his Church, which is, a royal
feasting of her: whereby we see, how the Lord never wearies, to heap his
favors, and increase her graces to his own, and as Psalm. 84. 11. and Joh. 2.
10. to keep for them the best last: O that we did not weary in like manner, in
his service and thankfulness.

In the words we have 1. a banqueting house mentioned; 2. that she was brought
in, into this banqueting house; 3. that it was he that brought her in; and 4.
what was displayed over her, after her bringing in.

First then, a banqueting house is mentioned, which in the Original is a
house of wine, as Assuerus's banquet was called a banquet of wine, showing
thereby, that the fruit which Christ bestows upon his Church, is not only
like that of the apple tree, sweet and delightful to the taste; but also it is
yet more excellent, like the fruit of the vine, whereunto he is also compared,
Ioh. 15. 1. which far exceeds that of the apple tree; because, besides that it
is 1. pleasant, and delights; it 2. quenches also; and 3. cheereth, or makes
joyful, Prove. 31. 6. as also, 4. it comforts the sick, by cherishing and
augmenting the vital spirits, and so is cordial and medicinal.

Next, for this house whereinto she is brought, we must understand, that as in
Noah's Ark, or Moses's Tabernacle, there were three rooms, so are there in
God's great house: For, 1. His great Hall, or outer court, is the whole world,
wherein are all men and creatures brought in. 2. His Parlour, or more inner
room, is the visible Church, professing Christ's name in common. And 3. His
Chamber of presence, or most inmost room, is the society of the Elect, where he
banquets their souls with that hid Manna, and such dainties as are mentioned,
Psalm. 61. 5. and in this Chapter, verse. 5; and in comparison whereof, all that
ever was most exquisitely prepared, either for, or by Princes, in their
greatest state, or (as Hester 1. 4.) to show the riches of their glorious
Kingdom, and honor of their excellent Majesty's, is but trash and dross;
these dainties being heavenly altogether, and nourishing the soul unto a
heavenly, blessed, and an eternal life, Ioh. 6. 51. Which banqueting-food has
these properties, whereby it excells all other: 1. It Is quickening, Ioh. 6. 57.
2. Though it be sweet and delicious, yet it is no ways surfeiting, but whereof
the l^ke may be said, qus plus sunt potae plus sitiuntur aquae. 3. It is
durable in the virtue and operation thereof, unto eternal life, whereas that
of the other food soon decaies, which makes us so often renew our meals. 4. This
not only quickens and gives life, but it likewise keeps and preserves from
death, Joh. 6. 41. And 5. the sweetness and delicacy of this, in comparison of
other things, that are sweetest to worldlings, makes the soul to disgust and
vilify such trash, as husks fitter for swine, than true Christians to feed
upon.

Secondly, it is said, that she was brought in into this banqueting house, not
being able of her self otherwise to come in; and therefore says our Savior,
Joh 6. No man comes unto me, except the Father draw him; there is such
blindness in our minds, such averseness in our wills, and such perverseness in
our affections, that till we be restored, as it were, to our limbs, we are like
that paralytick, that lay so long at the waters of Bethesda, or that creeple,
who sat at the porch of the Temple, Act. 3. altogether lame and impotent: And
therefore says David, I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou have
enlarged my heart, Psalm. 119. 32. and the Spouse likewise, Cant. 1. 2. Draw me,
and then we will run after thee. And until which time that he do so, and work
in us both the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 13. we can no more stir to enter
into this banqueting house, or be joined to his true Church as a lively
member, more than Lazarus could come out of his grave, till he was raised by
Christ.

Thirdly, it is said, that it was He that brought her in, that is to say, the
King, whom she mentions chap. 1. 12. and of whom David sa^es, Psalm. 73. 23.
Thou holds me by my right hand, showing thereby, the great honor that he
bestows on his Church, and every true member thereof, letting them not in as a
servant, but bringing them in by the hand as his spouse and beloved, and, as
the Psalmist speaks, Conducting them by his counsel, till he bring them to his
glory, Psalm. 73. 24. which indeed is a far greater honor than Haman vaunted
of, Hest. 5. 12. or that David offered unto good Barzillai.

Likewise we are to consider, the great odds between him, and his bringing in
of her to his banqueting house, and others, or the bringing in their guests to
their banqueting house. For 1. They whom others invite and bring in, may be yet
unwilling to have been brought in; but he makes such willing whom he brings in,
operatur enim and velle and perficere. 2. He can also give them an appetite. 3.
What he gives them is not only meat, but medicinal, and such dainties as are
spoken of before. 4. He can make that which they get, digest and nourish them,
that they may be strengthened and grow thereby.

Fourthly, we have what was displayed over her: 1. a Banner, and what this
banner was, to wit, Love. In Scripture then we find a threefold banner, at
three several times displayed, whereby the last only is suitable to this
banqueting house; the first may be called, vexillum honoris, displayed in the
Creation, wherein was manifested God's power and wisdom; the second may be
called, vexillum horroris, displayed on mount Sinai, in that terrible manner of
giving of the Law, whereby was manifested God's power and justice; and the
third may be called, (as here) vrxillum amoris, displayed by the preaching of
the Gospel, and whereby is manifested his wisdom and mercy, or the work of
that matchless love, which he showed to mankind; which love of Christ is
compared to a banner,

1. In respect of manifestation, that as a banner raised up in an Army on high,
is visible to all, so was his love, chiefly, when he was lift-up on the Cross,
like that brazen Serpent in the wilderness, and is still ^i^t up and made
manifest to all, in the preaching of the Gospel.

2. In respect of distinction, for what is it, but the love of Christ to the
godly, that makes them differ from others, or seperates them from the world
here in conversation, or shall hereafter in their condemnation.

3. In respect of collection, or gathering to Christ, which is only by the
displaying of the banner of Christ's love, whereby his soldiers are as it were
gathered together, and come to his Colors; and therefore says the Lord by
Esaias to his Church, Isa. 49. 22. I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and my
standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy
daughters upon their shoulders.

4. In respect of protection and victory, for as a banner set up upon the
walls, or displayed over a house or city, is a sign of defense and defiance to
the enemy, or as an ensign of victory; even so the Lord's love to his Church,
is that wherein her protection stands, and defiance of her spiritual and other
enemies, over whom he has been, and shall be still victorious; and that his
Church is his victorious conquest, recovered from Satan's tyranny, like the
Lamb out of the Lion's mouth.

5. In respect of terrification, and therefore the Church is said to be
terrible, as an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 10. and indeed, nothing is so
terrible to Satan and Antichrist, as the displaying of the banner of Christ's
love, by the true preaching of the Gospel.

6. In respect of union, which a banner makes, or the colors of any company or
reigment, whereunto they all come, who are of such a society, making up so a
compact and well ordered body; and unto which union of Christians among
themselves in love, nothing is so forcible, as the consideration of the banner
of Christ's love spread over them.

This banner was diversely displayed: 1. Before and under the Law, by obscurer
promises, typicall^ prefigurations, and prophetical predictions, more
involvedly, and less clearly. 1. Under the Gospel, more clearly and fully,
first, by the preaching of the Gospel, by Christ himself and his Apostles, and
thereafter by all faithful pastors and preachers of the Word, and shall be so
to the worlds end.

Observations.
1. Seeing Christ not only feeds, but with most heavenly dainties banquets his
Church, and every true member thereof, let us not be like those ungrateful
despisers of so great a benefit, as is made mention of, Matthew. 22. nor prefer
such base things thereto, but come with the banqueting garment of a holy
disposition, suitable for so high a calling; and as Rev. 3. 20. banquet him
mutually with the fruits of his own heavenly graces, as the Church invites him
to such, Cant. 4. 16.

2. Seeing we cannot come into this banqueting house of our selves, except we
be brought in by the guidship of the Spirit of God, and the powerful work of
his grace upon our souls, Let us earnestly implore the same, and pray that he
would, as David says, hold us by the right hand, conducting us by his
counsel, till he receive us to glory, Psalm. 73. 24.

3. The Church says, He brought me in, and again, His banner over me was love,
emphatically, so expressing what the Lord had done to Her, passing by the
fallen Angels, upon whom he had not shown such mercy, nor deigned them with
the like favor, which should therefore move Man, whom he has so freely loved
and honored, the more to love him, and honor him again.

4. This introduction of his Church into his banqueting house here, is a
pledge and earnest of his introduction of her into his banqueting house in
heaven hereafter, and mansion place of glory, as we see, Psalm. 84. 11. and 73.
24. Therefore let us strive to get this earnest, and first fruits; else, if we
enter not in at the gate of grace on earth, let us never think to enter in at
the gate, which may be called, as Act. 3. 2. the beautiful gate of glory.

5. Christ's love displayed over us here in this life, is called a Banner,
which is used only in warfare, to show, that the state of his Church here on
earth, is militant, and therefore she is exhorted, and every true member
thereof, to put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11. that they may be able
to stand against the wiles of the devil, and verse 18. praying and watching
with all perseverance, till they may say in the end, I have fought the good
fight, and have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4. or, as the Prophet says, My
warfare is accomplished, Esa. 40. 2.

6. Seeing a banner is set up over any place, in token of the defense of that
place, and defiance to the enemy, Christ's love therefore being this banner over
his own; let us then above all things seek it earnestly with David, Psalm. 4. 6.
and then we may be sure of defense, as he says, verse. 8. and as is shown unto
us, Prove. 3. 24. Romans 8. 31. 37. etc. and give a defiance to all our enemies,
saying with the Psalmist, Of whom shall I be afraid? yea, to death it self, as
Psalm. 23. 4. and 1 Cor. 15. 55.

7. Does Christ display his love both to us, and for so many comfortable ends
and uses over us? then let us be ashamed not to love him again, ut totus nobis
figatur in cord, qui totus pro nobis fixus fuit in cruce, and to display our
love toward him, that is, to manifest the same by our obedience, to his holy
commandments.

8. Last of all, we see the happy estate of the poorest, most afflicted and
despised Lazarus, who is a true member of Christ, to wit, that notwithstanding
of their outward and visible estate, they have the Lords love displayed over
them, and he banquets their souls with comforts, unspeakable and glorious.

Verse. 5. Stay me with flaggons, comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love.
Here is a wonderful effect of these former things, whereof she spoke: she
compared Christ before to an apple tree, whose fruit was sweet to her taste;
and showed, that he brought her in into his banqueting house, or house of
wine, and his banner over her was love; hereupon then she shows, that her
heart is so ravished with love toward him again, that she is lovesick, and
ready to swound therewith, and therefore cries out to be stayed with flaggons,
and comforted with apples. The similitude then is drawn from a Virgin, who is
betrothed, and through the vehemence of her love toward her future Spouse, is
lovesick, and swoundeth.

In the words then we have, 1 What she seeks. 2 Of whom she seeks. And 3
Wherefore she seeks.

First then, she seeks to be stayed with flaggons, having relation to the house
of wine, whereinto she was lately brought. 2. To be comforted with apples,
having relation to the apple tree, whereto she had before compared him.

Therefore we must consider: 1. what is meant by these flaggons, and how she is
stayed therewith; and 2. what is meant by these apples, and how she is
comforted therewith.

First then, flaggons are mentioned, because at banquets, wine was distributed
and brought in, by such, as we see, 1 Chronicles. 16. 2, 3. Also by flaggons is
understood, by a certain figure of speech, the wine contained in them, as Luke
22. 20. the Cup is taken for the wine contained in the cup; and by this wine
again in these flaggons, is meant the cordial comforts contained in the
Gospel, or Word of God, and promises thereof, that are only able to cheer up
a sick and dejected soul, or wounded conscience, as David clearly confesses,
saying, In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts have rejoiced
my soul, Psalm. 94. 19. And again, Unless thy law had been my delight, I had
perished in mine afflictions. This is therefore that sovereign balm of
Gilead, those still and cooling waters whereof David speaks, Psalm. 23. 2. and
like that wine and oil, poured in by the loving Samaritan, into the wounds of
the wounded Israelite; or that cheering liquor and flaggons spoken of here,
whereby the sainting soul is stayed from falling into desperation, and
powerfully comforted, strengthened, and established.

Likewise she speaks of flaggons, to show wherein these comforts are to be
found, to wit, not in that gilded cup of the Popes decretals and men's
traditions, Rev. 17. wherein only is the giddy wine of spiritual fornication,
wherewith that Whore of mystical Babylon made drunk the indwellers of the
earth, but in the flaggons of the old and new Testament, or written word of
God, which is that Pedum et virga spoken of by David, Ps. 23. 4. The two
witnesses, the two Olives, and Candlesticks spoken of in the Revelation, that
stand before the God of the earth, Rev. 11. 4. and that foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles whereon the Church is built, Ephesians. 2. 20. beside which
if any, though an Angel from Heaven, should preach any other Doctrine of faith
and manners, Let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8.

Next, she desires to be comforted with Apples, by which apples is meant
nothing, else, but that which we showed already is meant, v. 3. by the fruit of
the apple tree which was sweet unto my taste, and here, with the fragrant smell
whereof she desires to be comforted, and so the same being both for taste and
smell cordial and comfortable, whereby is given us to understand the
excellency of Gods word, and that it delights not only one of the spiritual
senses of the soul, but likewise all of them, being light to the eye thereof,
music to the ear thereof, delightful to the touch thereof, sweet to the
taste, and comfortable to the smelling, 2. By these flaggons, or wine therein,
and by these apples, the staying of her by the one, and comforting of her by
the other, is likewise represented unto us the diverse operations of the word
of God upon the godly soul, strengthening the weak, confirming the stronger,
enlightening the blind, quickening the dead, reclaiming the strayer, guiding the
ignorant, resolving the doubtful, making wise the simple and many other
operations, which we may see, Ps. 19. and 119. and here, staying them that are
ready to fall, comforting the languishing, and as, Ps. 19. 8. rejoicing the
heart, sweeter also then honey and the Honeycomb.

2. Having spoken of that which she seeks, we come next to consider from whom
she seeks so to be stayed with flaggons, and comforted by apples: where we find
that the Church in this her soul-sickness speaks to her friends in the plural
number to whom are committed the mysteries of the Gospel to manifest, and the
banner of Christ love to display, and to whom in Peter's person, he says to all
and every one, Pasce oves meas. These then by office being the stewards of the
Lords house, 1. Cor. 4. 1. under whose hand to divide aright and distribute,
are the childrens bread and these flaggons and fruits, therefore she desires
them that they with the comfortable doctrines and promises of the Gospel
applied to her conscience and present estate prudently, would uphold her now
ready to swoon, and so languishing for love: for by these, as nurses, the Lord
will have his children nourished with the sincere milk of his word, that they
may grow thereby, by them as stewards he will have them fed in his family, by
these as teachers he will have them to be instructed and Disciplinated in his
school, and by these as spiritual Physicians he will have them lanced, bound
up that are brokenhearted, cared for, cured, and comforted with the cordialls
of his word.

3. Thirdly, and last of all, we have the reason why she desires to be thus
stayed with flaggons and comforted with apples, and this is, because she was
sick of love, that is, languishing with desire to enjoy the comfortable
presence and comforts of her beloved, and as love is one of the strongest
affections, so is the sickness that comes of it, the strongest and ^orest
afflicter of any, as we may see, 2. Sam. 13. 1. and therefore the Greek
Septuagint, has, wounded of love.

Indeed there are two sorts of the souls sickness, the one common to all, but
the other proper to a few: the first is a sickness of sin, whereof all are
sick naturally, but (alas) all are not sensible, and this came from Satan to
us, and the first Adam; and this sickness is unto death^, Spiritual and
Eternal: the second is this love-sickness, whereof too few are sick, and the
church is here sensible of; and this comes from God and the second Adam, and
this sickness is unto life, arguing the spiritual life of grace to be in the
soul here, and that the same shall live the life of glory hereafter.

This spiritual love-sickness, (as other natural love sickness) has, 1. A
preceding sight and knowledge of the person loved, beholding in his word, and
by the eye of faith having gotten a sight how amiable and lovely Christ is to
the Soul, which so works on her affection (as we see, c. 5.) that she cannot
sufficiently express his praise and commendation.

2. This love-sickness has a continual longing and languishing till she enjoy
him whom she loves, as Amnon languished till he enjoyed Tamar, and Jacob longed
till he enjoyed Rachel: therefore David said, that as the Heart panted after the
water-brookes: so did his soul, till he should come and appear before the
Lord, Ps. 42. And the Apostle professed that he desired to be dissolved, that
he might be with Christ.

3. To the lovesick party, till this enjoying be, no other thing can give
content or satisfaction; and even so, neither to the lovesick soul, till she
enjoy Christ's presence, again after a spiritual desertion, can any earthly
thing afford her rest or comfort; she being therein like Rachel that could not
be comforted, till she find him again whom her soul loves, as we see, Cant. 3.
2. 4. and 5, 6, 7, 8. and as David speaks, till she be restored again to the
joy of her salvation here, and at last be brought to that fullness of joy which
is in his presence, and pleasures evermore.

4. One that is love sick, thinks on the party continually, yea the same so
takes up his thoughts, as talk with him of any other purpose or party, and it
is, as with one absent; even so is it, with the soul that is lovesick of
Christ; and 5. Such a one is restles, as Ahab was, till he got Naboths vinyard,
till they get and enjoy whom they do love; and even so is the soul till it
enjoy Christ.

Observations.
1. Whereas the church having received of Christ's fruit which was sweet to her
taste, and of his wine in his banqueting house thereof, which did cheer or
rejoice her Heart, cannot content therewith, but does here desire to be yet
more stayed with flaggons, and comforted with apples; we see, that the godly
can never enough be satiate with grace and the sweetness that is in Christ,
having once truly tasted thereof, and therefore we ought to try if this be our
disposition, and thereby if we have gotten true grace to be true members of
Christ's church; which if we have, then assuredly this is a sure token thereof,
that we will have a further desire to grow therein.

2. We see Gods wise dispensation of his grace, not giving the same but by
degrees, and as it were drop by drop, whereby we may by a holy wholesome
appetite be exercised in prayer and asking, and by a comfortable sen^e of his
renewing bounty be exercised in praise and thanksgiving.

3. Whereas she desires to be stayed with flaggons, we see wherein solid
comfort in all our soul-faintings or spiritual swoonings is only to be found,
to wit, in Gods word, the old and new Testaments: which whosoever leave, to
seek comfort in any other doctrine or dotages of man's invention or foolish
superstition, they leave the fountain of living waters to dig unto themselves
broken cisternes that can hold no water.

4. Seeing her speech is directed to her friends, in the plural number, and
not to her beloved husband, in the singular, which friends are the pastors of
the Word, to whom is committed the ordinary dispensation of the word of
comfort, as apples of Gold with pictures of silver, spoken in season to a
perplexed soul, therefore both their persons ought to be reverenced, and loved
for their works sake, and much more the word which they preach, remembering that
who hear them hears him that sent them, and who despises them despises him
that sent them, as the Lord said unto Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8. 7.

5. Let Pastors also for the performance of this Ministry of comfort, furnish
themselves with these flaggons and variety of the word of comfort, that in all
purdence and plenty they may come to love sick-soules, with the blessing of the
Gospel of Christ, that, as Job speaks of himself, the care that hears, may
bless them, Job. 29. 11. 13. The blessing also of them that were ready to
perish may come upon them, and they may cause the wearied heart to rejoice and
sing for joy.

6. Let also those who are comforted and raised up by their word remember, that
the comfort it self, comes mainly from Christ who is the true vine able only to
afford the cheering liquor thereof, and the apple tree which produces the sweet
fruit thereof, and that theirs is only the external ministry or exhibition,
but his only is the inward efficacy and application, that so from him chiesly
the same may be sought, and to him for the same the praise may be given.

7. We see what prudence Pastors should have, and not ever to be sons of
thunder, or as upon ^ball to denounce threatings, but sometimes and to some
persons to speak as from Gerizim; and not come with the terrors of Sinai, but
the comforts of Sion, lest they break the bruised reed, and quench the smoking
flax, contrary to their Masters practice, and eeke affliction to the afflicted,
whereas rather they should bind up the broken heart, minister the oil of
gladness to the spirit of heaviness, or (as here) stay the flaggering soul with
flaggons and comfort her with apples who is sick of love.

8. From the reason which she gives of her desire to be stayed with flaggons,
and comforted with apples, because she was sick of love, we observe that it is
not uncouth to see the dearest children of God to be subject to spiritual
swoonings, faintings and desertions, as we see, c. 3. 5. and here; and to be
sensible, sorrowful and solicitous therefore. Yea I may say, happy are they
who are so soul-sick, and most erroneous is the blind worlds judgment of such,
who think them the contrary.

9. Her sickness is here called, love-sickness, in respect of the vehemence
thereof, where with she was inflamed: where we see not only whereon, or on whom
the love of every godly soul is set, but that their love of Christ is not a
lukewarm love, but a fervent love kindled by the fire of Gods spirit, and
joined with a fervent zeal of his glory, whereby they prefer him to all
things, and the love of his truth, yea to their very lives which is not dear
to them, in comparison of him, or it, when they are called to hazard the same
for his name.

10. It is she only who is thus lovesick, that calls for these flaggons, and
apples that are mentioned, to show unto us, that such only hunger and thirst
after the word of God, and to these only the same is sweeter then honey and the
Honey comb, as David says, Psalm. 19. and Mary Magdalen shows; and therefore it
is no marvel to see a Soul wherein the love of Christ was never yet settled, to
have small or no appetite to the word of God, or delight therein.

Verse. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.
The church having called before for staying, and comfort, at the hands of the
ministers of the Word, here, finding and feeling straightwais Christ's help,
like a loving husband taking about her, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 5. 29. she
acknowledges and confesses that all the efficacy and chief application is from
the Lord himself, Saying, his left hand is under my head and with his right he
does embrace me.

Now, hand is sometimes put in Scripture properly, for the member of the body,
so called, Genesis 19. 16. And sometimes figuratively, and when it is applied to
God, as here, it signifies sometimes, God effectual purpose of things to be
done, as Act. 4. 28. 2. Sometimes, Gods actual power in performance, as 2.
Chron. 6. 15. 3 His help and furtherance of others in performance of his
good will as, Ezra. 8. 18. 22. and Neh. 2. 8. 4 His power resisting and
disappointing, yea destroying his enemies who do oppose, and delivering his
own, Ezra. 8. 31. Exodus 15. 6. 5 His bountiful providence toward all, and
chiefly toward his own, Psalm. 145. 16. 1 Chronicles. 29. 16. 6 His gracious
protection, Isay, 49. 2. 7 His upholding with strength and comfort, as here,
and Ps. 37. 24. and 18. 35.

Also we have in Scripture a creating hand of Gods, Job. 10. 8. 2 A redeeming
hand, Luke 1. 74. 3 A conducting hand, Ps. 73. 23. and 4. A receiving up hand,
or manus suscipiens, Ps. 31. 5. In like manner, hands of mercy offering, Isay.
65. 2. and a hand of justice punishing, Heb. 10. 31. Likewise a right hand (as
here) embracing, and a left hand supporting, both comfortable to the godly, but
the left hand dreadful to the wicked, Matthew. 25. 41. Of these two hands says
Bernard, Laeva levat, dextra suscipit; in laeva miserationes et merita, in
dextra remunerationes et praemia: Or, as Solomon says, length of days are in
her right hand, (speaking of wisdom) and in her left hand riches and honors,
Pro. 3. 16. But simply to look here to the mind of the Holy Ghost, howsoever
some expound these two hands to be the old and new Testament compassing the
soul about with the diverse comforts that are in them, as a left hand under, and
the right hand embracing one above, do compass and clasp the body, yet both
these hands of his signifies, that all that Christ is, his godhead and
manhood, natures and offices, life and death, burial and resurrection,
ascension and coming again to Judgment: all these by the powerful application
by the spirit of grace and faith applied to the lovesick soul afford great
comfort and refreshment.

Observations.
1. We see Christ's great love, who leaves not his own in their infirmities, or
straits corporal or spiritual, but is near unto them and present with them,
even in the greatest seeming desertions, to support and stay them, when with
Peter they are (as it were) sincking, or, as it is said, Matthew. 8. 25. ready to
perish; and who applies himself unto them, and embraces them as Elisha 2 King.
4. 34. applied himself to the Shunanites child, to revive him; or as, for the
comfort of the dejected prodigal, his father ran unto him, embraced him, and
did kiss him. Therefore let us still rely on his, more then fatherly tender
care, and say with David, Ps. 119. 116. Uphold me according to thy word, that I
may live, O Lord, and let me not be ashamed of my hope in thee.

2. We see that the flaggons she sought to be stayed by them, and the appl^s
for her comfort, availes not to preserve her from swoonings, nor raising up
again, till he put his left hand under her head, and with his right embraced
her, to show thereby unto us, that except with the outward ministry for
comforting, raising, or strenghning a soul, himself concur by his inward
efficacy, and powerful work of grace, all what Paul or Apollos, or any such
could do, can no wais avail, It is therefore that which we specially should
beg and desire.

3. Here we have a notable comfort, that he embraces her, when she is so weak
and in a swoond that she cannot embrace him: and therefore although our
spiritual fainting be great, and our faith so weak, that we are so far from
being able to hold fast, and (with Jacob) wrestle for a blessing, that our grip
seems altogether to be loosed, and we begin to sinck as it were; yet be of
good comfort, that we do not so much apprehend, as our safety stands herein
that we are apprehended, and gripped unto, or held up, by the hand of the
Almighty, and out of whose hand, none is able to pull any one of his sheep.

4. She sought only from the servants to be stayed by flaggons and comforted by
apples, because of her love-sickness, and yet she gets more, even her loves
near presence, and his loving embracement, and holding up of her head. So ready
is the Lord to give to his own more then their hearts can of^imes desire or
they expect or look for, as he did to Solomon; and Jacob, who looked not to
have seen Joseph before his death, and behold the Lord has shown to me (says
he) even thy seed also.

5. We see how thankfully she acknowledges her beloved's kindness and care of
her, declaring the same and how sensible she was thereof, which should teach us
to do the like, to his glory, who is so bountiful toward us; and thereby also
to comfort and confirm others, telling them, what the Lord has done to our
soul; and to manifest our thankfulness, as David vows to do, saying, Hold me
up, O Lord, and I shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes
continually.

Verse. 7. I charge you (o ye daughters of Jerusalem) by the Roes, and by the
Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, till he please.
Here is a charge given, but whether by the Church concerning Christ, or by
Christ concerning his Church, Interpreters vary, and it is not so easily
discussed by the Hebrew Text; where the word, My Love, is of either gender:
Some therefore expound it, That the Lord Jesus charges the false members of his
Church, not to trouble her peace (compared to a sleep or rest, whereinto she is
fallen, in his arms, as it were, after her swooning) by their schism, heresies,
or persecution. Some others again expound it, That the Church, having found
such tender care and love shown unto her by Christ, charges her true members,
(called, The davghters of Jerusalem) that by any unchristian behavior of
theirs, or sinning, they provoke not Christ, or grieve his Spirit, and thereby
interrupt this sweet fellowship, and cause him to depart, and withdraw his
comfortable presence (which lately she found) from her. And to this sense
agrees our English Translation, saying, I charge you, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my Love, till he please; that is, not at all, as we see by the like
speech used, 2 Samuel 6. 23. and Matthew. 1. 25.

In the words then we have, 1 A charge. 2 To whom it is given. 3 Whereby they
are charged. And 4 What to do.

First then, in the words we have a charge given by the Church, to all her true
members, which is of greater enforcing, than to exhort or require, which
imports both authority in those who do charge, as we see, 1. Tim. 6. 17. and
the duty of obedience in them who are charged. The Church therefore having
authority as a Mother, from Christ her Husband, she charges her children, who
owe obedience to her, to behave themselves so, as He be not, nor his Spirit,
grieved, by their bad behavior.

Secondly, this charge is given to the daughters of Jerusalem, where we must
note, that it was the manner of old, that the Bridegroom had young men to be
his companions and friends, which are in this song Christ's faithful Pastors,
as John the Baptist terms himself one of his friends: As also the Bride had
Virgins to be her companions and followers, with whom in this Song Christ's
Spouse is said to be accompanied, and are here called, Daughters of Jerusalem:
Daughters of one father, and one mother, to whom they owe, as children to
parents, love, honor, and obedience; and being such daughters, they are
sisters amongst themselves, as they are called, Cant. 8. 8. which imports love;
and being daughters of Jerusalem, that implies peace, the ground whereof is
love; as Abraham argued, Genesis 13. 8. to show what should be seen amongst true
Christians, even love and peace, as the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 133. 1.
Therefore we should try our selves hereby, if we be the true disciples of
Christ, and labor to have love in our hearts, and then easily we will incline
to peace; otherwise there will be seen nothing but discord upon light
occasions; and if we bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed one of
another; and if notwithstanding we say that we love God, we shall be found
liars, as Saint John witnesses, 1 John 4. 20.

Thirdly, They are charged by the Roes and Hindes of the field, which beasts
are mentioned, when love is recommended between man and wife, Prove. 5 19. that
as the males and females of these beasts, do delight and dearly love one
another, and where such love is, there is a care not to stir up to wrath, and
to move departure one from another; even so the Church adjures her true members
by these, that they may so delight and dearly love Christ, who has so loved
them, that they stir not him up, in anger, to withdraw his comfortable presence
from her, the proof whereof she had so lately found. Or they are charged by the
Roes and Hinds of the field, not to stir up her Beloved, because these beasts
are most tender, scarre, and soonest afraid or stirred up, by any noise or
tumult.

Fourthly, that which they are charged to do, is, that they stir not up, nor
awake her Love, till he please, that is, by their sinning against him, or by
their unchristian carriage, they grieve not his Spirit, (as we are exhorted,
Ephesians. 4. 30.) nor stir him up to wrath.

Now there are two sorts of persons, whom we should be loath to stir up to
wrath: 1. Great persons, in regard of the power of doing us evil; and herein
the motive is Fear. 2. Good persons and liberal, in regard of their bounty,
and doing us good; and here the motive is Hope: But in this her Beloved, both
are conjoined, for he is of greatest power both over soul and body, as also of
greatest bounty in gifts, both spiritual and corporal, temporal and
eternal; who also in all our ways, must be our guide and counselor, Psalm.
73. 24. in all our dangers and straits, our guard and deliverer; in all our
crosses, our chief and only comforter; and in death it self, and after, our
only constant, and best friend and rewarder. To stir him up then to wrath,
whose wrath is so dreadful. Heb. 10. 31. and of whose favor we stand more in
need, than the Tyrians did of Herod's, Act. 12. 20. is great madness; and to
grieve him, who in all our griefs must be our comforter and easer, and saver
from eternal grief and torment, is great ingratitude and folly.

Next, to know how he is stirred up or grieved, and whereby; It is, in a word,
by sin, and 1. as Great, which sort of persons are stirred up and offended,
when any indignity is done to them; and thus is God offended, when by harkening
to sinners, or Satan's temptations, (like our first Parents) the treacherous
counsel of his or our enemy, is preferred to his wholesome and good counsel.
2. As Good, our offending of him arises from that, which has an antipathy unto
his Nature of holiness; and this is when we sin, specially in such clear
light, and against light, customably and presumptuously, stubbornly and
impenitently.

Observations.
1. In respect that the Church here, charge so her true members, we see her
authority, that she she has from God, and for God, for which therefore we
should reverence her, and obey her; which if any stubborn child of hers will
not do, by our Saviors commandment, he is to be held as a heathen and a
publican.

2. Seeing her true members have their denomination from love and peace,
therefore they should bend all their endeavors, to maintain these holy virtues
among themselves, eschewing the contrary; seeing God their Father is the God of
peace, Christ their Redeemer is the Prince of peace, the work of the holy Ghost
is grace and peace, the Church is Jerusalem, a vision of peace; and they,
daughters of that mother, and therefore should be children of peace.

3. Seeing this is her charge and chief care, in retribution, as it were, of
all the love and kindness that she has found of him, not only, not to stir up
her beloved her self, but also to exhort and charge others, not to do the same;
this teaches us in like manner, in retribution of all his love and favors that
he has bestowed on us, either in re, or spe, what like care we should have, not
only not to offend and stir him up to wrath, by our own sinful life and
conversation, but likewise, as we are exhorted, Ephesians. 5. 11. to reprove sin in
others, and to exhort them seriously to forbear the practice thereof.

4. In that she charges them not to stir up her Beloved, we see the pronesse of
the best by nature, to stir up the Lord to anger by sin, and therefore we
should the more warily look to our ways, and watch and pray, that we enter not
into temptation.

Verse. 8. The voice of my Beloved: Behold, he comes leaping upon the mountains,
skipping upon the hills.
As between two betrothed Lovers, when the spring comes, the man calls and
invites his future Spouse, to come forth out of the house, wherein she has
remained in the winter season, that they may walk together abroad, and take
delight, and solace themselves now with the flowers, and those pleasant things
which the spring does afford: Even so the Church, in the rest of this Chapter,
is by her Beloved invited and called upon, to arise from all carnal security,
and forsake the love of this world, to follow him in the faith and love of the
Gospel, and to view and delight her self with the variety of these heavenly
comforts, and spiritual graces, which, like a pleasant spring, the same does
afford.

First then, in these words we have, 1 Whereby he calls or invites her, to this
participation of his graces, and spiritual delight thereof; to wit, by his
voice, which she discerns to be his. 2 After what manner he comes unto her,
to wit, readily and speedily, overcomming all impediments, leaping over the
mountains, and skipping over the hills.

First then, the Lord Jesus does call his chosen by his Word externally, which
is his Voice, as he sales, Joh. 10. 3 and by the work of his Spirit internally,
and effectually, whereby they not only hear his voice, but discern the same to
be his, and thereafter follow him, as he shows, Joh. 10. 4. having gotten a
spiritual ear, whereof the Spirit speaks, Rev. 2. 3. which hears that which
the world cannot hear, as it is said of Paul's conversion, Act. 22. 7. 9. that
he heard a voice, verse. 7., which they who were with him heard not, as is said,
verse. 9. and who not only have a spiritual ear, or hearing, ^ut also a
spiritual gift of discerning Christ's voice, from the voice of a stranger,
truth from error, and the voice of the Lamb, from that of the Beast's; horned
like the Lamb, but speaking like the Dragon. For, 1 They have not only the
knowledge of the truth in their mind, but the love of the truth in their heart;
which because some has not had, therefore, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. they have been
given over to the delusion of error. 2 They have the spirit of truth, and
therefore they can try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no^.

Secondly, prefixing an (Ecce) whereof cap. 1. 15. She speaks of His coming to
her, and manner thereof, according as he says, Joh. 14. 23. that he who hears
his voice, and keeps his word, his Father will love him, and we (says he) will
come unto him, and make our abode with him. This coming then is a spiritual
coming to the soul, by the Word, as the ordinary mean; so that they who
contemn the Word, contemn his coming to them by the same; and they who
reverence and receive the Word, they receive him who comes thereby; for our
Savior is said to come three manner of ways to his Church: 1 He came visibly
and corporally, in his Incarnation. 2 He comes (as here) invisibly and
spiritually, by sanctification. And 3 He is to come gloriously, for her
remuneration. To whom therefore by his Word he comes spiritually, to sanctify
them here, he shall come to them comfortably, to glorify them hereafter.

Then touching the manner of his coming, she shows, it was both cheerfully
and speedily, like one leaping and skipping, as also upon the mountains and
hills, that is, openly and apparently to the eye of faith, as Nahum 1. 15.
their feet are said to be, that bring good tidings, and publish peace; or else,
passing over all lets, as our sins, how great soever, like Manasses's, Mary
Magdalen's, and others, which hindered not his free grace; ^or the natural
opposition of a carnal heart, as Esa. 40. 4.

Observations.
1. We see how all the godly esteem of Gods word which they hear preached
unto them, to wit, as the voice of Christ himself, which therefore they hear
reverently, lay it up in their hearts with David carefully, meditate thereon
fruitfully, and obey it diligently, Ps. 119. 11.

2. We see that (as is shown us, Joh. 10. 4.) Christ's sheep have a discerning
faculty between the voice of their own shepherd and a strangers, and by the
rule of holy Scripture, as we have Isay. 8. 20. the Bereans example, and Paul's
direction, Gal. 1. 8. can discern error from truth, and the doctrine of Christ
from the doctrines of Antichrist.

3. Whereas it is said, not only that it is the voice, of her welbeloved, but
that he comes skipping over the hills, etc. we see, 1. how Christ comes
ordinarily to the soul, to wit, by the means of grace and preaching of the word
which whosoever despises, they despise the coming of Christ Jesus to their
souls for their salvation here, and shall never hear that joyful sentence
spoken to them hereafter, Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. 2. That although
the voice of the beloved be heard, yet if he come not himself by the power of
his spirit, and inward efficacy of grace to the Soul of the bearer, Paul's
planting and Apollo's watering, all will be in vain, and the word otherwise
heard will be b^t a dead letter, and as a tinkling cymball: wherefore we should
pray that the Lord would do to us, as he did to Lydia, Act. 16. 14.

4. We see that Christ comes first to the soul, and then invites it to rise and
come away to him, as v. 10. Wherein we see the Lords gracious dealing to us,
who may justly say, as the Baptist said to Christ. We have more need that we
should come to him, being, as Math. 11. 20. heavy laden that we may be eased,
and as to our Physician to be cured of our loathsome and deadly diseases, Ezekiel
16. Or as the Leper and Hemeroiss did, and yet as the loving Samaritan, and as
he did to the sickman of the palsy, Joh. 5. He comes to us, by which coming
great is the honor that is done to us, and therefore we may say with Elisabeth
as she said concerning the virgin Mary's coming unto her, How comes it that the
mother of my Lord should come to me: so much more, How is it that the Lord
himself should come to us? As also great is the profit that comes to us; for as
he said to Zacheus, salvation comes to our Souls when he comes to us.

5. The manner of his coming is skipping and leaping over the hills; that is,
cheerfully and speedily overcoming all impediments that might hinder, how great
soever: which should teach us not only in all our distresses and difficulties
wherein we call upon him to remember this to our comfort, but likewise when he
calls upon us, to the performance of any duty in his worship, or for his cause,
to do or suffer, that we should in like manner come unto him cheerfully and
speedily, as we see Abraham did in a hard task, Genesis 22. 3. and Zacheus, Luke
19. 6. and David professes, Psalm. 119. 32. Neither should any impediment hinder
us, as we see it did those, Matthew. 22.

Verse. 9. My beloved is like a Roe, or young Heart: behold, he stands behind
our wall, he looks forth at the window, showing himself through the Lattesse.
Here is set down his more near approach, than when he was but coming skipping
and leaping on the hills; for now, Behold (says the Church) he stands behind
our wall, etc. But, before she shows this near approach, we see that she
compares him to a roe, or a young heart, to show thereby;

1. As a young heart or roe are pleasant, (being so called, Pro. 5. 19.) so is
Christ to a faithful Soul.

2. As they are most loving to their match, (being also so called in the same
place,) so is Christ to his church, Ephesians. 5. 25.

3. As they are cleerly-sighted, and quick in hearing, so is Christ, Rev. 1.
14. Exodus 3. 7.

4. As they are swift of foot, so is Christ in coming for comforting his own,
and for their deliverance.

5. They haunt most high and hilly places, as it is said Planitie spreta
contendunt semper ad alta, so Christ haunts most, yea ever, heavenly disposed
souls.

6. It is reported that between the Heart and Serpent there is great enmity, and
that the Heart finding where the adder or serpent is; with his snuffing and
breath on her, either makes her flee, or kills her: even so is there between
Christ that seed of the woman, and that old serpent, whom he makes to flee and
overcomes by his word, the breath of his mouth, and thereby consumes the Vicar
of his power, till he abolish him by the brightness of his coming.

Next, as he is compared to a Roe or Heart in all the former respects, so to a
young Heart; to show, as in youth all natural properties of strength, agility,
sharp-sightedness and hearing, etc. are in full vigor; so all these things in
Christ that are for our comfort are in him in the most eminent perfection.

To come now to Christ's nearer approach, standing behind our wall, whereunto we
find, an Ecce, prefixed, which is a note of observation or attention, to show
us, that therefore we should look to our selves, and take heed to our ways and
actions, as having him who is to be our judge not far off, but near unto us,
even at the door as it were, and behind our wall, standing there, and as at a
window, or through a Lettice, spying and remarking all our carriage and
conversation.

Next, his standing behind our wall, signifies either the estate wherein he
finds us at first when he comes unto us, which is a closse door, as Rev. 3. 20.
Or a wall between him and us of a carnal heart till it be opened as Lydia's,
or like Jericha's be made to fall down and yield, by the sound of Gods word
preached. accompanied with the mighty power of the spirit, which is
sufficiently able to do this, as we see, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. behind which wall he
is said to stand Patiently waiting for our conversion. Or else this does
express, that Christ does not in a full and clear manner exhibit and show
himself unto his church in this world, but as one standing behind a wall,
looking in at a window, or showing himself through lattices. Thus Abraham and
the Patriarks saw him before the Law, Heb. 11. 13. but obscurely, as one that
sees a thing far off, and not fully nor clearly but as a part of a man, and
the least part also, is seen only of him who looks in at a window, and very
obscurely likewise,: when one shows himself as through a latesse.

Thus also Moses and Gods people under the Law saw him, but neither fully nor
clearly, but as they saw Moses himself when he was availed, and through the
obscure lattesses of types and figures.

Thus also under the Gospel is he seen, although more fully and clearly than
before or under the law, yet but in part only and obscurely by the eye of
faith, as the Apostle testifies, 1 Cor. 13. 9. 12. saying, for we know only in
part, and we now see through a glass darkly.

Yea when he was amongst men and in the world, yet (as says John) The world
knew him not, Joh. 1. 10, 11. for his deity stood behind the wall (as it were)
of his humanity, which may be called, our wall, because he took upon him our
nature, and became like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.

Likewise the wall which hinders us from the clear sight and knowledge of
Christ, may justly be called our wall, because it is our ignorance and natural
blindness, which makes us to see (as the Apostle speaks) darkly, and as in a
glass, which shall never be fully taken away, till we see him face to face,
and as he is, in glory, 1 Cor. 13. 13. as the veil was never rent till our
Saviors death.

These lattesses also through which he shows himself, are nothing else but the
two casements (as it were) of the holy Scriptures, the new and old Testament,
the searching and knowledge whereof whosoever sorbids to Gods people, they
defraud them of the sight of Christ by faith and that saving knowledge which
they should have of Christ here, and so far, as in them lies of that
blissful sight of his face in glory for ever hereafter, and so in like manner
do those who any ways, contemn or resort not unto, these blessed means of
grace and knowledge of Christ crucified.

Observations.
1. If Christ be lovely and pleasant, like a roe or young Heart, let each one
pray the Lord that he may be so in their eyes, and for this end that he would
grant them the eye salve of his spirit, and make sin loathsome and odious.

2. Seeing he stands behind our wall, which is a gesture of patient waiting, as
we see, Rev. 3. 20. Cant. 5. 2. Then let us welcome and open to him, and abuse
not his long-suffering patience, but do as Ps. 24. 7. and Genesis 24. 31. remove
all impediments and invite him to come in.

3. Seeing he is nearer then we are aware, and is looking on us, who is the
righteous Judge of the whole world, then let every one so carry himself as
being under his alseeing eye and who is to give to every one according to their
works.

4. If but a very little of him be seen by us in this life, like one looking
forth at a window, and that which we see is but very darkly, like one who
shows himself through a lattesse. Then let none glory in his greatest measure
of knowledge, that he can attain to in this life; but strive to grow therein,
and long for that happy day, wherein he shall see him more fully, and as he is,
face to face in glory.

5. Seeing these ca^ernents or lattesses, through which he shows himself, are
the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, then let all those who would
have a comfortable sight of Christ, either here or hereafcer, reverence and
resort to these, as the ordinary means of his manifestation.

Verse. 10. My Beloved spoke, and said unto me, Rise up, my Love, my fa^r one,
and come away.
Here she shows the end of Christ's swift coming unto her, like a Roe or young
Heart, and of his patient attendance when he came, which was, to call her by his
Word and Spirit, from the sloth and security wherein she lay, to follow him in
the faith and love of the Gospel, and of such heavenly things, whereof he
would have her participant.

In which words we have: 1 His loving compellation. 2 His earnest exhortation.
And 3 His motive, or reason of persuasion.

First then, he calls her, His love and fair one, whereof we have already
spoken.

Next, the exhortation is, to rise up, and come away, which imports, that she
was sitting or lying, a posture not fitting a Christian here, whose life is
compared to a race, Psalm. 119. 32. 2 Timothy 4. 7. Phil. 3. 12. etc. This rising
is either from security, wherein oftimes the very godliest lie asleep, as we
see in the example of David, before Nathan's awakening him; and in the Parable
of the ten Virgins; and here, Cant. 5. 2: whereunto also belongs that
exhortation, Ephesians. 5. 14. Or else it is from that earthly disposition, whereby
the very Elect, through carnal corruption, too much cleave to the things of
this world, and have their affections tied and entangled with the cares and
pleasures thereof, like Martha, being busied about many things, whilst one
thing is necessary.

The second action whereunto he exhorts her, is, to come away, which imports
(...) 1 a leaving of the place and posture wherein she was; and 2 a coming to
him, and following after him, who was calling her; as it is said of Matthew,
when Christ called him, that he arose, and then followed after him, Matthew. 9. 9.

First then, the Church is exhorted to leave somewhat, from which she must
come; and this is sinful security, and the love of the world, and vanities
thereof, as Abraham left Vr, Matthew his receipt of Custom, and Mary Magdalen
her former course of life, wherein she had lain so long.

Next, she must come away, and follow after Christ, as it is said of the Elect,
Rev. 14. 4. in the course of a watchful and holy conversation, that being the
end of her leaving that which was evil, that she might cleave to that which
was good; as Abraham left Vr, to go whithersoever the Lord should direct him,
and, as the Apostle shows, that his desire to be dissolved, or to be sreed
from this life, was, that he might be with Christ, and be made partaker of a
better.

Not that we are able of our selves to persorm that, whereunto we are here
exhorted, being so naturally addicted to the earth, as heavy things bend
downwards, and so dull in minding or meditating of heavenly things; but it is
he who raised Lazarus, who must by his powerful grace, rouse up and raise us,
and make a happy divorce between our hearts, and the love of sin and the world,
and set the same upon himself, and those things that are above; and therefore
unto him we should pray, saying, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis.

Next, after her rising, in that she is willed to come away, it shows, the
progress that a true Christian must make, walking from strength to strength,
till he see God in Sion; and not thinking it enough to begin well, as the
Galatians did. Gal. 3. 3. but to proceed, as the Apostle did, Phil. 3. 12* till
he may say, I have finished my course, etc. without being either
retrospicients, with ^ot's wife, or retrogradients, like those who would have
returned into Egypt; but constant goers on, as Joshua and Caleb did, till they
came to Canaan.

Neither must there be any delay in rising or coming away, but present
performance; this being Satan's policy, that with Pharaoh he may put off till
to morrow, or with Foelix, to a more convenient time, and say with Solomon's
sluggard, Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, Prove. 24. 33. before we should
rise, and come away to follow after Christ.

Observations.
1. From the manner of Christ's exhortation to his Church, to arise from
security, and that earthly disposition she was in, by so loving a compellation
of her, notwithstanding thereof, calling her his Love, and fair one, and not
chiding her for her laziness, and worldly mindedness; we see the admirable
indulgence of so meek a Savior, who does as Psalm. 103. 9, 10. and as verse. 13.
As a father pittieth his children, who pittieth them that fear him.

2. We see, that the imperfections that remain in the Regenerate, diminish not
the love of Christ to them, nor makes them deformed, or loathsome in his eyes,
for he calls them his love and fair one; which teaches us: 1 To imitate our
Master herein, that though we behold some imperfections in those, who profess
the truth with us, yet that we should not despise, or uncharitably judge them;
but rather look on the good that is in them, and for that esteem and dearly
love them. 2 This serves for our comfort, in time of Satan's tempting us, by
reason of our sins, and many infirmities, and to magnify his love toward us,
who howsoever we be so of our selves, yet he in mercy and love, (which covers
many infirmities) esteems otherwise of us.

3. By this exhortation, to arise and come away, we see, That the best are
regenerate only in part, and that a lump of natural corruption remains in
them, which makes them cleave to the earth, and sit down as it were in the
world, and on the love thereof, not considering, that we are but pilgrims
therein, whose time is both short and uncertain; and though worldlings find no
taste in ought but the world, yet we should not do so.

4. We see, that it is by the power of Christ's word, that he rouses and raises
up the soul from security, and love of earthly things, to the affecting of
heavenly; whence it is called, The power of God to salvation unto every
believer; and therefore, that we should highly esteem thereof, as the ordinary
means of grace, and eternal salvation.

5. It is not enough to arise from sin or security, or to wean our affections
from worldly things; but we must also come away, and cleave to holiness, and
set our affections on heavenly things, and such as are above.

Verse. 11. For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone. 12. The
flowers appear in the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the
voice of the Turtle is heard in our land. 13. The Fig Tree puts forth her
green figs, and the Vines with the tender grape, give a good smell; Arise my
love, my fair one, and come away.
Here we have the Allegory, under which the Lord does persuade the Church to
arise and come away, out of the estate of security, and from the love of
earthly things, to the delight and desire of heavenly, which is taken from the
time of the year, and change thereof; from a cold winter, wherein all things
lie as it were dead and barren, so that no pleasure is to be had then in things
that grow, unto a pleasant spring, wherein all such things spring forth, and
bud again: The description of which springtime, he makes from these five
things: 1 That flowers appear. 2 That birds sing. 3 That the voice of the
Turtle is heard. 4 That the fig tree puts forth her green figs. And 5 That
the Vine with her tender grape, gives a good smell.

By which two seasons is represented unto us, both what is the estate of all
the Elect, before their effectual calling, and what the same is thereafter,
when they are regenerate: Before their calling, their hearts are even like the
earth in winter, under cold forsts, hard and endured, dead and barren, and
liable to the storms of God's wrath and anger; but after they are called, and
that they begin to be regenerate, a strange change is wrought in them, from
worse to better; for then, through the influence of grace, and that Sun of
Righteousness, their hearts are chawed, softened, and warmed with his love; the
dew of grace descends upon them, as dew came down on Gideon's fleece, when the
rest of the earth was dry; the sweet flowers of heavenly graces do also bud,
and in their variety appear; there is joy then of the holy Ghost, and peace of
conscience, represented here by singing of birds, and voice of the Turtle; and
fructifying in a holy life and conversation, expressed by the fruit of the
fig tree, and grape of the vine.

Some also do understand by this winter season, the time of stormy persecution,
wherein the Church, like the 7000. in Eliah's time, does lurk, and by this
exhortation to arise and come away, that our Savior wills his Church, now in
the time of peace and tranquillity ensuing, to arise from her larking, and come
away after him in an avowed profession of his name, as those Christians did in
Constantine's time, who had lurked before in the time of the heathen and
persecuting Emperors.

1. Comparing the time of persecution and the cross, to winter, 1. In regard
of the Sharpness thereof, like winter, 2. Yet that it is wholesome to the soul,
as winter is to the body, 3. That it mortifies our corruption, as the winter
does hurtful vermin which otherwise would abound; and, 4. That it makes peace
the sweeter, and us the more thankful for it, as the winter makes the spring
and summer the more acceptable

2. Comparing also these flowers that then appear, to the godly, as we see,
Cant. 2. 2. 1 Because they are delightful to God, as flowers to us. 2. They
grow in grace by the influence of the Sun of righteousness, as flowers do
grow by the influence of the sun, 3. They smell sweetly through Christ, and
by their practice of renewed obedience perfected by him, to God; and, 4. (as
here) though in the winter they seem dead and perished, yet in the spring they
appear and rise again, and so shall the godly rise at the last day, though
they seem now quite perished, and lie dead in their graves.

3. Comparing also the singing of the birds, to the rejoysing of the godly,
when God has granted them peace and deliverance, as we have, Ps. 126. 2. and
who like birds, or singing Larks the higher they rise from an earthly
disposition in heavenly comtemplation and soaring, the sweeter they sing, and
are the more melodious in the ears of God.

But it is to be remarked, that with the singing of birds the voice of the
tur^le which is Gemebunda is joined, to show that our rejoicing must not be in
Gods mercies to us, without our mourning for our sins against him, as we are
exhorted, Ps. 2. 11. To serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

4. Comparing lastly, the godly to fig trees bringing forth sigs, and vines
bringing forth sweet smelling grapes, to show thereby unto us that the truly
godly are neither fruitless trees, or barren like that fig tree which our
Savior cursed; nor yet fruitful in evil, as those of whom our Lord
complains, Isay. 5. who in place of sweet fruit brought forth sour grapes;
but who being good trees themselves bring forth sweet and well smelling fruit.

Observations.
1. The persuasion to arise and come away, being taken from the comparison of
the diverse times of the Winter that was past, and the Spring that was now
present, does teach all such whom God has effectually called from darkness to
his mavelous light, not to sleep in security (as before) nor set their hearts
on things vain and transitory, as they did in the days of their ignorance when
they lay frozen in their sins, but now having been made partakers of the
heavenly calling that they ought to take their solace and delight in heavenly
things represented by these pleasant things spoken of in the spring.

2. By the diversity of the nature of these two seasons that are spoken of,
representing our estate in nature and under grace, we ought to try our selves
thereby, in which of these estates we are: If we find our hearts cold in zeal
or the love of God and heavenly things, or hard and obstinate, and that our
life is barren altogether in good works, etc. then we are as yet in the estate
of nature, and it is yet winter with us; but if we find that the sweet smelling
and delectable flowers of grace and holy virtues bud in our soul and appear in
our life, that we have hearts to praise God and mourn like the turtle for our
sins, and that we are fruitful in holiness and a godly life, then our winter
is past, and it is the spring with us, or estate of grace wherein we stand.

3. The repetition or reireration of the former exhortation that is used in the
end of this 13. verse to rise and come away, shows unto us these two things,
1. Our Savior his earnestness of our spiritual good and salvation, as he
testified to the Jews, How often would he have gathered them as chickens under
his wings, but they would nor, and therefore he uses here as it were line upon
line, and precept upon precept, saying once, and again. Arise my love, my fair
one and come away, 2. This shows the laziness of the best, and lothness (like
Lot) to rise from security and come away from the affecting of this world, and
these earthly things that are therein.

Verse. 14. O my dove that art in the clifts of the rock, in the secret places
of the stairs, Let me see thy countenance, Let me hear thy voice: for sweet
is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
Here he uses yet a further persuasion unto her to come forth unto him, and
confer with him: wherein we have, 1. How he styles her, 2. Whereunto he
exhorts her; and, 3. His encouragement of her, or reason of exhortation.

First then he styles her a Dove, (whereof we have spoken somewhat on the 15.
verse of the first Chapter, concerning the eyes of the dove,) and so likewise
he calls her, Cant. 5. 2. Comparing her so, 1. In respect of breeding, 2. Of
feeding, 3. Of nestling; and, 4. Of other properties, whereof we shall speak.

First then for breeding; Among all fowls the dove is most fruitful; even so
is the Church in bringing forth children to God, and of good works.

2. For feeding; The dove is not carnivorax, as ravenous fowls are; but feeds
cleanly upon pure grane; even so does the Church, not on the wisdom of flesh
and blood, nor on carnal pleasures, but on the pure word of God, and wholesome
grane thereof.

3. The natural place of nestling (as we see here) are rocks; and so is Christ
the rock to her, in the clifts of whose wounds she places all her safety.

4. These are her properties, 1. The dove is simple; therefore says our
Savior, be simple as the dove: and so is Christ's church, like Nathaniel, in
whom there is neither guile nor Hypocrisy.

2. The dove is chaste and faithful to her consort, and so is Christ's church
to him, both in affection and retaining the purity of his true worship.

3. The dove is mournful, as we have, Isay. 38. 14. And so is Christ's church
here, sowing in tears that she may reap in joy.

4. The dove is Harmless and Meek, and so is Christ's church and every true
member thereof.

5. The dove loves cleanness and to haunt to white places; and so does the
Church, cleanness and holiness of life, and all such societies.

6. The dove is sociall, avis gregaria, easily tamed, and profitable, and so is
the Church and every true member thereof.

7. The dove is timorous, as we see, Hos. 11. 11. and therefore has no fence
but flight, and for fear of enemies hides her self in the clefts of the rock:
even so do the godly, Ps. 119. 120. and who for fear of their spiritual
enemies hide themselves in the clefts, and under the protection of the true
rock, Christ Jesus.

8. The dove is swift in fleeing, as we see, Ps. 55. 6. and so is Christ church
by faith and devotion, pearcing the very heavens; and as the dove carried the
Olive branch, and was taken into the Ark, when the raven abode without, even so
the godly have peace and grace here, and are assumed to glory hereafter, when
the wicked are left out.

Next, she is called, his dove 1. By creation, Genesis 8. 11. 2. By purchase or
redemption, 3. By the fathers donation, (whereof, Joh. 17. 9) 4. By
confaederation, Jer. 7. 23. and 5. By matrimonial conjunction, whereby she
says, Cant. 6. 3. I am my welbeloved's, and he is mine, etc.

Now, the place where she is said to be, is, in the clifts of the rock and
secret places of the stairs: by which rock is no other meant but Christ Jesus
himself, so called by David, Ps. 62. 2 and 81. 21. and by Daniel, Dan. 2. 45.
Upon whom whosoever builds, he is only wise, and against such, the gates of
Hell shall in no wise prevail. And which rock is neither a dry rock but like
that in the wilderness which gushed forth abundantly with refreshing water, for
which cause the Apostle says, that, that rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Neither is it a barren rock, but like that whereof Job speaks, Job. 29. 6.
which pours forth rivers of gladning oil unto us, and plenty of consolation,
Petra caelestis (caducum enim terrenum omne) quae et solidum fundamentum
edificanti, et securum m^nimentum advolanti.

Next by the clifts of this rock, Some do understand, the Lords eternal
counsel and election of his own; wherein as in a most sure rock the salvation
of the Church rests, knowing that (as our Savior says) it is impossible that
the elect should perish, Matthew. 24. Others understand hereby that protection of
the Lord's, over his own; whereof David speaks, Ps. 32. 7. And our Savior,
saying of his sheep, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand, My father also that gave
them me is greater then all, neither shall any pluck them out of my Father's
hand. Joh. 10. 29. And, I and my Father are one. Others, and that most rightly,
understand, with Bernard, by the clifts of this Rock, the wounds of Christ, and
merits of his precious bloodshed: which, like so many clefts, or hollow places,
were opened upon the Cross, and whereunto every christian soul, in the time of
an accusing conscience, and Satan's pursuit by temptation, (who is like a
greedy Kite or Hawk) by the flight of faith, may have her recourse. In his enim
(says he) se columba tutatur, and circumvolitantem intrepide intuetur
accipitrem.

Thirdly, By the secret place of the stairs (as we see, Psalm. 91. 1.) is meant
the Lord himself, who is the hiding and secret place of his own, as we have him
so called there, and Psalm. 32. 7. and 84. 11. Unto whom the hunted and haunted
soul, by Satan's tempations, looks up; and by faith, or a holy confidence, as
by the degrees of stairs, ascends, and abides under the shadow of the Almighty,
saying with the Psalmist, He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in him will
I trust.

Having thus spoken of the Church her style and description, from the place of
her abode, follows to speak of that, whereunto she is exhorted, which is; 1.
to show him her face. 2. to let him hear her voice.

First then, His desire to show her face imports, that she had hid the same
from him. Now persons use to hide their face; 1 Out of shamefacedness, as
Rebecca hid her face with a vail, when she first saw Isaac, who was to be her
husband. 2 Out of shame for faults committed, and humility, as the Publican,
and Prodigal. 3 Out of fear, like Eliah and the Prophets, who hid themselves in
caves, for fear of Ahab and Jezabel's persecution.

The hiding then of her face here, is out of a holy and virgin-like
shamefastness; as also out of the conscience of her own guiltiness, (whereof
the godliest have reason to be sensible) and a fear also of her spiritual and
persecuting enemies, which make her to have her recourse to these clifts of the
rock, there to hide and secure her self.

Next, he desires to hear her voice. Now there is a threefold voice which the
Church utters; one to Man, which is, of preaching or instruction; another
before Man, which is, a vowed confession; and the third (which is specially
meant here) is her voice to God, which is prayer and supplication, which
delights the Lord, rejoices the Angels, vanquishes Satan, eases the conscience,
benefits the soul, averts judgments, and procures blessings.

Where we hay to remark, that the says, Let me hear thy voice, showing
thereby, that it is to him only that she should put up her prayers; for, as
the Psalmist witnesses, Psalm. 65. 2. it is he only who hears prayer, and
therefore to him shall all flesh come; as he commands, Psalm. 50. 15. And this
honor, being a jealous God, he will not give unto any other.

Last of all, the reason is subjoyned, why he desires her to show him her face,
and to let him hear her voice; for, (says he) sweet is thy voice, and thy face
comely; thereby the more powerfully to induce her so to do, and to remove out
of her mind any impediment, that might arise from the sense of her own
deformity, or unworthiness; to wit, that her face was not worthy to be seen by
him, in whose sight the very heavens are not pure, and before whom the very
Angels appear not, but with their faces covered; hers being so spotted and
unclean, as with the Leper under the Law, she had reason to cover her lips, and
to cry, Unclean, unclean: As also, that her voice was in like manner unworthy
to be heard, being but mournful and melancholious, and more fit for a solitary
desert, with the Turtle, than to be heard in his ear, who has planted the ear,
and to whom in the highest, the Angelical quires sing Allelujah.

To all these he sweetly and comfortably answers, That howsoever she is in her
self, or seems so to her self, yet in his sight, who so has loved her, her
voice is sweet, and her face is comely. We have then to consider, what makes
her voice and her face so.

First then her voice is sweet, in its rise or fountain, to wit, (as Romans 8
26.) when it arises from the Spirit of God, and motion thereof on the soul. 2
From a sight, sense, and sorrow for sin, in a broken heart, and contrite
spirit, whereof David speaks, Psalm. 51. 3 When it is uttered in says,
fervency, and humility. And 4 when the main end thereof is, God's glory, and
the soul's salvation; and all is offered up to God in Christ, through his merit
and only mediation: Then are our prayers like incense, and the lifting up of
our hands as an evening sacrifice; and then is the Church's voice sweet, or, as
the Prophet Malachi speaks, like the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem, which
were pleasant to the Lord, Mat. 3. 4.

Secondly, Her face is comely; whether the face of the body be meant, when it
is like Mary Magdalen's, when she did wash Christ's feet, all blurred with the
tears of true repentance, which like precious seed she is sowing, that she may
reap in joy; or when it is like David's, Psalm. 119. 136. when he did not only
wash his bed with his tears, but shed rivers of tears for the sins of others.
Or whether the face of the soul be meant, when it is stamped with his image,
and made comely by his beauty of holiness, (as he speaks by the Prophet) which
he put upon it, Ezekiel 16. 14. Any, or all these ways, the face of the Church,
and every true member thereof, is said to be comely in the sight of Christ.

Observations.
1. Whereas the Church is called a dove, it teaches all her true members, what
should be their disposition; as has been already shown, in the nature and
properties of the Dove.

2. We see, by her being in the clifts of the rock, her weakness of her self
to withstand her ravenous enemies, and that her only strength and safety
consists, in her recourse to her Rock, Christ Jesus, and in making him her
hiding place and refuge.

3. Her being in the clefts or narrow places of this Rock, shows plainly, that
those who would have safety by Christ, and the merit of his bloodshed, or
tuition from him, they must not be big-swoln with the opinion of their own
righteousness, or merit; for such can never enter in at rifts, or narrow
clifts of a rock, or at a narrow way, which only leads to salvation, Luke 1.
53. but the humble and poor in spirit, for to such only, as says our Savior,
pertaines the kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 3.

4. Seeing the Lord says to every true member of his Church, Let me hear thy
voice, etc. what encouragement is this to come to him by prayer, to obey and
seek after so gracious a Caller upon us, and not go with Romanists to Saints
and Angels, as mediators for us.

5. We see, when the Churches voice is sweet and acceptable, and her face
comely, even when she is in the clefts of the rocks, as Jacob smelled sweetly
in Isaac's sight, when he came clothed with his elder brother's garment: they
only then are acceptable to God, both their persons, and their prayers, etc.
who are in Christ Jesus.

6. We see, what encouragement this is unto us, to pray and praise the Lord,
seeing he tells us, that sweet and delectable is the voice of his Elect, when
in these holy exercises, they utter the same before him.

7. If our voice be sweet unto him, O how sweet should his voice, in the
ministry and exercises of his Word, be unto us, as David professes, Psalm. 19.
and 119.

8. If the face of his Chosen be so comely and beautiful in God's sight here,
O how comely and beautiful will it be, when it is free from any spot or least
wrinkle hereafter.

Verse. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the Vines; for our
Vines have tender Grapes.
Here is a charge given, and the reason thereof rendered; in which charge we
have, 1 who gives it; 2 to whom; and 3 what is the charge it self.

First then, it is Christ, the Master of the Vineyard, who gives the charge, as
he calls Himself, the Master and owner thereof, Esa. 5. and is declared to be,
Psalm. 80. and Matthew. 20. 1.

Secondly, those to whom the charge is given, are Pastors and Princes, or
Ministers and Magistrates; the one armed with the spiritual, the other with
the civil Authority, both being from the Lord, and both here to be employed
for the Lord, against the enemies of his Church; the one to act his part,
praedicando; the other his part, as Deuteronomy. 13. 5. puniendo; the Minister drawing
his sword, Ephesians. 6. by convincing the heresy; the Magistrate his sword, Romans
13. by coercing the heretic, and as the Minister of God, taking vengeance on
evil doers.

Thirdly, the charge it self, is, to take the foxes, even the little foxes;
where we have to consider; 1 who are these foxes, and why so called; 2 who are
these little foxes; and 3 how they should be taken.

First then, by these foxes, false Teachers are understood, the worst sort of
enemies that the Church has, and therefore only here mentioned; this we may
see to be clear, Ezekiel. 13. 4. where the Lord speaking of false Prophets, that
followed their own spirit of error, says, O Israel, thy prophets are like the
foxes in the deserts: and who therefore are thus compared;

1. In comparison of their subtlety and craft, by making a show of truth and
piety, as Herod did of worshipping Christ, Matthew. 7. 15. when they go about to
advance the mystery of error and iniquity, and, as our Savior says, coming
in sheeps clothing, but inwardly being nothing but devouring woolvs; which
subtlety they have from that great Fox, the Devil, who winded himself craftily
in credit with our first parents, as their friend, when he proved their
greatest foe; and who can transform himself into an Angel of light: And
therefore no marvel, that his ministers imitate him, as the Apostle shows, 2
Cor. 11. 15. Amongst which foxes, the great Romish Fox is the principal, and
therefore figured out to us by that Beast in the Revelation, that was horned
like the Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon; and whose emissaries likewise, the
Locusts of that bottomless pit, have men's faces, and women's hair, declaring
thereby, their fair and alluring pretenses; but they have Lions teeth, and
Scorpions rails under these, destroying simple souls.

2. The fox is not only crafty, but cruel, and blood-thirsty of the blood of
the flock; therefore Herod is called a fox, Luke 13. 32. also Pharaoh, Exodus 1.
10. And so is that Roman fox cruel, and ever has been, against the Saints of
God; and therefore is called that scarlet whore, that is drunk with the blood
of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17. 6. And so likewise are all
the foxes, his emissaries; witness the many, partly performed, and partly
intended massacres, of the professors of the truth, their bloody Inquisition,
and league at the Council of Trent.

3. The fox goes never straight forward, but tortuosis incedit amfractibus; or
by crooked windings, and in cavernosis latitat amfractibus; and he lurketh in
such places: Even so these forenamed foxes, walk not with a straight foot in
the Gospel, nor follows the straight rule thereof; but in crooked windings,
and by-waies of error, and human traditions, not leading to God by Christ, but
by Saints and Angels their mediation; nor to his merits only and
satisfaction, but to others, or their own in purgatory, etc. and using all
deceitfulness of error to compass their ends, and advance their power and
pride.

4. The time when they specially invade, is the night, when all are asleep,
both shepherd and sheep; even as in like manner we see that while the servants
were asleep the envyous man sowed his tares amongst the good seed: even so
there do these foxes specially invade Christ's flock to catch them as their
prey, and by their divelish doctrine to destroy their souls, when either they
find a flock without a pastor at all, or when they find a sleepy idol, and
slothful shepherd, and an ignorant flock: but on the contrary, where a well
instructed people are, who know Christ's voice and can discern it from a
stranger, as we have it, Joh. 10. and Cant. 5. And where such a pastor is, as
Jacob, or David, or those to whom the Angel appeared and annunced Christ's
birth, who were watching carefully their flocks in the night, there these foxes
dare not come, nor cannot prevail.

5. The Fox, especially in his hole, is a vile stinking beast, and so what has
been the vile stink of these Romish foxes, from their great one to the least,
in their lives and conversations, and in their cloisters, Nunneries, and other
places, let their Popes lives and others of their own Registers testify.

Secondly, by these little Foxes, are understood false teachers who subtly
and by degrees bring in errors in the Church, and therefore even in their
beginnings and first bud when they seem to be but little hurtful or
dangerous, are to be adverted, and taken heed unto, as hurtful enemies to the
Lords vines. These are they who privily (says Peter) were to bring in damnable
Heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and who were doing so even in the very Apostles times,
who were most watchful: for even then the mystery of iniquity was working as
the Apostle tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. setting down the particulars, Coloss. 2.
18. and 1 Timothy 4. 3. The reason why such little foxes should be in their very
beginnings curbed and taken, the Apostle Paul gives; saying, For they will
increase unto more ungodlyness, 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17. and their word will ear as
does a canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, little foxes even in Paul's
days. The proof whereof likewise Christ's church too truly found, in the
Method of introduction of Idololatreia, by bringing in, first, (...) adoration
of Images, by making of such and placing them in Churches, worshipping and
invocation of Saints, by set days at first only for commemoration of their
piety and constancy in suffering, etc. And the like, in rising to the height
of Papal dignity in the Ecclesiastic government Whence the Apostle very well
calls the wiles of the dive^ that arch and old fox, (...).

Thirdly, these foxes are to be taken, as the Apostle Peter in like manner
tells us, saying, But these as natural brute beasts are made to be taken and
destroyed, 2 Pet. 2. 12. But how and by whom? doubtless, as has been already
said, both by faithful Ministers, and zealous Magistrates, the one by the
sword of the Word strongly confuting their Heresies, and by Excommunication
casting them forth of the Church: and the other if they yet continue obstinate
and infest the vines, by civil and corporal punishment catching and
destroying them, lest they destroy the vines that have but tender grapes, that
is, seduce simple souls while they are as yet but only young and weak.

But why says Christ, Take us the foxes, and not simply, ^ake the foxes, or
particularly take me the foxes, but in common, take us the foxes? I answer, 1.
This is to show, that the taking of these foxes redounds both to Gods glory and
his Churches good, and therefore whosoever is negligent in doing of his duty,
Minister or Magistrate, he neither tenders Gods glory, nor his Churches good,
2. This is likewise to show for the Churches great comfort, that Christ and she
have common friends and foes.

Last of all, the reason of the taking these foxes, is, their spoiling of the
vines, by which are understand the members of Christ's church, against whom
these foxes do set themselves for hurt; compared here unto vines, Isay. 5.
Psalm. 80. as else where frequently in Scripture, Matthew. 20. etc. For the
reasons following.

1. The vine is called noble, Jer. 2. 21. So are the godly, and Gods Church
beyond all other societies, Psalm. 16. 2.

2. It has not outward beauty, but is full of inward sap; so neither has the
Church, like that whore, Rev. 17. But is beautiful within, through the
abundant sap of grace.

3. It is weak, and therefore needs under-propping: and so is the Church of
her self, but is under-propped by Christ, Cant. 8. 5.

4. It must be also hedged about for defense, Isai. 5. 5. Psalm. ^0. 12. and so
must the Church also, chiefly by divine protection.

5. It spreads far in the boughs thereof, Ps. 80. 11. And so does the Church
in her members to the utmost ends of the earth, Psalm. 2.

6. It is the most fruitful of any tree, and so is the Church and her true
members, ^oh. 15.

7. If it be otherwise, it is most unprofitable of any tree, and fit only for
the fire: and so are the members of the visible church, Ezekiel. 15. 3. Joh. 15.
6. and like unsavory salt, Matthew. 5. 13.

8. That it may be so, great pains is taken about it, Isay, 5. And so is about
the Church by the Lords vine-dressers, Luke 13. 7.

9. It must be pruned specially, and is much better thereby: so must the Church
by the cross and affliction, and with David She finds that it is good that she
is so.

10. The Vine with the grapes thereof send forth a good smell, Cant. 2. 13.
Hosea. 14. 7. and so do Christians by their fruitfulness in holiness, both
upward toward God in Christ, and to all such who see their godly example.

11. The vines (as we see here, and Psalm 80. 13.) have many enemies: and so has
Christ's church, both open and secret, subtle and mighty.

12. The Husbandman plants them, Psalm. 80. 8. and has a care of their
prospering, purging, and preservation: and so does the Lord, of his Church, who
therefore is so called, Joh. 15. 1. and to whom his Vineyard is more dear
then Naboths was to him, and none can take the same from him, or pluck any of
his sheep out of his hand.

13. There are many sorts of vines, whereof we have already spoken on the 6.
verse of the 1. Chapter, as there are many sorts of grounds spoken of in the
parable of the sower, Matthew. 17. And so are there many sorts of Christians, but
one sort only which are the noble and goodly vine spoken of here, and whereof
the Lords has such a care. called else where by Jeremy, the right seed, Jer. 2.
21. and these are such who, as Ps. 1. 3. and Isai. 5. disappoints not the
expectation of the Husbandman, but brings forth sweet grapes and good fruit in
due season.

Now the spoiling of these vines is nothing else, but the perverting and
drawing them from the truth by poisonable Doctrine, and deceiving (as our
Savior says) if it were possible the very elect, or (as the Lord speaks by
his Prophet) when under pretense of leading Gods people, such mis-lead them and
cause them to err, wherein these crafty foxes in the time of ignorance did so
prevail before the over-clouded eternal Gospel (as we see, Rev. 9. 2.)
began again clearly to shine, that (as we see, Rev. 13.) the whole world in
a manner followed the beast.

Observations.
1. In this charge, which we see Christ gives both to Ministers and Magistrates
concerning his Church, we see the care that he has thereof, and of every true
member that is therein, whereof for our comfort let us never doubt in
whatsoever estate she or we be in, both for protection and providence, although
it were our case, as Isreal's in Egypt or at the redsea, or like that boat
wherein he and his Disciples were, Matthew. 8. 24.

2. Here also we may behold the estate of Gods Church, that it shall never want
enemies, both subtle foxes that will creep in among the vines to spoil them,
and cruel boares out of the wilderness to waste and destroy them, Psalm. 80.
12. And therefore she should arm her self against both, and not think it
uncouth although she be infested by both; being herein conform to her head,
who had both cruel enemies who cried crucify crucify, and a crafty bosom
Judas who did betray his Master.

3. Their end and aim is to spoil the vines; where we may see the Malice of
Satan in his instruments is, next to the head, now against the members of
Christ's body, that he may have no Church; which therefore they seek to spoil
by poisonable Doctrine craftily, or else to cut off by persecution cruelly, and
yet herein through Christ's care and preservation shall be disappointed, who by his
spirit of truth shall lead his elect into all truth; so that it shall be
impossible that they can be deceived, and shall so preserve his Lilly amongst
the midst of thorns, that the gates of Hell, shall not prevail against her.

4. Seeing it is the duty both of Magistrates and Ministers each one in their
own places to take order with the enemies of Christ's church, they ought
carefully to take heed thereto, as once they must give an account: and we ought
all of us pray to God earnestly that he would thrust out many faithful
pastors, more and more, and many zealous Magistrates into his Church, who may
diligently do Gods work here enjoined, and hunt these hurtful and subtle
foxes, that spoil the Lords vines, which if they who should hunt and take them,
neglect, or that they be too strong, the Lord will not fail to do it himself,
as he did to Pharaoh, and that fox Herod, and others.

5. If Ministers and Magistrates should be the takers of these foxes, who spoil
the vines; then it is a shame to see either of them prove foxes themselves, and
wasters of the Lord's Vineyard.

Verse. 16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the Lillies.
Upon all the former speeches of Christ, expressing his love and care of his
Church, she breaks forth here into a gloriation; not a vain one, as Haman's;
nor a worldly one, as the rich Fool's; nor a wicked one, as Lamech's; nor a
self-one, as the Pharisee's; but a godly one, as the Apostle says, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord. It is therefore in that sweet and holy
communion, which is betwixt the Lord Jesus Christ and her, and comfortable
fruit which she reaps thereby, wherein her felicity stands, that here she
glories, saying, My wel-beloved is mine, and I am his. Where we must note,
first, That there is an union betwixt Christ and his Church, from whence comes
this communion; by which union he is her head, and she is by the Spirit united
to him, as his mystical body; whence follows, that whatsoever is in him, it
is hers; and therefore it is said, That he is made unto us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. And more particularly, from
this communion flows these benefits: 1 He has taken upon him all our sins and
guiltiness, and satisfied the justice of God for the same. 2 He makes us
partakers of his righteousness, which is made ours in justification. 3 He
gives us also his Spirit of sanctification, and all saving-graces necessary to
salvation. 4 He gives unto us the sense of God's love, true peace, inward joy,
comfort in crosses, courage against death, and victory over all our enemies.
And 5 He sympathizes with us in good or evil, and gives unto us right unto
life everlasting.

Her beloved then is hers, 1 By the Father's donation, Romans 8. 32. 2 By this
mystical forenamed union, diversely expressed in Scripture. 3 By faith's
application of his death, resurrection, ascension, mediation, etc. and benefits
or comforts thereof. And 4 He shall be ours most comfortably, in that full
fruition which we shall have of him, as our blessed Bridegroom at the last day,
after the solemnization of our espousalls, and entry with him into those
mansion-places of eternal glory.

She likewise is her beloved's; 1 By the Father's donation, Joh. 10. 29. 2 By
creation. 3 By redemption. 4 By desponsation. 5 By the bond of affection. And 6
By mutual application, that as we by faith apply him to us, so likewise by
holy obedience, as the imp to the stock, we comply to him, and apply our selves
and whole endeavors, to please and honor him.

Thereafter she expresses the delight, which the Lord Jesus takes in this sweet
communion, and fellowship with his Saints, whom he here calls Lillies, as they
are called, verse. 2. to wit, That he feeds amongst them, that is, he delights
in them, and in their obedience to his will* as we are said to feed our sight,
with such objects wherein we delight; and as he counted it food unto him, or
meat and drink to do his Father's will.

Observations.
1. We see here the Christian's happiness, and, how poor soever in this world
he be, yet what a great treasure he has, when Christ is his, in whom all
fullness is, and who is Lord of all; whom if we have, as the Apostle reasons,
Romans 8. 32. we are sure of all other things, that God knows to be for his
glory, and our good.

2. We see, if Christ be ours, we must likewise be his; for there are many that
would be content, that Christ should be theirs, but they labor not to be
Christ's again, by renewed obedience: But here we see, that we must be his, if
we would have him to be ours; and, a true faith, as it applies Christ, so it
makes one comply to Christ.

3. But mark the order, that Christ must first be ours, before we can be his,
for without him, we can do nothing; and it is he who seeks the lost sheep
first, and works in us both the will and the deed; so that till Christ give
himself first to us, and come first to us, as he did to ^azarus* lying in the
grave, we will never be able to give our selves to him, or to be his by faith
and renewed obedience.

4. If we be his, then it follows; 1 That we must not be Satan's, nor sin's,
nor the world's, nor suffer our affections to be set on any other, or any other
to lord over us. 2 If we be his, great is our comfort herein, that he will
count the wrongs done to us, as done to himself, or to her, who is one with
himself; yea, he who touches such, he has said, that they touch the apple of
his own eye. And 3 If the godly be his, then whatsoever good we do to such,
(this is our encouragement) we do the same to Christ himself, and his members,
as he will profess at the last day.

5. If Christ so delight in us, and in our obedience, that he feeds, as it
were, amongst us; how should we in like manner delight in him, and his
presence, and be obedient to him; not grieving, and far less quenching, his
good Spirit, by whom we are sealed to the day of perfect redemption?

Verse. 17. Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my Beloved,
and be thou like a Roe or a young Heart, upon the mountains of Bether.
Here the Spouse of Christ closes this Chapter, with an earnest and holy
prayer to her Beloved, that during the nightime of this life, which is
obnoxious to much sin and ignorance, troubles and temptations, signified by the
shadows here, that shall flee away at last; and till that happy change come,
signified by the break of day, or dawning; that all these forenamed shall be
removed, and have an end, and sighing and sorrowing shall pass away, by
Christ's glorious coming in the clouds on high, like a Roe or young Heart upon
the mountains of Bether, that till then, he would never remove his comfortable
presence from her, but be ready ever at hand for her help, by the comfort of
his Word and Spirit.

The mountains then that are spoken of here, are called the mountains of
Bether, called also Bithron, 2 Samuel 2. 29. which is by interpretation,
separation, or division; and were on the yonder side of Jordan, in the land of
Gilead; so called, because by Jordan they were separate, or divided from the
rest of Judea; and on these mountains, Hearts and Roes used to skip and feed;
and therefore the Church, speaking of Christ's second coming to judgment, when
he is to separate the sheep from the goats, she alludes to these mountains,
that are by interpretation, Separation; and by the Hearts and Roes that did feed
and skip thereon, she alludes to the manner of his coming, which she wishes to
be speedily; as the Church in the Revelation answers, with a like holy Echo,
saying, Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Rev. 22. 20.

Observations.
1. Her being his, and Christ hers, makes the Church to think of the Last-day
with joy, and so, earnestly to wish the same; And therefore, if either we would
have the remembrance of death and judgment, particular or general,
comfortable, and not to torment us before the time, and make us tremble with
Foelix, or the Devils, who believe and tremble; let us labor to have Christ
to be ours, and give our selves over wholly to be his, in like manner.

2. We see what our life is here on earth, till that joyful break of day come,
when Christ shall appear as the Sun of righteousness, and come in the clouds;
even a longsome and dark night, wherein there is troubles and temptations; and
in the very best, much ignorance and sinning, and therefore is rather to be
loathed than loved, the days thereof (as Jacob professes) being but few and
evil; and time thereof, (as Job says) being but of short continuance, and
full of trouble; during which time, this is the comfort of the godly, that at
last these shadows wherewith the soul is over-clouded here, shall flee away,
and Christ Jesus shall come to the same at last, like a Roe or young Heart on
the mountains of Bether.

3. During the time of this shaddowish and dark night, till the day break, and
the shadows flee away, the Church for comfort, help, and relief, has her
only recourse to Christ, and desires his presence to be with her; for then in
the darkest, and most cloudy or gloomy nightime, she cannot want light, and
lightsome comfort enough; which made David to say, that although he should walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, he would fear no ill, the Lord
being with him, his rod and staff comforting him. And therefore, in whatsoever
disconsolate, gloomy, or cloudy time we be in, till the set time of the Lord's
delivery come, let us in like manner desire the Lord's gracious presence to be
with us, and that he leave us not, but that his grace may be sufficicient for
us; and then, as our Savior said, Let his will be done, and not ours.

4. When Christ shall at last come from on high, like a Roe or young Heart on
the mountains of Bether, then only the separation shall be, of the goats from
the sheep; and therefore till then, the godly must be content with their lot,
the lilly to be amongst the thorns, the clean to be with the unclean in the
Ark, the Israelite to be with the Canaanite in the land, and the good grane to
be in one field with the ^ates.

Finis secundi Capitis.
Soli Deo gloria.
CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. By night in my bed I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him,
but I found him not.
IN this Chapter is set down; 1 The Church's conflict with a spiritual
desertion, and her happy overcomming at last. And 2 her new estate, as it were,
and comfortable condition, having gotten Christ; with her gloriation in him;
from the sixth verse to the end.

First then is set down the Church's diverse and far differing estate, from her
former condition; for before, she was glorying in his sweet fellowship and
communion, that he was hers, and she his; and that he did feed among the
Lillies. But now she shows, how he had deserted her alone, and with what care
and pains she did seek him, and could not for a long time find him.

In this verse then we have, 1 The action of seeking, and what it imports, 2
Who seeks. 3 Whom she seeks, and how he is to be sought. 4 When she seeks him.
5 Where she seeks him. And 6 her success of seeking him.

First then, Seeking imports three things: 1 A sense of want or absence. 2 A
need, estimation, and desire, of tha^ which we need. And 3 A hope to find and
obtain the same; therefore says our Savior, Seek, and ye shall find. The
Church then here had all these; for first, she was sensible of his desertion of
her. And happy is that soul that is so, for many are deserted; and albeit the
Lord says, Woe be to them, when I depart from them. Hos. 9. 12. yet they are
not sensible thereof, but are like those of whom the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 10.
4. that seek not God, nor is he in all their thoughts: 2 She knew what need she
stood in of him, both for her esse, and been esse, grace here, and glory
hereafter, as we have, Psalm. 84. 11. and therefore she had such an estimation
of him, and desire after him. And 3 she had hope, if she sought him, that at
last she should find him; especially seeing, that he has been found of them
that sought him not, and that he has promised, that he shall not be sought in
vain, Esa. 45. ^9. but that they who seek him shall find him, when they search
for him with all their heart, Jer. 29. 13.

2. Secondly, She who seeks her Beloved, is the virgin Spouse of Christ, called
by David, The generation of them that seek him, Psalm. 24. 6 which, in earthly
or carnal love, would seem to be against all modesty, in the nightime for a
virgin to rise out of her bed, and go along the streets, and seek, yea, ask for
him whom she loves: But in this spiritual case of the soul, and love thereof
to Christ, whom she seeks after, it is far otherwise, and highly commended;
even as importunity, which is hateful to man, as we see in the Canaanitish
woman, is acceptable and well pleasing to God.

But here a question may be demanded, to wit, whether the Church, or any godly
soul therein, be ever without Christ? Whereunto I answer, That out of all
doubt, the Lord Jesus is always present with his Church, and every faithful
soul therein; but the faithful have not always the same lively feeling of his
presence, but he seems to have forsaken them. Witness the Church her self,
where Sion complains thus, saying, The Lord has forsaken me, Esa. 49. 14.
and David's complaint, Psalm. 22. 1. The Lord also justifying that complaint of
his Church, saying, For a little while I have forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee: in a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the
Lord thy Redeemer, Esa. 54. 7. And when the Church, or any godly soul is in
this estate, there is no rest in their souls, which are sick of love, till, as
David says, they be restored to that joy of his presence, which they had wont
to find in him, and get that comfortable embracement spoken of, Cant. 2. 6.

3. Thirdly, He whom she seeks, is he whom her soul loves; which words show
unto us two things: I What was the main motive, that made her so to grieve at
his absence, and makes her so to long and seek for his presence: It is love,
and a fervant affection from her very soul toward him, the want whereof, where
it is in the soul of any, there will be no serious or true seeking after the
Lord, as may be seen in the practice of the most. 2 This shows, that although
to her present feeling, she seemed to be forsaken of the Lord; yet indeed and
truly she was not so, because her love toward him abode in her heart, which
love of God in the heart of his Elect, is a fruit and effect of his love
toward them; and so long as the one continues toward him, as surely does his
love and gracious presence continue and abide with them, though not alike felt;
but in the secret work of his saving grace, which makes them to seek him, and a
more plentiful and perfect sense of his comfortable presence, than for the
present they can find.

The way or manner how he is to be sought, whom the Soul loves, is:

1. Timely, which Esaias calls, While he may be found, and is near. Esa. 55. 6.
Therefore also says he, With my spirit within me will I seek thee early, Esa.
26. 9. And so also says the Lord by his Prophet Hosea, Hos. 5. 15. In their
afflictions they will seek me early, Psalm. 63. 1.

2. Truly, or sincerely, which the Scripture calls, With all the heart, Deuteronomy.
4. 29. and not feignedly drawing near with their lips, when their heart is far
from him, Psalm. 119. 2. Of which sort of seeking, the Lord complains by his
Prophet, that his people continued in their sins, and yet (says he) they do
seek me daily, Esa. 58. 2.

3. Uprightly, that is, for himself, and not like the Capernaits, of whom our
Savior said, Ye seek me not, because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did
eat of the loaves, and were filled, Joh 6. 26. or, as one says very well, Like
those who seek not Gods face, but his fingers-ends; and like covetous Pastors,
who seek not the good, but the goods of the flock, far from the Apostle's
practice, 2 Cor. 12. 14.

4. Fervently, and not with a faint desire, but with the whole bensell of the
soul, as David thirsted for the waters of the well of Bethlehem; or, as he
says, As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee,
O God. And again, O God who art my God, early will I seek thee, Psalm. 42. 1. My
soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land
where no water is.

5. Humbly, as Daniel professes, saying, and I set my face unto the Lord God to
seek him by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes,
Dan. 9. 3. And as Jacob sought the blessing from the angel, Hosea. 12. 4. by
tears and supplication; and as ^^ay exhorts, Isay. 51. 1.

6. Diligently, as the whorish woman professes that she came forth, diligently
to seek his face whom she loved, and had found him, Prove. 7. 15. or as Herod
desired the wise men to search diligently for the child, Matthew. 2. 8. as
Onesiphorus also sought out Paul at Rome very diligently till he found him, 2 Timothy 1. 17. and the woman sought her lost piece of silver diligently till she
found it, Luke 15. 8. For it is only such seekers to whom the promise of reward
is made, as the Apostle shows, saying, that the Lord is a rewarder of them who
diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

7. Carefully and sorowing, as Joseph and Mary sought him with great care
sorrow and solicitude, till they found him after three days seeking, Luke 2.
46. 48. in the Temple amongst the Doctors, and as we see here with what care,
and questioning the spouse seeks her beloved, yea not only with care, but as
is said, v. 48. sorrowing.

8. Prudently as well as painefully, where he is to be found, to wit, as she is
directed, Cant. 1. 8* in the means of grace, or, as the Psalmist speaks, in the
Sanctuary and law, Psalm. 63. 2. and 119. 115. or Temple, where Christ was found
by Joseph, and, as he tells himself, where he walks in the midst of the Golden
candlesticks Rev. 2. 1.

9. Constantly, not by a fit, but with the spouse here till he be found,
without looking back with Lots wife; and far less fainting and turning back,
as many do, like the dog to the vomit or the sow to the puddle; and as those
Disciples, Joh. 6. 66. who went back from Christ, and walked no more with him.

For the performance of all which former points in the right seeking of the
Lord there must be a preparation of the heart, which was the praise of good
king Jehosaphat, that he had prepared his heart to seek God, 2. Chron. 19. 3.
This being a task of no small difficulty to do it aright, and of greatest
concernment, which is life everlasting, Amos. 5. 6. As also hereby we may know
if we have sought God aright, 1. If (as Zeph. 2. 2. and Romans 12. 9.) we seek
after good and abhor evil, 2. If we seek things above as, Col. 3. 1. And 3.
If we seek the good of Sion, as Psalm. 112. 9.

4. Fourthly, the time when she seeks him, is the night, which is a dark,
silent and Melancholious time, thereby to show, 1. What a time it is to the
Soul when she is spiritually deserted; surely, as Joel speaks, a time of
darkness and of gloominess, a time of Clouds and of thick darkness, a
disconsolate night, Joel. 2. 2. wherein the soul is like Rachel for her
children that would not be comforted; all other things, in like manner till she
find her beloved, being to her like Job friends miserable comforters, or like
the white of an egg wherein there is no taste at all.

2. This shows the great love and desire she has of enjoying Christ's presence,
that although the night be ordained for rest, yet she cannot rest, but with
Isay she may say, O Lord I have waited for thee, Isay 26. 8, 9. The desire of
my soul is to thy name and to the remembrance of thee, with my soul I have
desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek thee early.
She cannot then tarry till it be day, neither can she have patience (as one
might think) till he come to her, but her affection and desire is so fervent
and flaming toward him that worldlings do wonder at the same, and they think
Gods children in the fit of this love-sickness, as Festus thought Paul, that
too much zeal and devotion has made them mad, Act. 26. 24. and therefore as,
I Pet 4. 4. They speak evil of them, and of the way of righteousness, thinking
it rather strange that they should not run with them into the same excess of
riot, as themselves do.

5. Fifthly, the place where she seeks him is her bed, a wrong place indeed,
fitter for carnal ease and sleep, and therefore he was not found there, till
she arose from that place, and roused up her self from that carnal security
wherein she lay before, and whereby she had lost her welbeloved, and sought him
(as we see hereafter) more painfully and carefully else where. It was the error
of Mary Magdalen and the other Mary, that they sought the Lord Jesus where he
was not, as the Angel told them, He is not here, for they sought him amongst
the dead, Matthew. 28. 6. and so as it is the Churches error here to seek her
welbeloved in her bed, so it is the error of many to seek the Lord Jesus in the
midst of carnal pleasures, worldly ease; or to think that he can be found in a
dead soul, and lulled asleep in carnal security: to whom I may say, he is not
there, but, as the Angel said, He is risen; so they who seek him rightly, must
likewise rise with him. As He did from the grave, so they from the bed of a
slumbering security with the wise virgins, and from a sluggish and tepid
seeking of him, to a zealous, careful, and painful search for him; for as his
worth is who is sought, so must the care and pains be accordingly to find and
enjoy him. As Solomon says of wisdom, If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures, then thou shall understand the fear of
the Lord, Prove. 2. 4. and find the knowledge of God, Matthew. 13. 44.

6. Last of all, the success is this, she found him not, the reason whereof
is, 1. As the Apostle says, Ye pray and obtain not, because ye pray amiss;
even so she sought and found not, because she sought him as yet but lasily and
amiss: and therefore if we would find Christ, we must not only seek him, but
seek him aright; as in all the exercises of religious duties, the work wrought,
or Opus Operatum, must not be so much taken heed unto, as the manner of
performance, or Modus Operandi, else as Peter ^ished all night and caught
nothing, so may we seek Christ long enough, and yet in no wise find him. 2. The
Lord will not at first be found of his own, whose very souls love him, not
for any want of love or kindness on his part toward them again; but, 1. For
the trial of their Faith, Love, and Patience, 2. To make them more earnestly
seek after him, asking, seeking, and at last knocking, or like the Canaanite
being importunate, and with Jacob, saying, I will not let thee go except thou
bless me: and, 3. This is to make them have the greater account and more
precious estimation of him, as also the greater care of retaining of him when
he is found, having had experience that it is not so easy a matter if we lose
his gracious and comfortable presence, to find the same again. And therefore
if the Lord speak peace to his Saints, let them beware not to return again
unto folly.

Observations.
1. We see the vicissitude or diverse condition of Christ's church here on
earth, sometimes rejoysing in Christ's presence, and sometimes saying with Sion,
the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me, Isay. 49. 14. and
therefore being like the Moon having a wain and a grow, or like the Sea, an ebb
and a flow of comfortable feeling, as the Mary-gold sometimes Lowres and
claspes, in the absence of the Sun, but anon when he shines, Opens and
revives as it were again, and therefore, 1. This should teach us not to think
uncouth of spiritual desertions, as the Apostle exhorts, concerning fiery
trials, to do the like, 1. Pet. 4. 12. And 2. To despise this life wherein we
are absent from the Lord, and subject to so many changes corporal and
spiritual, and to long for that life to come wherein we shall enjoy his
presence for ever, in whose presence there is fullness of joy and pleasures for
evermore.

2. In the greatest and most greevous desertions, try if thou can say with
the spouse here, that Christ is he whom thy soul loves, and may appeal to him
who knows the heart, saying with Peter, Lord thou know that I love thee,
and then assuredly thou may be comforted, and be assured that a soul that loves
Christ, and longs for him, shall in end find his comfortable presence, like the
Suns dispersing all foggy mists and vapors, to that souls rejoysing; yea
that loving and longing soul may be persuaded that it has already (like old
Simeon) Christ in the arms thereof, and that it rests (though in a spiritual
dwame not feeling) in his arms, as Cant. 2. 6. Because in true divinity
Desiderare est Habere, the desire of grace, is the evidence of the having of
grace and such are pronounced, B^essed, Matthew. 5. 6. therefore said Augustine,
Da domine desiderare, ut desiderando quaeram, et quaerendo inveniam. Medit, 1.

3. We see here the difference between the godly and worldlings, that which
they busy themselves like Martha to seek, are many things, yet all earthly,
base and transitory, as honors, riches, pleasures and the like, wherein they
are restles and indefatigable, and which when they have attained like the rich
fool and others, they have inherited and reaped the wind; but that which the
godly seek after is Christ Jesus, and as David sought, Psalm. 4. The light of
the Lords countenance, with Mary making that good choice of that which never
shall be taken from them.

4. Although the godly soul under the sense of spiritual desertion having
sought Christ, yet at the first find him not, (as here the Church does not,)
yet let not the same faint nor give over, but try how the same has sought
Christ, and suspect it self, that it has not sought him so fervently and
painfully as it ought, and therefore stir up its zeal, and be more fervent
and frequent in prayer and other exercises of devotion, and wait upon the
Lords time of his graeious manifestation. And, to know if the soul have sought
Christ aright try, 1. If thou have sought his face, that is, his favor, or
himself, for himself and not for by-ends, as some who seek not so much Gods
face as his finger-ends, 2. If thou seek Gods Law, that it may be in thy heart,
and he rule thee thereby; and, 3. If thou seek the good of his Zion, which is
his mystical body, and a part of himself, (as has been said before.)

Verse. 2. I will rise now, and go about the City in the streets, and in the
broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him
not.
Here is the Churches holy resolution without fainting to make a further
progress in seeking her welbeloved still, till she find him, 1. Arising now
(says she) without any delay, 2. Going about the streets and broad ways; and,
3. All this, is to seek him whom her soul loves, and yet no better success
then before: She sought him but she found him not.

First then she says I will rise, signifying thereby the stirring up in her
self a greater care and fervency in seeking after Christ, then she had formerly
had: for before she sought him only in her bed, which is, that drowsy estate
of carnal security, which the flesh brings upon the soul, and whereby it is
said that the wise virgins slept as well as the foolish, and wherein all the
true children of God, according to the flesh, could be content to nestle
themselves and lie warm, were it not that they are moved by the operation of
the spirit of God to do otherwise: and not only even in this bed to seek, but
also further to proceed, and arise from this bed, even in the night time, which
of any time is fittest for the bed, and most inconvenient and grievous to come
out of the same, and yet rather then she will not find him whom her soul loves,
she will forsake the love of all the ease* and pleasures of the world.

Yea further, she will not only arise and quit her bed of ease and delight, but
likewise in the unseasonable time of the night, she will go about the streets
and broad ways of the City, and seek her well-beloved, forecasting no dangers
nor inconveniences that may ensue, but putting all to the hazard. By this City,
Jerusalem is meant, the place where the Temple was built, and public worship
of God there exercicised; and by her going about this City, in the streets and
broad ways, the diligent and exquisite search is signified, which she made for
him whom her soul loved, in resorting to the means of grace, as we see in that
place of Jeremy, where the Lord says, Run ye to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad ways thereof, if ye
can find a man that executes judgment, and seeks the truth, and I will
pardon it, Ier. 5. 1. Which exquisite and diligent search she makes, by
omitting no place or occasion, where wisdom cries for her instruction and
edifying; as it is said, Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the
streets, she cries in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the
gares, and in the City she utters her words, Prove. 1. 20. but follows that
direction she got from himself, Cant. 1. 8.

Notwithstanding whereof, her success of seeking is but as before, she sought
him, but she found him not; the Lord wisely yet delaying, that her zeal and
fervency might be yet more stirred up.

Observations.
1. We see the profit of spiritual trialls and afflictions inward, which is,
to rouse up the soul from repidity or security, wherein it has lain, to a more
serious seeking of Christ, and increase of the saving graces of his holy
Spirit; so that all things work together for the best to the child of God,
howsoever they think of their present condition.

2. The Church here quits her bed even in the nightime, to seek after Christ,
and with the hazard of whatsoever danger or inconveniency, goes about the
streets of the City, that she may find him; which not only shows the fervent
zeal of a godly soul, but condemns many now, who would fain have Christ, but
will forsake or quit nothing for him; let be to hazard themselves, or undergo
any danger for his Names-sake; yea scarce will quit their carnal ease, or a
morning sleep in their beds, to come where Wisdom cries, and to seek Christ in
the use of his Ordinances.

3. The manner how she seeks Christ here, is, very painfully and carefully, not
superficially and sl^ightly, as many do, who are content with a mere formality,
and can be content to take pains about any other business, that concerns the
body, or this worldly estate; but take small or no pains at all, in religious
exercises of seeking Christ, and to work upon their heart for meet harboring
of him, and storing the same with the furniture of saving grace.

4. Although she sought him so, yet hitherto she finds him not, whereby we see,
that it is not uncouth nor unaccustomable, nor should it seem so to God's
children, albeit they seek, and do so the right way, zealously and painfully;
yet notwithstanding, that at the first or second time, they get not comfort in
their spiritual desertions: for this was the lot of David, who was hoarse in
crying; of our Savior Christ in his agony, who prayed thrice with strong cries
and tears; and of many other of God's dearest Saints; and therefore faint not,
nor give over, but insist and continue, and assuredly Christ's promise shall in
the end be found true, Seek, and ye shall find.

Verse. 3. The watchmen that go about the city found me, to whom I said, Saw ye
him whom my soul loves?
In this verse is set down the Church's further progress yet, and constancy in
seeking her well-beloved, and using all means to find him; and therefore going
forth (as has been said) into the streets of the City, she meets with the
watchmen, who usually in a City, and in the night time, pass to and fro, to
see if there be any stirring, whereby hurt may arise to the City in common, or
to any inhabitants therein. And of these watchmen she asks, If they saw him
whom her soul loved.

First then we are to consider, Who are these watchmen. 2 How they are said to
find her. And 3 how she asks them concerning her well-beloved.

First then, by these watchmen, the Pastors and Teachers of Christ's Church are
meant, as we see them called, Esa. 62. 6. Ezekiel. 3. 17. and 33. 6. and Heb. 13.
17. for these reasons.

1. To show thereby the necessity of their vocation; that as a City, which has
many enemies, intestine and open, has need of faithful watchmen, so has the
Church.

2. Their vigilance in attention, that as watchmen should be vigilant, and so
not only have clear eyes but watchful and not sleeping; so should Pastors
have the clear eye of knowledge, and the watchful eye of superinspection and
attendance, to know the estate of the flock.

3. Their prudence and discretion, that as a watchman should be able to discern
between friends and foes, and as, Judge. 9. 36. between shadows and
substances, so should wise Pastors between friends, to the truth, and
disguised woolves in sheeps clothing, and between fundamental errors, and
things of small consequence.

4. Fidelity in premonition, that as watchmen should be faithful in
forewarning, so should pastors be, as we see, Ezekiel. 33. 3. Esa. 58. 1. Act. 20.
26. and elsewhere.

5. As the watchman ought to take greatest heed to himself, because the enemy
strives first to surprise such, corrupt, or take them out of the way; even so
ought pastors, (as they are exhorted, Act. 20. 28.) to take heed specially to
themselves, that they be not surprised and corrupted by Satan, either with
error, or a scandalous life, which has ever been the bane of the Church, as we
see in Judas, Demas, and Diotrephes, with many arch-Hereticks, Arrius,
Eutiches, and others in the Primitive Church; and that Roman Antichrist now
adays, and as we have it foretold, Act. 20. 29, 30. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Revel. 9. 1.
and 12. 4. etc.

Secondly, It is said here, that the watchmen found her, but not that she
sought them, which signifies their diligence and fidelity, and accords with
their duty, Ezekiel. 34. 6. 16. to search and find out such as wander, or in a
spiritual perplexity, need resolution, binding up so what is broken, and
strengthening that which is sick, and like a bruised reed, or smoking flax.

Thirdly, her question to them, If they saw her well-beloved, because it was
fittest that they should know Christ, or see him, who were as the light of the
world to give knowledge of him, and show, or (like the Baptist) point him forth
to others; this being it which is said by Malachi, That the Priest's lips
should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.
7. for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. And therefore they are
compared to that star, that led the Wisemen to the place where Christ was.
Wherefore suitably she enquires at them, for Him whom her foul loves.

But unto this question, we see not here any answer made mention of, which
behoved to be; either because they made none at all, which is not like to be
the true cause; or else because upon their answer, at that present she found
not the good thereof, which is, that comfortable resolution and finding of him,
whom her soul loved, as she found within short space thereafter: The seed of
God's Word (like other seed) having its own time to brier and bring forth its
fruit, which the husbandman is bidden to wait for in patience. And God's Spirit
having his own time of efficacious working with the Word, and of the
comfortable application to the soul of that which it has been ruminating upon,
that so all comfort may be known to come from him only, who is the promised
Comforter, in and by the means of the Word, and all glory may be given to him
therefore.

Observations.
1. By the Church's constant inquiry, and indefatigable pains, notwithstanding
all discouragements of seeking, and not finding, as before, we see a most
worthy and imitable example to follow, of constant cleaving to Christ, as Job
firmly resolved, and as Ruth did to Naomi; and that we should never desist to
seek, till we find; to ask, till we get; and to knock, till it be opened unto
us.

2. In respect that Pastors are called watchmen, and especially, as Ezekiel. 34.
10. at whose hands the Lord will require the blood of such as perish through
their default: 1 They ought to consider the weightinesse of their charge, and
beg earnestly strength and abilities from God, to discharge the same. And 2
People, for their encouragement, should obey that exhortation of the Apostle,
Heb. 13. 17.

Verse. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loved; I held him, and would not let him go, until I brought him into my
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.
The Church getting no resolution that can satisfy her soul, she yet continues
seeking, and by constant seeking (as Joshua and Caleb followed the Lord) when
means fail, she finds him to her comfort; for neither can the most comfortable
speeches of brethren, who can tell, with David, what the Lord has done for
their souls; nor the resolution of Pastors, raise up a cast-down soul, cure a
wounded spirit, and comfort an afflicted conscience, till Christ himself come,
and show himself to the soul; as there was no cure by the waters of Bethesda,
till the Angel came down, and moved the same; nor no calm of the storm, till
Christ awaked, and spoke to the sea, Matthew. 8.

Next, when she has found him, as Jacob did the Angel that wrestled with him,
she held him, and would not let him go; and so she practices that Precept of
Solomon, Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go, but keep her sure; for
she is thy life, Prove. 4. 13. Which holding of him whom her soul loves, is by
the hand of Faith, gripping fast to the promises of his Word, and to him in
them. Neither is this rudeness (as it would seem) in her, that she should lay
hold on so glorious a King, and not let him go: 1 In respect of that mystical
and matrimonial union between them: And 2 in respect, that such sort of dealing
is most acceptable to Christ, who delights in such a holy violence, whereby the
godly take the heavens by force. And as we see in Jacob's example, which has
such power with God, and in the end never wants the blessing: Wherein the
mavelous kindness of the Lord is seen, that he yields himself (as it were)
to be so held and detained by us; yea, who furnishes' to us both the hand and
strength, whereby he is held, see Col. 2. 18. Neither thinks he it any
rudeness or unmannerlinesse in us, so to do; although Papists and enemies to
the truth would suggest, that it is too much sauciness for sinful men, to
come directly to Christ, and lay hold on him; and not rather in a more humble
manner, to seek unto some Saint or Angel, to intercede for them. But his true
Church here does not so, but seeks only to him, and by a holy confidence
lays hold on him alone, who cries out to all, Come to me all ye that are
weary and laden, and I will refresh you.

Neither is she content only to lay hold on him, and not to let him go, but
she brought him to her Mother's house, and into the chamber of her that
conceived her, that there He might abide and dwell with her; by which house or
chamber, is meant the heart, as it is said, Ephesians. 3. 17. That Christ dwells
in the heart by faith; and, as the Apostle declares, Romans 8. 9. by his Spirit,
which if a man have not dwelling in him, he is none of his. Which is called the
house of her Mother, or chamber of her that conceived her; because in the
heart, the seed of the Word is received, as in the womb of the Mother; and
faith thereby is begotten, as it were, and the new birth, or inner man, is
conceived. The marks of which finding, and bringing home of Christ to the soul
or heart, are these: 1 There is light or illumination, which must be, 1 a
humbling light; 2 a warming light; 3 a changing or renewing light, making the
heart a new heart, new words, new actions. 2 There is a life, known by the
motions thereof, and care of its self preservation, etc. and with it, a death
of and to sin. 3 There is peace joined with righteousness, and care not to
return again unto folly. 4 There is joy, such as Psalm. 51. 12. and 4. 6, or
like that of Simeon's. And 5 There is liberty from sin's slavery, and
spiritual bondage, as Esaias shows, That they may be trees of righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, and that they may be glorified, Esa. 61. 1, 3.

Observations.
1. This example, that the Church found her well-beloved at last, serves both
for comfort and encouragement to all those, who with a hearty affection,
diligently and constantly seek after Christ; for howsoever he come not so soon
as they would, yet let them not faint nor give over, but be assured, at last he
shall come to their comfort, and to the joy of their hearts they shall
assuredly find him.

2. She found him, when she was past the Watchmen, and all means had failed
her; which teaches us, When we have assayed all lawful means, and yet find no
comfort nor delivery by them, yet not to despair, but still rely upon the Lord,
who in the mount or height of the soul's trial or trouble, will be seen, as he
was to Abraham, to Israel at the Red Sea, in Babylon, as that vision, Ezekiel. 37.
shows, and to the King of Israel, 2 King. 7. to Daniel, the three Children,
Jonas, his Disciples in the storm, and others: Man's extremity, when all hopes
are failed, as in Lazarus's raising, being his opportunity.

3. We see here the power and praise of a true and lively faith, that it not
only lays hold on Christ, but also keeps and retains him fast, and will
not let him go; this being the victory, (as St. John says) not only whereby
we overcome the world, 1 John 5. but also whereby we overcome and prevail with
God, and by the very touch thereof can draw virtue out of him: Which excellency
of faith, if men did thoroughly weigh and consider, they would not be so cold in
the means thereof, nor so careless in seeking after the same; while as without
weariness they hunt after vanities, and vexation of spirit, and with Esau do
forego the blessing.

4. This example of her^ holding him fast, having at last found him whom she
misled before, shows what soul it is, who will be most careful to keep Christ
by all means, and advert narrowly to the grouth or decay of grace, working out
its own salvation with fear and trembling; surely such a soul only, that has
been spiritually exercised under the sense of sin, and standing in need of
Christ, and comforts of his Spirit, for which they have thirsted (as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 63.) like parched ground; or as David did, for the
waters of the well of Bethlehem.

5. We see, that she is not contented only to lay hold on him, and not let him
go, but she will lead him home to the inner chamber of her heart, that there he
may dwell with her; knowing very well, that where he comes to dwell, as our
Savior said to Zacheus, salvation comes to that house; and as Obededom's house
was blessed, because of the Ark's being there, so blessed is that soul wherein
Christ is; for, as Mary and Martha said, That if Christ had been there, their
brother Lazorus had not died, Joh. 11. 21. so where he is, there is no death
nor danger, but life and liberty, with all manner of blessings. And indeed this
is a great mystery; for although many profess the Name of Christ in word, yet
few know what this means, to bring Christ home to their heart; Christ indeed is
in their mouth, but their heart is far from him, and he from it, and therein is
only to be found, Pride, Malice, Covertousness, Uncleanness, Envy, and
Hypocrisy, etc. yea Satan dwells in their heart, and their speeches and
actions declare the same clearly, as the Apostle witnesses, 1 John 3. 7. etc.

6. If we have found Christ, and brought him home to the house of our heart,
let us remember these duties, 1. To keep a clean house to this our Heavenly
husband, who can abide no impurity, which is the least thing a woman can do to
her husband, 2. Let him be Master of his own House, and give him the chiese
place therein, 3. Entertain him as becomes upon his own, especially with a
dish of love: and, 4. Keep the marriage bed chaste, for he is a jealous God; and
admit not, nor have any familiarity with his known enemies.

Verse. 5. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and hindes
of the field, that ye stir not up nor awake my Love, till he please.
The church having regained Christ, by this charge (whereof we have already
spoken, c. 2. v. 7.) she shows her constant purpose of heart to retain and
intertain him hereafter more carefully.

Verse. 6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness, like pillars of
smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchants?
In these words is shown the effect of the Churches finding Christ, laying hold
of him and harboring him in her heart, to wit, he comes down to her on earth,
and takes up his dwelling in her heart, that he may perfume her with his sweet
graces, and make her ascend in her affection delight and desire, from the
world, the love, corruption, and fashion thereof, to heaven and heavenly
things, as we are willed, Coloss. 3. 1.

The words, are words of an Interrogation; uttered, as some think, by the
bridgroom, not being ignorant who she was, but in way of admiration to draw us
to the due consideration of the rareness and excellency of the thing seen.
Others take it to be the speech of strangers as yet, desiring to be instructed,
and admiring the glory of the Church, who is said here to come up, out of the
wilderness, like pillars of smoke perfumed with Myrrh and frankincense, etc.
Where we have to consider.

1. What is meant by the wilderness, 2. What is, her coming up out of the same,
3. Why she is said to come up like pillars of smoke, 4. What her perfuming is
with Mirrh and frankincense with all powders of the merchants.

First then, The wilderness out of which she ascends is the world, the
corruption wherein we are all by nature, the love, delight and desires thereof;
compared to a wilderness, 1. As in a wilderness there is nothing but wastness
and barrenness, so in the world and man's estate by nature there is nothing but
wastness and barrenness of all grace and goodness, in all the faculties of the
soul, members of the body, and whole course of life, 2. As in a wilderness
there are many briars and thorns, and many savage beasts; so in the world, and
man's estate by nature, there are many vices, the cursed brood of original
corruption, and a Savage disposition whereby many in men's shape are but very
beasts of diverse kinds, as Tigers, Foxes, Dogs, and Swine, etc. With which sort
the Apostle tells that he fought at Ephesus. 3. A wilderness is commonly dry,
which is one cause of the barrenness thereof, for which cause the Psalmist
says of the Lords goodness, that He turns the wilderness into a standing
water, and dry ground into water-springs, Psalm. 107. 35. as he also gave water
in the wilderness to his people out of the rock: even so in the world, and our
estate by nature, there is nothing in the heart but dryness and want of all
moisture of grace, which makes it to be so hard, and barren in all goodness,
till the Lord break the hard heart, and moisten with the water of grace the dry
and barren soul, 4. In a wilderness there is no Tilling, Sowing, Planting or
dressing at all, and therefore no good fruit, but either (as has been said)
barrenness or Briers; even so in the world, and man's heart by nature, there is
no fitness of ground for the seed of Gods word, nor planting of the saving
graces of the Holy Ghost, till we be made as the Apostle speaks the Lords
husbandry, 1 Cor. 3. and such a change be wrought, as we have, Psalm. 107. 35.
37. from barrenness to be fruitful to the Lord, while as the whole world
beside, out of which we ascend here with the Church, does remain as a wast,
barren, and until'd wilderness.

Secondly, by her coming up out of the wilderness, is not meant any corporal
or local mutation; for thus, neither does Christ come down to her, nor does
she ascend to him: but a spiritual ascension in affection and holy devotion,
by faith and Sanctification, not conforming her self (as the Apostle speaks)
to the world, but being transformed by the renewing of her mind, that she may
prove what is that good, acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2. In
respect of which going up out of the wilderness, (which is opposite to going
down, as we have Exodus 13. 18. and Genesis 42. 2.) Solomon says that the way of
life is above to the wi^e, that he may depart from Hell beneath, Pro. 15. 24.
and indeed this is no small work, seeing that the whole bensell of our hearts
naturally bend down-wards to this world and earthly things, and it is the
mighty power of Christ's grace when he comes, that makes this ascension.

Thirdly, she is said to come up out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
to show that her journey, and mounting up to Heaven (as has been said) being
moved by the fire of Gods spirit, is with a straight foot or course of
Sanctification, and with a steady and constant resolution, (like David's)
signified here by pillars, Psalm. 119. 57. and thus as a spiritual sacrifice
the godly offer up themselves, (as they are exhorted; Romans 12. 1.) and
straightly ascend to God, like the sacrifice of Abel, on Christ Jesus as the
alter, by the fire of the spirit, and resolving the earthly part of their
natural corruption piece by piece into ashes.

Fourthly, she is said to be perfumed with Myrrh and frankincense, and other
pouders of the Merchant, to show that thus the Church is made a sweet odor to
God in Christ, whose death is like Myrrh, bitter in taste, but sweet in smell,
and whose mediation is figured by frankincense, (whereof is mention, Exodus 30.
34.) as we see, Rev. 8. 3. so that through his death and mediation the Church
becomes a sweet odor to God, like Jacob in Esau's vesture. Also she may be
said to be perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense: Myrrh being a figure of
mortification of the flesh, whereunto we are exhorted, Col. 3. 5. It being used
in the imbalming the dead: And Frankincense, a figure of the grace of prayer
and holy devotion, as we see, Psalm. 140. 2. and Rev. 8. 3. With other pouders
of the Merchant, that is, with all other graces that Christ has bestowed on her
by the preaching of the Gospel, with all these she is said to be perfumed, and
so made sweet and fit to ascend up before God in the heavens: for otherwise in
and of our selves by nature we stink like hemlock, and are most loathsome and
abominable, fitter for that pit which burns with fire and brimstone then to
ascend up into such heavenly palaces, till he wash us, and anoint, and cloth us
as we see, Ezekiel. 16. and, as Esther was purified and perfumed with sweet odours
before she came to the king, Esther 2. 12 till we be purified by the blood of
Christ, and perfumed with the merit of his sufferings, and with the graces of
his spirit needful to salvation, before we present our selves for acceptance
to the King of kings.

Likewise she being in a barren wilderness where no such sweet and odoriferous
spices does grow, and being of her self also like the Church of Laodicea, poor
and wretched, Rev. 3. We see that she has not these things from her self, but
from her blessed bridegroom; whom when she found, she found also as in a full
storehouse all these things in him, and got all these things from him, so that
justly he might say to her, as he speaks by his Prophet, I decked thee with
ornaments, and thou wast beautiful with my comeliness which I had put upon
thee, Ezekiel. 16. 11. 14.

Observations.
1. We see that God can raise up a Church to himself even in the wilderness to
the admiration of observers, as Rev. 12. and although we be in the wilderness
of this world, yet with the Church we should not be of it, but with her we
should come out of it, as Abraham was bidden leave Vr of the Chalde's, Lot go
out of Sodom, and Gods people come out of Babylon, Separating our selves from
the manner of the conversation thereof, as we would be separate at the Last day
like sheep from the goats, from the damnation thereof.

2. As we should leave the wilderness of the world, so we should spiritually
ascend toward heaven like pillars of smoke, not only forsaking and abhorring
that which is evil, but (as the Apostle exhorts us) cleaving to that which is
good, Romans 12. 9. For in these two, true religion consists: as the people of
Israel quitting Egypt, behoved to mind Canaan; and those that disgust earthly
vanities, must be inamoured with heavenly graces, and seek those things that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of the Father. And as smoke is
caused by fire, so he who must enable and makes us do both these, is the spirit
of God, who is compared to fire, Matthew. 3. 11.

3. But the Church never mounts upward like pillars of smoke in a steady and
constant course, till after seeking she found her welbeloved, who first came
down to her, before she could ascend up to him; which shows us, that even so,
before we can come out of the world and nature, and ^mount up to heaven by a
Heavenly disposition, desires, and delight, we must be sensible of our
spiriuall wants, seek after Christ and find him: and therefore this is the
cause why so few spiritually thus ascend, but cleave and are glewed to the
world and remain in nature, because they were never yet sensible of their
spiritual wants, or what need they had of Christ, neither ever yet truly did
they seek after him, or comfortably find him, and who spiritually ascend not
here, shall never in their bodies ascend comfortably hereafter.

4. It is likewise said, that she not only ascends like pillars of smoke having
found Christ, but also that she is perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, etc.
Which shows unto us that till we be endued with the saving graces of God,
signified by these perfumes and powders of the Merchant, which makes us smell
sweetly in Gods sight, we will never be fit to ascend up, or present our selves
before his heavenly Majesty to expect acceptance, but will be as a stinking or
corrupt carcass, and our best exercises of devotion but abomination before him,
and therefore most earnestly should we seek the graces and gifts of Gods holy
spirit, that so we may be as pillars of smoke perfumed ascending like Abels
sacrifice, and finding acceptance.

5. The churches manner of ascending being thus persumed, is like pillars of
smoke; which shows unto us that our spiritual ascending, and heavenly
disposition must not be by fitts, but steady resolute and constant, without
wavering, notwithstanding of any wind of temptation, as was Joshuas resolution
to serve the Lord, Jobs practice of cleaving to him, and of all others that
have attained to the end of their faith which is the salvation of their souls.

Verse. 7. Behold his bed which is Solomon's, threescore valiant men are about
it, of the valiant of I srae. 8. They all hold swords, being export in war;
every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.
From this verse to the end of the Chapter, the church sets forth the glory of
Christ (whom after seeking at last she had found) by the glory of Solomon,
whereof our Savior speaks, Matthew. 6. 29. By particularizing it in these
three, Solomon's bed, his Chariot, and his Crown; his bed strongly guarded, his
Chariot richly furnished, and his Crown gloriously adorned.

First then our Savior is compared here to Solomon; and next his glory in
these three forenamed, unto the glory of Solomon. Himself then is compared to
Solomon for these respects.

1. Solomon was the son of David, and so was Christ according to the flesh,
and therefore so called in like manner.

2. Solomon (according to the signification of his name) was a peaceable
Prince; and so is Christ that Prince of peace, (as Isay calls him) who has
made peace between God and us, Isai. 9. 6. And is the author of all peace
external, internal and eternal.

3. Solomon was greatly beloved of God, 2 Samuel 12. 24. and so was Christ
proclaimed to be the welbeloved of the Father, in whom he was well pleased.

4. Solomon excelled, and exceeded all others in wisdom; riches and glory; and
so does Christ, who is the wisdom of the Father, the full treasure of grace,
and the king of glory, 1 King. 10. 23. Col. 2. 3.

5. The fame of all these in Solomon, spread a far off, and allured many to
come and hear his wisdom: And so has the fame of Christ's wisdom, grace and
glory, which he gives to the utmost ends of the earth, allured many to come to
him, and hear his wisdom revealed in the Ministry of his word.

6. Solomon took to wife an alien, the daughter of Pharaoh an Egyptian, and
made Her a glorious Queen unto himself, as we see, Psalm. 45. and so has Christ
taken those, who were aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, of a wicked
proprogeny, (as we see Ezekiel. 16.) even idolatrous Gentiles, and make them a
glorious Spouse unto himself in like manner.

7. He built that glorious Temple, which was called Solomon's Temple; and so
has Christ built his Church of lively stones, gloriously adorned by Grace here,
which is called likewise his Church, and mystical body; and which he shall
make more glorious to himself in the heavens hereafter.

Secondly, By Solomon's bed, where he lies in the nightime of this life, and
(as the Apostle says) where he dwells by faith, and there rests, as it were,
and reposes himself, is meant, the hearts of his Elect, Ephesians. 3. 17. as we
see, Cant. 1. 13. whose hearts and souls, (like Solomon's bed which was so
strongly guarded) 1 are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation,
as says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1. 5. and as the Psalmist shows, Psalm. 125. 2. 2
They are guarded by his holy Angels, called the Lord's heavenly Hosts, and
who are ministering spirits, sent out for the good of the Elect, Iuk. 2. 13. And
3 faithful Pastors, and able for the calling, furnished with the sword of the
spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. which is the Word of God; and skillful (as the Apostle
speaks) in the word of righteousness, Heb. 5. 13, 14. who by reason of use,
have their senses exercised, to discern good and evil, and to divide the Word
aright, and convince gainsayers. They also are a guard to Christ's Church, Rev.
2. 16. to guard their hearts from error and seduction, having the Word for
that end in readiness, Jer. 9. 3. and valiant for the truth, like the sword of
a valiant man girt to his thigh, Psalm. 45. 4. As also to protect them from
terror, or any invasion of Satan's temptations, which may affright their
render consciences, and disturb their peace. Or from other subtle snares and
practices of their enemies, which usually are accustomed, to be practiced and
put in execution, in the time of the night.

Observations.
1. We see here the honor that Christ bestows upon an Elect soul, that seeks
him; to wit, that, of a cage of unclean spirits by nature, he makes the same a
bed, as it were, or bedchamber for himself to dwell in.

2. The safety of that person, in whose soul Christ dwells; to wit, that
Solomon's bed, or any other King's, was never so surely guarded, nor may they
lie down with such assurance of safety; as we see, Psalm. 4. 8. and Prove. 3. 24,
26.

3. In Pastors that are like wise a guard to Christ's Church, and, as it was
sa^ of Elisha, who are like the horsemen and chariots of Israel, we see by
these words, what are required; to wit, 1 Fidelity, as in a King's Guard, to
whom he commits his person and life. 2 Vigilance, being like a Guard for
fear in the night. 3 Valor or courage, as Jeremy speaks, To be valiant for the
truth, Ier. 9. 4. 4 Expertnesse in war, for convincing the adversary, and
repelling the darts of the devil. 5 Furniture, with the fit weapon of the
sword of the Spirit. 6 Readiness to use and wield the same, like a sword, not
to seek, but at all occasions ready in the hand, or girt to the thigh. 7 Unity
and order, standing each one in their own station, and all about the bed. And 8
Not aliens themselves, but of the same true Israel of God, over whom they
watch, and therefore called so here, of the valiant men of Israel.

Verse. 9. King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon. 10. He
made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering of
it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of
Jerusalem.
Next to the Bed of repose, whereof we have spoken, follows the Spouse her
speech, how by the preaching of the Word, as in a Chariot, the true Solomon,
Christ Jesus, is conveyed to the soul, and carried whither he will, as the Ark
was carried by the Levites; the excellency of which benefit is compared, to all
most precious mettalls, and finest wood whatsoever.

In these words then we have, 1 A Chariot spoken of, and to be considered what
it is. 2 Who made it, to wit, Solomon. 3 To whom he made it, to himself. 4
Whereof, both generally, and in the particular parts, as pillars, bottom,
covering, and pavement. And 5 For whom with himself, to wit, The daughters of
Jerusalem.

First then, there is a Chariot spoken of, by which is meant, the preaching of
the Gospel, compared to a Chariot, because as a man is carried whither he will
in his Chariot; even so is Christ's Name, by the preaching of the Gospel; for
which cause, our Savior said to Ananias concerning Paul, that he should be a
chosen vessel unto ^m, to carry his Name before the Gentiles. And for this
cause also, the same is compared to that white Horse in the Revelation; whereon
our Savior is said to ride and be carried, Rev. 6. 2.

The word in the original is apirion, from parah, to flourish, to show, that
by the preaching of the Gospel, is the Church her flourishing and enlargement;
the Word being that spiritual seed, whereby many are begotten anew to Christ;
and the Church's only diadem or glory, as we see, Rev. 12. 1. unlike to that
of the Whore's, of external pomp, Rev. 17.

This Chariot therefore is a triumphall Chariot, wherein he that rides, and has
a Crown given him, as is said in the Revelation, goes forth conquering and to
conquer, Rev. 6. 2. and therefore says the Apostle, speaking of his preaching
the Gospel; Now thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph in
Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place, 2
Cor. 2. 14.

They who draw this Chariot, are the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who
therefore fitly may be compared to these goodly and richly furnished Horses in
Pharaoh's Chariots, Cant. 1. 9. or to that white Horse, whereon Christ is said
to ride, and to go forth upon, conquering. He likewise who drives this Chariot,
as Ezekiel shows, is the Spirit of God, who makes the Wheels thereof, and
them whom he rules, to go in their course, Ezekiel 1. 20. and 12. 1 Straight
forward, or, as the Apostle speaks, with a straight foot in the Gospel. 2 As
Esaias speaks, with alacrity, and doing God's work diligently, Esa. 60. 8.
fleeing as clouds and doves to the windows of the Temple. And 3 as Ezekiel, in
the forecited place, says, Without turning back, or taking their hand from the
plough, constantly, as we are taught, Phil. 3. 13. etc.

Secondly, He who made this Chariot, is said to be King Solomon, showing
hereby, who institutes the holy Ministry or Teachers of his Church, to wit,
King Jesus, the true Solomon, and Wisdom of the Father; and therefore, says
the Apostle, That it is he that gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 11. Even as it was he that called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and sitted
them for the work of the Tabernacle, Exodus 31. 2.

Thirdly, For whom made he this Chariot. The Text says, sibi, or to himself;
that is, for his own glory, in the riches of his grace, which he has made
manifest, by the preaching of the Gospel to Mankind. So that this should be
the aim of all faithful Pastors, as our Savior did, not to seek their own
glory, but the glory of him who sent them, in the procuring of the salvation of
his people, and referring all the glory of their successful pains to him
only, who gives the increase.

Fourthly, This Chariot is said to be made of the wood of Lebanon, meaning
thereby, the Cedars that grew there in Lebanon, which was a hill near Hermon,
and whereon such sort of Trees for the most part did grow: which Cedars, 1 were
a sort of tall Trees, signifying here thereby, that Ministers of God's Word
should mount upwards, not only in holy and heavenly meditation, but likewise
in affection, seeking those things that are above, and in a daily grouth of
grace, (whereunto they exhort others) and of a holy life; who are therefore
compared to Stars, that are in a heavenly station, and not found on the earth.
2 Cedars were strongly rooted, as we see, Hos. 14. 5. and so should Pastors be
specially, both in firmness of sound doctrine, and holy confidence, as builded
on a Rock. 3 The Cedars of Lebanon were such, as afforded a good smell, as we
see, Hos. 14. 6, 7. and so do faithful Pastors, both by sound and comfortable
doctrine, and by a holy life and example; and therefore says the Apostle, For
we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, 2 Cor 2. 15.
4 Cedar-wood was durable, and not subject (as other wood) to rottenness and
corruption; and so are faithful Pastors, and should be, neither corrupt in
doctrine, nor in life and conversation.

Next, more particularly, it is said, that the pillars thereof were of silver;
by which pillars, the chief Pastors in God's Church are understood, such as
were the Apostles, and others of eminent note, as we see Peter, James, and John
called, Gal. 2. 9. so called, both in respect of their own stability, as also
of their bearing up by the word of Truth, the Church and house of God wherein
they are placed.

These pillars also are said to be of silver, which is a costly and precious
shining metal; showing thereby, how precious faithful Pastors are in God's
sight; and as they are profitable like pillars, how precious also such should
be, in the eyes of Gods people, before whom they shine both in life and
doctrine; and especially, of what price and estimation the Word, which they
preach, should be unto them, as we see David professes, and as his son Solomon
declares, saying, The tongue of the righteous is as choice silver, Psalm. 119.
72.

The second part, whereof he speaks in particular, is the foundation or bottom,
which he says is of gold; and by which bottom, the foundation of the Apostles
their doctrine is meant, as we see, Rev. 21. 14. and Ephesians. 2. 20. said to be
of gold, the most precious and durable metal of any, to show the most precious
worth of the Word of God, registered in Scripture: and the perpetual indurance
of the same, against which, neither the rust of corruption, time, which wears
all things, nor the malice of the devil, and the gates of hell, shall ever
prevail.

The covering of which Chariot is said to be of purple, which is nothing else
but Christ's bloodshed, death, and passion, and the virtue and merit thereof
preached, which covers and cleanses our souls, and saves them from the wrath of
God, and eternal destruction, as the blood of the Paschall Lamb; an aspersion
thereof upon the Israelites doorcheeks, and lintells, saved them from the
destroying Angel. And therefore this being the clefts of the Rock which is
spoken of, Cant. 2. 14. whereunto, as a cover or shelter, the simple dove has
her recourse in storm, or when she is pursued by her cruel enemy.

The midst of which golden foundation, wherewith the same is paved and
overlaid, is Love, even the Love of the Elect to him, who has so loved them,
manifested in the doctrine of his Word, whereon they rely, and build their
faith and confidence.

Last of all, it is said, That as this Chariot is made to him self, or for his
glory, so likewise it is for the daughters of Jerusalem, or the good of his
Church, and salvation of his Elect; his glory being first, as it ought to be
the first and main end at which we should aim; and his Church's good being
next, and the salvation of souls, which we ought all to work out with fear and
with trembling.

Observations.
1. Seeing Christ comes to any person or place ordinarily, by the preaching of
his Word, as in his triumphall Chariot; then happy is that people, where his
Gospel is purely and plentifully preached; as on the contrary, unhappy is
their condition, when (as he threatens Ephesus, Rev. 2.) he removes his golden
candlestick from them, and as in Hosea he says, Woe be to them, when he
departs from them, Hos. 9.

2. The end why the Lord has instituted, or does in any place settle the
Ministry of his Word, is, His own glory, and his Church's good; therefore these
two should be the only ends, at which all faithful Pastors, in the discharge
of their charge, should mainly aim at, and have before their eyes.

3. This Chariot here spoken of, is made of the finest wood, and most precious
mettalls, which should therefore teach Pastors, to be ashamed, to be as common
or ordinary men in their conversations; and much more to be like the basest and
worst sort, earthly minded, unstable, scandalous, and corrupt; and not like
pillars of silver, but rather, of whom it may be said, as Isai. 1. 22. is said
to Jerusalem, Thy silver is become dross, and thy wine is mixed with water.

Verse. 11. Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the
Crown wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousalls, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart.
This is the speech of the Church to all her daughters, wherein she invites
them to come forth, and behold Christ, the true Solomon, in his glory. In which
speech we have; 1 Whom she invites. And 2 Whereunto she invites them; 1 to go
forth; 2 to behold King Solomon with his Crown; 3 is set down who crowned him,
to wit, his Mother; and 4 when, in the day of his espousalls, and of the
gladness of his heart. And so in these words we have, the end wherefore the
Gospel was preached, and Christ carried in his Chariot to the ends of the
earth; to wit, that all the faithful every where, who are effectually called,
may behold him as a crowned and victorious King, ruling in his Church by the
Scepter of his Word, and submission of his people, wherein he most rejoices.

First then, Those whom the Church invites to this contemplation, are called
the daughters of Sion, who are the same, who before were called the daughters
of Jerusalem, and by whom are meant all faithful believers, and true
Christians, either persons, or particular Churches; for this Sion was a mount
in Jerusalem, and as that was called the holy City, Isai. 52, 1. so Sion was
called, the Lord's holy Mountain, because of his Temple there, Joel 3. 17. and
did prefigure the Christian Church under the Gospel, as we see, Heb. 12. 22.
or as the Apostle there speaks, The general assembly, and Church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven. These, I say, are the persons who are
called forth, by the preaching of the Gospel, to behold Christ, thus seated in
the soul, as verse. 7, 8. and carried as in a Chariot, by the ministry of his
Word, to the outermost parts of the earth, as Psalm. 2. 8. as a Conqueror and a
King, crowned with glory and honor in his Church.

2. That whereunto she invites these, is, 1 To go forth; implying, that as long
as they remained within doors, they could not behold the glory of this King,
till they came forth; which going forth, is out of themselves, and their former
estate, not seeking Christ in their own reason, and carnal imaginations, or
having their affections and desires set on the world and earthly things; but
renouncing and denying themselves, and quitting whatsoever thing may be an
impediment; they must strive, with the Apostle, for a greater progress and
degree of perfection, in the true and saving knowledge of Christ, unto their
own salvation; by doing whereof, and with the eye of faith, in daily
meditation, beholding the glory of Christ, especially wherein he is now seated,
and wherein his Church shall reign with him; they shall easily despise all the
glory and pleasures of this world, as very dross and dung.

As Abraham therefore left his father's house, Israel Egypt, Moses the
treasures of Egypt, and the Disciples their Boats and Nets to follow Christ; so
must all those who would be saved, or see Christ savingly, leave their former
conversation, and whatsoever is dear unto them, (if it be an impediment to come
to Christ) though it were father or mother, wife or children, and as Lot came
out of S^dom, Moses put off his shoes going to see the burning bush, Exodus 3.
5. And as the Lord says to his people concerning Babel, Rev. 18. 4. Go out of
her my people, so they must go out of nature and deny themselves, the wantons
abandoning and forsaking their carnal pleasures with Mary Magdalen, the
covetous his worldly profit, as Matthew did his receipt of custom, the
extortioner his unjust gain with godly Zaccheus, the drunkard his excess, and
the proud his ambition, etc. And each one must go forth out of that which may
hinder him from a saving and sanctified sight and sense of Christ and his
gracious government in his Church, and in their own hearts here, or of the
comfortable sight of him crowned in glory hereafter.

2. That whereunto they are invited, and is the end of their going forth, is to
behold Christ, the true Solomon (and greater then he) as a king crowned, in
glory, power and Majesty, ruling in his Church, and in the hearts of all his
elect. A sight indeed needing a sharp-sighted eye to behold, and which is only
the eye of faith, whereby the wise men that came from the east saw him a king,
though a new born infant, swadled in clouts, and lying in a crib; and the thief
on the cross in like manner, though crowned with thorns, and hanging on a
tree: by this eye likewise, the patriarks saw him in the Promises before the
law^; the faithful in the sacrifices, figures, and Prophecies under the law;
and all true believing Christians in his word, Sacraments; and gracious
presence in his Church and their own hearts, under the Gosspell. And therefore
because the blind naturalist or worldling sees not these things, the daughters
of Sion who have received the eye salve of the spirit to discern spiritual
things and are like Ezekiels wheels, full of eyes, Ezekiel. 1. 18. They are called
upon only to behold this spiritual sight, and to these only the promise is
made, for, Blessed are the pure in heart (says our savior) for they shall see
God.

3. The daughters of Sion are called forth to behold Christ; the true Solomon,
as a king crowned with the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him: where we
have first to consider who is meant here by his Mother; and, 2. What is this
crown, and how he is crowned so by her.

First then we must understand that Christ has a natural Mother, to wit, the
Virgin Mary, who was his mother according to the flesh, as also he has a
mystical mother, which is his Church, who in a diverse respect is his sister,
as he calls her, Cant. 5. 2. His spouse, and his Mother here, 1. In estimation
and affection, because he so esteems and loves his Church and those who do the
will of his Father, as his very Mother; as he shows and calls such, Matthew.
12. 50. And, 2. Because by the Doctrine of faith the pastors of his Church, as
by an Immortal seed, they conceive and bring forth Christ in a manner in the
hearts of his elect, Gal. 4. 19. As the Apostle testifies saying, My little
Children of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you: for
which cause also the Church who is described by that woman in the Revelation
who was great with child is said, traveling in birth, to have brought forth a
man child, who was to rule all nations with a Rod of iron, who was caught up to
God and to his throne, which is competent only to Christ.

This mother then is said to set a crown on Christ's head, which is a sign of
dominion and victory, as we see, Rev. 19. 11. When her true and faithful
members acknowledge his sole and only Soveragnity over them, and submitts
themselves to be ruled and governed by him alone, and no other but their king
and Lord Jesus to lord over them, or have place in their hearts, whereas on the
contrary, those who give place to Satan, sin, or their own corruption, their
servants and subjects they are whom they obey, these take the crown (as it
were) from off Christ's head, and say he shall not reign over us, Psalm. 2. and
puts it upon Satan's head, and puts, only in Christ's hand by way of derision
(as it were) with the Roman soldiers, an empty reed for a scepter, and crown
him with a crown of thorns, and while they say in word, Let thy kingdom come,
they show in deed that they desire that it depart from them: and therefore they
shall hear a sentence of a dreadful departure from him, when they who crown
him here, as the true members and subjects of his kingdom of grace, shall be
crowned hereafter with the crown of glory.

And indeed great reason is it that his Church, and all godly souls should
thus crown Christ Jesus as their king and only Lord here: for, 1. In our
creation, as is shown, Heb. 2. 6 He crowned man (whom he made little inferior
to Angels) with glory and honor and set him over the works of his hands, 2. In
the work of our Redemption, he crowned our nature by assumption thereof to his
divine nature, advancing the same highly above angels, Ecce Deus si^lis nobis.
in that Hypostaticall Union on earth, and now much more in glory and at the
right hand of the Father in the heavens, 3. As he shows by his Prophet and
Psalmist Psalm. 103. 4. in the work of justification and remission of sin and
delivery from destruction, he crowns us with loving kindness and tender
mercies, 4. In the work of Sanctification, as he speaks by Ezekiel of his
church, Ezekiel. 16. 12. He put a beautiful crown upon her head, even that beauty
of holiness, whereof he speaks, Psalm. 110. 3. 5 For our use and comfort of this
natural life on earth, as David says, he crowns the year with his goodness,
and his paths drop fatness, Psalm. 65. 11. And 6 In the work of glorification,
he has laid up, for all his own elect, a crown of Righteousness, glory, and
life everlasting, 2 Timothy 4. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 4. Rev, 2. 10.

4. The time when he is said to be crowned, is the day of his espousal's, and
of the gladness of his heart, so that when a faithful soul acknowledges
Christ's sole and supreme soveraignity over the same, and wholly submits it
self to his ruleing and government, then and thereby is it espoused, as a chaste
Virgin unto Christ Jesus, as the Apostle shows, 2 Cor. 11. 2. And so at one
time as it were it crowns Christ, and is espoused to him: and as this is the
joy of the Angels, so is it the joy and gladness of his heart, who is Lord both
of men and Angels, proceeding from that love that he has to man's salvation, and
whom nothing at any time did so contristate when he was on earth, as the
stubborness of wicked sinners who would not be reclaimed, as he showed when he
wept over Jerusalem, and so grievously complained.

Observations.
1. We see that the daughters of Sion are called upon, to go forth to behold
king* Solomon and his glory. The cause then that so few see Christ the true
Solomon in his spiritual glory, beauty and Majesty, and be inamoured with him,
to seek after him and delight in him, is this, they have never learned to go
forth out of themselves, renouncing their own righteousness, will, and
corruption.

2. The eye whereby Christ in his spiritual glory is only seen, seeing it is
faith, and if we look upon him in his ordinances with a carnal eye, we will,
as Herod did, set him at naught. Therefore if we would see him either here to
our comfort, or hereafter in glory, let us seek after faith, and the eye salve
of the spirit, by servent prayer and frequent use of the means whereby it is
obtained.

3. Seeing Christ is a king, and our king ruling and protecting us, let us do
the duties of loyal and obedient subjects to him, and seeing we should crown
him here by acknowledging his soveragnity over us, and submitting our selves to
his rule and government, let us not defraud him of his crown-right here, as we
would not justly be defrauded of that crown of glory which he has at the
Fathers right hand, Heb. ^9. and is to give to all those who love and obey him
hereafter.

4. Seeing faith and obedience make such a spiritual sibness to Christ, that
his church and her true members are counted his Mother, and Spouse; therefore
hereby being so highly honored, let us all strive to have faith in a good
conscience; as Manna was laid up in a golden pot, that so we may attain to this
high advancement, and all these comforts that results therefrom.

5. As the submission of the soul, and espousals by faith and obedience of the
same to him is the gladness of his heart, so the finding of this disposition in
our selves, or the seeing thereof in others, let it be in like manner the
gladness and rejoysing of our heart, and the contrary the just matter of
greatest contristating the same.

Finis terti^ Capitis.
Soli Deo gloria.
CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. Behold thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair, thou have
doves eyes, within thy locks thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear
from mount Gilead.
IN this whole Chapter for the most part is the speech of the bridgroom set
down commending his bride, 1. Generally, 2. More particularly, whose praise or
expressing of her glory is not from outward Pomp and busking like that Whore of
Babylon spoken of, in the Revelation, Rev. 17. But from the comely feature of
the special parts of her body, and as Peter says, from the hidden man of the
heart in that which is not corruptible, and in the sight of God is of great
price, 1 Pet. 3. 3.

First then he begins her praise from her beauty in general, whereof we have
already spoken, c. 1. 15.

Next, from the comely feature of the parts of her body in particular* to show
thereby that her beauty and comeliness which he has put upon her, as he speaks
by his Propher Eze. kiel, Ezekiel. 16. 14. is a complete and perfect beauty,
defective in no part: for if in any person one part be deformed, though the
other parts be comely, in such there is no perfect beauty; but in Gods church
which is his mystical body there is no such thing, who is not therefore like
Nebuchadnezars Image, whose head though it was of gold, and the body of silver,
yet the feet were but Iron and clay, but she is glorious in all her parts and
members, and therefore being washed and sanctified by him, justly does he ^ay,
verse. 7. Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.

In this particular commendation, he begins at her eyes, saying, that within
her locks she had doves eyes, whereby what was signified, we showed before, c.
1. 15. Which are here said to be within her locks, used by virgins for decence
and alluring, as we see, Revel. 9. 8. Hereby to signify her care to procure
his love and delight in her.

Next he commends her from her hair, which he says is like a slock of goats,
that appear from mount Gilead, whereby are understood her holy thoughts
rightly ordered, as virgins hair uses to be, proceeding from a Sanctified
heart, as hairs do from the head, the chief part of the body, and rising
upward by heavenly desires and contemplation; and therefore compared (as is
said) to a flock of goats who delight to climb and seek to high and steep
places, and therefore are said to appear from mount Gilead, a goodly and high
mountain of pasture, whereof we read, Numb. 32. 1. Others understand by her
hair the multitude of common Christians, by external profession holding to
the head, yet some whereof often fall off, and others are cut off by
excommunication.

Verse. 2. Thy teeth are like a stock of sheep that are eaven shorn, which
came up from the washing, whereof every one bears twinne, and none is barren
among them, 3. Thy lips are like athread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely;
thy temples are like a piece of Pomegranate, within thy locks, 4. Thy neck is
like the tower of David, builded for an armory, etc.
Thirdly, he commends her from her teeth, the comeliness and beauty whereof in
the natural body consists in these two things, to wit, that they be eaven and
white, and therefore he compares them to a flock of sheep, that are eaven
shorn, and are white; being newly come up from the washing, by which are
understood in the mystical body of Christ's church, her faithful and godly
pastors, who 1 as the teeth cut and prepare the food for the nourishment of the
body, so do they devide the word aright, and prepare food for the nourishment
of the soul, as also 2. as these are like an eaven shorn flock, so this
signifies how pastors should agree in one harmony of truth and unity, 3. And
as the teeth are white in color, so should pastors be holy and spotless in
conversation: and lastly, as the churches teeth are like a flock of sheep
whereof every one bears twins, and there is none barren amongst them; so
should pastors labor to be fruitful by the immortal seed of the word to
beget and bring forth many children to God.

Fourthly, he commends her from her lips, which are for a twofold use, 1. For
the expression of love by kissing, as we see, C^nt. 1. 2. and, 2. For help of
articulate and comely speakking, (and therefore he subjoynes, that her speech
is comely.) And therefore her lips (here compared to a thread of scarlet) does
signify, 1 Her servent love to Christ, and that submission and obedience that
flows therefrom, spoken of, by kissing the Son, Psalm. 2. 12. as also her holy
and comely speech, here mentioned, both in prayer and praising God, and
edifying likewise her neighbors; showing thereby, (as it is said of the
virtuous woman) that the law of Grace is in her lips, and that the same
proceeds from a heart purged by faith, in Christ's blood, which makes it to be,
as if it were of a red or scarlet die. 3 Her lips are the delivery of the
wholesome doctrine of her teachers, precious like scarlet, and teaching Christ
crucified, by whose blood we are saved, and drawn like a wel-spun thread out of
holy Scripture.

Fifthly, He commends her from her temples or cheeks, the seat of
shamefastness or blushing, which he compares to a piece of pomgranat, that is
reddish, betokening thereby her chaste modesty, and blushing, if she do any
thing amiss, or be rebuked for the same; and therefore is not impudent (as
many are) in sinning, and of a whoorish forehead, that cannot be ashamed; nor
yet impatient or careless for rebuke. And this her shamefastness and modesty
are these rows of Jewels, wherewith her cheeks are made comely, as is said
before, cap. 1. 10.

Sixthly, He commends her from her neck, which is straight and comely, and is
like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury; signifying thereby, that being
united to her head by faith, as the neck joins the head with the rest of the
body, her carriage accordingly is upright and holy, not stooping, neither to
sin's slavery, against which she is armed with the whole armor of God, spoken
of, Ephesians. 6. nor yet basely bowing down to the love of earth and earthly
things, but as she is exhorted, Col. 3. 1. being risen with Christ, she seeks
those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of his Father.

Seventhly, He commends her from her two breasts, being both full and white,
and therefore compared to two young Roes, that are twins, and feed amongst the
Lillies; which breasts in women, are 1 for ornament and delight, as we see,
Prove. 5. 19. as also, 2 for use and nourishing of Insants, as we see, Psalm. 22.
9. Even so these two breasts of the Church, (which are the sound doctrine of the
Old and New Testaments) ments) are the only true and greatest ornament, that
any Church has, which makes her truly glorious; and therefore Rev. 12. 1. the
Church is said to have her crown of twelve Stars, which is the doctrine of the
twelve Apostles. As also, it is out of these two breasts only, that she gives
unto her children, as Peter says, the sincere milk of the Word, whereby they
do grow, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and out of them (as Isaiah speaks) God's children are
exhorted to suck only this milk, and to satisfy themselves with the breasts
of her consolation, Isai. 66. 11. all other milk of human invention and error,
being but poysonable and deadly; and if an Angel from heaven should, besides
these two breasts, offer or obt^ude any other milk, or preach any other
doctrine, as the Apostle says, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. These two
breasts are also said to be like two young Roes, because they are full of
vigorous sap and sweet nourishment, as young Roes are, that feed in a pleasant
pasture; and are like twins, by reason of their mutual agreement, in one and
the same heavenly truth of doctrine. And thus from seven particular parts, (the
number of seven being the number of perfection, as we see, Rev. 5. 6.) having
commended her, he thereby shows her beauty and comeliness to be complete and
perfect.

Observations.
1. Seeing grace makes the Church to be so fair and beautiful, and so lovely
in Christ's sight, that by prefixing the particle, [Behold] he admires, as it
were, the same, and calls others with him to behold and admire the same; as the
Queen of Sheba admired Solomon's glory and wisdom, when she saw and heard the
same; nothing therefore more then this should inflame our hearts, to seek after
grace and godliness.

2. First he commends her from her faith, which he calls her eyes, and which he
compares to doves eyes: Therefore we see the woeful estate of the soul, that
wants faith; to wit, that it is blind, and therefore no marvel that it be
mislead by Satan, and o^te^ stumble and fall, nor can discern things aright;
and therefore as the blind desired, that Christ would open their eyes, such
likewise should beseech Christ to open their eyes, with that eye salve of his
Spirit, and give them true faith, that they be not like blind Moles, grovelling
only in the earth, and going on to their endless destruction.

3. By the commendation of the Church's well ordered or dressed hair, her lips
and comely speech, her temples of bashful cheeks, and her straight and seemly
neck; we ought to learn the things signified hereby, that our thoughts arising
from purified hearts, should be holy and heavenly, ou^ words savoury and
edifying, our actions godly, joined with humble and bashful modesty, and our
whole carriage and conversation righteous and upright.

4. By the commendation likewise of her teeth and breasts, Pastors should learn
to be prudent and skillful, to divide the Word aright, holy in life, and
fruitful in begetting and bringing forth many to Christ; and to feed God's
children only with the breasts of the holy Scriptures, and the milk of sound
doctrine out of the Old and New Testament; and being the Church's breasts, they
should not be dry breasts.

Verse. 6. Until the day break, and the shadows fles away, I will get me to
the mountains of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense. 7. Thou art all fair,
my love, there is no spot in thee.
Some think these words to be the words of the Church of Christ, showing in
time of temptation or trouble, until comfort arise, whither she will go by
prayer, meditation, and confidence; to wit, to Christ her Bridegroom, who is to
her as a fair and firm mountain, full of all sweetest, odoriferous, and most
pleasant spices. Others expound these words, still to be the words of Christ,
who, Until the day break, and the shadows flee away; that is, till the day
of general Judgment, (as has been shown, cap. 2. 17.) as he has praised his
Church hitherto, so here he promises to be with her by his spiritual presence,
to the end of the world; and which he calls here a mountain, (as she is
oftimes in Scripture called, the Mountain of the Lord, and compared to Sion) in
respect of her holy calling, advanced above others of the world; and of her
heavenly disposition, rising in her desires and delights, above the earth and
earthly things; called also here Mountains of myrrh and frankincense, because
of the sweet and savoury prayers and praises, that she continually sends up to
the Lord in her members, with other such spiritual sacrifices, made acceptable
through Christ his mediation.

Which promise he concludes, with a repetition again of her praise in general,
of perfect beauty, which requires these three things; 1 Integrity of all the
parts, none wanting. 2 Due proportion one with another. 3 A good complexion and
constitution of all. Which praise he utters, to show his delight in her to be
so great, that he cannot sufficiently commend her. And further, the more to
confirm and comfort her against all her fears and infirmities, he tells her,
that there is no spot in her; from whence Paul seems to draw his alike speech,
Ephesians. 5. 27. not that she is this in her self, nor yet as she is here in this
life; but as she is by acceptance before God, and in Christ washed and
sanctified, and in respect of her future condition.

Observations.
1. In all troubles and temptations, we see the comfort that Christ's church
has, and all her true members; to wit, according to his promise, that he shall
be with them, even when, to their own sense, and judgment of others, he seems
to have forsaken them.

2. Here is another comfort also that the godly have, in the dark and longsome
night of trouble, that at last the break of day shall come, and all their
troubles, like shadows, shall flee away and depart.

3. But if we would be truly partakers of Christ's comfortable presence, at all
times with us, we must be like those Mountains whereof he speaks, by a heavenly
disposition, and a holy and firm confidence, smelling sweetly by grace in our
hearts, and by mortification, and the holy exercises of a godly conversation.

4. Seeing Christ's delight is so great in his Church, and her spiritual
beauty, that he cannot (as it were) sufficiently commend the same, repeating it
so often; how great should our mutual delight be in him, and his service and
obedience.

Verse. 8. Come with me from Lebanon, (my Spouse) with me from Lebanon: look
from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions dens,
from the mountains of the Leopards.
In these words, our Savior having cleansed and beautified his bride, he
invites her here to follow him, and to separate her from the society of the
wicked, and conformity with them, who are but as barren trees in a wild
forest, or father cruel and untamed beasts, who resort in hills or dens, as
Lions and Leopards, whereunto the wicked are compared to the Lion's for
cruelty, therefore says David, My soul is among Lions. Psalm. 57. 4. And again,
speaking of the wicked man (whom he so calls thrice altogether) he says, He
lies in wait secretly, as a Lion in his den to catch the poor, Psalm. 10. 9.
And again, Like a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young Lion,
lurking in secret places, Psalm. 17. 12. And therefore, when he prays to be
delivered from his wicked persecutors, he says, Save me from the Lion's mouth,
Psalm. 22. 21. And again, Save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver
me, Psalm. 7. 2. lest he ^ear my soul like a Lion, rending it in pieces while
there is none to deliver. In like manner, the wicked are compared to Leopards,
that haunt the mountains; 1 Because of their being full of spots, and all sorts
of indelible or incorrigible vices; therefore says the Prophet to the wicked,
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots* Jer. 13. 23. then
may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. 2 They are compared to
Leopards, both for craft and cruelty, who use craftily to couch and hide
themselves, that without being seen, they may observe and catch their prey; see
examples hereof, Exodus 1. 10. Matthew. 2. 7. therefore says the Lord by his
Prophet Hosea, Therefore I will be unto them as a Lion, and as a Leopard by the
way will I observe them, Hos. 13. 7. And again, the Prophet Jeremy speaking of
the enemies that he should bring against his people for their sins, and what
they should do unto them, says, That as a Leopard they should watch over their
Cities, Je^. 5. 6. 3 The wicked are compared to Leopards, because of their
swiftness to all wickedness, as we see, Habac. 1. 8. where it is said, That
the Caldeans horses that should come against Jerusalem, should be swifter than
the Leopards. And so in like manner it is said of the wicked, That as they have
a heart that devises wicked imaginations, so they have feet that be swift in
running to mischief, Prove. 6. 18.

Lebanon also, whereof mention is made here, sometimes is praised and taken in
good part, as Hos. 14. 6, 7. from the sweet smell of odoriferous spices,
flowers, herbs, and vines, that grew there; so also, in this same chapter,
verse. 11. 15. and 5. 15. etc. Sometimes it is taken in a worse part, as a place
where wicked enemies of God's people had their habitation, as Judge. 3. 3. to
wit, the Philistines, Canaanites, and Hivites, etc. in which sense it seems to
be taken here, when the Bridegroom calls his Bride to come with him from
Lebanon.

Amana, (otherwise called Abana) is also a mountain in Syria, whereof the
valley and river at the foot thereof took the name, as we see, 2 King. 5. 12.

Shenir likewise, which the Sidonians call Syrion, (as we have, Deuteronomy. 3. 9. and
Psalm. 29. 6.) and Hermon, were those mountains, which were of old possessed by
Og King of Bashan, and after by the Israelites. It is then from these places
that were inhabited by wicked men, and in respect thereof; which were like
mountains of Leopards, and dens of Lions, that the Bridegroom calls his Bride:
As he says to his people concerning Babel, Come out of her, my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18.
4.

Observations.
1. We see the duty of all such, who are washed from their spots, and made fair
and clean by Christ, not to continue any longer in sin, but to forsake the
same, and all wicked society, who like spotted Leopards, delight therein, and
to follow Christ with the Apostle, (1 Cor. 11. 1.) by the imitation of a holy
life, that he may be our pattern on earth, who is our patron in the heavens.
And when any Church leaves Christ, and he it, as Rome, we should leave it also,
and follow Christ, chiefly when it turns to a den of Lions and Leopards.

2. We see that sin changes men to beasts, as Dogs and Swine, Foxes and
Wolves, Lions and Leopards, and makes them of no better account with God, nor
the Godly.

3. We may perceive the happiness of the death of gods Saints, that frees them
from being any more amongst such, and places them in the blessed society of
God, his Saints and Angels for ever.

Verse. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished
my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
From this verse to the last, the bridgroom proceeds in the larger
commendation of his bride: and first, that her beauty is such that it has
ravished his heart, see, Pro. 6. 25. Which to show the truth and vehemence of
his affection toward her, he repeateth twice, and sho weth how the eye of her
faith that looks only to him, and the concatenation of his graces and
spiritual ornaments (like a chain) bestowed on her, makes her so amiable, and
has such a wonderful efficacy.

But if faith be one of her eyes (may some say) which is the other? I answer,
that in respect the church is brought in under the person of a woman, therefore
there are two eyes ascribed unto her, which two eyes are the eyes of faith, but
in respect that there are diverse degrees of faith, to wit, a weak faith, and a
stronger faith, therefore here he would comfort his Church showing the efficacy
even of a weak faith being true and sincere, that it is powerful to ravish
his heart, as the trembling touch of the woman diseased of the bloody issue
drew virtue out of Christ and got a blessing, as well as the strong hand of
Jacob who wrestled for the same, and the dimmest bleared eye that looked up
upon the serpent in the wilderness got cure of the fiery stingings as well as
the clearest. And of these two degrees of one and the same faith, as of the
stature and strength of one and the same person in infancy and riper age, does
the Apostle speak, saying that the Gospel is the power of God to salvation,
unto every one t^ believes, adding this reason, that the righteousness of God
is revealed in it, from faith to faith, not speaking, as if there were two
faiths, but one and the same, but a weaker increasing to a stronger.

Next to the solution of this doubt, and the better clearing of these words, we
have a new style which she receives, he calling her his sister, etc. Which is,
1. In respect of his incarnation, whereby God became like one of us, and he
took upon him our nature (as the Apostle shows) and was made like to us in all
things (sin only excepted) Heb. 2. 16. 17. That he might be a merciful and
faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. Of whose incarnation as Adam after his fall heard
with great comfort, and the rest of the patriarks, Genesis 3. 15. (mentioned, Heb.
11, 13.) so likewise Moses, (and the Prophets after him) Prophesied, saying, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto
me, Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you, Act. 3.
22. Matthew. 1. 23. Therefore shall his name be Emmanuel (says the Prophet,)
which being interpreted is, God with us; this union of our humane nature
Hypostatically with his divine nature into one person, being the basis or
foundation of that mystical union between him and his church here by grace,
and of that celestial union which we expect with him hereafter in glory.

2. She is called his sister, in respect of her adoption, Romans 8. 14* being
through Christ the child of that same heavenly Father, as Christ is himself,
though after a diverse manner, he being the son of God by nature and an
eternal ineffable generation, Gal. 4. 45. And she the child of God by grace,
and merciful adoption, and therefore a heir, and coheire of that same
inheritance of glory with her elder Brother whose sister she is, the Lord Jesus
Christ.

3. She is called his sister in respect of Sanctification, or the new birth,
Romans 8. 15. whereby as by her natural birth she was the child of Satan, whose
image she bore, so by her new birth she is the child of God, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. and
so a sister to the son of God, whose image she now bears, and therefore it
is said by the Apostle, for both he who sanctifies and those who are
sanctisied are all one, Heb. 2. 11. For which cause he is not ashamed to call
them brethren, as also so says our Savior, Matthew. 12. 50. Whosoever shall do
the will of my father which is in Heaven, the same is my brother, my Sister and
Mother.

But why is this redoubled, (thou have ravished my heart?) I answer, this is
used in Scripture, in prayers, as Matthew. 27. 46. to show thereby their
fervency, in Prophecies us, Genesis 41. 32. to show thereby the certainty; and in
simple narrrations as here, to show thereby the vehemence of affection, as is
before touched.

Observations.
1. We see the admirable efficacy of faith, that it ravishes Christ's heart,
than which no greater comfort can the soul have, and therefore it ought
diligently and earnestly be sought after, and the retribution which he craves
again of us is, as is said, Pro. 23. 26. My son give me thy heart, and let
the same be ravished by his excellency, and matchles love that he has carried to
us.

2. In respect that he says, that with one of her eyes she had ravished his
heart, that is, by her true, though a weak faith, not having yet made that
progress from faith to faith: this is a singular comfort to all such, who have
but a weak faith, provided they have the same in sincerity, or any other saving
grace, and use the means carefully that the same may grow.

3. Seeing it is the honor of Christ's church and every true member thereof to
be Christ's brother or sister, and consequently the child of God who is King of
kings, and heir of the kingdom of glory, what great encouragement is this to
Sanctification and doing of Gods will, and that we should labor to be like
him; who disdained not to be like to us. Also, if he be our brother, how should
we love him, and as Abraham said to Lot, there is nothing that should make a
strife, or the controversy whereof Hosea speaks between us. Hos. 4. 1.
Moreover being to us, both our brother and husband (^s Adam was to Eve) we may
be assured of his love, and all both brotherly and husbandly care and kindness,
which on our part with all sisterly and spouse-like duty we should requite.

4. This is likewise a great comfort unto us, that Christ is our brother: for
as Ruth said to Boaz, Ruth. 3. 9. spread the skirt of thy garment over me, for
thou art a near kinsman; so much more may the believing soul say to Christ,
spread the skirt of the garment of thy righteousness and mercy over me, for
thou art my near brother, and as to our comfort he declares that has done the
some unto us, Ezekiel* 16. 8. Also, this is a great comfort that we have a brother
such a favorit in heaven, as Joseph was in Egypt; and lastly, this should teach
all men, not to wrong good Christians who are Christ's brethren and sisters.

5. We see that he joins these two together, as the ravishers of his heart,
her eye, and the chain of her neck, (whereof we spoke before, Cant. 1. 10.) and
therefore we see where true faith is, it is never without the spiritual
ornaments of other saving graces, as we see Ezekiel. 16. 11. Which makes the kings
daughter glorious within, and to shine also without by a holy conversation.

6. If Christ's church be his spouse, we see here, 1. Her royal dignity, as
before her descent, 2. Her near conjunction, 3. Her great benefit, being
accepted with all her debt, whereof there is no suing thereafter from her, and
a communion of all his goods; and, 4. Her spouse-like duty, to love him, be
chaste, fear, obey, and in all things seek to please him.

Verse. 10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse (...) how much better is
thy love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices!
In this verse, 1. He praises her love, and prizes the same to be better then
wine and, 2. He compares the smell of her garment, to the sweet smell of
Lebanon.

The word in the original is in the plural number, Loves to show thereby the
plentifulness of the Love of Gods church and elect ones to him who so
plentifully and above all measure has so loved them, which plentiful
affection, and the fruits thereof (comprehended also under this word loves) he
declares is most pleasant and acceptable in his sight, as is said, Psalm. 133.
1. Of the unity of brethren, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity; good and pleasant there being joined together, as fair
and better than wine, in setting forth the churches love to Christ is joined
likewise here: and what is meant by wine, and how such a holy love as is spoken
of either here or there, is better than wine, I refer to that place, Cant. 1.
2.

Follows, (and the smell of thine ointments then all spices,) whereby is
employed that as Christ the head of the Church is anointed (as his name imports)
unto a threefold office, and with the oil of gladness above his fellows; so
likewise is his Church, of which unction John speaks, 1. Joh. 2. 20. and the
Psalmist, Psalm. 133. 2. and which unction is said here to give a smell, better
then all the sweetest spices whatsoever, which were either used (as we read)
for a holy use, and to make a holy unction, Exodus 30. 34. or for a civil and
more common use, as Esth. 2. 12. and were counted a fit present, or royal gift
for Kings, 2 Chronicles. 9. 9. and Matthew. 2. 11.

Observations.
1. If Christ so highly prize and praise our love to him, which is so due, and
so little profitable to him, as we see, Psalm. 16. 2. then how should we labor
to abound therein, and have our hearts inflamed therewith.

2. Before, Christ spoke of his Church's faith, verse. 9. and now he speaks of
her love, so that where the one is, there must the other be likewise, and where
love is, there must be obedience; according as he says, If ye love me, keep my
commandments; which serves to show now, how rare the love of Christ is.

3. With love here there is joined a sweet smell, as of precious ointments:
Even so, where the love of Christ is in the heart, there must be (as has been
said) the sweet smell of a sanctified life, whereby we become a sweet savor to
God in Christ, and afford to others a sweet smell of good example, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 11. 1. whereby, as our Savior shows, men seeing our
good works, are made to glorify God our heavenly Father; which (alas) few do,
but rather the contrary.

Verse. 11. Thy lips (O my Spouse) drop as an honeycomb, honey and milk are under
thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
Here in this verse, there are two things highly praised in the Bride of
Christ; 1 her speech; and 2 the smell of her garments: the former of which is
declared to be both sweet like honey, as also wholesome and nourishing like milk,
as is said, Prove. 12. 18. The tongue of the wise is health; and Jo^ 23. 12.
they are said to be more esteemed, than necessary food. These two, being the
two things wherewith the land of Canaan did abound, and which, as they did show
the goodness of that land, so these two, the dropping of her lips as honey
combs, and honey and milk under her tongue, shows the goodness of her heart,
from whence these proceed, for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks; and a good tree is known by the goodness of the fruit. The heart then
furnishes first to the tongue, and thence from the store of grace in the heart,
Eccles. 10. 12. there is a store of gracious words, which are called, honey and
milk under her tongue; which it again furnishes unto her lips, wherein (as is
said of the virtuous woman) the law of grace is; and they again, (like the
gainers with their talents) drop this honey on others; that as by Jonathan's
honeycomb, 1 Samuel 14. 27. they may get enlightening and edification; or, as the
Apostle speaks, her speech may be such, as may minister grace to the hearers,
Ephesians. 4. 29. Whose speech in like manner is compared, not to a lavish gushing
out, but to a dropping of a honeycomb; to show, as is said, Prove. 31. 26.
that, like the virtuous woman, she opens her mouth wi^h wisdom, speaking her
words in due season, and with discretion and moderation, and not as Solomon
speaks of a fool, Prove. 29. 11. saying, A fool utters all his mind, but a
wise man keeps it in till afterward, Eccles. 10. 14. And again, A fool is
full of words, but the tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright; whereas the
mouth of fools pours ou^ foolishness, Prove. 15. 2.

In the next words, he commends the sweet savor of her garments, to be like
the smell of Lebanon, Hos. 14. 6. whereby is not meant her bodily clothing,
for many of God's dearest Saints, like Lazarus, and the two Witnesses spoken of
in the Revelations have been but poorly clothed; yea, as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 11. 37. they have wandered about in sheeps skins, and goats skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy. But thereby
is understood her spiritual clothing, whereby the King's daughter is all
glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. And that woman in the Revelation is said to be
clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12. having, as the Apostle speaks, put on the Lord
Jesus, Romans 13. 14. This is also that garment spoken of by Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 16.
10. of broidered work, fine linen, and silk, that the Lord put upon his
Spouse, being thoroughly washed; and that white raiment, which the Lord Jesus
advises the Church of Laodicea, to get from him, that the shame of her
nakedness might not appear, Rev. 3. 18. and, as is said, Rev. 19. 8. which was
granted to the Lamb's Bride; to wit, That she should be arraied in fine linen,
clean and white, which is the righteousness of the Saints, imputed unto her in
justification, and inherent likewise in her by sanctification; the one being
like Esau's vesture, wherein Jacob got the blessing; and the other like
Joseph's party colored coat, which he got from his father; and whereof it is
said, Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white.

The savor of these garments is said to be as the smell of Lebanon, which was
a hill near to Hermon, where there did grow such sweet and aromatic trees,
herbs, and spices, that they gave such a smell, (as we see, Hos. 14. 5.) that
the passers-by were allured and delighted therewith. This smell therefore
Christians give, when by a holy life and conversation, they make their light so
shine before others, that they glorify God their heavenly father; and when
like the wise Virgins, by the oil of grace, their lamps are both burning and
shining; and thereby they delight and draw others, to follow their good
example. Whereas on the contrary, wicked professors send forth a most noisome,
pestiferous, and infectious smell, which, like that of Sodom, ascends into
God's nostrills, provoking him to wrath, vexes the godly, like Lot, and scares
many from the profession of the truth, but allures none.

This fragrancy the godly have from Christ, as we see, Psalm. 133. 2. and from
the sweet unction of his Spirit, Ezekiel. 16. 9. who (as the Apostle says) has
given himself to God for an offering of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2.

Observations.
1. We see here a strange alteration, that grace makes in the godly, that
whereas by nature (as the Psalmist speaks) the poison of asps is under their
lips, and their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, cited Romans 3. 14. by
grace, their lips drop as the honeycomb, and honey and milk are under their
tongue. Before, they were of polluted lips, (as Isa^. 6. 5.) but when the cole
of grace has touched them, they become purged.

2. Seeing the lips of the godly drop forth honey to those that hear them, even
such speeches, that (as Ephesians. 4. 29.) minister grace to the hearers. O what a
benefit is it to converse with the godly, by whose company and conference they
may receive such good: As on the contrary, what danger, detriment, and grief is
it, to converse with the contrary, under whose tongue the poison of asps is,
and it self a world of wickedness, (as James calls it) setting on fire the
course of nature, and is set on fire it self of hell, Jam. 3. 6.

3. But, (as our Savior speaks) seeing out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks; if we would have our lips to drop like the honeycomb, let us
labor to have our hearts purged of that root of bitterness, that is naturally
therein, and to have them sweetened by grace; and then the good man, out of the
good treasure of his heart, will bring forth good things.

4. With lips dropping like the honeycomb, a sweet smelling garment of a holy
conversation must be also joined, works with words, and practice with
profession; for it is not the honoring with the lips, that the Lord accepts,
except both heart and hand be joined therewith.

Verse. 12. A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed.
Here by two new similitudes, he sets forth her praise; the one is of a garden
enclosed, the other is of a spring shut up, and a fountain sealed. First then,
the church is compared to a Garden;

1. Because as a garden is taken out of common and waste ground, to be
appropriate to a more particular use; so is the Church, out of the mass of
Mankind, to be the Lord's peculiar; and it is he only, who makes us so to
differ.

2. In a garden, no rare or good thing comes up naturally of it self, but what
is sown or set; even so, nothing that is good, no, not to will, have we of our
selves, but what is sown or set by the hand of that heavenly Husbandman, Joh.
15. 1.

3. For such sowing or setting, the ground must be dug, purged, and
prepared; and so must our hearts for the good seed of the Word, and the plants
of grace.

4. In a garden, nothing uses to be sown or set, but what is useful or
delightsome, even so is all grace that is sown in the heart.

5. In a garden there is great variety of flowers, herbs and plants, etc. And
so there is great variety both of edifying gifts, and saving graces in the
church of God, all for the good of the whole body and every particular member
thereof.

6. No garden wants its own weeds unto which nature is a kind mother, and
therefore must be purged, dressed, and kept clean; even so none wants their
own infirmities, which our natural corruption brings forth and nourishes, and
therefore great need is there, of mortification, vigilance, and prayer, with
all such means whereby the heart may be purged, and kept clean.

7. Of all places men take most delight to walk in their gardens, and so does
Christ Jesus to walk in his Church, Rev. 2. 1. Psalm. 87. 2. and 132. 13.

Next, this garden is called, a garden enclosed, Psalm. 125. 2. 1. In respect of
distinction, as Goshen from the rest of Egypt, 2. Of protection, as the Lord in
Zechary speaks, being as a wall of fire about her, Zech. 2. 5. or as he says
in Isay, Isa. 27. 3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, lest
any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

3. In respect of privilege or appropriation, Psalm. 80. 12. Job. 1. 10.
Because that none others are partakers with her of those heavenly graces which
she receives from Christ, but her true members, and elect, how soever others
may be partakers of the means, and make a great show of verbal profession, as
if they were the Church, 4. In respect of her chaste carriage and reservation,
keeping her self only to Christ, 2. Cor. 11. 2. So that there is no entrance to
any in her heart beside him, she loves, obeys and worships him only, not
going a whoreing after any other, so that of her it may be said, Paret et patet
uni, nothing enters in it from without, but what comes from the heaven above.

The second thing whereto he compares her is, to a spring shut up and a
fountain sealed, where we see these two joined, a garden, full of pleasant
plants, and lest any thing should wither, or want moisture therein, here we
have a fountain or spring sealed up, that thereby as he speaks in Isay, he may
water it every moment, Isay. 27. 3. Therefore is the godly man compared in the
first Psalm to a tree planted by the river side. And it is to be noted that he
speaks not of waters, but of a spring never deficient, or a fountain that
still abounds, and yet though they abound so (as our Savior speaks, Joh. 4.
14.) that who drinks thereof they shall be unto him a well of water springing
up unto eternal life; yet, they flow not forth of the garden, but are shut up
and sealed, so that none are watered by them but those plants of this garden,
which our heavenly Father has planted.

The waters of this spring or fountain whereby the plants of Gods garden are
watered, as the four rivers that watered the earthly Paradise, are either those
of Gods holy word, by which faithful pastors water the Lords garden, as Paul
speaks saying, that he planted and Apollos watered, which in the external
sound or Ministry they flow out unto all, yet in the inward power and efficacy
they are sealed, and extend only to Gods elect; or else these waters are those
living waters, or that water of life which Christ only gives himself, and none
else is able to give, and those are the refreshing and comfortable graces of
his holy Spirit, whereby the soul is moistened and the Christian made fruitful
unto eternal life.

Now this fountain is said to be sealed, signifying thereby unto us these two
things, 1. The confirmation of grace to Gods elect, and that they shall never
fully nor finally fall away therefrom, in which sense the word sealing is used,
Jerem. 32. 10. and Ephesians. 1. 13. 2* It signifies the participation of grace and
reservation thereof to them only; as, that which is sealed is not communicate
with others, nor known to any but such as the same concerns, in which sense,
the word sealing is used, Isay. 8. 16. 3 It signifies the Lords preservation
and surety of his Church in common dangers and calamities, as we see, Rev. 20.
3. Matthew. 27. 66. and his continual having them in remembrance, as Job speaks
of sealing, Job. 14. 17.

Observations.
1. If we be as a garden or plot of ground severed from common use to the
owners particular use and delight, then let us walk as such, and not conform
our selves (as we are exhorted, Romans 12. 1.) to the present world.

2. This is a great comfort unto us that we are the Lords garden, for as a man
has a care of his garden and delight theretherein, so the Lord will have a care
of his church, even in her greatest extremities.

3. This also serves for our humiliation, that being the Lords garden, it is he
only who makes us to differ from others, and we have nothing that is good or
savours of grace in us, which is not his sowing, planting and watering and who
gives also the increase.

4. Seeing his church is a garden shut up, let us therefore make our hearts
patent only to him, as we have, Psalm. 24. 7. and shut up from Satan's entry,
the world, and all sort of wickedness.

5. The church also being a fountain sealed up, or a spring shut up, we see
that this is proper only to Gods church and Christ's elect number, to have
saving and indeficient grace; into which property none others have any share,
for it is shut up from them, as the rain was in the clouds so long in Elias and
Ahab's time, and flows only and falls on the elect, as the dew did on Gideons
fleece when all the ground beside was dry, and what ever their share be in
other things, yet happy are they who have their share in this.

Verse. 13. Thy plants are as an orchard of Pome granates, with pleasant fruits,
Camphire and spiknard. 14. Spiknard and Saf^on, Calamas and Cynamom, with all
trees of Frankincense, Myrr hand Aloes, withal the chief spices.
From the commendation of this garden, he condescends next to the praise of the
plants that grow therein, as in the Eden of God, and are watered by the
fountain and wellspring of grace, which are not common or ordinary plants of
small esteem, but are all sweet, fragrant, and precious, replenished themselves
with saving graces, as a Pomegranate is with granes or kernells, and bringing
forth sweet fruits of new obedience, which is like most odoriferous, sweet
smelling and precious spices, to the glory of God and the good example of
others, whereby we may see that of all the goodliest gardens that ever was, or
can be imagined, this is the first, surpassing all others, quantum lenta solent
inter viburna cupressi, and showing how far the church of Christ and true
members thereof in excellency surpass all other societies.

By these goodly plants then are meant all the faithful, transplanted out of
the first Adam, by the merciful hand of that heavenly husbandman, and planted
in Christ Jesus the true vine; from whom sucking sap, (as the woman diseased of
the bloody issue drew virtue) by a true and lively faith, and being incorporate
in him they bring forth the good fruit of holy obedience: these plants are
called, the Lords pleasant plants, Isay. 5. 7. which he has planted with his
own right hand, and branches which he has made strong for himself, Ps. 80. 15.
Trees also of righteousness transplanted out of nature, planted into Christ by
grace, and at last, from grace to be transplanted, to be with Christ in glory,
Isay. 61. 3.

Why also they are compared to Pomegranates has been touched, not being like
Hoseas empty vine, Hos. 10. 1. Or that empty reed which in derision was put in
Christ's hand, Matthew. chap 27. 29. But because they are replenished with the
graces of Gods holy spirit, sweet and delicious to the soul, as the granes of
the Pomegranate are to the mouth, yea some of them full with these graces, Act.
6. 3. 5. 8. As a vessel is full, although not full, as the fountain is said
to be, and which communicates to others.

As for the rest, towit, the fruits here spoken of, to insist upon them in
particular and show the excellency of every one of them, I mind not; partly
because we have spoken of some of them already, Chap. 1. Verse. 12, 13, 14.
etc. And specially because by these excellent, sweet, and precious spices, it
is the scope of the Holy Ghost only in general to ^how the excellency,
sweetness, and pretiousness in Gods sight of his own elect, his graces in them,
and their fruits of obedience.

These plants which bring forth such fruits has the Lord planted in all ages,
by the Ministry of his holy Prophets, Apostles, and faithful Ministers, as
Paul says of himself, I have planted, and by the wholesome and still waters
(whereof David speaks) of pure and heavenly doctrine, Psalm. 23. 2. These has he
watered, as it is written in like manner, Apollos waters: from which planting
and watering of the external Ministry, accompanied with the planting of the
Lords right hand and watering of his grace, or internal and divine efficacy,
as it is also added, but God gives the increase; from hence (I say,) do spring,
the saving knowledge of God, unfeigned repentance, a lively faith, a steadfast
hope, fervent love, holy Humility, Meekness, and mercy, mortification of the
flesh, watchfulness and prayer, sweeter before God, than all the sweetest
incense, and such fruits of holy obedience, that in value exceed all the
chiefest spices.

Observations.
1. Seeing Christ's Church consists of such excellent plants, let every one
labor to adjoyn himself thereto; otherwise being but as stinking hemlock, fit
only for rooting out, and casting into the pit of eternal perdition. As also
to be a right plant, replenished inwardly with saving grace, and bringing forth
outwardly, the sweet smelling fruits of holy obedience; and not a bastard or
degenerate plant, whereof the Lord speaks by his prophet Jeremy, cap. 2. 21. or
an empty Vine, bringing forth no fruit; or if any, as the Lord complains, but
sour and unsavory grapes, Isai. 5.

2. Seeing the godly are the Lords plants in his pleasant garden, which bring
forth such fruits; O happy are all those faithful pastors, whose ministry the
Lord uses, to plant and water such plants, and to make them fruitful in such
excellent fruits. Worthy is this work, and may be called opus operum; glorious
is this employment, let blind and profane worldlings think of it as they list;
great also is the blessing, and joy that a pastor may have, if he find, that
the Lord by him has planted a few, or one of these plants, and great shall be
the reward of such planters in heaven.

3. If the godly be the Lord's precious plants, and his noble Vine, (as in
Jeremy he calls them, Jer. 2. 21.) let the destroyers of these plants, and
layers of the Lord's vineyard waste, (as the Psalmist complains, Psalm. 80.)
consider, what fearful revenge abides them, and wrath from the Almighty God
hangs over their heads.

Verse. 15. A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from
Lebanon.
In the former verse, Christ called his Church, A fountain sealed up, which
does water all her plants; and here she ascribes all the praise thereof unto
him, affirming, that he is the fountain of the gardens, etc. that is, Look
whatsoever waters of life is in her, or in any particular Churches, without
challenging any part of that to themselves, they flow from him only, as the
prime and head fountain, and it is only out of his fullness, that they receive
grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. For, as the Apostle says, It has pleased the
Father, that for this end, in him all fullness should dwell. As the catholic
Church then is called a garden, so particular Churches are called here gardens,
and Christ is that fountain of the gardens, whose plenty and plenitude is such,
that it reaches it self to the watering of all these Churches, dispersed
through the world, and all the true members thereof, which are his pleasant
plants. The waters of this fountain, being like the few loaves and fishes,
which fed so many thousands, and there were twelve baskets full gathered up; or
like those waters in Ezekiel, that flowed out of the Sanctuary, so abounding,
that they were waters to swim in, and could not be passed over, Ezekiel. 47. 5.

Therefore also he is called, a well of living waters, and which sends forth
many streams, as those which come from Lebanon. Living waters being such as
alwais do flow, assprings do, and never dry up, opposed to standing waters. So
that the meaning is, that the graces and waters of life, which do flow from
Christ upon his Church, are such, as can never be dried up, they flow from so
bottomless and inexhaustible a fountain; so that albeit he bestow his graces
and gifts from time to time, in never so great a measure, yet are they not
diminished, but like the widow's oil, superabounds after all vessels are
filled therewith. Which waters likewise have these notable properties: 1 They
are cleansing, as we see, Ezekiel. 16. 9. though the stain were never so deep, or
the pollution never so great. 2 They are curing, as the waters of Jordan cured
the leprosy of Naaman, and as we see, Ezekiel. 47. 9. 3 They are quenching,
though the aguish thirst of the soul in temptation were never so great. 4 They
are quickening, like those waters in Ezekiel, which wheresoever they came, made
things to live. And 5 They are fructifying, as we have in that same place of
Ezekiel, verse. 11, 12. and as it is said, Psalm. 1. and in the preceding verses
of this chapter, making the plants of the Lord's garden like an orchard of
pomgranats, with pleasant fruits.

Observations.
1. We see the disposition of all the godly, that in a humble and thankful
manner, they ever acknowledge, what ever good or grace is in them, that they
have it from the Lord, the full fountain thereof, to whom therefore they give
the glory and praise.

2. Seeing Christ Jesus is the full fountain, and wellspring of living waters,
and that so graciously he invites all those who thirst, to come and drink
thereof, Isai. 55. 1. Let all those who would participate of these cooling,
cleansing, curing, and quickening waters, come to this blessed fountain, and
seek comfort, refreshment, and grace there only, where it is to be found; and
not to any Creature, Saint, or Angel, or other mean whatsoever, not of God's
appointment; like those, who leave the fountain of living waters, and dig up
pits unto themselves, that can hold no water at all.

3. These waters are called living waters, as being not only ever scaturient,
but likewise because wherever they flow toward a soul, they quicken the
same, and, as is said, make the same to live; and where life is, it has a care
of the conservation of it self, fleeing and abhorring what is destructive
thereto: there is likewise a natural appetite, after that which does nourish
and maintain the same, and it does manifest it self also, in the proper motions
and actions thereof. So that where these things are not found spiritually in
the soul, it is a token, that these waters, which are called living, never
entered therein.

Verse. 16. Awake, O north-w^d and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that
the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat
his pleasant fruits.
Upon the Churches humble and thankful acknowledgment, that all the graces or
goodness that is in her, or any member of hers, flows only from him, as the
full fountain, and the inspiration of his holy Spirit; Therefore our Savior,
in the first part of this verse, sends as it were his Spirit more plentifully
and powerfully yet, to breathe upon her. Such is the fruit of thankfulness for
benefits received, and the right using of the same, as it is said, habenti
dabitur. And in the second part of the verse, is the Church's invitation of
Christ, upon this increase of his grace in her, to receive and enjoy the holy
fruits thereof.

In the first part then of this verse we have, 1 The mission of the holy Ghost
to his Church, under the name of north and south wind. 2 The work of the
Spirit, which is Inspiration, under the word of blowing on hisgarden. And 3 The
end wherefore, that her sweet fruits of holy obedience may more abound, and her
heavenly grace may more be manifested, under these words, That the spices
thereof may flow out.

Having then spoken before, why the Church is compared to a garden, and in this
place is called, His garden, both by right of creation, and acqui^tion at a
deer rate; We have to consider, 1 Why the Spirit that blows on this garden, is
compared to wind; to wit, because of alike properties.

1. The wind has a purging power of the air, and therefore is called Nature's
fan; and so has the Spirit, to purge and cleanse the soul.

2. It has a cooling quality, and so has the Spirit, both to abate burning
concupiscence, and to comfort the scorching of trouble and temptation, or
Satan's fiery darts.

3. It has a clearing property, dispersing clouds, and causing serenity; and so
has the Spirit, to disperse the clouds of temptations, and make fair weather in
a perplexed conscience.

4. It has a piercing force, being subtle, and searching through every narrow
cranie; and so has the Spirit, as we see, Act. 2. 37.

5. It has a thawing quality; and so has the Spirit, to thaw our frosty and
cold hearts, and dissolve them, as it were, into a flood of tears.

6. It has also a drying and ripening property; and so has the Spirit, to dry
up the filthy issue of our sinful humors, and ripen us like wheat for the
Lord's harvest.

Next, there is two winds here spoken of, or a wind from two arcts, the North
and South Wind, which though they seem contrary one to another, yet herein they
agree, that both are necessary for the garden and Church of Christ. The
North Wind then first, is cold, sharp, and nipping; and the South-winde warm,
comfortable, and cherishing: Even so the Spirit, sometimes humbles, and makes
one like a low valley, and sometimes raises the soul with comfort, and makes it
as a high mountain; or, as is said, Psalm. 107. 26. sometimes they mount up to
heaven, and again they go down to the very depths. And to this end is God's
wisdom suitable in the outward means, some being Boanerges's, to cast down, and
some the sons of consolation, to raise up; that by and in these ordinary means,
the Spirit may blow accordingly.

The method also is to be considered, that is here used, speaking first of the
north wind, and then of the south, to show unto us, that till first the Spirit
of God humble us by the Law, and sight of our misery, we can never expect, that
he will be as a south wind to us, to comfort us by the Gospel, and give us a
true sense or assurance of the Lord's mercy.

Thirdly, the operation of the Spirit, is called and compared here to blowing:

1. Because as the wind blows freely, and where it lists, so does the Spirit,
Joh. 3. 8.

2. The blowing thereof is not seen, but felt; and so is the working of the
Spirit, by making a strange change; see Ezekiel. 37. 9.

3. It blows not ever alike, but sometimes more mightily, sometimes more
softly, and sometimes not sensible at all; even so does the Spirit, and
therefore in this place is bidden awake.

4. While it blows so mightily, it bears down all before it, whether turrets
or trees, so that nothing can withstand it; even so, sometimes the Spirit works
so powerfully, that it casts down all strongholds, and overcomes greatest
enemies, and most wicked sinners, as we see in the conversion of Manasses, and
Paul, etc.

5. When it blows softly on a garden, it not only furthers the grouth
thereof, but conveys sweet smells to the brain; even so does God's Spirit by
his breathing, further the grouth of grace, and conveyes sweet comfort to the
soul.

6. The blowing also of the wind, by filling the sails of ships, carries them
forward to their haven; and so does the working of God's Spirit on the soul,
and filling the same by grace, carry forward the same to the haven of eternal
happiness.

7. Men observe the wind, and the blowing thereof; and so should they the
operation of the Spirit, and the efficacy of the same, with the access and
recesse thereof.

Fourthly, the end of this blowing of these winds, on his garden, is, That the
spices thereof may flow out, whereby are understood God's graces, which, like
spices, are precious, pleasant, and odoriferous to the godly soul, and in it to
God also, whose gifts they are; and for them, the soul also is odoriferous to
him; and which graces oftimes, lie like fire under ashes in us, till the Spirit
blow, and then they are said to flow out, which is not by minoration, or
departing from us, but by emanation in their sense to us, and fruits and
evidence toward others; as faith is seen by works, like that of Job's
patience, Noah's constancy, Joseph's continency, Moses's fidelity, Phinebas's
zeal, and the like graces in holy men, by their holy examples, which for
imitation, (as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 11. 1.) they did leave behind them.
Which blowing of the Spirit likewise, for this end, is ordinarily by the
blowing of another wind; to wit, the preaching of the Gospel, as we see the
same so compared, Rev. 7. where when the Lord denounces, that the course of
the blessing of the Gospel should be stayed, John sees in a vision four
Angels, holding the four winds that they should not blow.

In the second part of the verse, follows, upon the excitation and increase of
his graces in her, for the end aforesaid, the Church's invitation of her
Beloved, to come to his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits; by which coming
is not to be understood, that he was absent from her, but that she desires a
more full and familiar presence of him: For, wherever true grace is begun and
settled in the heart, there is still a further and a greater desire thereof, and
of a nearer union thereby, more and more with Christ, till the soul be most
nearly of all after this life united with him, as the Apostle wished, saying,
Cupio dissolvi, and esse cum Christo.

The reasons of which her earnest desire, that he would come unto her, are, 1
The great honor that the soul gets by his coming thereto, which may say more
justly, than Elizabeth said of Marie's coming, How comes it to pass, the Lord
himself of heaven and earth should come to me? we being, as the centurion
confessed of himself, altogether unworthy, that he should enter under our
roof. 2* The great benefit that the soul gets, by his coming thereto; for he
brings with him a treasure of all grace and goodness, and comes not empty,
especially (as he said to Zaccheus) that day, salvation comes to the soul. 3 He
makes the place where he is, a kind of heaven, and whatsoever condition of life
a man is in, the same cannot be but comfortable.

The end of his coming is, To eat of his pleasant fruits; that is, to be
contented and delighted with her works of holy and humble obedience; which are
called 1 Pleasant; then, His fruits. Pleasant, 1 In respect of acceptance, as
such. 2 Of procession, because they come from his own Spirit, and inspiration
thereof. 3 In respect of their perfection, and perfuming (as it were) to be a
sweet favor to God in Christ, which they have from his obedience, and which is
a great comfort to us, when we look on our wants and blemishes. And 4 In
respect of right intention, or end, wherefore they are brought forth, or done;
which is, to please God, Heb. 13. 21. and Col. 1. 10

Next, they are called, His fruits; a font and fine: 1 Because they flow only
from him, and his Spirit, without whom, we can do nothing. And 2 The glory
whereof is only due to him, and not to us, our free will or merit, and to none
beside.

Observations.
1. We see by the order of these words, following on the former verse, that a
thankful acknowledgment of gifts already received, procures the enlargement of
the Lord's bountiful hand, to superadd and bestow more; as after watering of
his garden he does here, in breathing on the same.

2. When we are most dejected, and spiritually afflicted, let us take that to
be the work of the Lord's Spirit, in mercy, and for the good of his garden, as
the blowing of the sharp North Wind thereon, as well as when we are comforted,
and blown upon by the soft and Sweet south wind, of the peace of conscience,
and our restoring, with David, to the joys which we were wont to find in him.
Neither let us expect to enjoy ever or alike, the consolations of the Spirit,
or joy of his sensible presence, nor think, that spiritual desertions, or
trouble of conscience for our humiliation, shall ever endure; but there is a
vicissitude in our spiritual, as in our temporal estate here, sometimes
sowing in tears, and sometimes reaping in joy.

3. We see what a soil and soul is the Lord's garden; to wit, that which is
replenished with sweet spices, flowing out by the inspiration and work of Gods
spirit in their sweet smell and fruits of a holy life, and on the contrary what
a soil and soul is Satan's garden, to wit which is full of stinking weeds of
all corruption, flowing out by his suggestion and instigation in their noisome
stink like that of Sodom, and poysonable fruits of a wicked life and
conversation, which shows how rare Gods gardens are, and how plentiful
Satan's are in the land.

4. Though the soul be already made the Lords garden, and though it be both
planted and watered with his heavenly graces, yet we see that the spirit of God
must also blow thereon that her spices may flow out, which shows that we need
not only quickening grace to put life in us at first, and to have our hearts
purged and planted with grace, but likewise exciteting grace, and so grace upon
grace in a daily supply, to rouse up, draw forth and actuate that grace which
we got at first.

5. This blowing on the garden, is that her spices may flow out, which teaches
us, that it is not enough to be good, or have goodness in our selves, but it
must be Emanant and flow out, like the gaining with the talents, and shining of
the wise virgins Lamps, and as our Savior commands, Matthew. 5. to the benefit
of others.

6. Likewise as this should teach all Christians who would be good instruments
in church or polity if, they would have their gifts like spices to flow out for
the good of others, that then they should first be careful to be well stored
within with such themselves, so specially pastors should be so, who both in the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel by word, and in adorning that holy
calling by an exemplary singularity of life should make their spices, or holy
gifts and graces flow out, that as lights on a candlestick they may shine in
both, to all who are within the house.

7. Christ makes his spirit first breathe or blow on his garden, and then she
invites him to come and eat of the fruits which this breathing has produced.
So that we see that first, Christ by communicating grace to the soul he
begins, and then that his grace in the hearts of his Elect is not in vain,
but efficacious and operative to the producing of good and holy fruits.

8. We see that Christ's garden is a fruitful garden, which brings not forth
only leaves of verbal profession, or fair-promising blossoms of good hopes of
fruit, but fruits themselves, and as our Savior shows, much fruit, Ioh. 15. 5.

9. These fruits are called (his fruits,) for the reason aforementioned, so
that this is the humble disposition of all the truly godly, that as David
acknowledged, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. that he and his people had given to the Lord for
the preparation of his temple, only which was his own, even so they
acknowledge that any fruits of godliness which they are able to bring forth, is
only from his mere grace, and in so far, as they are good, they are his work
only; so far are they to ascribe any thing to themselves or to their own
merit, free will, or the like.

10. These fruits are called his pleasant fruits, or fruits that are pleasing
to him: which shows not only what is the care and should be of all good
Christians in all their ways and works to please God, but also if the good
fruits of a holy conversation be pleasing to God, that on the contrary the
evil fruits of a wicked life must be, and are, displeasing to him, provoking
his wrath, as we see, Isay. 5. etc. and his heavy judgments upon a Land.

Finis quarti Capitis.
Soli deo gloria.
CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my
Myrrh with my spices, I have eaten my Honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk my
wine with my milk: Eat my friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.
IN this Chapter we have, 1. How readily Christ answers the former invitation
of his Church, to come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruits, 2. Is set
down the Churches falling asleep into the slumber of a dangerous security: out
of which our Savior takes pains to awake her, 1. By his voice knocking and
calling upon her, to arise and open to him, to whom she returns a carnal and
worthless excuse, 2. By putting in his hand by the lock of the door, the
success whereof is set down, that her bowels were then moved for him:
Whereupon ensued a further progress in seeking him. 1. By rising up. 2. By
opening to him. But he had withdrawn himself. 3. By seeking him and calling
upon him, the success whereof notwithstanding was, that she could not find
him, nor gave he her any answer. 4. By going yet further and seeking, him through
the city, as Cant. 3. 3. The success whereof was worse then the former, she
not only found him not, but she was wounded by the watchmen, and the keepers of
the walls took away her veil from her. 5. By giving a charge to the daughters
of Jerusalem, if they found her welbeloved, that they would tell him, that she
was sick of love.

In the third part of the Chapter follows upon the occasion of this her charge
to them, and their asking of her, what her welbeloved was more then another's
beloved, that she so charged them, her description of the excellency of her
welbeloved, his beauty and good parts.

In the words then of the first verse, we have 1. His declaration how readily he
obeyed his Churches invitation to come into his garden and eat his pleasant
fruits; and, 2. His invitation of his friends to eat likewise and to drink
with him. In the declaration, we have, 1. The styles that he gives her, of
sister and spouse, as he did before. c. 4. v. 9. whereof we have spoken. Next
by this variety whereof he speaks, of Myrrh, spices, honey, wine and milk, is
understood the variety of the graces of Gods spirit bestowed upon his elect, to
his own glory and their salvation, and the sweet fruits and effects thereof
wherein he delights and has a complacency, as those have who eat that which is
sweet and delicious, and drink wine, or such pleasant and comfortable liquors.

Secondly, he invites here his friends to eat and drink likewise, that is, the
other godly, so called, Joh. 15. 14. whose delight and rejoysing in the
obedience of their fellow members is called here, eating and drinking,
therefore says our Savior, let your light so shine before men, Matthew. 5. That
they seeing your good works may glorify God your heavenly father. The godly
then are called his friends, and he theirs, Cant. 5. 16. 1. (as between
Jonathan and David,) because of mutual and entire affection, 2. Because of
comfort of one another company, Genesis 14. 14. 3 Because of the hazard that they
will undergo one for another, of their very lives, 4. Because of the rejoysing
mutually of one in another good, and condoleing in like manner of their
distress, as we see in David, and in Jobs friends, 2 Samuel 1. 26. 5 Because of
the care they have to pleasure one another, and to eschew what may displease or
break friendship between them.

Observations.
1. Out of this readiness of Christ to yield to the desire and invitation of
his Church, we may gather a lesson of great comfort, that, as he says Psalm.
145. 19. he will ever fulfill the desire of them that fear him, and hear
their cry, and will save them; and if he seem not so readily to answer,
assuredly it is for their good.

2. Seeing the Lords delight is in the graces of his holy spirit which he has
planted in the hearts of his Elect, and in the fruits of a holy obedience that
arises therefrom, this should move us to be careful to have our hearts stored
with these good graces, and our life adorned (like fruitful trees) with such
sweet fruits, as Isay speaks of, Isay. 1. 2. That so he may have delight and
pleasure in us here, and we may have delight with him and pleasures for ever
hereafter.

3. We see that friends only are invited, and not enemies to banquet with
Christ Jesus, and rejoice in the obedience of his Saints, here, as the angels
rejoice at a sinners conversion. And therefore 1. hereby we may try our selves
if we be friends to Christ, if we rejoice ever at the grouth of godliness, and
in the fruits of obedience, which we see in the godly, loving, and, with David,
honoring them because thereof, Psalm. 15. 4. And on the contrary, if we be
grieved with David, Psalm. 119. 136. and the mourners in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9. 4.
For the sins of others, as well as our own, and at their disobedience who
break Gods law and commandments. And, 2. We may see who are admitted to the
communion of spiritual rejoysing with Christ here, and shall be to the
communion of celestial rejoysing with him hereafter, to wit, only those who
are his friends; the portion of his foes being, a debarring from both, and an
adjudication to weeping and wailing for ever hereafter.

Verse. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh; it is the voice of my beloved that
knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.
Here is set down, 1. The churches ingenuous acknowledgment of a dangerous
estate of carnal security wherein she had fallen: and, 2. Is set down Christ's
carriage and care how to awake her out of the same: first then her
acknowledgment is in these words, I sleep, but my heart waketh, whereby she
shows that this sleep of hers was not a dead sleep, but rather such a samber
as was that of the wise virgins, both because in this sleep her heart was
awake, as also she heard the voice of her beloved, and what he spoke unto her,
which they use not to do, who are fallen into a dead sleep, whom no words will
awake. Of which sleep, we have these things to consider: 1 What sort of sleep
this is, to wit, spiritual, or that of security. 2 Whence it proceeds. 3 What
are the other resemblances between it, and the bodily sleep. And 4 What are the
effects thereof.

First then, the bodily or natural sleep is not here meant, seeing the Church
is only to be considered altogether, according to her spiritual estate and
condition; and therefore her sleep here is spiritual, whereof the Apostle
speaks, saying, Let us not sleep, as others do, but let us watch and be sober,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. and again, Awake thou that sleep, and rise up from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14.

Secondly, as bodily sleep proceeds of the binding up of the bodily senses, by
the vapors that arise from the stomach; so this spiritual sleep proceeds, of
the obstruction, or binding up of the spiritual senses of the soul, from their
proper operations, by the sinful vapors, arising from our natural
corruptions, or remnants of the old Man in the godly, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 5. 17. and Romans 7. 23. which when the same prevails, and through
want of watchfulness or coldness in prayer, waxes strong, then there is a
damping of the spiritual graces, and as it were a sleep or slumber that falls
upon the soul.

Thirdly, the other resemblances between sleep and security, are these*

1. Sleep is natural, and so is security.

2. Sleep comes often of idleness, and so does security, when the soul is not
exercised diligently in watching, prayer, and other holy and necessary
exercises, both of our general and particular callings.

3. Sleep is sweet and pleasing to flesh and blood, and so is security.

4. Such who are asleep, desire, that no man awake them, and they draw the
curtains before them to shut out light; even so do those who lie asleep in
security, they delight therein, and in darkness, and therefore desire not to
be roused up, by having their faults told them, and their works of darkness to
be brought to the light.

5. In sleep there is no exercise of the senses, nor motion; even so, while men
lie asleep in security, there is no exercise of the spiritual senses of the
soul; in seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, or feeling, as it ought; nor is
that motion which should be, in the diligent discharge of our duty, in
religious exercises, of prayer and repentance, and other holy performances.

6. Sleep is the image of death corporal, and security, I may say, is the
forerunner (if God awaken not the soul) of death eternal.

Fourthly, The effects of sleep are these:

1. In sleep, Fancy rules, and therefore sleep oftimes produces dreams, that
are deceitful; and when men awake, makes them but sad by disapointment, and
pensive in the end: Even so does security, making men dream to themselves, and
presume of freedom from punishment, and attaining to salvation, though they
lie in security, and live still in sin; while in the mean time, judgments
temporal seize upon them unawares, as they did on Sodom, or they be haled away
with the rich fool to eternal punishment.

2. Sleep lays a man open (as it were) unto many dangers, as, of robbery,
captivating, and killing, as we may see in the examples of Sampson, Sisera, and
Olofernes, etc. And even so does security, to many spiritual and alike
dangers; therefore says the Apostle, Be sober, be vigilant, because your
adversary the devil is a roaring Lion, walking about, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Matthew. 26. 41.

3. (As we see here) it causes a withdrawing of Christ from us, and makes the
means of grace, which is the word or voice of our Beloved, the less
effectual, our prayers more feeble, our zeal less fervent, our love to be
colder, our delight in holy exercises to decay, our faith less vigorous, and
our practice of obedience more slack and slender: and finally, breeds much
pains to the soul, before (as David says) it be restored to that joy, which
sometimes it was wont to find in the comfortable presence of Christ, and vigor
of those heavenly graces, whose force the sleep of security has so much abated.

But though she sleep, yet it is specially to be remarked, that she says, Her
heart was waking, which shows, that her sleep was not like a deadly lethargy,
or that her heart or conscience in that sleep, was like Nabal's, which died
within him altogether; but she retained the life of grace still in her soul,
and that seed remained in her, whereof John speaks, because she is born of God,
1 John 3. 9. the work of which new birth can never be extinguished, which is a
singular comfort, and which we have confirmed unto us, both in the old, and in
the New Testament, Jer. 32. 40. Romans 11. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Joh. 10. 29. Romans 8.
30. and Phil. 2. 13. etc. Which perseverance in grace, and estate thereof, they
have only from God, and his Spirit, moving on their hearts, as he did in the
Creation on the waters; and who keeps the seed of grace in them, and them by
it, from full and final falling away.

Indeed, they may be sometimes sore wounded and shaken, as Peter was, for their
humiliation, but not quite destitute of saving grace, Vt majorum etiam ruina,
sit minorum cautela. As also by sin, the act of grace for a time may be
restrained, as of repentance, and such other holy duties, as Psalm. 119. 59. is
mentioned, which we see to have been the time of David's security; but the
habit of grace can never be lost, because it is not acquired, but infused by
him, whose gifts are without repentance. As likewise some degrees of faith,
love, zeal, repentance, and the like, may be lost; but not all faith, all love,
all zeal, etc. for the seed still remains, because of the new birth.

Follows, next to the Churches acknowledgment of her security, wherein she
lay, Christ's carriage and care to awake her out of the same; which is, by his
voice, which she knows, and acknowledges to be the voice of her beloved, the
particulars whereof are these: 1 His compellation of her; 2 His petition; and 3
The reasons thereof.

First then, our Savior uses his voice, to awake her out of this her
security, not immediately uttered, but mediately, in the ordinary exercise of
the holy Ministry, whom whosoever hears, they hear him, and contra; and by this
his voice in the mouths of his holy Prophets, Apostles, and faithful Pastors,
has he called upon his Church, and awaked her from time to time, when (like the
wise Virgins) she has fallen asleep; which is his singular kindness toward
her, when he so awakes her, that she should not be surprised by her spiritual
enemies, or perish with the wicked world.

This is likewise to be remarked, how the faithful, even in this their sleep,
can discern and tell, that when his Word is truly preached, it is the voice of
Christ which they hear, and that does call upon them, according as he says,
Joh. 10. 4. That his sheep know his voice, and will not follow a stranger, but
flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers. They have therefore a
discerning judgment, which the Romanist's deny to God's people, and are not
like many, who halt between truth and idolatry, and will tell, that they know
not which is the true religion, or the voice of Christ, nor cannot judge
thereof, when every sect and profession boldly affirms, that they have the
truth on their side, and therefore cannot resolve with themselves to whom to
adhere: Surely such do plainly profess, that they are void of God's Spirit,
who by the gift of discerning, and rule of God's Word, cannot ^ry the spirits,
nor, like Christ's sheep, know the voice of Christ.

Next, she attributes to the voice of her beloved, knocking, as we see in like
manner, Rev. 3. 20. which shows, not only the earnest desire that Christ has*
of our salvation, calling and knocking at the doors of our hearts, that we may
open to him, and that salvation may come into our house; but also this shows,
the power of Gods Word, as it is called, the power of God unto salvation, to
all them who believe, Romans 1. 16. the preaching whereof, is (as it were) the
very hand of God, knocking at the doors of his Elect, and making them to hear
and open to him, the everlasting gates of their souls, that the King of glory
may enter in, Psalm. 24.

Again, it is to be remarked, that she says, It is the voice of her beloved
that knocks, who is indeed, dilectus deo ut filius, angelis ut dominus,
hominibus ut salus; beloved also justly, 1 For excellency of beauty, verse. 10.
being the Sun of righteousness^, and fairer than the children of men, Psalm. 45.
2. like the rose of Sharon, and lilly of the valleys, Cant. 2. 1. And 2 For
liberality of bounty, who not only gives us all good things, but has given
himself to us, and for us to the death of the cross, and, as Psalm. 84. 11. who
is the giver of grace here, and of glory hereafter. Therefore worthy is he, on
whom we should set our love, whereby we shall reap these benefits: 1 The
assurance of his love to us, and election of us. 2 This, like Moses's Rod, will
devour up all sinful love. 3 As Jacob's to Rachel, it will facilitate our
obedience, and hardest sufferings. 4 It will most enforce us of any motive, to
love our neighbor as we ought. And 5 assure us of that estate, wherein faith
and hope ceasing, our love only shall remain, and be perfected in heaven.

In the particulars of this voice of her beloved, we have, 1 His compellation
of her, which is by diverse titles, My sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled;
of all which we have spoken before: Only herein this is cap. 4. 9 cap. 1. 9.
cap. 2. 14. cap. 4. 7.
remarkable, that he gives her these titles, even in her infirmity, while she
is lying now in the sleep and slumber of carnal security, and has the door of
her heart closed (as it were) upon him, which shows what affection he bears to
her, or to any soul, wherein a love to him remains, though having many
infirmities; according to which, (as the Psalmist says) the Lord deals not
with us, nor rewards us according to our iniquities, Psalm. 103. 10, 13: But as
a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him.

Secondly, in this speech of our Saviors, we have what he desires of her,
which is, to open unto him; as Naaman's servants said unto him, 2 King. 5. no
great matter to perform, especially to so great and good a Lord, who had come
to her door so kindly, had waited on her so patiently, and was to benefit her
thereby so abundantly, (as he said to Zacheus) as to bring salvation to her
house.

In which suit of opening, we have to consider; 1 What this imports. 2 If we
have power to perform this. 3 The motives which should induce us. And 4 The
manner how to perform the same.

First then, this imports, that our hearts by nature, and in the estate of
security, are closed against God, ready patent to admit and let in Satan's
suggestions, and 10 harbor the thoughts of vanity, worldliness, or
wickedness; but not so patent to let in Christ Jesus, in the power of his
Word, and operation of his Spirit.

Secondly, we have no power or ability of our selves, to perform this duty,
till he who has the keys of David, who opens and no man closes, and who opened
the heart of Lyd^a with his word, Act. 16. 14. put in his hand by the hole of
the door, as verse. 4. and by the efficacy of his Spirit, concurs and enables us
to do what he directs; for without him we are able to do nothing: Therefore
sales Ephraim, Surely after I was turned, then I repented; therefore turn thou
me, O Lord, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31. 18, 19. etc.

Thirdly, the motives which may induce us to open to him, are many; for 1 He
opened the heavens, and came down to suffer the death for our sake that he
might open to us that heavenly paradise that was shut before against us. 2. he
opened in his Ministry, as that incarnate word, the good will of God to us for
our great comfort. 3. He opened not only his hands and stretched-out arms on
the cross, calling on all weary and laden to come unto him, but his very
heart likewise; ut paterent viscera per vulnera. 4. He opened the grave and
rose therefrom to give us comfort that it had lost it victory. 5. He opened the
heave^s and ascended in our nature to sit there at his Fathers right hand in
glory, and there to prepare a place for us and be our mediator. 6. He opens the
heavens to our prayers, and at death to our souls or persons, and daily he
opens his hand and fills us with his blessing, and every living creature which
is appointed for our use or comfort. And therefore for these reasons and many
more, should not we open to him when he comes and knocks at our doors?

Fourthly, the manner how we ought to open the door of our heart to him, is, 1.
Timely for we know not how long he will stand and knock, as we see in this
place, and if we open not unto him readily and timely, how soon he will depart
and it cost us great pains before we find him again, neither know we how long
our eyes shall be open, unclosed by death, and the grave be opened for our
bodies, and Hell for our souls, if we prove obstinate. 2. We should open
joyfully; rejoysing that he who is salvation should come to our house, as
Elizabeth rejoiced when the virgin Mary came unto her, and Jacob was over-joyed
when Joseph came to meet him, Genesis 46. 30. 3. We should open unto him widely,
enlarging our hearts with the full bensell of our desires after him, and a full
resolution to obey him in all his commandments; therefore we are bidden, lift
up those everlasting doors of ours, that the king of glory may come in, Psalm.
24. or, cast them wide open after the manner of receiving such great
personages. 4. We should open to him wisely, having purged and prepared the
houses of our hearts before, as we see, Genesis 24. 31. and the upper room was
for him wherein he did eat the passover, lest otherwise when we have opened
the door, if he see but like a filthy and stinking dunghill, he disdain to
come under so unworthy a roof.

Next to the action, the person to whom she should open, is, (to me,) says her
beloved, an empha^ick word indeed, and as Ezekiels wheels were full of eyes,
this also is full of motives or persuasions: to Me then, who is thy only
Savior and is come for that end, (Isay. 61. 2.) and who would not open to
such? to Me also, who is thy king, thy Priest, and thy Prophet, thy brother,
thy beloved, and bridegroom, etc. Therefore, as Laban said to Abraham's
servant^, Come in thou blessed of the Lord, why stand thou without, Genesis 24.
31* So should we say when he comes to our door: yea as Lot pressed greatly upon
the two angels that came unto him, Genesis 19. 3. and as Lydia constrained Paul
and those that were with him to come within her house, Act. 16. 15. So should
we by importunity of fervent prayer and earnest desire, press hardly upon our
Savior in like manner to enter and come within our hearts, and dwell therein
here, that we may dwell with him for ever and ever hereafter: Which if we have
done, we may know by these two marks and evidences, 1. As the graves at Christ's
death when they opened, they sent forth their dead, Matthew. 27. 52. Even so will
a soul that opens to Christ, send forth all dead works of obedience to sin or
Satan, forsaking the same, as Solomon says, he that confesses his sins and
forsakes them shall have mercy, 2. As the earth in the spring and in the month
April, that has it name from the earths opening it self, brings forth pleasant
and sweet flowers: even so, when the heart is opened to Christ it will bring
forth the sweet and odoriferous flowers of prayer, praise, and of a Christian
practice, godly thoughts, godly words, and godly deeds.

The reason why he is so earnest with her by so many compellations, as motives,
to open unto him, is, 1. The great pains he has taken in coming to her in the
very night time, which ordinarily is appointed for rest, 2. The great patience
and long suffering he has used, waiting on her, till his head was filled with
dew, and his locks with the drops of the night.

The similitude is drawn from hence, as if a lover should go far in the night
time, and endure great pains and other inconveniences to visit her whom he
loves so dearly. And indeed, unspeakable are the pains, sorrows and sufferings
that our Savior has endured for us; and great also, yea wonderful is his long
suffering patience waiting for our repentance; frequent likewise has his
calling been upon us, and his knocking at the door both of our hearts and
ears, and yet, Who may say that all these have prevailed, or that he has
opened his heart unto him? And therefore all the former serves the more to
aggravate our guiltiness and great unkindness unto him.

But some may say, does not Christ alwais dwell in the hearts of the
regenerate, how is it then that he calls and knocks to let him in? Whereunto I
answer, that there be degrees of the measure of grace, whereby Christ dwells in
his Elect, as was in the blind man's recovery of his sight whom Christ cured and
savv men at first only like trees. So that Christ dwells in those who have but
the least spark of a true and lively faith, but he knocks to have them to open
the doors of their hearts wider, and to receive him after a fuller manner.

Observations.
1. We see here how changeable the estate of a Christian is in this world:
before, the Church was rejoysing, and inflamed with a fervent zeal and love
of Christ, inviting him to come to his garden and eat his pleasant fruits, all
which now seems to be smothered, and when he comes to her, and calls and
knocks, yet she opens not unto him, but makes excuses. This is from that
bosom corruption whereof the Apostle complains, Romans 7. when through
neglect of daily examination, prayer, and resolution with David, the bensell of
a holy watchfulness and trimming of our lamps does slacken, Psalm. 119: 53. and
like the wise virgins we sleep, as well as the foolish, till Christ he awake
us.

2. The ingenuity of the godly may here likewise be seen, like Pharaoh's
butler, not blushing to confess their faults and infirmity, that God may get
glory, though with confusion of their own faces; and therefore the Church here
confesses that she had fallen asleep into carnal security, as Paul confesses
his persecution of Christ's Church, and of all sinners that he was the chief.

3. Here we perceive the difference between the godly and the unregenerate, and
between the security wherein the one falls, and the security of the other. In
the godly there are two principles, flesh and spirit, whereas in the
unregenerate there is but one, for they are all flesh, and therefore the godly
though they sleep, yet their heart vvaketh, and so their sleep is like an
unsound slumber, but the unregenerate their sleep is like a dead lethargy, out
of which they cannot be awaked: as also the godly, only sometimes fall into
this sleep, but the unregenerate continually do lie therein.

4. We see here, by her confession, that a true Christian has a discerning
Judgment of his own spiritual estate, and is sensible of his souls sickness
or health, and what is the work of the flesh, and of the spirit in him, as we
see, Romans 7. 19, 20. etc. And that he should thankfully and to his comfort
acknowledge the good, as well as humbly, the evil that is in him.

5. Hence also we may consider what is the best estate of the heart, to wit, a
waking heart or soul; which the more it be waking or watchful, the less it is
in danger of its spiritual enemies, and more ready and fit for receiving
grace, and intertaining its blessed bridegroom Christ.

6. Whereas he comes first in this her slumbering security to her, and calls
and knocks to awake her out of the same, we see the Lords gracious goodness,
who deals not with us as we do deserve, and who like that loving shepherd
that sought the lost sheep, seeks us in like manner first, as the Lord did
Adam, else we should never be able to awake and seek after him.

7. By her acknovvledging that it was the voice of her beloved that knocked,
we see that the godly, like Christ's sheep can discern their shepherds voice,
and put a difference betvveen it and a stranger's, betvveen the green,
wholsome pasture and still waters whereof David speaks, Psalm. 23. and
betvveen that which is hurtful and unvvholsome, or those poysonable waters,
mentioned Rev 8. 11. whereby many died.

8. The word of God preached is here called Christ's voice, and acknowledged so
by his Spouse, whereby we see, what reverence the godly carry to the Word, how
it ought to be haunted unto, heard, and obeyed; and the cause of the contrary
to be this, that men mistake, with young Samuel, that to be man's word, which
truly is Christ's own voice.

9. To this voice of Christ is attributed here, not only calling, but
knocking; which should warn us to try hereby, whether we be Christ's Spouse or
no, by the power that we find in his Word upon our souls, and at the door of
our hearts, if it be as a knocking, and procure an opening of them, as it did
the heart of Iydia, Act. 16. 14. and of those three thousand that were
converted to the faith, by one Sermon of Peter's, Act. 2. 41.

10. For performance of these holy duties, which the Lord requires at our
hands, for our own good, let us frequently meditate, what great pains and
sufferings he has undergone for us, what great love and kindness he has shown
to us, and with what long-suffering patience he waits for our, repentance; all
which, if they tend not to our conversion, they shall assuredly tend to our
conviction; to wit, that he has so long stood at our doors, calling and
knocking, till his head was full of dew, and his locks with the drops of the
night, and yet we have not opened.

Verse. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet,
how shall I desile them?
Here, by way of confession against her self, is set down her excuse, of
suffering her beloved to stand so long knocking at the door of her heart, and
that she opened not unto him, which was, That she had put off her coat, and
therefore how should she put it on again? She had also washed her feet, and how
should she defile them again? This putting off her clothes, being (we know) for
to compose her self to a settled rest, in the warm bed of security and carnal
ease, out of which she professes, that she is very loath to rise; as we see on
the contrary, that the keeping on of clothes, is a token of care and
watchfulness, Nehem. 4, 23. (which is recommended to all) and therefore, Luke
12. 35. our Savior exhorts all men, saying, Let your loins be girded about,
and your lamps burning, and be ye your selves like unto men, that wait for
their Lord, when he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and
knocks, they may open unto him immediately.

The washing also of the feet was a custom of these Eastern hot Countries, both
before they went to meat, or to rest and sleep, and therefore by saving, that
she had washed her feet, and how should she desile them again, she expresses,
as is already said, how loath she was to arise from the warm bed of carnal
security: Under which two excuses, are comprehended all other of like sort,
which flesh and blood does minister, for hindering to rise, and open to Christ,
and obey his calling, such as we see, Matthew. 22. and are usually suggested by
our corruption, as the quitting of our pleasure, or profit, our ease, credit,
or companions, if we do so; and that we shall fall in disgust, hatred, and
obloquie, and other like inconveniences: Neither is it a fit time as yet, (but
as Foelix said to Paul, Act. 24. 25.) we may take a more convenient season for
that, or the like purposes, etc. Such excuses do absenters of themselves from
public exercises of divine worship, make, and prophaners of the Lords Sabbath;
such also do covetous extortioners, revengefull oppressors: unclean
whoor-mongers, riotous, drunkards, and the like, frame to themselves, and
obtrude, and all for this end, to keep Christ out, though he frequently call
and knock at their door, to enter in.

Observations.
1. We see hereby, that it is not an easy matter, but a very hard and
difficult one, to bring the soul and Christ together, into a near and constant
fellowship, wherein, as Abraham did not with Sarah, concerning Isaac's
immolation, so we must not consult with flesh and blood, which will furnish so
many shifts and carnal excuses; but take heed to his voice, who calls and
knocks, and, as the Father spoke at Christ's baptism from heaven, hear him and
obey.

2. We see, how strong is carnal corruption, and remnants of sin in the
regenerate, to hold Christ at the door, and to slight his voice, calling on
the^ to open; and therefore, how much more stronger is the same in the
unregenerate, and it is no marvel that they open not unto him, and disobey his
voice.

3. These excuses she sets down, by way of self-accusation, that he proving so
kind to her, in his coming, calling, and compellation, yet she should have
served him so unkindly; which teaches us in like manner, to search our selves,
(as the Prophet exhorts) accuse and condemn our selves, that judging our selves
here, and confessing our unkindnesse to so kind a Lord, we may not be judged
hereafter.

Verse. 4. My beloved put in his hand by the lock of the door, and my bowels
were moved for him.
Here the Spouse subjoynes to the confession of her own unkindnesse to her
beloved, his constancy of kindness notwithstanding, unto her; that although
she kept the door still yet shut, and made needless excuses that she could not
open to him; yet though he withdrawes himself from her for a while, he will yet
leave that behind him, that shall raise her, and make her at last open, and
seriously seek him; and this she calls, The putting in his hand by the hole of
the door, the effect whereof which it produced, was, That her bowels was moved
for him.

This hand is the operation of his Spirit, as we see it called, Act. 11. 21.
which concurring effectually with his voice, formerly spoken of, by the small
entry of grace which was left in her heart, like a lock hole, makes such a
strange alteration in her, from that which very lately she was, that her
bowels presently begins to be moved for him, and thereafter she rises, opens,
and seriously seeks after him. By which moving of her bowels for him, is
meant, her serious grief and repentance, for her former security and repulse,
and not making right use of the means of grace; together with an earnest desire
now, a love, and a longing for him, which makes her hereafter to rise, open,
and laboriously seek after him. The like of which speech, of the moving of the
bowels, we have Jer. 4. 19. and 31. 20. signifying grief of heart, and an
inward disquiet.

Observations.
1. We see here God's gracious goodness, who never leaves his own fully nor
finally, which is the cause of their perseverance, and that they never leave
him neither, fully nor finally.

2. The difference between the hearts of the regenerate and unregenerate, is
this, The unregenerate, their hearts are altogether closed against Christ, for
in them, all is flesh, and no spirit; but the regenerate, their hearts have
still some entrance patent, as it were a lock-hole for Christ, to put in his
hand, and which the Apostle calls, The seed that remains in them, and in their
worst estate; albeit they have much flesh, yet they have some spirit.

3. For awaking any soul out of security, or working true conversion, the hand
of God must concur with his voice, and the power of his Spirit with the
ministry of his Word, else all Paul's planting, and Apollos's watering will be
in vain: Therefore it is said, that while Paul was speaking, The Lord opened
the heart of Lydia, Act. 16. 14. (see also Act. 2. 41.) that she attended to
those things which were spoken by Paul: Which should make us at all times to
incall for the Spirit, but specially when we hear his Word.

4. We see here the piercing power of God's Word, when the Spirit concurrs with
it, entering into the very bowels, and making a strange motion and change
there, as we see it made, Act. 2. 37. in three thousand converts at once; and
therefore is compared to a two edged sword, that pierces more sharply, even to
the dividing assunder of soul and Spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart, Heb. 4. 12.

5. Whereas she says, that her bowels was moved, we may perceive, that true
repentance begins at the inwards of the heart and soul, and makes a change
first and a commotion there: therefore sales David, Behold thou desire truth
in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom.

6. She says, that her bowels was moved for him, or for his offense, and her
unkindnesse to him; which shows another property also of true repentance, that
under the greatest calamities or corrections, that comes from the hand of God
upon his own children, it is still, not for these calamities that they sorrow,
or are chiefly grieved; but in a holy indignation at themselves, and for the
offending of so good and gracious a God, against whom they have sinned.

Verse. 5. I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh; and
my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.
Here unto her inward grief, formerly spoken of, she add^ outward acts of
amendment, which acts are called fingers and hands, these being the instruments
of action; so that she stays not at the inward motions that were stirred up in
her heart, as many do, who have some flashes of inward motions at the hearing
of the Word, or upon other occasions, which do soon vanish like the morning
dew: But she arises from her warm bed of carnal security, to open to her
Beloved; and while she puts to her hands to the handles of the lock, for this
end and purpose, she finds, that her Beloved had left by his touch, or putting
in his hand at the lock-hole, such abundance of sweet graces, like pure myrrh,
that wheresoever she touched, her hands did not only savor thereof, but did
drop with the same. O happy touch of his! without which, what would become of
us? or what duties were we able to perform, to his glory or our good, without
him?

Observations.
1. We see, that true repentance is a rising from sin and security, to
holiness and a godly watchfulness; therefore says the Apostle, exhorting
thereto, Awake thou who sleeps, and rise from the dead and Christ shall give
thee light, Ephesians. 5. 14. And as he who rises, changes the posture of his body,
and quits the place and condition wherein he did formerly lie asleep; even so
he who truly repents, changes the posture of his soul, from an earthly and
sinful disposition, to a heavenly; and quits his former manner of conversation
and company, and that delight which he had to lie in carnal security.

2. We see, that true grace and the gift of conversion, is ever progressive and
practical; and therefore, from the moving of her bowels within her, she comes
to rising, and to open the door to her beloved.

3. An evidence of Christ's coming to any soul in mercy, or any saving and
comfortable touch of his, such as the Leper found, Matthew. 8. 3. is, that he
leaves ever a sensible sufficiency of svveet and savory grace behind him, which
not only like oil or ointment supples more and more the former stiff heart
and will, and removes all impediments of his debarring any more, but likewise
inables to action, and makes all the actions of our Christian obedience and
endeavors to be acceptable to God like svveet smelling Myrrh or incense, and
where this svveet smelling grace is not left; and that the plenty thereof in
the soul kyths not in the hands, or practice of the life, it is a token that to
such an empty soul thereof, Christ as yet never came in mercy.

4. These shows to our comfort, that Christ never totally deserts an elect
soul, but howsoever he withdraw himself, yet he leaves that behind him, which
if we find, despair not (if we seek him) of his return, or our finding him:
for the Myrrh of his grace which he left behind him, and that holy desire of
seeking after him, and of opening to him, (as Joseph and Mary sought after
Christ when on the way they missed him) is a pledge of, after finding him
whom our soul loves.

Verse. 6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had with drawn himself, and
was gone, my soul failed when he spoke, I sought him, but I could not find him,
I called him, but he gave me no answer.
In this verse is set down the evidence of a further degree of grace yet in the
spouse of Christ but a dolorous disappointment: For 1. She opens now to her
beloved, but he was gone, 2. She seeks him, but she could not find him, and, 3.
She calls or cries upon him, but he did not answer, which is one of the
greatest griefs and temptations that can be, to a sensible and godly soul, as
we may see, Psalm. 22. 1. and Lam. 3. 8. etc.

But it may be asked, seeing Christ alwais dwells in the faithful, how can
it be said that he had withdrawn himself and was gone, especially seeing he is
present by the graces of his holy spirit, the evidence whereof we see in these
her actions. Whereunto I answer. True it is, that she could not repent, nor
rise, open to him, or seek and call after him as she does, unless that he were
present and wrought these things in her, who says, Without me ye can do
nothing: for all these things proceed from his grace, and yet she had not that
lively and comfortable sense of his presence which she had sometimes (as
before) found, c. 2. 4. and 3. 4. and now earnestly longed for, (as David did)
after the joy of the Lords salvation, Psalm. 51. and after the Lords presence,
as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, Psalm. 42. Neither let the want of
this feeling of Gods presence seem strange to God's children in their
spirituall^ desertions for a time, seeing they see that the same has been
incident not only to Gods dearest Saints which has made them so to complain as
we see in the Psalms and else where, but likewise to Christ Jesus the son of
God their head, and God himself coequall coeternall and coes^entiall with the
Father, who notwithstanding of that indissoluble union between his two natures,
which never could be separate, yet this withdrawing of the comfortable sense of
the divine nature from his humane upon the cross was such, that he cried out,
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Subtrahendo visionem, non
dissolvendo unionem.

Under which sense of his withdrawing, she says, My soul failed when he
spoke, to wit, when so lovingly he invited her to open unto him, so that the
word then presently spoken took not present effect, (as it usually does not in
many hearers) but now after she had fallen in this temptation of desertion it
does, and thereby her conscience is checked, as Reubens warning of his brethren
concerning Joseph, did in the time of their fear and agony, Genesis 42. 21. and
which is one of the fruits to a godly soul of spiritual desertion, or rather
an end why the Lord lays on them such distress of mind that they may call to
remembrance under the same their former sins whereof as yet they have not
truly repented or been humbled for, and the warnings and threats of Gods word
against the same, which they then neglected.

Next, she declares, that although upon her opening to him, he had vvithdrawn
himself and was gone, yet she faints not in weldoing nor gives over, but seeks
him; and although she found him not, yet still she insists like the Cananitish
woman or importunate vvidow, and calls upon him, but he answered not, which
action of seeking of Christ what it is, and how to be performed, etc. we have
already shown, chap. 3. 1. As also spoken of the like success in the same
place, where it is said, that she found him not. And as for this other, of
calling upon him, it is to be understood of prayer which frequently in
Scripture is termed a calling upon God, as we see, 1 King. 8. 52. Psalm. 50.
15. and 4. 1. Job. 27. 10. Act. 7. 59. and else where, and is to be performed,
1. In faith, Matthew. 21. 22. 2 In humility, with the poor Publican, and as we
see, Genesis 18. 27. 3 In fervency with Moses, Exodus 14. 15. 4 In sincerity not
dravving near only with our lips, but with such a heart as, Psalm. 51. 17. And
5. With frequency or alwais as Job speaks, Job. 27. 10. and continually as the
Apostle exhorrs, asking, seeking, and knocking, like the importunate vvidow,
till we obtain.

But this is the sorrow of the soul which I may call the soul of sorrow, that
she says, that he made her no answer, which seems to be contrary to his
promise, Psalm. 50. 15. and, Ask and ye shall get, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you. Whereunto I answer, that this not
answering was the not manifesting to her sensibly his presence, as she desired,
and yet even while she was calling for his presence, she did secretly enjoy the
same, else she had not been able to rise, open, seek him and call upon him so
constantly as she did, which is a great comfort to any soul under desertion,
that as long as they have a desire and longing after Christ, bewail his
absence, and the spirit of prayer and invocation, and the grace of constant
seeking after him without giving over, assuredly although to their sense and
feeling he have withdrawn himself, yet he is not gone, and though awhile he
stand as it were behind the wall, and look out at the windovv, as, c. 2. 9.
Yet he shall come in the end, and sensibly for their comfort he shall manifest
to them his presence, as Joseph discovered himself at last to his brethren, and
as Jacob was sure as long as he held the Angel that he should get the
blessing; so may they be; as long as they may keep that little hold of him,
which is by an earnest desire after him and calling on his Name.

Observations.
1. We see that Christ uses sometimes to desert his dea^est saints, and that
the godliest (through their own default) ^re subject unto these desertions, 1.
As a just punishment ^r their carelessness to humble them thereby. 2. To set an
^dge on his graces in them, avvaking them up and sharpning their de^ires after
him. 3. To make them to appreciate him and the comfort of his presence the more
and know what and ^ow vvretched they are without him. 4. To make them also
more vvatchfull over themselves and advert the grouth or decay of grace in
them, and also the more careful when they have regained him to keep him; and,
5. What a dreadful estate it is that abides the wicked, to be deserted for
ever, from which in mercy they are delivered.

2. Where she says that her soul failed when he spoke, we see how deeply the
Lords word and sword thereof pearces, and that it is a token that God has not
totally withdrawn himself from that soul whereon his word has its operation for
the humbling thereof, and stirs up the same to a constant and serious seeking
after him.

3. We see who they are that take the Lords desertion to heart, to wit, only
they who have had a sense and the comfort of his former presence, which made
David to pray saying, restore me to the joy of thy salvation, which joy if he
never had had before, Psalm. 51. 12. and had found the sweetness and contentment
of the same he had never so earnestly desired to be restored thereto.

4. We may perceive that not only sins of gross commission, but even sins
of omission (as here, of not having timely opened to her beloved,) wounds the
very souls of the Lords elect, so tender are their consciences, like David's, 1 Samuel 24. 5. and so sensible are their souls.

5. She says that, (as he called, and she gave him no answer, so) she called,
and he gave her no answer; so that she gets measure for measure, as wisdom
threatens, Pro. 1. 24. And therefore this should warn us all upon whom the
Lord calls in the day of grace, to awake and answer lest otherwise we call in
our deepest distress, and he answer not; or if he do, it cost us first (as it
did her here) much pains and long seeking.

Verse. 7. The watchmen that went about the City found me, they smo^e me, they
wounded me, the keepers of the wall^ they took away my veil from me.
Here she declares, notvvithstanding of her constant seeking of her beloved and
that yet she found him not, how she would not for all this desist, but insist
in secking him still, In doing whereof she shows what great calamities
befell her, and what hard useage she endured at the hands of the watchmen of
the City, where so diligently she was seeking her beloved. It is said here,
that these watchmen smo^e her and wounded her, and took away her vail from her:
by which watchmen, Teachers are understood, frequently so styled in Scripture,
for the reasons formerly alleged, Chap. 3. verse. 3. But these were such
pastors or watchmen, of whom the Lord by Ezekiel speaks, saying, The diseased
ye have not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, nor have
ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, Ezekiel. 34. 4. but with
force and cruelty ^e have ruled them; and therefore are said here to have
smitten her, as the Jews are said, to have smitten Jeremy with the tongue,
Jer. 18 18. and to have wounded her; to wit, in disressing more her conscience,
which they should rather have comforted, and not broken the bruised reed, nor
quenched the smoking flax. And so we see, that either they dealt imprudently
with her, being as Job's friends, miserable comforters, by mistake, or
misapplication: or else they dealt impiously with her, by erroneous doctrine,
afflicting more her soul thereby, than solidly quieting or comforting the same:
As we see in the Romanists their practice, who in place of Christ's sole
satisfaction, and merit of his suffering, obtrudes likewise man's own
satisfaction, by Penance, and suffering in purgatory; by doing whereof (so far
as in them lies) they take away her vail from her, wherewith only she is clad
and covered, (as we see, Rev. 12. 1.) and wherein only, by a holy confidence,
she does inwrap her self, which is, the sole righteousness of Christ, and the
p^rging and pacifying virtue of his blood alone.

But what are the causes, why the soul is so restless, that till she find her
beloved, she cannot, but with the enduring of all pains and hazards, persist
and go on? I answer, There are two main causes thereof; the first is, the
condition of the Subject, the second of the Object. First then, the Subject is
the Soul, which is 1 tender; 2 spiritual. First then, the soul in a believer,
who is in a living estate, is most tender, being very sensible of any evil,
especially of the greatest; wherefore when the soul has once seen God in
mercy, and tasted how good he is, and how comfortable has been his presence,
the loss of him to the soul cannot be but grievious; and this grief of the
soul, is the very soul of grief, as we see, Prove. 18. 14. and like the tearing
of the flesh; whereas other griefs that are only corporal, is like the
tearing of the garment. Secondly, the soul is spiritual, therefore must meet
with that which is spiritual, as fit for it; for as the body is not satisfied
with things spiritual, so neither the soul with things corporal: Wherefore
when the soul is in distress, all the world to it is but like a great cipher,
which amounts to nothing, and can never be content, till it enjoy his
spiritual presence and fruition, who is the God of spirits; the more of whom
it had before, the more bitter to it is the loss of him.

Next, the Object of the soul is God, who is such, that the soul cannot be at
rest, till she enjoy him, if we consider, 1 either the quality of the object;
or 2 the relation between the soul and the same; or 3 his operation. First
then, there are three qualities in God, which makes the soul so to long after
him. 1 His goodness and mercy, apprehending which, the soul thus reasons with
it self: O unhappy wretch, that there should be so sweet a fountain, and that
the streams thereof should flow forth to thousands, and none unto me; as the
prodigal said, that there was so much bread in his fathers house, and he died
for hunger. 2 His greatness or power, whereof is mention made, Psalm. 99. 11.
and Prove. 19. 12. which power is twofold: 1 Of Authority over all, as judge,
having life and death, body and soul, in his hand: Now what a shaking of the
soul is it, to apprehend by desertion, such an one to be against it. 2 Of
Ability, to work what he wills; and if once he pronounce sentence, there is no
way to eschew it, Eccles. 8. 4. 3 Eternity, for God abides for ever, which
makes his favor or anger the more considerable; and the apprehension thereof
so grievous, that it swallows up the soul, and till his favor be regained, to
be altogether restless.

Besides this threefold quality of the object, the relation wherein the Lord
stands to a believer is most near and dear, for he is a friend, a father, and a
husband; the most active friend, the kindest father, and the most loving
husband; the loss of one of which is great, but of all three most grievous:
And therefore is the soul restless, till he be regained.

Lastly, the Lords operation in the soul makes it so restless, he having made
the heart of his children like Noah's dove, no rest till it rest in him, and at
last with him; or being like the Mariner's Needle: therefore said David, Return
to thy rest, O my soul; or as that Ancient, Fecisti nos Domine ad te, and
irrequietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te.

Observation.
By the Church her constant seeking of Christ, let us learn in like manner,
never to faint nor give over; yea, though we ^ind no comfort in the means, by
which he is to be sought; and albeit in place of raising us up, we be yet
farther cast down; yet let us never despair of finding him, as long as we have
a heart constantly to seek after him.

Verse. 8. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved,
that ye tell him, that I am sick of love.
Being frustrate of the comfort which she expected, at the hands of the
Watchmen, and by them being yet more cast down; here she requires help of her
friends, whom she calls, Daughters of Jerusalem, (as we see them styled so
before, Cant. 1. 5. and 2. 7. and 3. 5.) that at least they would recommend her
spiritual condition, and disconsolate estate, in their prayers to her
welbeloved, which she calls, a telling him, that she is sick of love; And to
this effect, she lays it as a strait charge upon them, which shows both her
vehemence of longing and desire, after her beloved; as also, that it is the
duty of Christians, as members of one body, to have a fellow-sympathy with
their distressed fellow members, any way; and out of the same, earnestly to
recommend their case and condition to God; not that he is either ignorant of
their condition, or careless and unmindfull of the same; but that she would
have the concurrence of their prayers with her own, because (as the Apostle
tells us) she knows, that the prayers of the faithful, if they be fervent,
avail much, even when they intercede for the ungodly, as we see in Abraham's
for Sodom; and therefore much more for the Lord's Saints.

As for this love-sicknesse whereof she speaks, and which is her spiritual
condition, which she requires to be recommended to God, we have spoken thereof
already, chap. 2. 5. and which shows here, that nature or flesh bears not the
sway in her, which would have reasoned thus, I have risen and opened unto him,
I have also sought him and called upon him; and yet he has withdrawn himself
from me, and would not make answer; yea, by occasion of seeking him further, he
has made me to be smitten and wounded; and therefore why should I any more set
my heart upon him, or by my self or others, make any search for him. Thus (I
say) would flesh and blood have reasoned; but the godly are not led by the
wisdom of the flesh, nor consults therewith, as Abraham did not with Sarah,
when he went to offer up Isaac; but they are led by the Spirit of God, who
teaches them perseverance in well-doing; and the more they suffer for Christ,
or in seeking after him, the more to love him, and to be lovesick for him;
which makes the faithful, the more they suffer persecution for his Name, their
love to his cause, and zeal for the same, still to increase, with their
fervency in prayer, and courage for the truth, than any wise the same is seen
to be in peace and prosperity, Act. 5. 45.

Observations.
1. Whereas, notwithstanding of her hard sufferings by the Watchmen, that she
the more vehemently expresses the fervency of her affection, to her Beloved,
and no ways desists from seeking after him, we see, That true grace grows up
with difficulties as Camomill does, the more it is trod on, or the fire
burns the bolder, the more it is blown; and therefore the godly, wherein this
is found, are compared chap. 2. 2. to a lilly that grows up among thorns; as
Israel increased the more in Egypt, notwithstanding of their sore bondage.

2. By her address to the daughters of Jerusalem, requiring the aid of their
prayers, and manifesting to them her spiritual and disconsolate estate; we see
an imitable example to be followed in the like case, by all; for thereby, both
the soul gets a vent, as it were, and is greatly eased; occasion also is given
of finding perhaps unexpected comfort, and many are set on work with such a
soul, to knock at the gate of grace with the importunate widow, to get what is
desired.

3. We see, that it is not only for our selves that we should pray, but for
others, as our Savior has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc. for this does
charity require, which is ever joined with true faith, and shows, that by
that fellow sympathy we have, of the distresses of others, we are truly of the
communion of Saints.

4. Whereas she says, Tell him, that I am sick of love, we see in like manner
the familiarity, into which the godly are admitted by prayer, even to tell
Christ, what are either our own wants, or the case and condition of others,
recommended to our prayers, as a child is admitted by his father to tell him,
and crave of him what he would have; with that comfortable assurance also, If
those who are evil will give their children good things, much more will he,
who is the Father of mercies, and goodness it self.

Verse. 9. What is thy Beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest amongst
women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou do so charge
us?
Follows in this verse, the Answer, which these daughters of Jerusalem make
to Christ's Spouse, desiring of her to be informed further, of the excellency
and rare parts, that is in her well-beloved, beyond any other, which makes her
so affectionate toward him, and so peremptorily to adjure and charge them. And
while thus they answer her, the title which they give unto her, is that same
whereof we spoke before, chap. 1. 8. and which her beloved gives unto her then,
calling her the fairest amongst women; this beauty of hers not being in
outward, for the Psalmist tells us otherwise, that she is all glorious within,
Psalm. 45. 13. the same consisting in spiritual ornaments, which are neither
dimmed nor diminished by afflictions or trials, but then do shine most
brightly, as the steadfastness of their faith, the fervency of their prayers,
their lowliness and humility, their patience and perseverance, their contempt
of the world, and desire after heavenly things, and sundry other virtues, for
which these daughters of Jerusalem, not looking on her as the blind world does,
but with a spiritual eye, and right discerning judgment, do here pronounce and
style her, the Fairest amongst women.

Observations.
1. Then we see, that it is a spiritual eye which discerns spiritual
things, and therefore sees even in a dejected soul the beauty of holiness, as
David saw the godly (though never so base and mean in the eyes of the world,
Psalm. 16. like Lazarous) to be the excellent ones of men; and, as the Apostles
speaks, Of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.

2. An earnest seeking after Christ our selves, and godly conference of him and
of heavenly and spiritual matters and cases of conscience, is a mean to edify
and stir up others to piety and the like practice, and so to win souls to
him; which as it ought to be in all Christians, so specially seen in pastors,
who if they be seen only to seek after the world, and to talk of such things,
they are a great scandal to other weak Christians.

3. We see that it is a great step, and hope of funder proficiency in true
Christianity, when any seriously begin to inquire after the Lord Jesus as he
has revealed himself in his word and in the power thereof to his elect, and are
desirous to learn what are his excellent benefits and heavenly graces, which he
as a full fountain and treasure thereof, has in himself to dispense and bestow
on them who come to him.

Verse. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.
Here is the churches answer to the daughters of Jerusalem, their question
wherein she describes her beloved unto them, and shows forth his matchless
beauty and excellency, both from his color which declares his good
complexion, and from the fit proportion of every part of his body, in which
two true comeliness consists. In which description though it be not necessary
to expound what may be by every part signified, the mind and aim of the spirit
being mainly, by this description of Christ according to the natural parts of
a man's body who is young and lovely, to show that he is altogether beautiful,
excellent, and delectable, to the eye of the sanctified soul; yet we shall
touch a little and briefly somethings most convenient, And. 1. she says, that
he is white and ruddy, which two colors do shovv an excellent complexion, and
make up perfect beauty, Cant. 2. 1. see, Lam. 4. 7. as we see David commended
therefrom, 1 Samuel 16. 12. And our Savior for that cause compared to the Rose
of Sharon and the Lilly of the valleys, the white color denotating his
Innocence in himself, and the red his sinful case by imputation, as we see,
Isay. 1. 18. and 2 Cor. 5. 21. Also the red, betokening his bloody sufferings
for sin, and the white color, victory, peace, and joy obtained to us
thereby: yea he is so excellent beyond all creatures in heaven or earth. men or
angels, that she says, he is the chiefest amongst ten thousand, Psalm. 45. 2.

Verse. 11. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushie, and black
as a raven.
His head, or high dignity, as king and head over all, being king of kings, and
king over him also, who is said to be king of fear, and a fear to all kings,
is said to be of gold, that is, as, Isay. 9. 6. glorious and durable: or, by
the head of Christ may be understood his deity, as we see, 1 Cor. 11. 3. where
God is said to be the head of Christ, as Christ is said to be our head yea our
only head, we not needing another: whose locks are said to be black, for
setting forth his beauty, as a foil is to a bright and beautiful stone, which
color is a sign of heat and strength in youth, and denotates strength and
spiritual vigor in him, as the white color of hair, Dan. 7. 9. did show him
to be the Ancient of days, full of gravity, Majesty and Wisdom.

Verse. 12. His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of water, washed
with Milk, and fitly set.
His eyes are said to be as the eyes of Doves, (as hers also was by him
compared before, chap. 4. 1.) 1. For cleerness, (and therefore compared to a
flame of fire, Rev. 1. 14.) searching the very heart, but yet meek and
merciful to all true penitents, and delighting in purity, as doves do in
clear waters, and in holy Innocence, resembled by the whiteness of milk, and
taking pleasure in an orderly conversation, regulated by Gods word, and in
performing obedience to both tables of Gods holy law by an equal respect, as
eyes do their object, that are fitly and equally set and placed in the head.

Verse. 13. His. cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers; his lips like
Lillies, droping sweet smelling Myrrh.
His cheeks, which in Princes, specially, at their coronation are kissed in
token of homage, as we see, Psalm. 2. 12. and 1. Sam. 10. 1. As also in others
are kissed in token of reverence and affection, as we see, Exodus 18. 7.) are
said to be as a bed of spices and as sweet flowers, to show thereby the
sweetness that the subjection of the soul to Christ with reverence and love
toward him does afford, which none knows but those who in the sweet repose of
a good conscience and witnessing thereof do find the same to their joy.

His lips also are said to be like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh: see,
Psalm. 45. 2. whereby is to be understood his holy word and heavenly doctrine,
Joh. 7. 46. Which is compared to fragrant and white Lillies, in respect of the
purity thereof without any mixture of error, and is therefore called the
sincere milk of the word, as also is said to drop sweet smelling Myrrh, in
regard of the comfort thereof, which it affords not to every one, as we see in
those to whom it is as a scorching or destroying fire, and savor of death unto
death, Rev. 11. 5. and 16. 8. But only to humbled and believing souls, as we
see it was to David, Psalm. 19. 10. and is to every one who hungreth after the
same and takes delight therein.

Verse. 14. His hands are as gold-rings, set with the Berill; his belly is as
bright I vory, over-laid with Saphires.
His hands, whereby is meant, his actions, Luke 24. 19. (whereof the hand is
the instrument,) are said be like Gold-rings set with the berill, that is most
precious as gold in estimation, perfect (as the circular figure is of any) and
glorious like precious stones: for he did all well.

His belly likewise, or whole inwards, and bowels of compassion specially, is
said to be as bright Ivory, over-laid with Saphires, that is, pure and clear
without any spot, and most comfortable to the soul, as white and blew colors
are pleasant to the eye.

Verse. 15. His legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine gold,
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.
His legs, whereby is understood all his ways; specially of mercy and love
toward his Elect, are said to be as pillars of Marble set on sockets of fine
gold, denotating thereby, that they are always stable, holy, pure, and
glorious.

His countenance also, or loving favor, to them on whom he makes the same to
shine, is said to be as Lebanon excellent as the cedars, that is to say,
goodly, most pleasant and delectable, as we see David found, and therefore so
much desired the same, Psalm. 4. 6.

Verse. 16. His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely; This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
His mouth, to wit, opened in holy scripture, and promises of salvation therein
contained, is most sweet and comfortable, specially to a weary and fainting
soul, as Jonathans honey was to him; yea, he is altogether lovely, even all
Christ, and all in Christ, to a soul that loves him. This is her beloved (she
says) and this is her friend, of whom the daughters of Jerusalem asked, what
was he more then another beloved? a beloved of matchles beauty, as he has been
described, and a friend of matchless friendship, kinder then Jonathan was to
David, whose love exceeded the love of women, who died for his enemies that
painful accursed and ignominious death of the cross, that he might make
friendship between God and us, and befriend our wretched souls in delivering
them from death, and purchasing unto them life everlasting.

Observations.
1. We see out of her description of Christ to the daughters of Jerusalem, that
it is the Churches part and office to publish and paint out before the eyes of
the faithful (as the Apostle speaks) by the preaching of the word Christ Jesus
Crucified, for which cause she is called the staple-place and pillar of truth,
which thing is a mark of the true Church, and whosoever does it not, but
withholds from Gods people the sound doctrine of the Word, and would by dumb
images and idols, (the teachers of lies) paint out Christ crucified otherwise,
they are not the true Church of Christ.

2. By such a description, of the excellency and beauty of her Beloved, we see
what a rich Jewel they find, who find Christ, and to how rare and excellent a
matchless husband they espouse their souls, who by a lively faith espouse
themselves to him, divorcing from Satan, sin, and the world; also how much
worth the seeking so glorious a Lord is, and what happiness and great dignity
his Church has, by the fruition of him here, but far greater by enjoying of him
hereafter.

3. Christ's love is so firmly rooted in her heart, and it so plentifully
filled therewith, that even when he has withdrawn himself from her, to her
feeling, and seems so unkind to her, (as Joseph seemed rough and strange to
his brethren) that when she called, he would not answer her; yet she expresses
the vehemence of her love toward him so, that she ceases not to charge the
daughters of Jerusalem, to tell him, that she is sick of love; and so highly to
praise and commend him, as the strain of her best expressions can any way reach
unto; showing thereby, that true saving grace, and the love of Christ, is so
permanent and durable in the souls of the Elect, that there is nothing that can
befall them, or whereby it pleases the Lord to exercise them, that can cool
their love, but rather kindle the same to him; and therefore even then, as Ruth
did to Naomi, they cleave the faster to him; with Jacob they wrestle, and will
not let him go; and with Job they dare tell him, that albeit he should kill
them, yet never will he depart from him; nor shall ever his love go out of
their heart, or his praise out of their mouth: For (as the Apostle says) who
shall separate them from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all
these things they are more than conquerours, through him that has loved them,
Romans 8. 35.

4. From the description of his head, verse. 11. which is as most fine gold, not
subject, as other baser mettalls, to rust and corruption: Seeing a conformity
should be between the head and members, (his mystical body not being like
Nebuchadnezar's Image) therefore we should all strive to holiness, and not to
be subject to corruption or wickedness.

5. Likewise, from the description of his eyes, verse. 12. compared to Doves
eyes, the eyes of his Church being in like manner, chap. 4. 1. so called and
compared, delighting in purity, holiness, and innocence; we see (as has been
said) what a conformity not only should be, but is between Christ and his
Church in holiness; their eyes, ears, tongue, heart, and hand, all being
sanctified and made holy, as he is holy, by his Spirit who renewes them.

6. From the description of his cheeks and lips, verse. 13. affording such
sweetness; we see, how sweet, leight, and easy, is Christ's yoke of
submission, unto all the faithful, through love's facilitation, which is not
so to others; and how sweet also his word is to such, which exacts that homage
and subjection, not only in the promises but precepts thereof, howsoever it be
like Marah, even bitter to the relish of others, tormenting them before their
time, because of their distempered palate and corruption, which it lances;
therefore Foelix could not abide it, no more than a sore eye can endure the
bright light, which is delightful to others.

7. In the 14 verse, we see a conformity, between his actions and inwards, both,
holy, and void of corruption or spot; Teaching us, that the like conformity
should be between our inwards and outward, not to have fair outward, and foul
inwards, like painted tombs; nor to pretend fair inwards, but to have foul
outward, our actions, being contrary to our profession, and having the voice
of Jacob, but the hands of Esau.

8. His legs or ways (which are all holy) are said to be stable, like pillars
of marble, verse. 15? teaching us in like manner, that so should all our ways
of holiness be, without wavering, or inconstancy and backsliding, remembering
Lot's wife, and the punishment of Korah and others, who would have returned to
Egypt: We must be then like Joshua and Caleb, and not like those Galatians;
that began in the spirit, but would end in the flesh, Gal. 3. 3. For unto
stable standers, as David professes of himself, Psalm. 26. 12. and constant
perseverers, is the promise made of eternal life, Revel. 2. 10.

9. She says verse. 16. This is my Beloved, after all her description of his
beauty and loveliness altogether; and this is My friend, (says she) to show
unto us, that it is no comfort to know all the excellencies of Christ, and what
benefits are to be had by him, except by the application of a true faith, we
can say, He is ours; as Thomas said, My God and my Lord.

10. We see, that even in this spiritual desertion, and distress wherein she
is, yet she calls him her friend, persuading her self of his love, because of
his promise, that whom he loves, he loves to the end, Joh. 13. 1. and never
despairing of his favor and return. One special evidence likewise of this her
assurance, of his love and friendship to her, is, her love and affection to
him, which she professes, in calling him, her beloved: So that as long as we
find a fervent and true affection in our hearts to Christ, that with Peter we
may say, Lord, thou know I love thee; so long may we be assured, that he
loves us, and is a friend unto us, what ever be our estate, and although with
David, we were walking through the very valley of the shadow of death it self,
his rod and staff shall comfort us.

Lastly, is Christ our friend, so good and so great a one unto us, and
unparalled by any, let us then be ashamed to be enemies to him, by joining
with his enemy Satan, and, so far as lies in us, crucifying him again, and
trampling his blood under foot, and so be enemies to our own souls. Let us also
be ashamed, to join with the enemies of his cause, remembering what Jehu, the
son of Hanani, the Seer, said to Iehoshaphat, Should thou help the ungodly,
and love them that hate the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. But rather let us be friends
to his cause, and to them who are his friends; and then he will prove our best
friend, in our greatest need, and not only in life, but in death, and when all
other friends will forsake us, or like Job's friends, can be but miserable
comforters.

Finis quinti Capitis.
Soli deo gloria.
CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. Whither is thy beloved gone. O thou fairest amongst women? whither is
thy well-beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee?
THE 3 parts of this Chapter are these: 1 Is set down the daughters of
Jerusalem, who were so straightly charged in the former Chapter, verse. 8. their
question to the Spouse of Christ, and her answer, to the fourth verse. 2
Christ's renewed praise of her, whereby he shows the graces of his Church, to
the tenth verse. And 3. The manifestation of his tender love toward her, by
diverse expressions, from the tenth verse to the end.

In the former Chapter, the Spouse had at large commended her Beloved, and that
which the same now does produce, is, The daughters of Jerusalem their inquiry
for him, that jointly with her they may likewise seek after him: so powerful is
the manifestation of the excellency of Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel,
and of the benefits that the Church has by him, that it kindles a desire in the
hearts of all elect hearers, to seek after him, that they may lay hold on him
by the hand of faith; and, as old Simeon got him in his arms, they may apply
him to their souls, to their eternal salvation; an example whereof we may see,
Act. 2. 37. Which shows unto us therefore, what an excellent thing it is,
amongst all the actions of men, the preaching of the Gospell^, and setting out
of Christ thereby, (as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.) whereby souls are
instructed and enamoured to seek after him, to their eternal salvation.

But here one thing chiefly is remarkable, how they say, not simply, Whither is
thy beloved gone, that we may seek him: but, that we may seek him with thee,
this being the only right way, to seek Christ and find him, when we seek him
with his Church, and as himself directs, Cant. 1. 8. saying, Go forth by the
steps of the flock, and feed thy kids by the shepheard's tents; and when we do
not, as perverse heretics, and giddy schismatics, and brainsick separatists
do, who pretend, that they seek Christ, but will after a singular and
self-conceited way of their own do so, but not with his Church, in the
Scriptures only, and in the congregation of the faithful, under an ordinary
and constitute Ministry.

Observations.
1. The inamouring of souls to seek after Christ, being by the setting forth
of Christ and his graces, in the preaching of the Gospel, should greatly
incite and encourage Pastors, to perform the same diligently, and make it their
main task or (...), knowing that if they do so, great is their reward that
abides them hereafter, as we see is promised, Dan. 12. 3. and elsewhere in
Scripture.

2. The same being the fruit likewise, of godly and religious conference, such
as we see was the practice by the way, of the two Disciples going to Emmaus,
Luke 24. 13, 14. (by occasion whereof, Christ drew-near, and manifested himself
to them) should in like manner stir up and encourage people, most frequently to
use such.

3. Whereas they say, that they will seek her beloved with her: 1 This shows,
to what society or company we should adjoyne our selves, to wit, to those who
seek after Christ; and not to such, who, on the contrary, depart away from him,
and seek only, either after the world, wickedness, or vanity. And 2 This
teaches us, to seek Christ in the ordinary way, of his holy Ordinances, wherein
his Church has constantly ever sought him.

Verse. 2. My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to
feed in the garden, and to gather lillies.
In this verse, is her answer unto their question, wherein she shows, 1
whither he is gone; as also 2 to what end. The place then whither she says he
is gone, and consequently where he is to be found, by all those who seek him
aright, is, his Church, which she calls here his garden, for the reasons
spoken of, chap. 4. 16. so that as Joseph and Mary sought him, and found him in
the Temple, so as he must be sought with his Church, as the preceding words
teach; so also he is to be found in his Church, with which he has promised to
be present to the world's end, Matthew. 28. 20. and therefore was seen to walk in
the midst of his seven golden candlesticks, Rev. 1. 13.

Unto this garden he is said to go down, as to a low place, therefore verse. 11.
said to be a valley, to show the humility of those, who are the members of his
true Church, which they learn from their Master, who says to all such, Learn
of me, for I am humble and meek.

As also he is said, to go to the beds of spices, whereby are understood the
hearts of the faithful, wherein he dwells; and which are compared to beds of
spices, because in them, as in beds of a garden, his heavenly graces are sown,
and grow up by degrees unto maturity and ripeness, till they come to such a
perfection, as to bring forth fruits, whereon our Savior is said here to feed,
to show his delight in a Christian obedience, as a hungry man has in meat and
drink.

Likewise he is said to go down, not only to his garden in the singular
number, meaning thereby, the Catholic Church in general, which is His (as has
been shown before) by a manifold right; but also to his gardens, in the
plural, there to feed, denotating every particular Church, and every soul in
them, over whom he has a special and particular inspection, and to whom he has
promised his comfortable presence, and constant abode with them, Ioh. 14. 13.

The end of which his presence, by the power of his Spirit with his Church, and
external ministry thereof, is, To gather lillies; that is, to gather together
all his Elect, that before his second coming, they may be all one flock, in
one sheepfold, under one shepherd; which Elect of his, why they are called
Lillies, we have shown before, Cant. 2. 1.

Observations.
1. We see, though Christ seem to withdraw himself awhile from his Church or
garden, and seem to neglect her, (as the Disciples said, Mar. 4. 38. Do thou
not care that we perish?) and though he seem to leave any true member of her
under spiritual desertions; yet he is in his garden, and shall be present with
her and her true members constantly, to the world's end.

2. If Christ be present ever in his Church, as in his garden, and gardens in
particular, by a particular inspection, as he had of him who wanted the wedding
garment, and of Nathaniel, Ioh. 1. 48. Then how watchful a eye should we have
over our selves, considering that we are in his sight continually who walks in
the midst of his Golden candlesticks and has eyes as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.
14. to observe our ways, and shall be our judge at the last day.

3. We see what our hearts and lives should be if we belong to this his garden
and be true members of his holy Church, to wit, our hearts should be like beds
of sweet spices sown with heavenly virtues, and our lives should bring forth
sweet fruits, such as Isay speaks of, whereon Christ may feed, and not (as alas
the lives of most do) sour grapes to set our teeth one day on edge, Isay. 5. 2.

4. The gathering we see of the elect, and their effectual calling to be
Lillies in his garden is ascribed to Christ, for he only opens the heart, like
Lidia's, and does teach the same, therefore both by pastor and people from him
let the same (to wit, his grace of conversion) be earnestly sought and
implored, and all the glory thereof to him alone be only ascribed.

Verse. 3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, he feeds among the Lillies.
Here the sweet assurance that the soul had before of a comfortable communion
with Christ, begins to revive again under the former spiritual desertion,
and that joy of her salvation, whereof David speaks, Psalm. 51. begins to be
restored to her again. Of which words because we treated before, chap. 2. 16.
we supersede any more to speak of them here.

Verse. 4. Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as^an army with banners.
Here begins the second part of this Chapter, wherein the beloved renewes the
praise of his spouse, after the same manner, and almost in the same words as he
had done before in the fourth Chapter, and yet without any tautology, as might
be thought, or superfluous repetition, but most fitly and requisitly, he
speaks in so kind a manner to his spouse, after his former silence, chap. 5.
6. Now to her comfort, to testify his presence again, and that notwithstanding
of her former faultiness, which had made him to withdraw himself from her and
suffer her to endure such distress, yet he would not fully nor finally desert
her, as also in respect that she had bewailed her offense and had risen and
sought him sorrowing lest by her sin and security, it might seem she had lost
his love and her former comeliness in his sight, therefore for her comfort he
renewes the commendation of her beauty (as she had renewed her carriage) and
adds thereto, that thereby he might witness to her the constancy of his
liking.

In this verse then she is commended, 1. From her beauty, 2. From her
comeliness; and, 3. From her terror to her enemies: first then she is said to
be beautiful as Tirzah which was a city in Canaan not far from Samaria,
wherein, for pleasantness of Situation, Jeroboam built his royal place, and
thereafter the kings of Israel kept their court, as we read, 1 King. 14. 17.
Next she is said to be comely as Jerusalem, whereof already we have spoken at
large, which was not only commended for sanctity as the holy City, chap. 1. 5.
but also from peace, and the exercise of true religion and public worship in
her, beyond all other places whatsoever. Lastly, she is compared in respect of
her estate Militant on earth to an army terrible with banners. 1. The General
of which army is he whom Joshua saw (Joshua 5. 14.) The captain of the Lords
host, victorious ever and triumphant over all his enemies, who is described,
Rev. 19. 12. etc. on whose head are many crowns, whose eyes are as flames of
fire, and whose name is King of kings and Lord of lords blessed for ever, 2.
His soldiers, are all sons to the most high, and coheires with their
General of a heavenly kingdom, of undanted courage in greatest extremities,
as Martyrs have proved, and of invincible valor, more then that of David, or
his worthies, and so there was never so noble and valiant army as this, 3.
Their armor is armor of proof and spiritual, as we have, Ephesians. 6. 4. Their
banner or Ensign is the Cross of Christ, and his bloody sufferings, under the
colors of which avowed profession they constantly and courageously fight. 5.
They are all one compact body in a holy unity of faith and love, though they be
dispersed through the whole earth, marching all orderly in their several
stations wherein they are set by their great general; and 6. These are their
privileges, 1. Wounded they may be, but never killed nor over come finally, 2.
They are sure of victory over all their spiritual enemies, yea over death and
the grave it self, and to triumph in the highest heavens; and* 3. Each one for
his reward shall receive an incorruptible crown, and a glorious eternal
kingdom, with Christ Jesus for ever.

Observations.
1. Seeing the estate of Christ's Church here is Militant* and therefore
compared to an army, therefore, Let all her true members expect no ease, rest
or security on earth, but rather the uttermost daily, that either the craft or
malice of Satan can plot or practice; and therefore arm themselves with the
complete armor of God, be still on their watch, harden themselves like beaten
soldiers against all difficulties, resist temptations which are the assaults
of the enemy, like Gideons soldiers imitate their captain, fight that good
fight whereof the Apostle speaks, and be constant to the death, and they shall
receive the crown of life.

2. This should teach us to welcome death when it comes, which ends our fight,
gives the full victory, and enters us in the triumphant estate of glory.

3. We see, that that which is terrible to the enemies of Christ's Church
spiritual or corporal, is, when she is like a well ordered army, wherein is
no mutiny or con^usion, but unity of faith and decency of order; whereas on
the contrary, if she be as Midians army, Judge. 7. or the builders of Babel, by
heresy or schism, confusion and disorder, this is the greatest joy,
advantage, and ground of courage unto all her enemies.

Verse. 5. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me, thy hair is
as a flock of goats, that appear from Gilead.
The like of these words we have, chap. 4. 9. Which we have already expounded,
and as for any variation, which we find here, Christ does not mean thereby,
that she should turn away the eyes of her faith from him, he being the
constant object thereof, and wherein he so delights, that the doing thereof
ravishes his heart to her, as he shows there: but this is a kind of speech,
whereby he expresses how much the beauty of her eyes does inamour him, that it
makes him, in like case with her self, that is, to be sick of love, such is the
excellency and force of true faith, which for that cause we should be so
careful to obtain. The rest to the eight verse we have expounded before, in
the fourth Chapter, verses 1. 2. 3.

Verse. 8. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins
without number. 9. My dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of
her Mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her, the daughters saw her
and blessed her, yea, the queens and concubines and they praised her.
In this eight verse is set down the glorious attendance of the spouse of
Christ, as we have the like, Psalm. 45. 12. and 14. And, as it is likewise said
that kings shall be her nursing fathers and queens her nursing mothers; a
definite number of which queens and concubines being here put for an
indefinite; and by virgins all chaste worshippers whatsoever being to be
understood, and therefore they are said to be without number, as we find the
like speech of such in the Revelation, c. 7. 9. All which forenamed queens, for
birth, beauty, or busking, are no wise comparable to these three in her: for
all hers is from heaven and spiritual, but all their's from the earth and
natural; yea, as the Psalmist says, This King's daughter is all glorious
within, with the beauty of holiness, spoken of Psalm. 110. which by age cannot
fade, sickness cannot blast, nor death can quite abolish.

Next, verse. 9. the Church is praised from her chastity and unity, for which
she is blessed and praised; blessed by the Daughters, and praised by the Queens
and Concubins: In respect of which her spiritual chastity, she is called
Undefiled; and in respect of her unity, she is called One; yea, the only one
of her mother that bare her.

The title that he gives her here, calling her his Dove, of it we have spoken
already, cap. 2. 14. whereunto this only may be added, That as every thing in
the dove is amiable, as her eyes, Cant. 1. 15. and her feathers, Psalm. 68. 13.
and what not? so is the Church in the eyes of Christ, who sees no iniquity in
Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel; not that his justice sees any thing
otherwise than it is, but that his mercy will not see some things as they are.

Likewise, how he calls her his Dove, we have spoken in like manner: Therefore,
1 She is not her own, 1 Cor. 6. ult. because bought with a price. 2 Neither is
she the world's, for so it would love her; whereas on the contrary it hates
her, as it did her Head before her.

The first property then, from whence she is described, is her chastity,
implied in this, that she is called Undefiled; not that she is free from all
sinning, so long as she is in this life; but she is so perfectly by
justification, and reputed so in Christ by gracious acceptance, and
inchoatively made holy by sanctification, and made perfect by the perfection of
parts, which is evangelicall, though not of degrees, as the Law requires, and
is not competent to her estate militant.

Next, she is called One, all perfection rising from unity, and returning
thither; so that every thing, the nearer it comes to perfection, gathers it
self up the more toward unity: Therefore God is one, there is one Heaven, one
Earth, one Church in the earth, one King of his Church, one Law, one Faith, one
Baptism, etc.

And as there is perfection in unity, so there is strength; as on the contrary,
a City or Kingdom divided against themselves, cannot stand; therefore it is
said, That for the divisions of Reuben, were great thoughts of heart.

The Church then is called one, 1 as not being divided; 2 as not being
multiplied.

To begin then with the former; Whether we consider the Church as an
aggregation, of the outward visible particular Churches, of Christian
professors in common; or as the invisible and universal Church of the Elect
only, it is still one, professing one Lord, and so being one in the Head; one
Faith, and so being one in the heart; and one Baptism, and so being one in the
outward face thereof: No natural body being more one, than this mystical is,
which one head rules, one spirit quickens, one blood washes, one food
nourishes, and one roab covers, etc. And so it is one in it self, and one with
Christ, as Christ is one with the Father, Joh. 17. 22. What Church then has one
only head, the Lord, one only faith in the Lord, built upon one only
foundation, Ephesians. 2. 20. and one baptism in that faith; that, is Christ's Dove.

And as the Church of Christ is one, not being divided, so is she one, not
being multiplied: For as the Lord gave but one Eva^ to the first Adam, so he,
will take but one Spouse to himself, who is the second Adam; therefore many
particular Churches, whether Congregationall or National, make up but one
Universal. Neither are there two Churches, when we say, Militant and
Triumphant; but we distinguish only the diverse condition, of the diverse
members of Christ's Church, which is but one, as they are either in via, or
else already in patria.

Observations.
1. By this glorious attendance of the Spouse of Christ, of the greatest and
most honorable persons on earth, as Queens, who are her nursing mothers;
beside the glorious attendance of the glorious Angels, which is invisible, and
who are ministering Spirits, sent out for her good; We see, how powerful an
inducement this should be, to adjoyn our selves to Christ's Church, to be true
members thereof; and what honor the poorest and most contemptible attains
unto, who do so.

2. Whereas the Church is called a Dove, not any ravenous foul; those who are
violent, fiery, and furious spirits, are disclaimed from being any true members
of Christ's Church, who think, that there can be no zeal or piety, that is not
cruel; and that Religion should be propagated, not so much gladio oris, as ore
gladii, by bloody wars, massacres, and such like, which has been the
customable practice of the Roman Church, whereby that Whoor is drunk with the
blood of the Saints. Whereas Christ's Dove delights in no blood, but that which
was shed for her, but not in any blood shed by her: And it is by her own blood,
shed by others, that she has flourished and been enlarged, but not by her
shedding of the blood of others.

3. In respect of spiritual chastity, and pure worship of God only, according
to the rule of his Word, that she iscalled undefiled: Then we see, that what
Church soever, pretend what she will, defiles her self with idolatry, which is
spiritual whoordom, and departing from the sincerity of the Word of God, goes
a whooring after the traditions of men, superstition, and will worship, adoring
the creature, whereas only they should worship the Creator. That Church that
does so, is not Christ's Church, nor his dove and undefiled; but an
antichristian, idolatrous, and apostatick Church, usurping the Christian name.

4. Seeing the Church is called Christ's undefiled, he only claiming propriety
thereto; this shows, 1 That he may claim from us all whatsoever we are, our
souls and all the faculties thereof, our bodies and all the members thereof, to
be his in entire affection; in obsequie, in all things that we have from him,
in all these that we be for him, his glory, his cause, and his Church, etc. 2
As he may claim from us whatsoever we are, or have; so we being his, and he
ours, as cap. 6. 3. we may claim from him his love, his defense, yea himself,
and all his benefits with him; for the inference between conjugall parties, is
mutual and reciprocal; the husband and all he has is the wifes, and the wife
and all that she has, is the husbands.

5. Seeing Christ's dove is undefiled, those who delight in the pollutions of
sin, the world, and the flesh, are not Christ's true members, but it is to the
unclean spirit, that such unclean persons belong; neither such carnal ravens
but the clean and undefiled dove, is fit for the Lord's ark, to be taken into
the same.

6. Seeing Christ's dove and undefiled is but one, let all such who claim
interest in her, be as one, holding the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace; one in heart and affection, as the primitive Christians were, Act. 4.
32. one in mind, one in will, submissive in every thing to God's; one in work,
I mean, the practice of godliness; and one in tongue and profession of the
truth, that neither it be said, as, Hos. 10. 2. their hearts is divided; nor in
tongue, that they are like the builders of Babel; but that their ditton may be,
cor unum, via una. Neither let any small weaknesses in our ordinary
conversation, make a rupture of this brotherly unity, which is so commended and
commanded, Psalm. 133. 1.

7. She is also called, the choice or elect one of her that bare her, which
teaches us, that the true members of Christ's mystical body, which is his
Church, they are not of the ordinary multitude, who profess the Christian name
in common, nor must think, that this will suffice; but they must labor to be
choice ones, and singular beyond such, as Noah was in his age, and Lot in
Sodom, etc. not contenting with the common badge, or name, that they live, or
show of godliness, having denied the power thereof; but labor for the
sealing, that is spoken of, ^zek. 9. and Revel. 7. and the stamp of their
Father's Image.

8. It is said here, That the daughters that saw her, blessed her, or
pronounced her to be so; whereby we see, what it is that makes one to be truly
blessed o^ happy, and what is the right judgment, which men should have in this
point; to wit, not to account any blessed or happy, for worldly honor or
riches, or any external and accidental thing; but for the grace of God that
they see in them, and that kyths in the whole constant course of their life and
conversation, both in their duties to God and Man, although their estate were
never so mean, and their persons crossed and contemptible in this world, as was
that of Lazarus.

9. Also it is said, that the Queens and Concubines, they praised her, which
teaches us, what is only and truly praiseworthy, or which we should commond
in any; to wit, a holy and christian conversation, where^^ they express the
simplicity and meekness of the Dove, an undefiled and holy life, a peacable
and godly disposition, to entertain peace and unity with all men, so far as in
them lies, and whereby they labor to approve themselves to God, to their own
conscience, and to all that look upon their life and conversation, that they
are the true member's of Christ's mystical body.

Verse. 10. Who is she that looks forth as the morning? fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, and terrible as an army with Banners?
Here they who did see her beauty before, not only, as in the former verse, do
praise her, but in this place with admiration, at the matchless greatness and
glory thereof, they extol and magnify the same more amply, by way of
admiration, saying, Who is this that looks forth as the morning! etc.
ascending by way of gradation, to show the degrees of the increase, of the
light and brightness of the Church, which may either have relation to her
estate before the Law, under the Law, or under the Gospel; she being like the
morning light, before the Law; under the Law, like the light of the Moon, which
is changeable, as Types and Figures were; and under the Gospel, she being like
the clear or bright shining Sun. Or else she is said to be like the morning,
whose light more and more increases unto the perfect day, to show, how the
knowledge of the godly is ever in grouth in this life only, who know but in
part; but is nor perfect till the life to come. Next, she is said to be fair
like the Moon, to show, that as the Moon borrows her light from the Sun, so
does she her beauty and brightness from the Sun of Righteousness, as himself
tells her, Ezekiel. 16. 14. she having nothing of her self, but what she has
received. And lastly, she is said to be clear as the Sun, as Rev. 12. 1. being
clothed with the Sun of righteousness, and that righteousness of his, which
is imputed to her. She is said also to be terrible as an Army with banners, as
was formerly shown on the fourth verse, which she is not only so to her
spiritual foes, but also to wicked men, both in the threatenings of Gods Word,
which makes their conscience oftimes tremble, like Foelix; as also in her
sincere government, and execution of discipline, against scandalous delinquents.

Observations.
1. We see by these comparisons, how good and happy is their estate, though
never so poor and base in the world, who are true members of Christ's Church;
and therefore if we find this, by having grace in our hearts, let us never
grudge at our condition otherwise; for as Elkanah said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 5,
8. so the Lord has given us a worthier portion, than ten thousand worlds,
himself being our portion. And if he has likewise in earthly things dealt
liberally with us, yet let us never balance alike the same, with his bounty in
this, but be content to lose the one, for keeping the other, Luk, 14. 26, 27,
33.

2. If the Church, in her militant estate, be so glorious on earth, how
glorious will she be, and all her members, in her triumphant estate hereafter
in the heavens.

Verse. 11. I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the
valley, and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomgranate budded.
Follows now, after Christ's commendation of his Church, his special visit of
her, by going down to his garden, (the Lord speaking so after the manner of
men, as he does in like manner, Genesis 18. 21.) the end thereof being, To see the
fruits of the valley, that is, of those humble ones, who, as Esaias says,
Tremble at his word, Esa. 66. 2. and in all humility, brings sorth the fruits
thereof, without any proud conceit of their own merit; but when they have done
all, counting themselves unprofitable servants. As also he comes to see,
whether the Vines flourished, or the pomgranats budded; that is, whether they
were fruitful, or hopeful, and what progress and proficiency he could find,
in the practice of true faith and piety.

And therefore he speaks only of Fruit Trees, as Nuts, Vines, and pomgranats,
because unfruitful Trees are not to be suffered in the Lord's garden, Matthew.
3. 10. Luke 13. 7, 9. The godly being compared to Nut-trees; 1 Because as Nuts
has the best, unseen, within it, which is the kernel; even so the best side of
the godly is the inner man, (contrary to hypocrites) as we see, Psalm. 45. 13. 2
The Nuts with the greatest shours of rain, are washed only the more, but no
ways harmed; even so by affliction or persecution, are the godly profited, but
not prejudiced.

The godly also are likened to Pomgranats, which are full of seed and liquor,
to show, so are they replenished with the seeds and sweet liquor of grace.

Observations.
1. As Matthew. 22. we see, the Lord's particular inspection of his guests, so
here, his special and particular inspection of all sorts of trees in his
garden, whereof if we were mindful continually, it would be a sovereign
preservative against sin, and a motive to godliness, Hos. 7. 2.

2. We see what sort of ground the Lord's garden is, which brings forth good
fruit; to wit, Valley-ground, that is, humble souls, to whom only he has
promised to give grace, by which they sructisie; wherefore till we be made so
by repentance, we are not fit for fructifying; and when we are made fruitful,
true grace will make us yet more humble; none being so holy as our Head, and
yet none so humble.

3. We find no mention, but of fruitful trees in the Lord's garden; wherefore
if we be not so, we know what is threatened against such, Matthew. 3. 10.

4. Neither are all trees bringers forth of the like precious fruit; for we
see, some are but Nut-trees, and some more noble, as the Vine, and the
Pomgranat; If therefore we labor to be fruitful and faithful in our places,
though never so mean or low, it suffices, that we are in the Lord's house,
though a doorkeeper, or a snuffer, or a snuff-dish, being in the Sanctuary.

5. We see, that there is not a like progress or measure of proficiency in
all; for some have fruits, others (as the Vine) but flourish, and some (as the
Pomgranat) was but only budding; even as there are some but babes in Christ, 1
Cor. 3. 1. and some stronger men, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. It is well then, if true
grace be surely rooted in the heart, and be kything in any measure in a holy
life; provided it be constantly growing, in the holy progress of a christian
practice, as the Apostle shows was his own endeavor.

Verse. 12. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadab,
In these words is set down, upon Christ's coming down to his Garden, the
sudden rapture of the soul, as a swift Chariot to meet him, which is the work
of his Spirit, blowing mightily when he list, and which she says she found,
before she was aware; as we see the like in the calling of Zacheus, the
conversion of Paul, the Thief upon the Cross, and the change wrought on
Manasses, like the awaking of Peter unawares, by the Angels sudden and
unexpected coming upon him in the prison, and making the chains fall off from
his hands, Act. 12. 7. or like that descending suddenly of the holy Ghost, in
form of fiery tongues, upon the Apostles, Act. 2. 2: Which work of the Spirit
upon the soul unawares, makes such a rapture and alacrity of obedience, that
the same is compared to the swift march of the Chariots of Aminadab, who, as we
read, 1 Chronicles. 2. 10. was the father of Naashon, Prince of the children of
Judah, of whom our Savior came, according to the flesh, as we have it, Matthew.
1. 4. Others take this to be the name of Solomon's driver of his Chariots,
allusion being made in all this Song to Solomon. Others read Aminadib, which is
by interpretation, a willing people, and not appellatively, to show the
disposition of Christ's people, as Psalm. 110. and what makes them so forward to
come to him. Others take this to be a continued speech of Christ's, showing his
speedy march of mercy, when he comes to visit his Church in love, the very
tender affection of his soul toward her, making him to be like the Prodigalls
father, his running to meet his son, whom he saw afar off; or as is said here,
to the swift march of the Chariots of A^dab.

Observations.
1. In respect that this work of grace, exciting and enabling her to come and
meet her beloved, (who after a whiles withdrawing himself, was now come down to
his garden) was before she was aware, We may learn hereby, for any work of
grace in us, or good wrought by us, to whom belongs the glory, we being all by
nature like Ezekiel's dry bones, or Iazarus lying in the grave, the one
breathed upon, and the other raised, and both made to live and stand up before
they were aware.

2. We see, by the march of these Chariots, the manner how we should come to
Christ, when he comes to us; to wit, not lazily, lingringly, or slowly, but as
Psalm. 110. 3. willingly in the day of his power, cheerfully and speedily, as
his will is done in heaven; which made the Spouse to say, Cant. 1. 3. Draw me,
and we will run after thee; as likewise David, I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou have enlarged my heart, Psalm. 119.

Verse. 13. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon
thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two Armies.
Some think these words to be the speech of the Church's friends, exhorting her
to conversion, that with rejoicing they might look upon her, as one that had
returned from her straying, and in whom may be seen the battle between the
flesh and the Spirit, so long as she is in this life, like two Armies militant,
each one against another.

Others take this to be Christ's speech to his Spouse, now after her
conversion, when he has manifested himself unto her, who in the time of his
desertion of her before, had gone abroad, and painfully sought him, vvhere-ever
she might find him, Cant. 3. 4. and therefore now he bids her return (as she
had done before when she found him) to her own home, promising his comfortable
presence with her hereafter, and that he would look upon her, lifting up upon
her (as David desired) the light of his countenance, Psalm. 4. 6. And therefore
the style that he gives her, suitable to this work of his mercy, is Shulamit,
from Shalem, (from whence Jerushalem) which signifies Peace, because he was to
speak peace now, to her formerly distressed conscience, and to say to her soul,
that he was her salvation. Wherefore also is subjoyned, that which is to be
seen in this Shulamite, and in the whole progress of the Lord's dealing with
her; to wit, as it were the company of two Armies, his manifold mercies
victorious over her many miseries.

Observations.
1. If it be the speech of the Church's friends in that sense, that is first
spoken of, we may see, that it is the christian duty of every one, and
especially Pastors, Isa. 2. 10. Mica. 4. 1. to stir up all who concerns them,
to serious repentance, Hos. 6. 1. and if they see that work of grace in any, to
rejoice with the holy Angels greatly therein, Luke 15. 10.

2. In the godliest who are converted, there is no perfection here, but, as the
Apostle professes of himself, a battle, as of two Armies, between the flesh
and spirit, Romans 7. and 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. Therefore none should ascribe
perfection to themselves, as the Pharisees did, and Papists do, of whom it may
be said, as Prove. 30. 12. but should do as Phil. 3. 12. and acknowledge, as
Prove. 4. 18. and Heb. 6. 1.

3. If it be Christ's speech to his Spouse, in the latter sense, after her
conversion, bidding her (as David says to his soul) return to her rest, and
former tranquillity or peace in him, which she had wont to find, Isa. 54. 6, 7,
8. then we may see, that though for a time he hide his face, and his Saints are
disquieted, yet at last he will speak peace unto them; but let them take heed,
that thereafter they return not to folly, Psalm. 85. 8.

4. Where it is said, That we may look upon thee, we see the delight that
Christ has in the godly, and in that beauty of his, spoken of Psalm. 45. 13.
Ezekiel. 16. 14. Psalm. 110. 3. which he communicates to her, delighting to look
upon such a soul, as upon a most beautiful and love-ravishing face.

5. The tripling of the word [Return] shows his earnestness, either of the
conversion of a soul, as he said of Jerusalem, How would I have gathered thee,
etc? Or that she should perform any duty, that tends most to her own good and
welfare.

Finis sexti Capitis.
Soli Deogloria.
CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. How beautiful are thy feet with shoos O prince's daughter? the
joints of thy thighs are like Jewels, the work of thy hands, as of a cunning
workman.
THe parts of this Chapter are two. In the first to the Tenth verse, is set
down a further description yet of the Churches graces, by a commendation of
her, from her very feet upwards to her head, and all the parts of her body
far different from her natural condition, Ezekiel. 16. And in the second is set
down the mutual delight and desire each one to another which is between Christ
and his spouse.

In this first verse then begins her description wherein, 1. We have how she
is styled, O Prince's daughter, commending her thereby from her noble race, as
she is likewise called, Psalm. 45. 13. This not being by her first birth or
nature, whereof is mention made, Ezekiel. 16. 3. but by her regeneration and
grace, whereof we have the description, Joh. 3. 5. and 1. 13. God who is the
King of kings being her father, Christ Jesus being her elder brother, the
glorious Angels her servants, and heaven being her inheritance, Heb. 1. 14.

Next to her style which he gives her, he begins her commendation from the
beauty of her feet with shoos, whereby is signified her holy walking (as David
speaks) in the paths of righteousness and ways of Gods commandments, Psalm. 23
and 119. for then only are her feet beautiful in Gods sight with that beauty
of holiness spoken of, Psalm. 110. 3. and 29. 2. Whereas when men depart and go
astray from the Lords precepts, because of the pollution of sin and their
walking in the crooked ways thereof, their feet are most filthy and void of
all beauty, Isay. 59. 7, 8.

Next, her feet are said to be beautiful with shoos, whereof mention is made,
Ezekiel. 16. 10. and which are expounded by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 15. to be the
preparation of the Gospel of peace; in the true knowledge, holy profession and
sureable obedience whereof while, she walks constantly, her feet are truly said
to be beautiful with shoos, as theirs also are said to be on the mountains
who bring the glad tidings of peace, Isay. 52. 7. Now, there may be a threefold
or fourfold reason why her feet behoved to be shod with shoos, 1. Because being
of so noble a birth, and spouse also to so great a King it were not suitable to
her birth nor place, to go basely or barefooted, but to have her feet shod, yea
beautiful with shoos, as all the rest of her body is said to be richly
adorned. 2. Because of the way wherein she walks, being not only narrow, but
likewise rough and rugged through the many sharp and thorny crosses and other
difficulties which Satan casts in, to discourage her, into the way of
godliness, against all which she is armed and prepared being thus shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, and shrinks not but treads them all down,
being in all these (as says the Apostle) more then a conqueror, Romans 8. 37. 3
Her feet are shod with shoos, as the people of Israel were enjoined to be,
Exodus 12. 11. To show that she must make for a journey, which the life of all
the godly is here, yea, as the Angel said to Eliah, 1 King. 19. 7. Which is a
great journey to go, to wit, from earth to heaven, or the Egypt and wilderness
of this world to the heavenly Canaan. and, 4. Her feet are shod with shoos, Ne
terrae adhaereant, Col. 3. that her feet or affections cleave not to the earth,
as their's do, who (like the kings of Sodom and Gom^rrah that fell in the vale
of Siddim, Genesis 14. 10. Where were slimy pits,) in their affections in like
manner are entangled with the tough slime of Mammon, and are made thereby to
fall into many temptations.

Lastly, the joints of her thighs, which make her motion in walking, are said
to be like Jewels, the work of the hand of a cunning workman, signifying
thereby how precious in Gods sight like a Jewel well set in Gold, are her
straight steps and orderly walking in the paths of righteousness, beseeming the
Gospel wherewith she is shod: and so as she is glorious within by saving grace
in her heart, so is she likewise without, in the actions of her life, shining
like Jewels by her good works (as our Savior exhorts,) Matthew. 5. Or like the
wise virgins Lamps, which were burning and shined, Matthew. 25.

Observations.
1. Seeing Christ's church is called a Prince's daughter, yea his, who is Prince
of princes and King of Heaven and Earth, and that the dignity of a Christian by
his new birth is so great, this should move every one to seek to attain
thereto, and to repentance which is the pains of the new birth, and all other
evidences thereof.

2. So in like manner Let us carry, finding that we are born a new, as our
conversation may be suitable thereto, and disdain to be a base slave to sin,
or a drudge unto Satan.

3. Seeing the gospel and preparation thereof must be these shoos spoken of,
which maks our feet beautiful, it must not be in our head only by knowledge,
nor in our heart by affection, but also on our feet, in practice and walking
agreeable thereto.

4. Seeing these shoos spoken of, which we must put on upon our feet, makes
them and all our walking in them so beautiful, pleasant and acceptable to God,
let us daily when we put on our other clothing, put on likewise these shoos on
the feet of our affections, and make the power thereof be seen in all our
outward actions.

5. Whereas the joints of her thighs are compared to Jewels (as the godly
themselves are called by the Prophet,) Mal. 3. 17. We see how acceptable and
precious in the Lords eyes the ways and holy walking of the godly is, and
therefore like the wise merchant, Matthew. 13. 45. now careful we should be to
get this Jewel of grace, which makes our walking and holy ways to be so
accounted.

Verse. 2. Thy navell is like a round goblet, which wants not liquor, thy
belly is like a heap of wheat, set about with Lillies.
Here she is praised not only from her former holy and steadfast walking in the
Gospel, and obedience thereto as a daughter herself, but likewise from her
propagating the same as a Mother to others, and therefore so compared here:
First concerning her children in her womb, and thereafter nourishing them being
borne) upon her two breasts, wherefore, 1. Her navel under which the child lies
and is nourished in the womb is compared to a round goblet which wants not
liquor, signifying thereby her fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of grace.
2. Her fertile belly is said to be like a heap of wheat, ^ull of that goodly
grain and holy seed who are the regenerate, called here wheat as only fit for
the Lords garner, Matthew. 13. 25. And being such as the good husbandman sowed in
his field and are not like the wicked tares which the envyous man sowed, fit
only for combustion. And lastly, this her fertile womb is said to be like a
heap of Wheat compassed with Lillies, signifying that the fruit of her womb
whom she brings forth plentifully, are all beautified with holiness, in which
respect we see the godly in this song frequently compared.

Observations.
1. It is not enough to be holy our selves, but so far as we can, out of a
holy zeal to God, and a charitable respect to our neighbor, we should labor
to gain and bege^ as it were or bring forth others to Christ; and as Andrew
brought Simon his brother, and Philip Nathaniel, Ioh 1. so each one to count it
his greatest happiness, and espccially pastors, how many they may bring unto
Christ, and thereby enlarge his kingdom, and add daily to the communion of
Saints.

2. The regenerate are compared here to a heap of wheat, which is, 1. The
noblest grain of any, 2. Nourishing and prositable, 3. Indures that in winter
which no other grain does which is sown, 4. Is solid and not like the chafe
but abides the winnowing; and lastly is appointed for the garner, when the
chafe is dissipate, and the tares are burnt in the fire. Theresore let us
hereby try if we be such, 1. Partakers of the new birth, which only and truly
nobilitates, 2. If our words and actions nourish and edify, 3. If we can
patiently endure trouble or affliction, 4. If in trials like Job we constantly
adheare to the Lord, and resolve to cleave to him although he should kill us.
Then we may be sure that we are true wheat, having solid grace in our hearts
here, and appointed for the Lords garner, and mansion place of glory hereafter.

Verse. 3. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.
Of these words we have formerly spoken, Chap. 4. 5.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is as a tower of Ivory, thine eyes like the Fish pooles in
Heshbon by the gate of Bathrabbim, thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which
looks toward Damascus.
This comparison also does not much differ from that former, chap. 4. 4. Where
he says, thy neck is like the tower of David, saving that as there he shows
the strength of true Faith for overcoming temptations, and therefore adds,
(which is built for an armory); so here he shows the beauty, stedfastness and
holiness of faith, and therefore compares it to (a tower of Ivory.)

Next he says, that her eyes are like fish pooles in Heshbon, by the gate of
Bathrabbim, which Heshbon (as we read, Numb. 21. 26.) was a famous and fair
City, where Sihon king of Heshbon sometimes dwelt, which had fair fish-pooles
or ponds in it, and which the Reubenites after did possess, Numb. 32, 33. This
gate also Bathrabbim was a gate by which the greatest concourse of people
entered in and went forth, for which cause the same was so called, Bath being as
much to say, as the daughter, and rabbim of many, her eyes then are compared to
these fish-pooles, for their cleerness like water in the knowledge of Christ
and his truth, and seeing her self and her own ways, or else for her mournful
disposition, in shedding tears for her own sins, and the sins of the
times, as we see, Ezekiel. 9. 4. and Psalm. 119. 136.

Lastly, he speaks of her nose or spiritual sense of smelling what sweetness
is in Christ, and in the graces of his spirit, as also whereby she discernes
between truth and error, the noisome smell of sin, and fragrant smell of
godliness, and which nose of hers for beauty and comeliness he compares to the
tower of Lebanon, which Solomon built, as we read, 1 King. 7.

Observations.
1. Where her faith, signified by her neck, is compared to a tower built of
white Ivory, which denotates purity and holiness; we see then where holiness
(without which no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14.) is not joined with faith,
that faith is not true nor saving, Jam. 2. 14.

2. Seeing the Churches eyes for the reasons before named, are compared to
fish-pooles, we see then that ignorance, and impenit^ncy, are not suitable to
true Christianity.

3. The church has a spiritual nose or smelling, and suchlike other senses,
Let us try then if we be true members thereof by this, that we have the like,
and thereby discern as is aforesaid; else, if we have but coporall and
natural senses like unto beasts, we are not to be accounted better, yea our
condition shall be worse then theirs.

Verse. 5. Thine head upon thee is like Carmell, and the hair of thy head like
purple, the king is held in the Galleries.
Her head, whereby is understood her soul, (because as the head is the chiefest
part of man's body, so is the soul the chiefest part of man's whole frame and
composition) the same (I say) is compared to Carmell, and the hair of her head
like unto purple, which Carmell was a fertile plot of ground whereof we read,
Nahum. 1. 4. And therein a pleasant City so called, which was situate in the
hilly part thereof, and belonged to the tribe of Judah, as we see, Joshuah. 15.
55. From which the inhabitants were called Carmelites, as we have it, 1 Chronicles.
11. 37. Whereby is signified that as a fertile field is plentiful in good
grain or pasture, or a City is full of rich things and inhabitants; even so
her soul is stored with the knowledge of God, Phil. 1. 11. and fruitful in the
graces of his spirit, Ephesians 3. 19. Romans 15. 14. Whereunto is subjoyned, that the
king is held in the Galleries, to show that as kings who have their Galleries
of pleasure to walk in, when they would sted fastly behold any object wherein
they delight, they stand and are taken or held with that, whereon they look and
take such pleasure in: Even so this blessed bridegroom of hers, who is King of
kings and Lord of lords, when he looks on his Church, and his own graces in
her, whereby he made her so beautiful in his sight, he stands (as it were) and
is taken more and more with the love of her, even as he said before, Chap. 4.
9. Thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes and a chain of thy neck.

Observations.
1. Seeing the soul, which is called here the head, is compared in a true
Christian to a fertile and well replenished field or populous City, like
Carmell, how unfit are they to be called or accounted true Christians, whose
souls are altogether empty of the saving graces of Gods holy spirit, like that
house which was the receptacle of seven unclean spirits which were worse then
the first that had gone out of the same, Luk 17. 26.

2. Where it is said, that the king is held in the Galleries, we may see the
admirable excellency and beauty of grace, that it ravishes as it were with the
delight thereof God himself, who is the author of the same, so that he takes
more pleasure in beholding one beautified soul therewith though a poor Lazarus,
then in all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof, wherewith Satan
would have tempted our Savior, which should make us the more careful to
attain to grace, and count that soul happy which is beautified therewith; this
spiritual glory which is had here, being the only sure pledge of that
heavenly glory, which is to be had hereafter.

Verse. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!
The Bridegroom having thus praised his beloved her beauty and comeliness
severally and in parts from the very feet upwards to her head, now with
admiration (as it were) he praises her beauty in the whole, as being beautiful
and comely throughout, both by the perfection of parts here, as also beholding
her according to his acceptance of her as such, not seeing any iniquity in
Jacob, Numb. 23. 21. and as he will make her to be to himself hereafter by the
perfection of degrees, to wit, a glorious Church without spot or wrinkle.
Neither here does he only call her his love, but his love for delights, which
is a very Emphatick speech and forcible, declaring thereby, both his surpassing
love toward her; and his delight in her, for we may love many persons, and not
(as he does here) place our whole, and constant delight in them, so that as his
Father spoke of him from Heaven, This is my only beloved son in whom I
delight, so does he of her, This is my welbeloved spouse in whom I delight,
Ephesians. 5. 27.

Observation.
Whence we should learn, that if the Lord his delight be so much in us, as to
call us his love for delights, being only (as Abraham said of himself) but
base Dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. or as David professed, worms and sinful
wretches, unworthy to be beloved, Psalm. 22. 6. Job. 25. 6. O how much then
should we love so good a God and make him our love of delights, whose
excellency far surpasses all things or persons wherein the sons of men can
any way delight, the excellency or beauty of any creature, being but small
rays of that infinite excellency and beauty that is in himself who is the
creator, Psalm. 51. 5. Ezekiel. 16.

Verse. 7. This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters
of grapes.
As Jacob in blessing his sons, after he had blessed seven of them, he falls
out into these words, I have waited O Lord for thy salvation, Genesis 49. 18. and
then proceeds after to the blessing of the other five, even so after our
Savior had praised his Church in many particulars, and had subjoyned in the
general how fair and pleasant she was, as his love for delights, he proceeds
thereafter to her praise in more particulars as yet, and here in this verse to
the praise of her stature, and breasts: first then he compares her stature to a
Palm Tree: which tree is commended, 1. For talness and height. 2. For being
eaven and straight. 3. For perpetual greenness. 4. For thriving though under
the pressure of weights hanging on it, and yet neither bowing it to make it
grow crooked, nor bearing it down. And 5. We read that the branches of these
tree were carried as signs of victory and rejoysing, Revel. 7. 9. Als these
resembling in the godly, 1. Their growing up in grace and raising their desires
to things that are above, 2. Their uprightness and sincerity in their walking
both with God and man, 3. Their perpetual vigor and constancy in grace and
weldoing, 4. Their spiritual thriving under the pressure of heaviest crosses,
which neither makes them bow to any wicked or crooked course, nor bears them
down by despair in greatest extremity: and 5. That their estate after crosses
here, shall be victorious and Triumphant in joy for ever hereafter. And therefore
we see the godly man's estate compared to the flourishing of the Palm Tree,
Psalm. 92. 12. and that figures of Palm Tree with Cherubims were carved within
and without upon the walls of Solomon's temple (1 King. 6. 29.) To denotate that
of the godly on whom the Angels do wait as Ministering spirits, the spiritual
or mystical Temple of Gods Church consists.

Likewise her breasts here are compared to clusters of grapes, as not only
having nourishing milk for Babes, but likewise the cheering liquor of wine for
those of riper age, and in a word, variety of wholesome and comfortable food for
every hungry or thirsty soul, therefore does the Lord proclaim by Isay. Ho
every one that thirsts come to the waters, buy wine and milk without price or
money, Isay. 55. 1.

Observations.
1. Seeing the stature of Christ's Church, and the godly therein is like a
Palm Tree, of a tall and goodly grouth, this should warn all those who are
true members thereof to strive to grow in godliness daily, and heavenliness of
affection, that they prove not dwarfs in Christianity, standing ever (as it
were) at one stay and deceiving themselves, as if they had true grace, which
they have not who are so, because true grace, where ever it is, is still
growing, and the godly walk still from strength to strength, till they see God
in Sion, Psalm. 84. 7.

2. Against Sectaries and separatists we observe, that although the Scriptures
of the two Testaments be Gods word, here they are called the Churches two
breasts, because by the Ministry of the Church, and from her hands Gods
children must be fed, and therefore pastors are called the Lords stewards and
dispensers of this spiritual food, which (as Pharaoh's garners were under
Joseph's) is under their hand: wherefore whosoever would have the benefit and
comfort of the word, they ought not to despise the breasts of this Mother, or
contemn the ordinary Ministry of a constitute Church, and separate therefrom,
by which ordinarily faith comes (as the Apostle shows) and consequently
salvation, Romans 10. 14.

3. Seeing her breasts are not dry breasts, but full, like clusters of grapes;
this should teach all pastors to be stored in knowledge with old store and new,
out of the holy Scriptures, and as the men of God to be perfect unto every good
work of their holy calling, Matthew. 13. 12.

4. The clusters of grapes draw their liquor which they contain, and suck it
from the vine: even so should faithful pastors draw the doctrine which they
store up, and dispense to people from the true vine Christ Jesus allaverly,
that they may say with the Apostle, That which I received from the Lord, that I
deliver to you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. as the Moon borrowes her light from the Sun,
or the Pipe convayes the water, which it has from the full fountain.

Verse. 8. I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the
boughs thereof, now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the Vine, and the
smell of thy nose like Apples. 9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine
for my beloved that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are
asleep, to speak.
Follows here, this resolution, what he will do to this his Palm Tree, to wit,
he w^ll dress the same; whereunto is subjoyned a declaration of the
fruitfulness that will arise therefrom: first then the Palm Tree being tall,
for dressing of it, he speaks after the manner of the custom of Husbandmen
used by them in dressing or snedding such trees, which was, they did first
climb up into them, and so laying hold on every branch they purged or dressed
the same. Even so the Lord like a painful and diligent Husbandman he not only
plants and waters his trees, and looks to their grouth, but likewise (as we see
also, Joh. 15.) He has a care to purge and dress them, and every bough or
branch; which he does not only by his word, by which faith is begotten that
purges the heart, but sometimes by rough and sharp afflictions, like the
snedding knife, which curs away what is superfluous and luxuriating, and which
the for the present (as the Apostle says) it be grievous to flesh and blood,
Heb. 12. 11. nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness to such who are exercised thereby. Therefore he subjoynes how
fruitful she shall become by this his careful dressing, to wit, that her
breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, that is, full of sweet and most
pleasant fruits, as also the smell of her nose should be like apples, declaring
thereby, as men usually, breathe at their nose, so that she should breathe out
nothing but sweetness, as is the smell of apples.

Last of all, he says that the roof of her mouth should be like the best wine,
that is; her heavenly doctrine and all other her godly speeches which she
should utter by opening her mouth, should be full of wholesome instruction,
comfort and edification, like the best wine producing these effects, to wit,
spiritual delight, the warming of the soul with heavenly love, the inflameing
of it with holy zeal, and comforting thereof when it is dejected, which goes
down (says he) sweetly, to wit, when the same is heard with joy and delight,
and amongst many other effects produces also this, that it causes the lips of
these that are asleep to speak; that is, it wakeneth and rouseth up the
spirits of those who are asleep in sin and security, and causes their lips to
speak by humble confession, and other holy speeches to Gods glory, and the good
of others, to the like whereof they were not before accustomed.

Observations.
1. We see that Christ's Church and her true members, albeit well grown in
grace, like a Palm Tree for stature, yet has need to be dressed and purged in
the branches thereof, because of their often Luxuriating in peace and prosperity,
as we see in David, Psalm. 30. 6. And because of daily attracting of great
pollution and guiltiness, and therefore when he comes with the snedding knife
of affliction, or rough hand of purging, let us not think uncouth thereof (as
the Apostle exhorts) concerning the fiery trial, but reverence his care and
wisdom, submitting our selyes to his will, and craving the sanctified use of
any cross wherewith it shall please him to chastise us, 1 Pet. 4. 12.

2. If at any time we have found the Lord to have visited us with any cross,
thereby to prune or purge us, when we are delivered therefrom, let us try if it
has produced this good effect in us which is mentioned here, and Joh. 15. 2. to
wit, if it has made us the more fruitful in godliness and all religious duties.

3. If Christ's Church breathes forth nothing but sweetness, like the smell of
apples then let us try our selves hereby, if we be her true children, which
many brag to be, but declare they are not, by breathing out nothing but what is
corrupt and stinking, Ephesians. 4. 29. which is so loathsome to all, who have a
sanctified and spiritual sense of smelling that they cannot endure it, and the
roof of whose mouth and that which proceeds out of the same is so far from
being like best wine, that it is to any sanctified ear rather like that potion
of vinegar and gall that Christ got upon the cross to drink.

Verse. 10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
Of these words we have already spoken, Cant. 2. 16. and 6. 3. Only, from this
profession of the Churches, let us learn, 1. That if she be his, and those who
are her true members, then they are not their own, to live to themselves or to
the flesh, but to him who died for them and purchased them to be his by his
precious blood, 2. If his desire be to us, then let our desire be likewise to
him, to open to him the door of our heart, Rev. 3. 20. ever to embrace him with
the arms of faith, and fervent affection, to intertaine him with all holy
devotion, and neither to grieve, much less to quench his spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. And fear lest we fall to that height, Heb. 10. 29.

Verse. 11. Come my beloved, Let us go forth into the field, Let us lodge in the
villages. 12. Let us go up early to the vineyards, Let us see if the v^ne
flourish, whether the tender grapes appear, and the Pomegranates bud forth;
there will I give thee my Loves.
In these two verses is set down Christ's care and kindness toward his Church,
1. His care in calling upon her, as he had done before, Chap. 2. 10. To arise
from the delight of earthly things, to more heavenly and Celestial, of which
sort of excitation we have all need; and, 2. His kindness in admitting her to
that sweet and comfortable association whereof here he speaks, her estate now
being far different from her late and former condition, when he withdrew
himself, and made her with great pains and grief of heart to seek him, and yet
could not find him, but now he not only comes unto her, accepts of her, and
highly commends her; but likewise he kindly here invites her to go with him,
and refresh her self (as it were) in the fields, and to lodge with him in the
villages; yea not only so, but to go up early to the vineyards, where he may
show her his particular care and inspection that he has of every one of her
members, how grace is cherished, or decays, and how it grows or fructifies in
them, even as we read of Paul and Barnabas their care, Act. 15. 36. how after
their preaching of the Gospel, which Paul calls planting, they visited the
brethren in every City, which were the Lords vineyards, to see how they did.

As for the flourishing of the vine, and budding of the Pomegranate we spoke
before, Chap. 6. 11. And there he promises unto her the further manifestation
of his love and affection, which he expresses in the plural, (Loves,) for
indeed his love is manifold and plentiful, as that, of Election, Creation,
Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, providence, protection,
and at last Glorification.

Observations.
1. Out of this reiterate exhortation to arise, and come away following Christ
Jesus, whither he calls; we learn the great need we have of such frequent
excitations unto holy duties, being (as the Cretians were called slow bellies,
so we) slow obeyers.

2. We see here the vicissitude of a Christians estate in this life in
spiritual things, sometimes deserted (as it were) and dejected, and other
while enjoying a most familiar and near fellowship with Christ and comforts;
that so the godly soul may not be disconsolate altogether, but if tears be in
the evening she may expect joy in the morning, Psalm. 30. 5.

3. The difference between the souls estate under desertion, and now enjoying
a sweet fellowship with her Savior; in the one she is straightened, and
languisheth, as one bound in fetters, but in the other she does expatiate her
self like one set at liberty, and going forth to the fields, and villages with
them whom she loves.

4. When we follow Christ's calling, and go or walk as he does direct, then do
we get admission to most familiar fellowship, and the cleerest evidence and
assurance of his love to us, as he says, There will I give thee my loves.

Verse. 13. The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.
Here the spouse expresses her mutual love, and thankfulness to her beloved,
the grace of which thankfulness she compares to Mandrakes that give a good
smell, whereof we read, Genesis 30. 14. and to testify that the same is real,
she speaks of fruits* new and old for variety, which are the actions of a holy
life, and which, she says, that are laid up for him, not that in any wise he
can be benefited thereby, as the Psalmist witnesses, Psalm. 16. But signifying
that in doing of them all her scope and aim is chiefly his glory; that as all
is from him, so should all be for him, and the glory of all only redound to
him.

Observations.
1. Where grace or true thankfulness is, as it is sweet smelling and
acceptable, so it should be not only verbal but real, in the fruits of
godliness, both in our general and particular callings.

2. In performing which, let this be our aim, to wit, Gods glory, and not our
applause.

Finis septimi Capitis.
Soli deo gloria.
CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. O that thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of my Mother,
when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be
despised.
IN this Chapter is yet further set down the Churches love to Christ and the
vehemence thereof to the 8. verse, 2. The calling of the Gentiles is foretold
and spoken of to the 14. And lastly is set down the Churches prayer and desire
of Christ's second coming.

First then in this verse she declares the great desire she has of Christ's
constant presence, fellowship and familiarity, for her greater comfort and her
souls contentment, and therefore she wishes that he were as a brother to her
that sucked the breasts of one Mother, that so she might enjoy his presence, as
Brothers and Sisters that are of one family usually do; for then she would
manifest her love to him by delighting in his fellowship and kissing him with
the kisses of most entire affection. Now brotherhood signifies a mere
Conjunction or consociation, which some express in these three words, of race,
place, and grace, or which is, 1. By bond of nature, and in which sense Christ
is become our brother by taking our nature on him, 2. By confederation or
covenant, as was that between Jonathan and David, 2 Samuel 1. 26. and of which
sort there is mention made, Zach. 11. 14. between Israel and Judah. And in this
sense also by the covenant of grace Christ is our brother, 3. For being
companions in alike estate, as brethren in affliction, whereof Job speaks, Job.
30. 29. And so was Christ likewise herein with his Church on earth; and, 4. For
being of alike conditions, manner, and practice, as Simeon and Levi were said
to be, Genesis 49. 5. and as a slouth^ull man by Solomon is said to be a brother
to a waster, Pro. 18. 9. And so in like manner by communion of grace and
sanctification, his Church being holy as Christ is holy, he is said to be our
brother, Heb. 2. 11. This then is the desire of the Church here, that as Christ
is her brother by unity of nature or race by incarnation, Heb. 2. 14. so he
would be by communion of grace and sanctification as, Heb. 2. 11. And as a
brother he would be lovingly affected to her, familiarily conversant with her,
and kindly compassionate toward her in all her difficulties or griefs, like
one that had sucked the breasts of her Mother, that is, like one of nearest and
fullest Conjunction, as not only having one father, but one Mother also, and
fostered upon one breast, as we see in Joseph's affection and carriage for that
cause to Benjamin beyond all his brethren, Genesis 43. 29.

Then does he subjoyne these words, (when I should find thee without, I would
kiss thee,) whereby she expresses that the fervent desire of Christ's
fellowship and communion with her, is here accompanied with a promise of all
careful and affectionate duty, whereby she can manifest her love or longing
for him, and as formerly she sought him, ever till she found him; so now, she
says, when she shall find him without she would kiss him, thereby giving us
to understand both the right way to seek Christ, and to carry toward him when
we have found him. He must be sought then, 1. Not sitting at our own ease
within doors, but by taking pains and going out, therefore it is said, Pro. 1.
20. that wisdom is without, and cries in the streets, yea we must go out of
ourselves by self-denial that we may find him, and in him all grace and
goodness, Matthew. 16. 24. 2 This also shows with what a ready mind we should
go forth and meet Christ and welcome him when in his holy ordinances he comes
unto us, as Laban went forth with Alacrity to meet Abraham's servant, and
invited him to come in, as the blessed of the Lord, Genesis 24. 29. 31. Or as it
is said, Matthew. 25. 6. That this was the cry that was at midnight to the
virgins, saying, behold the bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him. And not
only does she profess that she would go forth and attend his coming but also
when she had found him without, she would kiss him (which was the ancient
manner, and is yet, of salutation and welcoming,) which kisses are either like
that of Mary Magdalen's, when she kissed his feet, of humble affection; or
those, whereby the Psalmist wills all men to kiss the Son, lest he be angry
and they perish in his wrath, Psalm. 2. which are of homage and humble
submission. And yet by doing so (she says) she should not give any just cause
to be either ashamed, as Isay speaks, Isay. 54. 4. or despised as David was by
Michal, for doing that which was not comely or decent for a modest and chaste
virgin to do, 2 Samuel 6. 16.

Observations.
1. According to the Churches wish and desire here, seeing Christ is become our
brother, 1. By incarnation, 2. By confederation, 3. As companion in alike
condition; and, 4. By communion of grace, and sanctification, then let us
honor him as our elder brother, love him and sympathize with him: and, in a
word, as the nearest kinsman under the law was bound to do a kinsmans part to
the defunct kinsman, so let us do a brothers part, to our dearest brother who
has died for us.

2. We see when Christ comes to us, how cheerfully we should not only open to
him when he stands and knocks at our door, as Chap. 5. 2. but should go out to
meet him, seeking all the occasions of the increase of grace, and of finding
Christ in the means thereof: and thus we should hunt after the blessing with
Jacob, while as profane Esau's are hunting after carnal pleasures, and when
we have found him, with all the kind imbracements of faith (as Simeon got him
in his arms, so) should we clasp him in the arms of our soul, applying him to
us, and we complying to him, and we should kiss him with the kisses of love,
and loyal obedience.

3. Though it be the custom of profane Ismaels to mock the religious, for
religious duties, or like Michal to despise them, yet the spouse of Christ and
her true members are no whit scarred thereby, nor moved more than David was, to
desist therefrom, but rather to insist therein with courage and constancy,
because they labor only to approve themselves to the Lord therein, their own
conscience, and the truly godly: and therefore, as the woman in the Revelation
has the Moon under her feet, Rev. 12. So they tread and trample with a holy
contempt all such despising, and go on Zealously in their godly course.

Verse. 2. I would lead thee and bring thee into my Mothers house, who would
instruct me, I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my
Pomegranates. 3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand
should embrace me. 4. I charge you, daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not
up, nor awake my Love until he please.
In this verse she shows that further she would do than kiss him, finding him
without, to wit, she would lead him, and bring him into her Mothers house;
which house what it is, we have shown before, Chap. 3. 4. But how comes it to
pass that she says that she would lead Him, seeing He must be our leader and
guide in all our ways, as David prays, O send out thy light, and thy truth
and let them lead me and bring me unto thy holy hill, Psalm. 43. 3. And again,
Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and after receive me to glory, Psalm. 73.
24. I answer, this is only to show that the Church now having stirred up her
self (as Isay speaks) to take hold of him, Isay. 64. 7. She resolves and
professes that she will do all the honor she can to him, such as is usually
done to great personages, who use, not only to be waited on and met without at
the door or gate, but a great way off, and convoyed or brought along to the
place whither they are coming, as we read, Psalm. 45. 14. Where it is said that
the Queen (spoken of there) shall be brought or convoyed to the king in raiment
of needle work, with the virgins and companions that follow her.

Next, having declared that she would lead him and bring him to her Mothers
house, she shows the office of her Mother, or what she would do unto her, to
wit, she would instruct her in the whole duties that she should perform to so
good and glorious a husband, Pro. 1. 8, 9. In whom the word of her instruction
should not be fruitless, for she should make him drink of spiced wine and the
juice of the Pomegranate, that is, she would honor and intertaine him with his
own graces, and render unto him such fruits of her faith as should be sweetened
and made savoury (like Jacobs savoury meat which he gave his father) with the
spices of his own spirit and humility wherein he delights.

By doing whereof (v. 3.) she shows in like manner what she may mutually
expect of him, especially in her time of need (as we see, Chap. 2. 6. Where the
same words are set down) to wit, the sweet supporting of his grace, and
comforfortable imbracement of his tender love, of which words because we have
spoken in the forenamed place, as also of the subsequent, we cease here to
repeat*

Observations.
1. The godly (we see) makes still a progress in grace, and all religious
duties, as the Church is said here not to be content only to find her beloved
without, but she will also with all observance and honor that she can perform,
lead him, and bring him into her Mothers house, and there intertaine him with
the choicest things she can.

2. We see the office of the true Church as a mother to her children, and of
all faithful pastors therein, which is, not to keep them blind folded in
ignorance, which that whoor of Rome calls the Mother of devotion, but to
instruct them in all the duties which they ought to perform to the Lord Jesus
acknowledging him to be their only head and husband, and no earthly creature
as his vicar therein; that he is also their only Savior, and they nor no
other, in part or whole are saviors to themselves; that he is likewise the
sole Monarch or king and Lawgiver to his Church, and with whose laws binding
the conscience none can dispense, the sole Priest also both for Satisfaction
fully on earth, and sole mediation he makes in the Heavens, as likewise that he
is her only Prophet that cannot err, and whose voice only as chief pastor in
the holy scripture, by all is to be heard.

3. We see that the Churches instruction to her children should not be
fruitless, but should produce the sweet fruits of holy obedience, as we see,
Isay. 5. and Joh. 15. is required; and whereby Christ is feasted, as it were,
and entertained as with spiced wine and the delicious juice of the Pomegranate;
so that the light of knowledge whereby we see, should produce the light of
obedience whereby we shine, and our lamps like those of the wise virgins,
should be both burning and shining.

4. By doing whereof we shall find that our work of obedience is not in vain,
but shall be well recompensed both with the comfortable embracement of Christ
Jesus in the arms of his mercy and protection in our greatest need here; and,
beside the sweet repose of a good conscience therein, which was Jobs greatest
comfort, she shall be recompensed in mercy with his perpetual and glorious sight
hereafter, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are
pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

Verse. 5. Who is this that comes up from the wilderness leaning upon her
beloved? I raised thee up under the Apple Tree, there thy mother brought thee
forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
Follows here, a question concerning the Church, which was in the same words
before propounded, Chap. 3. 6. to which place we refer the reader, but here
her posture is set down which was not there mentioned, to wit, that she leanes
upon her beloved, and whereby is signified, 1. Her relying by a holy and humble
confidence only upon him, in respect of her own weakness, and his supporting
of her by his special grace, whereof he said to Paul that it should be
sufficient for him, without which she was neither able to stand against
temptation, nor walk in that narrow way that leads unto salvation, let be to
walk upward, as she is said here to come up from the wilderness. And, 2. is
signified that in all her fears, dangers or difficulties, yea in death it self
(with David, Psalm. 23. 4.) her only stay and confidence for comfort,
resolution, or delivery, is only fixed on Christ her beloved; Leaning unto and
upon him alone, as all-sufficient, to be unto her (as says the Apostle)
wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. that,
according as it is written, he that glories may glory in the Lord.

After which description of the Church of Christ, chosen out of the world and
wilderness thereof, and coming up out of the same, both in affection and
conformity of like conversation, and leaning upon Christ only his merit and
grace, follows, Who first raised her up, that she might thereafter come up out
of the wilderness, and made her to be spiritually born of her Mother the
Church. Surely this is Jesus Christ alone, who raised the dead, and says here
to his Church, I raised thee up under the Apple Tree; before this she being
sitting in darkness and under the shadow of death, and in such a woeful estate
by nature, as the Apostle shows Ephesians. 2. 5. He is then said here to have raised
her under the Apple Tree, which is mentioned, Chap. 2. 3. and which tree is
himself, as the comforts that flow from him, verse. 5. are called apples. Under
him therefore and under his over-shaddowing by the efficacy of his own spirit,
which makes him say, I raised thee, does the godly rise from sin to
righteousness, and there does their Mother the Church bring them forth by the
work of regeneration, being conceived in her womb by the immortal seed of the
word, and cooperation of the Holy Ghost, even as it is said of the conception
of Christ our head in the womb of his Virgin Mother in like manner, that the
Holy Ghost should come upon her, and the power of the most high should
over-shaddow her, therefore that holy thing that should be born of her should
be called, The son of God, Luke 1. 35.

Where it is to be remarked, that the work of grace in and upon us, has here
two names whereby it is expressed, to wit* the one is, a raising of her up,
whence also it is called the first resurrection; and the other is, a birth,
whence it is called our regeneration: And is partly ascribed to Christ, as a
raising up, or first resurrection; and partly to the Church, as a birth or
regeneration; his part being in both, the inward efficacy, and her part, only
the outward ministry: he then that raised the dead, and shall raise them at
the Last day can only raise the dead soul, that all the glory may be to him
alone; and his Church as a Mother may well conceive and bring forth, but he
that only has the key of the womb (as he has of the heart, the clouds, and of
death,) who also marvellously frames our tender bodies therein, and gives
strength to the Mother to bring forth the birth, he likewise has the chief hand
in our spiritual conception, and in that forming of his Image in us spoken of
by the Apostle, Gal. 4. 19. which is our new birth or regeneration. And in
which work, as the dead has no power in themselves to rise, or the birth to
conceive and form it self in the womb, and thereafter to come forth out of the
same; so neither is it any way in the power of nature or man's free will, to
raise themselves or be agents in the first act of their regeneration and
conversion to God.

Observations.
1. Seeing in our coming up out of the wilderness of this world, and of our
Pilgrimage therein to our heavenly Canaan, we have no strength of our selves,
either to walk, or wrestle with any temptations with which we will encounter,
let us here with the ^pouse rely only for strength and supporting upon Christ
alone, and so lean upon our beloved.

2. Seeing he is author of all grace, and specially of that work of grace in
us, whereby being dead in sin we are raised to newness of life here, and
regenerated to the hope of eternal life hereafter, therefore let us ascribe
all the glory to him alone, and not to any merit or free will in us: for who
has made thee O man, but God only to differ from another? or what have thou
but that which thou have received? 1 Cor. 4. 7.

3. Seeing as he ascribes her raising to himself, so does he her birth to his
Church and Ministry thereof, therefore if we would be partakers of grace and
the work thereof, which tends and ends into Glory, let us not despise Christ's
Church her ministry and instruction, as was said in the former verse, but
reverence the same, knowing that he has not God to be his father, who has not,
or reverences not the Church as his Mother.

Verse. 6. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm, for love
is strong, as death; jealously is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are
coals of fire, which have a most vehement flame. 7. Many waters cannot quench
love, neither can the floods drown it; if a man would give all the substance of
his house for love, it would be utterly contemned.
In these words, out of the consideration and proof of his manifold love to her
(as has been shown in sundry particulars,) she breaks forth now into an
earnest prayer or petition, that the same may continue sure and constant
toward her, and that she may be assured and confirmed thereof, therefore she
says, Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and as a seal upon thine arm,
desiring so of him who is the only true High Priest of his Church, that as the
names of the tribes of Israel were graven like seals upon Aarons breast plate
of judgment upon his heart, Exodus 28, 29. when he went into the holy place for
a memorial before the Lord continually; even so, 1. That he should be
continually mindful of her in his intercession before God his father, as we
see that to be his priestly office, Heb. 9. 24. 2 That he should entirely and
constantly affect her, as there is no nearer conjunction then of that, which is
set as a seal, and makes a deep impression on the very heart.

Neither does she only desire to be set as a seal on his heart but likewise
on his arm, to show that she desires not only his continual remembrance of
her, as by the Prophet the Lord says, For that cause behold I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hand, Isay. 49. 16. but likewise that she desires the
manifestation of his affection by his actual aid, by supporting her in all her
infirmities, and his help of her against all her enemies, and all this by his
mighty power, which is called the arm of the Lord, Isay, 40. 10, 11. Exodus 15,
16. Zech. 11. 17. Luke 1. 51. Joh. 12. 38. And elsewhere in scripture.

Thereafter, she renders the reason of her desire, from the nature and force
of that sprirituall and fervent love which makes her so to suit this at his
hands, which she compares to three most strong things, 1. To death which
overcomes all men, as the Churches fervent love to Christ overcomes all
temptations and most cruel sufferings, as we see in the example of Martyrs, 2.
To the grave which is likewise invincible and devours up all; and even so does
Christ's love, (likned here to jealousy for the vehemence thereof that can
abide no corrivall,) overcome all difficulties, 3. To coals of fire, which
have a vehement flame that consume all the combustible matter of earthly trash
that is cast into it, yea unto such a flaming fire, which all the waters of
afflictions (as the Prophet expounds the same) Isay. 43. 2. yea the floods
thereof (as we have, Rev. 12. 15.) cannot quench or drown it, as the Apostle
shows us, Romans 8. 35. And which being of a Heavenly nature, by all that a man
has of earthly and worldly things cannot be balanced nor sufficiently
appretiated, which makes the merchant in the Gospel who overvalued the same
above all these things, to be accounted therefore the wise and prudent
merchant, Matthew. 13.

Observations.
1. We see what should be the very upshot of all our desires, to wit, to be in
Gods favor above all things, (as David did choose, Psalm. 4. 6.) and to be
nearly united to Christ, precious in his sight, and had by him in perpetual
remembrance, and, in a word, to be as a seal on his heart and a signet on his
arm.

2. If we would have our selves to be so to Christ, then we must labor that he
be so to us, to wit, as a seal upon our heart, in tender love to him, near
conjunction with him, mindfulness ever of him, and having the stamp of his
Image imprinted on our souls, that thereby we may be known, (like Cesars
coin) that we belong to him: neither let us set him only as a seal on our
heart by inward piety, but likewise on our arm by outward practice thereof.

3. We see that, That which makes her to desire to be set as a seal on his
heart and arm, is, strong love toward him, so that although our faith and
other graces be feeble and faint in us, yet if our hearts tell us that our love
to Christ is strong, and that with Peter we may say, Lord thou know that I
love thee, the same may be a great comfort unto us, John 21. 17.

4. It is out of this strong love of hers toward him that makes her so
earnestly desire this spiritual union with him to be as a seal on his heart
and arm, so that we may know our love to Christ by this our desire, and degree
thereof, for where our love is small or feeble, strong or fervent, so will our
desire be of this spiritual union.

5. The love she carries to him is compared to coals of fire, which indeed
(like that which came down from Heaven, to kindle and consume the sacrifices)
is of a heavenly descent, and is compared to fire (as the baptist speaks of our
inward baptism) 1. Because as fire has light with it, so the love of Christ has
the knowledge of him whom we love, Ignoti enim nulla cupido. 2. Fire has heat
and warmness with it, and so has the love of God, whereby it heats our cold and
frozen hearts, and warmes them with mutual love to God and zeal of his glory.
3. Fire purges the dross of mettalls; and so does Christ's love, our hearts
from corruption. 4. Fire melts the good metal and makes it pliable to the
hand of the Goldsmith; and so does the love of Christ, and makes it pliable to
the operation of the spirit, 5. Fire in the flame thereof bends continually
upward; and so does the love of Christ seeking his glory and those things that
are above: therefore let us try by these works and operations, if we have in
us the true love of Christ.

6. By these things whereunto this spiritual love is compared which are in
themselves invincible and overcome all other, especially such a flaming fire
which no waters nor the floods thereof can any way quench, and whereby (as is
said) are understood the sharpest afflictions or most cruel persecutions, we
may see what is the most sovereign preservative and fortification of the soul
against the time of trouble that we may stand as the well built house against
all stormy tempests, whatsoever, to wit, the love of Christ and of his sacred
truth, which shall make us (as the Apostle speaks and Martyrs practiced) to
triumph, saying, In all these we are more then conquerours.

7. This clause which says, If a man would give all the substance of his house
for love it would utterly be contemned, shows, that although worldling's
hearts may be won by Satan's temptation from the love of Christ and his truth,
as we see in Demas, 2 Timothy 4. 10. yet in them that are truly godly there is no
such force in any worldly treasures, who count all things but dung and loss in
comparison of the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus their Lord.

8. We see the two maine temptations whereby Satan seeks to alienate or draw
away our hearts from the love of Christ and his truth, and make us quit the
same, to wit, the waters and floods of trouble and persecution on the one hand;
and if that cannot serve the turn, then the allurement of worldly riches which
overcame Judas, and wherewith he tempted Christ's himself, showing him all the
kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof.

Verse. 8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do
for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
Here this holy and heavenly Song draws to an end. In the conclusion whereof
we have these points, 1. A consultation or demand concerning the Church of the
Gentiles which she prophesies shall be gathered to Christ, together with a
declaration of her great glory, 2. There is a comparison made between Solomon's
frultfull vineyard, and Christ's Church on earth, 3. We have a postulation or
desire that she may enjoy still the benefit of his word here, with a sanctified
care and heart to hearken thereto, and believe the same, and that he would
hasten his second coming to Judgment, when she might no longer walk by faith
but by sight, and enjoy his presence for ever in the heavens hereafter.

Concerning the first of these, we know before our Saviors suffering and
ascending to the heavens that the Church was then only within the pale of the
Jewish nation, who were at that time Gods only peculiar people to whom his
oracles were committed, Ephesians. 2. 12. all others being counted sinners of the
Gentiles, and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, till the partition wall
was removed, and that was performed which was promised to the Son, Psalm. 2.
8. And again, I have made thee a light to the Gentiles, and the salvation to
the ends of the earth: which by a vision was declared to Peter, whereby he saw,
that God had put no difference (as he says himself) between Jews and
Gentiles, after that by faith he had purified their hearts, Act. 10. 13. and 9.
Of this conversion then of the Gentiles and enlargement of the Church the
spouse here speaks, saying, We have a little sister and she bath no breasts:
where we have to consider, 1. How she calls her, 2. How she says, We in the
plural, 3. How she says in the present, we have a little sister, 4. How she
is said to have no breasts, and. 5. The care that she has of her, saying, What
shall we do for our sister in the day that she shall be spoken for?

The speech then it self we see is Metaphorical taken from the manner of Elder
sisters that are espoused, their speaking of their younger that is not yet for
marriage, being but little in stature and having no breasts, or paps formed and
^it to contain milk and nourish up children, and consulting as it were with
friends, against that time that she is ripe for marriage, what is the best way
to get her espoused.

First then, this being according to the manner of the Hebrews (as has been
noted before) that the whole is called the Mother, and the parts of the
Catholic Church are called sisters, In this speech then, the Jewish Church
calls the Church of the Gentiles to be collected of all nations, a sister, 1.
In relation to Christ, who is our elder brother, and who calls his Church
whether of Jews or Gentiles, his sister, as we see, Chap. 5. 2. Next, in
relation to her self, for unity of one nature with her, one faith, one father,
one Spirit, one Baptism, and one in affection.

Next, this sister is called a little sister, though this question might arise,
why she should call her so, seeing the Church of the Gentiles in greatness and
number was far to exceed the Church of the Jews; whereunto I answer, that
she is so called, 1. Not in respect of her number which was to be, but because
of her number then, which were but a few proselyts; or else, 2. In respect of
time, because the time was not yet come that the Gentiles should be called, and
by faith espoused to Christ, in respect whereof being of nonage she was as yet
little, or as a young damsel not ripe to be betrothed; 3. In respect of her
condition at her first conversion, at that time, not being yet so numerous;
and, 4. She might be called little, not only in respect of number then (as is
said,) but also of strength, stature, and knowledge; in all which after her
first conversion being conformed, she was daily only to grow.

2. It is said in the plural, we have a little sister, though at that time
there was no other Church but that one of the Jews, therefore including Christ
in this speech with her self, she says in the plural, We have a little
sister, thereby to show, that the Church of the Gentiles is not only a sister
to the Church of the Jews, but also to Christ, Romans 8. 29. He being the first
begotten amongst many brethren, who are all (as the Apostle says,) flesh of
his flesh and bone of his bones, Ephesians. 5. As also to show that he loves her as
dearly, will care for her and protect her, as ever he did the Church of the
Jews.

3. She says in the present time we have a little sister, although the Church
of the Gentiles many hundredth years thereafter was not to be called, 1. In
respect of predestination and Gods eternal decree, unto whom all future things
are as present in his sight, 2 In respect of prediction, and promises made
thereanent, which in all times are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. 3 For the
certainty of accomplishment in respect whereof to the eye of faith, which gives
a sort of being to things that are not yet, things to come are present, as also
for the same respect the Scripture usually speaks (as here) of things to come
as if they were present, or praeterit, as we see, Isay. 53. 3, 4, 5. and else
where. For all these respects, she says in the present, we have a little
sister.

4. This little sister is said to have no breasts, that is, a settled Ministry
affording the sincere milk of sound doctrine out of the old and new Testament;
because as yet she was like Abraham before he was called out of Vr of the
Chaldees, Jos. 24. 2. sitting as yet in darkness and in the shadow of death,
under gross ignorance, and damnable Idolatry, till that light arose to her,
who is the Sun of righteousness, and she was called to be his people who was
Lo-ammi, no people at all, which was by the preaching of the Gospel, Hos. 1.
9, 10. Yea which estate of the Church of the Gentiles her not having a settled
Ministry after the Gospel was preached, and after Christ's ascension, we may
see in many place, as, Act. 14. 21, 22. and Ti^. 1. 5. does testify.

5. Touching the care that she has for this her little sister, it is in these
words, What shall we do for our sister in the day that she shall be spoken for?
that is, what furtherance shall we yield to her for her conversion, increase
and establishment in the truth, when she becomes as a wooed bride to Christ by
the Ministry of the Gospel, as Rebecca was to Isaac by the steward of Abraham's
house. In the which work of conversion, increase and establishment, she
acknowledges two agents, one chief or principal, and another Ministerial or
^nstrumentall, and therefore she speaks in the plural number, saying, What
shall we do? the principal and fountaine-agent of all grace, enlightening and
establishment being Christ, who is the Author of all blessings upon his Church,
and the ancient Church of the Jews being the isntrumental agent when by the
Ministry of the holy Apostles and Evangelists who were of the Jewish nation the
Gospel was preached, and as the Lord said to Ananias concerning Paul, they
were made chosen vessels to carry his name before the Gentiles, Act. 9. 15.

This therefore they did for their little sister in the day that she was spoken
for, and thereby, 1. Did let her see her base condition by nature, before, like
poor captive Esther, the King of kings set his love upon her, 2. The glorious
and happy estate whereunto she was called, Ezekiel. 16. as we see the same
typified, Psalm. 45. And yet a far more glorious estate whereunto she should
be advanced in the kingdom of Glory, described unto us, Rev. 21. And 3. they
did deal between her wooer and her, with him by prayer, and with her by
preaching, as Laban said concerning Rebecca to get her consent, Genesis 24. 57. 4
As Abraham servant gave unto Rebecca jewels of silver, and Jewels of Gold and
raiment, v. 53. to adorn and prepare her for his Master, even so as
instruments of the grace of Gods spirit by their Ministry, they did prepare and
adorn her likewise as a bride to present her to Christ. And, 5. As the
Apostle did the Galatians and others, they vvatched over her and warned her
that she should not be tempted by other base and allureing wooers, and door in
her affection, or like Dinah gad by inconstancy and go a whoring after any
such, but keep her self as a chaste virgin to her heavenly bridegroom, till the
day of the solemnization of the marriage with her in the highest Heavens, when
Christ shall say, Even so I take her before my Father, and before his Angels.

Observations.
1. We see by the style which the Church of the Gentiles gets, that all
particular and national Churches are but sister-Churches, and none such may
claim to be a Mother universal Church and Mistress over all, as falsely and
ridiculously the Roman Church now does, and her proud Papal Bishop to be the
universal Monarch of the Church, and Head over all.

2. Where in the plural number it is said, we have a little sister, and so
that the Church of the Gentiles is a sister to Christ, as well as that of the
believing Jews, We see (as has been noted before) our dignity who are true
believers, with the sweet comforts that result therefrom, Chap. 5. 2.

3. In respect of Gods decree, prediction, and promises concerning the calling
of the Gentiles, that she says in the present time, we have a little sister,
we do observe that the decree and promises of God for things to come, are so
certain and infallible, that faith does justly apprehend them, and speak of
them before they be, as if they were already, which shows the nature of faith
to be as the Apostle describes it, Heb. 11. 1. as also serves much to establish
to us the comfort of Gods promises in greatest extremities to our great joy.

4. Concerning the care that she has of her little sister, saying, what shall
we do for her? etc. We see that the loving duties arising from zeal and charity
and as members of one body, that one sister Church can do to another for their
mutual help, strength or establishment, most willingly and readily they ought
to perform.

5. Whereas she says, What shall we do? we see that it is not enough only to
wish good to the faithful, or, as James says, to show our charity only by
words, Jam. 2. 16. but as the Psalmist says to the Lord, Do good unto Sion,
Psalm. 51. 18. even so we should do good to the faithful, and both our faith
and charity should be seen by works: for as the body, (says the Apostle)
without the spirit is dead, even so is faith which is without works.

6. She says, What shall we do for her in the day that she shall be wooed or
spoken for, whereby we see what the preaching of the Gospel is, to wit, even
like Abraham's message by the steward of his house, concerning a wife to his
son Isaac, even a wooing of a spouse and preparing her for Christ. And
therefore, 1. When ever we hear Gods word we should consider what is intended
therein, and accordingly attend thereto, and count it our greatest happiness if
it produce this effect upon us, as to woe and win us to Christ. And. 2. This
should be the scope of all faithful pastors, not to woe people or wed them to
themselves by gaining their applause, or seeking their own estimation; but to
woe and wed them to Christ, as was the Apostles practice, and of all true
pastors, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Qui non quae sua sed quae Christi quaerebant, aliis que
planctum non sibi plausum movebant.

7. It is said in like manner* In the day that she shall be spoken for: to show
us thereby, that there is a day that the Lord has appointed for the conversion
of such as belong to him, as we see in the parable of those who were called to
the vineyard at several hours, Matthew. 20. And in the conversion of the thief
upon the cross; and of Paul when he was a persecutor: wherefore we should
neither despair of the conversion of any, though a most wicked Manasseth, or an
Idolatrous heathen, see, Ezekiel. 16. (as all the Gentiles were, yea Abraham
himself before his calling out of Vr of the Chaldeans) for we know not the day
when they may be woed and won unto Christ. Neither should we our selves let
such a precious and happy day pass when it comes, unmade use of the same, lest
if we do so, as we see, Pro. 1. 28. and in the example of the foolish virgins,
a day of distress and destruction come upon us, wherein though we call and
knock, he hear us not, nor make us no answer.

8. Last of all, seeing the Church of the Jews had this care and love to her
little sister, the Church of the Gentiles, and that by, the Ministry of the
holy Apostles who were Jews by nation, the Gospel of grace was convoyed to
her; It is our part now to be as loving and careful for our elder sister, and
as earnest with the Lord in her behalf for her conversion and inbringing who
was the natural olive, and cut off by her unbelief, only for our behoof, as
she was for us, when we were without and aliens to the Commonwealth of
Israel.

Verse. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver, and if
she be a door we will enclose her with boords of Cedar.
Follows here, Christ's answer and resolution to the former question, saying,
If she be a wall, that is, well grounded on that foundation, mentioned Ephesians.
2. 20. of the prophets and Apostles; and described also, Rev. 21. 14. And be
built up or edified in the truth of salvation, as we see, Ephesians. 4. 12. (we) that
is, Christ inwardly and effectually by his grace, and her sister Church of the
Jews, outwardly and Ministerially by the word (will build upon her a palace
of silver), that is, we will further and promove in knowledge and grace, and
in the grouth thereof, that so she may be a fit and glorious habitation to God
through the spirit, as we find mentioned, Ephesians. 2. 22. Silver, noting here the
excellency, purlty, and durableness of this palace, not being of combustible
matter, and richly decked and adorned with the graces of Gods spirit. And if
she be a door or gate, that (as is said, Psalm. 24. 7.) the king of Glory may
come in thereat, or cast open for calling and admitting others, as is said,
Isay. 60. 11. Therefore thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be
shut, day nor night, that men may bring to thee the forces of the nations, and
that their kings may be brought. And again, Isay 26. 2. Open ye the gates,
that the righteous nation that keeps the truth may enter in, then (says he)
we will enclose her about with boords of Cedar, which was a sort of wood
that was used in the fabric both of the ark, as the most precious and durable
wood, as also in the building of the Temple of Solomon; and therefore fitly
here applied to the Christian Church, she being the habitation of the Lord by
his spirit, and the Temple of the true Solomon, and of the Holy Ghost; to
denotate thereby the precious and durable endowments of the gifts of Gods
spirit whereby he was to adorn and fortify her, and which by the Ministry
of his servants he was to bestow upon her.

Observations.
1. We see that the Church of Christ, and every true member thereof should be
like a wall, not wavering but stable in the truth, and therefore should not be
carried about with every wind of doctrine, but be rooted in the faith, as they
are exhorted, Coloss. 2. 7. that so like the house by the wiseman built upon
the rock, Matthew. 7. 25. they may stand against all assaults; and as is said,
Colos. 1. 11. they may be strengthened with all might, and for that cause they
should labor for the love of the truth, which because some received not
(says the Apostle) that they might be saved, for this cause God sent them
strong delusion to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

2. We see the straightness of the communion of the Saints amongst themselves,
that as the Psalmist calls Jerusalem a City that is compact together, Psalm.
122. 3. so here they are compared to lively stones compacted, (or as the
Apostle says) fitly framed, Ephesians. 2. 21. And firmly builded into one wall, by
the unity of one faith, and the cementing of the bond of love and of one
spirit, which they should keep fast, without schism or rupture, that peace
may be within the Church her vvalls, and prosperity within her palaces, Psalm.
122. 7. Which how good and pleasant a thing it is the Psalmist declares, Psalm.
133. 1.

3. We see (as in the parable of the gainers by their talents,) that to them
who have solid and true grace more shall be given, and therefore says our
Savior here, If she be a wall already, we will build a silver palace upon
her. Wherefore this should teach us to be careful to get true grace settled in
our hearts, and then assuredly where it is, by this as by one property thereof
it will be known, to wit, by grouth and a further increase.

4. We see the excellency of the Church and her preciousnesse in Gods sight,
how mean and contemptible soever in the eyes of vvorldings, to wit, that she
is like a glorious and rich silver palace of Gods own building; for which
cause he says, We will build upon her a palace of silver, which should be a
motive to all men to seek to be true members of this Church. As likewise shows
unto us, if she be so glorious and beautiful in her Pilgrimage and militant
estate, absent from her Lord, how glorious and beautiful will she be in her
heavenly country being present with him and triumphant in glory!

Verse. 10. I am a wall, and my breasts like towers, then was I in his eyes, as
one that found favor.
Here this little sister is brought in, showing that she is a wall built on
that foundation, spoken of Ephesians. 2. 20. and Revel. 21. 12. and has not only
breasts, but breasts like to towers, all which she acknowledges not to be from
nature; or any merit of hers, but from the free grace of God, as the Apostle
shows, and that favor that she says here, she found in his eyes. Thus then
for the certainty of faith (as has been noted before) she is brought in here,
speaking of that which was to come, as of a thing present. She was therefore
this wall that is spoken of, when by the planting, and after watering of the
Apostles, she was conformed in the Gospel of Christ, and the Lord gave her
that increase that is spoken of by Ezekiel when she multiplied as the bud of
the field, Ezekiel. 16. 7. and which was foretold by Isay, who brings in the
Jewish Church with admiration saying, Isay. 49. 21. Who has begotten me these,
seeing I have lo^t my Children, and am desolate? therefore thus says the Lord
God, behold I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard
to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy
daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. And Kings shall be thy nursing
fathers and Queens thy noursing mothers, Verse. 22, 23. etc. and which thing we
see began to be performed in that notable work of conversion, Act. 2. 41.

Likewise her breasts are said to be like Towers, and so not only comely
fashioned, as the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 16. 7. but so abounding in the plenty and
power of the Gospel of grace, that she afforded as a Mother such plenty of the
sincere Milk of the word unto the multitudes of her children and converts,
whereby they abounded, and (as the Apostle speaks) were so filled with
knowledge that they had the word of Christ in all wisdom dwelling in them
richly, Col. 3. 16. All which (as has been said) she acknowledges to have
received, from the mere and free favor of God which she found in his eyes who
is her heavenly husband, as is shown at length, Ezekiel. 16. that so all the glory
of this work of grace may be to him only, to whom glory belongs.

Observations.
1. We see here our happiness (if we make good use thereof), and the Lords
gracious dealing toward us, that we are borne and live in the time of the
plenty and clear light of the Gospel, when the breasts of the Church are like
towers, boudned or swollen up (as it were) with the sweet and sincere Milk of
the word, streaming forth plentifully every where to nourish her children, so
that much being given us we may look that much will be required, to wit, for
great and clear light, great thankfulness and obedience: and if we set leight
by this heavenly and great benefit, and either live in wilful ignorance or
wicked disobedience, bringing forth the works of darkness, our estate shall be
more wretched beyond that of Corazin and Bethsaida, as theirs was beyond Tire
and Sidon, Matthew. 11. 21.

2. Whereas she attributes all this to Gods free favor, hereby then a Church
may know that she stands in favor with God, and has found grace in his eyes,
when she injoyes the word in plenty and in power, so that her breasts are like
unto strong and well furnished towers, Cant. 4. 4. as was that of David's
built for an armory, and when the same is not only painfully preached by her
faithful pastors, but also Christianly obeyed by her Children and people.

3. Whereas she ascribes all to this, that she was as one that had found
favor in his eyes. After her example let us likewise learn in all
thankfulness and humility to acknowledge the fountain from whence all good
things whatsoever, spiritual or corporal, temporal or eternal proceed,
which is Gods free grace alone, and, that we have found favor in his eyes.

Verse. 11. Solomon had a vineyard at Raal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto
keepers, every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of
silver. 12. My vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have
a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.
Here is the second thing in the conclusion of this heavenly song whereof we
were to speak, which is the comparison between Solomon's vineyard and the
Church: And. 1. Why the Church is so compared, we have spoken before, 2. This
vineyard whereunto she is now compared, and which was Solomon's, Chap. 1. 6. and
7. 12. first is said to have been in Baal-hamon, which is by exposition, a Lord
or Master of a multitude, to wit, of vines, (as the Church is a mistress and
Mother of a multitude of believers) Baal signifying a Lord, and hamon a
multitude, which some take to be no proper name of any one place, but to
denotate the fertility of the soil, as it is said, Isay. 5. 1. That the Lord
had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill. Others again take it to be the
propper name of a fruitful plot of ground which did belong to Solomon, and lay
near to Jerusalem. Always the difference between this vineyard of Solomon's and
Christ's (which is his Church,) consists (as is set down here) in these
particulars.

First, Solomon let out his vineyard unto keepers, who shared with him in the
profit and fruits which it afforded, because of their labors, and paid unto
him every one of them for his part of the fruits thereof a thousand pieces of
silver. But Christ lets not out his vineyard so, but as his eye is upon it to
keep it himself, so he will have the whole fruits thereof only to himself,
that is, to redound only to his glory, and no man to share with him in any
part thereof.

Not but that our Savior lets also forth his vineyard to keepers and dressers
thereof; as we see, Matthew. 21. 33. and these receive likewise their hire or
reward, as we see in the parable of those who were called to labor in his
vineyard, Matthew. 20. But the keepers of Solomon's vineyard, did keep and dress
it in his absence, whereas the keepers of Christ's vineyard can do nothing
unless he be present and a coworker with them. Next the keepers of Christ's
vineyard they shall indeed receive a reward for their labors, yea, a very
great one, as Daniel shows and the Apostle declares, but this comes from the
Master of the vineyard himself, who promised it, but not from shareing in the
fruits of the vineyard, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Dan. 12. 3. 1 Cor. 3. 8. 2 Timothy 4. 8.

Observations.
1. We see here by Christ's reaping alone the fruit of his vineyard, which only
she brings forth to him, how faithful his Church is as a chaste spouse who
will not give the glory which is due to him to no creature in heaven nor in
earth, Isay. 42. 8. Psalm. 115. 1 Fa^ less will she ascribe that which is his,
to her self or her own merit.

2. Whereas Christ says of his vineyard that it is always before him, and he
consequently present with the same, we may see how blasphemous that doctrine is
of the Roman Church and of that beast or head thereof, horned like the Lamb but
speaking like the Dragon, who affirms himself to be Christ's vicar on earth,
as if he himself had deserted his Church, and let out his vineyard only to
him, as Master thereof: who indeed under pretense hereof shareth a large part
of worldly possessions, which he calls Peter's patrimony, and has coming in
unto him daily thousands of silver.

3. Seeing he says that his vineyard is always before him, whose eyes are
like a flame of fire, ever looking on it, this should warn us all, to look
narrowly to our selves, and watch over our ways, seeing we have him who is the
al-seeing God, and the righteous judge of the whole world looking upon us,
whereof if we were ever mindful, it would be a sovereign perservative to us
against all sin, 2 Chronicles. 16* 9.

Verse. 13. Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy
voice, cause me to hear it.
In these words is set down the Churches prayer to Christ that still she may
enjoy his presence in this life, and the comfort of his word with grace that
profitably she may hear and obey the same, wherein. 1. She calls him, (O thou
that dwell in the gardens,) that is, who constantly abides and walks in the
midst of thy Church, as we see him described, Rev. 1. 13. (The companions,)
that is, those who are thy chaste worshippers; therefore called, Psalm. 45. 14.
the virgin companions that follow the kings daughter who is all glorious
within, (they hearken to thy voice) that is, like the true sheep of Christ,
Joh. 10. 3. they hearken and embrace the sound and pure doctrine that is
contained in thy word, and preached by faithful pastors, (cause me also to
hear it,) whereby she professes, that it is the special grace of God, and
gift of his holy spirit, that opens the inward ear of the soul, whereof he
speaks, Rev. 2. 7. And who opens likewise the heart, as he did Lidia's,
whereby they hear his word aright, believe, and obey the same.

Observations.
1. Out of this style which she gives him, saying, O thou that dwells in the
garden, we learn this lesson of comfort, that Christ is not only present with
his Church, but as husbands are bidden to dwell with their wives, so he, is a
dweller with her, 1 Pet. 3. 7. as he has promised, Ioh. 14. 23. Yea an
indweller in the midst of her, and in the hearts of all her true members, whom
hereafter he shall make to dwell with him for ever in the heavens.

2. We see here a true note of the true Church of Christ, which is, where
Christ's voice sounds and is heard by his sheep, and virgin companions, there is
his true Church, and they are it only.

3. As these companions hearken to his voice, so she desires that in like
manner he would cause her to hear it; Where we may observe that it is a
necessary and commendable thing to advert what we see to be good in others, and
to endeavor to imitate that our selves, for which cause the Apostle recommends
his practice in so far, as he followed Christ, to be a pattern to others, 1
Cor. 11. 1.

4. She seeks by prayer this special grace from Christ, that he would cause
her to hear his voice, so that as all graces are to be sought by prayer, and
from God only who is the giver thereof, so this in particular should be sought
by all such who come to hear Gods word, or resort thereto conscionably.

Verse. 14. Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe, or to a young
heart upon the mountains of spices.
Last of all, as she began this song with a prayer desiring him to hasten his
first coming, so she ends it with a prayer desiring him in like manner with the
Church, Revel. 22. 20. To hasten his second coming: which very like suit, and
in the very like words we had before, Chap. 2. 17. Only she says here, Be
like a roe or young Heart upon the mountains of spices, where she spoke before
of the mountains of Bether, meaning by these mountains the heavens, called
mountains for their height and the eminency of that happy estate of Gods
saints there; and mountains of spices, for the sweet delights and pleasures
for evermore, that are at Gods right hand in that place of joy.

Observations.
1. We may perceive the difference between the godly and wicked: the
remembrance of Christ, coming to judgment to the godly is that which so
overjoyes their heart, that earnostly they wish the same, as the solemnity of
their mariageday and meeting with Christ, when their full redemption shall then
be accomplished; but to the other it torments them before the time, and affects
them with trouble of spirit, as Christ's first coming did unto Herod, Matthew. 2,
3. because then begins the accomplishment in soul and body of all their
endless misery, and easeless torments in hells fire for ever.

2. Are the heavens in comparison of this valley of tears and barren
wilderness of this world for sublimity of happiness, and all sweet delights
like the mountains of spices? O then let us loath this world using it only as
if we used it not, and climb these mountains by affection and holy desires
here, till we come to the full and real fruition thereof in glory hereaster.
Which the Lord grant to us for Christ sake. Amen.

Finis octavi Capitis, Cantici Canticorum.
Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

