AN EXTEMPORARY ANSWER To a cluster of drunkards, met together at Schiedam:
Made by Timothy Gunton, who was compelled thereto, upon his refusal to drink
the Kings health. Whether such impetuous drinking of other men's healths were
lawful, profitable, commendable, or reasonable?
IF lawful, it is either by the Laws of God, or man: If of God, it is
contained in holy writ, which is the old and new Testament; but from the Alpha
of Genesis, to the Omega of the Revelations, there is no such thing commanded;
therefore not by the Laws of God. If by the Laws of man, search the Records,
review the Statutes, and show in whose reign, and what year it was enacted.

If profitable, it must conduce to the good, either of soul or body: If of the
soul, it must be suitable, convenient, and agreeable to the soul; But the soul
is a spiritual creature, not capable either to eat, or drink any material
substance: If of the body, then be ye your own judges, what profit have ye to
drink the money out of the purse, the wit out of the brain, the bread from
wife and children, the health from the body, and the peace of God both from
soul and body?

If commendable, it is commended either by wise men, or fools: By wise men,
who know a thing to be good; By fools, who suppose a thing to be good: But
wise men know that man is the Image of God, and by his reasonable soul he is
distinguished from other creatures, and other creatures cannot (contrary to
reason) be compelled to drink against appetite; yet man being become worse then
a beast, not only drinks himself, but also compels others to drink, until they
vomit it up again; Wherefore, no wise man will commend it; And if a fool
commend it, it is for want of wit.

If reasonable, let all the world censure, what reason has one man to drink
another man's health, to impair his own?

By these let all men know it is worse then sordid stealth,
To fawn upon a friend, and swallow down his health.
Yet some audacious Rogues dare in their drunken notes
Pour King, and Kingdoms health down their ungodly throats
And stove it in their stinking paunch an hour, or twain,
And then they will spew, and cag, and piss it out again.
Oh then how sick art thou poor King, and commonwealth,
While drunken sots daily drink, piss, and spew thy health.
For these my lines I Will pardon crave,
And promise eke they shall be mended:
But first I must some reason have,
Wherein, and whom they have offended.

