A Contention for TRUTH: In Two Several Public DISPUTATIONS. Before thousands
of People, at Clement Dane Church, without Temple Bar: upon the 19 of Nevemb.
last: and upon the 26 of the same Month.

Between Mr Gunning of the one part, and Mr Den on the other.

Concerning the Baptism of INFANTS; Whether LAWFVL, or VNLAWFVL.

The Inspiration of the Almighty, gives Understanding. Great men are not
always wise; neither do the aged understand Judgment.

Job. 32. 8, 9. LONDON. Printed by J. Moxon, for Francis Smith, and are to be
sold at his Shop, in Flying Horse Court in Fleet Street, near Chancery Lane
end. And by John Sweeting, at the sign of the Angel. in Popes head Alley. 1658.

To the Reader.
IS there no end of writing Books? Have not our Ears been filled, and our Eyes
wearied with Hearing and Reading, touching this subject, Both Pro and Contra?
Are not the later writers in behalf of Infants Baptism, very many, viz.
Cardinal Bellarmine, and a great number of the sons of the Church of Rome: who
have in this point, dealt as ingeniously, as pithily, as ever any that took up
the defense of it could do? Have we not often heard of it from the pens of the
reformers; in the infancy of their reformation? viz. Luther, Melancthon,
Calvin: with a great number of late Doctors and Masters: viz. Featly, Marshall,
Goodwin, Fuller, Baxter, Audley, with others?

Have we not had also many who have labored not a little on the opposite
party? And both by their pens and sufferings testified against the Baptism of
Infants: as Morton, with some others contemporary; the Ministers of
Transylvania: and since of later years, Blackwell, Tombs, Cornwall, Fisher,
Lamb Senior, Lamb, Junior, Writer, Haggar, with many others, who will not be
offended because they are not named? Have the Protestants of late said any
thing more then the Papists before them? Or will this Book tell us one thing
more then either Protestant or Papist, has not formerly Declared?

On the other hand, what can be said more effectually to prove the Baptism of
Infants to bear an humane stamp, and superscription, and not Divine, then has
been said over, and again? What need then of this Book?

Patience good Reader, and know it is neither any conceit of the impotency of
those that have written before, or of the excellency of any thing herein
contained, above what has been before written; that has occasioned me to show
this to the world: but that the importunity of friends might be satisfied, and
the mouths of lying adversaries might be stopped, that they may be shamed out
of those slanderous reports, whereof they have been coyners. Thou have here the
relation of the discourses that passed between Mr. Gunning, and my self. I
cannot warrant it in every tittle perfect, but as fully, impartially, as I am
able to give thee: This I will affirm, that willingly I have omitted nothing,
that might conduce to the making his arguments, or answers seem valid. Indeed I
did wish, I could have showed thee this discourse in a more perfect form then
it is; and I did wish it heartily: and for the same purpose I did write unto
Mr. Gunning, declaring mine intentions to send my papers to the Press; and
entreating his favor to come to my house (in regard I was not able to stir
abroad) and to put to his file: if any thing were omitted, it should be
inserted: if any thing were inserted, that was not spoken, it should be
expunged: declaring also that I would wait for him four or five days. I did
wait twelve days; and at last I received from him (not by writing, but by
word) That he could not come; if I pleased, I might proceed: and if I did any
injury to him, he would let the world know of it. Thus when I could not do as
I would, I was forced to do what I was able to do. I have here propounded to
thy consideration, the matter as well as I can. Read, and in the presence of
the Lord, (setting prejudice aside) consider what Mr. Gunning has produced
that is of greater weight then those arguments Men have formerly written: I
leave thee to the perusal of the Book; at the latter end whereof, thou have an
account of some arguments that I had intended for to have urged at that time.
Consider them also with the rest, and let the Readers (that can) pray unto the
God of peace, that he would cause the Sun of Righteousness to arise; That
divisions may cease: and all that fear the Lord may be of one lipp, and of one
heart serving the Lord in Godly Simplicity, and Sincerity.

AMEN.
A Conference between A and B: Wherein is Contained an Impartial Relation of a
Disputation holden at Clement Danes, two several days. viz. on the 19th day of
November, and on the 26th day of the same Month: between Mr. Gunning, and Mr.
Den. Concerning the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of Children Baptism.
A MY dear friend, I rejoice very heartily to see you in health, and to enjoy
your society this day: And so much the more, because I have heard that you were
present at a dispute, two several days at Clement Danes, concerning the
Baptism of Infants; whether it be to be accounted Lawful, or Unlawful.
Concerning which dispute I have heard Reports so different, that I find it a
matter of difficulty to find a ground for Credence; I desire your gentleness
not to deny my request, but to grant me so much favor as to make me partakers
of your apprehensions of the whole matter. That by your impartial Relation of
the transactions of both days, I may find some good assurance of confidence.


B It is no wonder that you should hear various and uncertain reports, both of
this, or other disputes of like sort: Seeing that unto such like meetings as
these are, The greatest part Come with prejudice upon their spirits, Judging
before they have heard, and determining the whole matter before it begin. Some
bringing with them hearts fraught with envy, anger, and malice: insomuch that
if they Could, they Would not, and if they Would they Could not, sincerely
discern the truth of matters propounded. If it may prove a thing acceptable in
your eyes; I will not refuse to relate unto you the sum of the matter: so far as
my memory can comprehend: I shall not willingly omit any thing material. As for
words which might well have been spared on both sides, I shall take no notice
of them at all.


A I pray begin, and I shall Lend an attentive ear.


B I will first declare unto you the Occasion of this dispute, which was this:
A gentlewoman, who had (through mercy) set her heart seriously to seek the Lord
and his face, with resolution to walk in his ways, was not a little troubled
in spirit about the many differences in and about Worship, amongst those that
profess the name of the Lord: She looked upon her former ways as evil, and
to be forsaken; but what to embrace she knows not; Forasmuch as so soon as
she had passed through the Doctrine Of Repentance from dead works, and faith
toward God (in which the present differences of the Men of these times have
created no small difficulties) She meets with a great controversy about the
Doctrine of Baptism, which drives her into a strait; and she remains divided
in her thoughts; not being able to resolve her self, whether her Infant
Baptism were of God, or whether it were contrary to truth, being none other
but tradition of Men, a will worship, and by consequence vain and unprofitable.
While thus she remains uncertain, not knowing to which part to adhere whether
to those who professing the faith of the Lord Jesus do maintain and uphold the
Baptism of Infants, or whether it were not her duty to repair to a Baptized
Congregation, to require Baptism at their hands. If she make her addresses to
Counselors, one says thus: Fear not your Baptism is good and valid.
Another tells her that her Infant, Baptism is not of God: Both these use
Arguments, and Demonstrations and Reasons, which captivate her understanding,
that she discerns not in her self, what to embrace, or what to eschew: And
finding at present no way to deliver her self from this condition, is very
desirous a Conference may be had between Parties on both sides, about this
matter; To the end that what she could not be thoroughly persuaded of in her
mind when she heard them speaking asunder, might (through grace) be happily
obtained by hearing them speak friendly Together. This was the occasion of the
meeting: And Mr. Gunning (whether solicited by Entreaty of others, or moved
Voluntarily, I know not certainly) was pleased to take the business upon
himself, on the one part, to defend the Lawfullness of Infants Baptism; And
Mr. Den on the other part, yielded himself to oppugn the Baptism of Infants.

Two days were appointed for this conference: The first day was on the 19th of
November last, when they met at the place before appointed: And Mr. Den whose
part it was that day to be the Respondent, stood up in the Pulpit, and
entreating the multitude to be silent, and to behave themselves civilly, and
orderly, and craving attention he spoke.


Res. One there is who desires to be informed whether the Baptism of Infants
be Lawful, or Unlawful: I declare that the Baptism of Infants is Unlawful.


B After him stood up Mr. Gunning, in an opposite gallery, and spoke.


Oppo. I will prove the Baptism of Infants to be Lawful; thus,

That which the supreme Lawgiver of the Church has given in command to his
immediate Officers in the Church, by a perpetual sanction, and unalterable
decree, to be by them practiced, is Lawful: But the Baptism of Infants is by
the supreme Lawgiver of the Church given in Command to his immediate Officers,
by a perpetual sanction, and unalterable decree, to be by them and their
Successors practiced: Therefore the Baptism of Infants is Lawful.


A This is a very long Syllogism: I wonder a learned Man should use so many
words, which must needs procure more disadvantage then advantage; for most
times in multitude of words there is error.


B Indeed many of his Syllogismes were long, and Shard to be repeated:
Therefore I cannot promise to rehearse them Verbatim, only I will not willingly
leave out any word which is Material, or may be for the Opponents advantage.


A I think the sum of this may be gathered into fewer words, thus: That which
Christ has commanded to be practiced is Lawful: But Christ has commanded
Baptism of Infants to be practiced, Therefore Baptism of Infants is Lawful:
But let me hear the answer.


Res. I deny the minor, and do say, Christ never Commanded Baptism of Infants
to be practiced, either by his immediate Officers, or any other of their
Successors.


Opp. I will prove that it is the will and command of the supreme Lawgiver that
Infants should be Baptized. If the supreme Lawgiver would have Infants to be
saved, and they cannot be saved without Baptism (or desire of Baptism in
Parents or friends,) then is it his will and command that they should be
Baptized: But the supreme Lawgiver would have Infants to be saved, and they
cannot be saved without Baptism. Therefore it is his will that they should be
Baptized: for he that wills the end, wills also the means conducing to that
end.


Res. The minor I answer in the first place, freely granting that it is the
will of Jesus Christ that Infants should be saved: But saying that Infants may
be saved without Baptism, or without desire of Baptism in their Parents, or
any other for them.


A Do you think that the Opponent speaks his own thoughts? Or does he speak
it for disputation sake, when he says Children cannot be saved without Batisme?


B Questionless he speaks his own thoughts, even as he is persuaded in heart,
that no Infant can be saved without Baptism, or desire (at least) of the
Parents or Friends to have the Child Baptized. But hear his proof whereby he
proves Infants cannot be saved without Baptism, or desire of Baptism.


Oppo. John. 3. 5th. Verily, Verily I say unto thee, Except any one be born
again of Water and of the Spirit* he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
These are Christ words to Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, who came to Christ to
enquire of the way of God: And they are confirmed with an oath doubled, Except
any one: that is Man Woman or Child, none are excepted, be born again of Water,
that is Baptism: and of the Spirit, not Water alone without the Spirit, or
Spirit alone without Water, but of Water and of the Spirit: the Spirit working
by Water, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; that is he cannot be saved.
None can possibly be saved except they be Baptized.


Res. The place of Scripture you have brought is Allegorical, and therefore not
so proper to be a ground for Faith: not having one word in it to the matter in
hand to be proved: which is that Infants cannot be saved without Baptism: Now
here is in this TEXT, neither the word Infant, nor Baptism, nor Saved: (if
your gloss be laid aside:) But I have three things in answer to this TEXT, and
your gloss or exposition: The first is a general rule, which will serve to
answer not only this, but other arguments, that peradventure may be brought.
That Scriptures must be considered to whom, and of whom they speak; and not to
be applied to any other, concerning whom it does not speak. So you find in the
quoted place, that Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, comes to Christ to learn the
way of God, that so he might work the works of God: To this Man, Christ makes
answer, except a Man be born again, etc. speaking neither of Children, nor to
Children: The second answer is this: that by being born again of Water, is not
meant Baptism, but a Mistical not a Litteral Water: as in many other places of
Scripture spoken of. Thirdly, if it were granted that the TEXT, did include
Children, and that by Water were meant Baptism; yet will it not follow that
Children can not be saved without Baptism, because here is only mention made
of entering into the Kingdom of God: you know that the Kingdom of God has
manyfold exceptions in the Scripture: sometimes it is taken for Gospel
Preaching, sometimes for a visible Church state; Mat. 13. Sometimes for that
happiness which Men and Women (and not Infants) do enjoy through believing Romans
14. 17. The Kingdom of God is not meat or drink; but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost. This Kingdom Infants do not enter into, although
they should be Baptized; neither can they enter so long as they continue
Infants. Now if Water here do mean Baptism, it will infer no more but this;
that except any one be Baptized he cannot enter into a Church state, or he
cannot Enjoy righteousness and peace, and joy, in the Holy Ghost. These are
three answers I have for this TEXT.


Oppo. I will prove your first answer to be insufficient.


Res. Take notice that if you can prove two of them insufficient, yet if the
third stand good, it sufficiently answers your argument.


Oppo. I will prove in the first place, that Children are here meant and
included. The TEXT says (...) except any one; it comprehends all: none
exempted.


Res. We find many propositions in Scripture, spoken as generally as this,
where the Scripture speaks only to Men: and you your self will confess that
Children are not included: as Mat. 16. 24. If any one will come after me, let
him take up his cross: etc. Mark 8. 34. and Mat. 10. 38. He that takes not up
his Cross, and follows me; is not worthy of me. These and many more places
you will confess are not spoken of Children: John 3, 36. He that believes on
the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not
see life.


Oppo. Have you a Greek Testament? I pray look the place: as I remember the
word in that place is (...), he that rejects or rebelleth against the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, which Children do not.


Res. I do confess the word is so indeed, and I do acknowledge a difference
between (...) and (...) A Child cannot be called (...) but a Child may be said
to be (...) not a Believer: therefore I refer you to the 18 Verse. of that Chap.
He that believes not, is condemned already; and unto 1. John 5. 10. He that
believes not, has made him a liar: in both which places Children are not
included.


Opp. It is true that Children are not included in these TEXTS: But here are
many reasons in the context, whereby it may evidently be proved that they are
not meant of Children, but of Men and Women of years of discretion: but you are
not able to prove by the context in the third of John that Children are not
included in the word any Man.


Res. Its not my duty to prove any thing at this time; it is my part to answer,
and your part to prove, or disprove: when I am to be the Opponent I shall prove
that Children cannot be here included: for the present it is sufficient for me
to deny it.


Oppo. For your second answer, I will prove that by Water (in this place
alleged) is meant Litteral Water: it is plain, the Scripture calls it Water,
plain Water: besides in the 22th Verse. is rehearsed, Christ tarrying with his
Disciples, and Baptising; and in the 23 Verse. John also was Baptising in Enon
near to Salim; because there was much Water there: here by Water is meant
Literal Water, and Plain Water: And where can you find in the Scripture,
especially in the new Testament, that by Water is meant any other thing but
Literal Water, unless the TEXT do declare it to be Allegorical? As out of his
Belly shall flow rivers of Living Water: where presently the TEXT adds, This
spoke he of the spirit? besides, the constant tradition of the Church, and the
Unanimous consent of the Fathers, did interpret this place of Literal Water,
and of Baptism: even Tertullian himself, who is the man that is principally
urged by you, does interpret this TEXT in the same manner, except any one be
Baptized with Water and the Spirit, he cannot be saved.


Res. I answer first of all, it is no reason that it should be meant Literal
Water here in the first Verse because Literal Water is spoken of in the 22 and
23 Verses: for those words are a report of what was done at another time, and
in another place: and has no reference to this matter at all. Secondly that
the scripture is frequent in using the word Water Allegorically, is very plain,
as Esaias. 51. 1. Come to the Waters. John 4. 10. He would have given thee Living
Water. And as I deny not but in the places alleged by you, Water is taken
Literally: so may it be evidenced that it is very frequent in the scriptures to
take Water Mistically, and the sense in this place will be very good, with this
interpretation. Thirdly, whereas you say that all ancient writers were of this
mind, even Tertullian himself. I say that cannot be, that Tertullian should be
of your mind, that Infants could not be saved without Water Baptism: for he
himself (who was the first that ever mentioned Infants Baptism in writing)
does reprove it.


Oppo. Tertullian was not the first that mentioned Infants Baptism, for Justin
Martyr makes mention of it, in his Apology: and you can never find in all
Tertullian that he says Infants Baptism is Unlawful.


Res. Justin Martyr never once mentioned Infants Baptism: for Tertullian, I do
not say he says in so many words, that Infants Baptism is Unlawful: But in a
Sermon of his, entitled Qui sunt Baptizandi, Who are to be Baptized: He
endeavors to persuade Parents to keep their Children from Baptism, until
they were Capable of it: You will not says he, Trust them with Earthly
treasures, until they know how to use them; why then will you trust them with
the Heavenly? (speaking of Baptism:) and says he Fiant Christiani cum
Christum nosse potuerint: Let them be made Christians when they are able to
know Christ: And one thing more I must tell you, that when I did first read
this Sermon of Tertullian, I met with one passage which I did not understand;
neither could I make any sense of it: wherefore I consulted one that had
written notes upon Tertullian, and he plainly confesses that those words were
added by him to this end: Vt Authoris sententiam mitigarem, That might qualify
the Opinion of the Author, concerning Baptism: where you see what fair
dealing we have had with the writings of the Ancients: when an Index
expurgatorius has passed upon them, and expunged (by confession) many hundred
sentences: and who knows how many they have inserted?


Oppo. I can make it plain out of Tertullian, that he allows the Baptism of
Infants, in case of necessity, and danger of death: Besides it is known
Tertullian was an Heretic and died an Heretic. But I shall refer to the
Auditors what has been said unto this argument. You have said any one, does
not include all, and that water is not Literal water: I will proceed to
another argument, to prove the Lawfullness of Infant Baptism.


A There was yet nothing spoken to the third answer of the Respondent, which is
of as great consequence as any of the other: and if the other were of no force,
yet if that stand good, the argument is of no force: it was this, that
supposing the TEXT alleged, did speak of Baptising; yet by Entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven, is meant no other thing then a state of happiness, which
believers do attain unto here in this life, through faith in Christ Jesus, viz.
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.


B I suppose the Opponent had forgotten to refell it: and the Answerer, had
also forgotten to call for it. Let us hear the Opponent prosecuting a second
argument.


Oppo. That which is no sin for Parents to require, and for Ministers to
perform being required, is Lawful. But it is no sin for Parents to require
Baptism for their Infants* neither for Ministers to perform it being required:
Therefore the Baptism of Infants is Lawful.


Res. I deny the minor. It is a sin for Parents to require, and for Ministers
to administer Baptism to Infants.


Oppo. That which is confirmed by an everlasting law, and standing commission,
not to be altered to the end of the World, is no sin for Parents to require, or
for Ministers to perform.

But the Baptism of Infants is confirmed by an everlasting law, and standing
commission, not to be altered to the end of the World: Therefore it cannot be
sin in Parents to require, or in Ministers to perform, being required.


Res. I deny the minor, and say, There is No commission authorizing Parents to
require, or Ministers to administer Baptism to Infants, being required.


Oppo. The Commission is Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. All power is given to me in
Heaven and in Earth* Go ye therefore, and make Disciples of all Nations,
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you: and lo, I
am with you always, even unto the end of the World. AMEN. Here the Apostles are
Commanded to make Diciples of all Nations, Baptising them, and then teaching
them. Here it is plain Baptising, after Teaching.


Res. I do not deny that Teaching should follow Baptism, But I deny that
Baptism should go before all Teaching: moreover here is not one word of
Parents requiring Baptism for Infants; or one word of Infants being Baptized:
And whereas you seem to imply that the Apostles should make Disciples, by
Baptising of them. I demand of you before this assembly whether you believe
that by virtue of this Commission, by you alleged, the Apostles or their
successors either had, or have authority to take all Nations and Baptize them,
whether they will or no? Whether they consent or not?


Opp. No, I do not imagine so: but that they were first to make those (that
where of years of discretion) willing, by Preaching; and then to Baptize them:
And those that were not of years to make them Disciples, by Baptising of them.


Res. Now you say something, first make them willing* and then Baptize them.
But you have not expressed in the Commission any thing of Children who are not
willing: How willing Children are, appears by their Crying and Struggling at the
Font.


Oppo. I will prove Children are not unwilling, for as Ignoti nulla Cupido,
there can be no desire or will to a thing we do not know, so neither can there
be any Unwillingness to that which is unknown: now Children knowing nothing of
Baptism, it is not possible they should be Unwilling, seeing they know not any
thing of the matter.


Res. You might have spared this labor: for I did not say Children were
Unwilling: But I said they were not Willing: your duty had been to prove they
were Willing: there is a vast difference between Unwilling, and not Willing:
you know how willing Constantinus Copronymus was to be Baptized, when he was an
Infant; and how he came to have the name of Copronymus: I can tell you the
story, But I will not in this auditory. I desire you to frame a Silogisme out
of the TEXT alleged, concluding that here is a commission* either to Baptize
Infants, or to require their Baptism.


Oppo. I will, The Apostles are here Commanded to make Disciples of all
Nations: now Infants who are part of the Nations, cannot be made Disciples any
other way then by Baptism: therefore they are here commanded to make Disciples
by Baptism.


Res. First I say, you cannot prove that this Commission under the title of all
Nations, extends any more to Infants then that in Mark 16. Go preach the
Gospel to every Creature, extends to Infants: you will confess you have no
warrant for to Preach to an Infant in the Cradle, from this place.

Secondly, I deny that Baptism makes Disciples, it manifests one to be a
Disciple, it does not make him one* I pray prove if you can, that Baptism
makes any one a Disciple: it is written John. 4. 1. Jesus made, and Baptized
more Disciples then John. It is one thing to make, another thing to baptize a
disciple.


Oppo. I had thought it had been a matter of conscience, your denial of the
Baptism of Infants: but now I perceive you go about to deny all Baptism. I
will prove it is no sin for Parents to require Baptism for their Infants.
Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; for sin, is the Transgression
of a Law: But there is no Law forbidding Parents to require Baptism for their
Infants, or forbidding Ministers to administer Baptism to Infants: therefore
it is no sin either to require, or administer Baptism to Infants.


Res. There is a Law forbidding it, and that under a severe punishment.


Oppo. Show where that Law is to be found.


Res. I will, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. Here Moses Prophesies of Christ in these Words. A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, etc. But the Prophet that
shall presume to speak a word in my Name, which I have not Commanded him etc.
Even that Prophet shall die. Mark this, One word* and Prover. 30. 6. Add not
thou to his Words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. So that
until you be able to prove a command, there must needs lie a prohibition in the
way.


Oppo. I have proved a Command already, and I will further prove it. All Church
members may Lawfully be. Baptized: Infants are Church members, Therefore
Infants may Lawfully be Baptized.


Res. I deny the minor. Infants are no Church members.


Oppo. The minor is thus proved; If Infants belong to the body of Christ, as
members of his body, then are they Church members. But Infants belong to the
body of Christ, as members of his body, therefore Infants are Church members.


Res. I deny the consequence, though they be members of Christ body, yet are
they not to be accounted Church members.


Opp. If all the body of Christ be Church members; then if they be of the body
of Christ, then are they Church members: But all the body of Christ are Church
members: therefore Infants are Church members.


Res. I deny the minor, All the body of Christ are not Church members.


Oppo. The minor is proved: Ephe. 1. 23. And has given him to be head over all
things, to the Church, which is his Body. The Father has given Christ to be
head over all things to the Church* or in the Church, which is his body.


Res. You do now dishonor me, in seeking to deceive my understanding: the
thing you were to prove, was, that all that did belong to the body of Christ,
are Church members: And you bring me a TEXT to prove that all the Church is the
body of Christ.


Oppo. Where lies the difference, of these two propositions?


Res. The difference is very great between these two propositions. All the
Church is his body, and All his body is the Church. As much as if I should say;
All that are in this place are Freemen of London; and all Freemen of London are
in this place. If you have a TEXT that says, All that belong to his body are
Church members, Let us hear that,


Oppo. I will prove that Infants are Church members. All that are called, are
Church members: but Infants are called, therefore Infants are Church members.


Res. I deny the minor, Infants are not called.


Oppo. All that are Predestined are called, But Infants are Predestined;
therefore Infants are called.


Res. I deny the Major: All that are Predestined are not called.


Opp. The major is proved Romans 8. 29, 30. Whom he did foreknow, them he did
Predestinate to be conformed to the image, etc. that he might be the firstborn
among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did Predestinate, them also he called:
and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also
glorified. Out of this TEXT it follows, that if Infants be Predestinate, then
they are called: for whom he did Predestinate, them also he called.


Res. The Apostle speaks of such, and to such to whom he Wrote this Epistle.
Here cannot be proved that all the Predestinate are Called: neither do you your
self believe it. He has Called the Predestinate Romans, to whom he Wrote: But
he has not Called all the Predestinate.


Oppo. I will prove that Infants are Gods servants, and that he owns them for
his servants, and calls them his servants; and therefore they must necessarily
be Baptized, in regard they can do him no service at all, but by being
Baptized. The proof of this is Levit. 25. 42. They are my servants which I
brought forth of the Land of Egypt. That is the Children, as well as Men, and
Women: for here the Lord renders a reason of his command, viz. that in the Year
of Jubilee the Bondsman should go free himself, and his Wife, and Children also.
And this reason is rendered, for they are my Servants, whom I brought out of the
Land of Egypt. He speaks of real service, such as Bondmen do perform toward
their Masters: now if it be required in a servant to do his Master service, and
Infants can do no other service; Then it will follow, that Infants must and
ought to be Baptized.


Res. I pray you produce your Syllogism, Concluding what you ought to
conclude, and I shall give you answer.


Oppo. Thus I argue, All Gods servants may Lawfully be Baptized: Children are
Gods servants: Therefore they may Lawfully be Baptized.


Res, I deny the major; all Gods servants may not Lawfully be Baptized.


Oppo. If a servant be one who does service, and they can do him no other
service, then either they may be Baptized, or else they can do God no service
at all: yet God calls them servants.


Res. I answer in two propositions: First, Infants do not perform any service
to God, by being Baptized. Secondly, Infants are Gods servants, though
Unbaptised, or before they come to be Baptized.


Oppo. What service do Unbaptised Infants do to God? Give an instance.


Res. They are very faithful servants, performing all things that God
requires of them, to be performed by them.


Oppo. That is just nothing, they Eat and Drink and Sleep; this is all they
perform, and all the service they can do.


Res. It is good service for a servant to be quiet and do nothing, when and
where nothing is required: it is disservice to be busy and doing when the
Master requires nothing: whereas you say they Eat and Drink etc. I say therein
they are Gods servants, and that is the service God requires of them.


Oppo. God speaks of real service, such as Bondmen require from servants: will
any imagine a Bondsman serves his Master, that Eats and Drinks and does nothing
else? This is strange service.


Kes. Surely Eating and Drinking by Infants is a real service; such as Masters
do require, and all that they do require of their Infant-servants: and this
proves very advantageous for the Masters profit. Suppose I buy a servant an
Infant for Ten shillings, this Infant Eats and Drinks, and thereby grows in
stature, and I sell him for Ten pound: was not his Eating and Drinking real
service? Does not the Ox in the pasture do the Master as real service (though
he do nothing but Eat and Drink) as the Ox that labors daily at the Plough?
There will not be any thing gained by this Argument, until you can make it
appear that the Eating and Drinking which is performed by Infants is no service
of God.


Oppo. I will proceed to another argument: 2. Cor. 5. 14, 15. If one dyed for
all, then were all dead: And that he dyed for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live unto themselves, But unto him who dyed for them, and rose
again. It is plain from hence that all Infants were dead, if Christ dyed for
them: for thus the Apostle reasons: If Christ dyed for all, then were all dead:
But he dyed for all, and therefore for Infants, as well as others; Therefore
Infants were dead as others.


Res. I confess all were dead: But what this makes to the purpose to grant unto
you that Infants were dead, I do not perceive as yet.


Oppo. If Infants were dead, and it be the will of Christ they should be made
alive again, then may they lawfully be baptized: But Infants were dead, and it
is the will of Christ they should be made alive again; therefore they may
lawfully be baptized.


Res. I deny this consequence: Though they were dead, and it be the will of
Christ they should be made alive again; yet may they not lawfully be baptized.


Oppo. He that wills the end, must needs will the means to accomplish that
end. Now of Christ would have Infants to be made alive again, and there be no
other means whereby they can be made alive, but by Baptism; then he wills
their Baptism. But Christ would have them Live, and there is no other means
for them to be made alive but by Baptising: Therefore Christ wills their
Baptism.


Res. I deny the minor, there is other means for Children to be made alive,
though not by Baptism.


Opp. Assign that other means whereby Children may be made alive.


Res. Children are made alive without any Ministerial Applycation at all. Being
Sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant, shed once for all. God applying the
virtue of the Death, and of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ unto them.


Oppo. Then there needs not any ministerial applycation, to make Children
partakers of the Blood of Christ, shed for them. You do undervalue Baptism, as
if it were of no use at all.


Res. I do believe the Baptism of Infants to be of no use at all. I do
acknowledge the Baptism of Believers to be of good use. Yet not to make dead
men alive: Baptism is for the living, not for the dead.


Oppo. Another argument: That the Father has given Infants to Christ, cannot
be denied. For. All that the Father gives me, comes unto me, John 6. 37. and
If Infants be given by the Father to Christ, then they must needs Come to
Christ: and if they come to Christ, it must be either by Faith, Repentance, or
Baptism: for there can be no other way assigned, whereby any should come unto
Christ.


Res. Do you not remember that I gave you a general rule, in the answer to your
first argument, very necessary for the right understanding of Scripture?
Namely, that we must consider of whom, and to whom, the Scripture speaks? And
you will find that in this place alleged, the Scripture speaks of those
persons to whom (at that time our Savior speak those words; and cannot be
applied to any persons at any time. In the 36th Verse. Jesus said unto them, ye
have seen me, and believe not: All that the Father gives me, will or shall
come unto me. If you think this answer suffices not, frame a Syllogism from
the place.


Oppo. If Infants come unto Christ, then they ought to be Baptized: but Infants
come unto Christ: Therefore Infants are to be Baptized.


Res. I deny the Consequence, though Infants do come unto Christ (in some
sense) though not in the sense of that place alleged) yet need they not
therefore to be Baptized.


Oppo. If there be no other way for them to come, but by Baptism, then if they
come they must needs be Baptized. But there is no other way for them to come to
Christ but by Baptism. Therefore if they come they must needs be Baptized.


Res. I deny the minor. There is another way for Infants to come to Christ,
then by Baptising.


Oppo. If there be no other way to come unto Christ, but by Faith, Repentance,
or Baptism; and Infants cannot come unto Christ by Faith, or Repentance:
therefore they must needs come by Baptism, or not at all.


Res. I deny the minor* there is some other way to come unto Christ, then by
Faith, Repentance, or Baptism.


Oppo. Assign another way for Children to come unto Christ.


Res. Christ Jesus is the second Adam, the Heavenly Adam: As truly as all
Infants where dead in the Loins of the first and earthly Adam, so truly are all
Infants Spiritually in the Loins of the second and Heavenly Adam. In the first
Adam they were by a natural union: In the second by a Spiritual union: By
virtue whereof they are Sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, and made
partakers of grace and favor with God, without any ministerial application;
And so made alive in the second Adam.


Oppo. You cannot prove what you say to be true.


Res. It suffices me at this time that you cannot prove it false: It is my
duty now to answer: when it falls to my lot to prove, I shall prove what is or
may be required of me.


Oppo. I will urge you with what is written in the 1 Corinthians. 10. Chap. 1, 2, 3.
verse. All our Fathers were under the cloud; and all passed through the Sea: And
were all Baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea: And did all eat the
same Spiritual meat: And did all drink the same Spiritual drink: (for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.)
But with many of them God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the
Wilderness. Now these things were our Examples, or Types or Figures, and in the
11. verse. All these things happened unto them for Types.Here you see their
Baptism was a type of our Baptism. In that Baptism Men Women and Children
were Baptized unto Moses: Therefore in our Baptism Men Women and Children
ought to be Baptized.


Res. First I say, the TEXT does not say Men Women and Children, But all our
Fathers. Secondly it may be made plain by the TEXT, that Infants were not
Baptized unto Moses in the Sea: for it is said, they did all Eat and Drink the
same Spiritual meat, etc. You cannot affirm that Infants did Eat and Drink
Spiritually. The TEXT speaks not of Children. Thirdly, It is not the Apostles
intent to declare that their Baptism was a type of ours: But that their
Punishments were Figures and Types, and written for our admonition.


Oppo. He says in the 6th verse. These things happened unto them for Examples,
and in the 11. verse. All these things happened unto them for Types.


Res. Yea all their Punishments, for look in the 6th verse. These things were
our Examples (he says not To the intent that we should Baptize Infants, as
they Baptized them) but To the intent we should not lust. It is no mo^^ in
effect but this. No privileges how great soever can exempt Men (that are
sinful, and depart from the Lord) from suffering of Punishment: Christ has
given you great and many privileges, as he did to the People of the Jews; yet
do not you presume, for as they did not escape when they sinned; no more shall
you.


Oppo. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye
have been taught; whether by word, or our Epistle. The Apostle gives command to
the Church that they should hold the Traditions; nor that I do approve of vain
Traditions, which are the Commandments of Men; But such Traditions as are
Apostolical; delivered by the Apostles themselves, are to be held by the
Church: even as those things which were delivered in writing. As Apostolical
Traditions are to be kept and hold; and so Lawful. But the Baptism of Infants
is an Apostolical Tradition.


Res. I deny the minor, Baptism of Infants is no Apostolical Tradition.


Oppo. Augustine says that the Church always held it from the Apostles times:
meaning the Baptism of Infants: the same is generally acknowledged by the
Ancients; whose several Testimonies I can produce here.


Res. This was Austins opinion. And yet notwithstanding Erasmus who Labored
much in Austin: and Ludovicus Vives, who was very well skilled in his Doctrine;
neither of these believed the thing to be true; neither were they convinced by
his opinion: but both of them thought the contrary, Moreover you know what I
have told you before out of Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen: I think it
needless to repeat the same things again.


B After this there followed another argument, which was altogether the same
with the first: and therefore I shall not repeat it unto you. Thus ended the
Dispute of the first day of meeting: It was then concluded that they should
meet again the next week, upon the same day.


B ON the second day being the 26th day of November, the Disputants met
together again: at which time, Mr. Den was the Opponent, and Mr. Gunning the
Respondent: who having taken his place, Began to speak.


Res. One who desires to be informed touching the Baptism of Infants, whether
it be Lawful or Unlawful: I affirm the Baptism of Infants to be Lawful.


Oppo. I will prove the Baptism of Infants to be Unlawful. If the Baptism of
Infants be Lawful; it is either for some reasons delivered by you, or some
other: But not for any reason delivered by you, or any other: therefore the
Baptism of Infants is not Lawful.


Res. The minor is denied: Infants Baptism is Lawful, for reasons by me
delivered.


Oppo. If it be Lawful for reasons by you delivered; Then it is either for the
reasons delivered from Tradition, or from Scripture: but neither for the
reasons from Tradition, nor from Scripture: Therefore it is not Lawful for any
reasons delivered by you.


Res. For both, namely, both from Tradition, and from Scripture.


Oppo. If one of these reasons overthrow the other, then it cannot be Lawful
for both: But one of these reasons overthrow the other: Therefore it cannot be
Lawful for Both.


Res. I deny the minor, one of them does not overthrow the other.


Oppo. If Tradition overthrow your Scripture reasons, then one overthrows the
other: But Tradition overthrows your Scripture reasons. Therefore one
overthrows the other.


Res. Tradition does not overthrow Scripture reasons.


Oppo. It is generally held by the Tradition of the Ancients that Baptism of
Infants cannot be proved by Scripture: and the most part of those that
maintained the Baptism of Infants, did acknowledge that it could not be proved
by Scripture, but Tradition.


Res. I deny it, for Tertullian and Austin, do both prove it by Scripture: for
Tertullian interpreting these words of St. John, Except a man be born again of
Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: says,
that to be born again of Water and of the Spirit, is to be Baptized: except a
man be Baptized, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And St. Austin
says the same, in diverse places.


Oppo. As for Tertullian, he is not to be reckoned among the Men that
maintained the Baptism of Infants* for without doubt he opposed it: And you
your self did say when I alleged Tertullians words, that He was an Heretic:
As for Austin, it was his authority that I intended to allege: who has these
words: Take away Tradition, and the Baptism of Infants will fall to the
ground. The like may be found in most authors of former ages. You know this to
be true.


Res. They did not hereby deny the validity of the Scripture, to prove Infants
Baptism: but their meaning was, That without Tradition the sense and meaning
of the Scripture could not appear: as, Except a Man be born again of Water and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: we could not have
known, that to be born again of Water, had meant to be Baptized, unless
Tradition had given this interpretation of that TEXT.


Oppo. Then you grant that without interpretation beyond the letter, Infants
Baptism is not to be found in Scripture. I will leave this, and come to your
Scripture reasons. And first for your great Pillar John 3. I argue thus. If
Infants cannot be born again of Water and of the Spirit (while they remain
Infants) then this reason of yours is void: but Infants, while they remain
Infants, cannot be born again of Water and of the Spirit. Therefore this reason
of yours is void.


Res. Infants can be born again of Water and of the Spirit.


Opp. If Infants be born again of Water and of the Spirit; then are they
Spirit, and born of God: but Infants are not Spirit, neither born of God:
therefore are they not born again of Water, and of the Spirit.


Res. I deny the minor: Infants are Spirit, and born of God.


Oppo. First, I will prove Infants are not Spirit. In every one that is Spirit
or born of the Spirit, there is some evident demonstration and alteration
whereby they may be known to be born of the Spirit: But in Infants there is no
alteration nor evident demonstration whereby they may be known to be born of
the Spirit, or to be Spirit: Therefore they are neither Spirit, nor born of the
Spirit.


Res. That Infants are born of the Spirit, is de fide, a matter of Faith; and
that is far above all demonstration: it is not necessary that there should be a
demonstration, whereby every one that is born of the Spirit should be
manifested so to be.


Oppo. Then are they not like the Wind: which though we know not whence it
comes, nor whether it goes; yet we hear the sound, and feel the effect: and the
TEXT says, So is every one that is born of the Spirit.


Res. We know not whence the wind comes, nor whether it goes: so we know not
the manner how, but yet we have it de fide Faith without ground is but fancy,
and no Faith:


Oppo. But I will prove in the next place, that Infants are not born of God,
though I account them the happiest of Living Creatures. If Infants be born of
God, then they overcome the World: But Infants do not overcome the World:
therefore they are not born of God.


Res. It suffices that Infants are not overcome by the World: the World does
not combat with them: Name your TEXT.


Opp. If there be no combat; there can be no Conquest. But the TEXT says 1.
John 5. 4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcommeth the World. etc.


Res. It appears by the Context, that this is not to be understood of
Children, but of Men and Women; of such as Love God and keep his Commandments,
of such as believe in God, and by Faith have Victory over the World: Who is he
that overcommeth the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?


Oppo. These words are not to the purpose, I do not say they are meant of
Children. But I say they are meant of every thing that is Born of God: every
thing that is Born of God, overcommeth the World* Children do not overcome the
World. Therefore they are not born of God.


Res. Every thing in the TEXT must be extended no further then to such to whom
the Apostle wrote.


Oppo. I say the same thing: this answers not the force of the argument at all.
I will prove by another argument that Children cannot be born again, etc. If
Infants be born of Water and of the Spirit, then are they Church members, and
Sons and Daughters of the New Covenant: But Infants are not Church members, nor
Sons and Daughters of the New Covenant. Therefore they are not born again of
Water, etc.


Res. The minor is denied: Infants are Church members, and Sons of the New
Covenant.


Opp. If Infants be Church members, and Sons of the New Covenant, then they so
know the Lord as not to need any teacher: But Infants do not so know the Lord
as not to need a teacher: therefore Infants are not Church members, nor Sons of
the New Covenant.


Res. The consequence is denied.


Oppo. If all the Church members and Children of the New Covenant do so know
the Lord, as not to have need to be taught to know the Lord: then the
Consequence is true. But all Church members, and the Children of the New
Covenant, do so know the Lord, as not to have need to be taught to know the
Lord: Therefore the consequence is true.


Res. The minor is denied; all the Church members and Children of the new
Covenant do not so know the Lord, as not to need to be taught to know the Lord.


Oppo. The minor is proved, Heb. 8* 8, 9* 10, 11. verses: Jer, 31. 33, 34.
verses: This is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after
those days says the Lord. I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them
in their Hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People:
and they shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother;
saying know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.


Res. They shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every one his Brother;
that is, they shall not be all Teachers, James 3. My Brethren be not many
Masters. (...), that is Teachers: every one should not be a Teacher, to run
before he be sent, and intrude into the Office without a Lawful call: for no
Man takes this Office upon him, but he that is called of God, Again we know
that not only Children, but Believers, Men, and Women need teaching.


Oppo. I am ashamed of your Interpretation of this TEXT, so far from the truth,
(and I am persuaded) from your own Conscience. Would you not have Christians to
teach, and exhort, and edify one another? What manner of Spirit is this? You
say all need teaching: so say I also: But there are some things that the
Children of the new Covenant need not be taught, Ye need not that any Man teach
you: 1. John 2. 27. and that is to know the Lord, which is rendered a reason of
the first words; they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest.


Res. This word All, does not include Children Infants.


Oppo. I do not say it does, but it includes all Church members, and Children
of the new Covenant, from the least to the greatest: Least and greatest and
middle; and all Church members.


Res. You insist much upon the word All, All. When the word All has his
restriction in many places of Scripture, 1. Cor. 15. 27. It is manifest that he
is excepted, which did put all things under him.


Oppo. I do not marvil that you so much except against me for insisting upon
the word All: and whereas you say the word All has restriction in Scripture: I
do not deny it: but to prevent a restriction in this place, there is added;
from the Least to the Greatest. I leave this to consideration and proceed. If
Children be born of Water, and of the Spirit, and be made Church members; then
are they Disciples: But Children are not, nor cannot be Disciples: therefore
they cannot be born again of Water, and of the Spirit, etc.


Res. The minor is denied* Infants may be Disciples, and are Disciples.


Oppo. If all Disciples must hate Father and Mother, and Life, for Christ, and
take up their cross, and follow Christ: then Infants who are not able to do
these things, cannot be Disciples But all Disciples must hate Father and
Mother, and Life, for Christ; and must take up their cross, and follow Christ.
Therefore Infants cannot be Disciples.


Res. The minor is denied, It is not required in every Disciple to hate Father
and Mother, and Life; or to take up his cross and follow Christ: but of such
Disciples as are of years.


Oppo. The minor is proved in every part of it, by plain TEXT of Scripture;
Mat. 16. 24. Luke 14. 26, 27. If any Man come unto me (here is your (...) so
often alleged) and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife and Children, and
Brethren and Sisters; yea and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple: and
whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me; cannot be my Disciple,
Many TEXTS of the like kind there are.


Res. If any One and Whosoever, does not include Children, But the multitudes
that went with him, to whom he spoke, verse. 25th. and in the 28th. verse. Which
of you, intending to build a Tower, etc. he speaks of all them that are Capable
to hear him, and to understand him.


Oppo. Take notice that this is a weapon of your own, that I do oppose you
with: and consider how strange a thing you presented it to the People, that I
should restrain that place of the third of John, Except any one be born again.
And you your self are forced to restrain this, where the very same word is
used. I demand whether the proposition laid down in the TEXT be true.


Res. You did restrain it, but you gave no reason of your restraining it: But I
have good reason in the Context why it should be restrained. Do you show as
good reason as I have done already.


Oppo. I have showed reasons equal with yours. You say Christ spoke to the
multitudes which followed him: I say Christ spoke to Nicodemus, who come to
him, to enquire of the ways of God for himself. Besides, be pleased to
remember that the restraint of the word was not my sole answer: But I gave you
answer taking it in the largest sense: I gave you three answers; you give only
this.

Another argument. If it be a sin in Parents to require Baptism for, or in the
behalf of their Infants; then the Baptism of Infants is Unlawful; But it is a
sin in Parents to require Baptism in the behalf of their Infants. Therefore
the Baptism of Infants is Unlawful.


Res. It is not a sin in Parents to require Baptism for their Infants. But a
thing Commendable, and good.


Opp. If Parents have no Command nor Commission from God to require Baptism
for Infants; then it is a sin in them to require it for Infants: but Parents
have neither Command nor Commission from God to require it for their Children:
therefore it is a sin in Parents to require Baptism for their Infants.


Res. Parents have a Commission from God, to require Baptism for their Infants.


Oppo. Show us a Commission.


Res. Mat. 28. 19. Make Disciples of all Nations, Baptising them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all
things that I have Commanded you; and lo I am with you always, even to the end
of the World,


Oppo. Here is no Commission to Parents; but only to the Apostles.


Res. The Apostles are here commanded to teach them to observe all things which
Christ Commanded them; They are sent into the World to teach those that are of
years: and make them willing and then to Baptize them: and as for Children, to
make them Disciples by Baptising of them, and to teach the Parents to require
Baptism for their Children, that thereby they may be made Disciples, though
they be not Capable of teaching.


Oppo. You have often urged me with antiquity: and charged me with novelty, I
do now justly charge you with a Novel interpretation of the Scripture: Not
above twenty years old at the most, viz. that the meaning of the TEXT alleged
should be this, Make them Disciples by Baptising them.


Res. This is ancient and the Fathers did understand this TEXT so. But as for
your opinion it was not heard of, little above 500 years ago. Then there rose
up on Henricus that denied the Baptism of Infants; They that followed him were
called Henricians, and he and his followers were condemned for Heretics, and
excommunicated for their Heresy.


A Have patience I pray you, and bear with me a little. I desire to understand
the whole matter of these Heretics, and Heresies; and by whom they were
comdemned and excommunicated: for this will give me satisfaction in some things.


B I will declare the matter from the beginning of it. About the year 1047.
there reigned in Germany Henry, the third King; who held two grand Heresies (as
the Pope and his followers were pleased to style them) the one was detected,
viz. That Church Lands, and Churchmen were subject to his Jurisdiction.


A This was his detected heresy: What was the other suspected?


B De Baptismo parvultorum perperam sonsisse Creditur.He was suspected to have
an evil opinion of the Baptism of Infants, from this Henry the third, King;
who was afterward Emperor the second of that name, Began the Henrician
heresy. After him succeeded (not in the Empire, but) in opinion: Peter de
Bruis. His opinions laid to his charge, were, 1. That Infants could not be
saved by Baptism: 2. That the faith of other men could not stand them in
stead, that had no faith of their own. 3. That crosses were to be pluck down,
and burned. 4. That the Body and blood of Christ was not really or corporally
present in the Sacrament. 5. That the Sacrament was not a Sacrifice to be
offered to God. 6. That Prayers and Alms made, and given by the living, did not
profit the dead. 7. That Christians had no need of consecrated places to
Worship God in, neither need they to build any. 8. Upon the Lords day before
Easter, He invited much People to a feast, and dressed his meat with a fire
made of wooden crosses. After this man in the Year 1147. there arose one
Henricus a Monk, (which is the man spoken of by the answerer) who was accused
of Heresieby his adversaries: His heresies (as they termed them) were these.
First, Infants are not to be Baptized. 2. The cross of Christ is not to be
Worshipped. 3. The Body of Christ is not in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 4.
It is in vain to pray for the dead. 5. God is provoked to wrath, by Church
music.This was the Henrician Heresy in the full: They who did condemn and
excommunicate these Men, were the Pope, his Cardinals, and Council; and
Bernard, the fairest flower among them.


A Surely, I believe the same persons would have comdemned, this Answerer also:
forasmuch as he also is guilty of some of their opinions, for which they were
condemned.


B That is true enough: I therefore wonder why he did instance in these
persons. But I will return to the Disputation.


Oppo. I will prove that this interpretation of the place alleged, cannot be
true: viz. to make Disciples by Baptising: First By the Grammatical
Construction of the place. Secondly By the general Consent of Translators.
Thirdly, By the ^cripture Compared with this place. And Fourthly by the
practice of the Apostles; who were the persons executing this Commission: Make
Disciples of all Nations, Baptising them: (...) I demand what is the antecedent
to the relative (...) if (...) not understood in the word (...).


Res. (...) Nations is the anticedent.


Oppo. That cannot be: for then the Commission should be this: make the Nations
Disciples, by Baptising them: and you have granted, that this Commission does
not extend to all in the Nations; but only to such as are willing. Secondly
(...) is the Newter gender, and (...) the Masculine; how do they agree?


Res. It is a figure called Synthesis, wherein one gender is put for another:
which is frequent in the new Testament.


Oppo. I do not remember any place, neither do I believe any parallel place can
be showed out of the new Testament.


Res. Although I do not carry a Concordance in my head, yet I can show you one
place in John 14. 26. (...) and here the Relative (...) has for his antecedent
(...)


Oppo. It is nothing so, for the anticedent is (...) in the beginning of the
verse. and the words between (...) and (...) are a Parenthesis, and may be
omitted without breaking the sense.


Res. Is the Parenthesis noted in your Book?


Opp. No, But your consience tells you it ought to be.


Res. I will give you another place, Ephesi. 1. 13, 14. (...) Here (...) has,
(...) for his antecedent, this is a plain Synthesis.


Oppo. It is so, because of the word (...) understood.

What is the earnest of the inheritance?


Res. (...) The Spirit of God.


A Here the Respondent speaks not punctually, according to the truth: for
here the Relative (...) coming between two words of different genders, it may
accord with either: So that according to rule, it may be either (...), and in
my judgment, this is as little to the purpose as the other: for here is no
Synthesis in either of these two places.


Oppo. I will prove that the commission in the 28th. of Mat. cannot be a
warrant for Parents to require Baptism for their Children. If the TEXT do
require teaching before Baptising, then it can be no warrant to Baptize
Children who cannot be taught: but the TEXT requires teaching before Baptising.
Therefore that can be no warrant to Baptize Children, or require Baptism for
them, before they can be taught.


Res. I deny the minor, the TEXT in the 28th. of Mat. Go Disciple all Nations,
does not require teaching before Baptising, in all persons: indeed in those
that are of years of discretion, and capable of understanding, the Apostles
were first to teach them, and to make them willing by teaching; and afterward
to Baptize them But for Infants they were first of all to make them Disciples,
by Baptising of them, and afterward to teach them, when they are capable of
understanding.


Oppo. I have to oppose unto you: The translators and translations of all
sorts, in all Languages, from the first to the last, (so far as I know)
translated it Teach, without any doubt or scruple.


Res. Do you know what is the Ethiopick word?


Oppo. No I do not. Next compare Scripture with Scripture: there being no
better interpreter: this TEXT being compared with Mark 16. 15. Go ye into all
the World, preach the Gospel to every Creature. These Commissions are the same
indifferent words, Matthew Says, Go Disciple, or teach all Nations. Mark
Says, Go preach the Gospel to every Creature.


Res. I deny them to be the same, neither given at the same time, nor at the
same place: for the one was given in Galilae, in a mountain where Jesus had
papointed them: The other was given to them when Jesus appeared to them as they
sat at meat.


Oppo. Time and place does not alter the Commission, or prove them to be two:
how does it appear by your words that these words were spoken at several times,
and in two places? was it possible they might sit at meat in the mountain of
Galilae? The next thing I have to urge you with, is the practice of the
Apostles, who best knew the meaning of the Commission. They in the execution of
this Commission, did preach the Gospel, and when the People believed, they
Baptized them, both Men and Women; but not a word of Children (Acts 9. 12.) In
the City of Samaria: were there no Children there?


Res. Philip Baptized both Men and Women, under which Children are
comprehended; which is usual in Scripture: for Josua 8. 25. it is said that
Josua destroyed all the Inhabitants of Ai. And so it was that all that fell
that day both of Men and Women, were twelve thousand: even all the Men of Ai.
Here Children are comprehended under Men and Women; for they also were
destroyed: for he utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai: and Children
were part, it may be, a great part of the inhabitants of Ai.


Oppo. This is not much to the purpose: the TEXT does not say that there were
no more inhabitants but twelve thousand; but the Men and Women were twelve
thousand, and that they were all, the Men of Ai. It is possible,
notwithstanding that TEXT, that the inhabitants of Ai might be twenty thousand,
the Children being accounted. I leave your answer to consideration, and proceed
to another argument. If Baptism of Infants be Lawful, then it is of God: but
it is not of God: Therefore it is not Lawful.


Res. Baptism of Infants is of God, and an ordinance of God:


Oppo. Whatsoever is of God is to some good use or purpose. But Baptism of
Infants is to no good use or purpose. Therefore Baptism of Infants is not of
God.


Res. Baptism of Infants is to very good purpose; namely to wash away their
Original sin, that so they may be made the Children of God; without which they
cannot be saved: Except any one be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God.


Opp. I will prove that Baptism cannot wash away the sin of Infants. If all
the sin that Infants are or can be guilty of, be taken away before Baptism;
then Baptism cannot wash it away: But all the sin that Infants are, or can be
guilty of, is washed away before Baptism: Therefore Baptism cannot wash away
sin of Infants.


Res. The sin of Infants is not washed away before Baptism.


Oppo. If Infants have no other sin but the sin of the World: whereof they are
guilty, then all their sin is taken or washed away before Baptism. But Infants
have no other sin but the sin of the World, therefore all their sin is washed
away before Baptism.


Res. I deny the consequence.


Oppo. If the sin of the World be taken away before Baptism; then the
consequence is true. But the sin of the World is taken away before Baptism:
therefore the consequence is true.


Res. I deny the minor, the sin of the World is not taken away before Baptism:
I know your Scriptures.


Oppo. If Christ took the sin of the World away by his death, when he died;
then it is taken away before Baptism. But Christ Jesus took away the sin of
the World by his death: therefore it was taken away before Baptism.


Res. Christ did not actually take away the sin of the World by his death.


Oppo. John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the
World. 1. Pet. 2. 24. Who himself bare our sins, in his own body, on the tree.
Heb. 9. 28. Christ was once offered, to bear the sins of many: with a multitude
of places. Deuteronomy. 9. 24. To finish sin, and make an end of transgression, etc.


Res. Christ did not actually take away the sin of the World, but only
Potentially, in procuring a possibility of pardon upon conditions performed:
namely of Faith, Repentance, and Baptism, in those that are of years of
discretion; and of Baptism in Infants: and as they who are of years of
discretion cannot have sin taken away without repentance Faith and Baptism, no
more can Infants without Baptism.


Opp. I will prove that Christ did actually take away the sin of the world, by
his death: That which was not imputed, was actually taken away: but the sin of
the World was not imputed: Therefore it was actually taken away.


Res. The sin of the World was imputed before Baptism.


Oppo. 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; not
imputing their Trespasses unto them. Coll. 1. 20. And having made peace through
the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself. Heb. 10. 14.
By one offering, he has perfected for ever, them that are sanctified Esa. 53.
The Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all. A multitude of witnesses might be
produced.


Res. This is none other but what was said before: he did not impute them
virtually, (not but that he did impute them actually) until the performance of
the conditions before named.


Oppo. I will leave these places to consideration, and prove that the sin of
Infants was taken away wholly before Baptism, by another argument: If the law
whereby they were held guilty, was wholly taken away, then the sin was wholly
taken away. But the law whereby they were held guilty was actually and wholely
taken away.


Res. The law whereby they were held guilty was not actually taken away.


Oppo. If the Covenant that God made with Man before his fall, be wholely and
actually taken away, then the law whereby they were held guilty, is taken away:
But the Covenant that God made with Man before the fall, is actually taken
away: therefore the law whereby they were held guilty, was taken away.


Res. The major is denied, the Law or Covenant made before the fall of Man, is
not actually and wholely taken away.


Oppo. If that Christ have established a New Covenant, then the Old one is
taken away: But Christ has established a New Covenant. Therefore the old and
former Covenant is taken away.


Res. I deny the consequence; both remain.


Oppo. If two Covenants cannot stand together, then the consequence is true;
but two Covenants cannot stand together, but the second makes void the first:
therefore the consequence is true.


Res. Two Covenants may stand together.


Oppo. Heb. 8. 13. Heb. 10. 9. He takes away the first, that he might
establish the second. Heb. 9. 15.


Res. The Author speaks not of the Covenant made with Adam: But of that which
God made with the Children of Israel.


Oppo. I urge the reason of the Apostle, which if it hold good in that it will
also hold good in this: if the Covenant made with Israel must be disanulled;
then also must the Covenant made with Adam, before his fall, be much more
disanulled; in as much as it has as great an oposition. I shall easily prove
that Covenant to be taken away: If no Man in the World neither is nor shall be
judged by that Covenant, then it is wholely taken away: But no Man either is or
shall be Judged by that Covenant: Therefore it is taken away.


Res. Persons shall be Judged by that Covenant made with Adam.


Oppo. If Infants shall be judged by that Covenant made with Adam, then Infants
dying Unbaptised shall be shut out of Heaven: but Infants dying Unbaptised
shall not be shut out of Heaven. Therefore Infants shall not be judged by that
Covenant.


Res. Infants Unbaptised, (where there is no desire of their Baptism in their
Parents or Friends) shall be shut out of Heaven.


Oppo. If Unbaptised Infants be shut out of Heaven, then God punishes some
Creatures for that which they cannot help; but God punishes no Creatures for
that which they cannot help: Therefore Unbaptised Infants are not shut out of
Heaven.


Res. I deny the consequence.


Oppo. Then Shutting out of Heaven is no punishment.


B Here the Auditors (some of them) brake order, some crying out Bear witness:
he says, It is no punishment to be shut out of Heaven: because of the denial
of this consequence: some also affirm he plainly said so, in so many sillables,
which they can witness.


Res. The minor also may be questioned, for God may do what he will with his
own, having all power in his hand, as the Potter has power over his clay, to
use it at his pleasure.


Oppo. I do not say what God might or may do, but what he does. Now we know
that God cannot do contrary to his oath: but to punish Creatures, for that they
cannot help, is contrary to his oath; therefore God cannot do it. Moreover thus
I argue; if God punish Creatures for that they cannot help: then he does not
leave all the World without excuse. But he will leave all the World without
excuse; Therefore he will not punish any Creature for that which they cannot
help.


B This the Opponent repeated three or four times over, and received no answer
at all: no notice was taken of it: The Respondent complaining of the injury
done unto him by the disorder of the Auditors; which the Opponent confessed,
and said it was his sorrow, and altogether without his approbation. And then he
spoke as follows, and departed.


Oppo. Although I have many things to propound, yet considering the time
allotted and agreed upon is spent: and my own infirmities begin to press me. I
shall at this time cease.


A I pray declare to me what success this disputation had.


B Surely, according to the different affections (rather then Judgments) of
some Men and Women: Although Christ himself preached Church Gospel of the
Kingdom, yet some believed, and some believed not; Some spoke evil, and some
well: Some cried Victory on the one side, and some on the other.


A The censure of the vulgar, that know nothing, is not worthy of the least
account in the World; their approbation is very near to disgrace: and the
censure of the Learned, who want conscience, is as little to be esteemed: it
was wisely spoken by one of old, to a lewd person, who commended him highly: I
am afraid (said he) I have done something amiss: Because thou speak well of
me. But I desire to hear how it was resented by those that were truly both
Judicious, and Conscientious: especially what resolution the Gentlewoman ^ound,
for whose satisfaction the dispute (as you said at first) was appointed.


B I am not able to render a particular account of every one; But as touching
the Gentlewoman, the event was thus. The Dispute was ended the 26th. day of
November, and she (as I have heard) was Baptized the first day of December.


A Her practice declares her satisfaction: But I remember that day was very
cold, and sharp; it seems strange that a Gentlewoman should endure it at that
season of the year, and in such weather to go into the water, and to be dipped
all over.


B You know that Fantastical Ladies have a proverb: that Pride feels no cold;
and their naked necks and breasts, and arms, even in the coldest weather,
declare the truth of it: know that Faith is stronger in Christian Women, who
serve the Lord Jesus, then Pride is in vain ones, who serve the Prince of
Darkness. Take therefore this for a Maxim: That Faith, and Zeal, feel no cold:
Peter will adventure to walk upon the water, if Jesus say Come. And tender
Women will not be afraid to go under water, when Jesus bids Go: very hardly
will that person follow Christ, into the fire, who scruples to follow him into
the water.


But is it not very prejudicial to the health of such persons who have not
been accustomed to wet their feet in water? I remember Mr. Baxter writes, that
it is very dangerous; And many thereby are likely to perish, if they should not
miraculously be preserved.


B I acknowledge Mr. Baxter to be a Learned Man in many things; But herein he
betrays his science: and I am afraid, his conscience likewise: As touching
science, it is easy to prove that dipping of Believers, is not so dangerous, as
dipping of Infants: yet dipping of Infants was not only Commanded by the Church
of England, but also generally practiced in the Church of England, till the
year 1600. yea in some places it was practiced until the year 1641. until the
fashion altered. Again, I can make it manifest that dipping either Infants or
Believers, is not so dangerous as Sprinkling of Infants: and yet they sprinkle
them at all times, Night and Day, and Winter and Summer. And had M. Baxter
known this to be true, he would have told where and when any Believer was
killed, and by whom; that so he might have brought an Odium upon the Practice:
But he gives us not one instance that I know. But on the contrary, I shall tell
you my observation of many hundreds, that I have known Baptized; of both Sexes,
of all sorts: Old, Young, feeble persons, Women great with child: I never knew
any that had the least harm, or suffered any damage in respect of health. I
have heard many confess they received much benefit in respect of their Bodies;
But I never heard any complain, neither did I ever know any (I speak it to the
praise of the providence of God) that died within one year after they were
Baptized: excepting one maid in Essex, who died within a few weeks; and Mr.
Baxters brethren instigated, and spurred the Magistrate, until the person
Baptising her, was sent to prison for Murder, laid in Irons, Arrainged at the
Bar, at the Assizes holden at Chelmford. And although witnesses came in (the
one whereof was her mother) and testified that she was in better health, then
she had been, for some years before, for diverse days; and that she walked
comfortably abroad; yet the Jury was informed that he was guilty of Wilful
Murder. And had not his appeal stood him in stead, he had been in danger of his
Life. But when he had appealed, neither Priest, nor People durst prosecute him
any more.

If therefore Mr. Baxter and his Brethren could prove what they affirm to be
true; how great the Cry would be, you may proportionably judge, by this one
story: The whole matter whereof, with all the circumstances, are worthy to be
committed to the Press: ad perpetuam rei memoriam: That after ages may take
notice what manner of persons we live in the midst of; who Preach, Write, and
Print; that the Anabaptists are bloody.

I have a little more to speak to Mr. Baxter: that if there were such danger in
the Dipping of believers as he pretends: It must needs be that the
Administrator must be in greater peril then the Receiver: Forasmuch as the
Baptized goes into the water but once, the Baptist often: where many times he
stays the time until diverse persons are Baptized, if the danger be so great,
it need not to be feared that the Sect should greatly increase: by reason that
the Teachers, will soon destroy themselves. But I can show Mr. Baxter an old
Man in London, who has labored in the Lords Poole many years; converted by
his Ministry (as an Instrument in the hand of the Lord) more Men and Women then
Mr. Baxter has in his parish; yea, when he has labored a great part of the
day in Preaching, and Reasoning, his refection has been (not a Sack-possit or
a Cawdle) but to go into the water, and Baptize Converts: And he lives, when
younger and wary persons have gone to the grave before him. I wonder that Mr.
Baxter should forget what he has read in Authors, which he deems Authentike:
who write, that Ethelbert King of Kent, with Ten thousand Men and Women, were
Baptized in Canterbury; upon the 25th. day of December, in the year 597.


A The Providence of God appears to be very great in this case: as if the Lord
did puropsely intend to stop the mouths of Clamorous adversaries: yet I believe
he will not acknowledge it to be any miracle, for he will not willingly grant,
that God works miracles among the Anabaptists. But did not the Opponent declare
that he had more arguments; which he intended to have urged? I would willingly
hear them.


B You shall hear them: That Doctrine which leaves power in the hands of Men
to kill souls, without their own consent, cannot be of God: But the Doctrine,
of Infants Baptism (as the Respondent lays it down) Leaves power in the
hands of Men to kill souls without their consent: therefore the Doctrine of
Infant Baptism, laid down by the Respondent, is not of God.


A I think the major cannot be denied, in regard the Scripture says, Men are
not able to kill the soul Math. 10. 28. The minor therefore remains to be
proved.


B If men have power by his Doctrine to deprive souls of salvation; then they
have power to kill souls.

But by this Doctrine, Men have power to deprive souls of salvation: therefore
(by this Doctrine) Men have power to kill souls: The minor is proved, by the
grounds which are laid down, viz. Baptism is so absolutely necessary to
salvation, that no Child can be saved without it. Now we see many Parents can
and do withhold Baptism from their Children, and thereby (according to his
Doctrine) they kill the souls of their Children: For he that depriveth us of
the means, does deprive us of the end.


A I will not undertake the answer of this argument: Because I know not what to
say to it; I leave it for them that can: I pray you proceed to another argument.


B That Doctrine which makes the commands of Christ to be more obscure, then
the commands delivered by Moses; is not of God: But the Doctrine of Infant
Baptism makes the commands of Christ more obscure then the commands delivered
by Moses. Therefore the Doctrine of Infant Baptism is not of God.

That Christ speaks more plain then Moses, these Scriptures testify, John 1.
16, 17. Heb. 2. 3. Chapters, 2. Cor. 3. from the 6th to the 15 verse.

Now it evidently appears that Moses delivered ordinances plainly and
evidently, even in the smallest things: he was very punctual according to all
the form showed in the Mount. If then the Baptism of Infants be a thing of so
great weight, so absolutely necessary to salvation of them; How can it be
imagined that it should have been wholly left out of the Scripture, and not a
word of it to be found: as the defenders themselves confess? but only by
consequence; and this age is ashamed of the consequences, that pleased former
ages: and bring new and unheard of sequels, to confirm what they cannot find in
plain terms delivered.

A third argument is this: That Doctrine and practice which begets questions
that cannot be answered; and is upheld by practices which are ridiculous, is
not of God: But such is the Doctrine and practice of Infant Baptism: therefore
it is not of God. The questions and doubts are these chiefly. 1. How long time
may a Child be kept Unbaptized without sin? 2. Whether the Children of
Unbelievers may be Baptized? 3. Whether the faith of the Grandfather may give a
Child right to Baptism. 4. How far may we go back in a right or collateral
line to derive the right of Children to Baptism. 5. Whether sureties can
perform Faith and Repentance for the Child. 6. Whether that Child be truly
Baptized; whose sureties were unbeleevers.


The practices that are ridiculous are these.

1. The Priest demands of the Child whether it do believe in God? Whether it
do forsake the Devil? etc. whether he or she desire to be Baptized? The
Godfather answers, Yea: for this Child: when the Child has not any desire.
This is so Ridiculous, that our new Reformers are quite ashamed of it, and have
sent the Antique fashion out of doors: and cashired the Godfathers and
Godmothers. There were of old (even of the same antiquity with Infants
Baptism:) Men that did not spare to Baptize dead Men: so great a superstition
did possess the minds of some in the second and third Centuries: The mode was
thus; the dead man lies upon the bed: A living man creeps under the bed: the
Priest demands of the dead man, whether he repents? whether he desire to be
Baptized? The living man answers from under the bed, for the dead man; Yea, I
do repent, I do believe; I desire to be Baptized; after which they proceeded to
Baptize the dead man: And Scripture they alleged for the Collouring of this
absurdity, 1. Cor. 15. 29. Why are they then Baptized for the dead: and
peradventure they might say, it was as plain as any could be brought for the
Baptism of Infants. This was about the year 180. so soon had men perverted the
commands of Christ, and were become Strangers to his ways.

I will leave all these things to your Judgment, to try by the Touchstone what
price is to be set upon them. The Lord give the Reader and Hearers
understanding hearts.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page 7. Line ult. Read (...). Likewise P. 8. L2. P. 10, L. 4. supply I. P.
18. L. 5. Now instead of for, P. 24. L. 25. Faith without ground, is to begin
the Opponents speech, P. 30. L. 5. R. Parvulorum. P. 31. L. 23. R. (...). P.
32. L. 18. for Responent R. Opponent L. 19. for (...) R. (...) P. 33. L. 1* R*
by P. 33. L. 26. R. was it not possible P. 35. L. 17 R. Dan. 9. P. 38. L. 28.
for Church R. the


