THE MAGISTRATES Pourtraiture Drawn from the WORD, AND Preached in a SERMON at
Stowe-Market in Suffolk, upon August, the 20. 1656. before the Election of
Parliament Men for the same County.

On Isaiah 1.26. the former part. And I will restore thy Judges as at first,
and thy Counselors as at the beginning.

By WILLIAM GVRNALL, M. A. of Eman Coll. now Pastor of the Church of Christ in
Lavenham. Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. 1656.

THE MAGISTRATES Pourtraiture Drawn from the WORD.
ISAIAH 1.26. the former part. And I will restore thy Judges as at first and by
Counselors as at the beginning.


IF we consider the great wickedness of the people, to whom this holy Prophet
was sent, we may wonder that God suffered so rare a Jewel, to hang so long on
such a disobedient care, as theirs was; that he lent his Prophet so long to a
people that made him and his message no more welcome. But again, if we consider
how long heaven indulged them, this incomparable mercy, and calculate the long
race of his Prophetical course, we have reason to wonder as much, though he
found them so bad, that yet he left them no better. Stones wear with long
dropping, but these relent not under sixty years preaching, and more of this
holy man, (for so long the line of his Ministry was stretched) they were wicked
enough in Uzziah and Jothams reign, when he first ascended the stage of
Prophecy, but by Manasses his time, (in which he died, and that by a violent
and bloody death, (as Story tells us) being sawne asunder) they were wicked to
some tune. It was now full water at Jerusalem, yea, the whole land becomes sea,
covered with idolatry, oppression, and the work of sin, which might have been
expected any where, rather then among a people so divinely taught. But weeds
grow no where so rank, as in fat soil; we may know enough of this wretched
people, if we read this chapter, which like a true glass, will give us the
feature of that people, as it looked in the Prophets time; and I wish with all
my soul, we could not see a cast of our own Nations countenance in their face.

First, they were a people Sermon-proofe. They had heard away their hearing
ear, and it is a sad deafness, and hardly cured, which is got in hearing of
Sermons; how far they were gone in this we may guess by the Prophets strange
Apostrophe, ver. 2. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord has
spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. Take the words how you will, they speak them a people past council,
and instruction; if by Heaven and Earth you will have the Continents of both
meant, then by speaking to these is intimated, he had as good speak to the
inanimate creatures, as to them. That Preacher surely thinks his people bad
indeed, who directs his speech to the seats they sit on, and pillars they lean
to, Hear, O ye seats, and hearken O ye pillars. If for the inhabitants, Angels
and men, who dwell in these, still he reproaches their obstinacy. It shows the
Father can work little on his child within doors, when he comes into the open
street, and proclaims his rebellion to all the world.

Secondly, as they were Sermon, so Affliction-proof, they were so mad on their
lusts, that rather then not have them, they would swim through their own blood
to them; heavy judgments were on them, but no physic wrought kindly on them:
God was weary of smiting, but not they of finning; therefore we find him
making his moan as a Physician, who has run through the whole Art of Physic
to do his Patient good, but finds him grow worse under his hand, and therefore
at last speaks of giving him over, ver. 3. Why should ye be stricken any more,
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is faint? If affliction would do
you good, you have had enough of that; I have beat you till I have not left you
one sound part, from head to heel, and yet you will run after your lusts,
while your blood runs after your heels.

Thirdly, in a word, they were impudent in their hypocrisy; at the very same
time that they acted all their abominations, they kept up a gaudy Pageant of
Religion, they spared for no cost in the multitude of their sacrifices, but
appeared great Zelots in the Temple, which the Prophet, ver. 11. protests
against, as the worst part of all their wickedness. Indeed spiritual
wickedness carries in it the very spirits of wickedness.

And all this is not charged upon some petty party, and inconsiderable faction
in the Nation, which had not been so much, but the indictment is laid against
the whole Nation, ver. 3. Israel does not know, ver. 4. Ah sinful Nation. The
whole head and heart were as sick of sin, as they were of suffering. It Is sad
when all the house are down together, or those that are well, not enough to
look to the sick. There were indeed some gracious ones in that degenerate age,
but so few, that their Religion, like a pint of wine in a tun of water,
could hardly be tasted amidst such a multitude of ungodly ones.

Now as it is in the diseases of the body, when a general distemper has
invaded the whole (as in a Fever or the like,) there is commonly some one
principal part, whose disorder affects all the rest, which a wise Physician
bestows his chiefest skill to find out, as most conducing to the cure: so
here, the sad distemper which the Jewish Nation lay under, both in regard of
sin and misery, is observed by the Prophet in a great measure, to have
proceeded from one principal rank, and order of men among them, and that was
their Rulers and Magistrates, ver. 22, 23. Thy silver is become dross, thy
wine mixed with water, thy Princes are rebellious. Therefore the Lord levells
his threatenings at their breast, in an especial manner, ver. 24. Therefore,
says the Lord, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries. That as they had the
greatest hand in the sin, so they should have the deepest draught in the
judgment. No sins lie heavier on Gods stomach, and make him more heart-sick,
then theirs who stand in high and public place of Rule and Government. But
lest the godly should be discouraged at the calamities denounced against them,
(for they could not but know, it would be a sad day with the whole Land, when
God should make such an overturning of the great ones in it; the storm of Gods
vengeance seldom falls so upon Princes and Rulers, but that the people are
taken in the shower, and share with them in their sufferings.) To fortify
therefore the hearts of these few godly ones, he opens his design of mercy
which he had toward them, even in the captivity coming upon them, ver. 25. I
will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away
all thy Tin; where he compares their captivity to a furnace, themselves to
silver, the ungodly among them especially (Magistrates that were such) to
dross and tin, and himself to the Refiner, and that his design is not to
consume, but purge them from this dross that did allay and debase them, and
when he had done this (so as that wicked generation were once worn out) then
he would provide better for them; faithful Magistrates in the room of the
ungodly ones removed, ver. 26. which are the words of the Text, And I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, etc.

So that those words are as a lump of sugar after a bitter draught, given to
this poor people, to take away that unpleasing farewell, which the threatening
of a captivity might leave on their thoughts.

Where by the way observe, Gods love and tender care over the godly in evil
times, when his wrath is in its greatest career against the wicked, even then
his thoughts of mercy are full at work in his heart for his people, he is
carving a mercy for them out of the same Providence, in which he deals out
vengeance to the ungodly; God can blow hot and cold, wrath and mercy to his
enemies at the same breath; yea, he contents not himself with this purpose of
love to his people, but also he must acquaint them with it, that though they
could not be put in present possession of the promise, yet they might be kept
in possession of themselves, and by patience be enabled more comfortably to
expect the performance of it. No such sweet companion to go with the Saints to
a prison, as a Promise. The bed of affliction of it self is hard, now to
prevent their tossing and tumbling in it, through anguish of their present
sorrow, he lays this soft pillow of the Promise under their head; I will
restore. And

The words are a Promise, wherein observe

First, the Person promising, I will restore, etc.

Secondly, the mercy promised, Judge as at the first, and Counselors as at
the beginning.

Thirdly, the time and manner, when and how performed, wrapped up in the word,
And; which stands in the front of the Text, pointing to the preceding words,
They indeed tell us when and how God will do this for them. I will turn my hand
upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away thy tin. Then
follows the Promise in the Text, which comes in as a consequent of that great
National calamity to come upon them in the Babylonish captivity. So that though
the birth would be joyous, yet before this Promise could be delivered, many a
sad pain and bitter throw should precede. The people of God have usually their
hardest labors of their greatest mercies. So have Churches and Nations their
greatest Reformations, raised out of their greatest Confusions. Indeed, as a
vessel of silver, (to which God compares Judah) that is tempered of much
drossie matter, and much battered and cracked, can never be refined and made
fashionable, without melting and new casting. So God lets them know, they were
grown so corrupt and naught, that they needed a hot and lasting fire to burn
up their dross, that their Nation might he cast into a new mould, so new, that
the very form of Government was to be changed.

First, of the Person promising, I will restore; In which observe, how in
promising to give Judges and Counselors, he ownes this order of Magistracy as
lawful, yea, claims it as his Ordinance. Whence note.

In that time he will restore. Here is Divinity stamp't upon the face of it.
It Is called indeed an Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13. (...), not as if it were
man's invention: for all Powers are of God, but because it is discharged by men,
and intended for man's good. And truly it is so distasteful to the ungodly
world, because it lays their lusts in chains, and so torments them before
their time, that if God had not been in this bush (so often on fire) it had been
consumed before this. There has been old tugging to pluck this plant up, but
being of Gods planting, it stands too sure for man's hand to root up.

We may use the same Argument to prove the Divinity of Magistracy, which
sometime we do the Divinity of Scripture, viz. the strange preservation of it
in all the revolutions and changes that have come over the head of times, by
wars, and the confusions that accompany them. Some have indeed thrown off
their Governors, but never could a Government, as soon almost as one is off,
another is in the saddle; yea, so connatural it is to the principles and
notions of man's mind, that a Government is found, where no Scripture is found
to teach it.

Persians had a custom, that when their Prince died, some days (five as I
remember) of misrule, were indulged the people, in which they might do what
they would without control, that by the rapines and outrages, which might well
be thought would be committed therein, they might be brought in love the more
with the Person and Government of their succeeding Prince. It is a sad way I
confess, but a sure one, to know the happiness of a Government, by
experimenting the confusion of an Anarchy.

Jude 8. They did despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignity; Mark, not the
persons did so much displease them, as the office it self; and it had been
well for the Churches of Christ, if this error had died with the first
Broachers of it; some Anabaptists of later times, have declared themselves
heirs to this spirit of confusion and disorder; Among other positions of this
Sect in Transylvania, published one thousand five hundred sixty and eight, I
find this one, openly vouched by them, that it is a mark of Antichrist to have
in their Church Kings, Princes, and the sword of the Magistrate, which Christ
(say they) can no way allow in his Church; And I wish the sea, which runs
betwixt that land and ours, had been able to keep this error from setting foot
on English ground. But is Magistracy such an uncircumcised thing, that it must
be shut out of the pale of the Church? Is it an office fitted and formed for
Heathens, and not Christians? Truly, then I should choose to live rather among
Heathens then Christians. But how an those read the Scripture and not blush?
were the Saints at Rome Heathens or Christians? and does the Apostle bring any
such news to them, does he see them out of the Magistrates precincts? No, He
is the Minister of God to them for good; and he tells them they must needs be
subject, (though then the Magistrate was no friend to the Church) and that not
only for wrath, to save his skin from man's wrath, but for conscience sake, to
save their souls from God, Romans 13.4, 5. They cannot father their brat upon
the Scripture; No, it is a misshapen brat conceived in the womb of ignorance,
and begot by pride, and it will appear so by the two principles, which are the
very seed, of which this error is formed; and they are,

First, a liberty which they fancy Christ has given them, to which,
subjection under Magistracy (forsooth) is inconsistent; what will not a strong
imagination find in the Scripture? even that which was never writ, if it has
but a strong desire it should be so to back it. A liberty that never came into
his mind to give a strange liberty that leads to licentiousness, and ends in
bondage. True liberty is to choose good, and reject evil, and this Magistracy is
erected to defend thee in doing, Romans 13. Rulers are not a terror to good
works.

Secondly, a perfection that they dream of, which lifts them up so high, that
now they need not the Ministry of the Magistracy to keep them within bounds.
The Magistrate is an avenger (say they) to execute wrath to them that do evil,
but Saints, who are led by the Spirit, dare not do thus Well, suppose them so
holy as they would seem, yet do they not live among those that are wicked? (I
am sure they think and speak bad enough of all besides their own tribe,) and do
they not need the Magistrates help, that they may be defended in the exercise
of holiness? The Saints do not find the world so kind, as that they should
need dismiss their guard, before they get safe to Heaven. But what horrible
pride is this, to pretend to such a conduct of the Spirit, as to be privileged
from sin? the Apostles that were of as high a form in the Spirits School, I
trow, as the best in the Anabaptists bunch, are willing to be branded
themselves for loud liars, if they should pretend to such a perfection. If we
say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John
1.8. But the Churches of Christ have had too much experience of many of the
Anabaptists, to give them their hands to be such great Saints; No, no, it is not
their perfection that lifts them up above Magistracy, but their lusts that make
them not able to bear the Magistrates power. Those Scholars are the first that
would burn their Masters rod, who have most need of it. I am sure this sort of
men have shown, they need Magistracy as much as others. And some of them,
those I mean at Munster in Germany convinced the world, (for all their loud
cries against Magistracy at first) that they liked the Magistrates seat well
enough, when they could once come to set themselves in it. If God intend mercy
for England, this Anti-Magistratical spirit shall not prevail; If we be too
good to live under Magistrates, Gods Vicegerents, we are too bad to live under
Gods own care and Government. The Hebrews have a Proverb, Migrandum est ex eo
loco, in quo Rex non timetur. We had best make haste from that place where the
King is not feared, as if some heavy judgment impended that place where
Magistrates are despised; and it were a sin that could not long stay for its
guerdion and reward. I am sure those fanatic spirits in Germany found the
warrant of vengeance sent from God against them, endorsed with speed.

worthy Gentlemen) into whose lap the lot of this days choice shall fall;
Decline not the place for fear or ease. If God gives you a Commission, you need
not fear to act; you are but Underofficers, and of all Cowards, he is the
worst that dares not follow, when God leads him on. Go in this thy might (says
God to Gideon) have not I sent thee? Judges 6.14. Gods Word was his Warrant,
and Gods Warrant was his Protection. Frederick Duke of Saxony, when he had read
Luthers book, put out in Vindication of the divine Authority of Magistracy
against the Anabaptists, lift up his hands to heaven, and blessed God, that he
lived to see the place of Magistracy, wherein he stood, so clearly proved from
Scripture evidence, to be a place wherein he might with a good conscience act,
so as to please God therein. The Magistrates office we see is honorable,
because it is of God, yet sometimes it goes a begging, but it is a certain sign
of calamitous times, when good and worthy Patriots are loath to appear on the
stage of Government. Kings, Palaces, and Senate-houses do not use to stand long
empty, or are hard to be let, except some evil spirit from the troubles of the
times haunt them, and then indeed it is no wonder to hear it said, as in that
deplored time of Judah's declining-state, Esaias 3.7. I will not be a healer,
make me not a Ruler of the people; If the Physician will not take the Patient
in hand, it is to be feared, he thinks the disease too far gone, and he shall
have little credit in the business, if he hap to miscarry under his hand.
Indeed State Physicians, though never so faithful, can hardly escape blame, if
they do not the cure. The multitude judge the Pilot good or bad, as the voyage
he makes, is gainful or losing to the Owners. But I hope you have learned not
to judge your selves by others thoughts, Nemo miser sensu alieno, no man is
miserable by what others think of him; If you be not willing to give up your
own name to be sacrificed by the multitude, there is little hope of being a
Savior to your Country. Christ could not have saved man, if he had stood upon
saving his Name among men, he was willing to do them good, though he was
thought and spoken all to naught by them for his pains.

Do your duty, and leave the issue to God; I confess, it is a blustering time,
but sometime Mariners find fair weather at sea, when they launch out in a
storm. That God has the wind in his fist that sends you to sea, and if a
storm meet you in your work, Christ can soon be with you in it, and save you
from it. God is not more seen in sea tempests, then he is in land-stormes,
confusions, I mean, of States and Nations. He that stills the noise of the
seas, does the tumult of the people, Psalm. 65.7. They are there, and may well
be put together. Well, whatever comes of it, it will be more honorable and
safe for you (when called) to be found in Parliament, endeavoring to heal the
bleeding wounds of the Nation, though to your private hazard, then saving your
own skins whole at home. Is it not sad, that a poor woman in travel should die
for want of help, because it is midnight when she calls, and her neighbors,
loath to break their rests, or come out in the cold to save her life? England is
now in travel, and calls you to her labor; take heed that the ghost of your
ruined Nation does not haunt you to your graves, for denying your help. I
confess, it is like to speed the worse with the poor Land, because of some
unhappy disappointments in former Assemblies; it is with England, as with a
woman that has often called her women, but her pains have gone over and nothing
to be done, which makes her want help when she has most need of it; But who
knows that now the full time is not come for a birth? God only keeps reckoning
for States-deliverances, better go twenty times, when called re infecta, then
thy place once found empty, when the work indeed comes to be done.

Secondly, as God by this Promise of giving Judges as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning, ownes this order and state of Magistracy, so
he lays claim to the disposure of persons that bear this office, I will
restore, etc. It implies, that he had a hand in taking away those holy
Governors which ruled them in the first and better times for their sins; and
ordering worse in their rooms, as a plague for those sins; and that now he
will fill the Magistrates Seat again with faithful Judges and Counselors like
their first. Note hence,

Corporation, what plotting and siding is there, every one to lift up a head
for his own faction? And I wish there were not too much of this crowded into
the great Assembly of this day, wherein most (it is to be feared) come rather
to serve a party, yea, some particular person with their suffrages, then God
and their Country; well, plot what you can, Heaven will carry it from you all,
you (with all the bussle and pudder that is made) are but the fly upon the
wheel, it is the wheel of Providence, not you, that determines the issue of
this days meeting. Matches are made in heaven between Magistrates and people;
when they voted for Christ to die, and Barabbas to live, they did but make up
the work, that God had cut out to their hand; choose well or ill, you cannot
deny God his casting voice. When the ten tribes made a rent from the house of
David, it is said indeed Hosea 84. They have set up Kings, and not by me; they
have made Princes, and I knew it not; that is, they asked not Gods leave, they
were not by him, that is, not by his approbation, Princes that he knew not,
that is, not by their acquainting him, they took not God into their Council,
and if God could have known it no known it no way, else he should have been
wholly ignorant of the matter, yet God tells them, he gave them these very
Kings and Princes, Hosea 13.11. Gods secret Providence had the ordering of the
matter, while they please their own lust, they fulfilled Gods Council wrath,
who by their own wicked choice intended to plague them for their former sin.

I will restore, and no Key like prayer to open Gods heart. God rules the world
by the lusts of his enemies, and by the prayers of his Saints; he by
disappointing the one, and stirring up, as also graciously answering the other,
accomplisheth his own ends in the affairs of the word. The Egyptians policies,
and Isreal's prayers, helped on the ruin of the one and deliverance of the
other; when Israel groaned under the bondage of Pharaoh, the Lord hears their
cry, and saves them by the hand of Moses, it was worth their groaning to get
such a change, a Moses that carried them tenderly on his shoulder, for a
Pharaoh the cruelly rid on their backs. Prayer moves the great wheel of the
Clock, that sets all the rest a going. Persuade God, and he will persuade man;
Jacob was afraid of Esau, and makes God his friend, and God made Esau his
friend; He that could give Saul another spirit, and so altered the property of
the man, that before he is aware he shall prophecy with the Prophets; he can
alter those purposes which men had in their hearts when they came forth this
day, and make them Vote for those they little thought on, he can make profane
ones cast their suffrages into the lap of those that are godly; and truly if it
were not so, I should wonder how a faithful, godly Parliament Man could be
chosen in England, where the heap carries it. It has been a custom in former
times among us, for letters to come thick from Court, when Parliaments were to
be chosen, to Towns and Corporations, which had almost the effect of a
Mandamus. To be sure, God can send into the bosoms of men his secret messages,
which shall awe their consciences, Genesis 31.29. It is in the power of my hand
(said Laban to Jacob,) to do you hurt, but the God of your fathers spoke unto
me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed, etc. Poor man! in his power? when God
had tied his hands behind him, yea, sealed up his mouth, that he could not
speak a word but what God formed for him: Has not God thus met some of you on
your way, over-powering your hearts against your former thoughts? If he has
not met with you as you come, to bind up your hand from writing for an
unworthy person, you may expect to meet him as you go home, sometime or other
upon a sadder-errand. Better Cain had met God before he gave the bloody blow,
to have stayed his hand from striking it, then afterward to meet him with that
dismal Question, O what have thou done! O it will pierce thy heart like a
Dagger, when God shall ask another day, What have thou done in giving thy voice
for such as will help to ruin, not to heal the land? Thou art the Murderer of
thy Country, and its blood I will require at thy hands. So much of the first
Branch, the Person promising; the second follows, the mercy promised, Judges as
at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning.

Three Questions may here be propounded, why Judges and Counselors are here
promised, and not Kings and Princes? why the Promise double both Judges and
Counselors? And lastly, why Judges as at the first?

First, Why Judges and Counselors, and not Kings and Princes?

Because this Promise had a particular respect to a time, when their Government
was not to be Monarchical, (viz.) after their return from captivity, when this
Promise took place in Nehemiah, Ezra, Zerubbabel, and other faithful Judges,
that after them ruled the Jewish State; where I pray observe, Jews saw happy
days under Kingly Government, when the Kings were gracious and wise, and happy
under Judges and Counselors, (such as Moses, Joshua, Zerubbabel,) though with
less worldly splendor, and they saw as miserable days, under both Kings and
Judges, being under the former delivered up into the hand of the Assyrian and
Babylonian; and by the factions of the latter betrayed at last into the hand of
the Roman power: the sword of Government cuts as the hand is that holds it.

Why runs the Promise double, both Judges and Counselors?

Synecdoche comprehend whole Magistracy. Two things concur to complete a
Government; Wisdom to make wholesome Laws, and Advice for the good of the
People; and faithfulness with courage to execute these Laws; for the first,
here are Counselors to advise and form Laws; for the second, here are
Judges to inform and put life into these Laws by execution; Counselors
without Judges, are as a head without a hand; Judges without Counselors, a
hand without a head.

But why Judges as at the first?

Moses, or after in a Kingdom by David; where by the way we see, First, they
change in purity, and grow corrupt; Then God changes their peace and
prosperity; yea, sometimes of their very form and visible constitution.

But we shall wave the points those considerations would afford us, and take up
one Conclusion, which arises from the Subject matter of the Promise in
general, and it is this.

That faithful Magistrates are a choice blessing to a Nation. I will restore
Judges as at the first, etc. None of Gods gifts are (...), giftlesse gifts; it
is worth the having what God thinks is worth the promising; yea, when he gives
a people faithful Governors, he makes account he gives them a mercy not of the
least magnitude.

First, observe on what design God makes this Promise, which speaks it a
choice mercy; and that is to quiet and compose their thoughts in the
expectation of their captivity hastening upon them, and to make them the more
willingly to leave their own land, upon this account, that when they return,
they should gain this by all their sufferings, to have Judges as at the first,
as if this were a recompense adequate to all their losses and troubles. It must
needs be some great thing that a man offers, to make a man willing to have his
arm cut off, or endure some great torment. God gives this Promise, to make
them patiently bear the calamities which their long captivity will bring with
it, and therefore is a great mercy.

Again, observe how this is promised, not as a single mercy, but as a mercy
that has many in the womb of it; a mercy representative of all the good he
had in his thoughts to bestow upon them; he makes choice of this, as the
fittest Interpreter of his large heart, as that which might best assure them of
his love toward them. I will restore Judges as at the first, it is as much as
if he had said, I will restore all manner of blessings into your bosom; Indeed
as Magistrates are, so we may expect things will go in a Nation: There is no
one place where we may stand at greater advantage to see what God intends for a
people (good or evil) then by observing what Rulers and Governors, his
Providence orders out to them. The very Heathens signified thus much by their
custom, who in erecting the statues of their Magistrates by fountains, did
imply, that from them issued out the good or evil of a people. Two ways it
goes ill or well with a Nation.

First, when Religion and Righteousness stand or fall. Without those, Nations
are but forests of wild beasts, where the stronger devour the weaker. As the
Magistrate is, so are these lift up or cast down; no sooner here in the text is
Religion and Righteousness set down in the Chair of Government, but we find
the influence of it among the people, I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, etc. then it follows, Afterward thou shall be called a City of
Righteousness, a faithful City. So soon does the City learn to write, after
the Copy which the Court sets her. The Septuagint upon that place, Psalm 24.7.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, etc. read thus (...), etc. Lift up the Gates, O
ye Princes. The Gate leads the way to the City, and the Magistrate has the
command of the Gate, as he opens or shuts the Gate, so is Religion entertained
or shut out of a Nation, in the public Profession of it. Therefore the open
idolatry of a Nation is laid by God himself at the Magistrates door, Mich, 1.5.
For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the House of
Israel. Now mark the next words, What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not
Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem? That
is, what is the Spring of all this idolatry, and other abominations of these
two Kingdoms? Is it not the two chief Cities, and Princes Courts kept there?
Read Scripture-Story, and you shall find Religion flourished and faded among
the Jews, as their Magistrates were good or bad. When Moses by death let fall
his leading staff, and there was a godly Joshua to take it up, it yet went
well with Religion. When Joshua went off the stage, and there were but any of
those faithful Elders left, who shared with him in the Government to hold the
helm, Religion was safe, but when they were gathered to their fathers, and
none to come into their place, and fill up the breach, then all went to wrack
in Church and State, as we find, Judges 2.11. Then the children of Israel did
evil in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim.

Queen of Sheba without a Spirit of Prophecy, was able to see happy days
coming on the Jews from the piety and wisdom she observed in their Prince, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Because thy God loved Israel to establish them for ever, therefore
made he thee King over them to do Judgment and Justice. So the wickedness of
the Kings of the ten Tribes, after their rent from the house of David, (for
it is observed, not a good one is to be found of the whole pack, though some
less evil then other) is by the Spirit of God interpreted, to proceed from his
displeasure and purposes of wrath, that he had taken up against them, to break
and ruin them, Hosea 13.11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him
away in my wrath. Which is spoken (if you observe the place) not of Saul, but
of the ten Tribes after their rent from Judah; and not of a particular person,
but of the whole succession of Kings from Jeroboam to the last, under whom
their captivity found them. God gave them in wrath, that is, such as were sit
instruments to be a plague to them, and execute Gods wrath upon them; and when
he took any of them away, it was to make room for a worse, till by degrees the
Nation (as a morsel prepared for a foreign enemy) dropped into the Assyrians
mouth, and was devoured by them. The whole Series of the Jewish Chronicle will
confirm this, that when God intended mercy to them, he gave them faithful
Magistrates; when wrath and judgment, he opened the door for it, by taking
them out of the way. Josiah, who came to the throne in all ill time, and found
it deep in arreares with God, yea, under an arrest from God, for the
abominations of former times, and the people, at present, not much amended,
being kept in rather by his royal Sanction, then their own inclination, for
it is said, he made them stand to the Covenant.

Which implies, they would soon have fallen to idolatry, and their own ways,
had not he shored them up by his authority; yet this holy man's zeal for God and
Religion, doing as much as he could, tanta faece populi, reprieved them, and
was their Bail to keep them out of prison, as long as he was above ground; but
no sooner his head laid in the dust, and his wicked children in the throne, but
God calls for his debt, and would stay no longer.

spite to the peace and happiness thereof, I know no way like this, wherein
you could pay it to the full, by choosing unfaithful Counselors. David, when
he meant to curse Gods enemy and his to purpose, one thing he wished him, was,
that God would set a wicked man over him, Psalm. 109.6. one that would make no
conscience to oppress him, and tyrannically lord it over him; yea, God himself
puts it among his dreadful curses, Levit. 26.17. I will set my face against
you, and those that hate you shall reign over you. I shall lay but four
Arguments before you, to persuade you to a conscientious care in your present
business.

Senate of the Nation; you trust them with your purse, and I am sure most of
you account that something, whatever you think of other things; you will know
him well, to whom you will give the Key of your chest, where your money lies.
You trust them with your liberties and lives, and those your purses have paid
soundly for; yea, with your Religion, without which the other are not worth the
taking up. In one word, with all that is dear to you as English men, as
Christians, you put that power into their hands, which if they be not the more
faithful, they may turn like a cannon upon your own breasts, and so you most
truly become felo de se, guilty of your own miseries; and let me tell you,
those sorrows have a peculiar bitterness in them above all other, which are
not imposed on us, but chosen by us. Better an enemy should come in and turn
us by force of arms, out of possession of these, then we send those that shall
Vote us out of them, partly because of the little pity we shall deserve, or can
reasonably expect from others, when they shall see the rod with which we are
whip't was of our own gathering; as also because of the inward guilt which will
add a further stinging consideration then all this to our sorrows, and deprive
us of those comforts which the conscience of doing our duty would help us to,
in the greatest calamities that otherwise could befall us. He that is accessory
to the burning down of his house, by the negligence of a drunken person, whom
he trusted to watch and keep it, has more reason to be troubled, then he that
has it consumed by a fire from heaven, or some other inevitable Povidence. O
Sirs, there are less matters then these, in which you would be very choice and
curious; if you were to choose a Nurse for your child, you would look for one
of a healthful constitution and good disposition, you would weigh and taste her
milk whether good or no; You are now to choose Nurses for three Nations, so
Magistrates are called in Scripture, Nursing Fathers and Mothers; You are to
choose these in a time of these Nations languishing, as the only means under
God, (so thought by the best Physicians among us,) to recover the consumptive
state of this great body; and will you send any to such a place and work,
before you know what milk they have given in their private capacities in the
Country? If you were to choose a Shield, should it be one that would let the
arrow come through it, to pierce you to the heart? Magistrates are the Shields
of the earth. You value the life of the Nation little, that will put a Shield
into its hand you have not well tried; I am sure, David threw away Armor,
though it were a Kings, because he had not tried it; in a word, if you were but
to choose a Shepherd, or a Herdsman, any should not serve your turn. Pharaoh a
King thought it not beneath his care, though in so low a business, Genesis 47.6.
If thou know any man, says he to Joseph, of activity amongst thy brethren,
make them rulers over my cattle; you are to choose such, as are not to go
before beasts, but to lead in and out the Lords people and flock.

Jehoshaphat said to his Judges, I may with a little alteration apply to you
that are Electours this day, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take heed what you do, for ye
choose not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the choice. He is with
you to observe who you give your hand for, and why you give it. There is one
more that takes hands, then you see. When Bishop Latimer heard a pen going
behind the hanging, as he was upon examination before the Queens Council, it
made him more watchful what he said; and shall not Gods pen, that walks
behind the Tent, where thou set thy hand, make thee conscientious. It Is
God we have to do with in this matter, he is the Supreme Lord of Nations; all
Magistrates are his Underofficers, and hold their place of him, and are to do
faithful service for him. Moses, it is said, was faithful as a servant, Heb.
3.5. Now, of what dangerous consequence is it for a people, to choose one into
an office, that is a Traitor to his Prince? This thou do, when thou set
thy hand for an unfaithful person. Magistrates are said to be taken into Gods
throne, 2 Chro. 9.8. Now, dare thou set Gods enemy in Gods throne? what is
this, but to set up a Standard against God, and declare to the world thou
would shake off his Government. This day the temper of this Nation will be
discovered, no way that I know like this to feel how its pulse beats; and for
my own part, as this solemn National act shall appear, I cannot look upon it
otherwise, then as our owning or disowning God, to be our God, to rule over us;
and if the Nation do but vouch God to be their God, by a godly choice, I shall
not bury my hopes for our future happiness; God comes in mercy many times
before he is sent for; but he departs not to carry away his mercy from a
people, till they give him leave to go, yea, drive him away; and oh, how
unhappy art thou, O England, if thou may still have thy God, and will not?

expectation of Gods wrath; that (come it sooner or later) will take hold on
thee. And now tell me, had thou not better have been asleep in thy bed, yea,
sick in thy bed, yea, dead in thy grave, then to have come hither to do so
unhappy a days work? Oh, think when thou go this day to give thy suffrage
for any that thou did see the Covenant with thy hand at it spread before
thee; durst thou then venture, to blot out what there thou have wrote, by a
wicked and unworthy choice? Suppose one should put himself under an oath of
friendship, to promote the good and welfare of another, to his utmost power,
(as Jonathan to David) and this his friend, to whom he is thus engaged, falling
sick, should trust him to bring a Physician to him, and he should fetch a
murderer to poison him, or an Emperick which by his ignorance should kill him
(which comes to all one) Oh, how would his oath rot upon his conscience? This
thou do, only with this aggravation, thou do it to a Nation, he to a
private person; before therefore thou subscribest, spend one thought more upon
the matter. Consider, thou stand at the greatest advantage of paying thy
vows, and performing thy Covenant this day, that thou may in all thy life;
possibly, before the three years for a Parliament come about, thou may be
summoned into another world, to give an account, how thou bestowedst thy voice
now; or if alive, thou may be reserved to see a poor Nation helped to its
ruin by thy hand and such as thou art.

Fourthly, consider the greatest hopes our enemies have is to ruin us by our
own Councels: The time has been, the plot was to blow up our Parliaments, now
they labor to blow us up by our Parliaments; to make our Parliaments, I mean,
blow us up by their destructive Councels, and a Nation cannot die of a worse
death, then to be ruined by their Saviors, and how near we have been undoing
by some of them, it is so late, I think, I need not help your memories.

But you will say, Who is the man fit for our suffrage?



First, enquire for the fear of God in those you choose. This is writ with so
large a character in Scripture upon the Magistrates forehead, and is so
principal a letter in his Name, that it cannot be well spelled without it,
Exodus 18.21. Moses bids them provide such men as fear God; Magistrates are
called gods, because none among the sons of men represent his Power and
Majesty like them; by stamping Authority upon a wicked man, what do you but
present the beautiful face of God to the world in a broken glass, and give
them by his ill-favored countenance, an occasion of setting up unworthy
thoughts of God in their hearts, as if he were like him who is set in his
place? Some Kings have commanded, that none should carve this Pourtraiture in
any meaner metal then gold; And is it not pity that Gods Image should be
stamp't upon a person of base metal? as every ungodlie man is, how much soever
his name swells in riches and honors in the worlds style; Antiochus called a
vile person, Dan. 11.21. The poorest Saint he persecuted, was a Star, and he
as vile as dirt, even while he stamped them under his foot of pride. He that
puts a wicked man in place willingly, would, if he could, pull a righteous God
out of place. We had need look for the fear of God in those we choose into
Government, the more because they are so far above the fear of any else, and if
they have not the fear of God to keep them right no wonder if they miscarrie:
When Joseph would persuade his brethren they should have honest dealing with
him, see what pawn he gives them, Genesis 42 18 This do, for I fear God. Indeed
his power was so great, that if the fear of God had not given law to his
conscience, he had them at such advantage, that he might have revenged himself
upon them for their unkindnesse, yea, cruelty to him without laying his own
safety to stake at all from man; The Governors that went before Nehemiah,
wanting this, nothing could keep them from oppression, whereas good Nehemiah
himself, had no other cord but this to tie his hands, Nehemiah 5.15. But so did
not I, because of the fear of the Lord.

Exodus 18.21. Provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God; All
that fear God are not able men; Every godly man does not carry a Counselors
head on his shoulders; there are some so holy, that in regard of their Prayers
and the Power of godliness in their lives* may be said to be Saviors, (I am
sure the Nation had drowned, had not they helped to hold its chin above water)
but if they were called to Parliament-work, they might for want of wisdom and a
governing spirit be in danger of proving destroyers of it; and is it not pity,
that they who do such service to the public in their private capacities should
be called from praying for, to ruining of the Nation? Every good Christian
could not make a good Minister: the Apostle speaks of a special gift, besides
grace in common with others, that belongs to them, they must be apt to teach.
So a Senator must be apt to advise and counsel, without this all is
insufficient, because he wants that which should enable him to reach the end of
his place. A knife, though it has a sheath of gold, and a haft of diamond, yet
if it has no edge, it is not a good knife, it may be good to sell and make
money of, but not to cut. Look therefore for men of wisdom; you will not put a
suit to make, no, not a shoe to mend, meerlie because he is an honest godly
man, you desire something of the trade in the man, or else you may be pinched
for it, and go uneasy. But, oh you will say, if honest honest men, they will
do no hurt, you mean, I suppose, not willingly, for else they may do much; That
physic in a dangerous disease, which does not good, does hurt, because that
might have been given which should have done good. The distempers of the Nation
at this time are many, and those complicated, it will employ the skill of a
College of as wise State-Physicians as ever sat within those walls to find
out a remedy; And I am of his judgment, Si pereundum, inter peritissimos
pereamus, if we must die, let it be under the hand of the ablest Physicians,
for therein we shall be least accessorie to our own ruin.



First, consider the care of keeping Religion pure in a Nation, is part of the
Christian Magistrates charge, and not the least The Kings of Israel were
commanded to keep by them the Book of the Law* that they might learn to fear
the Lord, and keep all the words of this Law, Deuteronomy. 17, 18. which was not meant
only personally (that was to be the endeavor of every private Israelite) but
as a Ruler to see the Law of God kept, and the true Religion there commanded,
preserved in their Kingdom. Hence we find those Kings sharply reproved, that
did either set up, or connive at idolatry in their reign; and those commended
who removed the Monuments of idolatry, and restored the Worship of God to its
purity. Thus we find of Hezekiah, the most famous Reformer of them all, a
large testimony is given by God to him, for his zeal therein; That he cleaved
to the Lord, and kept his Commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses. And
truly, if it were the Magistrates work then, it continues to be so now, except
we can find that Christ has retrenched their power in matters of Religion,
which he has not: the observation is good that Dr. Rivet quotes out of
Augustine. If we would resolve the Question, what the Magistrates power is in
matters of Religion, we must observe those times rather, when the Magistrate
was a member of the Church; as in the Jewish Church he was, then when an open
enemy to the Church, as in Christ's and the Apostles time; There is no danger,
says that Reverend Author, to allow the Magistrate now as much power, as God
then approved of. Well, is Religion the Magistrates care? then for the Lords
sake, and Religions sake, choose not such as are corrupt and rotten in their
principles, except you have a mind to diffuse the infection presently over the
whole Land. The plague of this spiritual leprosy is spreading too fast already
in the body of the Nations. God keep it from among our Rulers, if it takes the
head once, we may then pronounce the whole Land unclean.

resolve into, and that truly is no less then Popery it self, which the
Merchants of Rome have these late years brought over from thence by wholesale,
and parcelled it out to the several Sects, Anabaptists, Seekers, Quakers, etc.
in the Nation, as their petty Chapmen, to retail it for them, and put off some
one point, and some another, as their trade lies here and there in the Land; so
that as it is observed of those diseases, Pox, Purples and Malignant Fevers,
when they abound, it is a sign the plague is not far off, their malignity being
soon heightened unto the Pestilence: so it is to be feared, these errors are
forerunners of Popery, in which they will end, except some help come timely
from the Magistrate, to spoil the Popes Market among us.

Solomon's throne of ivorie was supported by Lions; innocence and integrity
cannot be preserved in Magistracy without courage. It was base fear made
Pilate cruel to Christ, to save his sorry stake that he had in Caesar's hand.
The man had no mind to shed innocent blood, therefore sought how he might
release him, but when he heard the Jews cry out, If thou let this man go,
thou art not Caesar's friend, the very wind of this bullet killed the man's
heart, and makes him steer a clean contrary course, John 19.12, 13. When Pilate
therefore heard that saying (that now quoted) he brought Jesus forth and sat
in the judgment seat, and basely proceeded to an unrighteous sentence against
his conscience. Magistrates are great blessings (says one) modo audeant, quae
sentiunt; if they dare do their conscience. Choose men that dare be righteous,
only I wish we were wise to distinguish betwixt an humble boldness in a good
cause, and a proud stoutness in any cause, be it wright or wrong. That courage
is of the right metal, which like steel, will bend, but not like lead, stand
bent; some men if they be once engaged, will basely be bent and bowed into
partiality.

Fifthly, find out men that will make it their business to attend on the
public affairs of the Nation. It is said of Job, Job. 29.14.
he put on Righteousness, and it clothed him, he could as easily forget to put
on his clothes in a morning, when he arose, as to do his work as a Magistrate.
It were a sad thing that we should pitch upon any, who when they are chose,
should sleep out their time in the Country, or feast and juncket it away in the
City, not caring whether the Nation sinck or swim. Non-residence is as bad in a
Mgistrate, as in a Minister, they are Gods Ministers, as well as Preachers; so
says Paul, Romans 13.6. For they are Gods Ministers attending continually upon
this very thing. O, then it is well, when the Magistrate attends to it, does,
hoc agere; where should the tradesman be but in his shop? and where a
Parliament Man, but where his work lies in the house; they are not worthy of
the honor, that are weary of the labor, which goes with the Office. Why does
the head wear the Crown, and has the honor of the whole man put upon it,
but because it is lean with taking care for the whole body? The faithful
Magistrate is said to bear the burden of the people; Ex. 18.22.
away with those that will shift all the burden off their own, unto other
shoulders, that like to be carried upon the peoples shoulders on an
Election-day, and to hear themselves cried up with the applause of the
Country, but do not like to carry the burden of their Countries affairs,
either in their head, or heart, that have no ears to hear the cry of the
oppressed, when they come to them for relief.

Surgeon, that has not only a Lions heart, but a Ladies hand, to dress the
wounds of the Nation gently. We are like a man that has lain long, and grown
so weak, that the same strong Physic which might have cured him at first, when
nature was in heart, would now kill him out of hand.

you should choose by this single character, but take it in conjunction with the
rest; to choose merely for estate, is too like the Israelites folly, who set up
a golden calf in Moses room. But let not parts and grace, receive any
prejudice through envy, because they are inamelled with riches, and dwell in a
great house. It is noted as a sign of a declining State, when the money, and
coin of a Nation is embased, or less then was wont; when the metal is not so
pure, nor the piece so weighty, when for gold, and silver, there is brass,
leaden, or leathern, as sometime it has been. The Spirit of God compates
Magistrates to one of the purest of metals, as silver; And surely, it shows a
people are going down the hill of honor, when the places of Magistracy that
use to be filled with the chief heads of the Country, come to be of the ignoble
floor; indeed, when either Magistrate or Minister are of the lowest of the
people, to use the Scripture phrase; that Church and State, their day is in the
afternoon; and thanks be to God, there is not such a dearth of Gentry, but
some may be found, able to do God, and their Country service.

Tribe; but to know that, you must be content to wait for the great day, when
the world shall know, why I speak for, and others against the Ministry; I am
not therefore afraid or ashamed again to press this. Enquire for men that are
faithful friends to the Ministry. It has been resolved long since in the
Popes Conclave, that the surest and speediest way to cheat England of her
Religion, and Gospel, is to divide the people from their Ministers, and that
they hold still of the same mind; we see by their rigorous endeavor, to pursue
this one thing, as if they had laid aside all other plots, and shipped their
whole adventure in this one bottom; hence so many bitter invectives printed
against the faithful Ministers of Christ, their Persons, and Office; and
railing Rabshekahs sent about the Land, who whatever their text is, to be sure
make this their Sermon, to throw dirt upon the Ministers face; to turn the
hearts of the children from their spiritual Fathers, by rendering them as base
and filthy to their hearers, as the dirt under their feet, and have they not
prevailed far herein? when many thousands in the Land are made Prosylites to
them; yea, when some have ventured in Parliament it self, to heave both at the
maintenance, and office of the Ministry; and can you think him worthy of the
Magistrates seat, that would not allow you a Minister in the Pulpit? Oh my
brethren, know the Ministry has the same Authority to show for their calling,
the Magistrate has; the same God that gave Moses, gave Aaron; it is said he
led his people by the hands of Moses and Aaron. The same hand that planted one
Olive Tree, on the one side of the bowl, to wit, Zerubbabel the Magistrate,
did plant Joshua, the Minister, on the other, and both to drop their oil, to
feed the same lamp of Gods Church; the great blessings have been given in by a
concurrence of both, as we see in Reformations of the Jewish Church under
several Kings. I have heard that Queen Elizabeth, coming her progress into
this our County of Suffolk, when she observed that the Gentlemen of the County,
who came out to meet her, had every one his Minister by his side, said, Now I
have learned why my County of Suffolk is so well governed, it is because the
Magistrates and Ministers go together. Indeed they are the two legs on which
a Church and State stand. He that would saw off the one, cannot mean well to to
the other; an Anti-ministerial spirit, is an Anti-magistratical spirit; the
Pulpit guards the throne; Be persuaded to take that away, and you give the
Magistrates enemies room to fetch a full blow at them; as the Duke of Somerset
in King Edward the sixths days, by consenting to his brothers death, make way
for his own, by the same axe and hand.

I have no more by way of Council for you, as to the transaction of this day.
But my dear friends, think not you have done all your duty to God and your
afflicted Country by a Vote or suffrage, but labor to crown the work of this
day with these things.

First, follow those you shall choose with your prayers. Our Lord Jesus, when he
sent his disciples to sea, he went into a mountain to pray for them; he knew a
storm was coming toward them, and they would have need of his help; Truly,
you send these Gentlemen, whoever they shall be, to sea; and God grant it may
not be a winter-voiage. Oh, help them to as much strength as you can for their
work, and no strength like that which is got from Heaven; indeed the whole
success of that great Assembly must drop from thence. The hearing ear, and the
seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them, Pro. 20.12. Neither of these
can be spared if this Parliament ends well, they must have a seeing eye, to see
what counsel and advice is both wholesome and seasonable; and the people must
have a hearing ear, to submit to the Laws there concluded on, and the Lord
makes even both of these.

Scotland, that one standing at one end, cannot hear what another says
standing at the other end. If your sins get between your prayers, and God you
pray to, he cannot hear of that ear you would have him; If you do not reform,
lay no fault on the Parliament, though no good comes of their meeting. A
careless Patient disgraceth a good Physician; Samuels Council to Israel shall
be mine to you with the change of a word; Fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth with all your heart, for consider how great things he has done for you,
but if you continue still to do wickedly, you shall be consumed, you and your
Parliament.

the Parable of the man fallen among thievs and wounded, the Host was not
commanded by Christ to undertake to cure him, but to take care of him: Leave
the curing of the Nations wounds to God, a happy people you will be, if found
to have taken so much care of your poor Nation, as to discharge the duty of
your place, which you owe to God and it.

FINIS.

