The Quaker's JESUS: OR, The unswadling of that Child James Nailor, which a
wicked Toleration has midwiv'd into the World.

DISCOVERING The Principles of the Quakers in general. IN A Narrative of the
substance of his Examination, and his Disciples, as it was taken from their own
mouths, in their answer before the Magistrates of the City of Bristol; also,
of his Examination in the Painted Chamber Westminster, and the management of it
in Parliament, now published for the satisfaction of himself and some Christian
friends.

By WILLIAM GRIGGE, (Citizen of BRISTOL) who believes in that Jesus (and him
alone for salvation) that was crucified at Jerusalem, above sixteen hundred
years ago.

There is one evil which I have seen under the Sun, as an error which
proceeds from the Ruler.

Eccles. 10.5. Christ's Prophecy.

For many shall come in my name, and shall say I am Christ, etc.

Mat. 24.5. The Quakers Practice.

But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
also false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon themselves swift
destruction; and many shall follow their pernicious ways by reason of whom the
way of truth* etc.

2 Pet. 2.1, 2. The Christian's duty.

Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, (
the Margin readst, which we have gained.)

2 Epist. John 8. The Apostle's Imprecation.

Now if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

1 Cor. 16.22. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by Joseph
Cranford, at the Sign of the King's Head, in Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

THE Several Heads of the ensuing NARRATIVE.
1. SOme of Nailer's erroneous opinions and blasphemies declared. 2. The manner
of his riding into Bristol. 3. His Examination before the Mayor of Bristol. 4
His Examination before the Committee in the Painted Chamber Westminster. 5 The
Examination of Dorcas Erbury, before the Magistrates of Bristol. 6 When Nailer
was sent for to London, and much of what he and his Disciples confessed at
Bristol, (being denied there) made good against him. 7 Nailer sent for by the
Parliament, to answer to the Report of the Committee, and receive his Sentence.
8 When Nailer suffered the first part of his sentence. 9 The rest put off for a
week, by means of a Petition. 10 A Petition to the Parliament, for the
remitting his punishment. 11 A Petition to the Protector to that effect. 12 The
L. Protector's Letter to the Parliament. 13 The Parliament orders the remainder
of his punishment at London, and sends him to Bristol. 14 The manner of his
punishment in Bristol. 15 His sending up to London again. 16 Some sad
Meditations upon the sufferings of the true Jesus, (whom this blasphemer did
personate) setting forth no less then twelve particular bleedings, for the
sake of his redeemed ones. 17 The Cities Petition (by way of Remonstrance) to
the Parliament, in reference to these blaspheming Quakers. 18 Some Cautions,
with the humble advice of the Author, to his fellow-Citizens, and Christians,
to take heed of hearing uncalled, unordained, and unsent teachers, lest they
also be seduced. 19 A Collection of some few erroneous and blasphemous
Doctrines, vented by some rebaptized persons, which have discipled the Quakers
to much of their practice. 20 A discovery of horrid filthiness, practiced by
some rebaptized persons and Quakers. 21 A recital of several Books and
Pamphlets (which have past the Press, since Toleration) denying God, Christ,
Spirit, Word, Ordinances, Resurrection, Heaven, Hell, etc. whereby many poor
souls have been seduced. 22 A pretended Epistle of P. Lentulus a Roman,
written to the Senate of Rome, containing a Description of the bodily shape and
feature of Jesus Christ: a Copy whereof, was found among other papers, (to the
number of 21.) about Nailers Disciples, at their first Examination before the
Magistrates of Bristol.
An Advertisement to my Christian Friends, and Fellow-Citizen, for whom this
Narrative following is intended.
Christian Friends,
IF ever the Devil transformed himself into an Angel of light, or his Apostles
and Ministers, 2 Cor. 11.13.14, 15.
transformed themselves into the Ministers of Christ, they have surely now in
this apostatizing and backsliding age, which we (by means of a Toleration)
have fallen into: And that glorious things, (to wit) liberty abused, to the
dishonor of God, and great scandal of the Gospel; Yet sincere Christians,
(though they missed of the Reformation they hoped, and endeavored for) have
improved their Gospel-liberty, from Prelatical tyranny, (to a more humble
walking before, and holy Communion with their God and Jesus Christ,) under
which, many a godly Minister and private Christian, did suffer trouble as evil
doers, and that unto banishment, 2 Timothy 2.9.
confiscation and bonds; but the Word of the Lord is not (cannot be) bound,
though in a sense under their Lordship it was. This is therefore to advise,
yea, and persuade you, that from all Seducers, and whatever tends to seduction,
you stand off, and (as the Apostle says) turn away, Chap. 3. v. 5.
and keep close unto your Closet-duties, 1 These. 5.12.
and those public known Ordinances and Ministry, by which your fellow
Christians, before you have through grace (in some measure) experimented the
goodness of God to their poor souls.

Now Christ himself advising, Take heed what, and how you hear: from this is my
advice, Take heed whom you hear. Mar. 4.24. Luke 8.18. 1 These. 5.21.
I have sadly observed the abuse of that Scripture, Prove all things. That is,
say some, hear all, else how can we prove it? But this I have more sadly
observed, That contrary to the words following, Hold fast that which is good,
they have let loose (if not quite lost) that which is good. You know the
Proverb, A rolling stone, etc. Sure these wandering (rolling) Christians, have
increased but little of what is good. And indeed, Jude 13. verse. 12.
the Apostle, verse. 12. tells who they are that we should hear, its those that
are among you, and over you in the Lord, and admonish us. I confess I have
heard this often spoke, that I may hear others as gifted men, though not as
Ministers.

I answer, I suppose this may hold in Schools for disputation, Presbyteries for
approbation, but not in Ordinances appointed for Salvation. Isa. 55.3.
In this, I am so to hear, that my Soul may live, I am to consider when I come
to this Ordinance of preaching thus. I am come to hear for my life, Romans 1.16.
that which I hear is the word of God, which is his power to salvation; nay, if
it prove not my Salvation, it will my damnation. This being considered, shall I
run to hear every Fellow, who runs before he is sent, 2 Cor. 2.16. Jer. 23.21.
and uses his gifts before he has grace? nay, had every gifted Brother grace
to his gifts, that does not commission him to preach. I beseech you therefore,
keep close to a godly known Ordained Ministry. Will it be a plea of any
weight, at the great and terrible day of the Lord, for those many poor souls,
that have cast off their first love to Christ and his Ordinances, to say, I was
seduced by false Teachers, Anabaptists and Quakers, Fox and Nailor, etc. I
confess, it will add to the number of the Seducers stripes, but not take off
theirs who are seduced. When those poor deluded and seduced Souls, shall cry
to Christ their Judge for mercy, may he not then say to them, Did I not
command, that you should take heed, what, Mar. 4.24. Luke 8.18. Cap. 17.23.
and how, and whom you hear? Did not I command you to hear my Servants whom I
sent? Did not my Servant the Apostle Paul, give you a plain Scripture, Romans
10.14, 15.
How can they preach (savingly) except they be sent? May not Christ say, Did I
send or bid you hear Jesuits, Seducers, false Teachers, Impostors, Fox and
Nailor, and such like?

Friends, look to it, we shall be all in earnest then: at that great day of
account, a Christian must have his why for his wherefore. Walk therefore by
rule, yea, and hear by rule too, Isa. 8.20:
To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, its
because there is no light in them. And am I not to hear then (as well as they
to speak) according to this word?

And now Friends, being called by the Magistrates of this City (as you will see
in the ensuing discourse) to bear witness against (an unheard of Blasphemer)
James Nailor: I shall not only give you an account of him and his Blasphemies,
his Examinations, Sentence, and (deserved) sufferings, both at London and
Bristol: but of some of my own thoughts, in my Journey to London, Westminster,
(where I witnest against him) which thoughts, though they somewhat sadden'd my
Journey, yet much sweetened my Soul, and caused it to rejoice; That which much
sadded me (and oh! that my heart could be more serious in bewailing it) was,
that all which you will read of, spoke or done (by this Blasphemer and his
Disciples,) was against the Lord Jesus Christ: That which sweetened, and much
comforted my Soul was, Ephesians. 3.8.
That (though unworthy, and the least of all Saints,) I can in some measure
say, John 20.28.
It was against him, who is my Lord Jesus, my Lord and my God, all against him
that is mine, that has dearly bought me to be his. 1 Cor. 6.20.


THE EPISTLE.
Friends,
WHen I had composed the ensuing Narrative, and had fairly transcribed it for
the use of my self and Relations (as some very well know.) Some Christian
Friends, who perused it, know, that I never intended the publishing of it, and
indeed, being conscious to my own weakness and disability for such a work, I
need not be ambitious to be seen in the Press, It being also contrary to my
judgment, that men (under the notion of gifted Brethren) having not a call to,
nor indeed ability for it, should so often be seen in Press and Pulpit:
considering what the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things? But the practice of this present age
says, (such is the high conceit that impudence and ignorance has of it
self.) Who is not sufficient for these things? And truly Brethren, That which I
shall speak to, in reference to the occasion of this Narrative, will not be by
way of teaching, (for I dare not) but only helping my self and others, to
lament the sad effects of Toleration (falsely called liberty of Conscience)
which indeed long since, was moved for by many (and of late years too much
yielded unto,) and in a Book called, The Compassionate Samaritan, it was
desired, That the Parliament would provide, pa. 75, 76.
that private Congregations might have protection as well as public, And that
all Statutes against Separatists, might be repealed, and that the Press might
be free for any that writes, so he writes nothing scandalous or dangerous to
the State: you have in it never a [So] if they write any thing dangerous. to
Religion, and scandalous to the Gospel. Ah Brethren! This liberty has not been
(I suppose) and he that speaks by supposition, may sometimes speak truth, Luke
7.43.) the least cause of all our divisions, nay of all our blasphemies, errors
and heresies; nay, of all our loose principles and practices suitable thereunto
at present amongst us: all which is sadly to be bewailed and lamented by all
that fear the Lord. For although a rebaptized man is pleased (in print) to say,
R. P. pa. 66.
They do but dream, that say these are sad times: So he speaking to the
Presbyterian Ministers; yet truly, (by his good leave) there cannot be a Soul,
to whom Christ has said in the voice of the Gospel, Awake thou that sleep,
but, he being thus awakned, Ephesians. 5.14.
must say, That since England was delivered from Paganism and Popery, there
were never sadder times: If Judgments (and that spiritual) upon a Nation, may
be a cause of sadness. God now dealing with us, as with Pharaoh, who being not
humbled, but hardened under those plagues that were upon him and his people, God
threatens to send them all (the worst and saddest plague of all) upon his
heart. Exodus 9.14. In his Epistle to the Separatists and Anabaptists, prefixed
to his Quakers Catechism.
For I will at this time (says the Lord) send all my plagues upon thine heart.
And as that godly and discerning Divine, Mr. Baxter, certainly (says he) such
spiritual plagues, as our eyes now behold, are as evident notes of Gods heavy
displeasure, as men can expect to see on earth. Brethren, is not this sad? And
is it not sad, that men should be so Jesuited, as to take up such principles,
that (unless God do mercifully step in and prevent) will undermine and
overthrow the Gospel, Religion, Reformation, and all that is, or should be
dearer to us then our lives? Are not these sad times? and does it not call for
mourning, and that (if it were possible) with tears of blood? And is it not
sad, when some that were, and would now be looked upon as high Professors above
their Brethren, and yet now receive that for a glorious light, and true
Doctrine, which before they would have abhorred as heathenish: (as indeed it
is) insomuch, that if a Christian should have said some years ago, that they
would embrace such Doctrine, they would have answered (as Hazael did in another
case. 2 Ming. 8.13.
) What think thou, thy servant a Dog? And is it not sad then, to consider,
how many packs there are in the Nation of these Creatures? Yea, see one thing
more, my Brethren, which to me is very sad, That many of those who enjoy
ordinances in a reformation way, walk no more holy and humble under them, and
thankfully for them then they do. Truly, all these are sad things. But has it
not been our gifted Brethren, (whose pride (to say no more) has led them to
that boldness in Press and Pulpit) who have occasioned most of all this? And
good Friends, Do not all that fear the Lord think, (and that truly) that
England will have cause to bewail the Toleration given, and the liberty taken
in this kind? Alas Brethren! Is it enough, to make a man a Minister, that he
can two or three hours in a week As every sound is not music, so every Sermon
is not preaching.
discourse well (if it be well) and speak Scripture Language? in which time,
many times many speak nonsense fluently (and blasphemy without Book.) Why
Brethren, considering the helps we have by English Authors, its an easy
matter so to do, and its no hard matter to prove it the practice of gifted
Brethren (as they are called) even amongst us: Sometimes to bring some godly
men's Sermons (as Doctor Sibs, etc.) in a Pulpit, and with a bold face so
deliver it, that the hearers sometimes admire (as well they may) such matter
from such men. Well Brethren, did our hopeful Plants, fitted in Universities,
receive so much encouragement as they ought: Sure the Church of God would not
be at such a loss for Ministers, as to be beholden to such men: and if
Learning had that due encouragement it ought to have, through the blessing of
God; from thence might come abroad those that may pluck up those tares, which
this generation has sowed, and sow such Seed, that may feed the Church of God
with good bread, and not with chafe. Oh should I speak what I could of some of
these intruders, (for I know more then a good many) upon that honorable
Calling of the Ministry, Heb. 5.4.
(which (if we would keep to rule) none should take upon him, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron:) truly friends, I could tell you of such gross
ignorance, and that in fundamental catechistical points, of such profaneness
in conversation, of such spotted dealing in (and with) the world, that a man
(as a man, much more a Christian man) would cry shame on; But Brethren, I
forbear, and shall only give you instance of two Pulpit-brethren, (whom many of
you know) in reference to the first, (to wit) ignorance: the one supposed God
to be a man, (though more glorious than we) because the parts of a man, are
attributed to him in Scripture: Another reverend (Doct.) Brother speaking of
Circumcision, said, That being it was the cutting off of the foreskin it is
(said he) the cutting off of the foreskin of the forehead. Friends, I do not
shoot at rovers, but am able to black the white in my margin in this, as well
as in other things; 1 Timothy 3.1.
but I forbear, and do wish, that if men find their Spirits drawn out to
desire so great a work, and are godly and sound in the truth; they would submit
to a trial, by those that are able to judge of their gifts, and so to be
separate to the work, and sent forth according to rule, and then the Lord be
with the good. Obj.
But it may be objected, seeing I speak so much against others, why I practice
(and that without a call) printing my Self and this (all things considered) a
greater work then preaching or public speaking?

Answ.
I answer, 1. I had a call by the Magistrates of the City, to make good against
Nailer and his Disciples, what blasphemies they and my self heard delivered in
their Examinations, which accordingly I did before the Committee at Westminster.

2. Noting his Examinations in short hand there, (as before I did at Bristol) I
was able to give some account to the business, and the mannagement thereof in
Parliament. Mr. R. F. his Satan inthroned.


3. Could I have prevailed with that godly Minister, that set forth his
Examination here, to have forborne till the business had been ended, I should
gladly (again) have lent my assistance unto him, from my notes there, and then
you would have had it in better terms (he being far better able) then now you
have; but he then being willing to hasten what he had done to the Press, it
came forth without it.

4. I was moved by the earnest request of some godly friends, who had perused
it (when in a Manuscript) that I would let the world see the height of this
impostor's blasphemy, and his punishment.

5. I waited above a whole year, hoping some better Pen would have done it, but
that not appearing, this desires acceptance. And thus you have seen the Reasons
of my taking this boldness in printing, if they be not of weight, to give
satisfaction to all godly ordained Ministers, especially those to whom I am
known, and from whose Ministry, by the blessing of God I have received grace,
(if any) of these I beg pardon, it being (in this kind) my first fault, and to
them I promise shall be my last, etc. Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me,
it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me, it shall be, etc. As for all
others who are godly, (though we may differ in judgment) and yet may dislike
it, unto them I say (as Pilate of the true Jesus (now again truly crucified) so
may I of this false Jesus, justly punished.) What I have written, I have
written; and if they shall demand the cause of me, for thus writing, I trust I
shall be ready (for their godliness sake) to give them a reason, 1 Pet. 3.15.
and that with meekness and fear. But then for all others, whose ranting
principles lead them to damnable practices, who happily may see some weakness in
it, both for style and method, and so may scorn and reproach both it and me,
unto all such my answer is, whatever they speak of it, its under foot, and all
the shame that such black mouths can foam out, I have learnt from my dear Jesus
(whom they daily crucify) to despise, Heb. 12.2.
and shall say as David, Psalm. 119.42. So shall I have wherewith to answer him
that reproacheth me, for I trust in thy Word. And thus now being persuaded by
some godly Christians, that God would have glory by it, I have put it to the
adventure, and shall leave it to him, who can bring glory to himself, by what
means he pleases: and if by this discovery of blasphemy and filthiness, (and
that by professors) Jesus Christ, or any of his Ordinances, may be but one foot
exalted, I shall take it as an honor to be trod upon.

My Fellow Citizens, If you consider but that one piece of Blasphemy which was
in one of the papers found about Nailer, (to wit) That Christ that died at
Jerusalem, was but a figure of that Christ in them; and from this it is said,
Nailer is Christ: So you will see in Doroth. Erbury, her Answer to the
Magistrates, and upon this follows, he must be honored and owned as Christ:
whereupon this wretch Nailor, takes and accepts of this honor from his
Disciples, contrary to that we find in Scripture, Matthew. 21.15. For the
Argument was right by the Pharisees, That none ought to have Hosanna cried to
him, but the true Christ, either by old or young only, His Examination before
the Magistrates of Bristol.
the application they made is denied; he being the true Messiah 'twas due to
him. But what shall we say? with what words or tears shall we bewail it? that
a wicked, vicious, and blaspheming wretch, (a Jam. Nailor) should give an
Answer thus; If it come of God, I cannot refuse it.

But Brethren, you shall see the contrary practiced by John the Baptist, when
he was sent unto, and had a fair opportunity to be cried up for a Jesus; when
they put it unto him, Joh. 1.19, 20, 21.
and asked him, Who art thou? He confessed and denied not, but confessed I am
not the Christ. And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he says, I
am not. Art thou that Prophet? And he answered, No. (Also you may consider that
of Peter his practice, Acts 10.25, 16. But my work will not be Confutation, but
desire lamentation.) Now John answering No, though I would not be critical upon
words, yet considering this Blasphemer and his Disciples are so singular, and
do so tie themselves to Yea and Nay; as if Yes and No were not sometimes
translated in Scripture as well as the other; For as John answers No, so Peter
answers Yes, Matthew. 17.24, 25. And the Apostle Paul, Romans 10.18, etc. I would
not quarrel with words, but leave it as one evil mark of Seducers, 1 Timothy 6.4.
(strifes of words.) But because they make so much of it, and place much of
their Religion in it, I offer to consideration, that in 1 Kings, 3d Chapter,
from the 16th verse, to the end, where we have a Relation of two Women, that
came to Solomon about a Child, and both lay claim to it; (but to the thing in
hand) in ver. 22. you have both words Nay and No, and it is observable, its the
false Mother has her [Nay.] Now you know that Scripture-Proverb. As is the
Mother, so is her Daughter, and this you shall see made good by an instance in
the New Testament, like Mother like Daughter; Ezekiel. 16.44.
Saphira, who was privy to that hypocrisy of her Husband, in keeping back part
of the price they sold their possession for; when the Apostle asked her, Tell
me (says he) whether ye sold the Land for so much? And she said [Yea] for so
much. So then here you have a fit pair of hypocrites, to make Quakers; and
seeing the Scripture does thus match them, let them go together. Well, here you
see something about words, but in my Narrative, you will see something bad
enough in practice: Therefore Friends, keep to hearing as before was advised,
And beloved, seeing you know these things before, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own steadfastness, but grow in grace, Acts 20.32.
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And so I commend you to God,
and to the Word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
Inheritance among all them which are sanctified, and the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly, 1 These. 5.23.
and I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul and Body be preserved blameless,
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen, and Amen.

The Quaker's JESUS.
The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executes: the wicked is snared in
the work of his own hands.

Psalm. 9.16. A whip for the Horse, a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the
fools back.

Prove. 26.3.

BEfore I come to the Narrative it self, I think it good to put down some
opinions and positions this Blasphemer held, which I have gleaned out of that
honest and sober confutation of them in a Book entitled, The Perfect Pharisee,
and out of a Book of his own, lent me by A Quaker.
Dennis Hollister, he telling me that Nailer had answered that pack of lies,
(meaning The perfect Pharisee.) When I had read his Book, I returned it to him,
being in his Shop, walking with A Quaker.
Thomas Gouldney, says he, Now you have read some truths after your lies, set
forth by the Priests, I answered, That was truth before, but now I had read a
pack of lies. He told me, that some would believe nothing but lies, I answered,
Isa. 28.15.
that there was a generation of men, that made lies their refuge, and they were
Quakers, and so left them.

I heartily wish, (for old acquaintance sake) that this man D. H. may have
repentance given him, and turn again to his old puritanical principles, from
whence he is deeply fallen, that he may not go on to this Blasphemer's height,
lest he deservedly meet with this blasphemers doom from men, or from God, with
worse.

Some few of Nailer's erroneous opinions and Doctrines follow.
Quest. Whether any could be as holy, just, and good, Perfect Pharisee. p. 1.
as God himself?

Page 4.
Answ. That he did witness himself, that he himself was as holy, just, and good
as God.

Nailer being in conference with a godly Minister, said, that he wondered God
should reveal any thing to him, and he not know it.

Page 7.
Nailer did affirm, that Christ is in every man, and in the Reprobate, he is
held under corruption, and so extended the indwellings of Christ to Indians
that never heard the Gospel.

Page 8.
In a letter wrote by Nailer, were these two horrid blaphemies, 1. That Christ
in the flesh, with all he did and suffered therein, was but a figure, and
nothing but an example. 2. That he that expects to be saved by him that died
at Jerusalem, should be deceived.

T. P.
As to this last, it was spoken by another of them, to a solid godly Christian
of this City: and also delivered here, by another, L. Raymond.
at their public meeting place, where was near two hundred people, this was
sworn before the Magistrates, by a man of Mr. Walter Stephen's.

Pa. 22.
Quest. Whether the Scriptures be the Word of God?

Ans. That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but a declaration of the
conditions of them that speak them forth.

His own Book pa. 2.
Nailer bids all people turn from their outside lights, and turn to the light
of God within you; for every man in the world, had a light within him,
sufficient to guide him to salvation.

pa. 25, 26.
Nailer says, That men are justified by an inherent holiness, and that we are
not reconciled to God, till we be perfectly holy, and able to stand so in our
own power: and that no man that commits sin, or that is not perfectly holy, can
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, pa. 22.
unless there be a Purgatory, and that there is no real Saint, but he that is
perfectly holy in this life, and does not sin.

Thus we have seen some of his erroneous and damnable opinions. He is also
reported to be one vicious in his life, it being offered to be proved, that he
has been seen often (lasciviously) to kiss and dance upon his knee, one Mrs.
Roper, and that he had a child by her.

But to leave this, and set forth his higher impudence then all before (which
was enough, and too much,) viz. his personating of the Lord Jesus Christ, when
upon the 24. day of October. 1656. he came into Bristol.

The manner of the riding of James Nailor into Bristol, 24. October. 1656.
He rode on Horseback in at Redcliff-gate, with one bare before him, (namely,
Timothy Wedlock, of the County of Devon) and two Women leading his Horse, with
the Reyns in their hands, one on each side: Sister to (that seller of
irreligious Books) Giles Galvert.
Martha Symonds, the wife of Thomas Symonds of London, and Hannah Stanger, the
wife of John Stanger of London: these came before him singing, Holy, holy, holy
Lord God of Israel.

Thus he rode to the high Cross of the City, and to the White heart in
Broadstreet, being the house of Dennis Hollister, and Hen, Row, both eminent
Quakers.

The Magistrates being informed hereof, sent for Ja. Nailor, (the Quakers
Jesus) and his Disciples, Tim: Wedlock Sam: Carter, John Stanger, Rob: Crab,
Marth. Symonds Han: Stanger, Doroth: Erbury Among many papers and letters (to
the number of 21.) which were found about Nailer, and these his Disciples, at
their first examination, I have inserted only one, which you shall find at the
latter end of my Book. Isa. 28.15. Hos. 7.12.
(seven in number) before them, but such was their singing Hosanna, and holy,
holy, etc. and the great concourse of people, that their examination that night
was not much, so they were committed to Newgate, (as well worthy) till the next
day.

Saturday the 25 of October. being the next day, Nailer was sent for, and, before
the Magistrates being examined, was very ready in his answers to circumstances,
but wherein he thought the Question put to him, might discover him, either
would be silent, or else answer with subtilty, (like his older Brethren the
Jesuits,) and also denying some things that were put to him, out of his own
Book; but its no wonder, for this generation so to do, who make lies their
refuge, and use it, as if lying were a virtue.

Now (for the lenity shown unto them) God is punishing, as our Congregations
have heard, and if they were let alone to spread this error, of making the
light within them the only rule (as they do) it would make them cast off
Scripture, Ordinances, Ministry, and look upon themselves godified, and to say
what this Blasphemer says, I am Christ.

Mat. 23:15.
For although their work by their proselytes (whom they make twofold more the
Children of the Devil then themselves) be, to oppose the faithful Ministers of
Jesus Christ, with such impudence, when about their Masters work, to the
disturbing of the people of God, in their solemn public worship of God; yet
this will be an everlasting truth, (and we see it made good in this Impostor)
which the Prophet speaks with an asseveration. Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his Servants the Prophets. Amos 3.7.
And such is the good wisdom of our God, that when Satan thinks to appear most
like an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. Judge. 14, 18.
then shall these Philistims (without ploughing with another Heifer) unriddle
themselves, that thereby Sathan's cloven foot, may be the more visibly
discerned, 2 Timothy, 3.9.

The Examination of James Nailer of Wakefield, in the County of York, taken
before the Magistrates, the 25. of October. 1656.
I shall here bring in those Questions and Answers that were of most
concernment.

Quest. What his name was?

Ans. That the name given him by the world, was James Nailer.

Quest. How he lived, and was maintained?

Ans. He lived without care, as the Lillies, and was maintained by his Father.

Quest. Who is your Father?

Ans. Him whom you call your God.

Quest. What was your business to Bristol?

Ans. I came, as I was guided by my Father, in my way to London.

Being asked as to the substance of some letters found about him, attributing
several Titles unto him, which belong to Jesus Christ, calling him a Prophet,
and being questioned whether he were a Prophet?

Ans. That he is the Prophet of the most high God.

Quest. Why that Title is given him to be a judge to try the cause of Israel?

Ans. Nothing to this, nor to many other Questions.

Quest. Whether he knew Hannah Stanger (and how long) which wrote to him?

Ans. He had known her some months, and that he received the letters from her
in Exeter Goal.

Quest. Are you the only begotten Son of God?

Ans. I am the Son of God, and the Son of God is but one.

Quest. Whether his name was Jesus, (as in the Postscript written by Hannah
Stranger's Husband) and how long he had been called so, and whether there were
any other Jesus? To these things would not answer.

Quest. Whether he be the everlasting Son of righteousness.

Ans. That he is the Son of God, and the everlasting righteousness is wrought
in him, and said, if we had known the Father, we would have known him also.

Quest. Whether any of the expressions in the said letter, were blasphemy or no?

Ans. That which is received of the Lord is truth.

Quest. Whose letter was that marked T. S?

Ans. Thomas Symonds sent it to him, to Exeter Goal.

Quest. Whether he were the King of Israel?

Ans. Thou have said it, and he has no Kingdom in the world, but reigns in
the Father.

Quest. Are you the Lamb of God (as styled in the letter) in whom the hopes of
Israel stands?

Ans. That if he were not his Lamb, he should not be thus sought for to be
devoured, and that the hope of Israel stands in the righteousness of the
Father, in whomsoever it is.

Quest. Whether Isreal's hopes be in any measure in him?

Ans. Yea.

Quest. Whether any of the expressions in the letter, were blasphemy?

Ans. Who made thee a Judge over them?

Quest. Why came you into the City, in such an universal manner, two Women
leading your Horse, and singing Holy, holy, etc. with one bare before you?

Ans. It was for the praises of his Father, and said, he may not refuse any
thing that is moved of the Lord, and that their Father commanded them to do it.

Quest. Do thou think the Father commanded them?

Ans. Yea.

Quest. Whom did they mean, by Holy, holy, etc?

Ans. They are of age to answer for themselves.

Quest. Whether as he rode through Glasenbury and Wells, some did not spread
their clothes on the ground before him, and sing Holy, holy, etc?

Ans. He believed they did.

Quest. Have you called Martha Symond's Mother, as in G. Fox's letter (wrote by
G. Bishop?)

Ans. G. Fox did he, she was neither called Mother by him, nor any with him.

Quest. Whether he had a Wife?

Ans. That there is a Woman, whom the world calls his Wife.

I shall now give some account of his Examination in the Painted Chamber at
Westminster, before the Committee of Parliament, the 15th of November. 1656.
For though he denied part of what he confessed here, Bristol.
and juggled in much, yet he owned blasphemy in the height there, as well as
here.

Quest. Did any sing before you, when you rode into Bristol?

Answ. They sang a Psalm. Quest. What Psalm? Ans. Such as the words was. Quest.
Was not the words Holy, holy, etc. Ans. It may be it was. Quest. Did any Women
lead your Horse? Answ. There was some did hold the Bridle. Quest. Did you
reprove them for so doing? Answ. Nay, but I spoke to them about it; and they
said, they were moved of the Lord to it. Quest. Its laid to your charge, that
you did assume to your self, the fairest of ten thousands, did any give you
that Attribute? Answ. In words they did not. Quest. Did they any other way by
letter, or so? Answ. You have the letter. Quest. But I do ask you? Ans. If they
spoke it to that of the Father in me, I dare not deny it, for its beautiful, in
whomsoever its begotten. Quest. Do you own that attribute of being the only
begotten Son of God? Answ. I do not deny but I am the Son of God, and have many
Brethren. Quest. Are you the only begotten Son of God? Ans. I have answered.
Quest. Have any given you the title of being the King of Israel? Answ. I think
its in the letter. Quest. Do you own it? Answ. I have no Kingdom in this world,
but a Kingdom I have. Quest. Do you own the title of the King of Israel, and
Prince of peace? Answ. It is but one, and that of God born in me, is the King
of Israel, Jesus Christ, who is the King of Israel, is manifested in me, and
that I own. Qu. Have any called you the Prophet of the most high God? Answ.
Yea, I am a Prophet of the most high God. Quest. Are you the Prophet? Answ. I
have said. Quest. Are you a judge sent to try the cause of Israel? Ans. The
Judge of Israel is but one. Quest. Do you in any respect judge the cause of
Israel? Answ. No other way then as God is manifested in the flesh. Quest. Then
that way you are that Judge? Ans. I own it. Quest. How do you execute the
office of a Judge? Answ. No other way then as the Father in me. Quest. By whom
are you sent to do it? Ans. By him that has made all creatures, he has sent
his Son into me, to try the cause of Israel. Quest. In what manner do you judge
the cause of Israel? Ans. If they be brought before me in the counsel of my
Father, I do judge it, but not in carnal things. Quest. In what matters are you
made a judge, if not in carnal things? Ans. In matters belonging to the Kingdom
of God. Quest. By what spirit do you judge? Ans. By the indwellings of the
Father, and the Son. Quest. By what spirit are you guided to be Judge? Ans. Its
the Judge of all Spirits, and not to be guided by any but himself. Quest. Is
not the word of God the rule of the Spirit? Ans. The word of God and the Spirit
is one. Quest. Is not the written word of God that Rule? Answ. Its that which
does declare of that Spirit. Quest. Are you more sent then another man to do
this? Answ. No otherwise, but as the Father and the Lord is manifested in me,
and to no other but him that knows the indwellings of God. Quest. Have any
persons said or written, that your Mother is a Virgin, and your birth immortal?
Ans. I remember such expressions. Quest. Do you own this? Ans. Not according to
the natural birth. Quest Do you own it according to the spiritual? An. I am
born of the immortal seed. Quest. Who was your Mother according to your
spiritual birth? An. No man knows, but he that has it. Quest. You can tell
who was your Mother? To this no answer. Quest. Do you own your birth immortal?
An. Yea, according to the spirit. Q Had your birth any beginning? you say it is
immortal. An. If thou speak to the visible I had, but not otherwise. Q. Who
is the Father of your spiritual birth? An. I have told you. Quest. Who is your
Mother, the Virgin Mary? An. I have not said I was born of the Virgin Mary, but
there is a womb that you know not of. Quest. Do you own the title to be him in
whom the hope of Israel stands? An. As Christ is in me. Qun. As Christ is in
you, are you he in whom the hope of Israel stands? An. Yea. Qu. What are those
hopes that Israel have in you, more then another? An. None but those that have
it, can give account of it. Qu. What hope is it that they can give account of?
Answered not. Qu. Have any called you the everlasting Son of righteousness, is
he manifested in thy flesh? An. He is manifested in the flesh, I do not deny.
Qu. Are you the Prince of peace? An. I own him the everlasting Prince of peace,
begotten in me. Qu. When those titles were given to you, did you reprove them?
An. I spoke not to those that did it, but to the Letter, I know it would not
bear with some. Qu. Have any called you by the name of Jesus? An. Not as unto
the visible, but as to Jesus the Christ that is in me. Qu. Do thou own that
name King of Israel? An. Not as a creature, but if they give it Christ within
me, he has a Kingdom, of which thou wottest not. Q. Did any worship you, and
kiss your feet in the prison? An I do not mind it. Qu. Do you remember it? An.
I may be they might. Qu. Is there that worship due to you, which was to Christ?
An. If they did it to the visible, they were too blame, but if to the
invisible, that worship is due to me, according to my measure, as was due Oh
the height of horrid blasphemy!
to Christ.

Quest. Then you say, that worship was due (to that which you call the
invisible in you) to you as was given to Christ at Jerusalem? Ans. Yea.

Qu. When you were asked at Bristol, are you the King of Israel, did you say
thou have said it?

An. I cannot tell whether I said it there, but I do say it here, if they had
known the Father, they had known me also.

Qu. What estate have you, how are you maintained in your Travels?

An. I take little care for that.

Qu. Who provides for you?

An. Him that clothes the Lillies.

Qu. How do thou live? by bread?

An. I live by the word of the Lord. Qu. Do you live by that only? An. So long
as it pleases the Father, I do.

Qu. How long have you fasted without bread?

An. Some weeks.

Qu. How many weeks?

An. Two or three.

Qu. Did you live without any food all that time?

An. Yea.

Qu. Did any offer you any food in that time?

An. Yea, many did, but I refused and lived by the word of the Lord.

Here I have only given account briefly of his Examinations at London, which I
hoped would at large have come forth by some faithful hand, it being presented
to the House, by the Committee in fifteen sheets of paper, as then taken from
his own mouth, but waiting a full year, and no such thing appearing, I have the
easier been persuaded to publish it.

I shall here insert the Examination (only) of Dorcas Erbury, (one of his
Disciples) who indeed spoke without juggling downright the sense of them all.

The Examination of Dorcas Erbury, before the Magistrates of Bristol, October.
27. 1656.
Quest. Where do you live? Ans. With Margaret Thomas of Bristol.

Quest. Why did you sing Holy, holy, etc. before James Nailer when he rode in?

Ans. I did not sing then, but they that did were called to it by the Lord.

Quest. They called him that rode on the Horse, the holy one of Israel. Is he
so?

Ans. Yea, he is so, and I will seal it with my blood.

Quest. And is he the only begotten Son of God?

Answ. He is the only begotten Son of God.

Quest. Why did you so honor him, as to pull off his stockins, and put your
Clothes under his feet?

Ans. Because he is the Lord of Israel, and is worthy of it.

Quest. Do you know no other Jesus the only begotten Son of God but him?

Ans. He has declared him to be the Son, and I know (no other Savior) but him.

Quest. Jesus Christ was crucified upon the Cross, and how is this he?

Ans. He is manifested in him.

Quest. Do you believe in James Nailor?

Ans. Yea, I do believe in him, whom thou call so.

Quest. What name do you give him?

Ans. The Son of God.

Quest. What do you call him usually?

Ans. I am commanded to call him Lord and Master, and I am to serve him.

Quest. Who commands you to call him so?

Ans. The Spirit of the Lord which is within me does command me.

Quest. Jesus Christ is dead, Nailor is alive.

Ans. He has laid down his natural body.

Quest. What body is that he has?

An. That body which he has is by the power of the Lord. Does not the
Scripture say, I will change thy natural body, and it shall be a spiritual body.

Quest. He has flesh and bones, which a Spirit has not.

An. He has new flesh and new bones.

Qu. Jesus Christ has raised from the dead, has Nailor done so?

An. Yea, he raised me from the dead.

Qu. How so?

An. I was dead two days, and he laid his hands upon my head, and said, Dorcas
arise, and from that day to this, I am alive.

Qu. Where was this done?

An. In Exeter Goal.

Qu. Who was witness to this?

An. My Mother did bear witness to it; (she standing by.)

Qu. If he has such power, why does he not open the Prison-doors, and come
forth?

An. When the work of the Lord is done in the Prison, the doors shall open
before him.

Qu. Jesus Christ had Apostles and Disciples, has he any?

An. Yea.

Qu. Where are they?

An. Some are with him, and some abroad.

Qu. Jesus Christ does sit at the right hand of God, and shall judge the world,
does Nailer thus?

An. Nailer shall sit at the right hand of the Father, and shall judge the
world.

Here we see Blasphemy in the highest: and now the Magistrates sending a Letter
to Mr. R. A. (their godly Town-Clark, and honorable Burgess of Parliament) of
these wretches Examinations: upon his report to the House, the Parliament chose
a Committee from amongst themselves to take notice of it, and sent a Messenger
for Nailor: two of his Company, viz. Sam. Cater, and Rob. Crab, the last of
October, were discharged (their examinations amounting not to much,) and were
seen that day to come to the In Broadmeddow at Bristol.
Synagogue of Satan, where the Quakers meet.

The Magistrates sent Nailor for London, the 10th of November, with 4 of his
Disciples, viz. Stanger and his Wife, Martha Symonds, and Dorcas Erbury.

Now lest they should deny (as much they did) what they confessed here, Mr. Phil.
Dorney their Clark, and (upon the request of the Magistrates) another with him,
to evidence what here they said, went for London, and upon the 15th of November
(being the first day of their hearing before the Committee in the Painted
Chamber) made good against them what they here owned.

Upon Wednesday following, the Committee met again, and then agreed upon some
Reports to be made to the House, but being not fully satisfied, upon Saturday
following, sent for Nailor again, and examined him fuller, showing much
patience in hearing his long-winded answers, which were framed with much craft
and subtilty, and though he denied much of what he said at Bristol, yet owned
there greater Blasphemy than before.

At that time was one of the Witnesses called again, to manifest the manner of
his coming into Bristol, and what he there confessed before the Magistrates;
upon this, when he that was called began to speak, a Member of the Committee
spoke something in Nailors behalf, but being satisfied by the rest, the party
called upon then to speak, being desired to speak on, he directing his speech
to the Chairman, spoke as follows.

Sir, If any Gentleman here present be not satisfied to what I shall speak,
because I am not upon my Oath, I do here tender my self to be sworn, that what
I shall speak, shall be nothing but the truth: they answered, they should
believe him without an Oath: he then said,

Gentlemen, Upon the request of the Magistrates of Bristoll, I do here appear,
and the business I am now upon, is the Cause of God, yet I shall speak to you
in Scripture Language, Job 13.7.8.
If I tell you I dare not lie for God (being bid to speak on, did) Sir, As to
this wretche's coming in, I was not an eyewitness. But that Testimony which
the Magistrates have sent up to your Honors, was affirmed by two Gentlemen,
that were members of the Common Counsel of Bristol, who were eyewitnesses
thereof.

The Chairman (who was godly Mr. Bamfield, Recorder of Exeter) desiring him to
speak on, he told them, he was present at the examination of this Blasphemer,
before the Mayor of Bristol, and noted his answers to what was there put to him
in short hand, and after transcribed them, and compared them with those sent up
to your Honors (which the Mayor has firmed) and found them to agree.

Sir, The coming of this Blasphemer into Bristol, in such a manner,
personating the Lord Jesus Christ, did so take with those that fear the Lord
(however others may deem it) that (to my knowledge) it did cost many tears:
and I do not know (in these dividing times) what did better take amongst us
then this, when we heard, that upon our Burgesses Report of it to the House,
the Parliament so resented it, as to choose out from amongst themselves, your
Honors to take notice of it. And truly Sir, though it be very sad to us, that
we are the Head Quarters of this generation of Quakers, that has brought forth
such an Impostor, yet we look upon it as a providence, that it is in time of
Parliament. And we have thus far witnest against it, and shall leave it to your
Honors wisdom, to do as God shall direct you.

Upon Wednesday the 25. of November. the Committee met again, and then agreed to
deliver their Report to the House, which they did upon the 4th of December. in 15
sheets of paper. It being read in the House, not one Member excepted against
any thing in it; but upon debate, not knowing but it might concern his life,
they generally agreed to hear him themselves first.

The sixth of December. Nailer was sent for, and called to the Bar, the Report
of the Committee was particularly read in parts, and his answer required to
each Head.

Quest. Whether his answer before the Committee to these things, were thus? He
answered to every head yea, and denied not any part thereof.

Whereupon the House agreed upon all the matter of fact reported by the
Committee, and adjudged it horrid Blasphemy, and he a Grand Impostor and
deceiver of the people, and ordered him close prisoner.

After 8. or 9. days debate, upon the 16th of December, the House came to a
Resolution in Nailers business, and upon a division of the House, it being
carried in the Negative, that the question for death should not be put; The
House then considered what the punishment should be, if not death: So they
voted his punishment to be as follows.

Nailor's Sentence.
That upon Thursday next, the 18th of December. he stand in the Pillory two
hours, in the new Palace yard, with a paper of his offense and crime in his
breast. And then presently to be whipped by the Hangman, to the old Exchange:
upon Saturday following, to be put in the Pillory for two hours, before the
Exchange; and then bored through the tongue with a hot Iron, and stigmatized
with the letter B. in his forehead: And afterward, be by the Sheriffs of
London, conveyed to Bristol, and there ride through the City upon a Horse, with
his face to the Horse tail, and then publicly whipped through the Town: And then
by the Sheriffs of Bristol, to be conveyed to Bridewel in London, there to be
kept close Prisoner, from all society of people, from pen, ink and paper, kept
to hard labor, and to eat no more than he yearns by his labor, and not to be
released till further order from the Parliament.

The next day being the 17th of December, Nailor was brought to the Bar, to
receive his sentence agreed upon.

The next day, Thursday the 18th of December. Nailor according to his sentence,
stood in the Pillory in the new Palace yard two hours, and immediately after,
was from thence whipped by the Hangman to the old Exchange.

Upon Saturday following, being to receive the remainder of his punishment
there ( London) in the morning was a Petition sent in to the Parliament, to
desire the respiting of his punishment for a few days (he being not well)
least it should endanger his life.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
The humble Petition of the persons, whose names are underwritten.
Humbly Shows,
THat we are credibly informed, (by those eyes that have seen it) that James
Nailor is in a very ill and dangerous condition of body, not fit to undergo
that part of your sentence he is adjudged unto this day, and were desired to
acquaint this Honorable House so much, And to beg the respite of a week, or
some small time, as to your wisdom and goodness shall seem meet, that he may
recover a little strength, before he be called forth again: Which office of
charity we could not refuse, though we are not partakers with him, nor abettors
of him, in any things that have occasioned this sentence.

Therefore since we believe, it is not your intent to destroy that life which
you spared in your sentence. We humbly pray, an Order of Reprieve may be
granted for a few days, and it will be accepted as an Act of your Christian
moderation and clemency.

And we shall pray, etc. T.Z. J. S. J. W. C. H.


This Petition occasioned this Order following.

Ordered,
That the further punishment of James Nailor, which should have been on this
day, shall be suspended till this day sevenight, and be executed on him then,
and that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, do observe the Order accordingly.

Tuesday
Tuesday after being the 23. of December. there came near about an hundred men,
with a Petition to the Parliament door, for the remitting the rest of Nailors
punishment, The House understanding of it, many worthy Members would have had
it rejected, but the House was divided, and at last, put to the Vote, whether
to be admitted or no, which was carried in the Affirmative; whereupon, the
Petition was called in, and one Mr. Joshua Sprigg, (formerly an Independent
Minister) presented it at the Bar before the House, and made a short Speech
before the delivery of it, the Speech I could not get, but the Petition was as
follows.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
The humble Petition of diverse peaceable and well affected persons, in the
Cities of London and Westminster, in behalf of themselves and many others.
SHOWS,
THat your moderation and clemency, in respiting the punishment of James
Nailor, in consideration of his illness of body, has refreshed the hearts of
many thousands in these Cities, altogether unconcerned in his practice, And
has opened their eyes to see something more than the terrors of Mount Sinai,
to dwell upon your Honorable House, and has likewise given them some hopes,
to see you come forth in the Spirit of our Lord Jesus, yet more and more, to
the convincement of those that err, and are out of the way.

Wherefore we most humbly beg your pardon, that are constrained to appear
before you in such a suit, (not daring to do otherwise) that you would remit
the remaining part of your sentence, against the said James Nailor, leaving him
to the Lord, and to such Gospel remedies, as he has sanctified.

And we are persuaded, you will find such a course of love and forbearance more
effectual to reclaim, and will leave a Seal of your love and tenderness upon
our Spirits.

And we shall pray, etc.
The substance of the Petition was for the remitting and pardoning of the
residue of Nailors punishment; the Parliament that day came to no result about
it, but broke up.

This Petition was in the first place subscribed by Col. Scrope, sometimes
Governor of the Castle and Fort of Bristol.

The Petition to the Parliament, being not like to take that effect they hoped,
they made their address to the Protector, as follows.

To his Highness, Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, S. and
J. and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
The humble Petition, etc.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners (having out of tenderness to the good cause of our
spiritual and civil Liberties) concerned in some late proceedings of the House
of Parliament, and to the good of these Nations, and the government thereof,
appeared in a Petition to the Parliament, (a Copy whereof, is hereunto annexed)
for the remitting the remaining punishment of James Nailor: which Petition, is
received into the House, and rests there; We humbly conceive it our duty
also, in consideration of the joint interest, which your Highness with the
Parliament has, by the Instrument of Government in the Legislative power, to
make our humble address and request to your Highness.

That you will be pleased, according to all former Declarations, and the
experience we have had, of your Highnesses care of this tender interest of
Liberty of Conscience, to weigh the consequence of these late proceedings, and,
according to the 37th Article of the Instrument aforesaid, and one of the
grounds you declare upon in the War with Spain, your Highness will stand up
for the poor people of God in this day.

Wherein your Highness will not do more right to your Petitioners, than to your
self and these Nations.

And we shall pray, etc.
Friday being the 26. of December, his Highness the Lord Protector sent a
Letter to the House, about the business of Nailer, as follows,

Oliver P.

RIght trusty, and right well beloved, We greet you well, Having taken notice
of a Judgment, lately given by your selves, against one James Nailer, Although
we detest and abhor the giving or occasioning the least countenance to
persons of such opinions or practices, who are under guilt of such crimes, as
are commonly imputed to the said person: Yet, We being interessed in the
present Government, on the behalf of the people of the e Nations, and not
knowing how far such a proceeding, wholly without us, might extend in the
consequences of it, do desire, that the House will let us know the grounds and
the Reasons, whereupon they have proceeded.

Given at White Hall the 25. of December. 1656.
To our Right trusty and well beloved, Sir Tho: Widdrington, Knight, Speaker of
the Parliament.

This Letter occasioned a great Debate in the House, to consider, what Answer
should be returned to it.

An Answer was not agreed upon, but another day appointed, viz. Tuesday
following, mean while, the Parliament (like themselves) orders Nailor to
receive the remainder of his punishment, (according to his sentence) which upon
Saturday the 27. of December, was executed upon him, standing in the Pillory
before the Exchange two hours, and after that, was bored through the tongue
with a hot Iron: And then stigmatized with the letter B. in his forehead, and
so sent again to prison.

At this time, Nailor receiving the second part of his punishment, there was
one A Quaker.
Robert Rich, a Merchant, suffered to stand on the stage with him by the
Pillory, who took a paper out of his pocket, and placed it over his head,
whereon was written, It is written, Luke 23.38. This is the King of the Jews.
Oh wretched impudency, and horrid Blasphemy! and yet this wretch never
questioned; only an Officer stepped up, and pulled it down.

The 16th of Jan. Nailor came to Lawfords gate at Bristoll, and there lay that
night, being sent by the Sheriffs of London, to the Sheriffs of Bristol, to be
delivered to them, who before had received this Order, as follows.

Whereas James Nailor is by Parliament adjudged, to be guilty of Horrid
Blasphemy, and a Grand Impostor, and a great Seducer of the people, whereupon
Judgment was given, and in that Judgment it is, amongst other things,
adjudged, that the said James Nailor be sent to the City of Bristol, and
conveyed into, and through the same City, on a Horse bare ridged, with his face
backwards, and there also publicly whipped, the next Market day after he comes
thither, And that after the execution of this punishment, he be committed to
prison in Bridewell London.

These are therefore, by virtue of an Order of Parliament, to require you, to
receive the said James Nailor, from the hands of the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, or their Deputies, and that you do execute, or cause the said
Judgment, in all and every the particulars aforesaid, to be duly executed and
performed, And that thereupon, you convey, or cause the said James Nailor to be
safely conveyed from Bristol, to the City of London, and there to be delivered
unto the Governors of Bridewell London, there to be dealt withal, according
to the said Judgment. Whereof you are not to fail. And for doing whereof, this
shall be your Warrant in that behalf.

Dated the 7th of Jan 1656. Tho: Widdrington, Speaker.

To the Sheriffs of the City of Bristol.

The 17th of Jan (according to his sentence) Nailor took Horse at Lawfordsgate,
the entrance into the City, and rode with his face to the horse tail, through
the City, without The place of his first riding in.
Redcliffe gate, and there alighted, and brought to the middle of Thomas
Street, and there stripped, and then tied to the horse, to be whipped from thence
back again to the middle of Broadstreet.

Now in this Blasphemer's punishment, that Proverb [of Kissing goes by favour]
is altered: For with the Hangman at London, and (I will not say whom) here at
Bristol, whipping goes by favor: but this Order following, was given to Mr.
Roch, the Keeper of Newgate, in reference to the favoring of him.

Mr. Roch,
CAuse James Nailor to ride in at Lawfordsgate, upon a Horse bare ridg'd, with
his face backwards, from thence along Winestreet, to the Tolsey, thence down
High street, over the Bridge, and out at Redcliffe gate, there let him alight,
and bring him into St. Thomas street, and cause him to be stripped, and made fast
to the Cart horse, and there in the Market first whipped, from thence to the
foot of the Bridge, there whipped; thence to the end of the Bridge, there whipped;
thence to the middle of Highstreet, there whipped; thence to the Tolsey, there
whipped; thence to the middle of Broadstreet, there whipped; And then turn into the
Tailors Hall, there release him from the Cart-horse, and let him put on his
Clothes, and carry him from thence to Newgate, by Tower lane, the back way.


Now whereas custommarily the Bellman goes before, and makes Proclamation of
the offense of the offender, yet this unparalleld Blasphemer (though as vicious
as erroneous) the Keeper commands the Bellman to the contrary, and suffers one
Jones a Coppersmith, and an ugly Quaker to hold back the Beadle's Arm, when
striking, and in all the way the Bell rang but six times, which, according to
custom of such correction, should have been more, for far lesser, (nay no)
fault in comparison to this; But which is worse, and more sad, there was one
Robert Rich, a monstrous wretch, having a Mairmaids head (such was the length
of his hair) that did ride bare before, singing, Holy, holy, etc. This Rich,
the 15th of December. sent in to the Speaker of the Parliament a letter, with
this impudent Challenge.

If I may have liberty of those that sit in the Parliament, I do here at their
door attend, and am ready, out of the Scriptures of truth, to show, that not
any thing James Nailor has said or done, is Blasphemy, or worthy either of
death or bonds; but to return,

Ah poor silly Bristol! How has the imprudent neglect or timorousness of some
in thee, in not crushing the shell, and the sottish seduced credulity or
indulgence of other some, in nourishing the brood of this Serpentine Generation
of Quakers, given them too much advantage, to fulfill among us, that infallible
prediction of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse
and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. For that Ezekiel. 8.23.
behind is worse yet: These wretched Quakers that would scarce seem to own
Nailor at his coming in the 24. of October. yet now many accompany him, and
when he was going to horse at the gate, though in that shameful manner (as
before) yet use these expressions which follow.

Behold the Lamb of God, says one, This is the cornerstone which the builders
refused; another: Sworn by John Jones, Ship-wright.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced (and wept) another. Let all
the Angels in Heaven worship him, a fifth, Give honor to whom honor
belongs. These wretches wept, but sure he has a hard heart, that does not
weep in earnest, to hear and see such Blasphemies against the true Jesus (as
these are) and those Titles that belong unto him, to be attributed to such a
blasphemous wretch as this is; who upon Friday night lying at the Lamb without
Lawfords gate, (being the night he came thither, Sworn by Tho. Jeffries, and
Ruth Harris.
Jan. 16.) had a woman in bed with him, (I say in bed) by this circumstance, in
the Oath taken before the Mayor. [The Maid and Tapster, saw a woman at 10. of
the Clock at night, on the farther side of the bed, and covered, lying with her
arms over the rug] and though they would not swear she was naked, and in the
bed, yet the Maid did swear, that about 5 of the Clock the next morning, this
(whorish) woman, was lying in the same place and manner. One such action you
have before in the third page, offered to be sworn but enough and too much.

After this, the Sheriffs of Bristol sent him up to the Governor of Bridewell
London, who had received this Order, as follows.

Whereas James Nailor is by Parliament, adjudged to be guilty of horrid
blasphemy, and a grand Impostor, and a great Seducer of the People, whereupon
Judgment was this day given, and in that Judgment it is (amongst other
things) adjudged, That the said James Nailor be sent from Bristol to London,
and committed to prison in Bridewel there, and restrained there from the
society of all people, and kept to hard labor, till he shall be released by
Parliament. And during that time, be debarred from the use of pen, ink and
paper, and shall have no relief but what he earnes by daily labor.

These are therefore by virtue of an Order of Parliament, to require you, or
your Deputy, to receive from the Sheriffs of Bristol, or their Deputies, the
said James Nailor, and that you do execute, or cause the said Judgment, in all
and every the particulars aforesaid, to be duly executed and performed. Whereof
you are not to fail; for doing whereof, this shall be your Warrant in that
behalf.

Dated the 16th of December. 1656. Tho. Widrington, Speaker.

To the Governor of Bridewel-London.
Now some mercy it is in these evil times (wherein every man almost does what
is right in his own eyes) that there are some Magistrates who have endeavored
(though in Parliament, and, you see elsewhere, Judge. 17.6. and 18.7.
with great opposition) to put offenders to open shame. But though Justice, and
Justices here, may be mocked, God is not, Gal. 6.7.
(and men shall one day know) will not be mocked. What answer will these
wretches make, Psalm. 4.2.
when God shall put this Quest O ye Sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory
into shame? For God himself has said, I am the Lord, that is my name, Isa.
42.8.
and my glory will I not give to another. And though wretches would take it,
yet they must stand off, they shall not have it; nay, they cannot have it. For
upon all the glory shall be a defense. If upon the Church the body, Chap. 4. v.
5.
much more on Christ the Head.

I have now done as to this Impostor, and his deluded ones: And shall say as
the Apostle did to that Sorcerer (so to him.) Thy heart is not right in the
sight of God, Acts 8.21, 22, 23.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee, for I perceive that thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. See Mat. 12.31, 32.

Here you have had a sad, but a true account of Blasphemy in the highest, and
though Nailor himself, and some of the others, did juggle in their answers, yet
Dorcas Erbury speaks the sense of them all.

Now though the times may be such as to question, whether there be any
Blasphemy or no; yet God will one day say, I know the Blasphemy of them which
say they are Jews, Rev. 2.9.
and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: Will he not much more say it of
this wretch, that says he, is Jesus, etc.

This is a Blasphemy to be bewailed, if possible, with tears of blood; Psalm.
73.9. Ephesians. 4.10.
for it reaches to the Heavens, nay, to him that is exalted above the Heavens
(I suppose in dignity.)

And that my heart may be the more affected with him, my dear Lord and Savior,
against whom all this is, I shall desire to call to mind two things.

1. His Relation to me. 2. His sufferings for me, and both upon the account of
free grace.
And oh that my heart might, not only be affected with, but my soul afflicted
for it, That all this should be said and done against him who is my head, the
Lord my Righteousness, my Advocate, my Mediator, my Savior, my Christ, my
Jesus, my continual Intercessor, my Wisdom, Sanctification, and Redemption, my
All in all.

Now considering our Relation, methinks it should soften the hardest heart, to
wear it self out with melting tears, What, is all this against my elder
Brother? yea, my Lord and my God? What, all done against my loving and lovely
Jesus?

But that it may (if possible) be more affected (as I am sure it ought to be)
let us consider, And methinks Christ is now speaking from Heaven to us, John
6.67.
in these apostatizing days, as he did to his Disciples. Will ye also go away?
And may not Christ say, as the Lord does, wherein have I wearied you? testify
against me. Mica. 6.3.


He can say to us, I have unthroned my self of my glory with my Father, and
took upon me your nature, and so came in it nearer to you then others, and will
ye go away? What you? If I had done no more, this had been enough to have kept
you to me for ever, and not look after another. I took your nature upon me, not
for any pleasure I had in it, or ease by it: but that by suffering in it, you
might be preserved.

What had I done might our dear Jesus say, who can charge me with sin? the
Devil himself cannot do it, the Prince of this world comes, and has nothing
in me. Joh. 14.30.
If all I did suffer was for you, standing in your room, so to suffer, will you
thus requite me? May not Christ say, as the Lord does by Moses? Do ye thus
requite the Lord? Oh foolish people and unwise! Is not he thy Father, Deuteronomy.
32.6.
(Savior) that has bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee?
Surely we may say as in the verse before, verse. 5.
Their spot is not the spot of his children, that thus blaspheme him, or, as it
is (more emphatical) in the Margin, That they are not his children, that is
their blot.

But now say some of these spotted and blotted ones, what is Christ? what did
this Christ at Jerusalem? We have an answer at hand, out of the word of truth
(if you had grace to believe it.)

As to what he is, I answer, He is the only begotten Son of God: and yet the
Son of man, in this one Scripture both, And the Word is made flesh, and dwelt
among us, John 1.14.
and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth.

As to what he did?

Answ. But this man, after he had offered one Sacrifice for ever, sat down at
the right hand of God. Heb. 10.12.


But believing soul (to thee I desire to speak) see and behold what he did,
when he stood in our stead, to grapple with his Fathers wrath for us, And all
we shall see it out of that Gospel already preached and received; And if an
Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1.8.
preach any other (Gospel) let him be accursed.

Consider we then his first bleeding, 1. Bleeding. Luke 2.21.
when for our sakes he submitted to (the painful Ordinance of) Circumcision, 1.
Bleeding. Luke 2.21.
whereby also we may receive much benefit, it by faith and the operation of the
holy Spirit in our hearts (being circumcised by the circumcision made without
hands:) we apply it to our selves, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ. Colos. 2.11. But I shall by and by let
you see, no less then eleven particular bleedings more, which I trust, will
help affect our hearts, and constrain us the more to love and obey him.

Luk 22.39. compared with 44. Mat. 26.39.42.44.
Let us in the next place, consider his bleeding at the Mount of Olives: And O
that we could consider (as we should) his Agony there! This, this was his soul
afflicting passion, praying, If thou be willing, let this Cup pass from me
(three times) And being in an Agony (says the Text) he prayed more earnestly,
and his sweat (Mark O soul) was as it were great drops of blood, 2. Bleeding.
falling down to the ground. This earnestness in prayer, was a wrestling to
purpose (even beyond Jacob's, Genesis 32.24.28.
though he prevailed with God.)

Consider O my soul, also the willingness of thy Savior, after this deep
Agony, and great conflict with his Father, he knowing all things that should
come upon him, goes forth, and meets the traitor and his company, and said unto
them, Whom seek ye? Joh. 18.4.


Luke 22.66.
Now as thou see the readiness of thy Savior, so behold also the malice of
the enemy, their readiness (says the Text.) And as soon as it was day, the
Elders of the people, and the chief Priests and Scribes came together, and led
him into their Counsel (As soon as it was day they did it) Here was no Respite
to the true Jesus.

Then if we consider his Executioners, they are not men of an effeminate
spirit; but says the Text, These things therefore the Soldiers did, Joh.
19.24. Ezekiel. 21.31.
who (as the Prophet has it) are men brutish and skilful to destroy; yea, and
to deceive too; who are men burning (says the Margin) their rage and malice
sets them on fire, and then who can stand before it?

Oh soul! to help thee, yet further to mourn over thy dear Savior, consider
these men, (Soldiers) are not only skilful to destroy, but its a passe-time to
them, witness that saying of two great Soldiers, Abner and Joab; And Abner
said to Joab, 2 Samuel 2.14.
Let the young men now arise, and play before us, And Joab said, Let them
arise, and they did, etc.

And now oh my soul! look upon thy dear Jesus, this true Jesus is scourged
indeed, Mat. 27.26. 3. Bleeding.
in earnest, it was not a mock-punishment, his sacred body was whipped to
purpose, so that if the Spouse should be asken, What is thy beloved more than
another beloved? Cant. 5.9.
she might answer, Now my beloved is black and blew (not white and ruddy.) And
after this, none comes to wash and supple his stripes; but immediately
delivered into the hands of these merciless men (Soldiers.) And concerning his
whipping, Histories tell us, That their whips were of small cord and wires,
that so every stroke might tear the flesh. (Ah my dear Jesus) Soul, can thou
think his sweet body was not torn to purpose by them, when that wretch (
Pilate) delivered him up to their will? Do what you will with him: was ever any
Malefactor so delivered up? Mark what St. Luke says, And he released unto
them, him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had
desired, Luke 23.25.
but he delivered Jesus to their will, to do with him what they would. (So one
Translation.)

After this, the Soldiers took Jesus into the Common Hall, and they stripped him
(the Soldiers did. Mat. 27.27, 28. 4 Bleeding.
) Soul do thou think it was gently done? no, no, this fetched (I suppose)
blood, Holy Jesus! from thy sweet (but very sore) body again.

After this, they put on him a Roab (as they call it) and when they had platted
a Crown of thorns, they, (the Soldiers) put it upon his head: Soul, verse. 29.
do thou think it was tenderly done? It may be they handled it so, but they
did not head it so. Now behold the blood of thy Savior, 5. Bleeding.
from his sacred head (thy head) running down every way. And when they had
fastened the Crown, then they put a Reed in his right hand, and they bowed the
knee before him, (who indeed was worthy to be worshipped, though they mocked
him,) saying, Hail King of the Jews, And they spat upon him (the Soldiers
did) and smote him with their hands, Joh. 19.3. Mat. 27.30.
and took the Reed, and smote him on the head. Ah dear soul, fresh bleeding
with a witness; 6. Bleeding.
for such men's blows (when enraged) are not light, his sweet cheeks, and
sacred head, felt the weight of their fingers. Now Soul, look into the face of
thy dear Savior, and see how those sweet Cheeks are besmeared with blood and
spitting: will not this draw tears? (oh heart, harder than the nether
Millstone) again.

After they had mocked him, they took the Roab off from him, Gently? no, verse.
31.
no (the Soldiers did it) and did not the plucking off of this woollen Garment
(by such men) fetch blood again? 7. Bleeding. I suppose the plucking off this
Roab, fetched blood also, because we find, v. 28. they stripped him before they
put it on. John 19.17.
doubtless O soul! thy Savior bled a fresh, do not we know how tedious it is
to have a little woollen cling but to a small soar? Oh! How was then the
plucking off that coat from my Saviors body, so gored in blood by such
merciless men? And yet all this is but preparation to crucifixion.

Now my soul, now eye thy Savior, in this pickle bearing (that which after
bore him) his Cross; (so St. John has it) questionless, bleeding as he went,
with drops to the ground; for though they took the Reed out of his hand, and
smote him therewith, and that on the head, and took off their mocking Roab, yet
we do not read, that they took off his real Crown of thorns, which caused a
continual bleeding. Well now he comes to his crucifying.

And when Christ was on the Cross, he said to his Mother, Woman, verse. 26.8.
Bleeding. 9. Bleeding. 10 and 11 Bleeding.
behold thy Son: so say I, oh my soul I Soul, behold thy Savior, laid upon his
Cross, and behold one hand nailed, and by and by thou shall see another
harmless hand nailed, and then his lovely feet successively.

Mark oh soul, not feet making haste to shed innocent blood: Isa. 59.7.
compared with John 18.4.
but those feet of his were pierced, that were innocent, and yet readily
carried him to shed his own blood for others that were guilty; indeed soul! Is
this a truth? did his lovely feet thus carry him to that place where (for thee)
they were thus pierced? then oh my soul! learn to make this use of thy feet,
the feet of thy body; or (thy affections) the feet of thy soul, oh be thou, one
of them that follow the Lamb (this Lamb) whither ever he goes, step by step,
oh my Soul! Isa. 41.2.
be thou ready at his call (as that righteous man Abraham was) in all obedience
to come up to his foot.

12 Bleeding.
And now Soul, Behold his 12th and last bleeding, when lifted up upon the
Cross, and his sacred side was pierced; causing him to bleed to purpose, to
the finishing of his own life, and accomplishing of thy salvation. Oh
therefore, let him have thy heart in service, John 19.34.
for thou have his blood in sacrifice; and his heart blood might (forthwith as
in the text) come out well enough for this also the Soldier did.

Now soul look up, and hear what thy Jesus said, It is finished: And behold
what thy Jesus did (says the Text. verse. 30.
) He bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost.

The people hearing what was to be done, Luke 23.48.
came together (says the Text) to see that sight, And all the people that came
together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their
breasts, and returned. Oh for an eye of Faith! to see thy Savior, this blessed
sight indeed, thy Jesus thus bowing down his bleeding head, and finishing the
great work of Redemption for us. May we not smite upon our hearts, and say,
what have we done? What a bloody sight have my sins made? And cry out, Psalm.
116.12.
what shall I render to this my Lord, for all the benefits I have gained by all
these his sufferings? oh let us lay a charge upon our souls! Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3,
4.
and say, Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name: Bless the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth
all thine iniquities? who heals all thy Diseases? who redeemeth thy life from
destruction? who crowns thee (not with thorns, but) with loving kindness, and
tender mercies? And all this gained to us, by this his bleeding, and that unto
death.

Thus, oh Soul! Romans 5.8, 10. 2 Cor. 5.14. Zach. 12.10.
thou have seen Christ's love sealed with his blood, who when we were enemies,
thus bled and died for us. Oh then! let the love of Christ constrain us to
mourn over him, that was thus for us pierced: that is (amongst us) thus
blasphemed. Let it constrain us to love him again, to love his Word, (all his
Ordinances, Saints; especially his Ministers, and the more them, Isa. 52.7.
because by Impostors and Seducers so much maligned: now let their feet be more
beautiful than ever, and that for their tidings sake, as the Prophet faith.

And that we may see its a Gospel-text and duty, the Apostle makes use of it
from the Prophet, to be our duty thus to love and honor those Teachers that
are sent (that have Commission, for its confined to them.) How shall they
preach except they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the Gospel of peace, Romans 10.15.
and bring glad tidings of good things?

2 Timothy 3.5 verse. 6.
Now the Apostle speaking, that in the last days, perilous times shall come;
amongst other sinners, brings in Blasphemers, and they have also their form of
godliness. But the precept is, from such turn away, (not turn unto.) And the
Apostle gives them this Character, They creep into Houses, and lead captive
silly Silly women are easily led captive by ^ubtle men.
women, (and men too, but) laden with sin.

Jud. 1 3.4.
And we shall see the Apostle Jude, directing his Epistle, not only to them that
are sanctified by God the Father, but to the preserved in Jesus Christ, and
called; tells them, (though yet preserved) it was needful for me to write unto
you, and exhort you, that you should earnestly contend for the faith once
delivered to the Saints. (Why all this, what is the matter?) The Reason is, for
there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old, ordained to
this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now
does not this Text set forth this Impostor ( Nailor) being so exceeding vicious
and erroneous?

Ah poor Bristol! that thou must (for indeed thou can) witness this more
then any. Thou may say indeed, this is a day of trouble and rebuke, Isa.
37.3, 4.
and of Blasphemy, it may be, the Lord our God will hear the words of Rabshekah
(this Nailor) and will reprove the words which the Lord our God has heard;
wherefore, lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left. What Hezekiah said
to the Prophet Isaiah, do we that remnant that is yet left, say to you, all you
despised, contemned opposed Prophets. For though these Seducers and their
Proselytes deal so with you, yet unto us that fear the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.1.
you are in our account, the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries
of God: therefore for the Lords sake, lift up your prayers for us, do not only
preach to us, but make conscience (in your private devotions) of praying for
us; Genesis 20.7.
for that Text is an everlasting truth. He is a Prophet, and shall pray for
thee. If you ask why we are so earnest? I Will tell you.

That remnant that is left, is but a remnant out of a remnant, and even in them
(and me) are the seeds of Apostasy; for Heresy is a work of the flesh,
therefore pray for us, Gal. 5.20.
pray that we also may perform our duty, which is, to pray for you.

And oh that the Spirit of prayer were recovered again in us! I do somewhat
remember, when the Sword was first drawn in Ireland, how we were affected,
considering our Brethren, and their leading the way to our own troubles, how
this stirred up a spirit of prayer, when we considered the Concomitants of
War, and those destroying instruments, which (as one says) made many times a
harvest for the Devil) as glittering Swords, roaring Cannons, Skul-dividing
Holberts, murdering Muskets; that while one is discharging his Gun, another
discharges him of his life, and that [it may be] one Brother another; This did
then so put us a weeping and praying, that it could not be said, Isa. 64.7.
as the Prophet Isaiah, there is none that stirs up himself to take hold of
thee. O you Teachers! pray your hearers into a praying posture: But it will be
said, this is over now. I would it were, suppose it be, is there no cause of
weeping and praying Consider.

When the Question was put to Mary, Woman, why weepest thou? Oh says she! Joh.
20.11, 13.
(speaking as a woman undon) they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him.

Now though War be gone, and what the Soldiers have not taken away, we yet
keep, yet do not men (Devils incarnate) seek to take away Sabbaths, Scriptures,
Ordinances, Ministers, yea, our Lord Jesus his person, were he within their
reach? and we know not where they would lay him. And may not we say again,
these things the Soldiers did. And one of the Soldiers pierced his side, Joh.
19.24, 34.
) and was not Nailor a Soldier, as well as a famous infamous Quaker and
Blasphemer?

And now Brethren, let none take offense, before it be given, because I have in
setting forth the sufferings of Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, so often
mentioned the word Soldier; for its frequent in all our four Evangelists, and
my practice has declared, that I own War, as an Ordinance of God, when
rightly stated, but let me say this to them, and to my own soul, to help us to
lament, let us look upon David, an eminent instance, who, though he was a
Soldier, a man of much blood; he was also a Saint, a real Saint, a man of many
tears, Psalm. 119.136
(says he) Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law.

Truly, if we can say as Nehemiah (that good man) did of himself (as to the
Kings Discerning) I had not [saith he] been before time sad in his presence.
Nehem. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
Yet now [if ever] we have cause of sorrow of heart, and sadness of
countenance, as he had.

Consider we Nehemiah's cause of that sadness, which occasioned the speech of
the King. Wherefore the King said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing
thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart, oh that it were so
with us! Then I was very sore afraid, and said unto the King, Let the King live
for ever. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my
Fathers Sepulchers lies waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed with fire?
Then the King said unto me, For what do thou make request? So I prayed to the
God of Heaven [I suppose some secret ejaculation at that time] the application
I leave to those to whom more properly it belongs; the persons, Ministers, whom
we are now speaking of, and calling upon our selves, more to pray for. But to
return,

O that we could pray more! Yea, and methinks we should, you standing in so
much need of prayer, as indeed you do, For, you, you who are the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, are the mark shot at, its you who are the more able, and more
godly, amongst you, which is the white in that mark, at which they aim, and
level their malice.

And then considering how earnestly you beg it of us, as you do, 2 These. 3.1.
in one place Brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
course, and be glorified. And the Apostle Paul, we shall see, Never did any man
beg for an Alms, Romans 15.30.
with more earnest entreaties, than he did for the Saints prayers, Now I
beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the
Spirit, that you strive together with me, in your prayers to God for me. And
Jesus Christ has not only taught us to pray, Luke 22.44.
but by his own example has taught us to put up earnest Supplications, He
being in an Agony, prayed more earnestly. And this was a little before his
sufferings, a little before his lifting up upon the Cross.

Now this lifting up, was to draw all men unto him, Joh. 12 32.
and the Pole, upon which our Lord Jesus is thus lifted up, is the Gospel. (He
is the true Serpent indeed lifted up, that whosoever believes on him, should
not perish, but have eternal life.) As a godly Divine observes.
Now those that do bear this Pole, or Standard, whereby we come to see what he
has done, and how he has bled for us, were the four Evangelists, and then the
Apostles, and so onward their successive Brethren the Ministers, with whom he
has promised to be always, Mat. 28.19, 20
even to the end of the world.

So then, by virtue of this promise, we have encouragement to pray; for though
men and Devils band together against them, yet a standing Ministry he will bear
up, and that to the end, (not of that age, as some would have it, but) of the
World; And bear them up he will sure, for they are Stars, and that in his right
hand, and who shall, nay, who can, Rev. 1.2.
pluck them thence?

But now that we may make up what, and wherein we have been wanting in this
duty, we have a promise also to enable us, and let us turn that promise into a
prayer, and earnestly beg of God to make it good, which is, That he will pour
down the Spirit of grace and Supplication upon us, Zech. 12.10.
and then shall prayers and tears be poured out from us with acceptance.
Which that we may, let us talk less of them, less then that against them, and
let us up, and be doing, in praying more frequent, and earnest for them. And
let one and the other put up this joint prayer, as Nehemiah did, Chap. 1.11.
O Lord I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy
Servant, and to the prayer of thy Servants, who desire to fear thy name; And
prosper good Lord the studies and labors of thy Servants, that all error and
blasphemy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, may fall before them,
Amen.

Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Amen and
Amen.

The Magistrates and Ministers of the City, taking into consideration the
height of this wretches blasphemy, before treated of: And the great
disturbance, and opposition the Ministers and people have in the time of their
public worship of God, made their address to the Parliament, then sitting at
Westminster, by way of Remonstrance and Petition, as follows.

The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council of the City of Bristol: Together, with the Ministers of the Gospel, and
other chief Inhabitants, who desire to fear God, and serve our Lord Jesus, in
sincerity, in the same City.
THat we (especially the Magistrates) have with much regret and sadness of
spirit) lain long under much reproach and ignominy, occasioned by the increase
of a Generation of seduced, and seducing persons among us, called Quakers, who
at first were supported and upheld by some Soldiers, Cap. Beal, and Cap.
Watson.
then in chief command, in the absence of the Governor of the Garrison: The
wickedness of which sect of men, has not in our Nation (as we know of) been
formerly heard of: And so destitute of a Law, to punish and restrain, and
therefore have not been able to suppress; And whereas we have waited long for
some directions to that purpose, being unwilling to run upon unknown
precipices, these people have strengthened and encouraged themselves in their
iniquities, upon some pretended countenance from thence, whence we cannot
suppose it; so that also we could, and did (yet with some difficulty) punish,
and thereby in some measure hinder their open and frequent disturbances of our
public worship, We had not power to silence their Blasphemies, nor restrain
their confused and tumultuous meetings, although to the high dishonor of God,
in their unchristian principles and practices (too well known) and in
profaning the Sabbath, by multitudes of their Proselytes, flocking from all
parts of the Country round about us, upon that day. But now so it is, that one
James Naylor, a most eminent Ring leader, and head of that Faction, has lately
appeared here amongst us, more high then ever, in horrid and open Blasphemies,
expressly avowed and owned by his nearest followers, as that he is the only
begotten Son of God, And that there is none other then he, That he is the
everlasting Son of righteousness; And that in him the hopes of Israel stand;
That he is the King of Israel, and Prince of Peace, And calling him Lord and
Master, saying, his name shall be no more called James, but Jesus.

All which are no other, then the natural issue of their Scripture denying
principles. And now we desiring to follow the ductures of Divine providence,
which has brought their iniquity to a height, at such a time as this is, when
the Legislative power of the Nation is sitting, in whom it is to provide
wholesome and good Laws, against the growing evils of the times, wherein the
Lord eminently (in our apprehensions) calls for your zeal for his glory; We
humbly make our applications to your Honors, and with profession of our
abhorrency, and utter detestation of the damnable and blasphemous Doctrines of
the Quakers, which tend in their own nature, to the utter ruin of the true
Christian Religion, and Civil Government, both in Cities, Families, and all
Relations, as would too soon appear, had they power in their hands; And who
now, not as heretofore tacitly, and by way of implication; but openly and
expressly dishonor that sacred name, by which we are called, and trample upon
that blood by which we are justified, by making others sharers with him in his
incommunicable excellencies.

And do therefore humbly pray, that your Honors would now take up the reins
of Government into your hands, which have too long layen loose in this
particular, and to curb the insolences of all ungodly persons, who in this, or
any other way, do, or may eclipse the glory of our Christian Profession, by
their unbridled and licentious liberties, that so the reproach not only of this
City, but of the whole Nation and Government, may be rolled away, and the glory
of this work, being acted by your hands, might render your name worthy to be
enrolled, amongst the number of those faithful Confessors, to whom the honor
of our dearest Lord, has bin more precious then their lives, and all worldly
enjoyments.

And we shall daily pray, etc.
That Committee which was appointed for the hearing of Nailor.
This Petition being read in the House, the (...) of January, 1656. with other
Petitions of the like nature, from several places of the Nation, there was a
Committee appointed to take them into consideration, and to prepare a Bill
against Blasphemy.

Now my Fellow Citizens and Christian Friends, and all you that are sanctified
by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called, even you that are
called, and yet preserved: The Apostle Jude exhorts you earnestly to contend
for the faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, verse. 3, 4.
And the reason he gives of your standing to, and earnest contending for that
faith, is in verse 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were
before of old, ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of
our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ.

My beloved Friends, the Counsel I gave in my Epistle, is, that I do now give
again, and beseech you to take: its from Christ himself, Take heed how, and
what you hear (then I may say whom you hear.) For what the Apostle said will
come, I may now say, is come, When some will not endure sound Doctrine, but
after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4 3.
shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears: And has not
this infectious Disease so spread, that many professors have been so scabby,
that they are very scabs in Religion? Brethren, I know something, and some such
ones, and I believe some of you know more. Well then, take heed, and beware,
let men have a Scripture-call to teach, before we have a call to hear, lest we
be seduced.

Those seducers, who formerly came creeping in amongst us, have (since a wicked
Toleration given) so increased, and now got to that height of impudence, that
not only houses, but Churches, Press and Pulpit, have sounded too loud of
hellish Blasphemies.

I heartily wish, that that Epistle of Mr. R. Baxter, (prefixed to his Quakers
Catechism) to the Separatists, and Anabaptists in England, were by them laid to
heart: And that the Anabaptists especially, would seriously consider it: For
the Quakers practice is what their Doctrines hold out; for though every
Anabaptist be not a Quaker, yet every Quaker is a Non-baptist, if not
rebaptized: one of their Queries to Mr. Baxter, being this, Quakers Catechism
their 3d Query.
what express Scripture have you for Infant Baptism? And oh that some able pen,
would in the spirit of meekness, hold forth the rise of our Ranting Blaspheming
Tenants and practices, which I suppose, would easily be made appear, to be from
the Anabaptists Doctrines.

I shall give in something of my low observation, and go no farther then my own
knowledge, nor from those I know, that have either printed, preached, or
practiced that which is abominable, even in Bristol, (at present the Receptacle
of Blasphemers, and base men) and parts adjacent; some Speakers to the
Anabaptist Church in Bristol, that have in Press and Pulpit, held forth such
Doctrines, that tend to what is abominable, both in principle and practice, and
that in, and near the said City.

One, an Anabaptist, or rebaptized man, blames Ministers for speaking from but
one Text, in one Sermon, saying, Did ever the Prophets and Apostles do so?
(whither tends this?) in a little thing, called, A Word to the World, p. 56.
Again, If you have been in the Pulpit, to deliver the Message of Christ, why
are you afraid to have your Doctrine questioned? p. 64. (what means this?) The
Devil has as great Rhetoric and Logic, as the Heathen, or the national
Ministers. A little thing called P. No power, p. 4. In his Dialogue between Law
and Gospel, brings in the Law querying, Will thou not own me for Rule of life?
And the Gospel answering, No, by no means, p. 110. In his Book entitled, A
word to the pretended Ministry, (meaning the National Ministry.) He advises
Ministers to declare to their Congregations, their disowning their Ordination,
and that speedily, else they will be laid aside, p. 169. In his Epistle to the
World, He tells the Ministers, that what they yet suffer, is but the beginning
of sorrow, p. 186. And though he gives 13. Characters of a true Gospel
Minister, and they be all found in each of them; yet if they renounce not their
Calling, they will be laid aside, both by God and man, p. 189. 190. Whither
tends all this? Do not the Quakers practices in opposing and questioning the
Ministers in their Congregations (and that with such impudence, and much
disturbance) declare themselves to be discipled by the Anabaptists Doctrines?
But oh that this were all! It may be this man's weakness, but you will see anon
others wickedness.

Consider we also those Doctrines of T. C. Speaker to the Anabaptist Church (so
called) in Wells, Sworn against him, before the Mayor of Axbridge, in the
County of Somerset, by Mr. Carlisle, Minister of Biddisham, and Mr. Smith,
Minister of Badgeworth, viz.

1. That he denied Jesus Christ to be the eternal Son of God. 2. That he
denied any local Heaven. 3. That he denied the equality of the Son with the
Father. 4. That he denied the Trinity. 5. That he affirmed the Saints to be the
Sons of God, in the same manner as Christ himself. 6. That he affirmed the Law
to be abrogated. 7. That he affirmed, the bodies of the Saints should hereafter
be turned into Spirits. 8. That he affirmed the Divine essence, to be
communicated to the Saints. 9. That he denied Jesus Christ, by his death on the
Cross, to satisfy divine Justice. These things you have in print before.
Farther, this T. C. in his Book (subtly) styled, The Marrow of Christianity.
(The very Title whereof, caused me to spend (or rather mis. spend) so much
time, as to read it, having taken it from a friend, a godly Maid: when I saw
the Author's name, left she should be seduced) has this passage, speaking of
Satan, says he, page 12.
When down right Papacy will not serve, he will turn himself into a Prelatical
shape; and then when once Prelacy grows out of date, he can change himself
into other shapes. But let me speak plainly, into an Anabaptistical shape, Do
not those Doctrines before recited, speak full enough to it? If not, you shall
see another piece of his hellish Doctrine, and then you will believe it; For in
the same Book, speaking of that Gospel Ordinance, page 122.
and gracious privilege to the Infants of all Believers, to wit,
Infant Baptism, he says thus, That it is a Mystery of Iniquity, and one of the
most soul ruining Mysteries of Iniquity, that ever came from Hell. And in the
year, 1656. preaching for Mr. Tho: Ewin, (an Anabaptist-Lecturer in Bristol,)
he seconded, and, as he thought, farther confirmed that hellish Doctrine thus;
That whosoever pleaded for Infants Baptism, are no better than those Jews that
pleaded for Barabbas, Mr. R. H.
a murderer, and refused Christ. This given to me under the band of a godly
Christian old Disciple, that heard him: Friends, remember Christ's Counsel,
Take heed what you hear, and that against Christ's Ordinances, This of
Infant Baptism for one For,

Surely, where Baptism comes, its a saving Ordinance, or carries and offers
salvation, in the institution of it, to the House, though every one that is
baptized, is not saved: as Noah's Ark was a type of Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. and
that was the saving of his House, Heb. 11.7. as (and by) a temporal
deliverance; and so Baptism, as to an outward sign: though some baptized Cham's
be in, and of the House, as of old, one was in the Ark.

And therefore Friends, this considered, you that are better satisfied with
these men's Call, Doctrine and practice, then other Christians, who (being
unsatisfied therewith) cannot hear them: yet you may reason with your gifted
Brother of Bristol, and know of him (if he can tell you) why mis-baptized? For
if amiss, you cannot be right, till you are rebaptized, as he is; But why
amiss? because

1. Baptized by a lawful ordained Minister, and not by, etc.

Or why? 2dly, Because the Element of water is applied only to some part of the
body, and not to the Clothes, as in his pool-swilling.

Or why? 3dly, Because with a little water out of a Not superstitiously, but
conveniently placed.
Font, and not in a River: (A poor ground,) Is not a little Font-water, as true
water as the Ocean?

Or why? 4thly, Because sprinkled only on the face, and not doused over head
and ears: Has not sprinkling a more fit resemblance to those Texts, Heb.
12.24. 1 Pet. 1, 2. then this immodest dipping?

Or why? Lastly, Why you are amiss in the Subject; for you were baptized an
Infant: And may not this be amiss for him to say so? Why did the Apostle
baptize Acts 10.22.24, 33, 44, 47, 48 compared with 11.14. with Mark 16.16.
Acts 16.14, 15, 31, 33. Chap. 18.8. 1 Cor. 1.14.16.
five Households, and was there in none of them a Child, or Children?

I shall tell you what Mr. Constable. Jesup.
a godly Minister preached unto us, for right Doctrine, (though others may call
it amiss) about Infant Baptism, opening this Text, Acts 16.31. etc. said that
in the Greek, Faith is applied only to the Jailer, and moreover he said, That
the Syriack reads these words, v. 33. He was baptized, he, and all his straight
way thus. [He, and the Children of his House were baptized.] But this godly
Minister of Jesus Christ, by a Den. Hollister (now no small Quaker) told a
godly Minister of Jesus Christ, That he had a plot that should shortly cast out
Jesup and Paul both. This was but a little before Mr. Jesups putting forth.
Plot of some (of whom several are since turned Quakers) was put by his
Ministry, as to Bristol, (to the grief of all that feared the Lord in it,)
whereby the City quite lost him.

My Christian Friends, You have about this their practice, these three things
to observe,

1. Its a very improbable opinion, to say or think so.

2. Where in Scripture, the Household is mentioned, and the Children excluded,
there are Children by name excepted, as Genesis 50.8. but in neither of these
Texts, which speaks of the Apostles baptizing the whole House, are Children
excepted, therefore they (if any were there) are included.

3. Until it be proved (as it concerns these Adversaries, and Infant Baptism
dangers,) that there were in those Households no Children, the enemies to this
truth, and blessed Ordinance of Infant Baptism, have said nothing; And
therefore I suppose, you of right may say he is mistaken.

And now to retutn.

Another Speaker sometime to the Anabaptist people in Bristol, J. B.
(that I may come to speak something of their practice) when this pool
swilling, or re-baptizing, began first amongst us) though he had a Wife of his
own, yet some of their fraternity meeting together, and discoursing of their
experiences and liberties, how their spirits were drawn forth to act their
loose principles, in as loose practices, confessed how he had enjoyed his
liberty, (rather wicked lust) with such a woman, and she, proving with Child by
him, Wid. M.
poor soul, when she could no longer hide it from the eye of the world, becomes
her own Executioner, and the Child's both, by drowning her self in that water,
wherein before she was rebaptized. Mr. J. P.
This wretch, being spoken with by a godly Minister, acknowledged the thing,
that he had enjoyed his liberty, or rather lust: and also, that, among other
Tenants that they held, this was one, Community of women: But (I confess) he
said, that the sad accident that befell the poor Creature, had convinced him (if
you will believe him) of that tenent. Friends, take heed whom you hear.

T. T. F. Y. T. A.
Another Speaker to the Anabaptist People (but now a perfect Quaker) was so
accustomed to this gross and filthy sin, that he did lie in bed with a whore
on each side of him; for though they were both rebaptized, (whatever you call
them) I do call them whores; for from one of their own mouths (glorying of her
liberty, in what they did) was heard, that which I tremble to think on, and am
ashamed to write, it being not fit for a modest tongue to speak, nor chaste
ears to hear, and therefore shall abruptly leave it.

These people require an express Text for Infant Baptism, which need not, it
being proved by undeniable consequences;) but here you see by this beastly
practice, an express text, fulfilled in the very letter, 2 Pet. 2.22. But it
is happened unto them, according to the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his
own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. And
here you have seen a Boar and two Sowes, wallowing in the mire, and that after
washing. Friends, be not offended, for its all Scripture Language.

I had thought to have given a brief Account of (that Tailor) John A Leyden,
and that Rebaptized Crew, and Anabaptistical Fryery of Munster, but I refer the
Reader, to the History it self, and shall only give you one Relation, of the
folly of two Sisters, after they were seduced (and so rebaptized) in Germany,
citing the very words of the A short History of the Anabaptists.
Author: It was (says he) speaking of the Anabaptists in Germany,) their
constant Doctrine every where, that Women must be common. Three Reasons they
had, (well worthy to be registered to posterity) to persuade honest women to
prostitute their bodies, if they would be saved.

The first was, That Christians must renounce those things which they love
best, and therefore Women must renounce their beloved honesty.

The second, That for Christ's sake, we must undergo any kind of infamy.

The third Reason was; That the Publicans and Harlots, shall go before the
Pharisees into the Kingdom of Heaven. Lying with other women then their Wives,
they called Spiritual Marriages, and under that title, they would lie with
Neeces and Sisters. They had (says the Author) a main Reason for community of
Women, that as Christians are all one Spirit, they must also be all one body.
These two Maiden Sisters (spoken of before) before they were rebaptized, says
the Author) had been much solicited, and could never be won, till they were
persuaded to be whores for conscience sake. I dare say as much for the two
rebaptized Creatures before mentioned, p 51. for I knew their Conversation,
for some years. On a civil account women have women-guides, upon a (pretended)
sacred account, women have men dippers.
Let women therefore, if they will be washed, have women-guides, and take heed
of that immodest action, for men to dip them. Its the Apostles counsel, avoid
all appearance of evil. If there be but a show of evil, Christians are to avoid
it.

But of this sort of people, amongst us now, you have a character given by
Dennis Hollister, (who was some years an Elder over them, and a Speaker to
them) in his Book sent to the Independent-baptized people, who call themselves
a Church of Christ in Bristol, but are found to be a Synagogue of Satan. Title
page, and in p. 14. He tells them, he is constrained to bear witness, that
they are no Church of Christ, (neither know the name of Christ) but a Synagogue
of Satan, and a cage of unclean and hateful Spirits, in which lodges pride,
hypocrisy, envy, slandering, backbiting, railing, lying, love to this present
world, and conformity to the fashions, customs, and conversation of the same.
And of these I may say, as the Apostle does, these are they, 1 Tit. 1.12.12, 13.
whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole Houses, teaching things which
they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake: For you see one of themselves, even a
Prophet of their own says they are liars; this witness is true.

And now Brethren, these things I relate, not because I would privilege or
excuse any Church or member thereof, (even the purest) as being altogether free
from faults, (yea, sometimes scandalous.) But then first we must enquire, what
are the principles that such do hold out; For if they hold out sound principles
in Doctrine, that such things ought not to be done, Rev. 2.20.
(which Pharisees and other Sectaries do not, but teach men so, Mat. 5.19.)
Then cannot these things be justly charged on them. And then 2dly, We are to
consider, who are the Societies and supposed Churches, we have to deal with in
this Charge; for if they are such who pretend to higher l^ght, greater refining
and reformation; yea, (as some of them do) to sinless perfection, then they may
be justly minded of their spots and blots, their blemishes and imperfections:
And so there cannot be any retortion upon them, who, holding out sound
Doctrine, contend for a strict Discipline, which would help these things. And
let it be observed. Lastly, That as for these Sectaries, Quakers, Anabaptists,
etc. (Amongst whom commonly, are such things:) there is openly by some, and
secretly by others, an opposing and undermining of those great Ordinances of
God, a right Magistracy and Ministry, who in a civil and ecclesiastical way do,
or would carry on Government in Church and Commonwealth, whereby such wicked
persons and practices might be shamed and punished; Jude 8.
and now dealing with them who are found to despise Government, we may well
reprove them, (and that without reproach) that so many among them, do defile
the flesh. Likewise also, these filthy dreamers, defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

Mr. R. T.
And now Friends, I shall tell ye somewhat of a Sermon, that I heard some years
since, from an able and godly Divine, who was then Minister of St. Nicholas in
Bristol, (who was well known to us, and in those days, often heard by us,) he
then, pressing the power of godliness, and strict walking in the ways of
holiness and purity, had this passage, says he, If there be any other way to
Heaven, then purity (mark) then burn the Bible, renounce thy Baptism, tell God
he lies to his face. Oh lamentation, Brethren lamentation! What times are we
fallen upon? Burn the Bible? Why, In Mr. Ewins his answer to D. Hollister, p.
17. and 68.
says one Seducer, he thanks God he has done it already, as pa. 63.

Another ( Dennis Hollister) at a meeting of the Independent Anabaptist people
said, That the Scripture was the greatest blind and plague to men's souls, this
day in England.

Another J. W. said to a godly Divine Mr. P. That the Scripture was the cause
of all the divisions and distractions in the Nation. Renounce thy Baptism. Why,
what is it worth? its null, its void, its worth nothing, you must renounce it,
and be rebaptized, Why? Why, your Infant Baptism, is a misbaptism, says Mr.
Ewins, (in that Answer to Hollister, pa. 59.) Tell God he lies to his face.
Why, says another, nay, many others, so we do. The Scripture, the Bible, the
Word of God, what word of God? what Bible? bibble babble, its as an old
Almanac out of date, its a blind and plague to the Nation (as before)
therefore we never use it, we need it not, we speak the dictates of the Spirit.
Ah my Brethren, remember the Word was, Take heed whom you hear, you ought to
remember it, its the Word of him that is the Captain of your salvation the Lord
Jesus Christ, Heb. 2.10. You know the forgetting of the Word (amongst Soldiers
in time of danger) may loose thy life, and that by thy friend, he may not know
thee; nay, Christ himself will one day say, for want of remembering this word
(take heed) Depart from me, I know you not. To forget the word, it may
overthrow a Garrison, ruin an Army, loose a Kingdom; nay, to forget this word,
may loose thy soul, Mat 16.26.
which is of more worth then all the Kingdoms of the World; nay, the world it
self, will thy Christ tell thee.

Friends, my advice is still the same, remember the Word, take heed whom you
hear; And now to as many of my fellow Christians and Citizens, as have forgot
it: the word to them is, faces about, and you know all Military terms, when
the word is, faces about, and no hand mentioned; it is to be understood, to the
right. So the word now is, to the right about, unto thy keeping close to
public Ordinances again: to thy old puritanical principles again: to thy
constant Family duties again: to thy hearing (and that only) of those that are
sent, ordained Ministers again: Although Seducers (to make parties, and carry
on their designs, who would set us in a flame again if they could) quarrel at
Ordination (though Scripture be clear for it, and as clear against usurpers and
Seducers, 1 Timothy 4.14.
that run before they are bid to go.) And quarrel at laying on of hands,
saying, its a Ceremony (which if so, yet by their leave, its a Gospel
Ceremony.) And at Presbytery; yet that also has an express text of Scripture,
which is a part of the everlasting Gospel.

Rev. 14.6.
Well dear Friends, about to Infant baptism, own that Ordinance in public,
let us walk (our selves) more worthy of it, and answerable unto it; bless God
for thy privilege, that he will admit thy Child, thy Infant, to be a member of
his Church visible. Oh be not so hard hearted! as to deny that to thy Child
which God does offer thee, thou being a Believer, do not so easily part with
thy privilege, and that which is thy Child's due. Read godly Mr. Thomas his
Answer to Mr. Speed, p. 23.29. The Title of the Book is, A Vindication of
Scripture and Ministry.

Brethren, the advice is again, take heed how, and what you hear. And had you
not need so to do? I suppose, that when you first heard some of your uncalled
Teachers, their smooth Doctrine so pleased you, that you would labor to
justify your practice in so doing (though since, many of you are of another
mind) and you little thought, that they themselves would be rebaptized, and
turn rebaptizers; and so bring in another Baptism, Ephesians. 4, 5.
when the Apostle says there is but one: And you less thought they would
unchristen you, and so (as much as in them lies) make you Heathens, telling
you, that you are misbaptized: but you see the nature of error. And as for this
ugly immodest action of dipping, or rebaptizing, (for I dare not call it an
Ordinance without sin) it does not only make null, and overthrow the Ordinance
(as before:) but calls in question the judgment and practice of all those
grave, able, and godly Divines, who have in these See Mr. Philpots letter
hereafter cited.
sixteen hundred years, received thousands of Infants, as Members into the
visible Church, by Baptism, (and are now Saints in the Church triumphant) and
yet now must be questioned, and made void with a word, to call it misbaptism;
and thus nullify the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, Infant baptism.

And Brethren, I call this dipping, or Rebaptizing, an immodest action, because
I could tell you (the name) of a Gentleman of credit, who by accident, coming
by the River (at Stony-Wear) where a Woman was to be rebaptized, stayed to see
the manner (or rather immodesty) of it, and did in the action, see her
nakedness. And upon Thursday the 18 th of June, 1657. When Mr. Ewin and Mr.
Symson, dipped two men and five Women, the nakedness of one of the women, in
this action of dipping, was seen above her knees. For this there are many
witnesses. Is this an Ordinance? Its an uncivil immodest action, let us abhor
it; and let us all take heed, that we be not by Consider, that Seducers have
not only a faculty to deceive us, but there is in their flatteries a power to
force, Prove 7.21. with much fair speech, she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him.
drawing words, and fair speeches, cheated of our Religion.

Well Friends, let us about again, and take that counsel from the Lord himself,
Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand you in the ways and see, and ask for the
old paths, which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for
your souls.

Friends, take heed, and be not deceived by this Sect. For its the observation
of many godly Divines, that where this prevails, God does usually follow it
with some sad Judgments. The story of Munster, has sufficiently set them
forth. Oh! the Rapes, the Poligamy, the murders that were there committed,
which I thought to make some brief Relation of, but I would avoid tediousness,
and, to help you further to lamentation, shall leave the Reader to the Story it
self. For though an Anabaptist in print tells you, the Argument of Munster has
been so often pressed, that its wore threadbare, (he dares not say, it is not true)
yet let me tell you, that its to be feared, had these men power, they would
make this threadbare Argument cotton again. And they begin to talk already, A
Commission-Officer in Ireland (and that no mean one neither, but now out of
Commission) told a person of quality of this City, (he discoursing with him,
about their dipping or rebaptizing there in that Nation) that though for a
while they did forbear, yet, if we did not come about to them, to be
rebaptized, they should look upon us, as they did upon the Rebels of Ireland.

Brethren, you see what is spoken, and one man may speak the sense of a great
many, and its no hard matter to instance action (toward it) as well as words
See the Parallel of Munster and Abingdon, by W. H. Oxon. 1657. 1 Samuel 11.2.
but a few months since, but I forbear. And truly, some are of opinion, (and
that not a few) that had this Generation power, their quarter and terms might
be as bad (if not worse) as what Nahash offered the men of Jabesh Gilead, which
was to thrust out all their right eyes.

And now truly I think, if there be any such necessity of dipping, it may be to
cool the heat of those, who are exercised with such an immodest action, I judge
not how chaste their thoughts are at such a time, but leave it to him that
knows them, but I know they are but men.

But Brethren, that we may be established in this blessed truth, and
Gospel-Ordinance of Infant Baptism, let us read and consider that unanswerable
Treatise of Godly Mr. Baxter about it: and I also recommend Mr. Sydenham his
Treatise of Infant Baptism, and another Gospel-Ordinance (in which they that
fear the Lord, have much communion with him) to wit, singing of Psalms. The
Book is of no great price, I desire a serious reading of the 10, 11, 12, and 15
Chapters, where this godly man, though dead, yet speaks, to the satisfaction
(I suppose) of every sober Christian.

And Brethren, I shall to this, close with desiring a judicious reading of a
letter, of that eminent Christian, and godly Martyr of the Lord, Mr. John
Philpot, who sealed, amongst other truths, this (truth also) of Infant Baptism.

The Letter is an Answer to a young man, that seemed to stumble at Infant
Baptism, where you have in short, Arguments sufficient, against all the
Adversaries of this truth: And in this Letter, he proves the Baptism of
Infants, from the Apostles practice; and tells us of one Auxentius, who was one
of the Arian Sect, that first denied the Baptism of Infants; and next after
him, Pelagius the Heretic; and in our days (says he) the Anabaptists (be not
offended, its the words of this Saint and Martyr of the Lord, Mr. Philpot) who
are an inordinate kind of men, stirred up by the Devil, to the destruction of
the Gospel. His letter is thus subscribed, Your yoak-fellow in Captivity, His
last letter in Foxes Acts and Monuments. Page 1670. or last Edition. Vol.
3.606. Col. 2.
for the verity of Christ's Gospel, to live and die with you in the unity of
faith, John Philpot.

Brethren, I do not undertake disputation (but I desire lamentation) blessed be
God, that is done already to our hands (and this truth maintained and defended
by grave, able, and godly men, (yea Martyrs) let us then put it to heart, and
bewail this also, with Rivers of tears, Psa. 119.136.
that an Ordinance of Jesus Christ (to wit, Infant Baptism) should be thus
justled out by such immodest action, in Rivers of water.

Friends, keep to hearing, as before advised, and take that counsel, that the
Prophet gives to the people: Jer. 27.9, 10. Jude 8.
therefore hearken not you to your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your
filthy dreamers, (so Jude has it) nor to your Inchanters, nor to your
Sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, (Look to the light within you) you
shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they prophecy a lie unto you.

Now that you may be prevailed with, to keep close to your own and known godly
Ministers, 1 These. 5.12, 13. Gal. 3.1.
(lest you come to be bewitched, as the Gallathians then were, and many poor
souls now are) take heed and beware of the occasions. Providence having ordered
my habitation in that Parish and street, where the Synagogue of Satan is, (I
mean the Quakers meeting place) I may happily observe something more than you,
though considering my Pastor over me, and my Ordinance enjoyments, I desire to
bless God, and can say, Psalm. 16.6. Rev. 2.13.
My lot is fallen in a goodly Heritage: and though God may have his Antipas,
even where Satan's seat is: yet its sad, to speak of the knowledge of such
things (of which we tremble to speak) and that of those that promised better.
Jer. 5.1.
But oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a Fountain of tears! that I
might weep day and night for these things, that people (by taking liberty to
hear any) should be so seduced, as to hold forth such deeds of darkness,
instead of light.

J. W.
What says one? Do you look to be saved by the boy that was born at Jerusalem?
Oh my Soul! its that holy Child Jesus, Acts 4.27. Psalm. 1.1. E. E. S. T. J. D.
D. W. J. C.
that these wretches (who are now got up to sit in the seat of the scornful) do
thus jeer. Others buy and sell on the Lords day, and (being spoken with
thereabout) tell you, all days are alike: Some work, water Gardens, dry
clothes, travel and ride upon that day, viz. a perfect Quaker, whose
Maidservant went some months with Child by him, before he married her, (a
blessed perfection among them.)

Another eminent Quaker, who had a Child by his wives Sister, as appeared by
his running away after she was delivered, (and that by her self.) and then the
Child being put to her Sister to nurse, in some few days died, (but how I know
not,) and then he returned again. And that you may see Hell broke loose upon
us, Ezekiel. 8.15. T. E. J. J.
mark further, and if these things bring not tears from thee, beg of God to
soften thy heart, and mourn that thou can not mourn.

The 10th of July, 1656. an honest young man, reasoned with a perfect Quaker,
who told him, That he did thank God he had burnt the Bible, and dissuaded the
said young man, from reading it any more, or praying any more, but to hearken
to the light within him.

Oh my Soul! its the blessed Book, that God by his good providence has
preserved, and handed over to us, from one Generation to another, and, if thou
have any comfort here, or hopes of any hereafter, thou have it thence. And my
soul, do thou keep close to God in prayer.

Psa. 119.126, 127, 128.
And Friends, let us be of David's mind, and tell the Lord, It is time Lord, for
thee to work, for they have made void thy Law; therefore (oh beg for David's
heart,) I love thy Commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold: therefore
(again) I esteem all thy precepts, (mark) concerning all things to be right,
and I hate every false way. Why my Brethren, every word of God is pure, Prove.
30.5.
what ever men and Devils say to the contrary.

One thing more, Consider this Examination following, and then tell me what you
think of Toleration; mean while, I shall tell you what a grave and able Divine
said, and preached of it (when the War was between us and the Dutch, Mr. J. K.
) That we, like them, tolerating all Religions amongst us, God, in his
Judgment at present upon us, will not suffer us to tolerate one another.

At the general Sessions of the Peace, held in the City of Bristol, the 17th of
February, 1656.
The Examination of Thomas Peacock.
THis Peacock asked one that was with him, this Question, Do thou believe on
that Thief that was hanged at Jerusalem? Sworn by John Tailor.
It is that does delude thee and all the World: and the Priests do preach up
this Fellow.

Another deposes, that the said Peacock asked the said Informant, whether he
knew that there was a God and a Devil, and swore several Oaths, in a ranting
manner, Sworn by Edw. Lockstone
and yet justified himself to be without sin. Says the Informant, do you
justify God your self to be without sin? To which, Peacock answered, That he
did not sin, neither could he sin. Says the Informant, Is not this your
swearing in this manner a sin? And if you cousen, and cheat, or be drunk, is
not that sin? No, says Peacock, its no sin; and then the said Peacock, brought
a place of Scripture, There is no evil in the City, but God is the Author of
it. And declared, that God was the Author of all sin. Then the Informant told
the said Peacock, that he was mistaken, That God did suffer sin, but was not
the Author of sin. Then Peacock replied, That God and the Devil were Brothers,
and did act one with another: And as touching swearing, the said Peacock said,
The greater his Oath was, the greater was his glory.

Another deposes, that he asked the said Peacock, Thomas Harding.
why he did not observe the Sabbath day, and go to Church? He replied, That he
knew not the Sabbath, neither would he hear Baal's Priests. And the Informant
at another time, heard him say, That there was no Devil, and that the Devil was
a poor Rogue, and did nothing but wash the dishes, and sweep the house, and run
on an errant, when one would send him.

Peter Poulston and Humphry Wall, both depose as follows.

That upon Whit-Tuesday, 1656. This Informant Wall, speaking of God and Christ,
The said Peacock answered, What, do thou talk of a God? there is no such
thing as thou talkest of. The Informant asked him, How was then the World
created? To which the said Peacock answered, Thou talkest of what thou know
not. Then the Informant asked him, What do thou make of our Savior Christ? I
am ashamed to express the Answer in my own Language, it being so filthy; but it
was sworn to, therefore take this Beast's beastly answer (of a Friend) in
another Tongue, E podice meo, Christum aeque bonum egerere possum.

Brethren, I could further tell ye the place where, the time when, the parties
whom (but I forbear) being a Company of Anabaptists and Quakers sitting
together, and discoursing of God and Christ, etc. and look as that great
Blasphemer Peacock (before) spoke so abominable filthy of our Lord Jesus
Christ; Deuteronomy. 28.58.
so one of these spoke as abominable filthy, of that glorious and fearful name
of the Lord our God, (as thus,) one of this sweet Company, when they were
speaking of God, [to speak as modestly as I can] broke wind, and said, there
goes your God.

Oh Brethren! whose hair is not an end, and heart trembling, to hear such
horrid filthiness, and unheard of Blasphemy, that we cannot sufficiently
bewail? Truly, if ever we had need, Jer. 9.17, 18.
now is the time as the Prophet speaks, to call for the mourning women [whose
affections being tender, may help as to lamentation] that they may come, and
let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down
with tears; and our eye lids gush out with waters. And oh! that our souls
could bewail these things!

Brethren, God has his mourners in secret, (though but few.) Oh let God see
(though none else do) by our practice, Ezekiel. 9.4.
that we are of that number, and then happily we may be marked in the day of
the Lord's vengeance. Go, says God to the Prophet, set a mark upon the
forehead of the men, that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that are
done in the midst of them: And methinks, God speaks to Prophets in these days,
as to Ezekiel. Sigh therefore, thou Son of man, with the breaking of thy
loins, and with bitterness sigh before their eyes. (And oh! Chap. 21. ver 6, 7.
that we could see more affection in Prophets, before and over their
Congregations, then there is, such, as we see Paul had, Phil. 3.18. For many
walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you, even weeping, that they
are the enemies of the Cross of Christ,) and it shall be, when they say unto
thee, Why sighest thou? That thou shall answer. For the tidings, because it
comes, and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every
spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water. Behold it comes,
and shall be brought to pass says the Lord God. You the Lords Prophets,
reverend Fathers, and our dear Pastors over us in the Lord, if your people ask
you, why sigh you? Oh that you had not matter to answer them! It was the
Judgment of the Sword, that was coming upon Jerusalem, and in a fearful
manner, with such expressions from God, that I am sure we seldom hear of; but
in this place God did lay about him to purpose, and therefore says the Lord,
verse. 16, 17. Go thee one way or other, forward or backward, either on the
right hand, or on the left, whether on the right hand, or on the left, whither
soever thy face is set, I will smite my hands together, and I will cause my
fury to rest, (mark) I the Lord have said it. Its true and to our comfort,
Psalm. 125.3.
The Rod of the wicked shall not rest on the back of the Righteous; but (if the
righteous transgress). the Rod of God may. And the Prophet tells us, Psalm. 41.2.
That the Lord will not deliver his people unto the will of his enemies; (but
let me tell you, he did deliver his Son up to their will, as has been already
showed; but this by the way.) But do people ask, Why do Ministers weep and sigh
so bitterly? you, the Lords Prophets, can tell them better than I, you can tell
us, its for those hideous unheard of Blasphemies, not to be paralleld, which
are bringing upon us unknown, unheard of, and (which is yet worse) Spiritual
Judgments. Nay, do we not read of Judgments, that the Lord threatens that we
never read of? Deuteronomy. 28.61.
The Lord will bring upon thee every plague, that is not written in the Book of
this Law. And if we should think of escaping, The Text tells us, that those
curses shall pursue and overtake us, verse. 45. Well, as we are free from
opposing Prophets, let us take heed we do not slight their sayings.

Zech. 1.4, 5, 6
Consider we that place, Be ye not, as your Fathers, unto whom the former
Prophets have cried, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye now from
your evil ways, and from your evil doings; but they did not hear, nor hearken
unto me, says the Lord. (mark) God takes our not hearkening unto his Prophets,
a not hearkening unto him. Well, your Fathers, where are they? and the
Prophets, Do they live for ever? But my words and my Statutes, which I
commanded my Servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your Fathers? And
they returned and said, Like as the Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us,
according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he dealt with us.

And truly Brethren, it were no hard thing to trace out, how the Lord has
been, and is fulfilling this Text upon us. Since we let fall the first cause we
engaged in (for some men have showed themselves, Hos. 7.12.
as skilful to deceive, as to destroy.) I will chastize them as their
Congregations have heard.

But Brethren, I intend not Confutation of error, (having neither time nor
ability so to do,) but Lamentation.

But blessed be God, we have a considerable number of godly able Ministers,
that have born their Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ, and to their
solemn League and Covenant. As also against the Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of these times, and the toleration of them, which is the title of
their Book, printed in 1647. And that the World may see, they are neither
afraid, nor ashamed to own what they have done, its subscribed by no less then
52 Ministers of Christ, within the Province London. And many fifties, 1 King.
18.4.
I doubt not but, there are in the Nation of the same mind, though they may
seem caved, to many of us, as the prophets of God in honest Obadiah's time so
covered.

And my Brethren, what ever others do, these I look upon to be to England (as
Elisha said of Elijah. 2 King. 2.12.
) The Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. And further let me say,
Blessed be God, these Blasphemies and Errors are well answered and confuted by
some able godly Ministers, whose Doctrine and manner of life we have known. As
by those 5. 2 Timothy 3.10.
godly Ministers of New Castle, in a Book called, The Perfect Pharisee. Also
Mr. William Thomas, Minister of the Gospel at Ubley, And by Mr. Christopher
Fowler, and Mr. Simon Ford of Reading, Mr. Ralph Farmer of Bristol, and Mr.
Baxter of Kidderminster, whose solid sharp (yet sweet) Epistle to the
Separatists and Anabaptists in England, is worthy serious observation in his
Book called, The Quakers Catechism. Now of those solid judicious Answers of
these holy men of God; we may truly say (as Job speaks. Job 6.25.
) How forcible are right words? And as truly of their Adversaries, the words
following. But what does your arguing reprove? And indeed Brethren, some had
need undertake it; For I dare say, If all the errors, that proceeded from all
the Heretics since Christ's incarnation, did appear together, we should see
this our Toleration have produced them, as may be seen in James Nailor and his
Disciples: let him therefore be Jezabel (if you will) not Jesus, as they
blasphemously call him. And that you may see somewhat more of their wickedness,
I shall here insert a passage, which does declare, not only their actions
deserving, but also their expressions reproaching, the due execution of Justice
upon them.

Upon the 5th of February, 1656. one Jews Harris, a Quaker, having been in the
Country, came home to his House in Bristol, and there meets with one William
Hill, a Brother of that Fryery, who (amongst other discourse, asked the said
Harris, why he sell from his principles (meaning as he was a Quaker.) He
answers, that he should not account for him; but they further discoursing of
their pure Religion, Ranting and quaking, at last their words came to blows,
and Harris murders Hill; for which murder he was ( Aug. 13th, 1657. in Bristol)
arraigned and condemned, and the 31. day executed. Thus having such wicked
principles, they both came to this untimely and shameful end. This Harris had a
Letter from some Quakers, which he when he was upon the Gallows, conveyed to a
godly Minister, there attending to exhort him to mind his condition; the
Minister, having received it, tore it presently in pieces: upon which, some
Quakers that were then present, said, What, will ye persecute to the death?
Thus calling this just execution for murder persecution. And my Brethren, Mr R.
F.
Is not this also to be bewailed, that such liberty should be given to a people
of such principles, who would not have murderers executed, but call it
persecution?

When the Government by Bishops was taken away, (though its supposed, it would
have been better for the Nation, if that counsel given, by that Reverend
Father, and learned Doctor of our Church, Bishop Usher, Primate of Ireland, had
been taken, as it was tendered in 4. Propositions to the Parliament, in the
year 1641 for the reduction of Episcopacy, into the form of Synodical
Government) After that time, there came forth a little thing, called Lambeth
Fair, where you might have bought many Surplices, Hoods, Coapes, Caps, and
variety of such knacks and need-nots, very reasonable. I confess; that in that
Government, there were many things, which my low apprehension saw no need of,
As, that there should be 24. Diocesan Lord Bishops, that they should have 24
Chancellors, 24 Registers, with their men, 48. Proctors, 120. Apparitors at
leaft, and many more then a good many: The whole number appertaining to
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, with the rest belonging to them, are
judged to be no fewer than ten thousand persons, which at but 20 li. per Annum
a man, is two hundred thousand pounds, and to maintain the Bishops Courts, and
their greatness, was at least four hundred and fifty thousand pounds per Annum
more, besides the Charges of the 24. Deanes to the great Churches, and 544
Canons Residents, and Prebendaries; besides many Petty Canons, Vicars,
Singing-men and Boys, Organists, Gospellers, and Epistlers, which took up in
Lands, three or four thousand pounds yearly. All this you have more largely set
forth in a Book, entitled, A short View of the Prelatical Church of England.
Mr. Bernard.
At this Fair of Lambeth, things being sold cheap, were soon bought, and the
great Revenue of the Prelates and Collegiat Churches (which would have given a
comfortable subsistence to a godly Ministry) was put off by such wholesale
penny worhs, that it was quickly distributed, by those that knew well enough,
how to divide the Spoil: Well, you are deceived, the good Lord give repentance
to the deceivers.

Friends, Lambeth-Fair is at an end, and you know, Fairs do not use to belong,
but Markets are more frequent; and since Lambeth Fair, has been down, there
has been a Market up, called Toleration, and such Commodities are to be sold
at the Sign of the Black-spread Eagle, near Paul's, by Giles Calvert, where you
may be furnished with such Writings, Books and Pamphlets, that shall deny God,
Christ, Spirit, Word, Ordinances, Resurrection, Heaven, Hell, what not?
Brethren, I shall give you a sad view of some of those Wares, though I do not
advise the buying any of them, but beseech you to abhor and detest them,
Touch not, taste not, Colos. 2*2^.
handle not, (for they shall all perish, and they that walk by them.) And, as I
said, take heed what you hear; so also what you read: But that we may the more
bewail the abuse of liberty, and the sad effects of Toleration, whereby our God
has been so dishonored, the Gospel scandalized, and the truth of our
Profession justly questioned, consider the Wares here suffered to be sold,
which are such, as though we counted Hell a fable, or to endeavor the filling
it our duty.

One comes, Sir, Have you a Book that declares the Bible not to be the Word of
God, and that it is but humane? Yea, here it is called, The Pilgrimage of
Saints. p. 4. By Lawrence Clearkson. Sir, you may have two or three more.

Sir, Have you any against the Nature and Essence of God? Yea, Arguments by
John Biddle. p. 7. Says he, Its a wretched distinction, to distinguish between
Essence and Person. And that God has more hand in men's sinfulness than
themelves, in a Book styled Comfort for Believers. p 36.37 you may have 3 or 4
more.

Sir, Have you any thing against the Trinity of persons in unity of Essence?
Yea, That the Son to be co equal with the Father, or the Holy Spirit, to be a
distinct coequal person, is from the Chapel of Rome. Paul Beast. p. 4.5.

Sir, Have you any Book to declare that Christ is not God? Yea, The better part
of Christ's person is man, there being but a gradual difference betwixt him and
Moses, and us: And to make Christ coequal with his Father, is to make a false
Christ, or two Gods. Mysteries discovered by Paul Beast. p. 6.

Sir, Sir, Have you any Book against the Deity of the Holy Ghost? Yea, The Holy
ghost is no more omnipresent than the Devil. Arguments by John Biddle. p 18.

Sir, Have you any Book against Gods Election? Yea, They who preach, that none
shall be saved but the Elect and predestinate, are notable liars. Divine light.
p. 15.

Sir, Have you any Book against Original sin? Yea, If we had been to suffer in
Hell, in relation to Adam, or the Law, then Christ also should have suffered in
Hell for us, which he did not. Fullness of Gods love. p. 56.

Sir, Have you any Book against Christ as Mediator? Yea, Christ came not to
reconcile God to men, but men to God. For though Christ do hold forth love and
life, yet he did not purchase it, but was purchased by it. Paul Hobson. p. 4.7.

Sir, Have you any Book to maintain universal Redemption? Yea, If God commanded
the Gospel to be preached to all, and Christ died only for some, then God
commands a lie to be preached to the most part of men. Fullness of Gods love. p.
15. The damned shall be saved, for Christ descended into Hell to break their
bonds, preaching peace to them. Divine light. p. 8. Heathens, Hypocrites, and
Devils, have for a time damned themselves, but will be delivered. p. 19.20.
That they are Devils incarnate, who are, or shall be found to deny the Covenant
of general redemption. Divine light the Epistle to the Reader.

Sir, Have you any Book that does deny the immortality of the Soul,
Resurrection, Heaven, Hell? Yea, many that deny all and say, That man (as a
rational Creature) is a compound, wholly mortal, contrary to the common
distinction of soul and body; and that the present going of the Soul, into
Heaven or Hell, is a mere fiction. Man's mortality by R. O. Title page. Its
also called the Hell-hatched Doctrine of the immortal Soul. That none ever
enter into Heaven, since the Creation. p. 8. That it is clear in Scripture,
there is no Resurrection of the natural body, but its to be understood of the
body mystical, Scripture Prophecies opened by E. Avery. p. 8. That that
reasonable Soul, which is in all mankind, is God himself, who is in a wicked
man, as well as in the Saints. p. 38. That no man is yet in Hell. Fullness of
Gods love. 1. L.S. p. 29. That all other Creatures, as well as man, shall be
raised, and delivered from death at the Resurrection. Man's mortality. p. 50.51.

Well Brethren, black wares, and hellish commodities, many more of which, you
have set down in that Book before mentioned, ( viz. The Ministers of London,
their bearing Testimony to the truth) which I desire every stayed and well
principled Christian to have by him.

And that this Market may be kept up, says one, no detriment can redound
either to Church or Commonwealth, by the Toleration of Religions, in Mysteries
discovered by the aforesaid Paul Best ( Beast.) p. 14.

Brethren, I should not descant upon any man's name, 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude 10.
but that two Apostles speaking of Seducers, are full to it. But these, as
natural bruit [beasts] made to be taken, and destroyed, speak evil of the
things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own
corruption, and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, sporting
themselves with their own deceivings. Beasts (says the Apostle) made to be
taken and destroyed; not as Christians, but as Heretics, if not as men, yet as
Beasts; if not destroyed, yet taken, that is restrained which may be best.

Another, speaking of errors that may be preached by guifted Brethren, says,
The more publicly they are, the less harm they will do. In Mr. Shepheard's
Book, called The peoples privil^dge and duty guarded against the Pulpit and
Preachers incroachment p. 69 But if Mr. Shepard should be asked, whether it
has so proved? If he say yea, I think the hellish blasphemies, that have made
our ears to tingle, (and should make our hearts to ache) would give him the
lie. Heretical things (as a godly Divine observes) are like the roots of
thorns, Mr William Thomos.
that are in themselves soft; but from that softness, they bring forth pricking
and piercing things; And as that godly Minister further observes; though
liberty in it self be a good thing, yet its weaklings temptation, and Seducers
advantage, And I am sure it has sadly proved so, and that to the tearing to
pieces of God and Christ, and all that is (and should be) dearer to us then our
very lives.

Well, if you will buy further, Giles Calvert will fit you.

Sir, Have you any Book against the Ministers? Yea, against all the Teachers in
the Nation as Ministers of Antichrist, by This man being a Scholar, I heartily
desire, that he may not car^y about him his learning and parts, as Vriah did
David's letters*
Thomas Speed a Merchant in Bristol, as appears by his Epistle to all the
public teachers in the Nation, prefixed to his Book, called, A brief and plain
Reply unto certain papers received from William Thomas, called a Minister of
the Gospel at Ubley in Somersetshire. And indeed is not only called so, but by
all that fear the Lord, (who know him) owned to be so, being a blessed
Instrument in the hand of the Lord Jesus, for the converting, confirming and
comforting of many Saints at Ubley, and the places adjacent; and for the
confirming of this truth, I desire all my Christian Friends to read, and
consider his solid and sober Answers to Mr. Speeds Epistle, and to his Book.

Sir, I see you are furnished with such choice, that you can supply any, if they
come from Hell, you can fit them, and indeed you have (I suppose) from all
Nations Chapmen; but Sir, I am of Turkey, and from Mahomet, can you supply me
also?

Yea Sir, I can help you to the Alcoran (it self) of Mahomet, translated out of
Arabic into French, and since our (blessed) liberty, into English.

Sir, Have you a Catechism for Children, that they may learn to know that
principle the light within them? Yea Sir, and this Catechism is so approved,
that its (already) the second Edition, enlarged by George Fox, and printed for
Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle, at the West end of Paul's.

My Brethren, though this Book be for little ones, yet its not the least to be
bewailed by us, Mr. J. K.
and we may with grief of heart, call this liberty (as a grave Divine does.) An
intolerable Toleration, that there should be a a printing, and reprinting of
that, which may teach the Children of Christian Parents, Heathenish principles
(to wit) to look only to the light within them; and that this principle may be
the better fastened into their memories, the Word lights, inlightneth, and
light is used (at least) six hundred times, and it teaches them that the
Scripture is no light; one of the Questions being thus, Is the Scripture the
light?

Answ. Nay, Thus answer these perfect sinners (though humble Saints say as
David did, Psalm. 119.105 Prove 6.23.
Thy Word is a Lanthorn to my feet, and a light to my steps. And Solomon tells
us, The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light.) And teaching those
little ones also to deny the Sabbath, the Question being thus, Is the first day
the Sabbath?

Answ. Nay, teaching them also, that the Ministers of the Nation are of
Babylon, Antichrist, false Prophets and Seducers: thus endeavoring to train
them up so, that their practice may be like to those wicked profane Children,
that mocked the Prophet Elisha; insomuch, 2 King. 2.34.
that the Lord sent two Bears out of the Wood, and destroyed two and forty of
them. Let Children (as an Antidote against this,) take that into their
Catechism. And let me say to this Author Fox, (and his Companions) whose
subtilty (and craft) is used (by the help of Satan) to convey poison into our
little ones, that although the Almighty God do not send Bears out of the Wood
to destroy them (as those profane Children) yet, (with reverence let me say)
he may one day so play the Bear, with those that forget the Lord (in opposing
and contemning his Servants, and teach others so) as once he threatened to do
with those that forgot him, saying, their heart was exalted, therefore have
they forgotten me, I will meet them, (says the Lord) as a Bear that is robbed
of her Whelps, I will rent the caul of their heart. Hos. 13.8.
Truly Friends, unless these wretches meet God timely by repentance, his
meeting them thus will make them quake indeed.

But Sir, I have heard of one James Nailor, to be accused for horrid Blasphemy,
and personating the Lord Jesus Christ, and that some did own him as their
Savior, and that one of his Disciples said, That she did look to be saved by
no other but him, Dorot. Erbury. pa. 12.
I suppose, you have no such thing as to justify him; for I am told, the
Parliament passed a severe sentence upon him, and that its executed.

Oh Sir, I Will tell you, its nothing but the Priests malice, and Sir, here is a
Book of little price (for so the good people may have them; (I Will not get by
them) where you shall see his innocence cleared by two eminent men (wicked
Seducers) who told Nailors Judges (many Parliament men) to their faces, of his
innocence: nay, A Quaker.
Robert Rich challenged them at the Parliament door, That whatever Nailor did,
or spoke, he was at their door ready to make it good out of Scripture; and that
nothing he did or spoke, was worthy of death or bonds. And that those Books may
spread in the Nation, there are store at Bristol, sold by Nicholas Jorden (a
perfect Quaker, if common drunkenness and perfection may stand together) and
that at 3. farthings a piece.

Now among other things, that are reckoned in the Merchandise of Babylon, Rev
18.13.
are the souls of men; and to the end, poor souls may be the better fitted for
Babylon; yea, for Hell it self: you see some part (and but a part) of what this
tolerating Market does hold forth, and that very cheap.

O my Friends! Take heed and beware who you hear, how you read, and what you
buy: And why will you lay out your money for that which is not bread (but
Blasphemy, Isa. 55.1, 2.
) when you may have wine and milk without money, and without price? Friends,
there is a Disease we are all infected with, its hereditary from our first
Parents [pride] you know who said to Eve, You shall be as Gods, knowing good
and evil, Genesis 3.5.6.
(mark) And when she saw (says the Text) it was a Tree to be desired, to make
one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat. And so now, we must hear
all, try all, read all; we shall thereby be wise, and get knowledge. (Ah white
Devil!) Knowledge (says the Apostle) puffs up; 1 Cor. 8.1.
and has it not done so? speak Christian. Is not that Text sadly fulfilled.
Isa. 3.5. The Child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, etc.
godly Mr. Baxter.

Ah my Friends, keep to your known Teachers, and labor for humility; for
(says one) None are more like to Christ, then the humble, that are low in
their own eyes, and compassionate of others: so none are more like to the
Devil, then the proud, that think highly of themselves, and contemptuously of
others. These men by their teachings, by their printings, by their travels,
from one end of the Land to the other; yea, from one Nation to another, from
Sea to Sea; yea, and beyond the Seas they act, as Satan's factors to make
Proselytes, and, when made, Mat. 23 15.
They make them twofold more the Children of the Devil than themselves. Abhor
therefore, and detest the Pharisees (and Quakers) singularity. God I thank
thee, I am not as other men, etc. but if they be not as other men (I suppose)
they (the Quakers) are as other Heathens, who walk by the light within them, as
well as (yea far better then) they; for they (to wit the Heathen) cannot so
blaspheme our Lord Jesus Christ (as these do) whose relation to us, and
suffering for us, should move us to bewail it: and oh! that we could bewail his
often bleeding (if it were possible) with tears of blood.

And that we may shun the condition of these seduced souls; lets us consider
this Text, For its impossible for those, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the World to come: if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, (Mark,
its to themselves) and put him to an open shame. Was ever this Text so
fulfilled as now it is in these wretches? who speak so shamefully of our Lord
Jesus, that we (tremble and) are ashamed to name it in our own Language. Ezekiel.
19.14. Chap. 7. verse. 16.
These things are a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation. And oh! that
we could mourn therefore, as those Doves in the valley, every one for his
iniquity!

The Prophet speaking of several plagues (as Famine, drought, dearth,
Pestilence, the Sword; nay, he overthrew some of them, as Sodom) that were
brought upon Israel; he by way of complaint, tells them no less then five
times; Yet have ye not returned unto me, Amos 4.6. to 13.
says the Lord. At last, the Lord comes in with this sad threatening, (a hidden
judgment.) Therefore thus will I do unto thee oh Israel! (Thus, what thus, who
knows? and because I will do thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God oh
Israel! oh! that England would prepare to meet the Lord! Why? Because he will
do thus, what thus? He will bring, shall I say? Nay, he has brought, not
bodily (that is too little, it has done no good upon England, as it did not
upon Israel) but spiritual Judgments; and certainly, such spiritual plagues,
that neither we nor our Fathers ever beheld the like, and are (as Mr. Baxter
observes) as evident notes of Gods heavy displeasure, as men can expect to see
on earth. And is not that text now fulfilled, viz. 2 These. 2.11, 12.
And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they shall
believe a lie: (mark, send Seducers) That they all might be damned, who believe
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Ah poor seduced souls! they
cry up Heathen principles (a light within them, casting off the light the word
of God without them:) and see how the Lord in judgment, does give them up to
their Brethren, (the Heathens) practices. They changed the truth of God into a
lie, for this cause (says the Text) God gave them up to vile affections, Romans
2.25.26, 29, 30, 31.
and to a reprobate mind, and to an abominable conversation, being filled with
all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full
of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, haters of
God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to
Parents, without understanding, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful. Here is a blessed pack of Quakers; I so say, because
amongst them in this Synagogue of Satan (so near me) without wrong (for I would
not wrong the Devil) there might be drawn out such persons, in whom these black
Ethiopian spots are.

Ah poor England! (ah hypocritical Nation!) may not God plead with us, as once
with his people? pass over the Isses, Jer. 2.9, 10, 11
go beyond the Seas, amongst the very Heathen, and consider diligently, and see
if there be such a thing. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no
Gods? But my People have changed their glory for that which does not profit.
Chap. 1. verse. 4.
Have we not (since this wretched Toleration) changed (nay lost) the glory of
our Gospel-profession? and is not that of the Prophet Isaiah, a right character
upon us? Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
Children that are corrupters, (mark) they have forsaken the Lord, they have
provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are gone away backward. And may
not this provocation of the Lord cause him to say, Shall not my soul be avenged
on such a Nation as this? (that did, Jer. 5.9.
with their hands lifted up to the most high God, Covenant for Reformation) who
by a Toleration, Isa. 10 6.
are become an hypocritical and false Nation?

Oh my Brethren! my council is still the same. Take heed how you hear, for we
shall one day give account for what we hear. And that we may take the more
heed, consider what falseness the Book of God discovers unto us for our
caution, viz. A false Nation (as before.) False Christ's (the occasion of my
Narrative) you have also false spirits, seducing spirits, Mat. 24 4, 5. 1 Timothy
4.1. 2 Pet. 2.1. 2 Cor. 11.26. Jam. 2.19, 20.
then false Prophets, and false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13. False Teachers in the
forecited place of Peter, then false Brethren; then you have false faith. And
last of all (which is worst of all) a false heart, 1 Timothy 4.2. Speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared with a hot Iron.

Now Brethren, there being so much falseness in all these particulars, how much
does it concern us, what, whom, 2 Chronicles. 17 3
and how we hear? Its said, the Lord was with Jehosaphat, because he walked in
the first ways of his Father David: Ah Brethren, the first ways of
professors, when they kept close to their known Ministers, then they kept close
to God and Christ, Jer. 6.16. 2 Chronicles 19.11.
Sabbaths, Ordinances, Duties; these good old ways, were the first and best
ways. Let us walk courageously in this way, and the Lord shall be with the
good. And however the Prophets of God are opposed and contemned, let us keep to
rule, we shall never else be established, either Nation or Kingdom (what rule?
mark) Believe in the Lord your God, Chap. 20. verse. 20.
so shall ye be established, believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. Ah sad
Toleration! the Lord give repentance to England, for all those abominations it
has ushered in, and protected among us. The good Lord, after they in power
over us, have repented (of whom we may say as Ezra 9.2. yea, the hand of the
Princes and Rulers, has bin chief in this trespass) give them further grace,
to make a Law of restraint, lest the judgment of God, (which is justly to be
feared) break in upon them and us, without remedy. But they mocked the
Messengers of God, Chap 36. verse. 16. Gen ^0.7.
and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, till there was no remedy. Well, however let us honor
them, for that is an everlasting truth, He is a Prophet, and shall pray for
thee. And, had we not their prayers, it would be sad with England: nay, God
forbid they should so sin, 1 Samuel 12, 23.
as not to pray for us; well, then let us make conscience of praying for them,
and there is this reason for it; for if all estates and ranks amongst as should
desert profession, and despise the Gospel, yet they are set for the defense of
it; and therefore (hear them) pray for them: Phil. 1.17. Neh. 1.11.
to which I shall add this prayer, The good Lord be attentive to the prayer of
thy Servant, and the prayer of thy Servants (both Prophets and People) that
desire to fear thy name.

And Brethren, is not this to be bewailed, that there should be such calling
for Toleration, the mischiefs and sad effects of it being so many, and so
great, that they cannot be aforehand imagined; besides the further disturbance
of the peace, by different factions, and making the divisions in Families, to
be almost as many as persons; suppose the Husband a good Protestant, it may be
the Wife an Independent, the Children Anabaptists, the Servants Quakers.

Oh Brethren! how sad is this? And moreover, that there should be a conniving
at those ranting opinions that tend to all manner of ungodliness, See Doctor
Cawdry, his Sermon upon Joshua 24.15. pa. 28.

In the Reign of Henry the third, one pretending himself to be Christ, was by
the Magistrates, then immured between two walls, and there perished, as being
thought unworthy to dye by the hands of any man. Speed's History. p. 522, 523.

If a Nebuchad. did make such a Law, as to tie up the tongues of all in his
Dominions, not to speak a word against the God of, etc. Dan. 3.29. Oh how does
it concern Christian Magistrates much more.

This would be a compassionate compulsion.

Mr. W. T.


which have so spread, that it has infected the Nation from head to foot.
Witness the great friends Blasphemy, and this unparalleld Blasphemer had, that
put the Parliament to so much expense of time, before that honorable sentence
was given against him (death it self being his desert.) This considered, O that
those in power over us, would at last prove such happy Reformers to the Nation,
and show such pity to the souls of their poor Brethren, as to put a restraint
upon all soul-infecting persons, and set on fire all those soul-poysoning and
blaspheming Pamphlets that are abroad, (which would be an acceptable
sacrifice.) For its to be feared, that Christians may have just cause to rue
the liberty given (to Press and Pulpit) in these days: Now that people might
have some stop, when tumbling headlong into Hell, being so principled, that
they think it their duty to do Hell service.

Oh! that the Parliament (who had such an Impostor and Blasphemer brought
before them, (that their Predecessors never heard of the like) had made the
Nation so happy, as to compel people (as one says well) to Ordinances, though
unwillingly that so (if possible) they might be brought to God, and goodness
willingly! And for their encouragement, they had in holy writ, a very imitable
pattern, Josiah by name, And Josiah took away all the abominations: 2 Chronicles.
34.33.
(many Pamphlets abroad are abominable things) out of all the Countries that
pertained to the Children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel
to serve (made them to serve) even to serve the Lord their God, and all his
days they departed not from following the Lord, the God of their Fathers. And
a good effect it had upon them; for all his days they kept close to God. Thus
to appear and act for the good of souls, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. 2 Chronicles. ^5.^
will be your Crown. Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with you Now
the Lord is with you, while you be with him, and if you seek (and act for) him,
he will be found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. Arise
therefore, for this matter belongs unto you, we also (say they that fear the
Lord) will be with you, Ezra 10.4, 5.
be of good courage and do it. Then arose Ezra and did it, Go ye and do
likewise, and the Lord be with the just, Amen.

An Epistle of Publius Lentulus, (found in the Roman Annals) at that time
President in Judea, under Tiberius the Emperor,) written to the Senate of
Rome: (A Copy whereof was found (among other papers, to the number of 21.)
about Nailor's Disciples, at their first Examination before the Magistrates of
Bristol.)
THere appeared in these our days, a man of great virtue, named Jesus Christ,
who is yet living amongst us, and of the Gentiles, is accepted for a Prophet of
truth, but his own Disciples call him the Son of God. He raises the dead, and
cures all manner of Diseases. A man of stature, somewhat tall and comely, with
a very reverend countenance, such as the beholders may both love and fear; his
hair of the color of a Philbert full ripe, and plain almost down to his ears,
from the ears downwards, somewhat curled, and more orient of color, waving
about his shoulders; in the midst of his Head goes a seam, or partition of his
hair, after the manner of the Nazarites; his forehead very plain and smooth,
his face without spot or wrinckle, beautified with a comely red: his nose and
mouth so formed, as nothing can be reprehended; his beard somewhat thick,
agreeable in color, to the hair of his head, not of any great length, but
forked in the midst, of an innocent and mature look; his eyes gray clear and
quick; in reproving, he is terrible; in admonishing, courteous, and fair
spoken, pleasant in speech, mixed with gravity; it cannot be remembered, that
any have seen him laugh, but many have seen him weep; in proportion of Body
well shaped and straight; his hands and arms right delectable to behold, in
speaking very temperate, modest, and wise; a man for his singular beauty
surpassing the Children of men.

To some particulars in this description (that wicked Impostor) James Nailor,
bearing some small natural resemblance, viz. in shape of body and color, of
hair, he (cunningly like himself) endeavors to answer the rest, (whereunto he
was much unlike by nature) by an artificial composure of his countenance, to an
affected gravity, parting the hair of his head, wearing his beard forked, and
the like; the better to carry on his damnable juggling and imposture, among
those poor deluded wretches, that were given up to believe lies; that so they
might take him to be the person there described, and be drawn the more easily
to give him that honor and worship that does of right belong to the true Jesus.

AN END.

