THE ARRAIGNMENT OF PRIDE, OR, Pride set forth, with the Causes, Kinds, and
several Branches of it: the odiousness and greatness of the sin of Pride: the
Prognostics of it, together with the cure of it: as also a large description
of the excellency and usefulness of the grace of Humility: divided into
Chapters and Sections. By W. Gearing Minister of the Word at Lymington in
Hantshire.

Superbus dictus est, quia supra vult videriquam est: qui enim vult supergredi
superbus est. Isidor. lib. Etymolog. LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Francis
Tyton, and are to be sold at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the Inner
Temple gate, 1660.

TO THE Right Worshipful RICHARD LVCY OF CHARLECOT in the County of WARWICK,
Esquire; and to the Religious Lady ELIZABETH LVCY his Wife.
Right Worshipful,
Diverse Nations and great Captains have born diverse Ensigns in their wars: the
Egyptians in the City Heliopolis carried an Ox, in Memphis a Bull, in Arcine a
Crocodile: The Persians in their first Standard had the picture of the Sun,
which they call Mithra; in the second Fire, which they call Grimasdes, in the
third a golden spread-eagle: The Romans when their Empire grew great and
strong, had five principal Standards; in the first and chief before the Legion
was an Eagle, in the second a Wolf, in the third a Minotaur, in the fourth a
Horse, in the fifth a Boar: The Cymbrians carried into the field a brazen Bull:
Julius Caesar bare an Elephant: Porus King of India had the picture of
Hercules: The Germans carried the picture of lightning; the old Britains used
to paint their faces to seem terrible to their enemies: but now-adaies every
man bears the ensign of Pride: the world is a sea of monsters, a Pageant of
fond delights, a feigned Comedy, a delectable Phrenzy, a Cage of gaudy birds, a
Theater of gilded fooleries and painted vanities. Pride is an hook whereby the
spiritual Leviathan draws multitudes of men to destruction: Pride rides on
horseback cum purpurata and phlerataa vest, while many of the poor and needy
members of Christ, even Orphans, Widows, Fatherless and Friendless are fleeced
to the bare bones; Some are grown great, and are very proud of their greatness,
giving honor to none but the God Mauzzim, Suidas.
like Thules that proud King of Egypt, who (having enlarged his bounds to the
sea, and called it Thule, Difficile est ut non sit superbus qui dives est.
August. Sermon. 31.
an Island after his own name) asked where there were any King or God more
potent then he; yet even these men while they hold the liberty of others in
their hand, are languishing in the bondage of their own ambitions; others
abounding with wealth and riches (whose eyes are dazzled, whose hearts are
bewitched with the glory and sweetness of these outward things) are puffed up
with secure presumption, Psalm. 73.6.
Pride compassing them about as a chain, who like the Scythian Griffons keep
great heaps of gold and silver, Genimian. lib. 4. cap. 9.
and yet enjoy it not. Some have said that Pride was born at the Court; but I
am sure it was bred in every ones heart: some look very big for having a great
feather in their cap; some for a gay coat or gaudy suit which they have gotten
upon their backs; but if there be any glory in these, it is to be given to the
Bird, to the Silkworm, to the Stuff, to the Clothier, to the Tailor: others
have lofty looks because of their long locks, or because they have got a set of
borrowed and powdered hair, an argument of the weakeness of those heads that
wear it, to be proud of a mendicated execrement. Such as these take more pains
to cherish the ornament of their face then of their conversation, and had as
rather see the Commonwealth in confusion, as their Perriwig in the least
disorder: Some would be cried up for complete persons for their beauty, neat
garb, skill in singing and dancing, their fine complements and courtings,
quaint discourses and artificial behavior: Quod volumus sanctum est. August.
others would be magnified for their great wit and little learning, and will
have their own opinion in every thing, engrossing all the talk to themselves
wherever they come, and if any weak person be overcome by them, they will
speak Tragically upon every thing in Controversy, Quod in corporibus tumor,
hoc in animabus superbia est. Sicut enim illic quod immodice turget, sanum non
esse, ita and tumidos carere sanitate dicimus. Chrysest. homil. 17. in 1. Tim.
and by making themselves prodigal of that which they have not, they will needs
be Judges of that whereof they are incapable: how many are there daily to be
seen, who rely upon the only Mercury of their wit, and overflowing in the
looseness of their own opinions, they are as unstable in their manners as in
their imaginations, and while they think to elevate themselves beyond the
vulgar in the search and science of the most excellent things, they are drowned
in the misprision and ignorance of themselves.

But of what a base spirit is man to think to add to his worth by such toys as
these are, no one of them making him better, but many times worse, then before?
good spirits cannot long be in love with such fooleries; he that loadeth
himself with Pearls will never trouble himself with Cockleshels; such trifles
are vain and foolish, having no virtue, but in the bud, nor goodness, but in
the blossom, which oftentimes comes to nothing: Ut in area extollitur palea
super granum, non quod sit dignior, sed quod sit levior, and cum sit levior,
altiorem obtinet locum; sic in hac vita superbus fertur super humilem, non ob
meritum and veram virtutem, sed ob vanitatem and falsam de se opinionem; and
cum sit parvi momenti, se aliis anteponit, a quibus virtute superatur. Hect.
Pintus in Ezekiel.
the excellency of true virtue consists not in setting up, or setting off our
selves, for it matters not where we be, so we be in rule and order. Naturalists
say of true Balm, that it is tried and known by dropping it into water; for if
it sink down to the bottom, it is held and taken to be the most excellent: So
to know a man to be truly excellent, truly wise, truly generous, noble,
learned, we must see whether his virtues tend to the bottom, that is to
humility and lowliness; for if they swim on the top and be set to show, Qui
sine humilitate virtutes congregat, quasi in ventum pulverem portat. Greg.
homil. 6.
they may be termed virtues and graces, but falsely so called: he that gathers
virtues together without humility, is like a man that carries dust into a
rufling wind, says one of the Ancients: It is said that the Walnut-tree is
very hurtful to the Vine in the field where it is planted, for it sucks out the
nourishment of the earth, not leaving enough for the Vine; and the leaves of it
are so thick, that they make a dark shade, drawing Passengers to it, who to
beat down the fruit, tread down and spoil the Vine: of this nature are all
worldly vanities to the soul, wherein foolish men pride themselves; while the
thoughts run out after them, a man's whole time is taken up with them, many
strong temptations assault him, and his heart is trodden down and spoiled: In
brief, Pride banisheth heavenly love and the fear of God out of the heart,
enfeebleth the spirit, and blemisheth a man's reputation, and though it be the
sport of the world, yet is it the bane of the heart: Pride is a furnace, whose
mouth is self-conceitedness, the flame vanity, the sparkles contemptuous words,
the smoke an evil name, the ashes misery, and the end shame: but on the
contrary; they that write of husbandry tell us, that if one write any word upon
a sound Almond, and put it into its shell, binding it well, and setting it into
the earth, all the fruit of that tree will grow with that word imprinted in it:
So also whosoever has humility in his heart, shall have it also grow up with
him in his outward actions; and as the life springs from the heart, the Almond
from the kernel, it will bring forth all the actions that are the fruits
thereof with humility stamped upon it, which will be seen in a man's eyes, lips,
vestures, gestures, and in all his carriage.

And now (right worshipful) I bring to you a few clusters (though not in a
Lordly dish) which I gathered in the time of a great sickness, when God shut me
up from the public exercise of my Ministry for diverse months together: Pardon
I beseech you my boldness in adventuring thus far upon so slender a knowledge,
and less deserts: the good report that you have for your humble conversation,
and the great respect that you show to the godly and learned Ministry, when
multitudes of men requite their labors with intolerable contempt, has
encouraged me to present you with this little Treatise, the design whereof is
to set forth the nature, the original, the several branches, the greatness and
deformity of the hemlock of Pride, with salves to cure this fretting leprosy,
and to display and advance that contrary and most excellent grace of humility,
a garment which the greatest man and the best Christian need not disdain to
wear, Nihil excelsius humilitate, quae tanquam superior nescit extolli. Ambros.
sup. Luc. 7.
a dish that should never be wanting at your tables, which (like the Mulberry)
will prove both food and Physic for your souls: Non magnum est humilem esse in
abjectione, magna prorsus and rara virtus humilitas honorata. Bern. sup. missus
est.
God has advanced you in the world above many others; but yet humility will
raise you higher, setting you near to the most high: Its no great matter for a
man to be humble in a mean and low estate; but it is a great and rare grace to
see humility in men of honor and greatness: Be pleased I pray you to accept of
this small present, a better then such as this is, being past my power to
bestow; and for greater gifts you need not any: my building (to the view
whereof I take the boldness to invite you) is not great, and therefore my entry
into it must not be over-spatious. The Lord replenish you more and more with
this soul-adorning grace of humility, which has a wonderful aptness to receive
a Sea of graces and heavenly blessings from the overflowing fountain and Father
of mercies; so prays

Your Worships in the Lord to be commanded, W. G.
From my study in Lymington, Jan. 1. 1659/60.
Index Rerum.
Chap. 1 THe porch or entrance into this work Chap. 2 Of Pride in general: the
definition of Pride Chap. 3 Of the causes of Pride Chap. 4 Of the kinds of
Pride External Internal
First of External Pride of the body, and those things that belong unto it 1 Of
Pride of apparel Sect. 1 Of immodest apparel Sect. 2 Of costly apparel Sect. 3
Of wearing habits above our degree, where also the manifold use of apparel is
showed Sect. 4 Of superfluous garments Sect. 5 Of wearing strange apparel
Chap. 5 Of Pride of beauty, and the vanity thereof Chap. 6 Of Pride of gesture
Sect. 1 Of proud looks Sect. 2 Of a proud gate or pace Sect. 3 Of disdaining to
give salutations and civil respect to superiors or equals: some objections
answered
Chap. 7 Of Pride of hair: plaited hair, long hair, borrowed hair Chap. 8 Of
Pride of riches Chap. 9 Of Pride of honor Sect. 1 Of affectation of high
Titles and a name in the world Sect. 2 Of affecting high places Sect. 3 Of the
Pride of men in high places: where the several steps to the Pride of the Papacy
are set down Sect. 4 Of Pride of a generous and noble descent
Chap. 10 Of Pride of diet Chap. 11 Of pride of strength Sect. 1 Of Pride of
bodily strength Sect. 2 Of Pride of strong holds
Chap. 12 Of Pride of children Chap. 13 Of Pride of outward privileges Chap.
14 Of internal Pride: and first of Pride of the heart Chap. 15 Of Pride in the
will Chap. 16 Of Pride in the affections Chap. 17 Of Pride of gifts in general
Chap. 18 Of Pride of wit Chap. 19 Of Pride of memory Chap. 20 Of Pride of
eloquence Chap. 21 Of Pride of learning and knowledge Chap. 22 Of Pride of
inward strength Chap. 23 Of Pride of grace, and of humility it self Chap. 24
Sect. 1 Of the odiousness of Pride, both to God and man; and how God resists
the proud Sect. 2 Five reasons why God resists this sin of Pride
Chap. 25 Of the greatness of the sin of Pride Sect. 1 Of the original of
Pride; and that it is an Epidemical evil, found in all sorts of persons Sect. 2
How Pride is found in every sin, and the root of all sins, especially of seven
great sins
Chap. 26 Of the Prognostics of Pride, in three Sections; showing the
mischiefs it threatens to the soul in seven things Chap. 27 Of the cure of
Pride: the first direction Chap. 28 The second direction Chap. 29 The third
direction Chap. 30 The fourth, fifth, and sixth directions Chap. 31, 32, 33 The
seventh direction: where Jesus Christ is largely set forth as a great example
of humility from his birth to the time of his crucifixion Chap. 34 An
exhortation to humility, setting forth the excellency and usefulness thereof:
the conclusion of the whole work
The Authors cited in this Treatise.
A
R. Abbot contr. Bishop Abbot on Jonah Adams Melchior. Adam Albertus magnus
Ainsworth Ambros. Sir Anth. Shirley Anselm Aquinas Aretius Aristotle Arnobius
Augustine
B
Babington Baronius Sir Richard Barckley Basil Beda Bellarmin Becolcerns
Beneventius Bernard Beza Bonavent. Boys Bruson Bulling. Epist. Bucan. loc. com.
Bulla Pii 5
C
Calvin harm. Evang. Calvin instit. Cameron. stellit. Carrion Cronic. Cartwright
Cassiodorus Clem. Alexand. Caussin. holy Court Caelius Rhodigin. Chald.
Paraphr. Cedren. Graec. hist. Chemnit. harm. Conrad. Lycost. Cicero. Caesarii
homil. Coster. Enchyrid. de notis Eccles. Chrysostom Cyprian Chrysologus
D
Davenant in Colos. Diodorus Siculus Mr. Dent
E
Erasmus Estius Euripides Eusebius. hist.
F
Fox Dudl. Fenner Ferus Franz. hist. sacra.
G
Gerson Genevenses Glos. interlin. Grymstons Romans hist. Gorran Gualter Greg.
moral. Greg. homil. Gratian
H
Hist. novi orbis Bishop Hall Hect. Pintus in Ezekiel. Hieronym. Mr. Hieron
Herodotus Horat Hooper Hugo Card. Hugo de S. Vict. Hugo de discipl. monac.
Hilarious
I
Irenaeus Isidor. Soliloqu. Isidor. Etymol. Ital. transl. Joseph antiqu. P.
Jovius Innocentius Justin hist. Junius Jul. Capitol. Juvenal. Sat.
K
Keckerm. Syst. Ethic. King on Jonah
L
Livius Lucius Apuleius Lumb. sent. Lyra Lyran Luther
M
Magdeb. hist. Marlorat Macarius Mantuan Maldonat Sir John Mandevil Melancton
Musculus M. S.
N
Nazianzen
O
Onuphrius Ovid
P
Pagnin Paraeus Parisiensis Petrarc. de remed. utr. fortunae. Piscator Plia
nut. hist. Philo Judaeus Plato Procop. de bell. Gothico. Plutarc. moral. Plutar.
vit. Platina de vit. Pontif. Jo. Picus Mirand. Epist. Philostratus Dr. Plaifer
Q
Quintilian Qu. Curtius
R
Rheyner Rhem. Annot.
S
Salvian de provid. dei Sir Philip Sydney Seneca Sent. hebr. Septuagint
Struther Suidas Socrat. Eccl. hist. Stella Suetonius Sir. Versio Dr. Sutton
Symmachus
T
Tacitus Tailer Tertullian Theophilact Theodoret. Eccl. hist. Torshel
Tremellius Tripart. hist. Thuanus
U
Valor. Episcop. Valor. Maxim. Vella Volateran Virgil Vulg. translat.
W
Jo. Wolf lect. Weemes Wicelius Woodward
Z
Zanch. Zosimus
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF PRIDE.
1 John. 2.16. -- and the pride of life --
CHAP. 1. The Porch, or Entrance into the work.
THe drift of the Apostle in this Epistle, and in this Chapter, is, to exhort
all the faithful (whom he divides into three ranks, Mundum vocat homines
deditos rebus; hujus m^ndi, i.e. corporalibus ac sensibilibus; mundum autem sic
acceptum, i. e. homines malos diligi vetat, quatenus tabes sunt, etc. Estius in
loc. Per ea quae sunt in mundo omnia, quaenos ad peccandum solicitant,
quaecunque tandem sint. Aretius in loc.
according to their standing in Grace) unto Brotherly Love, verse. 7-10. which
that he may the more effectually press upon them, he calls them back from the
love of other things; the immoderate love and desire whereof, is contrary to
brotherly love and charity; and the things of this sort, are the world, and the
things of the world, ver. 15. By the world, may be meant the men of the world,
addicted to the things of the world, i. e. to corporal and sensible things. And
the world being thus taken, we are forbidden to love wicked Worldlings, as they
are such. By the things of the world, we are to understand Pleasures, Riches
and Honors, or all those worldly things which provoke us to sin against God,
whatsoever they are.

The reasons why our Apostle labors to draw them off from the love of
worldly things, are,

1. A Disparatis; Because God and the World cannot be truly loved together,
ver. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

2. A partibus mundi integralibus: From all the parts of the world, whole and
entire, which are the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of
life.

3. From the Original of all worldly things. 1. Negatively, they are not of the
Father. 2. Affirmatively, but of the world.


4. Res humanae non habent (...) aut (...), sed (...).
From the frailty and instability of all these worldly things, ver. 17. And the
world passes away, and the lust thereof.

In this 16 verse, the Apostle gives us an account of whatsoever is in the
world, reducing it all to these three heads, The lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and pride of life.

The Evangelist speaks not of the frame of the world, but of the things of the
world, which the corrupt nature of man is apt to dote upon; it consists of
the lust of the flesh, etc. The word Lust is taken,

1. For the habit, or lusting faculty, and such lusts as these are called
habitual lusts.

2. For the motions and actions of lust, and these are called actual lusts.

Lusts are either good or evil:

1. Good; and these are either natural or spiritual.

Natural lusts that are good, are such as come from nature in her state of
innocence.

There be also spiritual lusts; as when the Spirit lusts against the flesh,
Gal. 5.17. and the soul of a Christian pants and longs after God, Psalm.
42.1.

2. Evil lusts: Which are such as are contrary to the commands of God; and
these are here described to be of two sorts: Fleshly lusts, and Worldly lusts:
Called the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eye; the one denotes unto us
all inordinate motions of the will, all unlawful desires of the understanding,
of the affections and sensual parts, Gal. 5.16.

By the other; (viz. the lust of the eye) is meant an inordinate desire of
worldly things; Fastus, five superbia mund.
it is such a desire, as is the desire of the will as well as of the
affections: And so the special objects of it are Pleasure, Riches, and Honor;
the act of Pleasure, is Lust; the act of Riches, Covetousness; the act of
Honor, Ambition, and Pride of Life.

The Syriack reads it, Sir. verse. (...) non simpliciter vitam significat, sed
vitae genus, and quod vulgo dicunt statum. Estius. (...) est vivendi genus and
ratio. Calv. in loc.
the pride or haughtiness of the world. The Greek word (...) signifies a proud
ostentation of any worldly thing; and the word (...) does not simply signify
the life of man, but the manner, state, and condition of that life; and
therefore called Pride of life, because pride is found most in such as mind
the things of this life, and because it is most demonstrated in the course of
our life.

Austin says, that with these three the Devil set upon our first Parents; the
lust of the flesh in them, was to taste of the forbidden fruit; the lust of the
eyes, to have their eyes opened; Beda in Mat. 4. Haec tria pro trino numine
mundus habet.
and the pride of life, to be like unto God. And Beda shows, that the Devil
made use of these three for the tempting of our blessed Savior. The reasons
why the objects of Lust are reduced to three heads; are,

1. Because these are things that men most desire.

2. Because men are most unable to refrain these lusts. Pride here comes after
Lust, to note to us, that what men greedily lust after, they enjoy by pride.

CHAP. 2. Of Pride in general.
MY purpose (God assisting me) is from this Text, to handle this great sin of
Pride: And first I shall define it, though I confess that it is a sin so great,
that I can hardly give a full definition of it. I have read of Apelles, Conrad.
Lycost.
that excellent Painter, that being commanded to pourtray a Giant of a great
stature, and finding it hard to set him forth so great (in that small table he
had in hand) as was required, he painted in the table an hand of huge bigness,
and two Giants also, who with two long sticks measured one finger of the Giants
hand, that by the greatness of that finger, the mighty stature of that Giant
might appear. So at this present I am compelled to do; I am now to set forth to
you a mighty Giant, that swelling sin of Pride, and a little to touch upon that
excellent Grace of Humility: I can but only paint a hand of either, but by
observing the Proportion thereof, you may the more easily take a true survey of
both.

Quest. You may ask, What is this sin of Pride?

Answ. Superbia est amor affectus seu appetitus inordinatus propriae
excellentiae, alios injuste cupiens superare. Gerson. Superbia est elatio
vitiasa, quae inferiorem despiciens, superioribus and paribus satagit dominari.
Hugo de S. vict.
Pride is an inordinate desire of a man's own excellency and glory, a refusal to
be in subjection to those to whom he ought, and a sinful affection to be above
others. Proud men (like the Sons of Belial) do reject every yoke; and like
those Citizens that hated Christ, and sent a message after him, saying, We will
not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. Therefore the Romans painted
Pride in the form of a Devil, having three Crowns upon his head, one upon
another; in the first was written Transcendo, I surpass all others, because the
proud man thinks he exceeds all other men. And therefore says Hugo, Pride is a
vicious haughtiness, whereby a man despises his inferiors, and earnestly
busieth himself to rule over his equals, and those also that are above him. In
the second Crown was written, Non obedio, I obey no others; because Pride would
give Laws to others, but obey none himself. In the third was written, Perturbo,
I trouble all; and we see by experience, that the pride of some persons does
trouble a whole Nation. Pride then is a swelling desire of a man's own
excellency and glory, Caera superbia est vitium quo se existimans aliquid. vel
esse honum quod non est, vel a se esse quod est, in se, non in Domino
gloriatur. Bern. Epist. Melius est in malis factis humilis confessio quam in
bonis superba gloriatio August. in Luc. 18.
whereby a man is pufft up with something that is in him, or the conceit of
something that is peculiar to him. Pride makes a man high in his own esteem; it
was a proud one that said, I am not as other men are, Luke 18.11. and he gives
God thanks for it, that he is no extortioner, unjust, etc. a strange kind of
Prayer, Non est ista supplicatio, sed superlatio; this is no confession of his
sins, but a commendation of his virtues; he comes not as a beggar, to show his
rags, to move mercy and compassion; but as a proud bragger, showing his robes,
standing upon his merits; Non ostendit vulnera, sed potius munera, he
confesses not his wants, but boasts of his worth: And many in the world
there are of his stamp, that think all their Geese are Swans, holding
themselves more wise, more holy, of better conversation, of more pure note, and
better report then others; as if this were a thing most just, for a man to
justify himself, as Austin speaks against Faustus the Manichee: August.
contrae Faust. Manich. lib. 5. cap. 7.

The clock of the Pharisees Tongue, went truer then the dyal of his Heart.
Adams.


But he should have let another have commended him, and not his own mouth; he
should not have been his own Crier and Trumpeter. The Hebrew word Gauoah,
signifying the high man, is by the Greeks rendered (...), which signifies an
appearance, not a real thing; an appearance more then enough; showing that
Pride is a great vanity, an appearance of that which is not in reality; the
counting of a man's self to be something, when he is nothing: Gal. 6.3. Superbia
offuscat oculum mentis. Bern.
Its natural to men to think too well of themselves, and too meanly of others;
to magnify, yea, Deifie themselves; and vilify, yea, nullify others: For a
man looking through the spectacles of self-love, thinks every gift that God
has bestowed on him greater then it is, imagining shadows to be substances,
and mole-hills mountains; yea, even his own blemishes and deformities to be
ornaments; Narcissus-like, Acts 8.9, 10.
doting upon his own face; and as Simon Magus, who though he were a wicked
wretch, and a notorious Witch, yet will have it given out, that himself was
some great one, To whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest,
saying, This man is the great power of God. Apoc. 3.17.
So the Church of Laodicea said, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing. So the Scarlet-colored Strumpet glorified her self, Apoc.
18.7, 8, 9.
and thought her self a Queen, when she is ready for ruin.

Yea, this corruption prevails upon the very Regenerate, and such as are in
part sanctified: We read that the very Apostles themselves strove for
precedence, Luke 22.24. and 9.46. Surely the Disciples thought that it was a
very small matter for them, to think every one his own penny the best silver,
and to envy Peter, James and John, for being in more esteem with Christ (as
they thought) then themselves. And in all ages since Christ's time, there have
been some in the Church, that have had an overweening conceit of their own
righteousness, purity, and perfection, as the Catharists, Donatists,
Jovinianists, Pelagians, and the Quakers, and others of that stamp in these
days, thinking that a just man has not sin remaining in him; and the Papists,
and such like, who will have a hand in their own conversion.

CHAP. 3. Of the causes of Pride.
1. THe first cause of Pride in us, is, that bitter root of Pride that was in
our first Parents; it is an evil that is hereditary to us all, that every one
of Adams race brings with him into the world; it is reigning in every soul in
the state of nature, and it is abiding in the best; and if God leave them but a
little, they will quickly show it, as Hezekiah did; though he was holy,
sincere, and full of faith and confidence in God; yet when God left him in the
business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, his heart was lifted up,
2 Chronicles. 32.25, 31.
and stufft with pride.

2. A second cause of Pride is ignorance. Menander an Heathen could say, (...),
etc. Whenever you see a proud man, say, There Is a fool; and it is weakness,
folly and ignorance that causes pride and high thoughts of our selves; as with
the lowly there is wisdom, Prove. 11.2.
so with the proud and high-minded there is folly and ignorance. Melancton
said, that all proud men are fools, and all fools are proud: Melanct. explic.
dom. 11. post. trin.
Proud men are in darkness, and self-conceited men are foolish; and blind men
see no evil; and men use to call a proud fantastical man, a proud fool: Prove.
26.12.
Nay Solomon says, See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more
hope of a fool then of such a man.

Ignorance of God, and of our selves, is a great cause of pride.

1. Ignorance of God: Proud Pharaoh was ignorant of God, when he scorneth the
message sent to him from God; he cries out, Who is the Lord? I know not the
Lord, etc. The ignorance of Gods glory and greatness, and of his infinite
perfections, is one cause why the heart of vain man is apt to swell with pride;
Principium superbiae est nescire Deum. Chry. homil. de Ozia. Cognitio Dei
consternit atque contundit humanam superbiam. Call. instit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
for were we acquainted in some measure with Gods glorious perfections, it
would humble us in the sense of our manifold imperfections: Likewise the
ignorance of Gods purity and holiness, his mercy and goodness; men are apt to
pride themselves, while they look upon others, comparing themselves with the
best; but did they look up to Gods infinite greatness and goodness, and to his
unspotted holiness, the pride of their hearts would fall down.

2. Ignorance of our selves is the cause of pride, De ignorantia tui
venitsuperbia. Bern. in Cantic.
and high thoughts of our selves. Demonax the Philosopher being asked when he
began to Philosophize, answered, when he began to know himself. And Plato
says, that the Oracle of Apollo did stir up every man that entered into his
Temple, to the knowledge of himself, by this short sentence written over the
gate of the Temple, Homo scito teipsum; bonum est enim scire propriam
infirmitatem. Aug
Nosce teipsum, Know thy self; laboring by the true knowledge of themselves,
to bring them to humility: Therefore says Austin, O man, know thy self, for it
is good to know thine own infirmities. When men stand upon their own bottoms,
and magnify themselves, it is an argument they know not themselves: Deformed
persons in the dark see not their own spots. If a Leper should boast of his
beauty, The Owl is a proud bird, but of great debility of sight.
you would say, this man knows not his own face, or has not seen his face in
a glass; so he that walks in the dungeon of ignorance, sees not himself, and
knows not that evil that is in himself, and what evils he is subject to,
therefore he is apt to have high thoughts of himself. Did man consider his many
sins, and daily transgressions, his inability to stand, his readiness to fall,
the corruption of his birth, the wickedness and misery of his life, and the
uncertainty of his death; did he consider, that what good soever he has, it is
not his own; and what he has he may lose, if not rightly used; and that one
day he must be called to an account for what he has received; then would he
find little cause to be proud of any thing. The more wisdom a man has, the
more humble it will make him; and the more ignorant he is, the more proud. Job
says, Job 28.13.
That wisdom is not to be found in the land of the living; the Chaldee
Paraphrast translates thus, Neither is it found in the land of proud livers, or
of those who in their lives are proud sinners: They that have least wisdom,
least grace, commonly think they have most; and they that have most, see the
most want. By seeing much into themselves, they see how much they want; and
that which they have, being nothing to what they lack, makes them have mean
thoughts of themselves.

3. A third cause of Pride in many men, is, from the flattering applause of
others. When men's parts and learning, Qui auditis blanditiis in altum se
extollit, quid aliud quam aurum reprobum fuit, quod fornax igne consumpsit?
Gregor.
and their opinions in Controversies are applauded, when men are cried up for
their wit, eloquence, memory, this is apt to puff them up with pride; then they
think there is something in them extraordinary, for which they may hold up
their head: This makes them look too much upon themselves, as those that stay
long at a glass, poring upon their own faces, till at length they fall in love
with their own shadow. When Herod made an eloquent Oration to the people, they
gave a shout, Act. 12.22, 23.
saying, It the voice of a God, and not of a man: This vain applause of the
people, pufft up his heart with pride, making him to give that glory to
himself, that was due to God. A proud heart loves to be tickled and flattered;
Adulatio blanda omnibus applaudit, omnibus salve dicit. Haec sagitta leviter
volat, and cito infigitur. Cassiodor. in quadam Epistola.
and flatterers deal with men whom they flatter, as the Jews did with Christ;
they blindefold him, then call him Rabbi, and seem to reverence him. A blind
man hears the good that is said of him, but perceives not the hurt and evil
that is meant toward him; and it many times falls out, that those that love to
be flattered for their virtues, are also (as a just plague and punishment upon
them) flattered in their sins. It is a great weakness in any man to delight in
such persons, being the most pernicious people in the world, keeping a man ever
from the true knowledge of himself; and they will follow him no longer then
they can get by him, like the Celedony stone, that loses its virtue, unless it
be rubbed with gold; or like the Ivy, that sucks out the sap of the Oak that
supports it: They deal with a man, as a man does with a candle, carry it while
it serves his turn, and hurl it away when it is like to burn his fingers.

4. The fourth cause of Pride is the Devil: The true Original of all Pride is
Satan himself; through his sin, it was the first sin that he committed, some
think. God did discover to the Angels, Zanch. de not. Dei.
that the second Person in Trinity should take upon him the Humane Nature, and
that these would not stoop unto him: Thus Zanchy and others. But whatever the
particular object of it was, it is most probable that it was the sin of Pride.
When the seventy Disciples which our Savior had sent out to work miracles, and
to preach, returned again with joy, saying, Lord, Luke 10.17, 18.
even the Devils are subject unto us through thy name: He said unto them, I
beheld Satan as lighting fall from heaven. Some are of opinion, that our
Savior spoke here of the fall of Lucifer from Heaven for his pride; Gregor.
Theophil.
whereof ye may read Revel. 12.7, 8, 9. where it is said, Superbia est caput
antiqui Serpentis.
that Michael and his Angel fought against the Dragon and his Angels; and in
fight prevailed so, that there was no more place found in Heaven, either for
the Dragon himself, or for his Angels, but he was cast out, and they with him;
and this fall (no question) Christ Jesus was an eyewitness and beholder of in
his Divinity, being that Michael there spoken of, who gave him the fall, and
threw him down; and thus they take the answer of Christ to be a caveat to these
Disciples, to take heed of being infected with pride, occasioned by their
prosperous success, from this fearful example. Some say, the Devil has in him
every sin secundum reatum, Aquinas. Dr. Boys.
but only pride secundum affectum: They say he is guilty of other sins, only
tempting men to them; but that pride is his own proper and peculiar sin; but
the Scripture notes him to have been a liar and a murderer from the beginning;
therefore I see not how their assertion holds. But though it be not his
proper sin, yet it is his special sin; and therefore the Proverb says, As
proud as Lucifer. Men use to parallel a proud person with the Devil, and no
sinner besides; and it is an undoubted character of a child of the Devil, in
whomsoever it domineereth: And for that cause, Satan (like that great
Leviathan) may be called the King over all the children of Pride. Job 41.34.
And as every Soldier may be known under whose banner he fights, by some sign
that he carries: So Pride is the mark to know under whose banner he fights,
that bears it, scil. the Devils. Pride is the proper badge of the Devil, Quid
est Diabolus? Angelus per superbiam a Deo superatus. Aug. in vigil. nativ. dom.
Sermon. 4.
which he gives to all his followers. One calls Pride the Devils Grammar, the
first book taught in his School; this Grammar teaches ill construction, and
ill versifying, to measure our selves at a large ell, and others at a short
one, making long short, and short long: This Grammar also makes ill
declensions, teaching even children as well as men, to decline from good to
evil. Superbus est Diaboli. Martyr. Aquinas.
And the proud man does daily worship the Devil, being guided by his Laws and
suggestions, framing himself to do his will. Pride began in mente Angelica, and
being conceived in the mind of an Angel, it changed his most noble nature into
a Serpentine nature, and no marvel he desires to make men like himself.

CHAP. 4. Of the kinds of Pride.
PRide is twofold; External and Internal.

First, of External Pride of the body, and those things that belong to it: and
first,

Of Pride of Apparel, and the vanity thereof.

SECT. 1. Of immodest apparel.
1. THat Apparel is vicious, and an ensign of Pride, when it is not modest, but
carries with it an incentive to lust and wantonness. Hos. 2.2.
The Prophet Hosea speaks of the adultery between the breasts; they had either
naked breasts, or else hung alluring Ornaments between the breasts. A woman in
the attire of an Harlot met the young man, Prove. 7, 10. One of the Ancients
says, that they which dress themselves with a desire and intention to please
men, or to provoke any to lust, they offer up their own souls to the Devil: And
Hierom says, If a man or woman adorn themselves so, Hieron. Epist.
as they provoke others to look after them, though no evil follow upon it, yet
the party shall suffer eternal damnation, because they offered poison to
others, though none would drink of it. Such apparel is the badge of Pride, the
bait of Lust, and the foment of Vanity.

SECT. 2. Of costly apparel.
2. THat apparel is a badge of Pride, that is too expensive, when so much of a
man's estate is wasted upon the superfluous decking of this earthly tabernacle,
by which the bowels of many of Gods poor distressed Saints might have been
greatly refreshed. Let women wear modest apparel, not with broidered hair,
gold, pearls, or costly array, but with good works: 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. The
Lacedaemonians had a Law, that none but harlots might use rich apparel, that
honest women might be brought out of love with bravery.
Now when they wear such costly garments, that thereby they are restrained from
feeding and clothing the poor and needy members of Christ, this is sinful. This
is exceeding contrary to the garments that the godly wore in former times,
wherein all excess and adorning of the body was abandoned. Our first Parents
were clad in beasts skins, the Prophets wore rough garments, and John Baptist
was clothed in Camels hair, and the blessed Virgin only in a mean habit, to
cover nakedness, not to beautify her body. Matthew. 3. Non ad ornatum corporis,
sed ad tegumentum nuditatis. Chrysostom. Vestis est remedium turpitudinis
erubescentiae, quam per peccatum contraximus; ante peccatum sufficiebat homini
propria pulchritudo pro vestitura, nec habebat causam erubescentiae.
Now great folly it is so curiously and expensively to deck and trim the body,
that must ere long be a dish and feast for the worms, and neglect the soul that
must live for ever. Tell me, says Cyprian, if Paul durst not glory, but in the
Cross of Christ, how dare thou to pride thy self in these vanities? It is the
foolishest thing that can be, for a man to be proud of gay and costly garments,
which are but the badge of sin, and the ensign of shame. What credit were it
for a Traitor to be fettered with silver bolts, or a Fellon to be hanged with a
silken halter? Our garments are but a remedy for the filthiness of our shame,
which we have contracted by sin. Before the Fall, man's own proper beauty was
sufficient to him instead of apparel, neither had he any cause of shame:
Consider the Lilies of the field, says our Savior, they labor not, nor do
they spin, yet Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these.

SECT. 3. Of wearing habits above our degree.
3. HEre also does Pride appear, when persons wear habits above their rank and
degree. The pride of the rich man is set down, Luke 16. in that being neither
honorably descended, nor deservedly advanced, Luke 16.19, 20. Auferimur cultu;
gemmis auroque toguntur Omnia; pars minima est ipsa puella sui. Ovid. lib. 2.
de Remed.
but only having scraped an huge estate together, he would (being but a
Peasant, or at best, but a private man) be apparelled above his place: For our
Savior tells us, There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and
fine linen, etc. This some gather, because he is not called Vir, but Homo in
Latin, nor (...), but (...) in Greek, and those that are skilled in the three
Learned Tongues, know, Solis nobilibus ^cuit bysso indui. Philostratus.
that Adam in Hebrew, (...) in Greek, and Homo in Latin, signify mean men of
no esteem, whereas Ish, (...), and Vir, signify some desert and renown
purchased by Arts or Arms: Now his pride is set forth, Purpura olim vestis
regia and senatoria, 1 Macchab. 14.43.
in that he was clothed in purple and fine linen. Purple was anciently a
garment only for Kings and Noble Senators to wear, granted by license among the
Jews to their High Priests to wear.

And fine linen] This same Byssus, translated fine linen, was linum Indicum
and Aegyptiacum, Chemnit in Luc. 16.
so precious, as anciently it was exchanged for gold, weight for weight, as the
learned note. Genes. 4 1.42.
We read that Joseph, by the appointment of Pharaoh, was so apparalled, when he
was made Viceroy of all Egypt; and our Savior Christ tells us, Mat. 11.8.
that they that wear soft raiment, are in Kings houses. This man then being at
the best, but some Citizen or rich Tradesman, forgate himself, and took too
much state upon him, to strout it like a Peer of the Land. Mollia indumenta
animi molliciem indicant. Bernard. Quid de habitu dicam? in quo jam non calor
sed color requiritur, magisque cultui vestium quam virtutum insistitur? Bernar.
Sermon. super pass.
Soft garments do show the softness and effeminateness of the mind, when men
do much affect them. Every man is to consider his place and ability, and see
that he exceed not in sumptuousness for the matter of his garments; for it is
not fit he should wear silk, that is scarce able to pay for cloth; and
commonly, to wear garments above our calling, is but an allurement to evil. It
is written of the Emperor Severus, that in his time he never beheld any man in
Rome apparelled in silk and purple: but now there is a great confusion of
degrees; for Gill cannot be known from a Gentlewoman.

The use of apparel is diverse:

1. For necessity, to warm us, and preserve us from injury by wind and weather.

2. For honesty, ornament and comeliness.

3. For distinction of one Sex from another, and for distinction of qualities
of men and women: For great persons may and ought to wear rich apparel, so it
be sober, seemly, and civil. Curiosity of garments is a demonstration of the
deformity of the mind and manners; Ornamentum est quod ornat. Seneca. Vestium
curiositas, deformitatis mentis, and morum judicium est. Bern.
and that is an ornament which does adorn the body, says Seneca. John Baptist
was not apparelled in soft raiment, viz. in silks and velvet, and such
effeminateness, that suited the Court, and not the wilderness; his apparel was
neither costly, for the matter and stuff whereof it was made, nor yet curious,
for the fashion and manner of making, but decent and comely for his person and
profession. He had his garment of Camels hair, and a leathern girdle about his
paps, and his meat was locusts and wild honey. Matthew. 3.4. Serica, purpura,
and tincturarum fucus decorem habent, sed non praebent. Bernar. ad Sophiam
Virgin.
Thus as Valerius Maximus writes of Diogenes the Philosopher, that he would
rather content himself with a thredbare gown or cloak, and live upon herbs,
then go to the Court and flatter the Emperor: So John Baptist would wear a
mean habit, and live in a mean estate, rather then frame himself to wink at
vice, and flatter Herod; therefore he chose rather to wear a homely weed, best
beseeming the plain and naked truth, Quae autem contra mores hominum sunt
flagitia, pro morum diversitate vitanda sunt, etc. turpis enim omnis pars est
suo universo non congruens. August. confess. lib. 3. cap. 8.
then gorgeous and gaudy apparel, better suiting a Parasite then a Preacher.
Some think it is lawful for Countries to wear what they list, and to follow
every day a new mode. Howsoever (questionless) the God of Order allows a
difference and distinctions of persons; yea, even approves that they should be
known from the vulgar by their apparel, answerable to their estate, Luke 7.25.
And a man may see by natural reason, that silks, and better stuffs too, were to
no purpose, if none might wear them: yet excess is reproved even in Princes,
Amos 6. But against meaner persons especially, that seldom use any other book
then a Looking-glass, and are vain in their habits, there is a notable
threatening, Isa. 3.16, 17. Doubtless it is a fault even in the greatest, when
bravery in the Court, causes beggary in the Country. It was not the costly
apparel of Solomon's Servants, but the good order that they kept, that the Queen
of Sheba so much admired. 1 King. 10. Dudley Fenner.
De vestitu lex est, ut eo tantum utamur, qui cujusque aetati, ex aequalium
bonorum, modestissimorumque exemplo prorsus sit (...). Tit. 2.3.

SECT. 4. Of superfluous Garments.
4. PRide appears in the superfluity of Apparel. There may be superfluity
herein.

Quantum ad magnitudinem,
Et quantum ad multitudinem.
1. For the greatness of Garments; Cato speaks of one that was called Grando,
because he would have every thing great, a great Hat, great Shoes, and all his
garments very great. Thus women are to be taxed, that wearing costly garments,
do draw long tails after them, sweeping the ground, and raising the dust
therewith: Much of that superfluity might be spared to cloth the backs of many
poor Christians, whom they see half naked before their eyes. God taxes the
Jews for this superfluity by the Prophet Jeremiah; Jer. 2.34.
In thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents: I have
not found it by secret search, but upon all these. The good things which they
had in great abundance (with which they ought to have relieved and clothed the
poor) they consumed in the skirts of their garments; but such kind of garments
as these shall be consumed with burning and fuel of fire, or Cibo ignis, meat
of fire, according to the Hebrew, Isa. 9.5.

2. Superfluity consists in the multitude of garments. Great was the pride of
Heliogabalus; that would not wear a garment twice: but in the Country of
Licaonia, Mat. 10.10. Luke 9.3.
none might wear but one garment in one whole year. When Christ sent out the
Disciples to preach the Gospel, he bids them not to have two coats apeice, and
to take nothing with them for the journey.

Object. But is it not lawful for a man to have two coats, to have change of
raiment?

Answ. You are to know, that this inhibition of Christ was only temporary, not
perpetual, Mat. 10.5, 6.
but only till the Apostles had preached to the Jews, which to do, one suit
would serve their turn (for they were commanded not to go into the way of the
Gentiles, nor to enter into any City of the Samaritans, but to go rather to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel) And either their journeyes should be so
short, Non proibisse il possedere quaeste tali coseima commanda lor quaesto,
non solo perch, non stano rotardat i da nifs uno impedimento, ma ancora a
fincche gustando aliquanto il benefitio de la divina providenzia siano
preparati a questo officio Apostolico.
as they might easily reach from place to place with one coat, and without
refreshing themselves by the way; or else he would extraordinarily strengthen
them, and provide for them, that they should in the strength of what they had
eaten at one place, go to another, as he did Elijah: If Christ had not allowed
them to have had two coats at other times, as well might they say that they
should never preach to the Gentiles, because Christ forbade them for a time to
go into the way of the Gentiles; which is cancelled, Mat. 28.19. when he bids
them go teach all nations: Mark 16.15. and so was this cancelled also by the
practice of Christ and his Apostles; for Judas was his Almoner, and
purse-bearer, and his Disciples had two swords in his company: And in all
probability, Paul had two cloaks, 2 Timothy 4.13.
for we read of one that he left behind him at Troas, and it is likely he had
another with him.

But that which I am now speaking of, is a superfluity in respect of the
multitude of garments: Take not two coats; that is, says Lyra, superfluous
garments: One man wears enough on his back at once to cloth two naked
wretches all their lives. Adams.
many there are, that have such variety of garments, that they will rather let
the moths eat them, than give away any of them to clothe the poor and needy. To
such James speaks, Go to now you rich men, Jac. 5.1, 2.
weep and boule for the miseries that are coming upon you: your riches are
corrupted, your garments moth-eaten: the very moths shall witness against such
abusers of apparel.

Object. Does not John Baptist, (when the people came to his Baptism, asking
him what they should do) say unto them, Luke 3.11.
Let him that has two coats impart to him that has none; and he that has
meat, let him do likewise; this is no great variety, nor any superfluity, to
have two coats; does not this seem to set open a wide gap to Anabaptistical
parity, and equality, and Platonical community?

Answ. I must confess that it is an hard task, to walk with an even foot in
this argument, but either the rich or the poor will abuse something as shall be
taught them: let a man teach that it is lawful to possess goods, clothes,
money, land, and other goods that a man has left him by his Ancestors, or
gotten by his honest industry, and rich men will soon conclude, that they are
absolute owners of their wealth, and may use it, yea even abuse it, at their
own pleasure: Let a man on the other side stir up men to charity, the poor are
apt presently to think themselves more than quarter masters of their rich
neighbors goods; and if they be somewhat slow in giving, they will be quick
enough in taking them before they be given.

Quest. A question may arise then, Whether there is any propriety, any meum and
tuum in goods and clothes, etc. because the Baptist here speaks of an equal
division?

Answ. 1. We must answer affirmatively, that there is; and it may thus be
proved: What God gives, man may possess, Psalm. 104.28. That thou give them,
they gather: the blessing of God makes rich, Prove. 10.22.

2. They are not only given to men as general blestings, but as peculiar
favors to his own children: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, etc.
Psalm. 112.1. Wealth and riches shall be in his house, ver. 3. Many of the godly
have had great riches, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, David, Solomon,
Joseph of Arimathea, Nichodemus, and others, whose faith Christ commends to
us; therefore the possession of abundance is lawful. Object. Are not all
things the Saints?


3. Christian piety does not overthrow but maintain a civil policy, which
allows possessions; else to what use be all Laws about weights, measures,
buying, selling, usury? yea, else what use is there of the eighth Commandment?
But I must not stay here: for though it be lawful for rich men to possess and
enjoy those things that God has given them, or (more truly) lent them, 1 Cor.
3.21. Answ. Theirs by right, but not by possession; a right to all things, not
in all things. Jus ad rem, non in re.
yet they must remember, that they be but stewards of them, and must come to
account for them, and must use them well. Under these two kinds of provision
for back and belly, John prescribes liberality in every kind, signifying unto
us, that every one must out of his superfluity, and what he may spare, supply
his brothers necessity, and what he sees him want. Lyra says, that in those
hot Countries men needed but one coat; therefore we must give what others need,
and what we may spare.

SECT. 5. Of strange apparel.
5. PRide appears further in wearing strange apparel, of new and stange
fashions. Heliogabalus erected a Council of Women, Sir Rich. Barkley de summo
bono.
who should determine what manner of attire the Matrons of Rome should wear.
Caligula was a laughing stock for the dissolute fashion of his apparel: In
Licaonia they would endure no inventions of any new fashions: If any one
devised any new fashions, When Alphonsus King of Arragon was advised to wear
more costly apparel: I had rather, said he, excel my subjects in manners and
authority, then in a Diadem, and purple. Diogenes meeting an effeminate young
man that had attired himself finely but undecently for a man, as he thought:
Art thou not ashamed, said he, when Nature has made thee a man, to make thy
self a woman!
that differed from the ancient manner of their Country, the deviser was
banished, and the device abolished. The Persians had a Law, That whosoever
brought into their Country, any strange or new manners, or fashions, he should
lose his head. And Adrian the Emperor would say, that there is not any thing
that does more hurt a Commonwealth, then to infect the same with strange and
unaccustomed manners and fashions in apparel; therefore he made a Law against
both. When men clothe themselves with garments of diverse colors, and strange
fashions, this I call strange apparel: And here you may see the fantasticalness
of proud spirits, frequently to change the color and fashion of their apparel:
These men are like the Camelion, changing themselves into every color and
shape they behold; one day they are in this color and fashion, and the next in
another: Such as these are but beasts in the shape of men; a beastly mind, and
a barbarous habit usually go together; good men have always shunned these
fooleries. Such as these the Lord threatens, Zeph. 1.8.
It shall come to pass in the day of the Lords Sacrifice, that I will punish
the Princes and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange
apparel. God judged not the ornaments of silver, and gold, and precious stones,
to be absolutely needful for us; for if he had, he would not have hid them in
the bowels of the earth, and in the remotest parts of the world, in Shellfishes
in the Sea, etc. And one observes, if God would have covered us with diverse
colored garments, Non haec ornant corpus, sed mentem detegunt. Quintilian.
he would have made Creatures some green, some yellow, some red, and some of
all colors, and have caused silk to be sown as flax is. There was never any
age but found danger in gorgeous and fantastic apparel, and Seneca says, this
has brought ruin upon many a Commonwealth. Tacitus.
The Roman History says, that the first that wore purple, was smitten with
thunder. Chrysostom says, That God would have us look on Herod's garments, who
(as Josephus says) was clothed in cloth of silver when he made his oration to
the people, Acts 12. Joseph. Antiqu.
that those that see the vanity of his garments, may also see the penalty of
his pride. It is but immodesty and madness for Christians to jet it out in
silk, and silver, and gold, seeing the Persians therewith clothe their very
Camels.

1. It is prodigal spending of Gods blessings and benefits to be bestowed on
better purposes.

2. It is a note of vanity and idleness, Faemina culta nimis, faemina casta
minus.
to be still devising newfangled fashions.

3. It is an ensign of pride to use them, being invented without consideration
of convenience.

4. It argues much levity and frothiness, to be still changing; it would make
the world believe, that the Moon were our Mistress and predominant planet, and
then every body knows what kind of people we are. Excessive bravery does not
make those that wear it more commendable. Clemens Alexandrin. Paedagog. lib. 3.
cap. 11.
It is a great reproach our English Nation has gotten, to follow all fashions:
Therefore other Countries do paint an English man naked, with his cloth under
his arm, and a pair of shears in his hand, seeking a Tailor to find him out a
new fashion.

To conclude this Chapter, it is better to have our minds well clad with
virtues and graces, The Turks say, Ut derisi potius quam vestiti esse videantur
Angli. Sir John Mandev. 1 Pet. 5.5. 1 Timothy 2.10.
then our bodies with vestments; this is required of women the weaker vessels,
and therefore it is much more beseeming men, that must guide and govern them, 1
Pet. 3.3. then are we best adorned, when we are clothed with humility and good
works, and do put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. 5. Of Pride of Beauty, and the vanity thereof.
BEauty in self is a commendable thing, and many good women in Scripture have
been commended for their beauty; as Eve made in perfection, Sarah, Pulchritudo
corporis est congruentia partium, cum quadam coloris suavitate. August. ad
Nebrid. (...). Euripides.
Genes. 12.11.14. Rachel, Genes. 29.17. Esther, Est. 2.7. Bathsheba, 2 Samuel
11.12. Rebecca, Genesis 26.7. Jobs three daughters, Job 41.15. Naomi, Ruth 1.20.
Goodmen likewise have been commended for their beauty, as Joseph, Genesis 39.6.
who was a goodly person, and well-favoured; David, 1 Samuel 16.12. who was ruddy,
and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. Daniel and his
three companions, Dan. 1.4. Moses, Exodus 2.2. But beauty is a thing whereof
people are apt to be proud: Ezekiel. 28.17.
This is charged on the Prince of Tyrus, that his heart was lifted up because
of his beauty; though that be meant of his honor, riches, and greatness which
had a splendid beauty in them; yet is it also true of natural beauty;
Pulchritudo corporis bonum Dei donum est, sed propterea id largitur etiam
malis, ne magnum bonum videatur bonis. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 15. cap. 22.
men and women are apt to grow proud of it. Quintus Hortensius a Roman Consul,
is infamed by Historians, because he stood long poring in a glass when he made
him ready, and was too curious in trimming up himself. Philip King of Macedon
deprived a Magistrate from his Office which he had given him, only because he
heard he was more busied in beautifying and trimming his person, then in
studying his books. The use of glasses was first intended, that thereby men and
women might the better know themselves; that the most beautiful might learn to
avoid all infamous things, and not defile the dignity of their persons with the
deformity of their manners. It was the advice of Socrates in Laertius, Socrat.
in Laert.
that young men should have always a looking-glass to look themselves in it; if
they were outwardly deformed, they might labor to recompense it with inward
comeliness; and that those that were outwardly beautiful, might also labor for
inward beauty: But alas! our glasses have now lost their primary institution,
Lucius Apuleius de magia, lib. 1.

Qui eximia forma est, id agat, ut animi pulchritudo corporis pulchritudini
splendore respondeat.

Nazian. in maximum.


and made many persons to forget themselves; and like Narcissus, to dote upon
their own faces, thinking that every one that sees them wrongs them, that does
not admire them. Besides, many there are that use artificial painting to set
off themselves, that they may seem more beautiful then they are. Painting is
not intended to please chaste eyes, and is but a whorish varnish, learnt from
that wicked Jezabel whom the Dogs devoured. Socrates says, That one Pambus
lamented (being brought out of the wilderness to Alexandria by Athanasius)
there, seeing a woman taking pains that way, he burst out into tears, Fastus
inest pulchris, sequiturque superbia sormam. Dum comuntur, poliuntur,
vestiuntur faeminae, annus est. Seneca.
and wept bitterly: And being asked why he wept, he assigned two causes;

1. Says he, because she takes so much pains, and spends so much cost and time
to cast away her self, and damn her soul.

2. Because she takes more pains, and bestows more labor to please vain
young men, then I have done to please God. Tripartit. Histor. lib. 8. cap. 1.
p. 484.
Now Solomon, or Bathsheba his Mother (both very beautiful) say, that favor is
deceitful, and beauty is vain, Prove. 31.30. or a very vanity, as the Geneva
Translation has it. Beauty is compared by holy men to a painted Snake, that is
fair without, and full of poison within. Deles picturam Dei (mulier) si vultum
tuum materiali candore oblinias, si exquisito rubore perfundas. S. Ambros.
Little reason has any one to be proud of it, or trust in it; as the Poet long
ago.

Virg. Oformose puer, nimium ne creed colori,
Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.
What then can be said of Jezebels art? if natural beauty so soon vanishes, 2
King. 9.30. Haec non sunt membra quae Deus fecit, sed quae Diabolus infecit.
Cypr. de Veland. Virginib.
then surely artificial beauty sooner decays. It Is a great vanity to be proud
of beauty, which is but as a Tulip, or flower in May, that shows it self to
day, and to morrow withers away, and returns to the earth from whence it
came: The body it self passes away like a shadow, who then can undertake that
beauty, which is but momentaneum corpor is accidens, a momentary accident of
the body, shall abide with him? If the body fall to ruin, the accident cannot
stand. Among all the qualities that flee away with the body of man, there is
none more swift then beauty, which on a sudden shows it self as a pleasant
flower to the eyes of the beholders, causing many to praise it, but by and by
it vanishes. When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make
his beauy to consume away like a Moth. Says David, Surely every man is vanity.
Psalm 39.11.
Beauty is but a slender vail, and but skin deep; an hot burning coal will
scorch it, the nail of an enemy will lacerate and pluck it off, Florem decoris
singuli carpunt dies.

Seneca in Octavia.


and a few fits of a quartan-ague will change it into swarthy deformity; old
age, and the space of a few years, will show the slightness and vanity of it,
and death will utterly consume it. The apprehension of this (I suppose) made
that beautiful Roman Prince Domitian write thus to his friend: Socrates vocabat
formam modici temporis tyrannidem. Bruson. lib. 2. cap. 44.

Beauty is the finest flower that will soonest fade and wither. Petrarc. de
remed. utriusque fortunae.


Know thou, says he, that there is nothing more set by then beauty and
comeliness of body, and nothing less durable. One in Germany was so fair, that
some were very earnest with him to have taken his picture.

He answered them, no. But, said he, a few days after I am dead, take me up,
and picture me as you find me then, and let me be a Monument to posterity; and
they took him up two or three days after he was dead and buried, and they found
him half eaten up with Toads and Serpents, and venomous Creatures, and so he
was pictured accordingly. Thou that now pridest thy self, that the form of thy
face and body is without comparison: Know thou, that it is not long ere the
habit of thy mouth, and the color of thy face shall be changed; thy goldy
locks, and shining hair shall wax gray, and become white, or fall off from thy
head; that deep wrinckles shall plough up thy tender cheeks, and bright
forehead; that some sad cloud shall cover those pleasant torches of the eyes,
Repent dum nescit incanescit caput, rugatur facies, etc. Hieron. Epist. ad
Cyprian.
and darken those shining stars; that the scurvy or some other standing
filthiness shall cover over that white and slender Ivory of the teeth, and
break them in pieces, that they shall not only be of another color, but of
another form and fashion; thy strait neck and shoulders shall grow crooked,
together with thy feet; thy hands wither, and thy whole body be decrepit;
Anceps sorma bonum, mortalibus exiguum donum, brevi temporis momento capitur,
etc.

Seneca in Hippol. 1.760.


and the day will come, that thou may not know thy self in a glass; and all
these things which thou think to be far from thee (if thou live) I tell
thee, will soon befall thee: And though thou will not believe me, nor any man
that now shall tell thee of it, yet then thou will exceedingly wonder to see
thy self so much transformed. What will it avail thee to be proud of that which
is not thine, which in color is inferior to many Roses and Lilies of the
field, and which thou can not keep long with thee? besides, bodily beauty
has been a snare to many a soul. Beauty has kept back many from making any
progress in the way of holiness, and has turned them the contrary way. How
many precious hours do many persons spend at the Glass, and in trimming this
outward sheath, which might have been much better bestowed in adorning the
soul? Suetonius writes, that Augustus Caesar, was never wont to spend any time
in trimming and beautifying himself.

Aristippus being persuaded to go to Corinth to see the beautiful Lais, gave
this answer, Non emam tanti poenitere.


whereby many profitable things are neglected. He that is in love with his
face, or comely form, has an enemy at home; and (which is worse) a delightful
one, such a one as robs him of his time, takes away his rest, steals away his
heart; such a one as is the foment of lust, and frequently as great a passage
to hatred as love; that which brings the chastity of many in suspicion, and
is the occasion of reproach, and often draws a man or woman into danger; and
yet this is a thing that the world does much dote upon: Nothing does so soon
kindle a fire in the affections of men, as the beauty of women.

Oh! boast not then of bodily beauty, but rather labor after spiritual and
heavenly beauty, that with the Kings Daughter ( Psalm. Gratior est pulchro
veniens in corpore virtus.
45.13.) thou may be all glorious within. This is more pleasant, and more
lasting then corporal beauty, which the longest day cannot wear out, nor any
disease extinquish, nor death it self. If beauty and grace be joined together,
as in Abigail, they are much to be desired. Eliab was of fair countenance, yet
says God to Samuel, look not on his countenance, 1 Samuel 16.7: for I have
refused him.
It is said of Aspasia the wife of Cyrus, that she was (...), wise and
beautiful; but beauty little benefited Bathsheba, nor Absalom, who had a
beautiful face, and a deformed soul. As a jewel of gold in a Swines snout, so
is a fair woman without discretion, says Solomon. Prove. 11.22.
But we read of the Laver of brass, that it was made of the looking-glasses of
the women which assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation:
whence some of the Rabbis, Exodus 38.8.

Ainsworth ad loc.


the Chaldee Paraphrast, and Junius and Ainsworth do collect, that these were
Religious women, such as had renounced the vanities of the world, and given
themselves to the service of God; in sign and token whereof, they brought their
looking-glasses, the instruments they were wont to use in dressing their
bodies. to make the instruments, whereby through faith they might sanctify
their souls: Of such we read, 1 Samuel 2.22. Some say they helped the Priest to
wash the Sacrifices, and it may be they used to wash the feet of such as had
traveled far, and took pains to come to Jerusalem to the service of God.

CHAP. 6. Of pride of gesture.
SECT. 1. Of proud looks.
THe heart of man is many times discernable by the face, In loculis, poculis,
and oculis cognoscitur homo. Sent. Hebr. Superborum est (...) and despicere.
Interior animi qualitas intuentium oculis patenter indi. catur. Temperanda est
sacies and modificanda in gestu suo, ita ut nec proterve exasperetur, nec
molliter dissolvatur, sed semper habeat rigidam dulcedinem, and dulcem rigorem.
Hugo de Disciplina Monach.
and the pride of the heart is visible in the eye: Solomon speaks of a proud
look: Six things the Lord hates, yea, seven are an abomination to him; and the
first of the seven is a proud look. Prove. 6.17. As an amicable, so a
disdainful and scornful frame of heart is seen in the eye: It is written of
Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, that he had so high and terrible a look,
especially when but a little moved, that it was said of him, Every wrinkle in
his forehead was a sepulcher to bury a Prince in; One character that the holy
Ghost gives of a wicked man, is the pride of his countenance, Psalm. 10.4. The
eye of man of it self is not proud and haughty, but as the heart instructs
it: There is a generation, says Agur, O how lofty are their eyes, and their
eyelids are lifted up, Prove. 30.13. Let thy face be so composed and tempered
in its gesture, says Hugo, that it be neither too much exasperated, nor
effeminately dissolved, but let it always have a rigid kind of sweetness, and
sweet kind of rigor. David professing his humility sets it forth thus, Lord,
my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty. Psalm. 131.1. and no such person
would he entertain in his family. Him that has a high look, says he, and a
proud heart will I not suffer, Psalm. 101.5. such the Lord threatens: The lofty
looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of man shall be bowed down,
Isa. 2.11. Thus God threatened to visit the fruit of the stout heart of the King
of Assyria, and to bring down the glory of his high looks, Isa. 10.12.

SECT. 2. Of a proud gate or pace.
PRide is not only visible in the eye, but also in the pace or going. David
prays, Let not the foot of pride come against me, Psalm. 36.11. It is said, that
Agag came to Samuel delicately, 1 Samuel 15.32. and we read of the daughters of
Israel, that they made a mincing, and a tinckling with their feet as they went,
Isa. 3.16. The Tragic Socks were called Embades, they were for a strutting and
lofty gate. God notes the very pace and gestures of men and women, and those
that walk in pride, he is able to abase, Dan. 4.37. Let the daughters of
England see whether they are not guilty in this kind, as well as the daughters
of Zion? When Elijah had denounced utter ruin upon the house and posterity of
Ahab, Ahab hearing those words, rent his clothes, put sackcloth upon him,
fasted and lay in sackcloth, and went softly; he was so humbled, that his very
pace and gesture was altered, 1 King. 21.27, 29. and the Lord takes notice of
it: See thou how Ahab is humbled before me? etc. Let there be gravity in thy
gesture, simplicity in thy moving to and fro, honesty in thy walking: Let no
uncomeliness, no lasciviousness, Sit in gesta tuo gravitas, in motu
simplicitas, in incessu honestas: Nihil dedecoris, nihil lasciviae, nihil
petulantiae, nihil insolentiae, nihil levitatis in tuo incessu appareat; animus
enim in corporis gestu apparet. Isidor. lib. 2. soliloqu.
no malepartness, no pride, and insolence, and levity appear in thy goings; for
the mind appears in the bodily gesture, says Isidore.

SECT. 3. Of disdaining to give salutations and civil respect to Superiors or
equals.
PRide of gesture is further manifest, when men give no reverence to their
Superiors, no respect to equals, either by courteous salutations, friendly
deportment, or carriage suitable to the persons with whom they have todo. Some
great persons inhigh places are so puffed up with pride, that they will show no
civil respect to any they think are inferior to them. Excessive was the pride
of Caesar the Dictator, Sueton. de C. J. Caesay re dictatore. p. 30, 31.
who was continual Consul, and perpetual Dictator; for so he wrote, C. Julius
Caesar, Dictator perpetuus: He would be styled Pater Patriae, and have his
Statue among the Kings, and his Image among the Gods: His pride was many ways
notorious, especially by receiving the decrees of the Senators himself sitting,
though they presented them to him themselves; yet took he it so highly, and in
such snuff, that Pontius Aquila rose not to him as he rode along the streets,
that in a long time he would promise nothing, or give nothing, but if Pontius
Aquila would give him leave: But this his intolerable pride hastened his end.

Great is the pride (in this respect) of an upstart Generation of men among us,
called Quakers, in these days, who will give no respect to their Superiors,
Equals, or Inferiors.

Object. But here it is objected by them, That our Savior says to his seventy
Disciples, when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel (among other things
that he gave them in charge) Salute no man by the way, Luke 10.4. Here some
will say, Does Divinity and Christianity overthrow common courtesy, and take
away and abolish good manners and civility?

Respon. Surely no: that is but a vain fancy gathered from this and such like
places of Scripture.

Object. 1. But may not this encourage men in evil courses?

Respon. We must distinguish between a man's person and his sin; for we may
salute his person friendly, and yet reprove his sins sharply; as Christ calls
Judas friend, Mat. 26.50. and yet says he was a Devil, John 6.70.

Object. 2. But they will say, They know not whether every passenger they meet
be a brother or no, therefore they will not salute him.

Respon. That as our Savior Christ in that Chapter, proves every man to be a
neighbor, so ought we to think every man professing the Christian Religion a
brother, having one God for our Father, one Church for our Mother, being
baptized in the same faith, professing the same truth, living under the same
Law.

Object. 3. But they will say, Peradventure he may be a Papist, or an Atheist,
or one differing from that Profession which they have taken up.

Respon. What if he be? till I know the worst, charity requires me to hope and
judge the best; yea, our Savior Christ in the very next verse, Luke 10.5.
bids his Disciples at their entrance into any house, say, Peace be to this
house, before the inhabitants were converted, yea, even before they knew
whether they would accept and embrace the means of their salvation, being
offered to them.

Object. 4. But they will further press us with the authority of the blessed
and beloved Apostle John, 2 John 10.11. who says, If there come any unto you,
and bring not this Doctrine, (sc. that which he had taught them) receive him
not into your house, neither bid him Godspeed; for he that bids him God-speed,
is partaker of his evil deeds.

Respon. But if we consider to whom, and of whom, and of what sort of coming
these words are spoken, the Objection is easily answered: for,

1. These words are written to the Elect Lady and her children, as we may see
in the inscription of the Epistle, and these might easily be seduced.

2. They are spoken of cunning Heretics, who-sought to creep into private
houses, and insinuate themselves into silly women, and seduce the simpler sort
of people, as Paul told his Scholar Timothy; 2 Timothy 4.6.
and is plain by the words here, If they come unto you, and bring you another
Doctrine.

3. He does not say, if you meet them by the way, Salute them not, speak not to
them; but if they come to your houses, receive them not, entertain them not;
and for the prohibition of bidding them, Nulla cum talibus commercia, nulla
convivia, nulla colloquia misceantur; simus ab illis tam separati, quam sunt
illi ab Ecclesia profugi. Cyprian.
God-speed, it comes after such time as they have manifested and declared
themselves to be such bad people, and dangerous persons: And concerning such,
Cyprian has a good caution, have no conversation, commerce, or familiarity
with those that are open Heretics, and professed enemies to the true Christian
Religion which you profess; for what reason is there that you should entertain
them at your private houses, that refuse to go with you to Gods public House
and Ordinances. Herein I am persuaded, many in this Nation, in themselves
well-meaning people, show too much weakness: We must not bid men [God-speed] in
evil practices, if we perceive and know them.
But for uncivil and discourteous carriage to any, especially to such as we
meet and know not, it has no warrant from this place; nay, it is not credible,
that John that was the best loved, and most loving of all the Apostles, would
let fall any word against the offices of love, whereof kindly saluting of
strangers is one.

Object. 5. They say, They know not what ill purpose he may have in his mind,
as namely, to rob, steal, kill, etc. and therefore they fear, if they should
bid him God-speed, or God be with him, they should be, as it were, accessory to
his bad actions.

Respon. This is a causless fear: They pray rather that he may be diverted, and
turned from such lewd purposes and practices; for so long as God is with any
man, he will keep him from all such bad businesses: And when I pass by a man at
his work, and bid him God speed, I pray to God to bless him in his honest
labors which I see him about, and not that he may have success in any evil way
which I am not privy to; and when I part from any man, and bid God be with him,
what do I but desire God to bless and keep him from doing and taking harm?

Object. 6. They say, This is a kind of taking Gods name in vain, and speaking
of him, when we think not of him.

Respon. I would know, whether any man can know, whether I think of God, when I
use his name in saluting any man: I am sure that Solomon says, 1 King. 8.39. 1
Cor. 2.11.
That God only knows the hearts of the children of men; and Paul says, None
can know the things of man, but the Spirit that is in man. Howsoever, it cannot
be denied, but that ordinarily our devotions are more settled and composed, our
minds better disposed in our more solemn prayers for our brethren; yet why may
we not show much love and good affection in short and sudden good wishes and
ejaculations? for what can be said more shortly and sweetly, then God be with
you? for if God be with us, who, Romans 3.31.
or what, can be against us?

The meaning then of that place, Luke 10.4. is not to forbid common courtesy,
and ordinary civility, but only needless complements, and idle curiosity,
whereby they might be hindered and stayed from the quick and speedy dispatch of
their business: So Elisha sending home Gehezi to restore the Shunamites son to
life again, bad him, Gird up his loins, 2 King. 4.29.
take his staff in his hand, and salute no man by the way; and if any body
saluted him, not to answer him again. Dice questo accioche essi faccino questo
viaggio con ogni diligenza senza indugio alcuno. Ital. annot.
The meaning of which place (in the judgment of the Learned) is nothing else,
but that he should make haste, and not loiter or linger, and trifle out his
time by the way, entertaining needless discourse with any body, which many
times solemn salutations and taking acquaintance one of another give occasion.
Otherwise, that Salutations have been usual in Scripture, might easily be
proved; for Boaz of Bethlehem salutes his Reapers, Ruth. 2.4.
and is saluted of them again. And in the New Testament, Questo era il lo made
di salutare, per quale essi desidera vano prosperita, and ogni felicita and
benedittione. Ibid.
the Angel saluteth Mary, and so does her Cousin Elizabeth, the wife of
Zachariah, and Mother of John Baptist; yea, Christ himself, even after his
Resurrection, saluteth both the women that were at the Sepulcher, and also his
Apostles: Therefore we see that courteous salutations are lawful and
commendable, notwithstanding the rudeness and incivility of Quakers, and such
absurd persons in these days to the contrary, that will neither salute, nor
give respect to any man whom they meet. Christ himself saluteth his Disciples,
saying, Peace be to you: It was the common and ordinary salutation among the
Hebrews, and it was a good one, for by it they wished all sorts and kinds of
good to the party whom they saluted; and so the seventy were enjoined, Into
what house soever you enter, say, Peace be to this house.

CHAP. 7. Of Pride of hair.
PRide of hair is to be seen three ways; in plaited hair, long hair, and
borrowed hair.

1. In plaited hair, which is expressly forbidden by the Apostle: Speaking to
women, he says, Whose adorning, 1 Pet. 3.3.
let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, etc. The
Lacedemonian Soldiers were called Comatimilities, because they trimmed their
hair as if they had gone to the games of Olympia.
Which by the most judicious Interpreters is conceived to mean all that
artificial dressing of the head and hair beyond its natural use, merely for
vain oftentation. The natural use of hair is to be a covering; now when persons
alter the form of it, by frizzeling, plaiting, and curling of it, this is
unwarrantable. Hierom expressly condemns the hanging the hair below the
forehead. Plutarch tells us that it was usual among the Romans, when a woman
was to be dressed at a wedding, that they did plait and divide the hair of her
head with the point of a spear, to show how much they hated curiosity in
dressing. Causin said of some Ladies, When was it that a dozen of Communions
had taken from them one hair of vanity?

2. In long hair: We read of the Antichristian Locusts, Rev. 9.8.
that they had hair as the hair of women; not that it is unlawful for women to
have long hair, 1 Cor. 11.15.
for long hair is a praise to a woman, and is given to her for a covering,
says the Apostle; but in respect of the abuse of it by men: For though Paul
says. It is a shame for a man to wear long hair, Coma longa apud Graecos in
viris erat signum luctus. Plut. Mor. 1.560.
and nature it self teaches that lesson; yet so effeminate are many men, that
their hair is as the hair of women for the length of it. The Apostle does not
prohibit a man to nourish his hair a little for his health sake, as is the
custom in cold Countries; but discommendeth those that cut it not at all, or
wear it of too great a length, as Absalom did, whose hair afterward proved his
destruction; for he was hanged up in an Oak by the goldy locks of pride, whom
many young men, and some old men now a days do imitate. Aug. l. 1. de opere
Monach. tribus extrem. capitibus.
Austin reproves certain Monks or Anchorets, whom he calls Crinitos fratres,
because they wore hair hanging down upon their shoulders, in a certain
imitation (as they would seem) of the old Nazarites, Sampson, and others. I
shall not use any bitter invectives against this sort of men, but (as that good
old Servant of Christ Mr. Dod sometimes said) if we can preach them into
Christ, they will cut off their long hair.

3. In borrowed hair: And here is to be condemned the folly of many men in
these days, that cover over one sort with another, and change the color of the
hair given them by God, by wearing Periwigs of another color, Pyrrhus and
Hannibal were wont to change the color of their hair.
and all, that they may seem more beautiful, and younger then they are, and may
the more affect those that look upon them. Now this which they think is their
glory, is their shame. To such men Cyprian speaks to the purpose, Will thou
alter the workmanship of God, and think to escape the judgment of God? Non
metuis qua talis es, ne cum resurrectionis dies advenerit, artifex te tuus non
recognoscat? Cypr. tract. a. de habit. virgin.
Thou who make another color to thy face or hair then God has given thee,
exchanging thy natural with artificial, art thou not afraid, that in the day of
the Resurrection, thy Artificer and Maker do not know thee? he means, with
the knowledge of approbation. Our Savior tells us, that we cannot make one
hair of our heads white or black, nor change the natural hue of the excrements
of the body, Mat. 5.36. as if he should have said, He that affects to seem
grave, being but green, Quicquid ex se Deum contempserat in culpa, totum Deo
serviret in poenitentia; and quot in se habuit oblectamenta, tot invenit
holocausta. Gregor. Homil. 33. Philip and Archidamus could not abide artificial
colored hair.
cannot make one of his black hairs gray; nor he that has not lost his Coltish
tricks, with his Colts teeth, but carries a youthful mind in an aged body,
cannot with all his skill make one of his hoary hairs turn black again. We read
of a certain woman (thought to be Mary Magdalen) but known to have been a
notorious sinner, Luke 7.37, 38. when she was converted, she washed the feet of
Christ with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, etc. Her love
was great, iuflamed in her heart, as she thinks nothing too much, but all to
little too testify the same, verifying that saying of Gregory, whatsoever she
had abused in the service of sin, she now converted to be instruments of
repentance, and consecrated to the service of God: Those amber lips of hers
which were wont to be used lasciviously, to kiss wantonly, were now converted
to an holy use of kissing penitently; that ointment wherewith she was wont to
perfume her self, she bestowed upon her Savior; those eyes which she had used
as lattices of lust, were now cisterns of salt tears, to wash Christ's feet; and
those hairs which she had used to curl and frizzle to allure her Lovers, now
became Towels to dry the same.

CHAP. 8. Of Pride of Riches.
RIch men are very apt to be proud; it is an hard matter to have high estates
in the world, and not to have high minds; therefore says Paul to Timothy,
Charge the rich, 1 Timothy 6.17.
that they be not high-minded. Pride is a worm growing out of riches; rich men
are subject to Satan's greatest temptations, Superbia divitiarum vermis. Toll
superbiam, and divitiae non nocebunt. Aug. in Sermon. 31.
who chiefly sets on the vessels that are most richly laden. But riches have
been the cause of the ruin of many that have been pufft up with them: Crassus
an exceeding rich Roman, growing very proud, procured himself to be made
General of the Romans Army, being then threescore years old, where he was
overthrown and slain with his son, and almost all the Army of the Romans; and
to give him the greater disgrace, the Parthians caused his mouth to be filled
full of gold, with these words, Thou have thirsted after gold, now take thy
fill. I have read, that Allan King of the Tartars made war upon Calipha King of
Persia (a man that insatiably doted upon his riches) and took him Prisoner in
his own City, his Soldiers fighting very faintly in his defense, because he
had laid up his treasure in a Tower, and would not pay them their wages. He was
by Allan imprisoned in the same Tower, with these words, If thou had not kept
this treasure so greedily, Nich. Causin's Holy Court.

To build many fair houses, and be master of many servants, to have much money,
corn and cattle, can be but small commendation, because they be not in homine,
but extra hominem. Seneca ad Lucil. Epist. 41.


but distributed it among thy Soldiers, thou might have preserved thy self
and the City; now therefore take thy pleasure, eat and drink thereof, seeing
thou have loved it so well; and so suffered him to dye for hunger in the midst
of all his riches. Abbas the late Persian King, having a heavy complaint made
of one of his Mirza's, or great Princes, for his intolerable pride, and
tyrannical oppression of the poor people, and finding the accusation just,
thought death too small a punishment for him; therefore he condemned all his
Lands and Goods to be sold, and restitution therewith to be made to such as he
had oppressed; and if all would not serve, he condemned himself to pay the rest
out of his Treasure or Exchequer, being in some sort guilty by making no better
choice: He caused his ears and nose to be cut off, and him perpetually to wear
a thing about his neck like a Hogs yoke, Sir Anth. Shirley, p. 71.
and inhibited all persons from giving him any relief, but what he got by his
own labor, to teach them how dear poor men's goods cost them. Devout Bernard
inveighed (not without cause) against the vain pride, and superfluous pomp of
the Prelates in his time, Bernard.
which grew by their abuse of abundance of riches. There is (quoth he) an
infamous sort of men, that reign in the whole body of the Church, the Ministers
of Christ serve Antichrist; they jet up and down in great honor and pomp, with
the Lords goods, but they give no honor to the Lord, and that is the Whores
attire, which you see every day carried about: Insana and stolidae jactantiae
est, ob rerum abundantiam efferri animo; lubrica namque and instabilis fortuna,
citoque sublimia dejiciuntur, and humilia exaltantur. Plut. Mor. 1. p. 271.
Their saddles, briddles and spurs be gilt, the furniture of their feet is set
out with more pride and pomp then the Temple of God. Hereof it comes, that
their tables be so sumptuous, and furnished with delicate meats, their
cupboards with rich plate; from thence comes their gluttony and drunkenness,
and harmony of their pleasant instruments of Music: This is not (says he) to
adorn the Spouse of Jesus Christ, but this is to riffle her, this is not to
preserve her, but to destroy her; this is not to defend her, but to give her to
Thieves for a prey. It is written of Cardinal Sylberperger, that he took such
pride in his money, that when he was grievously tormented with the Gout, his
only remedy to ease his pains, was to have a basin full of gold set before him,
into which he would put his lame hands, turning the gold upside down. But it is
written to the commendation of Pope Alexander the fifth, Platin. de vitis
Pontific.
that he was so far from being proud of riches, that he was very liberal to the
poor, and left nothing to himself; whereupon he would often take occasion to
say merrily, That he was a rich Bishop, Diodorus siculus.
a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope. Diodorus Siculus tells us, that the
people of Carthage when they were in a poor and mean estate, they usually every
year offered the tenth and tithe of their spoils to Hercules their supposed
God; but when they grew rich, and were Commanders of diverse Countries, and
Masters of great matters, they grew proud, and forgot their devotions, 1 Samuel
25.17.
and Hercules fell short of his homage, service and sacrifice. Nabals much
wealth, and little wit, made him so proud, that he thought no body good enough
to speak to him. Good men are apt to be tainted with this infection; for we
find that Hezekiah grew proud of his treasures, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 27, 28.
and his heart was lifted up; for Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and
honor; And he made himself Treasuries for silver, for gold, and for precious
stones, etc. and God had given him substance very much. Art thou proud of thy
riches? thou have but a doubtful and burdensome happiness, and that which will
yield thee more envy then joy: And scarce shall you find a rich man, The
richest man in the world is much inferior to a golden mine.
but at last he will be driven to confess, that it was better for himself in
Mediocrity, then in great abundance. Art thou proud that thy riches do
increase? thou have as much cause to be troubled, that thy joy, peace and
tranquillity do decrease: Thou have little reason to be proud of riches, if
thou considerest what difficulty it is to get them, what anxiety to keep them,
what fear to lose them, what grief in parting from them: Great wealth does not
make a man truly rich, but keep him the more busy; God often takes away the
worlds good things from his dearest children, lest they deprive them of better
things.
riches make not a man the Lord, but the Keeper of them: See therefore that thy
riches be not thy masters, but make thou them subservient to thee; otherwise
they are not riches, but bonds and fetters, and heaps of cares and fears to
perplex thy mind. The labor to get worldly riches is long, but their use is
short; and he that takes greatest pains to gather them, has often times least
use and pleasure of them; and those goods that are gotten by shifts, are (for
the most part) lost with shame. Thou boastest thou art full of riches, take
heed that this fullness does not break thee; all fullness seeks an exit; such
fullness has brought death to many, Omnis plenitudo exitum quaerit. Riches make
themselves wings and flee away as an Eagle, etc. Prove. 23.5.
and has taken away rest from all. In the highest of thy prosperity be afraid
of an after-clap, for the tide may turn, and the wheel quickly run round; and
thy riches may be taken from thee, or thou from them. Luke 12.19.20.
That proud rich man mentioned, Luke 12. lays open his folly many ways:

1. By making, as it were, no difference between his soul and the soul of a
beast, by placing his content in these things, and calling them animae bona,
the good things of his soul, which be not Corporis, but Fortunae, as the
Philosopher speaks, O bruta verba! si suillam animam habuisses, quid ei pro re
laeta nisi hoc ipsum renunciasses. Bafil.
as men commonly speak. O brutish words! says Basil upon the place.

2. His folly appears, in that he calls them his own goods, Famelici panis
est, quem apud te detines; nudi vestimentum quod in capsulis servas;
discalceati solea est, quae apud te computrescit: Egeni pecunia est, quam tu
defossam habes. Basil in loc. Aliena rapere convincitur, qui ultra necessaria
fibi retinere probatur. Hieron.
whereof he was but a steward, being deceived in his Title and Tenure, holding
himself an owner, and master of what he was but a servant, and for which he
must be accountable to God: Besides, he should not have scraped all to himself,
but have imparted what he could have spared toward the relief of the poor, the
fatherless, the stranger, and the widow, as some of the Ancients note upon the
place.

3. His Arithmetic failed him; for whereas he thought he had a lease of his
life, and sure estate in these goods for many years, it so fell out, The Wicked
make garments, and the Godly put them on; little knows the wicked for whom he
builds and gathers.
that he was disappointed of his hope, and dispossessed of his hold in a very
few hours. God said unto him, Thoufool, this night thy soul shall be required
of thee, or do they require thy soul, and then whose shall all those things be
which thou have provided? Some descant upon the words thus, [This night shall
they require thy soul;] i.e. the Devils, with whom they say, this covetous
wretch had driven the bargain before, and there lacked nothing but the
delivery; and doubtless all of his stamp do lay their souls to pawn and
mortgage. Others observe (and that truly) that where good men die willingly,
singing their Nunc dimittis with good old Simeon; worldly wretches must be made
yield their due, as bad debtors must be forced to payment: But I note this only
by the way. Then says God, Whose shall these things be? King David observed
long ago, Psalm. 39.6.
that man oftentimes disquieteth himself in vain, heaping up riches, and not
knowing who shall gather them. And Solomon says, that a stanger sometimes
eateh up, and enjoys all a man's labor, Eccles. 6.2. King Saul could never
endure David, yet he was the man that succeeded him in his Kingdom. Haman could
never brook Mordecai the Jew, yet he was his heir: As the Partridge sits on
eggs, and hatcheth them not; or (as the ordinary Translation, and the Margin of
the new) gathers young, which she has not brought forth, and which will for
sake her again, when they perceive she is not their Dam; so he that gets
riches, and not by right, Jer. 17.11. Nemo unquam hostis tam periculosus, quam
in improbos prosperitas sua. Aug. Epist. 39.
shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.
Such a proud fool was a Cardinal here in England, in the time of King Henry the
sixth; so rich he was, that he thought nothing could prevail against him; and
when he lay on his death bed, and perceived he must die, he murmured
exceedingly, and said, if the Realm of England would save my life, I am able to
get it with policy, or to buy it with my riches. Fie, said he, will not death
be hired? will money do nothing?

Little reason there is (if men rightly consider it) why they should be proud
of riches, Periculosior prosperitas animo quam adversitas corpori. August. in
Psalm. 41.

Poor Lazarus was carried into rich Abraham's bosom; to note, that Heaven will
hold both rich and poor; neither riches nor poverty simply do exclude men
thence.


when as our Savior tells us, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and, That it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of
a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 19.23, 24.
that is, one that has riches in admiration, whose heart is wedded and glewed
to it; and so he expounds himself, Mark 10.24. How hard is it for them that
trust in riches, to enter into the Kingdom of God! This speech therefore must
not be simply considered of all rich men; for Abraham, Job, David and Solomon,
and many other holy men, were very rich. But when Christ says, It is easier
for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of God:

1. Some say, That in Jerusalem there was a certain little Gate called Foramen
acus, through which a Camel could not go with a burden upon his back, but must
first be unloaded, and creep upon his knees: Semblably, if rich men will enter
in at the strait Gate of Heaven, they must empty their hearts and minds of
pride, and the love of riches, and be ready and willing to leave them at Gods
pleasure, by his appointment and direction, Mat. 5.3.
and also be humble and poor in Spirit.

2. Others take the speech to be an Hyperbolical Amplification: How hard is it
for them that have many riches, etc. as is usual in Scripture to set out a
great number by an Hyperbole; As many as the sand on the Sea shore; or, the
Stars of Heaven; or, the Birds, or Beasts, or Fishes, etc. And surely, rich
worldlings are not unfitly compared to Camels, whose riches are more for burden
then for use; Quibus divitiae sunt potius oneri, quam usui.

Hieronymus capit Camelum pro animante; cui subscribit and Erasmus. Alcani
intendeno un canape da ancora, ma non ne banno per ancora adutta alcuna
autorita. Ital.


as a Camel carries a burden, but not for himself, yea, oftentimes carries
gold all day, and at night is turned into the stable with a galled back, a pair
of dirty heels, and an empty belly: So a greedy worlding, that has toiled all
his life time, and made gold his confidence, at the hour of death is turned
into Hell with an heavy heated soul, and a guilty conscience, having even got
Hell for his hire, to provide for such as will never thank him, and who will
not bestow any of it by way of Restitution, to redeem him out of Hell; or (if
there were a Purgatory, as the Papists say) they will say, he has answered for
getting it, and they will not part with any, but keep it.

3. A third sort there be, who understand not a Camel, but a Cable rope, which
good Authors avouch to be signified by the Greek word (...), as Beza, Calvin,
Chemnitius, Stella; and these follow Theophilact, (...) funis nauticus and
crassus, cui anchoram alligabant, a similitudine Cameli animant is tortuosi.
Caelius lib. 4. cap. 18.
who says, That howsoever a whole Cable cannot possibly be got through the eye
of a needle, unless it be as big as the ring of an anchor, which is not usual;
yet if it be unwound, and unravelled, in tenuia filamenta, into the several
small links and threads, it may be done, though with much difficulty; and so an
impossibility is not pretended, Vulgarius vult hoc loco significari rudentem
nauticum, and apud Suidam eo reperitur significatu. Item non impossibilitas
praetenditur, sed raritas rei demonstratur. Hieron.
but only the rarity of it is demonstrated, says Hierom. Therefore seeing
riches have been such stumbling blocks and snares to many souls, we have little
cause to be proud of them; but they that have them, ought to pray, that they
may be sanctified to them, and that they may have the right use of them, Luke
16.9. And to pray with Agur, Give me neither poverty nor riches, etc. lest I be
full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? etc. Prove. 30.9.

Let every one labor then to be rich in God, in Wisdom, in Faith, in
Godliness, in good Works. The godly poor God chooses to enrich with Heavenly
riches; not a Senator, for he would have said, My Dignity is chosen; August. de
verb. domini. Sermon. 59.
if a rich man, my Wealth is chosen; if an Orator, my Eloquence is chosen; if a
Philosopher, my Wisdom is chosen, says Augustine. This is durable riches, and
riches that can never be taken away. To him that has God, nothing can be
wanting, unless he himself be wanting to God, says Cyprian, Habenti Deum nil
potest deesse, nisi desit ipse Deo, quia Dei sunt omnia. Cyprian. Orat. Domin.
because all things are Gods.

CHAP. 9. Of Pride of Honor.
SECT. 1. Of Affectation of high Titles, and a Name in the World.
HErein the pride of the Pharisees appeared, who affected the name Rabbi; i. e.
Mat. 23 8.
to be counted wise and understanding. When Sarah cast out the bondwoman and
her son, Christo non vieta che non si renda il suo honor a i magistrati, e a i
maestri: ma condauna l'ambitione. Ital. Annot. Sir Rich. Barckley de Summo bono.
the posterity of Hagar were content at first with the name of Hagarens; but
afterward in the pride of their hearts, considering that Hagar was but a
bondwoman, they would not be called Hagarens, from Hagar; but Saracens, from
Sarah the freewoman, and principal wife. True virtue is contented with one
title, or with none at all; for it self is a sufficient title. Alexander the
great, being pufft up with pride for his great victories, could not bare the
greatness of his fortune with that virtue he won them: That vain Woman
Cleopatra, would be called Regina Reginarum.
But being more desirous of honor, then able to receive it, he commanded
himself to be called the Son of Jupiter, and to be honored as a God; and while
he went about to increase the glory of his acts, he defaced them with such vain
titles; for he received more mocks of the wiser sort, then adoration of his
flatterers: When he sent to the Cities of Greece to have his new title of
Godhead to be confirmed by public authority, Sapor the Persian wrote to
Constantius, and called himself King of Kings, and Brother to the Stars, the
Sun, and the Moon, etc.
the matter being in consultation, one steps up, and said, Well, seeing
Alexander would needs have it so, let us make him a God. Great and detestable
is the pride of the Pope of Rome, who will be called the most holy Father, yea,
Holiness it self: What is this but to lift up himself above Christ? Christ
indeed is absolutely called the Holy One; but the Pope calls himself, the
Most Holy One, and that absolutely: Thus he proudly exalts himself above
Christ, which is proper to Antichrist. The like may be noted from the title of
Christ's Priesthood, Hebr. 4.14, 15. where he is called an High Priest, and a
Great High Priest; but the Pope arrogateth to himself an higher title, Pontifex
Maximus, the greatest High Priest, wherein again he lifts up himself above
Christ, showing that he is not his Vicar, but the Successor of the Archpriest
of the Pagans, whom the Romans called Arch-flamens. And Gregory sometime Bishop
of Rome said, Whosoever calls himself, Pareus in Apocal.

Their glory is great, that got the name of Great, as Alexander the great,
Pompey the great, Charles the great; but they get more glory, who obtain the
name Optimus; i. e. the best.

Trajan wrote his title upon a wall, which Constantinus seeing, called Herbam
parietariam.


or desires to be called the Universal Bishop, is in this his ambition a
forerunner of Antichrist, in that he proudly prefers himself above the
rest. And the Pope afterward becoming Bishop of the chief Seat, and not
contented with that title, a while after he made himself greatest, or chief
Priest, which Dignity till then was proper to the Roman Emperors: for after
Augustus, all the Roman Princes, who governed the Roman affairs under the name
of Emperors (as Onuphrius writes) either took on them the chief Pontificacy,
or else suffered themselves to be called Pontifices Maximi, as Constantinus,
Constantius, Valentinianus, Valens, and Gratianus; who although they detested
the function of chief Priesthood, being addicted to the Christians,
nevertheless they despised not, nor rejected the title thereof; Gratian the
Emperor being the first (as Zosimus tells us) who forbad by Proclamation, that
the Title of Pontifex Maximus should be given to him. Now these Augustal Titles
being rejected by the Emperors, because of the impiety thereof, the Pope
assumed them to himself, making himself the greatest Priest, and soon after
Ecumenical, Catholic, and Universal Bishop, being styled Prince of Priests,
and Head of Churches. But what will it profit men to have swelling titles, and
to have their names known upon earth, if their names are not registered, and
upon record in Heaven? What can it benefit a man to be famous and talked on
upon earth, and be commended in City, Court, and Country, and to have his name
in many Books? If this be not attended and accompanied with a sanctified heart,
its but matter of pride and vanity.

To this Section let me add, that the affectation of vainglory, and getting
themselves a name, has been found in men of a base condition; and some will
endanger their lives to get themselves a name, not fearing to run into present
death, to win same to themselves after this life, Such was the humility of
Pertinax the Emperor, that he forbad his name to be written in the Imperial
possessions, because they were not proper to the Emperor, but to the Romans.
by some notorious fact, not respecting the wickedness thereof. Pausanias being
ambitious of a name, slew Philip King of Macedon, the most famous man in his
time. I have read likewise of another, that set the Temple of Diana on fire,
which for the sumptuousness of its building, and curiosity of Workmanship, was
one of the wonders of the world: And being asked why he did it, he answered, for
no other end, but to get him a name, and that he might be talked of when he was
dead. And Livy tells us of a Roman, who was so desirous of glory and fame, that
he attempted to burn down the Treasure-house at Rome; and being apprehended,
and put to torment, and examined, he confessed, that he had no other end in it,
but that writers might make mention of him in their Chronicles.

SECT. 2. Of affecting High Places.
THe Pharisees loved the uppermost seats in the Synagogues, Luke 11.43.
and greetings in the Marker-place. Christ does not say, You sat in the
upper-most seats (and therefore denounces a woe against them) for of
necessity, some body must sit in the chiefest seats; but this was their sin,
The poor Prodigal desires to be made but as one of his fathers hired servants.
not the taking, but the loving the first place, Ye love the upper-most seats,
etc. desiring it, striving for it. This was the disease of the Pharisees, 3
John 9. Vain honor is the idol of fools. Adams.
and it is hereditary to all proud persons; and wheresoever it is, it is a mark
of pride. It is said of Diotrephes, that he loved the pre-eminence. Christ
reproved this kind of pride by a Parable, when eating bread in the house of
one of the chief Pharisees, Luke 14.7. Luke 14.7, 8, 9, 10.
he put forth a Parable to those which were bidden, when he marked how they
chose out the chief rooms, saying to them, When thou art bidden of any man to a
wedding, sit not down in the highest room, lest a more honorable man then thou
be bidden of him; and he that bade thee and him, come and say to thee, Give
this man place, and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room. But when
thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room; that when he that bade
thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher; then shall thou have
worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee: David had rather be
a doorkeeper in the House of God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

A doorkeeper, in limine insidere, to sit in the threshold, as the Hebrew
signifies; frequentare limen, versari in ecclesia. Tremel. The Rabbis expound
it, to sit at the gate, as the meanest Officer in Gods house.

(...), rather then be in the tents of wicked men in pomp Septuag.


For whosoever exalts himself shall be brought low; and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. Here was was a fault among the ghuests, and them that
were invited and called to the feast; and that was, by putting themselves
forwards too fast, striving for the highest room, and not simply taking it,
according to men's rank and place in the Church or Commonwealth; for the
contrary is rusticity, and want of good education (not civility or urbanity)
from which he disswadeth by two Arguments:

1. Lest the judgment of the Master and maker of the feast, jump not with the
conceit of his ghuest, and so he having authority to place and displace in his
own house, put him back that was over-forward. The like advice gave King
Solomon long before, Psalm. 48.10. Prove. 25.6, 7.
saying, Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King, and stand not in
the place of great men; for better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up
higher, then that thou should be put lower in the presence of the Prince
whom thine eyes have seen.

2. From the evil issue and success that proud persons do meet with; viz. to be
disgraced: For as Solomon tells us, Prove. 16.8 Luke 18.14.
That pride ever goes before a fall; and, He that exalts himself shall be
abased. True honor consists not in the Titles, Dignities and Preferments
that we possess, but rather in the good works that we do; Augustine says of
Cato, Quo minus petebat gloriam, eo magis illum sequebatur. Aug. de Civit. Dei,
lib. 5. cap. 12.
and he is more honorable and praiseworthy, that deserves honor, and has
it not, then he that possesses it, and deserves it not. Can thou reckon
that to be any part of thy happiness, which produces an infinite number of
evils? It may be thou art in great Assemblies saluted with caps and knees, and
art reverenced at Feasts in the highest places at the table; and yet thou
considerest not that oftentimes many a wicked man is preferred before thee: And
what advantage is that to the state of thy body or mind, whereof a man
consists? that cannot be counted the greatest good, which often is not only
turned into evil, but also perverteth them that possess it, and makes them
worse.

SECT. 3. Of pride of men in High Places.
IT is commonly seen, that high Places are apt to puff men up with pride.
Hamans preferments made him so proud, as he thought none good enough to be his
Peer. Intolerable has been the pride of many Popes in this kind: What pride
did Pope Gregory the seventh show, Regni e falsi honori, le gemme, et l'oro,
cui solo it mondo vagillando creed l'alta fatiche, il nostro hyman lavoro, Che
sia del tempo dolorose prede, Nascon d'affannai, et fuggonsi poche hoar, Solo
il ben nostro oprar gia mati non muore. Benevent. de Rambaidis.
to make the Emperor Henry the fourth, stand three days and three nights at
his gate, barefooted, and bare-legged, with his wife and children, in the deep
of winter, in frost and snow, to entreat for absolution? The like pride
appeared in Pope Alexander the third, that made Frederick the Emperor at
Venice, fall down before him to the ground, and ask him forgiveness, while he
trod upon his neck, and gave him a push or two: And to show the more arrogance,
he used these words of Scripture for a pretense, saying, Super aspidem and
Basilicum ambulabis. The like pride was in Pope Celestinus, that put the Crown
upon the head of the Emperor Henry the sixth, not with his hand, but with his
foot, and threw it down again from his head with his foot; affirming, that he
had power to make Emperors, and to depose them. What great pride was in that
Pope that cast Francis Dandalus Duke of Venice under his table to gnaw bones
among the Dogs? It is written also concerning Pope Boniface the eighth, thus,
That Albertus Duke of Austria, being by the Electours chosen King of the
Romans, desired of Boniface the blessing and confirmation: To whom this proud
Pope answered, That he was unworthy of the Empire; and having the Crown on his
own head, and a Sword girt about his loins, he said, I am Caesar. Julius the
second, the Predecessor of Leo (a better Soldier then a Priest) goes with an
Army (as Wicelius witnesses) in the year, 1513. against the King of Navarre,
and threw Peter's Keys into the River Tiber, saying, If the Key of Peter cannot,
let the Sword of Paul prevail. Of which Mantuan says thus: Ense potens gemino,
Mantuan.
cujus vestigia adorant
Caesar and aurato vestiti murice reges.
Great Caesar with victorious Kings
Who golden Crowns do wear,
They do adore his foot steps who
The double sword does bear.


Now here we may observe the steps or ladders, or gradations to the pride of
the Papacy.

1. The first was the departing of Constantine from Rome to Constantinople: So
says Gratian; but Vella, and other Popish Writers, tell us otherwise.

2. The second, was the fall of the Empire in the West, Anno 471. in the time
of Augustulus: Of whom this Epigram was made, Augustus Romanum imperium
condidit,
Augustulus labefactavit.


Augustus founded the Roman Empire, Augustulus destroyed it.

3. The third was a Charter made by Constantine, Emperor of the East, to
Benedict the second; viz. That they might choose a Pope without the Emperor,
which before they could not.

4. The fourth was the Amity between Zachary Bishop of Rome, and Pipin
Governor of France, who ruled for Childerick, and sent to Pope Zachary to be
resolved in this doubt, Whether it were fit for him to be King, that had the
Name and Dignity, or he that bare the burden. He presently picked out the
meaning, and said, He that bare the burden; then Pipin labors to depose his
Master, and does so. The occasion was this, the Pope finding the Lombards
grievously disturbing Italy, Aistulphus, or as some, Aristulphus King of the
Lombards besieged Rome three months.
sent for Pipin with an Army out of France, by whose help he suppressed the
Lombards, and thrust the Greek Magistrates out of Ravenna, and all Italy,
usurping the Principality of Ravenna, by the gift of Pipin the Conqueror; unto
whom in recompense thereof (a thing not heard of before) he gave the Kingdom of
France, thrusting Childerick the lawful King, into a Monastery or Covent. Here
is not Scala Jacobi, or Coeli, but Inferni; for one must gratify the other
again.

5. The fifth step was, the decay of the Eastern Empire, Anno, 756.

6. The sixth step was, the Translation of the Roman Empire from the Greeks to
the French or Germans, in the person of Magnifical Charles (as Bellarmine
calls him:) for the Romans making insurrection against Pope Leo the third,
because of his detestable pride, the said Charles, the Son and Heir of Pepin,
coming with his Army into Italy again, freed the Pope: Hereupon the Pope not to
be ungrateful (out of the fullness of his power) gave unto Charles the Title of
the Roman Empire (the which belonged to the Greeks, and therefore was not his
to dispose of) crowning him Emperor of the West. On the other hand, Charles the
new Emperor to gratify the Pope, forced the Citizens of Rome to swear
fidelity to Leo, and appointed him Lord of Rome; the which Donation, Lodowick
Son of Charles, afterward confirmed and increased.

7. The seventh step, was the Constitution of Electors of the future Emperors,
enacted by Pope Gregory, and Otho the Emperor, both Germans and Kinsmen.

8. The eighth step reaches to Heaven: for thus they teach, Christus be ato
Petro aeternae vitae clavigero, terreni simul and coelestis imperii jura
commisit, Christ has committed to blessed Peter, the Keykeeper of Eternal
Life, the power both of earthly and heavenly Jurisdiction and Government.
Boniface the eighth made a Decree, That e^very humane Creature must submit
himself to the Bishop of Rome, under pain of eternal damnation. Platina de
vitis Pontific.
These be the words of Gratian concerning Pope Nicholas, and the Gloss upon
them says, Argumentum quod Papa habet utrumque gladium, and spiritualem and
temporalem: An argument that the Pope has both Swords, both the Spiritual and
Temporal; and in the marginal notes, Papa habens utrumque gladium, imperium
transtulit: The Pope having both Swords, translated the Empire.

That the properties of God are attributed to the Pope, you may see by their
writings. Papa dicitur habere coeleste arbitrium, and ideo etiam naturam rerum
immutat, substantiam unius rei applicando alii, and de nihilo potest aliquid
facere.

Thus the Popes Parasites flatter him; Sicut non est Potestas nisi a Deo, sic
nec aliqua temporalis vel Ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalis nisi a Papa. As
there is no power but of God; so (say they) there is not any Temporal or
Ecclesiastical, Greg. 7. surnamed Hildebrand said, That he had power to give
and take away Kingdoms at his pleasure; and it is more to make and mar Kings,
then to be a King: as R. Nevill Earl of Warwick sometime said in the Civil War
between Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth of England.
Imperial or Regal power, but of the Pope; In cujus femine scripsit Christus,
Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantium, on whose thigh Christ has written, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. Gregory the ninth lets this Doctrine fall from his
own pen, Ad firmamentum coeli, hoc est, universalis Ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo
magna luminaria, i.e. duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt Pontificalis
authoritas, and regalis potestas; and ut quanta est inter solemn and lunam,
tanta inter Pontifices and Reges differentia cognoscatur. For the firmament of
Heaven, that is (says he) of the Universal Church, God made two great lights;
that is, appointed two Dignities, which are the Pontifical Authority, and the
Regal Power; and as a great difference may be seen between the Sun and Moon; so
as great a difference may be known between Popes and Kings. See what pride is
in the Man of Sin, Some Popes in pride have caused themselves to be worshipped.
who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped.
That high places are apt to puff men up with pride, Decius the Emperor
evidently saw, who when his Father would have invested him in the Empire, as
David did Solomon in his Kingdom, in his life time, refused the honor with
this modest excuse, I fear if I am made Emperor, lest I forget that I am a
Son; Vereor, nc, si fiam imperator, dediscam esse filius; and malo non esse
imperator and humilis filius, quam imperator and filius indevotus. Valor.
Maxim. lib. 4.
and I had rather not be an Emperor, and be an humble Son, then an Emperor,
and an undutiful Son.

He knew it seemed, that Honores did ordinarily mutare mores, that honor did
change men's man's; and so surely theydo in nature corrupted, and not by grace
corrected, or where grace prevails not, or is not predominant above nature; for
where it is, goodness will so oversway greatness, as no Dignity shall cause men
to neglect or forget their duty. Now this is a great vanity, for men to be
proud of honors, or high places, especially if we consider the instability of
honors, great preferments, Craesus King of Lydia, spoiled by Cyrus King of
Persia, and bereft both of his Kingdom and life: Cyrus himself afterward
served so by Thomyris.
and great men's favors; as appears in Parmenio and Clitus, in high favor with
Alexander the great, and Seneca with Nero, and Bellisarius with Justinian the
Emperor; yea, even in Dionysius himself, Bajazet, and many other great
Princes: And even in holy Writ, 1 King. 2.5, 6.
we see Joab a great favorite with David at the first, is at last distasted by
himself, and quite cashiered by Solomon his Son, and that by his approbation
and appointment; so likewise Haman rose not so fast, Hest. 7.
but he sell faster. They that be in the hight of honor to day, Tolluntur in
altum, ut lapsu graviore cadant.
may be in the lowest degree of disgrace by to morrow; for we know not what a
day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. And we have seen many notable instances of the
transitoriness of worldly honor in these our days: Man being in honor abides
not, Similis est pecoribus morticinis.
he is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.12. The old Translation reads it
thus, Man shall not continue in honor, he shall be like the beasts that dye;
or as Tremellius, Tremell.
he shall be like the beasts that dye of the Morrain, and so become useless and
fit for nothing: And many times men are lifted up on high, that their fall may
be the greater. Dionysius of Syracuse, glad to teach a School at Corinth, to
get a poor living.
Some in these days boast of the honor that they have gotten by the disgrace
of others, of their rising by others falling; but this is a great vanity, to
grow proud that we rise by others ruins. Thus did the common soldiers in
Tacitus repress the pride of Pompey: Nostra miseria magnus es. Tacitus. Honor
is the greatest outward glory, says the Philosopher. Arist. Ethic. 4.
Thou art great by our misery, therefore swell not against us. He that (like
Matthias) comes in the place of another, must rather lament the others loss,
then grow proud of his own gain. If the Gentile be advanced by the fall of the
Jew, he should not boast against the Jew, but rather lament the Jews falling,
then be proud of his own rising. Many in these our days, have erected to
themselves stately Palaces, Vbi honor non est, ibi contemptus. Hier. Epist.
by the fall of other men's houses; and such as these, are ready to swell with
pride against their decayed brethren: It is a sign of a vain mind, to think the
worse of any man because he is fallen; or to think the better of our selves,
because we are risen. What though Job be on the dunghill, yet he shall be
restored; and though Joseph be in prison, yet he shall be advanced.

If therefore men are ambitious of honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.
let them honor God: Them that hononr me, says he, I will honor. Let David
carry himself valiantly in the wars of Israel, though Saul himself labor to
keep him down, Non facit nobilem atrium plenum sumosis imaginibus; animus facit
nobilem. Sen. Epist. 44.
and to eclipse his glory, yet the very women in their songs shall prefer him
before their King, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands: If Mordecai the Jew be faithful to King Ahashuerus, and discover the
Treason of Bigtanah and Teresh, there will come a time, that the King will be
at leisure to read the Chronicles, and reward his good service, Est. 6. If
Daniel continue constant in Gods service, it shall at last appear, that the
truth was at his side, and he shall prevail, and be preferred according to his
desert, Men mistake the way to be great, while they neglect the way to be good.
Adams.
Dan. 6. If Paul and Silas be painful in their places, and seek their Masters
glory, and the enlargement of his Kingdom, by the propagation of the Gospel, if
men be dumb and silent, the very Devils shall confess them to be the servants
of the most high God, and to show unto men the way of Salvation, Acts 16.17. In
a word, if our Savior Christ go about preaching in the Synagogues, and curing
diseases, and doing all sorts of good deeds, howsoever the Rulers of the Jews
accuse him, Joh. 6.15.
and persecute him, and seek to execute him, yet many of the common people
admire him, yea, seek to advance him, and thought to make him their King,
howbeit he will accept of no such honor; yea, Pilat himself cannot but confess
to his eternal Glory, and his own perpetual shame, that though he condemned him
to please the people, and not displease the Emperor, yet he found no cause of
death, nay no fault in him, Joh. 19. The way to be truly honored, is first to
be virtuous; Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juvenal. Sat. 8.
and this the wise ancient Romans knew right well, by building the Temple of
Honor within the Gate of Virtue; to teach all their people, that whosoever
would come to the one, must pass through the other; and doubtless, wheresoever
Honor is placed in the Crest, and has not virtue for a Supporter, all true
Heralds know to be but false Arms; and wheresoever it is conferred without
virtue, it will not continue, it being out of its element and proper place: But
on the other side, There be two things make holiness above greatness; 1. The
work of Holiness. 2. The reward of Holiness; Blessing shall cover the head of
the righteous, Prove. 10.6. Dr. Sutton.
wheresoever is virtue, there honor and estimation shall be first or last; for
it follows true virtue, as the shadow accompanies the body when the Sun
shines; and when it does not, it is but the over-casting of a cloud, and the
Sun will one day shine again.

SECT. 4. Of Pride of a generous and noble descent.
PRide of descent is, when men do boast of their noble Extraction and Generous
Original: This is a thing most ridiculous, for a man to boast of that which
belongs to another: It is better that others be known by thee, then thou be
known by others. Plato says, that every King comes of a slave, and every
slave of a King: Such was the pride of C. Caligula, that he took from the
ancient noble families their Arms, and Badges, as from the Torquati their
collar; from the Cinnati, their curled lock; from Cneius Pompeius his
posterity, the surname of Magnus. Suetonius in vit. Calig.
The great Tamerlain was the son of a Peasant, and kept Cattle; Arsaces King of
the Parthians, was of so base a stock, that his Parents could not be known, yet
he got such renown by his virtue, that his posterity were called Arsacides, as
the Emperors of of Rome were called Caesar's, of Augustus Caesar. Pertinax a
Roman Emperor, was son of an Artificer, his Grandfatherwas a slave. Agathocles
King of Cicily, the son of a Potter. The Emperor Probus, the son of a
Gardener. The Suldan of Cayro, was chosen out of the Mamalukes, to which honor
none might arise, unless he had first been a slave. Diverse Popes likewise were
basely descended. Little cause have men to pride themselves in the Nobility of
their birth, when they come by it by their Parents, who by some virtuous or
noble acts, exceeded other men, and were by the people held in the greater
estimation, which honor for their sakes, descended to their posterity: So that
if any glory be due, it is due to the Parents, and not to the children, unless
they tread in the steps of their Parents, and many times Children do not tread
in the steps of Virtuous Parents; which gave occasion to Cicero to reprehend
Catiline, by comparing the antiquity of his blood with the vitiosity of his
manners; Faelix quem virtus generosa exornat avorum, and Qui virtute suis
adjicit ipse decus.
who says of him, That he was not more famous by the Nobility of his Parents,
then ignominious by his notorious vices. Let the French King and Queen, says
one, be thy Parents, if there be no virtue in thy mind, I will regard thee no
more, then if thou had an Husbandman to thy Father, and a poor Countrey-woman
for thy Mother. But if Nobility of blood be joined with grace and true
humility, it is a thing much to be esteemed. The Jews boasted themselves, they
had Abraham to their Father: Luke 3.8.
It is more credit for a man to be countenanced by his own virtues, Vere
nobilis ille non quem, sua villa sed virtus nobilitat; and melius domum Domino,
quam Dominum dome honestari.
then the virtues of his Progenitors: It is better to be the beginning, then
the end of a man's house. The best Nobility is built by virtue: God chooses not
as man does, by outward appearance; he chooses Saul out of Benjamin, the least
of the Tribes, and his Fathers family the least in that Tribe, by his own
confession, to be King over Israel, 1 Samuel 9.21. So in the choice of David, 1 Samuel 16.7. Not Eliab, nor Amminadab, nor Shammah, nor any of the rest chosen,
but little David, that kept his Fathers sheep. Thus Christ chose Fishers to be
his Disciples, Mat. 4.18.21. and Shepherds to be the Heralds of his Nativity,
Luke 2.8. The foolishness of God is wiser then men. Of whom he makes choice
especially, the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 1.26.
That not many wise, not many mighty (after the flesh) not many Noble are
called.

Brag not of the clarity of thy blood; for God made all mankind of one blood;
Acts 17.26.
and if any man's blood be more purethen others, it is not Nobility, but
soundness of body causes it. Malo Pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Aeacidae similis, Vulcaniaque arma capessas, Quam te Thersitae similem producat
Achilles.
Boast not of thy antiquity, for every man's Original was one and the same;
there was but one common Parent of mankind, one Spring and Fountain of all
men. Beast not of the antiquity of thy Family: for how many Noble Families have
there been of whom there is no remembrance at this day? and in our days we have
seen the overthrow of Noble and Royal families: Every thing which springs up
in time, dies with time. Boast not of thy Birth, for thy Nobleness comes not
by thy birth, but by thy life. Let us not then so much desire to be great, as
to be good; nor to fet our Pedigrees from ancient houses, as to carry our
selves worthy such Ancestors; else their goodness cannot so much credit us, as
our badness will discredit them. Sir Philip Sidney.
We may say of all these outward things, as an honorable Gentleman was wont to
say of the Arms of his house left him by his Ancestors,

Vix ea nostra voco; We can scarce call them ours, alluding to a saying of a
Poet,

Et genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi, etc. In a word, if we be
good, we shall be great; for if they are greatest in blood, These two are
infinitely and jointly in God; viz. Greatness and Goodness, who is both optimus
and maximus.
who can derive themselves from the highest persons, and greatest Peers; then
surely incomparably greater be they, which can derive themselves from him which
has no Peer; and so may all the faithful, without check of pride or
presumption; for Christ himself acknowledges them as his kinsfolk, Matthew.
12.50. saying, Whosoever (let him be never so mean in other respects) shall do
the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my Brother, and Sister,
To be the Sons of Nobles, is nothing, to the Sons of God; to be born of
Princes, is but baseness, in comparison of this, to be born of God; Moab is but
a washpot, Edom but a wiper of shoes. Dr. Sutton. Saints are Gods excellent
ones on earth, Psalm. 16.3.
and Mother. And here it may not be unfit to bring in these Verses:

Why does Earths Gentry count themselves so good,
Giving Coat, Arms, for all the world to gaze on?
Christ's Blood alone makes Gentlemen of blood,
His shameful death does give the fairest blazon.
then he is ancient'st, and of best behavior,
Whose Arms and Ancestors and from his Savior.
CHAP. 10. Of Pride of Diet.
IT is said of the Rich man, Luke 16. that he was not only clothed in purple,
but also he fared deliciously every day: As he painted his back with gorgeous
and gaudy apparel, so he pampered his belly with delicate and dainty fare,
Great feastings are not without great sin; men thereby become unfit for the
service of God; it makes men dull to hear the word; Venture non habet aures;
Pinguis venture dormit libenter, readier to sleep then learn any good.
and that not now and then, but every day. He might have fared well, and
feasted sometime, as appears, Psalm. 104.15. where God gives not only bread,
but wine and oil also: But here was his pride, in making dainty bread his daily
bread, and keeping his Christmas (as they say) all the year long; he was
altogether given to security and sensuality, being, as Crassus in his purse, so
Cassius in his pots; like those greedy Epicures described, Isa. 56.12. He that
prides himself with his delicious meats, and dainty fare, is an an absolute
Idolater: His God is his belly, Phil. 3.19. The Temple of this false God (says
Tertullian) is in the lungs; his Cook is his Priest; his Table, or Dresser, his
Altar; his Meat, his Sacrifice; and unto this his God Bell he offers whatever
Sea or Land will afford him; it is a wonder to see how he has his Officers in
every place; for him war is waged against the Air, and Clouds, and Birds are
disnestled from the Kingdom which nature has allowed them; for him the face of
the earth is turned into a shambles; for him Seas are sounded, Depths are
plummeted, Shipwracking storms, and direful tempests are ferried over; all this
hurly-burly is made for a stomach four fingers broad, for which a little bread
and water would suffice in necessity, and in superfluity the whole world is too
little to satisfy. Adam had been better without his Apple, Esau his red
pottage, and Belshazzar his feast for his thousand lords, Dan 5.1. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Such a one was that rich fool, Luke 12. who pulled down his barns, and would
build them up greater, and never made any conscience of doing good with all his
goods, but only to play the Epicure, and live the life of a beast, in
idleness, riotousness, and sensuality: Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and
be merry. We should remember, that we live not to eat, like those Creatures
Horace speaks of, that eat consumere naturam, to consume nature, but that we
may live and glorify God. And our Savior teaches us that lesson, Luke 21.34.
and Paul, Romans 13.12, 13. Christ pronounces a woe to such Sensualists, Luke
6.25.
Woe to you that are full, for ye shall hunger: Most commonly men are punished
in the same things they sin: Qui sumptus magnos ubi non decet fecerit, ubi
decet exiguos faciet. Seneca.
Dives tormented in his tongue, because he had abused it by his Epicurism: And
waste is commonly punished with want.

It is written in an old Chronicle, that in the days of King Vortiger, sometime
King of this Land, An. 447.
there was a wonderful plenty of all provisions (like Pharaohs seven plentiful
years in Egypt) whereupon ensued the common sins growing out of it, Pride,
Idleness, Gluttony, and Adultery; and after that ensued such a famine and
plague, as the living were scarce able to bury the dead. Pride, Idleness, and
fullness of Bread, were the sins of Sodom. As the humility of Christ appeared
in many other things, as I may have occasion to show hereafter, so also in
abstinence in his Diet: We often read, that he fasted, seldom that he feasted,
never that he surfeited: And when he did go to eat with those that invited him,
he would labor to feast their souls, as they feasted his body: And when he was
to work a miracle, and feed five thousand grown men, besides women and
children, he had not in his family five loads of bread (which any man would
have thought little enough for so many) but only five loaves of bread, and not
wheaten bread neither, Austin makes an Allegory of the miracle of loaves,
thereby understanding the calling of the Gentiles, who came from far to the
Commonwealth of Israel: They had nothing to cat; i. e. says he, They wanted
spiritual food, and the knowledge of God and Christ: By the five loaves he
understands, the five Books of Moses; by the two fishes, the two Testaments; by
their sitting down on the grass, the mortification of their flesh, submitting
unto him, after which time he satisfies and suffices them. John 6.9. Sic care
nutrienda est ut serviat, and sic domanda, ut non superbiat. Hugo de S. Victore.
wherein there might have been some more hold and tack; but even barley bread,
which is not so hearty and baitable: The like may be said of the other part of
the diet of Christ and his Apostles; it was not flesh, that is held the more
solid and substantial feeding; but fish, a frothy and flaggy kind of meat; nor
any great deal of fish neither, such as Peter and his fellow-fishers caught,
when they brake their nets, Luke 5. but only two fishes; nay more then that, as
for their number they were but two, so for their quantity they were not great,
as Whales, Dolphins, or the like, but two little small fishes; as appears, in
that a little boy, as John speaks, carried both them and the five loave.
Whence one of the Ancients infers, that our flesh is so to be nourisht, that
it may be fit for service, and so to be kept under, that it swell not with
Pride.

A little will serve to suffice nature: Qui ad naturam vivit, semper dives est;
qui ad opinionem, pauper. Sen.
Good David would have been content with Nabals superfluity and reversion, 1 Samuel 25. and poor good Lazarus with the crumbs that fell from the rich Gluttons
Table; and many a poor Saint and Servant of God with small pittances; and why
should any of us be at any great cost with our bodies, to feed them with all
manner of dainties, when as thereby we do but, as it were, cram our selves fat
to feed the worms? Insanus and irritus labor est, gerere curam carnis, et
abjicere curam cordis. Bernard. Its a shame to delight more in the dead
carcasses of a Beast or Fowl, then in the living God.
Wherefore it is true that Bernard says, It is a mad and vain kind of labor,
so much to indulge the flesh, and to cast away the care of the soul. It is
folly for a man to lay his whole living upon a house, and then have nothing to
maintain it: This is our case; for our body is but domicilium animae, the
dewlling place, or habitation of the soul.

CHAP. 11. Of Pride of Strength.
SECT. 1. Of Pride of Bodily strength.
PRide is one of man's greatest weaknesses, but always grounded on some supposed
strength, either of body or mind. Great was the stature and bodily strength of
Maximinus the Roman Emperor; (...). Amos 2.14.

Grimstones Roman History.

One on the Theater before Maximinus (to daunt his pride) sung certain Greek
verses to this effect, Et qui ab uno non potest occidi, a multis occiditur;
cave multes, si singulos non times.


for as ( Julius Capitolinus reports) he was eight and an half Geometrical
foot high, which is two foot and an half more then we see any man ordinarily to
be in these days; and as he had a great body, so had he all parts thereof
proportionable to his greatness, and was so extremely strong, that a cart heavy
laden, which two Oxen could hardly move, he would easily draw and turn at his
pleasure; with his fist he brake an horses leg, and striking a horse in the
chap with his fist, he brake out all his teeth, and was so fierce and
courageous, that he made no account of any man: He overcame sixteen strong men
that were Water-bearers and Servitors of the Roman Camp, coming to handy gripes
with them, without resting, not being moved by any of them: Yet he whom one man
could not overcome, was at last overcome by many Soldiers, and others with
them, who came very boldly to his Pavilion, and without any resistance slew him
and his Son. Great was the strength of Sampson, so that when a young Lion
roared upon him, he rent him, as he would have rent a Kid, having nothing in
his hand, Gibbor The mighty man, shall not be delivered by his great strength,
Psalm. 33.16. Judge. 15.14, 15. Fortis es, and altum sapis? at res vilissima; nam
and Leo est te audacior, and aper fortior, Chrysostom.
Judge. 14.6. and when he was bound with cords, by the men of Judah, how did he
break those cords asunder? The cords that were upon his arms, became as flax
that was burnt with fire, and his bands loosed from off his hands; and finding
a new jaw bone of an Ass, he slew a thousand men therewith: At another time he
went to Gaza, and took the doors of the Gate of the City, Judge. 16.3.21.
and the two posts, and went away with them bar and all, and put them upon his
shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron: yet
at last was he betrayed by Dalilah into the hands of the Philistines; None was
stronger in body then Milo, yet many men were more excellent then he.
who took him and put out his eyes, and bound him with fetters of brass, and
made a Miller of him, to grind in the Prisonhouse at Gaza. Do thou exceed
others in strength of body? yet consider thou art therein inferior to the
Horse, the Elephant, and diverse other beasts; thou show what a poor creature
thou art, to put confidence in bodily strength. The force of an hidden evil
overcame Hercules, that was not to be overcome by any man. The strongest man in
the world, There is none strong like our God, 1 Samuel 2.2. Jer. 9 23. Cogita
quantarum ipse sis virium; istae enim non tuae sunt, sed hospitii, imo carceris
vires tui; vanum autem est, cum ipse sis fragilis, forti habitaculo (dicam
melius) forti Adversario gloriari. Petrarc. de Remed. utriusq, fortunae. The
Amorite was strong as the Oaks, yet God destroyed him, Amos 2.9.
his strength is but weakness, compared with the strength of an Oak. Let not
the strong man glory in his strength, says the Lord. There is no man so
strong, but his strength may be impaired either by immoderate labor, or by
some sharp and violent disease, or by excessive grief and sadness, or decrepit
old age, which overcomes all things. Do thou boast of thy great strength?
let me tell thee, that every weighty thing labors with its own burden; and
this is the nature almost of every thing, when it comes to its height, it
descends not with an equal motion; the ascent is more slow, but the descent
is precipitious, and this bodily strength when it begins to decline, will
decline apace.

SECT. 2. Of pride of Strongholds.
I Find in Alexanders wars, that when he came to subdue the Sogdians, a people
that had a rock for their habitation, and the munition of rocks on every side,
Volateran reports of Niniveh, that it was eight years a building by no less
then ten thousand Workmen; and Diod. Sieulus says, The walls were an 100 foot
high, the breadth able to receive three carts on a row, it had 1500 turrets,
but is now laid waste.
they jeered him, and asked him, Whether his Soldiers had wings or no? Unlefs
thy Soldiers can fly in the air, we fear thee not. Many men when they get
into a strong hold (like David in his strong Mountain) think they shall never
be moved: But fee how the Lord threatens Israel, if they hearkened not to the
voice of the Lord, and to do all his Commandments and Statutes, that he would
bring upon them a Nation of fierce countenance, that should besiege them in all
their gates, until their high and fenced walls came down, wherein they trusted
throughout all their Land. Natural men since the fall, must have some strength
or other to trust to: Deuteronomy. 28.52. Genesis 11.7, 8.
When Cain was driven out from his Fathers house, he falls a building of
Cities; and we read of some after the Flood, that would build a Tower of Babel
that should reach to Heaven, to get themselves a name; but the Lord soon
confounded their language, and scattered them abroad from thence upon the face
of all the earth. Thou boastest that thou live in an impregnable Castle: Do
thou not know the Proverb, Quis cladem illius urbis, quis funera sando
Explicet? aut posist lachrymis, etc. Virg. 2. Aeneid.
that there is no place that is invincible? Even that Tower of Locris (that
double Tower) could not be defended by Hannibal himself; and that impregnable
Tower of Praeneste, then which Historians say, never was a stronger, when it
could not be overcome by force of arms, it was taken by flattery and false
promises, and was demolished. That Fortress cannot stand long, where wickedness
gets in between the timber and the stones; besides, the faith of Gods
children, which can remove mountains, is able to throw down the strongest
walls, Heb. 11.30.
as it did the walls of Jericho. No strong-hold of it self is sufficient to
secure a man from the wrath and vengeance of God pursuing him. Jam seges est
ubi Troja fuit. Ovid. Epst. 1.
I have read of Bishop Hatto in Germany, that suffered the poor to starve at
his door, albeit the Rats eat up his corn; but after they had devoured his
Corn, they sought after him from house to house; wherefore he built him an
house in the River Rhemes, where the water runs very swiftly; yet that would
not serve, they got to him, and eat up him also; whereupon that Tower is
called, The Rats Tower unto this day. There is no true security in any thing
but in God: He that dwells in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty: Psalm. 91.1, 2.
I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge, and my fortress: my God, Psalm. 18.2.
in him will I trust. The Lord is my rock and my fortress, etc. my strength, in
whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower,
says David. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs into
it, and is safe, Prove. 18.10. God has promised his people, that the munitions
of rocks shall be their place of defense, Isa. 33.16. The Lord will set them so
high, that none shall be able to reach them, to do them hurt: But let the
wicked man build never so high, his pride will bring him down: Thy terribleness
has deceived thee, says God to Edom, and the pride of thy heart, (...).
Cedren. hist p. 452.
O thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock, that hold the height of the
hill: though thou should make thy nest as high as the Eagle, I will bring
thee down from thence, says the Lord, Jer. 49.16. When Nicephorus Phocas had
built a mighty wall about his Palace, for his security, in the night he heard a
voice crying, O King, though thou buildest as high as the clouds, yet the City
may easily be taken, the sin within will mar all.

CHAP. 12. Of pride of Children.
CHildren, especially to Mothers, whose affections are very strong, are very
taking things, being little images of themselves: Parents take so much delight
in their children, that the evils of children affect them, as if they were
their own. How earnestly does the woman of Canaan cry out to Christ for her
daughter? Matthew. 15.21.
You read likewise of a man crying out to Christ, Master, I beseech thee behold
my son, for he is all that I have, Luke 9.38. Behold my son, that is, have
mercy on my son; as it is expounded, Matthew. 17.15. And so sometimes videre is
taken for respicere, and respicere for misereri seu delectari, Psalm. 66.18.
Parents are apt to dote too much upon an only son, therefore when they are
taken away, the grief of Parents is excessive. The greatest mourning in
Scripture, is set out by the mourning for an only son: Indeed, some there are,
whose affections are so strong to their children, that they take it heavily, if
God take away but one of many children from them. Ambrose reports a doleful
accident, that befell a poor man in his time, who had five sons, and knew not
how to relieve himself and them in a famine, unless he sold one, to buy food
for the rest: On a time, with a heavy heart, he called them all about him, to
see which he might best spare: He looks upon his eldest son, It is engrafted
in the hearts of Parents, by the very Law of Nature, to be loving, and
pitiful, and kind to their children; therefore God in his Law, Exodus 20. only
bids children be dutiful to their Parents in the fifth Commandment, but says
nothing to Parents to be careful for their children, knowing it to be derived
to them by a kind of natural instinct, and therefore they need no teaching for
it. Luke 7.12.
and thought he was best able to shift; but shall he part with him that was the
strength of his youth, and the first that called him father? he cannot endure
it; then he looks upon his youngest, and thinks how he may part with him;
and alas, he faith, he was the Nest-chick, and dearly beloved of his deceased
mother, and therefore he must not go; a third resembles his Ancestors and
Progenitors, having the Grandfathers neb, and the Grandmothers eye, and in him
they should live, when he was dead, and therefore he must not go, whatever came
on it; the fourth has been ever loving to him, and the fifth most diligent,
dutiful, and industrious; so that the poor man can spare never a one of his
Olive plants from about his table. And if a man could not part with one of
many, what a grief (think we) was it to the poor widow of Naim, to part with
one and all? she being not a young wife neither, that might have many more, but
an old widow, utterly without hope of issue.

Has God given you many children, pride not your selves in them: Men are apt
to glory in them, because they bear their names, their resemblance, and they
do, as it were, live in their children, when themselves are dead; they are the
Parents multiplied. Have thou many children? thou have also many cares for
them, and many sorrows about them: If thy children are good, thou art still in
fear of losing them; if evil, thou art in continual sorrow for them; and till
thou know how they will prove, thy solace is ambiguous, and thy care is
certain. Many good men have been greatly afflicted in their children; as Adam,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Eli, David, and others. Glory not then in the multitude,
beauty, strength and comeliness of thy children; for God can easily take them
all away, as he did Jobs children, and all at once. Thus God threatens Ephraim,
glorying in his children, Their glory shall flee away like a bird, from the
birth, Hos. 9.11.
from the womb, and from the conception: though they bring up their children,
yet I will bereave them, and there shall not be a man left. Many fond and
indulgent Parents, are like the Ape, that kills its young with hugging them.
Parents nostros sensimus parricidas. Cypr. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Monast. vit.
cap. 4.
May not children now use the same complaints as were in Cyprians days? Our
Fathers and Mothers have proved our murderers, soul-murtherers, worse then
they who murder the body, as Chrysostom speaks. When Parents too much dote
upon their children, they take a quick way to bereave themselves of them. We
read that Jacob loved Joseph, and doted more upon him then upon all his
children, Genesis 37.3.
therefore the Lord bereaves him of his Joseph (that lay so near to his heart)
for many years together, and then his sorrow was as great for the loss of him,
as he took delight and contentment in the enjoyment of him. It is the greatness
of our affections, Woodw. Child's Patrim.
as one well observes, that causes the greatness of our afflictions. They
that love too much, will always grieve too much: It is good for Parents so to
delight themselves in their children, as that they could be ready and willing
to part with them; and then, with Job, they will bless God, not only for
giving them, but also for taking them away. He was a wise Heathen that said, I
kiss my child to day, and then I think it may be dead to morrow. Love your
children only as creatures, and let not the Mothers child, be the Mothers God;
nor the Fathers son, be the Fathers Idol. Eli honored his sons more then God;
therefore God said, there should not be an old man in his house for ever, 1 Samuel 2.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
and all the increase of his house should dye in the flower of his age; and
this should be a sign unto him, that his twosons, Hophni and Phinehas, should
both of them dye in one day.

Let Parents imitate those that brought their little children unto Christ, that
he might touch them, and bless them: Let them bring their children to Christ,
and offer them to God:

1. Luke 18.15.
By prayer, for his blessing upon them: Thus Abraham prayed even for Ishmael,
Genesis 17.18. There Is no question, but Job prayed as well as offered sacrifice
for his children, lest they might forget themselves and offend God in their
feastings. This must be a daily duty of Parents, and continued act so long as
they and their children live upon earth.

2. They are to be offered to God by Baptism, in the face of the congregation
so soon as conveniently they may: If a Father knew he had some special friend
that had cast his love and affection upon some one of his children in such sort
as he meant to adopt him, and make him his heir, he would be careful that he
should be trained up according to his directions. Now faithful Parents must
know and believe, that God is the God of them and their seed, and therefore
having made his covenant with them, they should earnestly desire to have the
seal of it. I know that Baptism does not confer grace, ex opere operato, as a
Kings Letters under the broad-seal do not give a pardon to a malefactor, Non
profuit ei visibilis Baptismus, quia defuit invisibilis spiritus sanctus.
August.
but only signify that it is the Kings pleasure to afford him that favor; as
also that all that are baptized, shall not be saved, as Austin speaks of Simon
Magus. The outward Baptism did not profit him, because the invisible holy
Spirit was wanting to him. And lastly, that it is not absolutely necessary to
salvation, but God can save without it, as doubtless he did diverse Israelitish
children dying in the wilderness without circumcision, and as was the case of
the Thief upon the Cross, Valentinian, and others. However it be not necessary
in regard of God, yet in respect of us, it is, both that we may be obedient to
his commandment, and also to help our weakness.

3. They must be brought to Christ, and offered to God (when they have
knowledge and years of discretion) by good education: for this God took special
order in his Law; telling his people, that his laws must not only be in their
own heads to know them, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
but in their mouths to talk of them, and learn them to their children. And
questionless, the common dissoluteness and disobedience of children when they
be grown up, proceeds from the carelessness of Parents; when they were young,
they offered them not to Christ, nor put them to his school, but trained them
up in wantonness, pride and vanity, which is the bane of youth. And thus some
have brought their children to beggary, others to the Gallows, and more have
brought them to spiritual and eternal death.

CHAP. 13. Of Pride of outward privileges.
EVil men are very apt to pride themselves in their outward privileges. The
Jews boasted they were Abraham's seed according to the flesh, though they cared
not to follow Abraham's faith: they boast also that they have the Temple of the
Lord, Jerem. 7.4. Deus habitat in medio nostrs, apud nos babet domicilium. Haec
prima hypocritarum munitio. Calv. in Jerem. 7.
and they cry, the Temple of the Lord; as if they should have said, God
dwells in the midst of us, he has his habitation with us: This is the first
fortress of hypocrites, says Calvin. They gloried, that they were a vine of
Gods own planting, that God had known and chosen them out of all the families
of the earth to be his peculiar people, and had entered into covenant with them.
There is nothing more common with proud and wicked men, says Salvian, then to
defend themselves by the name of Catholic, when in life they are more profane
than Goths and Vandals: Salvian. de provid. dei. lib. 7. Vanum sine corpore
nomen. Hoc nomine ecclesia. sola Romana gloriatur. Coster. in Enchirid. de
notis Eccles.
a vain name without a body: yet this is the argument of Costerus the Jesuit;
in this name the Roman Church alone does glory. But what does this privilege
of a religious name profit them that call themselves Catholics? and the same
may be said of the Catholic faith and profession. Little reason have men to be
proud of outward privileges: for the Apostle tells us, that in Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision avails any thing, Gal. 6.15.
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; nothing is acceptable to God, nor
available to salvation; Chrysostom says of the Jews, that divinis pene obruti
erant beneficiis.
and under these two, he Synecdochically comprehends all outward privileges,
prerogatives, dignities and precedences whatsoever: under circumcision
comprising the dignities of the Jews, Romans 3.1, 2. Romans 9.4, 5. under
uncircumcision, the Gentiles, with all their wit, wealth, strength, laws,
policy, or whatever is of esteem among men, and glorious in the eyes of the
world, all which he accounts as nothing in respect of regeneration. Luke 16.15


1. Therefore first, wealth, strength, nobility, wisdom are nothing, and not to
be gloryed in, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. You see your calling brethren, not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called: But God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to confound the mighty, etc. and things that are not to
confound the things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence.

2. Outward callings are nothing, as to be Emperors, Kings, Priests, Prophets,
Apostles.

3. Or outward actions of hearing, fasting, almes-giving, prayer. It is a mark
of a wicked castaway to rest in these things, of one who builds the house
not upon the Rock, Qui domu^ aedificat, non in petra sed in arena, August. in
Ps. 103.
but upon the Sand, says Austin. It is the note of such as shall be refused,
when the great King shall make distinction between the sheep and Goats.

4. Kindred and alliance avail not; for if the blessed Virgin had not as well
conceived Christ in her heart by faith, Beatior Maria percipiendo fidem
Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi, and Christum faelicius gestavit
cord, quam corpore; mente, quam ventre. August.
as in her womb according to the flesh, she had not been saved, Luke 11.27, 28.
For when a certain woman said unto Christ, Blessed is the womb that bare thee,
and the paps that gave thee suck; he said, yea rather blessed are they that
hear the word of God and keep it. It seems to have been an usual thing among
the Jews to commend Parents by their children, and to commend children by
pronouncing their Parents blessed in them: So it is recorded of Rabbi Jochanan
Ben Zachary, that commending one of his scholars, he brake out into this
speech, Blessed is she that bare thee. And in profane Authors, this and the
like speeches are usual, Ashre sevvaled techa. Beataquae te genuit. Tremel. in
loc.
Faelices tales quae te genuere Parents.

Thus Solomon tells us, that a wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son
is heaviness to his mother, Prove. 10.1. yea as good children be comforts to
their Parents privately, so they be credits to them publicly, as the Psalmist
says, he that has good children need not be ashamed to meet his enemy in the
gate; and that this is an especial outward blessing, Quisque nascitur ex Adamo,
nascitur damnatus de damnato. Aug. in Psalm. 132.
our Savior denies not; for in his answer he does not cross and contradict
the speech as false, but only correct it, showing, that though it were a good
thing in the kind to have good children, yet it was a better thing to be good
our selves; and howsoever his blessed mother were a vessel of grace on earth,
and be now a glorious Saint in heaven, yet herein consisted not the height of
her happiness, in that she bare him in her body, but rather in this, that she
believed on him in her heart. And if Christ's kinsmen had not been his brethren
as well by spiritual adoption and regeneration, as by carnal propagation, Mark
3.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
and generation, they should not have had inheritance in the kingdom of God.

5. Nay, the outward Elements are nothing without the inward grace.

1. For Baptism, it is not the washing the face or body, nor the washing away
the filth of the flesh, that is acceptable to God, but the stipulation of a
good conscience that makes request to God, 1 Pet. 3.21.

2. For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, he that does not as well receive
panem dominum, 1 Cor. 11.27, -- 29.
as panem domini, the bread that is the Lord, as the bread of the Lord, is an
unworthy receiver, and so is guilty of his body and blood: and the reason why
these outward privileges are nothing available with God, is, because the
things that God regards are spiritual, and eternal, not temporal and carnal,
as these are, which shall utterly cease in the Kingdom of glory: for then shall
Christ have put down all rule, and authority, and power, 1 Cor. 15.34.

Object. But it may be said, that these outward privileges and earthly
prerogatives of King over his Subjects, Master over his servants, Father over
his children, have a place here in the Kingdom of grace, and that Christianity
does not overthrow civil policy.

Resp. That a man must be confidered two ways, both in regard of his outward
or inward man.

1. In regard of his outward man, as he is a member of the civil society,
whether family, Church or Commonwealth, there be differences of persons, as
Masters, Servants, Magistrates, Subjects, bondmen, freemen, poor, rich, as
the Apostle tells us, Colos. 3.18. 20. -- 22.

2. But if a man be considered in respect of his spiritual estate, as he is a
member of the invisible or Catholic Church, Romans 14.17. Ephesians. 4.4. Gal. 3.28.
under spiritual government, consisting in righteousness, peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost; there is no distinction or difference, Romans 12.5.

The Popish opinion therefore which teaches, Christi nomen induere, and non
per Christi viam pergere, quid aliud est quam praevaricatio divini nominis?
Cyprian.
eth, that there be some outward callings and actions that may commend us to
God, wherein we may glory, is here justly condemned, as to lead a single life,
to keep many set fasting days, and pray much, to vow voluntary poverty, to
perform regular obedience, to profess a monastical life or monkery, to be
buried in a Friars Cowl, to abstain from such and such meats, etc. whereas Paul
tells us, that outward privileges will not serve our turns, Virginity and
single life an external pre-eminence among men, no internal righteousness
before God: it is among those things unde faciamus been, sed non unde fiamus
boni. August. 236. Sermon. de temp. V. Abbot cont. Bishop.
nor meat commend us to God, 1 Cor. 8.8. Therefore it is a great vanity for men
to think highly of themselves for outward privileges, nor may we glory in
them. Nay, the King himself may not be lifted up above his brethren; Deuteronomy.
17.20. Paul's example is excellent to this purpose, who neither esteemed the
things before his conversion, as his education and breeding, being a Jew, a
Citizen of Rome, a Pharisee, a great Doctor and Rabbin, brought up at the feet
of Gamaliel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, etc. or after his conversion, Epist. ad
regem.
as being an Apostle, wrapped up into the third heaven, hearing unspeakable
words, not possible for a man to utter. And if any man had cause to glory in
these things, Paul had: 2 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
But says he, I forbear, lest any man should think of me above what he sees
me to be, or that he hears of me: and of the esteem that he had of all these,
(...).
you may see, Phil. 3.8, 9. he accounts them all to be but loss and dung for
the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, for whom he suffered the loss
of all things.

CHAP. 14. Of internal Pride, and first of Pride of the heart.
THe heart is the principal seat of Pride: As the heart is in the midst of the
body to convay life to all parts; and as the Sun is in the midst of the
Firmament to convay his light, heat, and influences to all inferior and
sublunary bodies; So Pride gets into the midst of the heart to corrupt all:
thence we read in Scripture of Pride of the heart, Prove. 16.
and of the proud in heart. This pride of heart is demonstrated,

When the heart is carried out after great and high things; The Lord charge
this on the Prince of Tyrus, thine heart is lifted up, Ezekiel. 28.2.
and thou have said I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the
seas; yet thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thy heart as the heart
of God: By the heart we understand here, the thoughts, designs, projects, and
high imaginations of the heart which carried out his heart after high and great
things. Therefore God is said to scatter the proud in the imaginations of their
hearts. Luke 1.51.
David clears himself in this, Lord, mine heart is not haughty, Ps. 131.1.
nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in
things too high for me. Pride when it gets into the heart, Javah signifies
to have high thoughts, and to mind high things.
makes a man highly conceited of himself, lifting him up above the common
condition of mortals, causing him to think he is a petty God, and to set his
heart as the heart of God.

1. Hence it is that men lay aside the study and the knowledge of practical
truths, that tend most to edification, and would most advantage them, and busy
themselves about the knowledge of things too high for them, and which if they
do know, they are not the nearer to the power of godliness. Let no man beguile
you of your reward (says Paul to the Colossians) in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18.
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind: they did but argue then for Angels, as Papists do for Mediators;
they must have Angels, middle persons between God and men, and then come to
discourse of the Hierarchy of Angels; there may be much of pride under a
seeming show of humility; some there are that seem humble without, that are
proud enough within, as Alexander said of Antipater, when one told him,
Antipater est intus purpura. Plutar. (...).
that Antipater jetted it not in purple, as other of his Lieutenants did; true
said Alexander, but Antipater is all purple within, meaning that he was as
proud in heart, as those that made so great an outward show: so the Apostle
here speaks of a voluntary humility, or as the marginal note is (which I best
approve of) a voluntary in humility, that they must not come to God
immediately, but must have an Angel to make way for them, as a poor supplicant
comes not immediately to his Prince, but has some Courtier to make way for
him; Thus they pleaded for Angels, as the Papists plead for Saints, to be
Mediatores ad Mediatorem; to be Mediators for them to the Mediator, but all
this was but real pride, The word (...) signifies an intruder upon others
rights.
intruding on things which they have not seen; intruding upon Gods right to
whom it belonged to appoint his worship; but these voluntaries in humility
invade upon God, or intrude on things which they have not seen. When men shall
look upon doctrines that tend to the practice of godliness as low things, and
they must have higher things, this comes from pride of heart. If any man
consent not to wholesome words, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. Costui e gonfiato di superbia
non sapendo nulla, ma essendo stolto intorno a le questioni. Ital.
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions aad strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, supposing that gain is godliness: Such men as these may think themselves
the only Gnostics and knowing men, but such a one is proud, knowing nothing;
when men make use of their knowledge in a way of opposition, and so make
themselves and others Scepticks in religion, this is a knowledge or science
falsely so called, ver. 20. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy
trust, avoiding profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of science falsely
so called: this keeps men off the further from embracing the truth, and being
settled in it.

2. From this root it is that many men sinfully cry down Magistracy and
Ministry; many such there are in our days: but these men do not act without a
precedent, Number. 16.
Korah and his accomplices have showed them the way. I know nothing that more
crosses Satan in his design, then a good Magistracy and a faithful Ministry;
and therefore it is no wonder, if by his instruments he labor first to corrupt
them, then to disparage them, and alienate the people from them, and so to
ruin them: and then they would set up themselves in their places, who thus
impudently cry down these two great Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry.

1. That Korah and his company aimed at the Priesthood, appears by Moses
upbraiding them, Number. 16.9, 10. Seems it a small thing to you, that the God
of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel to bring you near
to himself to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, etc. and seek ye
the Priesthood also? as if he should have said, is it not enough that God has
advanced you above thousands of your brethren, but that ye will have the
Priesthood also? This was the design of the Kohathites. What is Korahs plea?
The people are all holy: what need then any one to teach or offer sacrifice?
they can all teach themselves, say our Church levellers, the Church are all
Saints, and they all know the Lord from the greatest to the least. Whereas
Christ has given some Apostles to his Church, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14.
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, etc. where we may
observe,

1. That Pastors and Teachers are as truly a gift to the Church of Christ, as
Apostles and Prophets, though much inferior to them, yet they are more
constantly continued to the Church then the former.

2. These were given to the Church, not only by laying the groundwork to bring
men home to Christ, but also to edify the body of Christ, and to bring it to
it is just perfection, till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ: for till we come to be grown up in Christ, we have
need of the Ministry.

3. This is a great means to prevent childishness of spirit, which many
nowadays are subject to, being tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine. Now from this pride of heart it is that men so much slight
the ministry; those whose hearts are full of pride do lift up themselves
against Gods messengers; and the high conceit that men have of their own gifts
and parts, makes them slight that ministry that God has appointed for the
salvation of their souls. Thus it was with the proud Corinthians: whom Paul
upbraids by an Irony, 1 Cor. 4.8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have
reigned as Kings without us, and I would to God ye did reign, that we also
might reign with you.

1. Now ye are full: full without us; so full, that they had no appetite to any
more, no mind to any meat set before them, so filled were they with gifts and
parts, that they had no mind to Paul's ministry.

2. Now ye are rich: so rich, that they could impart to others, and even teach
their teachers [rich without us].

3. Ye have reigned as Kings without us: as great difference between them as
between King and Subjects; Voi havete conseguito il regno senza voi, ye have
gotten a Kingdom without us. Hal. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.
proud men do ever carry a Kingdom in their heads; and then he speaks by way of
Emphasis, now, or already: he could not speak unto them as to men, but as to
babes, that were fed with milk, not with meat, they were not past the spoon;
yet were they so full, so rich, so high in their own conceit, that they needed
not Paul's ministry, nor any further teaching from him.

2. It is evident that Korah and his companions aimed not only at the
Priesthood, but also at the Scepter, Number. 16.13. for Dathan and Abiram said
unto Moses: Is it a small thing that thou have brought us out of a land that
sloweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thy
self altogether a Prince over us? Will thou put out the eyes of these men? Now
what was the fair vizard that they put upon so foul a face?

1. They pretend to be great enemies to ambition; they say to Moses and Aaron,
ye take too much upon you, This pretext would quickly take, when they made
themselves Tribunes of the people, and chamoions for their spiritual liberties.
Torshel.
why lift you up your selves against the congregation of the Lord? ver. 3.

2. They cry up the people, they were an holy people, all the congregation are
holy, every one of them; here then is the inference. No need of a Magistracy,
they are a holy people that have the Lord to govern them; and a holy people
that know how to govern themselves.

3. They charge them for taking too much upon them, whereas they took no more
then God had given them: and for lifting up themselves above the congregation,
when God had thus advanced them: Exodus 4.10, 11, 12.
yea Moses was very backwards to take a commission from God, and after he had
it, complains of his burden, Number. 11.11. Now these men pretended to rise up
against Moses and Aaron; but Moses tells them, that they were gathered together
against the Lord: Numb. 16.11.
when God by his providence places men in the Magistracy and Ministry, and
they act faithfully in their places, those that band against them do rise up
against the God of heaven, whose right it is to pull down one and set up
another: therefore when such as these are trampled upon, the Lord vindicateth
his own authority, and exalts his own name: See the success of this course of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, etc. it was very dreadful; for one part of them, the
earth opened its mouth and swallowed them up and all that they had, so that
they went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them, ver. 33. and
another part of them were consumed by fire from the Lord, even the two hundred
and fifty men that presumed to offer incense, ver. 35.

The people therefore must not meddle with David's Crown and Scepter, nor
Samuels Ephod; Vzzah must not meddle with the Ark, nor Saul offer sacrifice:
nor the Emperors Cook take upon him to expound Scripture; for if he do, and
set a false gloss upon it, and falsely apply it, Basil may wisely and worthily
check and reprove him, It belongs to thee to prepare pulls and broth for the
Emperor, Tuum est pulmen a Caesari praeparare, non Evangelium exponere. Basil.
but not to expound the Scriptures. If the Cobbler be so saucy, as to find fault
with the thigh of a picture, whose art and trade reaches no higher then the
ankle, the Painter may well tell him, that he is out of his element, and put
him in mind of the old Proverb, Ne suitor ultra crepidam.

It is good for all men to mind their own matters, and not to be Curiosi in
aliena republica. Vzziah, though a King, yet for offering incense, and usurping
upon the Priestly office, is smitten with leprousie to his dying day. Purpura
facit Imperatorem, non Sacerdotem. Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 18.
Saul is reproved as a fool by Samuel for the like fact and sault, 1 Samuel
13.13. The Reason. Ambrose gives to Theodosius, Purple makes an Emperor, not a
Priest.

CHAP. 15. Of Pride in the Will.
VVIll-Pride is demonstrated two ways.

1. When man's Will is set up against Gods Will. It is Gods prerogative Royal,
that his Will is a Law to himself, and to all Creatures; it is his prerogative
to do what seems good in his own eyes: I say unto you, says Bernard, that
every proud man exalts himself above God; for God will have his Will to be
done, and the proud man will have his own Will to be done. Now God approves
things that are reasonable; but the proud man goes without reason, and against
reason. Bern. flor. cap. 1.
now here is the pride of man, that he sets up his own Will to himself as
his Law, and that he cares not to be guided and ruled by the Will and commands
of God: every proud person seeks to do what seems good in his own eyes. God
commanded the Jews, saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and you
shall be my people, and walk in all the ways that I have commanded you, that
it may be well unto you; but they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but
walked in the counsels and imaginations of their evil heart, and went backward,
and not forward, Jer. 7.23, 24. and ver. 27. Therefore thou shall speak all
these words unto them, but they will not hearken to thee, thou shall also call
unto them, but they will not answer thee. Austin, when he confesses that sin
of his in his youth, robbing his neighbors Ort-yards, he aggravateth that sin
by many circumstances, and among others, because he would satisfy himself; and
therefore says, that all sinners do what is good in their own eyes, not what
God would have them.

The Will of God revealed may be divided into two branches.

1. Obedientia nisi humilium esse non potest. August.
The particular Will of God revealed to some particular persons, upon
particular occasions, to the performance of some particular duties; and this
many times dispenceth with a general precept: as we may see, Genesis 22. when
Abraham is commanded to go to mount Moriah, and there offer up his own son in
sacrifice to the Lord, contrary to the sixth commandment, that says, Exodus
20.13. Non occides, thou shall not kill. Item, Exodus 11.2. Exodus 3.22. where
the Israelites are commanded to rob and spoil the Egyptians, of jewels of
silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, contrary to the eighth commandment,
which says, non furaberis, thou shall not steal. So where Saul is commanded to
slay the Amalekites, with all that appertained to them, 1 Samuel 15.3.
and spare nothing. Now herein appeared Abraham's and the Israelites humility in
setting about what God commanded, and Saul's pride, Proud men wish in their
hearts, though they dare not speak it with their tongues, for fiat voluntas
tua, fiat voluntas mea; the wicked through the pride of his countenance will
not seek after God, Psalm. 10.4.
in doing no more of Gods command then what seemed good to him; therefore he is
reproved by Samuel, and rejected, by the Lord, 1 Samuel 19.28. But these
instances are no precedents to us, unless we have the like charge that they
had, and then we must yield absolute and simple obedience, without reasoning or
disputing the case: For however Gods Will be sometimes occulta, yet it is never
injusta, says Austin: he does not as men should do, viz. bid things because
they be lawful, and forbid them because unlawful; but whatsoever they were
before, his Will alters the nature of them; for whatsoever he bids is
lawful; Ipso facto, virtute mandati aut intera dicti.
and whatsoever he forbids is unlawful, ipso facto, by virtue of the command
or interdiction; of this we have seldom any examples nowadaies.

2. The other branch of his revealed Will which is more ordinary, is his
general Will concerning all estates and conditions of people, contained in his
general precepts: and this has diverse branches.

1. The first whereof is the conversion of a sinner. As I live says the Lord,
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live. And Christ says, This is the Will of him that sent me, John
6.40.
that every one that sees the Son and believes in him, should have
everlasting life. And Paul says, that it is the Will of God, that some of all
sorts of people should be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4.
and come to the knowledge of the truth.

2. A second branch of Gods revealed Will to us, is our Sanctification, 1 These.
4.3. and Peter tells us, that it is the Will of God, that by well-doing we put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men. 1 Pet. 2.15


Now when men do not endeavor to effect their own conversion, when they will
not come to Christ, Joh. 5.40.
that they may have life, nor labor after sanctification, they set their wills
against the Will of God.

2. The second note of Will-pride is impatience.

1. When men are impatient of reproof: better is the patient in spirit than the
proud in spirit, says Solomon. Eccles. 7.8. Superbi amant veritatem lucentem,
oderunt redarguentem. Aug. confess. lib. 10. cap 23.
Reverend Musculus found this spirit in the Anabaptists in his time; when he
had deserted the Romish Church, he was compelled through poverty, to hire
himself with a Tailor, and to work with him at his trade; this man he found to
be an Anabaptist, one that pretended to much holiness, but was nothing so,
though a great talker. Musculus therefore reproves him; and among other things
finding that he was idle, and neglected his calling, urged him, with that of
the Apostle, He that will not work, let him not eat. Melch. Adam. in vit.
Muscult. p. 735.
But the Anabaptist was too proud to receive a reproof, and poor Musculus was
presently thrust out of his doors. Pride stops the ear against reproof. Reprove
a scorner, says Solomon, and he will hate thee: this shows such men to have
Atheistical hearts; did they believe holy reproofs and threatenings taken out of
the Word of God, they would not scorn them, but tremble at them: when the Word
of God comes so close, that it touches men's bosom sins, and crosses them in
their evil ways, but they will not hearken, but find out shifts to evade the
force of the Word, this comes from Pride in the Wills of men. When Jeremiah
had made an end of speaking to all the people all the Words of the Lord, for
which the Lord their God had sent him to them: Jerem. 43.1, 2.
Then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshajah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the proud men, saying to Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely; The Lord God has not
sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there; but Baruch the son of
Neriah, sets thee on against us. Now as a proud man hates a just reproof,
so being guilty, he easily applies to himself any thing that he hears,
though not spoken to him, Sueton. in vit. Tiber. Neron.
as Suetonius records of Tiberius Nero, that hearing Zeno the Philosopher
disputing, and not understanding some harsh sentences he used, he asked in what
Dialect he spoke? who answering truly, in the Dorick, it was taken so ill, as
the poor man was condemned to perpetual banishment for it, as if he had closly
taxed Tiberius his loose and lascivious life he led among the Rhodians who
spoke that Dialect. They who have high thoughts of themselves, think meanly of
what others say to them: were men poor in spirit, they would embrace every
advice that has truth and holiness in it. Therefore when the Prophet would
fasten a reproof on the Jews, Jerem. 13.15.
he says to them, Hear, and give ear, and be not proud. As in the matter of
private reproofs, so, the proud man cannot endure Church censures. Hist.
Magdeb. Centur. 2.
Aquila the ancient Greek translator of the Bible, left Christianity, and
turned to Judaism, being angry at a sentence of excommunication against him: so
Santangelus the great Lawyer of Bordeaux was much enraged against the famous
Camero, Cameron. Stellit. in Epist.
and other Ministers of the Protestant Church, because he was convented before
their Synod for some delinquency.

2. When men are impatient under afflictions: A proud man cannot endure to be
crossed in any thing, nor bear the least affront: such men are like the Devil,
who is the proudest and the most discontented creature of all other: Pride fills
men with murmuring and discontentedness against Gods Providence; if things go
not according to a proud man's will, then he fumeth and is impatient. Thus it
was with the Israelites; God had brought them out of Egypt, brought them
through the wilderness, and to the border of the land of Canaan; but when they
hear there are Giants, and fenced Cities, Number. 14.2, 3, 4.
then they fall a murmuring against Moses and Aaron, and said unto them: would
God that we had dyed in the land of Egypt, or in this wilderness: and in their
mad mood, they say one to another, Let us make a Captain, and let us return
into Egypt. So in like manner those discontented rebels, Numb. 16. call Egypt a
land flowing with milk and honey, ver. 13. whereas it was a land where their
infants were murdered, and themselves cruelly enslaved; they had forgotten
those evils and miseries out of which God had delivered them, but now they talk
as if God and Moses had done nothing for them, but deprived them of many
comforts which there they possessed. He that rules over his own spirit, says
the wise man, Latius regnes domando spiritum, quam si Lybiam remotis Gadibus
jungas. Horat. lib. 2. od. 2. ad Salust.
is greater than he that overcomes Cities, Prove. 16.32. Therefore self-denial
is a Grace enjoined by our Savior to accompany the bearing of the Cross, Luk:
9.23. A man must not only abnegare sua, deny and forsake his goods and lands
for Christ's sake, if necessity require; nor also abnegare suos, forsake his
friends if they labor to withdraw him from his best friend; Amandus est
genitor, sed praepoamdus est Creator. Arabr.
but also abnegarese, he must deny himself, yea to hold himself as it were an
excommunicate person (as one says in another case) if he will bring his will
to submit to Gods Will, and quietly bear the yoke of Christ. How patiently does
our Savior carry himself in this respect; when a bitter cup was put into his
hand to drink. Thus he prays to his Father: Father, if thou be willing, Luke
22.42 Matthew. 26.39.
remove this cup from me, as Luke has it: Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me, as Matthew has it: nevertheless, not my will, but thine be
done. Calvin says, these latter words be a correction of his former petition,
Videmus ut pia sint vota, quae in speciem a dei voluntate discrepant: quia non
exact semper, vel scrupulose a nobis inquiri vult deus, quid statuerit ipse,
sed quod pro sensus nostri captu optabile est, flagitari a se permittit. Calv.
in Harm. Evang.
which he says, he let fall on the sudden, by reason of the greatness of his
grief, without considering what his Father had decreed: he was so earnestly
bent on what he naturally desired, without recalling himself: yet he freeth him
from fault, though he asked what was not agreeable to his Fathers will. Its
lawful says he, to pray for the peaceable and flourishing estate of the
Church, the suppressing of superstition, and the repressing of the enemies of
Gods truth, though perhaps he purpose not to grant these things, but will have
his Son reign in the midst of his enemies, and his Church as the Lilly among
thorns, and the wicked to remain, to exercise the faith and patience of his
Saints.

But in my conceit Beza says better on Mat. Quod additur, non significat
repugnantiam voluntatum quae peccato non caruisset, sed diversitatem, quae per
se vitiosa non est, ne in hominibus quidem, si modo hominis voluntas cognitae
dei voluntati libens acquiescat. Beza in Matthew 26.
26.39. that it was not a correction, but an explication of his former
Petition, and a Declaration with what condition he should ask it: nor does it
signify a repugnancy of wills, which could not have wanted sin, but a
diversity, which per se is not vicious, no not in men, if so be the will of man
does willingly assent to, and rest in the known Will of God.

The meaning then briefly, may be this: Father, if it may stand with thy good
pleasure, Christ was willing to die, voluntate rationali, though not naturali,
for our redemption, to be obedient to his Father. Lumb. sent. lib. 3. distin.
17.
and man's redemption may otherwise be wrought, let this bitter potion of my
passion pass by me; but rather then disobey thy decree, and not do what I came
for, I yield to any thing, submitting my self to thee, and my will to thine.

This confutes the Monothelites, a Sect of Heretics of old, that thought and
taught Christ to have but one pure Will, as Calvin notes: but properly it
condemns such as desire the fulfilling of their own perverse, crooked and
corrupt wills, whatsoever became of the Will of God: but if Christ in whom
reason never lost his regiment, Perdidit vitam, ne perderet obedientiam. Bern.
nor was ever either non resident or non regent, yet submitted himself and his
Will to his Fathers Will, what ever it cost him (for as Bernard says, he lost
his life, that he might not lose his obedience) then what arrogance and Pride
were it in us, to desire our wills simply to be done? no, all our prayers,
petitions, deprecations, and supplications, must be with condition and
submission to the Will of God; Oramus, non ut deus quod vult faciat, sed ut nos
quod vult faciamus. Cyprian.
when we pray that petition, Thy Will be done, we pray not that God may do what
he Will, but that we may do what he wills, says Cyprian.

CHAP. 16. Of Pride in the affections.
PRide in the affections is discovered by a kind of a sinful and fantastical
affectation to be like unto God: there is a likeness to God in holiness, in
grace, in humility, this is commendable; and this is the Image of God wherein
man was created; but Pride is a sinful affecting to be like unto God. There are
two things wherein a proud person does affect to be like unto God.

1. It is Gods prerogative royal, that whatever excellency he has, he has
them in and of himself; he is not beholden to any creature, It is written of
one Timotheus an Athenian, that after he had proudly said in a great assembly,
Haec ego feci, non fortuna, he never after prospered in any thing. Deuteronomy. 8.14,
15, 16, 17, 18.
and the whole glory of all that he has belongs to him: Now a proud man does
assume to himself the glory of all the excellency that he has. Therefore God
gives a caveat to his people, Beware when thy herds and flocks multiply, and
thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, etc. that then thy heart be not lifted
up, and thou forget the Lord thy God which brought thee forth out of the land
of Egypt, from the house of bondage, etc. Beware lest thou say in thy heart, My
power, and the might of my hand has gotten me all this wealth: But thou shall
remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth,
etc. and Deuteronomy. 9. says he, when thou shall pass over Jordan, and possess
Nations greater and mightier than thy self, Cities great and fenced up to
heaven, ver. 4. speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God has
cast them out from before thee, saying, Deuteronomy. 9.1, 4.
For my righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this land; but for
the wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive them out before thee:
Perhaps in word, the proud man may make some kind of acknowledgement of God, as
the proud Pharisee; Lord, I thank thee, I am not as other men are, nor even as
this Publican: yet he assumeth all the glory to himself, though in word he seem
to honor God. Parisiensis
Parisiensis says, that a proud man is both an idolater, and sets up himself
as his own idol, and so robs God of his glory. The proud man makes himself his
own Alpha, thanks himself for all; makes himself his own Omega, seeks himself
in all, begins, and ends at himself. Humble Paul cries out, In me, that is,
Romans 7.
in my flesh, there dwells no good thing, and when he speaks of his own
labors, he says, 1 Cor. 15.10. Rhem. annot. in Heb. 5.
by the Grace of God I am that I am. The Papists here are to be taxed, who (as
the Rhemists do confess) affirm Gods election to be because of faith or good
works foreseen in us. But this is contrary to Scripture and reason: for that
which is the effect, cannot be the cause; but good works and faith be the
fruits of election; as Austin speaks thus on Ephesians. 1.4. He chose us not because
we were holy, but that we might be holy; he chose none being worthy, Elegit nos
non quia sancti eramus, sed ut sancti essemus. Neminem elegit dignum, sed
eligendo effecit dignum. Aug. cont. Julian. Pelag. lib. 5. cap. 3.
but by choosing made him worthy; you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,
says Christ to his Disciples: whereas if God should elect for faith and good
works foreseen, men should first choose God, by believing in him, and doing such
good works as were acceptable to him. It was the error of the Elders of the
Jews, when they came to Christ in the behalf of the Centurion, to plead his
worthiness to him, why he should heal his servant. Here was their Pride to
think, that by outward service of God men might merit his favor: He loves our
Nation (say they) and has built us a Synagogue: Luke 7.2, 3, 4.
wherein they resemble our Papists and diverse orders of Monks and Friars, who
will not stick to promise men heaven, if they will be but bountiful Benefactors
to their Fraternities, and Monasteries, Cells and Cloisters: But however he
could challenge nothing for himself, Omnes peregrini ritus, and externae
religiones, Senatus consulto damnatae erant. Tertul. in apologet. cont. gentes.
nor they for him at Gods hand, for these his good deeds; yet he was a worthy
man, and a good Christian, as appears by his love to Religion, and care to
build a place for the people to assemble themselves to Gods worship. No
difficulty detaineth him from doing his duty: Its like enough that this fact
being complained of, might procure him Tiberius the Emperors displeasure, and
cost him the loss of his office; for all foreign and strange Religions were
hated, and might not be admitted by the Romans, as Tertullian tells us.

2. It is Gods prerogative royal to act all for himself, he has no higher end
than his own honor and glory. The Lord made all things for himself, for his
own glory, Dionysius junior alebat Sophistas, non quod magni faceret, sed ut
propter eosin admirationem esset. Plut. mor. 11 p. 400.
Prove. 16.4. Now a proud man does not mind the glory of God in his own
thoughts, but his own glory, his own praise, credit and esteem. The Pharisees
when they gave alms, blew a trumper, that people might take notice what
merciful men they were, that they might have the glory of men; and when they
prayed, they often did it in the corners of the streets, that they might be
seen of men. Humane applause was all they sought for; approbation from God and
acceptance with him they look not after, and this they have as their reward.
Therefore says Christ to his hearers, Mat. 6.1, 2, 4, 5, 6.
Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be seen of them, etc. Mat.
6.1.

Object. But it may be said that our Savior, Mat. 5.16. commends and commands,
what he forbids and condemns here; for there he says, Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works: and here, See that you do
them not before men to be seen of them.

Answ. If we compare the places, we shall see its no such matter; for in the
former place we are bidden to do good works before men, that they may see them,
and glorify God for them, and be occasioned to imitate and follow them, as 1
Pet. 2.12. And here we are forbidden to do them before men: About one hundred
and odd years agone; some of the Princes, Noblemen, and Gentlemen of Germvny
in a vain glorious way, caused these five letters V.D.M.I.Ae. the first letters
of verbum dei manet in aeternum, to be wrought or embroydered, or set in plate
upon their cloaks, or sleeves of their garments, to declare to the world, that
forsaking Popish traditions, they were professors of the pure Word of God: but
many of these men had not the Word written upon their hearts. Joh. Wolf. lect.
membr. Tom. 2. ad ann. 1549.
not simply, but eo animo, to be extolled, praised and magnified for doing of
them: we may bona opera ostendere, show our good works; but not ostentare, not
make an ostentation of them; we must aim at Gods glory, not our own: if it
follow, it must be upon the by, and more then we expect or respect in doing our
duties. It must, as one says, be but a consequent, no cause moving us. But
praise will follow virtuous and pious actions, as the shadow the body. The
Romans made the image of vain glory in the form of a vagrant woman, writing
over her head, This is the Image of vainglory: This Image had a Crown on her
head, a Scepter in her left hand, a Peacock in the other, her eyes veiled and
blinded, sitting on a Chariot drawn by four Lions; the reason of all this was,
because the lovers of vain honor and glory, are as inconstant as a vagrant
woman; the Crown on her head showing, that they ever desire to be honored and
admired in this world like Kings; the Scepter betokening their desire to rule;
the Peacock showing, that as the Peacock decks his former part with his tail,
and so leaves his hinder parts naked, so vainglorious men deck themselves in
the eye of this world, and deprive themselves of eternal glory; the vail that
is before her, denotes how blind the vainglorious man is, that he cannot see
his own folly and arrogance; the four Lions intimate, that the vain honor of
this world is ever drawn with four cruel sins, as fierce as Lions, Pride,
Avarice, Luxury, and Envy: A proud man can bear reproach of none, and seeks to
be adored and praised by all. Calvisius Sabinus got servants skilled in all
arts, and speaking all languages, arrogating all that they knew to himself.
Seneca ad Lucil. Epist. 27.

CHAP. 17. Of Pride of gifts in general.
GIfts are those endowments with which God fills the minds of men for the
edifying of the Church of Christ, and of these the Apostle tells us there is a
diversity, 1 Cor. 12.4. Si sono benle differenti and de doni, maegli e un
medesimo Spirito, etc. Questo fanno il genere sotto il quale si contengonole
specie che sono soggiunte delle amministrationi, and operationi. Ital. Annota.
in 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.
and these all proceed from the Spirit of God: Gifts are (as it were) the life
of a Christian; and the Spirit of God is the life of them all. There is not
greater variety of Herbs, Trees, Plants, Knots, Flowers in a curious garden
enclosed (to which the Church is compared) then there is of gifts in the minds
of men: some indeed have a double portion of gifts, as Elisha had of the spirit
of Elijah, and every one has his proper gift suitable to that place whereunto
God has called him, his dimensum, as the Scripture terms it. Now the design
of the Devil is to make a man proud of his gifts, and to look more upon his
gifts, then look to the giver of them: when a man feeds this humor in himself,
and is so far from checking it in his heart, that he rather seeks to foment it,
and add matter to it, and shows it by the contempt of others of inferior
gifts, this is a note that gifts do puff him up with Pride.

Now this is a great vanity for a man to be proud of gifts.

1. Because these gifts are not our own, but Gods: Who made thee to differ from
another? or what have thou (says Paul) which thou have not received? and if
thou have received it, 1 Cor. 4.7.
why then do thou boast? etc. every good and perfect gift comes from above
from the Father of lights who gives freely, etc. Jam. 1. We have nothing that
is good, Omnia mea mala, pure mala sunt and mea; omnia mea bona, pure bona
suit, et non mea. Hugo Card.

Austin observes against the Heathen, that Christian virtues far surpass the
virtues of the Heathen by the name they are called; says he, you call yours
habits, because you have them; we call ours gifts, because we receive them from
God.


but is the gift of God, and comes from the grace of God. Thus one says, All
my evils are purely evil, and mine; All my good things are purely good, and not
mine: And Austin upon the fifth Petition of the Lords prayer says, What can be
less then bread? yet lest we might think to have that of our selves, our Master
has taught us to beg it of our heavenly Father, saying, and praying daily,
Give us this day our daily bread: therefore seeing all that we have, whither
for the body or mind, are Gods gifts, we must not say of them as proud
Nebuchadnezzar does, Is not this great Babel that I have built? etc. Dan. 4.30.
Be not these the things that I have attained to by my wit, parts, industry?
etc. We may not say of the gifts of God in us, as the Atheists of their
tongues, Psalm. 12. that they are our own, and we may do with them what we list:
for, if they are ours, let us show our evidence, when we purchased them, and
what we paid for them, before whom the instruments were drawn, sealed and
delivered: Besides, we must know that as our gifts be not our own absolute
fee-simple and freehold, but we only copyholders and tenants at will, nor
have we any such custom but may be broken at the pleasure of our Landlord: so
we be not so much as quarter owners of them, but only stewards over them, and
must be accomptable for them, Luke 16.2. Therefore we must not be proud of any
gift, but acknowledge Gods goodness, and say with the Kingly Prophet, what
shall we render to the Lord for all his benefits toward us?

2. Because Pride of gifts hinders a man from doing much good with them; the
end why God gives diversities of gifts to men, is that they may impart them to
the benefit of one another: Posuit Deus in Ecclesia quosdam ut oculos, quosdam
ut linguas, nonnullos ut aures, alios item manuum, alios pedum qui rationem
obtinerant. Basil.
you know that in the body of the world there are diversities of commodities
for this end and purpose, that one Nation may have commerce with another.
Hirams country yields good timber and stone, Solomon's country good wheat and
oil: Moah was a sheep-country, and Ophir was famous for gold, Chittim for
ivory, Basan for oaks, Lebanon for cedars: this is the ground of all commerce
and traffic: so God has enriched one with this gift, another with that, not
to grow proud of it, or to monopolize it to themselves, but mutually to impart
their gifts to the good of one another. 1 Cor. 12.21, 22, 25.
As in the body natural there are many members, yet but one body, and the eye
cannot say to the hand, nor the head to the foot, I have no need of thee, but
all must be helpful to, and not disdain each other, that there may be no
schism in the body, the members must have the same care of one another: so men
of the greatest gifts and parts must not disdain to be helpful to the meanest
Christian. There was found in the house of Luther these words, Res and verba
Philippus, Res sine verbis Lutherus, verba sine re Erasmus. Melancton was words
and matter, Luther was matter without words, Erasmus words without matter:
therefore as Dr. Hall observes, has the blind man legs, and the lame man
eyes, that there may be an exchange between them for the benefit of mankind.

3. The more and greater our gifts are, the more we are indebted to God; when
God comes to call us to give up our accounts, he will look into our receipts:
he that has had five talents must account for five; for to whom much is given,
of him much shall be required. Now to be proud of thy great gifts, Luk 12.48
is to be proud how much thou stand indebted to God.

CHAP. 18. Of Pride of Wit.
PRide of wit, is when a man is pufft up with his knowledge, quickness of
apprehension, depth of judgment. As the finest cloth is soonest stained, so
the rarest wits are most subject to Pride: as moths do sooner breed in fine
cloth then in course, so Pride and vainglory do soon surprise a man of the
quickest wits: a good and modest wit is better then a great wit; Errores magni
siac magnis ingeni is non nascuntur. August.

That men should not be proud of wit, or natural parts, Chemnitius proves from
the example of Tacianus, who by the testimonies of Clemens. Alexandrinus and
Eusebius, was a man of great parts, yet fell into great heresies, and gross
absurdities. Vid. Chemnit. Harm. 1. part. (...) 2. p. 7, 8.


for often-time a great wit is the spring of great evils, and the greatest
errors usually arise out of the greatest wits; thence Tertullian called the
Philosophers (the great wits of the world) Haereticorum Patriarchas, the chief
Fathers of Heretics. When men of great wit and parts appear for an error, the
repute of their ingenuity and parts draws many after them, and does much
mischief; and such men do most misuse their wit, and abuse it to
licentionsness. The Grammarian busieth his brains about the Concordances and
regiments of Nouns, Verbs and quantities of Syllables, and will not for any
thing make a Soloecisme in speech, but will not stick to make a thousand in his
actions; the Rhetoritian discourses copiously, the Logitian disputes
subtly; the Arithmetitian is cunning in numbers and divisions, but he will
scarce impart a penny to the poor; for then if it come to matters of practice
in life, he is better skilled in addition, and multiplication, then in
substraction and division; he will use Zeno his Rhetoric, and open his hand
wide to get riches; and then his Logic, shut it again to keep them, when he
has them. About these things many men beat their wits: But its better to have
a true knowledge of a man's self, then the course, situation, and operations of
the stars and planets, then the virtues of herbs and plants, then the
diversities of humors, and complexions, and constitutions, then the natures of
beasts or whatever Philosophy rational, moral or natural can afford to man; for
what booteth it the Geometritian or Cosmographer to be able to measure the
compass of the earth, or take the height of the moon, when with all his art he
cannot meet out the length of his own life, though but a span long, nor take
the measure of himself and his own deceitful heart? if we look not into our
selves, we cannot know our selves; and if we take a strict view of our selves,
we cannot be proud. That witty men are apt to abuse their wits, Austin shows in
an Epistle of his to Licentius a young Noble man that was very witty, one that
had been sometime his scholar; a witty Poem of his coming to the hands of
Austin (who perceived he had wickedly abused his wit therein) he writes to him
in this manner: I have read this Poem of thine, and I know not with what verses
to lament and mourn over it, because I see a pregnant wit in every line, August
39. Epist. ad Licent.
but such a one as I cannot dedicate to God: then he exhorts him, Da te Domino
meo, etc. Give thy self to my Lord, who has given thee this excellent wit; if
thou had found a golden cup, would thou not have given it to some public
use? God has given thee a golden wit, Pliny says of C. Caesar Dictatour that
he was a man of a prompt and ready wit, as nimble and active as the very fire;
that he ordinarily indicted letters to four Secretaries or Clarks at once, and
was wont to write, read, and to give audience to suitors, and hear their causes
all at one instant. Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 25.
thy understanding is a golden cup, and will thou let thy lusts drink out of
it, or will thou drink thy self to the devil in it? know thou, that Satan seeks
to make thy wit an ornament to him, and thy parts the credit of his court and
cause. Boast not of the acuteness of thy wit; for it is not the acuteness of
wit, but the goodness, equability, solidity and constancy thereof that is best
to be commended: a quick wit is but as a slender web, if it be light, frothy,
and inconstant. Some there are that glory of the depth and subtilty of their
wit, glorying of their trains for their foes, and tricks for themselves and
their friends, how by their wits they have fet off others, and set up
themselves, yea even what they have gained by their sinful devices, these are
like brazenfaced harlots: this is a wicked emulation to strive who shall be
worst. This fault had sometime overtaken Austin before his conversion, but he
confesses and bewaileth it bitterly; we must beware of it, for it is a fearful
thing to be wilful and witty in wickedness; Jer. 4.22.
of such the Prophet speaks, They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have
no knowledge. Such as these are all worldly Politicians and cunning
Machiavilians, that think themselves wiser then Moses, and Daniel, David or
Solomon, yea peradventure then God himself; for they will prefer their own wits
before his revealed will in his Word, and their own plots and projects,
stratagems and devices, before his precepts and prescriptions, statutes and
directions: such a fellow was Achitophel, 2 Samuel 17.23.
who out of pride, and for anger that his counsel was not followed, went and
made his will, and then hanged himself: such another was the King of Tyrus, of
whose Pride and fall you may read, Ezekiel. 28. from 1. ad 10. such another was
Herod Agrippa, of whose pride and fall we read, Act. 12.22, 23. for being
content to accept the peoples flattering acclamation of his vainglorious
declamation, for which they accounted him a God and no man, his miserable end
presently ensuing, proved him a miserable man and not god. The wisdom of the
flesh, says the Apostle, is enmity with God; Romans 8.7. (...), M^ton adjuncti.
whatever man's corrupt wit and carnal wisdom enclineth to, delights in, or
exercises it self about, is directly contrary and opposite unto God, and very
enmity it self against him.

CHAP. 19. Of Pride of Memory.
MEmory is one of the greatest natural gifts, and one of the principal utensils
of our life, it is the repository of truth, and the storehouse of the soul,
depending much upon the understanding: Some men have excelled for the greatness
of their memories, having, Plin. not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 24. Some have so good
a memory, that they go (as it is said) to gather Mulberies without a hook, to
the well without a pitcher.
as one says, drunk memoriae dolium; a whole hogs-head thereof. The memory of
King Cyrus was so great, that he was able to call every soldier that he had
through his whole army by his own name: L. Scipio could do the like by all the
Citizens of Rome; and Cyneas Ambassador of King Pyrrhus the very next day that
he came to Rome, both knew and saluted all the Senators by name, and the whole
degrees of Gentlemen and Cavalry in the City. King Mithridates governed diverse
Nations of diverse languages, and gave laws and ministered justice to them, and
made speeches to every Nation in their own language: Thuan. in chit. doct.
virorum. p. 384.
and so great was the memory of Beza, that when he was above fourscore years of
age, he could perfectly rehearse any Greek chapter in Paul's Epistles, or any
other thing which he had learned long before. Now some have been proud of their
memories, and God has taken it from them, as from Messala Corvinus the great
Orator, who after a great sickness forgot his own proper name: Staupitius
Tutor to Luther, and a good man, in a proud ostentation of his memory repeated
the Genealogy of Christ ( Matthew. 1.) by heart in a Sermon of his, but being
quite out, when he came to the captivity of Babylon, Melch. Adam. in vita
Staupitii. p. 20.
he uttered these words, Now I see that God resists the proud. Can thou
remember many things? know, that God can make the remembrance of those things
sad to thee, that have been most delightful to thee: Memoria similis reti, quod
majora continet, minora transmittit. Erasmus.
If thou have done that which is good, the remembrance of that will be sweet
unto thee; but if thou have done evil, the remembrance of that will cause thee
sorrow and vexation of spirit; If thou can remember many things, then thou
must expect that thy sins, and reproaches, faults and wickednesses will come to
thy remembrance, as well as any good thing that has been done by thee; It is
said of Julius Caesar that he forgot nothing but injuries.
and the thoughts of bypast evils will more afflict thee, then the delight of
any present good can be pleasant to thee. A free man will indeed remember his
captivity with delight, Haec olim meminisse juvabit.
a man that is set at liberty will remember his bonds, and a man that is
ransomed and returned home his exile, a rich man his poverty, a man restored to
health his sickness: but there is some thing that will stick close to a man
upon the remembrance of it, and that is ignominy and reproach: a good name is
better then riches, yea then life it self. Boast not then of the greatness of
thy memory; for in the remembrance of diverse things, there wants not
abundance of trouble; some things will prick, some things will wound and tear
thy conscience, some things will terrify thee, some deject thee, and other
things will confound thee. Art thou proud of thy great memory? let me ask thee
this question, What then is the reason thou art so forgetful of Gods
Commandments, When one promised Themistocles to teach him the art of memory
invented by Simonides, he said he had rather learn the art of forgetfulness,
then of memory.
and of divine precepts, which are but few in number? whence is it that thou
forgettest that one and only God, and thy duty toward him? It may be, thy
memory is very tenacious of injuries, of worldly things and outward
concernments (for even old men do precisely remember all their several debtors,
and their manner of dealing, and all the coffers, cabinets and corners, wherein
they have laid up and hid their gold and jewels; they carry an exact inventory
of them in their heads.) But what a vain thing is it to remember all other
things, and not know how to return into our selves, and to forget the one thing
necessary? Its good to put many things out of our minds, and utterly to forget
them, so we may remember God; and whosoever truly remembers him, may say he
has forgotten nothing. Eccl. 12.1.
Therefore remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: Remember the
providence of God, and the years of the most High to observe them and improve
them for thy good; remember the justice of God to keep thee from sin, remember
the commandments of God to do them, the mercy of God to keep thee from despair;
remember thy sins to mourn and grieve and to be daily humbled for them, and
Gods mercies to be continually thankful for them; remember death that thou
may always be in preparation for it: King Philips Page of Macedon, Memento
Philippe te esse hominem.
was to sound this every morning in his ears, Remember O Philip that thou art
but a man; the remembrance of these things will never puff thee up with Pride,
but always keep thee very humble.

CHAP. 20. Of Pride of Eloquence.
ELoquence is an excellent gift wheresoever it is bestowed, and for this many
heathens have been famous. The Athenians exiled Thucydides their Captain
General: Pronunciatio and vita Philosophi debent esse compositae; it ought to
be like snow coming leisurely, not like rain coming down as by buckets. Plin.
not. hist. lib. 7. cap. 30.
but after he had written his Chronicle, they called him home again, wondering
at the eloquence of the man. Socrates sold one Oration that he made for twenty
talents of gold. Pliny says, that Cicero's eloquence was the cause that all
the Tribes renounced the law Agraria, as touching the division of lands among
the Commons, albeit their greatest maintenance consisted therein; he says that
he was the first that was saluted by the name of Pater patriae, Father of his
country; the first that deserved triumph in his long robe, and the Laurel
garland for his language, and calls him the Father of eloquence and of the
Latin tongue: Augusto prosluens, and quae principem deceret eloquentia fuit.
Tacitus.
Suetonius says, that in eloquence Augustus Caesar was most excellent and
expert; and well might he be so: for even during his wars, he says, he read,
wrote and declamed every day; he would never deliver a speech to his wife or
servants, but it was premeditated, lest it might rusticitatem olere, savor of
clownishness, or gravitate carere, want gravity: and Caesar the Dictatour in
eloquence, Philosophi et multo magis Theologi debent verba ponere, non
projicere, et imprimis quaerere non quantum, sed quemadmodum dicant. Medicus
aegros in transitu non curat; ergo concionator qui animarum medicus est,
insistere debet, donec auditores condiderit. Seneca ad Lucil. Epist. 40.
either matched or over-matcht the very best in his time, says Suetonius; and
Cicero de Oratore says, he gives place unto none. But most of these were
pufft up because they had the trumpet at their lips. It is better for a man to
be dumb then eloquent, if humility be not adjoined thereunto: no man can be a
good Orator, unless also he be truly good: One being asked why he spoke so
well, and lived so ill: answered, because his words were in his power, but not
his actions. When Calisthenes had made an eloquent Oration in the praise of the
Macedonians, Alexander not pleased with his person, taxes and disgraceth his
action, saying the goodness of the cause made him eloquent, and any man might
have spoken as well of such a subject; and therefore to try him, bid him to
speak ex tempore in their dispraise, which when he had likewise done
eloquently, he took him off and said, Before the goodness of the cause, now
vainglory and malice made him eloquent. And Hierome was wont to say of a
Philosopher, that he was a vainglorious creature, and a base bond-slave to
praise. Gloriae animal, et popularisaurae mancipium. Hieron.
Doubtless eloquence in it self is much to be desired, especially by Ministers;
this made Paul exhort the Ephesians, as to pray for all Saints, so for him in
particular, that utterance might be given unto him, Ephesians. 6.19. that he might
open his mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel. And although
some think that Paul was not eloquent (which they would collect from 2 Cor.
10.10. it being only, Optimi doctores sunt qui docent faciendo, and qui magis
admiratione digni sunt cum videntur quam cum audiuntur. Seneca ad Lucil. Epist.
53.
as I suppose, a slight opinion that that proud Church of Corinth had of him,
as appears by the verses following) yet doubtless Paul was extraordinary
eloquent, as appears in that the Lystrians took him for Mercury the god of
eloquence, because he was the chief speaker, Act. 14.12. also it is evident by
his diverse Orations in the Acts of the Apostles, and by all his Epistles; yet
such was his humility, and so meanly does he think of himself in this respect,
that he earnestly begs their prayers, that he may speak and speak to the
purpose as he ought to speak. Echerus bonus Orator, nunquam tamen dubitavit,
nunquam intermisit, sed semel incipiebat, and semel desinebat. Seneca.
When the Holy ghost was poured out on the Apostles on the day of Pentecost,
they will not be silent, when the Spirit has given them utterance and made
them eloquent; where there is a head fraught with learning and knowledge, and
an heart full of devotion, there will be a mouth full of instruction, as
Solomon tells us, Prove. 10.11. Prove. 15.7.
The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: and the lips of the wise
disperse knowledge, being like Mary's pound of Spikenard to persume the whole
house, John 12.3. or like a candle in a work-mans shop, Austin confesses this
to God of his Father, that he troubled not himself how he prospered in Gods
service, only his care was that he might be eloquent, and learned to speak
well. Luke 4.20, 22.
to give light to all that are in it. Our Savior and John Baptist were very
eloquent and powerful Preachers. Herod was much affected with John's preaching,
Mark 6.20. and the men of Nazareth were much taken with the preaching of
Christ; their eyes were all sastened on him, and wondered at the gracious words
that came out of his mouth: he taught them as one that had gravity and
authority in his speech: Mat. 7.29.
so powerful were his words, that when the Pharisees and chief Priests sent
their officers to take Christ, they were taken by his words; Joh. 7.45, 46.
and being returned, they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The
officers answered, Never man spoke like this man. Many by nature and Art have
Gratiam verborum Grace of words, but want verba gratiae words of Grace or
gracious words; now Christ had both, and Grace was poured into his lips: Psalm.
45.2.
they have Gratiam verborum that are eloquent, and many times by pride abuse it
to reproach others, or set off themselves; but they have verba Gratiae, that
speak a word in season to the wearied soul, Ephesians. 4.29. Whither our eloquence
be natural or acquired, we should use it without affectation and ostentation,
and not pride our selves in wit, words or phrases, Reyner.
and good words to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the
hearer. Herod had an eloquent tongue, but was pufft up with it, and the peoples
admiration of him for it; whereas he had a thousand miscarriages in his life
that troubled him not: But Herod by all his eloquence could not persuade the
silly worms, who (as the Scripture says) immediately devoured him, because he
gave not God the glory, Act. 12.23.

CHAP. 21. Of Pride of Learning and Knowledge.
GReat was the flaw natural reason met with in Adams fall; that that breach
might in some measure be made up, God did not only lighten that Luminare
magnum, his holy Scripture, but lightened also luminare minus, a less light, the
light of reason; by the help of arts and sciences he enlarged man's capacity
even to the apprehension of his supernatural properties. Whither humane
sciences began before the flood, or since; whither they were derived from
Abraham to the Chaldeans, or from Joseph to the Egyptians; and whither Cadmus
brought learning to the Greeks, and Carmenta to the Latins, or whither it came
in by the Phaenicians or Assyrians, in general, I have now nothing to do to
enquire; but this that I shall say, is, that wheresoever or in whomsoever they
are, they be of God. This I note to stop those mouths that spend their
invectives against humane learning: humane learning is with them like Saul's
armor; it is too cumbersome, too unweildy to bear.

Object. But the Scripture says, God will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
bring to naught the understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1.19. and Paul bids
the Colossians beware, lest any man spoil them through Philosophy and vain
deceit, Colos. 2.8.

Answ. 1. When he says, he will destroy the wisdom of the wise, it is not suam
his own, nempe divinam illam quam ipsis dedit, viz. that divine wisdom that he
has given them, but fucatam illam, Summa cura provideto, ne cum accepta
scientia tenchras ignorantiae petit, lumen humilitatis tollat; and sic vera
sapientia esse nequit, quae licet elocutionis fulgore luceat, cor tamen
loquentis obscurat. Greg. moral.
quam sibi arrogarunt, that adulterate wisdom which they have arrogated to
themselves, and so grow proud therewith; Those sentences which Paul quoteth out
of the Greek Poets in the Acts and elsewhere, are (as Austin speaks) thereby
delivered ab injust is possessoribus, as it were redeemed out of the hands of
unjust usurpers: then indeed was the Mathematical and Chaldaick learning truly
owned, when it was situate in Moses and Daniel: then was the Oratorial and
Greek learning rightly placed, when it was in the tenure of Paul and Apollos:
all humane sciences, holy sentences and aphorisms are then in their due and
un-usurped possession, when they fall into the hands of the Saints generally,
and specially, when they reside in Gods Ministers, whose lips must preserve
knowledge.

2. When the Apostle speaks against Philosophy, you are to know that he neither
condemns the whole body of Philosophy in general, nor any part thereof in
particular being rightly used; it is only that empty nominal and equivocal
Philosophy that goes about to seduce with enticing words, that Paul condemns;
Davenant in Colos. 2.
he only inveigheth against the abuses thereof, by men that are pufft up with
fleshly wisdom: he rejects it not simply, but only in some respects, when it
contains not it self within its own bounds, and keeps not within its compass;
but intrencheth and intrudeth upon Divinity, to the dishonor of God, and
disadvantage of the truth, and thus it becomes vain deceit, which is added
interpretative, Calvin in Colos. 2.8.
by way of interpretation, as Calvin observes upon the place: that old serpent
the Devil is not more subtle in his turnings and windings, L'Apostolo non
condanna la filosofia semplicemente usando, egli a le volte i principii communi
con la vera filosofia main quanto ch' ella non si contienne suoi termini ne
indrizzata a la gloria dei. Ital. Annot. in loc.
whereby he compasses the earth, then were the heretics of former times,
turning and winding in their Philosophical subtilties; the practice of the
Fathers in those times, was out of solid and substantial Philosophy to convince
them, and so to do by them as David by Goliath, to wound them with their own
weapon.

It were easy to show diverse Paradoxes in Philosophy, which cannot stand in
divinity, wherein man's pride sets him to dispute against the wisdom of God; As

1. The eternity of the world: Philosophers say, the world is from eternity,
because they say, Ex nihilo nihil fit: Out of nothing, nothing is made; and
Divinity teaches us; that God made all things out of nothing: Quod quidem
verum est physice, and juxta naturae regulas, sed non Metaphysice, si ad primam
causam and causam causarum, sc. deum respicias, qui mundum hunc visibilem ex
nihilo creavit, and creare potest quicquid vult.
that Maxim in Philosophy is true Physically, and according to the rules of
nature, but not Metaphysically, if we look to the first cause, to God the cause
of causes, who made this visible world out of nothing, and can create
whatsoever he will.

2. The second is, that there shall be no resurrection, A privatione ad habitum
nullus estregressus.
because its an axiom in Philosophy, that from the privation to the habit,
there is no regress; a natural body reduced to its first matter, whereof it was
made cannot possibly take up the same again, and live after death: the
Athenians therefore mock at Paul, when he teaches at Athens the doctrine of
the resurrection, a doctrine cross to Philofophical principles: which also is
true naturally and physically, but false if you take it in a Metaphysical and
supernatural sense, referring it to God.

3. Diverse dispute also Philosophically against justification by faith only, or
by Christ alone, as the imputation of his righteousness to us, Romans 5.19. 2
Cor. 5.21. Psalm. 32.1. Here again they wrangle and proudly cavil, saying, How
can one be just or righteous by another righteousness, any more then be wise
by another man's wisdom, or learned by another man's learning? I answer, that
these things be not of the same sort or kind; for the former be also inherent
in their subjects, as they cannot be separated from them, or imparted to any
other; But the other may and are, virtute unionis Christi and Christianorum, by
virtue of the union of Christ and Christians.

And a man may be fed with another man's meat, if it be given him, and he eat of
it; or warm in another man's garments, if he wear them, or most properly pay his
debts with another man's money, if it be either given him or lent him.

Diverse other devices there are in Philosophy, or more truly, diverse conceits
and odd opinions of Philosophers, which cannot stand with the truth of Divinity.

1. As all their sorts and kinds of Magic, and judicial Astrology.

2. That the soul is not an immortal substance.

3. That all things come to pass and are carried either by chance and fortune,
and at all adventures, and mere contingences, as the Epicuraeans: or else by
fatal destiny, and a concatenation of second causes, as the Stoics: Item all
their fond and foolish false opinions de summo bono, concerning true happiness:
Some of the learned have reckoned up above two hundred and eighty opinions
concerning this point: Thus when any thing taken out of the writings of any
men, though never so ancient or learned, or what show of wit or wisdom soever
it make, if it be contrary to the Scriptures, and the written Word of God, its
no better then vain deceit, and therefore we must beware of it, avoid it, lest
we be spoiled by it: In a word, we must not fet principles in divinity or the
articles of our faith, Aquinas has a good and modest rule, Rationi naturali
verae nunquam contrariatur Theologia, sed eam excedi saepe, and sic videtur
repugnare; non enim vera ratio dicit, illa superiora fieri non posse absolute,
sed non posse fieri virtute aliqua finita, quod etiam theologia fatetur. In his
and hujusmodi Philosophia Theologiae se submittat, ut Hagar Sarae; Patiatur se
admoneri and corrigi. Sin nimus pareat, ejice ancillam Aquin. Clem. Alexan.
Struther.
out of the writings of Philosophers, nor set up our rest to believe no more
then we can see reason for; for there be diverse things in the Scriptures,
beyond the course of nature, and above the reach of humane reason, Romans 1.22. 1
Cor. 2.14.

All knowledge if it be not sanctified, is apt to puff a man up with pride, 1
Cor. 8.1.
as the Apostle speaks of it. One observes that a great wit without learning,
Knowledge when it is used to ostentation, it is no better then a drunken
knowledge; therefore he that is pufft up with it, had need be let blood, in
vena sapientiae.
is a good knife without a whet-stone; and learning without solid judgment, is
as the edge of glass, it is sharp, but in brittle mettle; and to this I may
add, that wit and learning without humility are a body without a soul, and but
a sharp sword in the hand of a mad man; reason does not so far exalt a man
above a beast, or learning the knowing man above the ignorant, as humility does
the godly man above them both; but where all these three meet together they
make a complete man, and Christian. This kind of pride that I am now speaking
of, is discovered in popular preachers, whose end should be to win souls to
Christ, but they desire to get into a crowd and there preach only for
ostentation, and to get applause, pretending before their Sermons earnestly to
beg the Spirits assistance, Hi quaerunt potius fastu^ hominum, quam pastu^
ovium. Bernard.
and yet trust more to their own wit, memory, and eloquence in the venting of
their quaint phrases and neat compositions, in the framing whereof they never
sought for the direction and assistance of God.

CHAP. 22. Of Pride of inward strength.
WHen Christ tells Peter, that all of them should be offended because of him,
Matthew. 26.31. Peter being over-confident of his own strength, answered him,
Luke 22.33
though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended, ver. 33. and Luke tells us, that he said, Lord, I am ready to go with
thee, both into prison, and to death. Christ had not only said, that All that
very night should be offended because of him, but he produces a Text out of
the Old Testament for proof of it, saying, for it is written, I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad, Zech. 13.7.
Here was a plain prediction out of a Prophet expounded by the Lord of the
Prophets; yet Peter one of the great Prophets children and scholars will not
admit it, but opposes it, and not once nor coldly, faintly, and fearfully, but
twice, and that boldly and confidently, yea impudently, (...)
Mark. 14.29, 31. Now that this was a great fault in Petr, Chrysostom assures
us, saying, that it was a note of great pride to gainsay such a Master; and our
selves cannot but confess as much: Tully tells us, that Pythagoras his scholars
would jurare in verba Magi^^^^, swear whasoever their Master had said, for
(...) went far with them, Cicero. lib. 1. de not. deor.
yea even pro oraculo and solidissimo argumento: and Plato says, it was a
received position in his time, that their worthies, whom they thought descended
of the gods, Filiis deorum absque ulla demonstratione credendum. Plato. Humana
omnia dicta argumentis and testibus indigent; at sermo Dei ipse sibi testis
sufficiens est: nam necesse est ut quicquid incorrupta veritas loquatur,
incorruptum veritatis testimonium sit. Salvian.
must be put to prove nothing, but their word went for a sufficient warrant: it
was surely then a great fault in Peter not to believe his Master, who was the
eternal truth, yea even the eternal Son of the eternal God. Now Peter's pride
and arrogance, and overweening conceit he had of himself, caused him to think
himself Christ's Colledge-Phaenix, and prefer himself before all his fellows;
Though all men should be offended because of thee, yet will not I; yea I will
die with thee, rather then deny thee. What difference, I pray, for the present,
while this proud fit holds him, between him and the Pharisee? Luke 18.9, 10.
who makes a strange prayer, beginning not with begging, but boasting, God, I
thank thee, I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as
this Publican: and wherein was Peter behind? for he makes ever as fair a
flourish; for says he, though all forsake thee, I will still follow thee;
though all nen flinch from thee, though all men deny thee, I will rather die
with thee: Here were big words, but they proved but wind, as the event
declared; for his vain confidence proved but pain cowardice, and he that
promised most performed least: for the rest that said little or nothing (at
least not till they were provoked by his example) did not act recorded contrary
to their promise, but he denies his Master, swaggers and swears that he knew
him not: therefore it is great presumption to arrogate or attribute, or assume
too much to our selves, or rely too much upon our own strength; for if we be
left never so little while to stand upon our own feet, we slip and slide and
fall presently: men of this humor be like a company of drunken soldiers, who
seem very valorous, while the wine has overcome their wits, but when they have
slept out their surfeit, and be come to themselves, do often betake them to
flight, and think one pair of heels worth two pair of hands: The Scripture
tells us, that the way of man is not in himself: and Christ tells us, Heu nihil
invitis fat quenquam fidere divis. Virg. AEneid. Opem mihi feras Domine ne
scandalizer. Chrysostom.
that without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. We must not therefore promise
any thing of our selves, but rather pray that God would direct us in our
promises, and enable us to perform them: It was Peter's fault that he did not;
he should rather have prayed as Chrysostom says, Lord, enable me that I may
not be offended, then rashly have promised I will not be offended. We are here
assaulted with many temptations, sometimes at the right hand by prosperity,
sometimes at the left hand by adversity, sometimes privately, sometimes
publicly, sometime in one sort, sometime in another; therefore we have need of
strength beyond our own, and to be strengthened sometimes in our understandings
and judgments, that we may discern and distinguish between good and evil,
truth and falsehood; sometimes in our wills, that we may make a right choice,
according to our understanding and knowledge; and sometimes in our affections,
to teach us to love, hate, fear, etc. what and how we ought, both for the
matter, manner and measure: Gods children in Scripture are compared to good and
fruitful trees; now to keep the comparison; what is it for a tree to be of a
good kind, fruitful and planted in a fertile soil, unless it be hardy and able
to endure and bear out Summers heat, that it spill it not, and winters frost
and cold that it chill and kill it not? in like manner, unless we be
strengthened, supported and sustained from above, we shall never be able to hold
out, and bear about the many troubles and trials that will befall us; for as our
natural life is strengthened and preserved by food and such necessaries as be
needful for our bodies; so our spiritual life must be maintained by the graces
of Gods Spirit, as needful and necessary to our souls. Briefly, we need
strengthening that we may be able rightly to use our spiritual armor, both
defensive and offensive, Paulus Jovius.
as its best for us, and appointed to us: else, as Scanderbeg told one that
begged his sword, it would do him but little good, or stand him in small stead,
because he had not his arm too: so we can make but poor use of Gods armor,
unless we be strengthened by his arm, Col. 1.11.
with all might, according to his glorious power.

CHAP. 23. Of Pride of Grace and of Humility it self.
Pride of Grace is when Christians swell and grow big with conceit of their own
perfection, and in comparison of their grace, zeal, knowledge, conscience and
obedience, do not stick both to slight and condemn their brethren: others are
carnal, they spiritual; others are weak, they strong; others ignorant, they see
the truth; others are lukewarm, themselves zealous professors: nay some there
are that are proud of humility it self, and proud that they are not proud.
Pride begets diseases out of precious remedies, says Chrysolgous. Mr. Fox
said, As I get good by my sins, by being made thereby to take the more heed to
my ways, so I get hurt by my graces, Ex remediis generat morbos superbia.
Chrysolog. Sermon. 7.
by being proud of them. Bernard tells us of one who bewailing his own
condition, said, He saw thirty virtues in another, whereof he had not one in
himself; and peradventure says Bernard, of all his thirty, he had not one like
this man's humility. A man truly humble indeed attributes and arrogateth
nothing to himself, but ascribes all to God, Humilitas dum proditur, perditur.
nor will he willingly lose this jewel of humility by proclaiming he has found
it; for it is the greatest pride that may be, to be proud of not being proud.
Every one should see that his heart be not pufft up with spiritual graces; for
what have thou that thou have not received? says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 4.7.
Thou have not these graces, because by nature thou art better then others, for
thou art a child of wrath as well as others. Hierome says of the Lady Paula,
She was least that she might be greatest; by how much more she humbled her
self, by so much the more by Christ she was exalted; Ephesians. 2.3. Minima fuit ut
esset maxima; quanto magis se dejociebat, tanto magis a Christo sublevabatur;
latebat and non latebat. Hieron. Caetera vitia in peccatis, superbia bonis
maxim timenda. August. ad Dioscor. Epist. 56.
she lay hid, and yet she lay not hid: other vices in sins, but pride is most
to be feared in Gods good gifts and graces.

CHAP. 24. Of the Odiousness of Pride.
SECT. 1.
PLato once said of moral virtue, that in it self it is so beautiful, that
could a man see it in its proper colors, it would even ravish the eyes of the
beholders, and make them fall in love with it: so I may say of sin (and
especially of this sin of Pride) that it is so ugly, that the vilest sinner in
the world durst not commit it, did he behold the deformity and ugly visage
thereof; Pride is a sin very odious both to God and man.

1. It is very loathsome in the eyes of God; it is one of those sins that
Solomon sets down to be an abomination to him: Prove. 6.16, 17. Prove. 16.5.
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord; and if the
person be abominable, then all the services be abominable: God does not
vouchsafe so much as a favorable look toward proud persons: though the Lord
be high, Ps. 138.6.
yet he has respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows a far off: he looks
upon them with contempt, they stand at a great distance from God, and God from
them; Prove. 3.34.
surely he scorneth the scorners. Whenever God sees a proud man, he says,
Behold mine enemy! Isa. 66.2.
To this man will I look says God, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
etc. i. e. to the man that is poor in spirit. God cannot look above him, for
there is no superior to him, nor look round about him, because there is none
that is equal to him, (Father Son and Holy Ghost are but one God) but he looks
downwards; and the lower and more humble any man is, the more the Lord regards
him, Morlorat. in Luc. 1.
says Marlorat. deus humiles misericordiae suae oratores amat, fastidiosos
justitiae praesumptores odit. God loves the humble that sue to him for his
mercy, but hates the proud presumer on his righteousness, Luther in Psalm. 5.
as Luther says.

2, As it is odious to God, so also among men; there are none more hated and
envied then proud persons, Chrysostom. Orat. 65. Omnis fere vitiosus diligit sibi
similem. Solus superbus elatu^ odit. Innocentius. 2 Reg. 14.8, 9, 10.
as Chrysostom speaks; men are apt to pity the drunkards, and to envy the
proud; and as one well observes, it is a peculiar curse of God upon this sin of
Pride; whereas one drunkard loves another, and one swearer loves another,
etc. yet one proud man hates another; they that would have all the honor and
pre-eminence themselves, do swell with pride against the pride of others. Read
the story of Amazias King of Judah to this purpose, who having slain the
Edomites with a great slaughter, Superbia ab omnibus contemnitur, quia superbus
omnis est injustus, plus sibitribuens quam sibi debetur, and per consequens,
aliis etiam derogat quod aliis debebatur. Keckerm. System. Ethic. lib. 2.
sent to Jehoash King of Israel, saying, Come let us look one another in the
face, i. e. let us fight with each other; as we say, when two Armies meet to
fight, they face one another: but the King of Israel writes back to him in
Parables deriding of his pride, with as great a pride: saying, The Thistle that
was in Lebanon sent to the Cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter
to my son to wife; and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and
trod down the Thistle: Thou have smitten Edom, and thy heart has lifted thee
up; glory of this, and tarry at home; for why should thou meddle to thy hurt,
that thou should fall, even thou and Judah with thee? Thus he wrote that
Amaziah might understand his pride: The King of Israel took it in as much scorn
to be challenged by the King of Judah, as the Cedar might think it an indignity
to match his daughter with the Thistle: when Diogenes saw Plato delight in meat
and curious beds, he got up upon them with his dirty feet, and said Calco
Platonis fastum, I tread upon Plato's pride; but Plato replied, sed majori
fastu, but with a greater pride: and Plato observing Diogenes walking with a
threadbare cloak full of holes, he said, he could see his pride through the
holes of his cloak.

2. It is a sin that God resists. God resists the proud, Jam. 4.6. he sets
himself in battle array against the proud; it is not said in the whole Bible,
that God resists any sinner but the proud. God may be said to resist the proud

1. By scattering their devices and confounding their counsels: thus he is said
to scatter the proud in the imaginations of their heart: Luke 1. Thus God dashed
the devices of Achitophel against David, and Haman against the Jews.
how did the Lord dash the devices of Nimrod, and those proud Babel-builders
upon the face of the earth, that in the pride of their heart would have built a
tower, whose top should reach to heaven, thereby to get them a name! Genes. 11.
Thus the Lord scattered the devices of the proud Egyptians, when they boasted
in their great power and glory, and vaunted when they pursued Israel, I will
overtake them, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them:
Ex. 18.11.
But says Jethro to Moses, In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, the Lord
was above them.

2. By taking from them the things whereof they are proud; when the heart of
man is too much set upon a child, or any other thing, usually the Lord takes
it from us: when the daughters of Zion were proud of their beauty and bravery,
Isa. 3.16, 17, 18.
the Lord threatens to smite the Crown of their head with a scab, and discover
their secret parts, and take away their bravery. And because idolatrous Israel
did not know (says the Lord) that I gave her corn and wine and oil, and
multiplied her silver and gold which they prepared for Baal; therefore will I
return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season
thereof, etc. Hos. 2.8, 9.

3. Romanoru^ est, Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos.
By punishing them with sore judgments. A wise heathen being demanded what God
was doing in heaven, answered, that he did nothing but throw down the proud,
and set up the humble. Herein the Lord declares his Sovereignty: God puts Job
to that which was Gods peculiar work; Deck thy self now with Majesty and
excellency, and array thy self with glory and beauty, Job 40.10, 11, 12.
cast abroad the rage of thy wrath, and behold every one that is proud and
abase him, look on every one that is proud and bring him low; it is Gods
peculiar work to bind all the sons of pride. The day of the Lord of Hosts shall
be on every one that is proud and lofty, Isa. 2.12.
and upon every one that is lifted up and he shall be brought low. Behold the
day comes that shall burn as an oven, Malac. 4.1.
and all the proud and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. This sin was that which threw the Angels out of
heaven, aspiring, Vltor superbos sequitur a tergo deus. Pride was so ponderous
in the Angels, that heaven could not hold it. Midleton.
as some think, to be equal unto God. This sin was that which ejected our first
Parents out of Paradise; therefore the Lord shut up their way to the tree of
life with flaming Cherubims. When Pharaoh swells against the Lord, Who is the
Lord, etc. the Lord staineth the pride of his glory. When Nebuchadnezzar
proudly speaks, walking in his stately Palace of Babel, Dan. 4.30.
Is not this great Babel that I have built by the might of my power, and for
the honor of my Majesty? the same hour was he driven out from men to eat grass
with the oxen: and when his understanding and Kingdom are restored to him
again, he acknowledges that Gods works are truth, and his ways judgment, and
those that walk in pride he is able to abase, Dan. 4.35. Pride was one of the
sins of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. (...). Herodot.
which procured its great overthrow: when Sennacherib lifted up himself against
the God of heaven, he sent an Angel that slew in one night of his army 185000.
and he himself was slain by his own sons: and Herodotus says, that this was
left upon his Tomb, Whosoever thou art that see me, Quem dies vidit veniens
superbum, hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem. Sen. in Thyest.
learn to fear God. God spared Herod while he persecuted the Saints, yea when
he slew James with the sword, and imprisoned Peter; but an Angel immediately
smote him, and worms consumed him, when he waxed proud. If God touch the lofty
mountains of pride, Prove. 29.23.
he makes them smoke. A man's pride (that is, any man's pride) shall bring him
low, says the wise man: and he says further, that pride (as an usher) goes
before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall, Prove. He plentifully
rewards the proud doer. Ps. 31.23. Retribuet his qui abundanter faciunt
superbiam.
16.18. And usually God abaseth proud persons by weak and base means, to let
them see what things of nothing they be: thus Peter standing upon his valor
and manhood, was daunted by a poor maid; and proud Goliath overcome by a sling
and a stone thrown out of the hand of a stripling: so the pride of Pharaoh is
punished, not by Lions, Bears and Tygres, but with flies, lice, frogs, locusts,
etc. And Herod's pomp and glory is soon laid in the dust by a few worms or
lice: And to show how God hates proud persons, he often throws them down by
those that were by many degrees baser than themselves. (...). Ambros. Aug.
Arnobius. debite Lyranus.
Many proud Tyrants have been laid aside, and those that have been unlikely
have worn the Crown. How did God rent the Kingdom from Saul, and give it to
David keeping his fathers sheep? Mordecai the despised Jew is advanced, and
proud Haman is destroyed: when pride comes, then comes shame, Prove. 11.2.

SECT. 2.
Great reason there is why God should resist this sin of pride.

1. 2 These. 2.4
Because it is a sin that opposes and resists God: as the wicked in his
pride persecuteth the poor, so in his pride he opposes God, Psalm. 10.4.

The man of sin is said to oppose or lift up himself above all that is called
God or is worshipped.

1. Pride opposes God as God: other sins are set, some against his mercy, some
against his justice, some against his holiness, Cum omnia vitia fugiant a Deo,
sola superbia opponit se Dee. Gregor.
others against his law; but this sets it self against God as God; it would
un-God him if it were in its power: other sins deal with men like themselves,
or with the creature only; this sin is so high-spirited, and of such a stout
stomach, as it sets self in open defiance against God himself; it does as it
were take up the bucklers against him, and challenge him the field: Now great
is the folly of that man, that in pride resists God; for who has hardened
his heart against him and prospered? Job 9.4.

2. Pride invadeth Gods honor, it robs him of his glory; Xerxes grew so proud,
that he contented not himself Cum Graecis tantum sed cum Diis bellare, and
therefore sends four thousand armed men to Delphos, to race the Temple of
Apollo, who presently were destroyed, to show, ut quanto gravior offensa deorum
esset, tanto infirmiores, immo nullas esse hominum vires. Justin. lib. 2.
therefore the Lord sets himself in battle array against the proud. If the Cedar
took it scornfully to match his daughter with the Thistle; how much more will
God take it in disdain, that sinful man should exalt himself against God, and
deprive him of his glory? God will cause some wild beast or other to tread down
this proud Thistle that would rob him of his honor and glory: God is very
tender of his honor; he says expressly, My glory will I not give to another:
the Papists therefore do rob God of his glory, by giving to Angels and Saints a
part of his glory; likewise all charmers, south-sayers, blasphemers, swearers,
and sacrilegious persons: what makes sin to be sin, but because it dishonours
God? God has abased his glory to set his love upon us; why then should not we
exalt his glory for his sake?

3. Pride sets it self to oppose the people of God, and therein pride would
pull God out of his throne: therefore it is said, that the Lord would have war
with Amalek from generation to generation; Exodus 17.16.
for he said, because the Lord had sworn he would have war with Amalek, etc. it
is in the Hebrew, the hand upon the throne of Jah, that is of God; this is
referred to Amalek, Quia manus Hamaleki fuit contra solium Jah. Quia tam impie
proterveque se gessit Hamalek tanquam solium dei subruiturus cum populo ejus
violentia sua, et quamvis non provocatus non potuit conquiescere, quin populum
persequeretur indignissime, and aciem extremam insestaret ejus; and quidem eo
tempore quo populus ad spectandam dei gloriam erat convocatus: idcirco bellum
(...) huic genti denunciat Deus, and populo suo inimicitias aeternas imperat.
Vid Deuteronomy. 25.17. Junius.
because the hand of Amalek is upon or against the throne of the Lord,
therefore Jehovah will have war with Amalek, because Amalek in acting against
Israel the people of God (meant here by the throne of God) did lift up himself
against God and his throne. Junius and Piscator read the words thus, because
the hand of Amalek was against the throne of God; they put in [Amalek] because
Amalek attempted to lay his hand upon the throne of God; therefore wicked proud
persons, whenever they do act any thing against Gods people, they would in
the pride of their hearts (if possible) throw down the throne and Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, as is often times done among men; what is done against such a
subject, is done against the Princes Crown and dignity; they that persecute the
godly go about to pick out Gods eye.

4. Pride makes a man to abuse all the mercies of God; the more mercies evil
men taste, I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved Psa^^^
the more pride does bud forth. Pride is now budded forth, and grown as it were
into a rod. It is said of the old Israelites, that they took strong Cities and
a fat land, and possessed houses full of all goods, (...), Symmach. Bemithbi
bethscalvetha. Scalah significat salvumesse, and nomen Schalvah prosperitatem.
and wells dug, vine-yards, and olive-yards, and fruit trees in abundance:
So they did eat, and were filled and became fat, and delighted themselves in
thy great goodness, i.e. in that goodness of thine manifested in the creature;
not in God, in grace and holiness, Nehem. 9.25, 26. Nevertheless they were
disobedient, and rebelled against thee: the more of these temporal blessings
they had, the more they waxed proud. According to their pastures were they
filled, and their heart was exalted, Aqua illa tanquam mel illi sapuit. Stella
in Luc. But I rather take it, that he made the barrenest place fruitful to
them. Jesurun that is, his chosen. Hierome. His rightful people. Calvin.
Figuratively Israel was so called for his righteousness. Junius. Therefore God
takes it the more ill, that he should offend in this manner, that should have
been upright: he was fat, and covered with fatness. Some expound it, gross or
fat in sin, but the word will not bear that interpretation: but notes fatness
in the best sense, as Pagnin observes; the fat of the land, Gen 45.18. Pareus
in Genes. i. e. the riches of the land, says he. Wherefore rich men are called
fat ones. Calvin. In Isa. 10.16. He kicked, a comparison from an unruly horse
too well fed: like unruly beasts, the fatter they were, the more unruly.
therefore have they forgotten me, says God, Hos. 13.6. When the heart is
lifted up with the creature, it forgets the Creator. When Jesurun did eat the
increase of the fields, and sucked honey out of the rock, and oil out of the
flinty rock, butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs and rams of
the breed of Bashan; and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, etc. then
Jesurun waxed fat and kicked: thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou
art covered with fatness: then he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15.

5. Pride makes a man slight all the judgments of God, to kick against the
rod, and grow mad against his medicine, as Austin speaks. Of such the Lord
complains, Jerem. 5.3. O Lord, thou have smitten them, but they have not
grieved: thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction:
they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return.
When King Jehoram was brought into a great strait, the Prophet Elisha labors
to convince him of those sins which had brought him into it; 2 Reg. 3.13
Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and to the Prophets of thy Mother;
thereby intimating to him, that the wickedness of his Fathers house had brought
him into these extremities: but Jehoram puts that off, and would not be
convinced that they were any other then the accidents of war. Nay, said he, for
God has called these three Kings together to deliver them into the hand of
Moab. Pride is such a sin that it remains after sore judgments of God
executed upon the sons of pride. Pride hardens the heart, and then nothing
can work upon it.
Thus Daniel tells King Belshazzar: O thou King, the most high God gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and glory, and honor, etc.
but when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was
deposed from his Kingly throne, and they took his glory from him, and he was
driven from the sons of men, Dan. 5 18, 22.
and his heart was made like the beasts, etc. and thou his son, O Belshazzar,
have not humbled thy self, though thou knew all this. Therefore says the
Lord, This is true humility to be able to rejoice that Gods glory may be set
forth in our shame, as that noble learned Earl wrote to his friend. Joh. Pic.
Com. Mirand. Epist. ad Francis. Pic.
Isa. 9.9, 10. All the people shall know, even Ephraim, and the inhabitants of
Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, The bricks are fallen
down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we
will change them into cedars. God had humbled and pulled down those that were
great, but they had a great deal of Grandeur; they would raise their hearts to
a higher pitch of pride, than those that were thrown down before them. Calvin
in Isa. 9.9.
It is not the sin of one Nation alone, nor of one time alone, says Calvin
upon that place. With how many strokes has God afflicted England for these
many years past and yet more pride then ever!

CHAP. 25. Of the greatness of this sin of Pride.
SECT. 1.
1. THe greatness of this sin may be made manifest in respect of its original,
the height of the place from whence it descended; it was born in heaven,
Superbia in caelo nata est; sed velut immemor, qua via inde cecidit, (...) luc
postea redire non potuit. Hugo.
in the breasts of those Angels that kept not their first estate; therefore
Hierome says, that it is Natione caelestis, by nation heavenly; How art thou
fallen from heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning! For thou have said in thy
heart, I will ascend into heaven, Isa. 14.12, 13, 14, 15.
I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, etc. I will ascend above the
heights of the clouds, I will be like the most High. Pride laboring to ascend
into heaven, the Lord throws it down. Therefore, says he, thou shall be
brought down to hell, etc.

2. It is an epidemical evil; it appears in all sorts of men and women
whatsoever: many are profane and proud of their profaneness, they glory in
their shame, as the Apostle speaks; as it is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.10. Isa.
3.9.
the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not return to the Lord
their God. The (...) countenance does witness against them, Quidampro
carnalibus, quidam pro spiritualibus superbiunt, and est una superbia sub
diverso color. Bernar. 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.
and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not: the show of their
countenance did declare that they did glory in their shame: men think it a
piece of bravery that they are sermon-proof, and can stand out against all the
threatenings of the word: and among professors of religion, and those that have
a form of goodness, Paul says, that in the latter days, there should be such
as should be self-lovers, covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers, despisers of
those that are good; Women as well as men are given to pride; pride being cast
out of heaven, and wandering upon earth, a woman took her in, and there she has
dwelt ever since. The shop of pride is the woman's wardrope.
traitors, heady, high minded, etc. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth?
thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, etc. therefore said I,
surely these are poor, these are foolish, for they know not the way of the
Lord, nor the judgment of their God, Jer. 5.4, 5. I will get me unto the great
men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the way of the Lord, and the
judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke and burst the
bonds, says the Prophet. Aretius complains why Gospel-government could not
be carried on among the Helvetian Churches, because the great men would not
come under the yoke, Isa. 3.16.
and the common people loved to live at liberty; hence it was that there was so
little good done among them. Pride you see is an universal general sin, that
has corrupted all estates, and from which none are free: Pride being seated in
the heart, cannot always be discovered or discerned by the habit; it may as
well be found in a poor country cottage, as in a sumptuous Princely Palace:
under a leathern jerkin, as under a velvet jacket. Diogenes said of pride, It
was a shepherd, and the vulgar were the sheep, which it carried from place to
place even as it would. And whereas other sins are committed at some time, in
some place, by some person, Non sit novitios, accioche gonfiato di superbia,
not a novice lest he be pufft up with pride as a bladder pufft with wind.
Nuovamente piantato ne la feed, ma ben instructo. Ital. Annot. in 1 Timothy 3.6.
this may be committed both at the Court, in the City, Town and Country, in the
Church, Field and House, and wheresoever a man be, carrying his proud mind,
haughty heart, and high spirit with him; Item at all times, by night or by day;
nay howsoever a man be employed, whither he be solitary and alone by himself,
or whither in company with others: one compares pride unto death which spares
none, high nor low; pride has more tricks and cunning to allure the hearts of
men then other sins; yea this is a sin to which Ministers as well as others are
subject; therefore the Apostle would not have a novice that is unmortified and
unexperienced, enter into the Ministry, lest he be pufft up with pride, and
fall into the condemnation of the devil: as the devil labors to infect all
sorts of persons with the sin of pride, so especially the Preachers of the
Gospel: as appears in that he raises a strife for precedence and superiority
even among Christ's own Disciples: Luke 9.46.
and they that are acquainted with Church histories, Superbia caelestes appetit
mentes.
know right well, that the precedencies of Bishops, and their Seas and Seats,
has been a point too much canvased in many Councels. And this old Sophister
and pestilent Politician the Devil, has great reason to bestir himself to
breed ambition and faction among such persons.

1. Because they fall not alone, but like blazing stars draw tails after them,
they draw many others after them. Gualt in Lu^^
Gualter expounds and applies the falling of the star into the bottomeless pit,
obscuring the sun, and ingendring locusts, to the pride and apostasy of the
Roman Church, and of the Pastors thereof, Rev. 9. and doubtless pride in the
Ministry, will breed profaneness in the people.

2. Because while they intend this, they cannot attend their flocks, nor give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine, as Paul advises
Timothy: 1 Timothy 4.13.
nay while they seek themselves, and their own things unmeasurably, they cannot
truly seek the things of our Lord Jesus Christ; even as when the Shepherds
follow other things, their flocks must needs go to wrack: So when Pastors
altogether mind their own advancement on earth, they are not so industrious as
they should be to bring their people to heaven. Pride is a King, and all other
vices are attendants upon it.


3. Pride is the most stately, and the most costly sin: it sits like a Queen
with a Crown upon its head, Isa. 28.1. It comes like a King with a huge troop
and train of attendants, and (as a King) requires more charges to maintain it
than other sins; therefore some persons will put themselves upon many
inconveniences to maintain their pride. One says, that pride has gotten a
coach drawn with four horses, an ambitious desire of rule and dominion, love of
proper praise, disobedience of all laws and governments, and contempt of
others; the wheels of this coach are verbosity, and boasting, levity, and
arrogance: the coachman is the spirit of pride; the lovers of honor and
worldly vanities are those that ride in the coach; the horses are without
bridles, the wheels without any stay; and those that are carried, are giddy
weak and inconstant, full of motion and mutation.

4. It is a sin hardly rooted out where once it is seated: it plays Rex, and
will not easily be dispossessed. Cum been cunctaris, cum cuncta subacta putaris:
Quae prius infestat, vincenda superbia restat.
As great Princes do not easily suffer themselves to be dispossessed of those
strong holds that they once set foot in: it is much more easy to avoid other
sins; as drunkenness, luxury, theft, murder, and such gross sins, Sub host
quem occidit, moritur, qui de culpa quam superat elevatur. Gregor.
then the sin of pride; and the devil thinks himself more sure of a man by
pride, than by any other sin: for as an Archer, if he shoot a dear or any other
beast in the foot, or leg, or side, is not sure of his game; but if he strike
him in the heart, then he is his own: so Satan by other sins does but slightly
wound the soul; but by pride he gives it a deadly wound. Pride is the first sin
that declares its life and vigor in a child, and the last that dies in a
man: we read that Abimilechs skull was broke by a piece of a millstone thrown
down upon him by the hand of a woman; Judge 9.54.
the man being ready to die, called out hastily to his armor-bearer, saying,
Slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. Note, says Chrysostom on
this place, Chrysostom. in Judic. He dies under the hands of the enemy which he
had slain, that is proud of the sin he has overcome.
the man was dying, but his pride would not die. As it is the first enemy that
assaults the soul, so it is the last that quits the field; other vices are
mortified and subdued, and forced to forsake the field before life forsakes our
bodies; but pride alone holds out to the last; it is ultimus diaboli laqueus,
the last snare of the devil, a stain hardly washed out; and many times it grows
out of the ashes of other sins; when a man has overcome all other sins, Inter
omnia peccata, tu semper es prima, tu semper es ultima; nam omne peccatum te
accedente committitur, te recedente dimittitur. Innocent. de contemptu mundi.
lib. 2. cap. 31.
yet then is he to buckle with this Giant of pride. As death is the last enemy,
so pride is the last sin that shall be destroyed. Among all sins, says
Innocentius, speaking to pride, thou art the first, and thou always art the
last: and as the Israelites were delivered, when the firstborn of Egypt were
slain, so we might hope the sooner to be delivered from our other sins, if once
we could be free and rid of this, which Mr. Dent calls the Master-pock of the
soul.

SECT. 2.
5. PRide is found in every sin, in every sin there is a spice of pride; in
every sin there is found some contempt of God and his law: when we refuse to
obey Gods commandments, does it not proceed from pride? Nehem. 9.16, 17.
they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not
to thy commandments, and refused to obey, there is pride in disobedience. Agur
when he makes his request to God for a middle estate, he sets down the fear of
his own heart, what evils he might run into, Prove. 30.9.
if God should give him abundance; lest I be full, Cartwr. in loc.
and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Mr. Cartwright says, this seems to
be so intolerable, Every contempt of God is pride: but every sin is a contempt
of God: Ergo every sin is pride. Aug. lib. de not. et gratia.
that it scarce falls upon a Professor; this seems to be Pharaohs sin, Exodus
5.2. who said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? yet holy Agur
found some roots of this sin even in himself; Lest I be full and deny thee, and
say Who is the Lord? So likewise when men are impatient, and set themselves to
control the wisdom and power of God, this is a great pride, and a charging of
God with folly. Job is acquitted from this, being silent under the hand of God.
Shall any man teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those that are high? Job.
21.22.
one dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet: his breasts are
full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow; Peccatum superbiae
committitur, cum quis praeceptum contemnendo peccat. Aug super. Number. cap. 25.
p. 242. Eccl. 7.10.
and another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with
pleasure; they shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them. Job speaks of the different dispensations of Gods Providence toward men;
now when we murmur against such passages of Providence, this is for a man to
teach God knowledge. Therefore Solomon says, Say not thou, what is the cause
that the former days were better than these? for thou do not enquire wisely
concerning this: you may see boys sometimes stand upon their heads and hands,
and toss up their heels against heaven; so do men like such children, toss
their heels against heaven, when they kick and murmur at Gods providential
dispensations.

SECT. 3.
6. PRide is the root of all evil.

1. It is the root of all heresies: Austin says that pride is the mother of
all heresies and heretics, and that all doctrines of impiety do come forth
from the root of pride. Superbia matter omnium haeresium and haereticorum. Omnes
doctrinae impietatis de radice superbiae proveniunt. August.
And Bernard says, that in all heretics, there was ever one intention, viz. a
hunting after honor and glory from singularity of knowledge. The Gnostics
swelled with Pride, that they knew all things, and therefore were so called,
though many of them were notorious heretics, and men of brutish lives. Simon
Magus whom the Church History calls the first author of all heresies, was very
proud, giving out that himself was some great one, to whom all gave heed from
the least to the greatest, Omnibus haereticis unae semper suit intentio, sc.
captare gloriam de singularitate scientiae. Bern. in Cant Eusebius. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 13.
saying This man is the great power of God; the same Simon was counted in Rome
for a God, having his picture between two bridges on the river Tiber, with this
inscription, Simoni deo sancto, to Simon the holy God. Pride and
self-conceitedness is the root of all heresy. Suum cuique pulchrum, Scindentes
and elati, and sibi placentes. Irenaeus, advers. haeres lib 4 Hos. 12.1. Habak.
2 5
every one thinks his goose to be a swan; proud men think themselves to be
something when they are nothing. Naturalists do observe of the wolf, that she
lives certain months of the wind; so proud men (like Ephraim) do feed on the
wind, and follow after the east wind of their own conceits: the proud man is as
he that transgresses by wine: Pride is a soul-drunkenness, an intemperance of
the affections, Quanto amplius quis superbiainvolvitur tanto lucem veritatis
minus intuetur. Anselm. de similit. cap. 98.
when men are not wise to sobriety, then as drunkards fall into absurd and
ridiculous actions conceiting strange things of themselves; so proud persons
fall into ridiculous and absurd opinions, being blown up with high conceits of
their own wisdom. Facies mea inflata non sinebat me videre. August.
Pride suffers not a man to see or know himself: as Austin well knew, when he
said, My swollen face suffers me not to see: meaning his proud heart hindered
him from looking into his own state: which is evident in this story of Simon
the leper, and Mary Magdalen: of which one comments thus: the Physician stood
between two diseased persons, Hymeneus and Alexander made shipwreck of faith.
Hymeneus was a preacher full of ostentation, a striver about words to no
profit, whose words did eat like a Gangrene.
but one of the sick folk was sensible of that great sickness, the other was
insensible of his estate, being ignorant of this thing, that he was far from
his salvation, which senselesness came from his heart swollen with pride and
conceit of his own worthiness. 1 Timothy 2.14, 16. And Baronius says, Alexander
was the Jew mentioned, Act. 16.33 a forward man in the Apostles cause. Psalm.
25.9. Baron. annal. Tom. 1. ad ann. 57. Nullum malum est, quod superbiae par
sit; ex bomine facit daemonem, convitiatorem, maledicum, perjurum, mortis ac
caedis cupidum. Superbus perpetuus est in tristibus, perpetuo indignatur,
perpetuo maeret, nibil est, quod hanc animi ipsius passionem exaturare queat:
quemadmodum enim avari, quanto plura acceperint, tanto pluribus egent; ita and
arrogantes, quanto majore honor fruuntur, tanto cupiunt honorari magis.
Crescit enim illis ista animi passio. Passi vero finem non novit, sed tum
primum cessat, quando laborantem occiderit. Chrysostom. homil. 1. in 2. ad
Thessalonic. Caput omnium morborum. Basil. Caput omnium peccatorum superbia.
August.
A proud man is always looking after high things, exercising himself in things
that are too wonderful for him; therefore (like the Philosopher staring at the
stars) he stumbleth at a stone, and falls into the ditch of error. God hides
heavenly mysteries from those that are wise and prudent in their own eyes, and
reveals them to humble babes: those that God teaches are meek and humble
ones; whereas God does not teach but resist the proud.

2. It is the root of all other sins: Initium peccati superbia, Pride is the
beginning of sin, says Petrarch; and the son of Syrach has said as much
before him, Ecclus. 10.4. it is the head of all vices, and the sink of all
iniquities, it is the center from which the lines of all vices are drawn.

1. It is the root of envy: one proud man would excel and go before all men;
Sola miseria caret invidia.
therefore he grieveth if any one be equal with him or compared unto him; and
from hence arises envy. Because the women in their dances said, Saul had slain
his thousands, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8, 9.
and David his ten thousands; Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased
him, and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, Fools and
beggars are never envied.
and to me but thousands, and what can he have more but the Kingdom? And Saul
eyed David from that day forward; that is, he cast an envious eye upon him.
This temper seemed to be in Christ's own Disciples; Luke 9 49. Invidus non est
idoneus auditor. Aristot. His ears are not fit to his head Adams.
for John comes to Christ, and says, Master, we saw one casting out devils in
thy name, and we forbad him, because he followed not thee with us; now this was
but an unreasonable reason of their prohibition; and it is a fault as well as a
fashion of all Professions to advance themselves, and to keep others under:
Austin says, that Pride envies all superiors, because it cannot be equal to
them; envies his inferiors, because it fears it should be equal to it; and
equals, because they are equal to it: There cannot be a greater vexation to an
envious man, than to see another do well by him; therefore Seneca wishes, that
such persons had eyes and ears in all places, that they might even pine
themselves away by repining at other men's welfare; and Diogenes advised one
to become good to be revenged of a proud man that was his enemy. Envious
persons would have all men cut to their scantling, and every bodies foot of the
just length of their last: these are not unlike Procrustes or Gobryas, Invidia
hominum vanorum asseclaest. Plut. Mor. 1. Luke 7.38, 39. Quicquid laudabile
est, invidiae materiam praebet.
that cut every body to the just length of his bed. When Mary Magdalen (as it
is conceived) had washed the feet of Christ with her tears, and wiped them with
the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed his feet with precious
ointment, Simon the Pharisee (in whose house he then was) envied at it; saying,
This man, if he were a Prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman
this is that touches him, for she is a sinner: hereby he shows his pride and
hypocrisy, in thinking better of himself, and worser of others then there was
just cause, thinking and speaking ill of her that was better then himself: If
he had looked well upon himself, he needed not have sought out in this woman
what he might have envied; he might have seen enough at home, quod lugeret,
what he might have lamented, as Bernard speaks. It Is the humor of all envious
proud persons to deal with sins, as it befell Moses's rod; Ex. 4.3, 4.
being hurled from him it was a Serpent, but taken to him a rod again: so these
men make their own sins small, and others great; therefore Christ reproves him
for it. Simon, says he, I entered into thine house, thou gave me no water for
my feet: which was but an ordinary custom in entertainment, and of good use in
those hot countries, to refrigerate and cool them after their travel; That it
was usual, Genesis 1^.4.
appears by Abraham's entertaining the three Angels, whom he thought to be
men; Let a little water I pray you be brought, and wash your feet, Genesis 19.2.
and rest your selves under this tree; the same Lot affords to the two Angels
that come to his City: Genesis 24.32.
the same Laban does to Abraham's servant and those that were with him: thus an
old man of Gibeah does also to the Levite and his Concubine traveling from
Bethlehem Judah to mount Ephraim: Jud. 19.21
This ordinary favor thou have not afforded me, even to wash my feet with
ordinary water; but she has washed them with most sweet water drawn from the
fountain of her heart and through the passages of her eyes; sorrow for her
sins, Suetonius says, that Tiberius caused his son Germanicus to be slain,
lest he should succeed and prove better then himself; and the two eldest sons
of Germanicus to be famished, because he thought they were by the people too
much honored.
being as it were the bucket to fetch out the same; and wiped them with the
hairs of her head, a towel not artificially made by her, but naturally growing
from her. Thou gave me no kiss at all, but she since my coming in has given
me many, for she has kissed my very feet; mine head and best part thou
anointedst not with oil; but she has anointed my feet with ointment: therefore
seeing thou have neither showed piety nor pity in washing and refreshing me,
nor love and charity in kissing and embracing me, nor mirth and joy in
anointing me; I may well conclude, that however thou speak fair to me, yet
I am never a whit welcome to thee; and that this woman whom thou enviest
(whatsoever thou think of her) is much better then thy self. When Eldad and
Medad prophesied in the camp of Israel, Number. 11.28, 29.
Joshua envied at it, and said, My Lord Moses, forbid them: but Moses was of
another spirit: Enviest thou for my sake? says he, would God that all the
Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon every
one of them. So Paul; so Christ be preached, quomodocunque, Phil. 1.10.
he rejoiced, though some preached him out of envy, and said, he would joy: Obj.
Does not Christ envy salvation and the means thereof to the Scribes and
Pharisees, when he thanks his Father for hiding the mysteries thereof from
them? Matthew 11.25 Ans. No, but because they refused, and so for their contempt
are thus deservedly punished, he thanks his Father for mingling mercy and
justice together, viz. justice upon the proud, and showing mercy to the humble.
and John Baptist says of Christ, He must increase, but I must decrease; which
some conceitedly say, was signified by John's being born on Midsummerday, when
the year was at highest and the day longest, and now shortning; and Christ born
when the sun was at the lowest, and the days at the shortest and lengthning.
John Baptist labors to credit Christ among his Disciples, though with the loss
of his own reputation; saying, that Christ must increase, and he must decrease;
and while he labors to credit Christ before a few, Christ credits him before
a great multitude; therefore he said to the multitude concerning John, What
went you out to see? A Prophet? yea I say unto you and more then a Prophet: for
if it were a credit for Achilles (as Alexander the great sometime said of him)
to have Homer the trumpeter of his praises; then what an honor was it for John
Baptist to be commended by Christ himself? Now as for envious persons one
wittily says, Lest God might seem to wrong them in sending them to heaven,
where there are degrees of glory, as there are here of grace; therefore they
shall go to hell, where they shall find no matter of envy, but all the objects
of extreme misery.

2. Pride is the root of censuring. Pride is like some severe Schoolmaster,
who will be pleased with nothing but of his own doing; Curiosum genus hominum
ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. August in Confess.
and therefore it is always censuring the actions of others; of such Austin
speaks, There is a sort of men that are very curious to pry into other men's
lives, but very sluggish to correct their own. Diotrephes loved to have the
pre-eminence among others; therefore says John, He prateth against us with
malicious words, 3 John 9.10. Rash censuring proceeds from pride; such men
think by how much more they depress the good name of others, My brethren, be
not many Masters, Jam. 3.1. non siate molti censori, be not many Judges, or
censurers so others, Ital. Annot. in loc.
by so much the more they advance their own reputation: I am not as other men
are, nor as this Publican, said the proud Pharisee. Both Jesus Christ, himself,
and John Baptist cannot escape the censures of the proud Pharisees; therefore
Christ compares them to foolish and froward children sitting in the
marketplace (as peradventure the manner of that country then was) and crying
one to another, saying, We have piped to you, and ye have not danced to our
pipe; and we have mourned to you, and you have not lamented, or born your part
therein; so sullen and surly have you been, as you have thought scorn either to
accompany us or to comfort us; Imperoche ei reprende un vitio molto usato tra
gle huomini: quando ci ascuno condanna severamente gli altri permittendo in
tanto a se stesso ogni cosa. Ibid.
to such peevish brats our Savior compares these Scribes and Pharisees, Luke
7.32. and gives the reason of this comparison, ver. 33, 34. for says he, John
Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, i.e. not pampering his
pallat, nor pleasing his flesh either with delicate and dainty fare, or with
costly and curious apparel, having used such abstinence and austerity, that he
might seem rather an Angel then a man; As Goats in touching the sweet
Almond-tree with their tongues make it turn bitter; so proud cersorious persons
have venom in their hearts, in their tongues, in their breath, in their eyes,
as has the Basiliske.
and what has he gotten by this behavior but rash and unjust censuring? you
say he has a devil, or some familiar spirit, which makes him able to do this:
on the other side, concerning my self, you say, The Son of man is come eating
and drinking, and behold a glutton and a winebibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners. The Son of man is come, and eats and drinks, and keeps company with
great sinners for their conversion, knowing that he may make them better; but
they cannot make him worse, he being free from corruption, and therefore not
capable of contagion; and yet cannot he escape your censure: thus you are
neither well full nor fasting, as the Proverb says, and you will not be
brought to any good, either by austerity or familiarity. Hence I may note, that
it is an hard matter for a Minister so to carry himself, but he shall have a
hole picked in his coat; let a Minister live a retired life, and be very
studious, and use few words, he shall be said to be proud and stately; let him
be but modestly and moderately merry in good sort in company, they will censure
him to be of a gossiping disposition; Superbi aliorum vitia in oculis habent,
sua vero a tergo ponunt. Seneca.
let him in his preaching show variety of reading, he shall be taxed with vain
glory: let him keep himself close to the Word of God, and apply matters plainly
to the consciences of his hearers, Such men are like the Lamiae in Seneca's
Epistles, that put their eyes in their heads when they went abroad, and locked
them up at home.
he shall be counted a dry fellow, and not worth the hearing the second time.
But for such as are possessed with this pride, that see nothing that they like,
and take not offense at, they had need drink as much as they can of the wine of
charity, and that would free them from these humors that make them of so
perverse a spirit.

3. Pride is the cause of disdain; hence it comes to pass that men do scorn
and disdain at others; disdain is either in word or in actions.

1. In word: Asaph speaking of those that were prosperous in the world, Ps.
73.6, 9.
says that pride compasses them about as a chain; they speak loftily, they
set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth;
and they say, How does God know! is there knowledge in the most high? and David
says, The Jews are charged for speaking stout words against God, Malac. 3.13.
for denying the providence of God.
The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy
Law, Psalm. 119.51. and ver. 85. The proud have dug pits for me, and have
forged a lie against me. Of this kind of disdain, our Savior speaks, Mat.
5.22. Whosoever shall say to his brother Racha, shall be in danger of the
council; but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire,
i.e. whosoever shall not only be angry with his brother without a cause, as in
the former part of the verse, but also expresses the pride and wrath of his
heart, by some disdainful gesture or expression, shall be in danger of the
council, Omnes despicere superbiae est. Plutar. Mor. 1.
i. e. of an higher degree and greater measure of torment: but he that shall
say, thou fool, ass or idiot, shallow-brain and cockwit, in contempt of his
brothers weakness, shall be in danger of hell fire; i.e. shall undergo the
greatest and highest degree of punishment. Hereby our Savior alludeth to the
Jewish customs, who had three sorts of Courts to censure and punish several
sorts of offenses and offenders.

1. One held by three men in every village, where smaller matters were decided
and determined, or the wrong doers censured and punished: or (as some say) it
was debated, an aliquis esset damnandus, whither some one were to be condemned?

2. The second held by twenty three, in every of their Cities, Quo supplicii
genere damnatus esset puniendus.
before whom were brought matters of an higher nature, and by whom severe
punishments were inflicted, and by whom it was determined, with what kind of
punishment the condemned person was to be punished, not much unlike our
Quarter Sessions.

3. The third and last was held at Jerusalem only, and that by seventy two
Judges, who had only the greatest matters of all brought before them, from
whose sentence there might be no appeal; Qu. Curtius reports of Alexander the
great, that espying an old soldier stiff in following him in the cold winter,
himself arose and made him sit in his seat by the fire, saying he would respect
not their fortunes, but ages.
being not unlike our general Assizes, or high Court of Parliament. In a word,
Christ teaches us hereby, that as there be degrees of sins on earth, so there
shall be diverse degrees of punishments in hell: here by judgment, council and
hell fire, are meant eternal torments, though in a lesser and greater measure;
and that the sorest punishments are provided for proud and disdainful persons.

Jesus spoke a parable unto certaein men that trusted in themselves, Superbire
quasi super ire. Isidor. Etimolog.
and despised others; He that idolizeth himself, is apt to disdain at others:
men are apt to think meanly of others that are inferior to themselves in
birth, gifts, parts, estate, etc. Whosoever despises the poor, despises his
Maker, Prove. 17.5. God made him an object of pity, not of disdain.

2. There is disdain in actions: Great was the disdain of the Jews and
Samaritans one toward another, as may appear, John 4.9. where a woman of
Samaria refuses to do a very small favor to our Savior Christ eo nomine
because he was a Jew; Unde enim insultandi ferocia? unde superciliosa
austeritas? nisi quod se quisquam efferendo alios fastuose and fastidiose
despicit? and absit arrogantia, and omnes mutue modestissimi erimus. Calvin.
for asking her but a little water to drink, she denies it him, and thinks she
does well in so doing; for she tells him that the Jews and Samaritans meddle
not or have nothing to do one with another: such like are they that unjustly
separate from our public assemblies, like those in the Prophet, that say,
Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou, Isa. 65.5.
Whence comes that fierce insulting over others? whence is that supercilious
austerity? whence is it that men so proudly and disdainfully despise others,
says Calvin, is it not by extolling themselves? let arrogance be far from us,
and we shall carry our selves modestly one toward another. When Trajan was
censured for making the imperial Majesty of too easy an access: Why, ought not
I, said he, be such an Emperor to private men, as I would have an Emperor be
to me, if I were a private person?

SECT. 4.
4. PRide is the cause of covetousness; whence came covetousness, racking of
rents, biting usury, etc. but from pride in one kind or other; it is like fire
which never cease climbing up, so long as there is any thing above it, till
it has spoiled all: the proud man is said to enlarge his desires after the
earth as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers unto him
all Nations, and heapeth unto him all people, Habak. 2.5.

Object. The Apostle says, that covetousness is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy
6.10.
how then can pride be the root of covetousness?

Answ. That both the one and the other may be understood to be rightly spoken,
sigenera peccatorum singulorum, non singula generum utraquelocutione includi
intelligantur; for there are some men, Nonnulli sunt, qui ex cupiditate fiunt
superbi: and aliqui ex superbia fiunt cupidi. Lumb. sentent. distinct. 42.
who from covetousness become proud, and some from pride become covetous. There
is a man, says Austin, who would not be a lover of money, unless by this he
thought to be more excellent; therefore he coveteth riches that he may excel:
here covetousness springs from pride; and there is another, who would not love
to excel, unless he thought by this to get greater riches. Therefore it
appears, that covetousness sometimes springs from pride, and sometimes pride
from covetousness; and therefore of each is it rightly said, that it is the
root of all evil.

5. Pride is the cause of division and contention. Prove. 13.10. Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. cap. 10.
Pride is the great incendiary of the world: only by pride comes contention,
says Solomon. Eusebius shows, that when the Emperors began to favor the
Christians, then they began to fall out and disagree among themselves: Plenty
and prosperity do usually make men proud, and pride engendereth strife and
contention: He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife. Prove. 28.25. Prove.
21.24.
Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who deals in proud wrath. When the
wind crosses the stream, the waters rage; so a proud heart is apt to rage when
any thing crosses it. When proud Haman saw Mordecai bowed not, Esther 3.5, 6.
nor did him reverence; then was Haman full of wrath, and he thought scorn to
lay hands on Mordecai alone, for they had showed him the people of Mordecai:
When Peter Martyr was dead, Bullinger wrote to Zanchy to come to Tigure, and
succeed him; he tells him it was their Churches chiefest care to have a quiet
spirited man. Hen. Bulling. ad Zanch. inter Zanch. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 6.
wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were in the Kingdom of
Ahasuerus: from this root it was that there arose a strife and reasoning among
the Disciples of Christ, who should be greatest of them: Mark and Luke say,
the contention was only which of them should be the greatest, or chiefest,
expressing no place: but that must be supplied, out of Matthew, Matthew. 18.1.
who adds, that the question was, Who should be greatest in the Kingdom of
heaven? Now these words by diverse, be diversely expounded: Some understanding by
Kingdom of heaven a glorious estate, which the Disciples dreamed of, and
thought their Master should have here on earth, after his resurrection, where
he should reign as King, and they accompany him as Princes, Dukes, and great
Lords; and whereof they think that Zebedees wife spoke, putting up her petition
in the behalf of her two sons, James and John, Mat. 20.21
that the one of them might sit at Christ's right hand, and the other at his
left hand in his Kingdom; and that they were of this mind, seems to appear,
Act. 1.6. A quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price. 1 Pet. 3.4.
where between the resurrection and ascension, they ask their Master, Whither
at that time he would restore the Kingdom to Israel? which is expounded of a
temporal Kingdom: of this opinion is Musculus, Melancton, Marlorate, Calvin,
and others of our modern Divines. And it is most certain, that by Kingdom of
heaven is meant sometime the state of grace in this life, Romans 14.17.

Others understand it of the Kingdom of glory in the world to come; as
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. homil. in Math.
who reproves the people of his time, because they came short of the defects
and imperfections of the Disciples, in whom he says, though it were a fault to
contend and strive on earth, Bees will not abide where Eccho's are; nor will
the Spirit of God dwell with contentious persons.
who should have the highest place in heaven, where shall be no pride,
ambition, nor emulation; yet he says, it was a greater fault for them only to
seek and strive to be great on earth, scarce ever thinking of heaven: from this
root it was, that the Corinthians ran into Schisms and parties; one was for
Paul, another for Apollos, a third for Cephas, a fourth is above all Ordinances
and Ministers, he is for Christ himself. 1 Cor. 4.6. Concord on earth is Gods
music in heaven.
Now says the Apostle, These things brethren, In have transferred in a figure
to my self and to Apollo for your sakes, that ye might learn in us, not to
think of men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for
one against another: they were pufft up like bladders full of wind, while these
divisions were among them.

6. From this root of pride it is that men do blaspheme the truths of God that
are clearly laid down in the Word: The Pope blasphemously arrogateth to himself
one of Gods peculiar prerogatives; for so says the wisdom of God, Prove. 4. By
me Kings reign; which he usurpeth, Ecce nos constituti sumus super gentes and
regna! Bulla Pii Quinti pontific.
these three sins are joined together, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, 2 Timothy
3.2. and ver 5. having a form of godliness, but denying the power of it: this
is to be referred to all that went before; men shall be lovers of their own
selves, having a form of godliness; covetous, having a form of godliness;
boasters, proud, blasphemers, having a form of godliness, etc. the two first
make way for the last; when men are boasters, ascribing that to themselves
which they have not, and conceit that they are of higher parts and gifts then
they are, then they are proud, and show their pride, when they appear in their
own eyes and in the eyes of others bigger then they are; the opinion of others
more holy and more judicious then themselves they regard not, that at last they
come to be blasphemers: When men will believe no more then what they see reason
for, at last they come to blaspheme those truths that they first owned; hence
arise all those gross blasphemies that are among us: The Socinians deny the
Trinity; reason cannot comprehend this mystery, therefore they set their wits a
work to deflour Scripture: and the union of the divine and humane natures in
the person of the Son of God, because it is cross to reason, therefore they
blaspheme this truth: Christ says, Believe me, that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me; now they will not believe it, because they cannot comprehend
it; and then God leaves them to their own reason, and the pride of their own
hearts, to blaspheme those high and sacred truths which they should embrace.

7. Superbus ac saevus dominus, qui serviisse patrem suum parum meminit. Plin.
Pride is the root of cruelty toward others; and this may be seen commonly in
those that have risen from a mean to an high estate in the world, that they
have soon forgotten the rock from whence they were hewn, and have proved very
proud and supercilious, as Pliny says of Largius the Lacedemonian, that he was
a haughty and cruel Master, and one that forgot his father to have been a
servant. We have a Proverb, Set a beggar on horseback, and he will ride a
gallop; to set a man of low degree in high place, it is like strong drink to a
weak head, Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum.
it will make him giddy: well did Agur reckon this among the things which
disquiet the earth, which the earth could not bear; a servant when he reigns,
and an handmaid heir to her mistress, Prove. 30.22, 23. A proud and cruel
wretch was one Messala a Proconsul of Asia under Augustus the Emperor, Seneca
lib. 2 de iracap. 5.
of whom Seneca says, that having beheaded three hundred men in one day, he
strutted among their dead corpses, applauding himself, and crying out, O rem
regiam, O royal and Kingly deed! Seneca likewise reports of Cneius Piso, a
proud, Theodorus Tutor to Tiberius foretold the cruel disposition of his
scholar, calling him often Clay soaked in blood. Suetonius.
mad-brain'd and hasty General of the Roman army, that having made a law, that
if two men went from his camp together, and returned single, he that came
without his fellow should be slain, presupposing and presuming that he had
slain his fellow: it fell out that two of his soldiers went out in a dark
night, one upon some occasion being parted from the other they could not find
one another again; whereupon he commanded him that was returned without his
fellow to be slain, and gave order to his Centurion to see the execution, which
which they are going about, Seneca lib. de ira c. 16
the other comes and shows himself safe; whereupon the Centurion staid the
execution, and carried him to Piso to plead his innocence, and beg his pardon,
which he would by no means grant, but caused them all three to be executed;
Periere tres ob unius innocentiam; et tria crimina fecit, quia nullam invenit.
Sen. de ira.
the first because he was condemned, and he would not revoke or reverse his
sentence: the second, because he gave occasion that his fellow was condemned;
and the Centurion for not executing his Generals commands; which gave occasion
to Seneca to say upon that cruel act, Three perished for the innocence of one;
and three crimes he committed, because he found not any. Sueton, in vit. Calig.
Caligula boasted how many men he had condemned and seen executed, while the
Empress his wife fetched a nap in an afternoon: he commended in his own nature
nothing more, or almost so much, as (...) (to use his own word) unremoveable
rigor: he it was that wished the people of Rome had but one neck, that he might
cut them off at one blow. But the judgments of God have often surprised proud
and cruel Tyrants. Procopius tells us of one Theodorick sometime King of the
Goths, that in his pride having villanously slain two Noble Romans, Symmachus
and Boethius. Procopius lib. 1 de bello Gothico.
that bloody deed was still boiling in his heart, and the thoughts of it would
give him no rest, nor suffer him to be quiet; and one time, having a fishes
head set upon his table among other dishes, he presently conceiteth it to be
the head of one of them, the eyes his eyes, the teeth his teeth, Theodoret
tells us, that a certain Christian Captain was so bold with Valens the
Emperor, as to tell him, that he was unfortunate in his wars, because of his
pride and cruelty, and some notorious abuses offered to Gods Messengers and
Ministers. Theodoret. Eccles. hist. lib. 4.
and so falling into a fit of frenzy he died destracted of his wits. So
likewise Philo the Jew reports of one Flaccus, that having used all kind of
cruelty to the poor Jews, and being afterward banished by Caligula, in his
exile, he thought every man that he saw to intend some harm to him; therefore
if he saw any come toward him softly, he thought he had some plot against him;
if he came hastily, then he thought he came with a commission to dispatch him;
if any spoke him fair, he thought they flattered him, and meant to deceive him;
if any spoke roughly to him, he thought they scorned and contemned him: these
and such like be the conceits of guilty consciences, who still suppose even
bushes and trees to be men, and men to be devils sent to torment them. It is
reported of Constantine that good Emperor, that he was a man of an humble and
tender spirit; for being troubled with the leprosy, and desiring much to be
cured of it, if it were possible; Male semper aegrotare quam tali remedio
convalescere. King on Jonah.
and being told by his Physicians, that he could not but by having his body
bathed in the warm blood of infants, he returned this answer beseeming his
profession, I had rather always to be sick, then to recover my health by such
a remedy: I have read likewise of Augustus Caesar, who being on a time invited
to a supper by one Pollio a noble Orator of Rome, who had a servant that brake
a curious crystal cup, for which fact Pollio condemned him to be thrown into a
fish pond to feed his Lampreys, which Caesar understanding, dashed the decree,
Of all Nations, the Spaniards are reported to be the most cruel, out of their
pride calling themselves the sons of God, that the poor Indians may the more
reverence them. Hist. novi orbis.
and controuled him that made it; saying that the life of a man was more to be
regarded then all the cups of crystal, and fish ponds in the world. And such
was a certain Empress, who coming to her husband, and finding him condemning of
men, as he played at Chess, entreated him either to give over his game, or give
no sentence; for the men he passed sentence upon, were not like those that he
played with. So Eusebius says of Constantine, that being necessarily enforced
to fight with Infidels, yet he took the best order that he could, Eusebius. lib.
2. cap. 13. Cambyses the second King of Persia finding Sysannes for money to
have corrupted justice, he caused him to be flayed, and his skin to cover the
Tribunal, and set his son Ottanes in his place, and bad him, Patris exuvias
intueri, and just judicare; a notable example of justice on a cruel
oppressor. Chronic. Carrion. lib. 2. p. 214.
that there might be but little blood shed, and therefore he propounded rewards
to such as could take them alive. The Anabaptists in Germany were of another
spirit; for had they once forged a device in their fantastical brains, they
would execute it, though it cost many lawful Magistrates their lives for it;
and what might be their ground? Some revelation and suggestion from the spirit:
but what spirit? surely not the spirit of truth, but some lying spirit, such as
possessed and inspired Ahabs false Prophets. Great is the pride and insolency
of some Masters toward their servants; not considering that they also have a
Master in heaven, to whom they must be accomptable. Some gather from that
parable put forth by our Savior, Luke 17.7, 8. (Which of you having a servant
ploughing or feeding of cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come
from the field, Go and sit down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, Make
ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thy self and serve me, till I have eaten
and drunken; and afterward thou shall eat and drink? does he thank that
servant, because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not) Some I
say, gather from thence, that Masters may usurp and insult over their servants,
and think that therefore they may make them work hard all the day, and wait
upon them at night in needless and unnecessary attendance: But God in his law
provideth against oppressing of servants; he provideth rest for oxen and asses,
much more for men and women; Hos. 6.6. Aut manu capti in bello, aut are empti,
vel a morte redempti.
and tells us by his Prophet, that he will in some cases dispense with his own
service, and have mercy rather then sacrifice: and besides, these servants here
spoken of, were not such as we now have: but were either such as were taken in
war, or bought with money, or redeemed from death, and therefore owed more
service to their Masters then ours do: and yet even they must not be wronged;
for doubtless though it were a corrupt custom, yet it was very unlawful, to
make servants slaves, and to impose more upon them then they were able to
endure, cruelty being an abomination and crying sin before the Lord.

CHAP. 26. Of the Prognostics of Pride.
SECT. I.
MAny are the mischiefs and dangers that Pride threatens to the souls of men;
therefore I think it not amiss to set before you some of the sad issues of this
soul murdering Hydra.

1. It threatens the decay of gifts. The reason of man is blasted by pride; man
in the pride of his heart affected to be like unto God, Festus slandered Paul,
that much learning had made him mad: so it might have done, if Paul had been as
proud of his learning, as Festus was of his honor.
and he became below a man, even like the brute beasts that perish. Proud
persons are usually such as run mad; when Nebuchadnezzar was pufft up with
pride, Inquinat egregios adjuncta superbia mores.
he lost the use of his reason, and was driven out from men, and turned a
grazing with the oxen. Parts and gifts are blasted, when a man grows proud of
them; when man grows proud of his gifts, he forgets the giver, and returns
the glory of them to himself: Mr. Hieron in Psalm. 51.
No vessel so safe to preserve the gifts of God in, as a box of sobriety lined
with humility, says a judicious Divine of ours: God will take away his
Ornaments, if (like little children) we begin to look and point where we be
gay; Si tibi gratia, si sapientia, formaque detur: Sola superbia destruit
omnia, si comitetur.
and here you may see the matter whereon pride works; it is contrary to all
other vices; for whereas they are conversant about evil things, pride is still
upon the abuse of good things: for one man is proud of his wit, another of his
memory, another of his learning and knowledge, etc. all which are good things
in themselves, and might be well used; but by pride are so abused and spoiled,
as they serve to little or no purpose: nay, were a man endued with never so
many moral virtues, viz. if he were as wise as Solomon and Lycurgus, as
temperate as Socrates or Cato, as just as Aristides, as valiant as Alexander
the great, or Julius Caesar, if pride be joined with it, it spoileth all; yea
Bernard says, Petrac. de remed. utriusque fortunae.
that if pride had been joined with Mary's virginity it would have tainted it;
and Petrarch says, that though a man were virtutum omnium alis evectus, lifted
upon the wings of all virtues, yet sola superbia bona omnia corrumperet, pride
alone would spoil all the good gifts of God, and make them of little account.

2. Pride threatens the decay of grace; no grace can lodge and flourish in a
proud heart. God gives grace to the humble, but takes it away from the proud.
Ut superbia est orige omnium criminum, ita and ruina cunctarum virtutum. Hect.
Pintus in Ezekiel. 15.

Superbus instar inanis rami se erigit in sublime, non animae utilitatem
quaerens, sed vanitatem. Hector. Pintus in Ezekiel. cap. 2.


One observes that pride is the greatest thief in the world; for whereas
covetousness takes away pity to the poor; luxury, chastity; and anger,
patience, etc. Pride takes away humility which is the root and foundation of
all graces: great spoils does the devil carry away from the field of pride,
that he cares not what a man have, so he can make him proud. A proud man with
all grace (if that were possible) is worse then an humble man with all sin, if
it were possible, says Chrysostom: according to the measure of humility is
the measure of other grace in the heart: humility empties the soul for God to
fill it; it empties it of temporal things, and then it must needs be filled
with spiritual blessings: the Church is Lilium convallium, a lilly of the
valleys. The showers of heaven run from the lofty mountains into the low
valleys, Humilitas intelligentiae lumen aperit, superbia operit. Gregor.
soaking them and making them very fruitful: the mountains are dry, hard,
barren, cold, full of dangerous precipices: so the proud are full of the
dryness of indevotion, their hearts are hardened, they are barren and
unfruitful in good works, they are subject to the precipices of sin and
destruction; they have no soakings from the Spirit of God, and therefore are in
a withering and decaying condition: a proud heart is a cold and dead heart: the
mountains of Gilboa are accursed; but blessed are the poor in spirit, Matthew.
Humilitas cordis humani receptaculum gratiae Divinae. Bernard.
5.3. The humble man is a valley sweetly planted and watered, says Dr. Hall;
he is watered with constant dews from heaven, his heart is made tender by the
Word as Josiahs was, he is fruitful in every grace and good work. A proud heart
pufft up with self-conceitedness of grace and goodness enough (though it have
none) can receive none; proud men are like the Cedars, that are high, fair, and
flourishing, but never bearing fruit. God gives good graces, and the devil
lays in wait to destroy them. Aug. ad Monach.
Humility opens the eye of the understanding, pride puts a vail upon it. The
humility of man's heart is the receptacle of Gods grace, says devout Bernard:
and Macarius says, it will make a man even spiritually covetous of the graces
of gods Spirit; wherein the richer we are, the poorer we shall seem to our
selves; and the more we have already, the more we shall still desire, which is
a commendable covetousness, Matthew. 5.6.
as our Savior assures us. Pride is a sin that does expose the soul to a
dreadful curse from God; Ps. 119.21
Thou have rebuked the proud which are cursed (says David) which do err from
thy Law; pride makes men err from Gods commandments, and this pulls down a
curse upon them, The world calls the proud happy, Malach. 3.17. but God says
they are cursed.
so that they become like the barren fig tree cursed by our Savior, and then
no fruit is to be found upon them any more. It is reported of one Dydimus, that
he should make this answer to one Alexander a Jewish Priest, desiring some
grace, for a fashion at least, Non habes vas quo recipias, God is ready to
bestow it upon thee, but thou have not where to receive and keep it.

3. Pride bereaves a man of all true peace and comfort; no true peace can lodge
in a proud heart; for every proud man is at defiance with God; and how can that
man have peace in himself that is at war with God? learn of me says Christ, to
be meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest to your souls; therefore
peace and rest cannot be to the proud in heart: A proud man like the clouds is
tossed with every blast and tempest; he has no rest in his windy spirit, his
heart is still in fear, he is like a wave of the sea, tossed to and fro: Pride
cuts off the comforts of the soul; he that walks most humbly, walks most
comfortably; as God dwells with humble souls, so when they lie low before him,
Isa. 57.15.
and are even dead to sense, God will revive the spirit of the humble; pride
and vainglory are spiritual spiders; if they enter into our hearts, and we do
not hunt them out again, as the Bees do the corporal spiders out of their
hives, we shall soon see the storehouse of our conscience to be much troubled
and perplexed. I have read of Bernard having preached an eloquent sermon at a
great festival, Sicut de font terreno and de corporali fluvio non potest
aliquis bibere, nisi voluerit se inclinare: ita and de vivo font Christo and
sancti spiritus fluvio, nemo aquam vivam haurire poterit, nisi se humiliter
inclinare voluerit, propter illud quod scriptum est, Deus superbis resistit.
Caesarius hom. 30.
before a great concourse of people, the people extol him, but he walks very
dejectedly: the next day he preaches a very powerful Sermon, plain and full of
profitable matter, his sincere hearers went away satisfied; but those that
before applauded him were dumb and silent: but himself was much cheered in
spirit; and being asked, why he was so sad when he was so much admired, and so
pleasant when not applauded; he returned this answer: Heri Bernardum, hodie
Christum praedicavi: yesterday I preached Bernard, and to day I preached Jesus
Christ: those Ministers and people shall have most comfort, that are most
sincere and most humble.

4. Pride bereaves a man of God himself which is the chiefest good; Dolium nisi
undique sit pice illitum, and nullas habeat ruinas, vinum non potest continere;
sic cor nisi humilitate muniatur, and nullas habeat vitiorum ruinas, Dei non
potest esse domicilium. Sanct. Isaias Abbas. orat. 12. de vino. Invidia aufert
mihi proximum, ira meipsum, superbia Deum. Hugo de S. Victore.
God is said to dwell with the humble: Though the Lord be high, yet he has
respect to the lowly, Psalm. 138.6. Thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, Isa. 57.15. God has but
two dwelling places, one in the highest heavens, the other in the lowest and
humblest hearts; an humble and contrite soul, has a heart and spirit beaten to
powder, as the word properly notes, and with such a one will the Lord dwell:
As a vessel unless it be every where smeered with pitch, and have no decaies,
it cannot contain the wine put into it: so if the heart be not fenced with
humility, and have no ruining vices, it cannot be the habitation of God: Hence
Hugo says very aptly, that envy takes away my neighbor, anger my self, and
Pride takes away God from me.

SECT. 2.
5. PRide spoileth all the good that a man does: Pride (like wicked Pharaoh who
commanded the Egyptian Midwives to kill the male-children of the Hebrews,
Superbia and vana gloria insidiosissime and blandissimae bestiae, and tanquam
serpents optimis actionibus obrepere solent. Chrysostom.
the first day of their birth) destroys every good duty done by us, if humility
be wanting to the doing of them. Pride and vainglory be like flattering
beasts, and the very bane of our best actions, if they be mingled with them,
creeping into them like serpents, as Chrysostom speaks: yea Austin says, that
other vices are conversant about sins and unlawful things that should not be
done, but these will be busied about virtues and good works which ought to be
done. And Chemnitius tells us, that whereas other vices vexant servos Diaboli,
do vex the servants of the Devil, that pride and vainglory vexant servos Dei,
do vex the servants of God, as well as others. To feed the hungry, Caetera
vitia versantur circa peccata and illicita quae fieri non debent; haec circa
virtutes and bona opera versantur quae fieri debent. August.
to give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to visit the stranger,
defend the fatherless and widow, be good works; but if we be proud of them, and
boast of them, they are marred in doing, and we lose the glory of them, because
we glory of them. Bonaventure says that proud persons, doing good deeds, and
bragging of them, be like a foolish hen, laying an egg, and then chackling,
whereby she loses it, and has it taken from her. So proud persons by boasting
of their good works lose the reward of them, as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.2.
The Pharisee said, he was no extortioner, no unjust person, no dishonest
dealer, no adulterer, he fasted twice in the week, he paid his tithes duly and
truly: these were good things, Sicut humilitas omnia vitia enervat, virtutes
colligit and roborat; sic superbia omnes destruit and annihilat. Gregor.
but he should have staid till some body else had spoken of them, therefore he
went not away justified: Hence Gregory draws this conclusion, As humility
weakeneth all vices, and gathers together and strengthens virtues; So pride
destroys and annihilateth all virtues and virtuous actions. Pride is most to be
feared in deeds well done, says Austin. Superbia maxim timenda in recte
factis.

1. Consider that as the Sorcerers of Egypt did many miracles that Moses did;
so reprobates and the children of the devil may in pride, vainglory, and
hypocrisy counterfeit many outward good works for the matter that the children
of God do through grace.

2. What good soever we do, its Gods gift that we do it, and through his grace
that we are enabled to perform it.

3. When we have done all we can, we come far short of perfection, and what the
law requires of us, and what in duty we are bound to do, Luke 17.10. therefore
little reason have we to be proud of any good that we do: Upon this ground it
is that our Savior requires, that all our good actions be done in secret:
therefore says he, when thou do alms, Mat. 6.3.
let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. Luther says, the meaning
is, Luther in loc. Per dextram bonam voluntatem, and per sinistram appetitum
humanae laudis. August.
take not so much from some unjustly and wrongfully, that so thou may seem
bountiful in relieving others liberally; make not many poor, and think to make
God Almighty amends by keeping of a few: but that is not likely to be the
meaning of the place; Austin understands by the right hand, the right purpose
of the heart and mind, and by the left hand an inordinate desire of the praise
of men. But I think they are most agreeable to our Saviors meaning, who make
the words an Hyperbole, telling us, that we must not make Father, Mother, wife,
child, or any friend as near and dear to us as our left hand to our right,
acquainted with any thing that we do, thereby fishing for, or hunting after any
praise from them, or desiring to be extolled by them: nay so far must we be
from blowing and blazing our fame abroad, and being our selves, or desiring
others to be trumpetters of our praise; as (if it were possible) we should
conceal whatever might be like to puff us up, and make us proud even from our
selves, forgetting (as the Proverb says) good turns done of us, and
remembering only good turns done to us.

Now our Savior having directed to a right course in almes-giving, does also
the like in praying; when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites
are, that pray in the corners of the streets, and standing in the Synagogues,
that they may be seen of men: But when thou prayest, enter into thy closet,
etc. Matthew. 6.4, 5.

Object. But is it then not lawful to pray in public may some say?

Answ. God forbid we should so say or think: we have both the commandment of
God, Levit. 23.8. Joel 1.14. Joel 2.15, 16. Matthew. 18.20. 1 Timothy 2.8. Psalm.
103.22. and the practice of the godly to the contrary, Psalm. 26.8. 2 Chronicles.
28.5. and for public prayer there must be a public place by Gods own
ordinance; and it is more powerful then private prayer, as the supplication of
a County, Incorporation, and Commonwealth, then of a few, like many brands and
coals together that give the greater heat: Non cupientes sancti esse, sed
videri. Gregor.
the thing found fault with then, was not the matter or action of praying in
public, but the manner or end, affection or affectation rather to be seen of
men and praised by men, not desiring to be holy, but to seem so, and to be
called so, as Gregory says. Therefore says our Savior, When thou prayest,
enter into thy closet, and shut thy door upon thee, etc. i. e. approve thy self
to God, and so carry the matter, as it may (if thou can) be hid from the
world: for as a man may pray in secret in an open place, as the Publican, Luke
18. So a man may pray for ostentation in a secret place, even under many locks,
and with many doors shut upon him, if he withdraw himself, to the end he may be
seen and observed. Therefore Austin writing to certain Eremites, whom he
styles brethren in the wilderness, August, Ad fratres in eremo. Claude ostium,
hoc est, noli sermon clamare nec diffundere orationem tuam, nec jactare per
populos sed in secreto tuo ora securus, ut te in secreto possit audire, quoniam
videt and audit universa. August. Ambros. Hieron. Chemnit.
bids them come out of those solitary places, and come into towns and Cities,
yea even to the Court, rather then be proud of being in a wilderness.

Object. But may not a man glory in the good works done by him? does not the
Apostle say, Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing
in himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6.4.

Answ. The Apostle lays down a remedy against self-love, and overweening
conceit of our selves, and it stands in proving and examining a man's own work
by it self, without comparing it with another man's: Whereof he renders this
reason, Then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.
There is a double ground of glorying; one out of a man's self, the other in a
man's self.

1. Out of himself, in God alone, Jerem. 9.23. He that gloryeth, let him glory
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.31.

2. In himself, viz. in the comfortable testimony of a good conscience, 2 Cor.
1.12. The one is glorying before God, the other before men; the one of
justification, the other of holy conversation for the time past, and constant
resolution for the time to come; the one in the testimony of our own
conscience, the other in the testimony of Gods Spirit, witnessing with our
spirits, that we are the sons of God, Romans 8.16. the first not here meant, 1
Cor. 1.29.

Object. This glorying in a man's self is vainglory, and a branch of pride.

Answ. It differs from vainglory in two things.

In the Foundation. In the End.
1. Vainglory has for its ground and foundation, our own virtues, gifts,
works, considered as they come from our selves, not from God: whereas this true
glorying, is grounded upon them as they are fruits of regeneration, and
proceeding from justification by Christ, and reconciliation with God.

2. They differ in the end: vainglory tending to the advancing of our selves,
in an opinion of our own proper desert; this true glorying aims at Gods glory
alone, acknowledging that all the good that we have, and all the good that we
do, to come from God alone, rejoicing in our good works, not as causes, but as
fruits of our justification: so that if the question be, whether we be
justified by them or not; we must then disclaim them, and tread them under our
feet, and account them as dung, as Paul did, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10.

SECT. 3.
6. PRide will make a man unfit for society with others: Pride is a great enemy
to union; therefore it is that there are so many sad separations of men one
from another in these divided times. It is very hard for men of proud spirits
long to accord and unite together. Melanct. Comment. in Prove. 13.10.
Melancton compares proud men to mountains, and says, concerning such men
there was wont to be this Proverb, Duo montes non miscentur. Two mountains will
not mix together: Humble persons are very sociable, they can converse together
with an unequal respect of age, parts, sex, or degree: Humble men, like the
Bees, love a sociable life; who as Ambrose observes, are included and enclosed
in one hive, and shut up with one door. Proud persons cannot cope together; a
proud man envieth his superiors, because they be above him; he scorneth his
inferiors, because they be beneath him, and labors to keep them down, lest
they over-take him; and he studieth to supplant and undermine his equals, lest
they outstrip and excel him: therefore that our Savior might correct this
humor among his own Disciples, he took a little child, and set him in the
midst of them, Matthew. 18.2, 3.
saying, Unless ye become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of God. Children are humble and meek-spirited, they envy not, they
disdain not, they exalt not themselves one above another; the children of a
Prince will be familiar and play with the child of a peasant; they equal
themselves one to another, till they be told their places, and made proud by
being observed. So must not Christians strive for precedence and superiority
above their brethren. Thus David says, that his heart was not haughty, etc.
nor walked in matters too high for him: but says he, I have behaved and
quieted my self as a child, Psalm. 131.1, 2. Servus servorum dei.
as a child that is weaned of his mother; my soul is even as a weaned child.
The Pope indeed is styled by a most lowly title, The servant of the servants of
God, though he be nothing less; but had we hearts truly humble, we should learn
the Apostles lesson, and serve one another in love. The Romans therefore
painted humility in the form of a serving-man, wearing black garments, his head
hanging down, and a staff in his hand, to represent the several good
conditions of humility, and of the humble man.

1. He thinks meanly of himself, albeit most noble and excellent.

2. He ever thinks himself bound to run the way of Gods Commandments; this is
expressed by the staff in his hand.

3. The black-garments express him to be one of Sions mourners, like the poor
Publican lamenting his sins, standing afar off, as not worthy to lift up his
eyes to heaven.

4. To signify that himself was created to serve God and others; and this the
picture expressed, by being in the form of a servingman.

7. Pride threatens ruin and destruction to to a man's children, house and
family. The Hebrews call the generation of children the building up the house:
and Pride throws down this building.
The Lord will destroy the house of the proud, says Solomon, Prove. 15.25.
though (like Lucifer) he set his nest among the stars, yet pride will unnest
him, and throw him down. Thus God brought ruin upon the house of Valois; those
proud persecutors of the French Protestants. So likewise Maximinus the Roman
Emperor, having made a decree against the Christians, and being in the act of
persecuting them, he perished in an insurrection and mutiny of his soldiers,
who hated him for his pride and cruelty, and killed not only himself, but his
son also, crying out, That there should not a whelp escape of so bad a breed.
Proud Parents are the greatest enemies to their children, that possibly can be,
making them liable to Gods wrath and curse. When good Hezekiah grew proud of
his treasures, Quae servare poterat occultata, praedae reddidit obnoxia
ostentata, M S. Isa. 39.6, 7.
and showed them to the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon: the Prophet tells
him from the Lord; that the days should come, that all that was in his house,
and all that his Fathers had laid up in store to that day, should be carried to
Babylon; and that his sons which he should beget, should be taken away by them;
and be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of Babylon; his house and posterity
should be ruined for his pride.

8. It will make a man nothing? though a proud man think himself something, yet
he is nothing, Gal. 6.3.

Object. Are men nothing, were they not created in the Image of God, in
holiness and righteousness?

Answ. Paul speaks not of men, as they were in the state of innocence, Perch
se alcuno si stima esser qualche cosa, essendo egli niente inganna se stesso
con la sua fantasia. Ital.
but as they are in the state of corruption and apostasy; and therefore now man
is not what he may imagine himself to be; and if he think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. The Italian translator
renders it thus: If any man deem himself to be something, he being nothing,
deceives himself with his own fancy. The pride of thy heart has deceived
thee, says the Lord to Edom. Obad. ver. 3. The proud man thinks he has
substances when he has but shadows; as they that think themselves Princes,
when they be but Peasants, Isa. 29.8.
and base persons; or like such as dream they be at feasts, and waking are
hungry: men are usually deceived two ways.

By others. Or by themselves.
1. By others: as by flatterers, so they are deceived occasionally.

2. By themselves; and so they are deceived truly and properly. For he that
deceives himself may well please himself, but it is in his error; for indeed he
deceives himself in his imagination, as James tells us, Jam. 1.22, 26. Every
proud man at the last shall have no more to speak in his own defense, but that
which an Apocryphal writer speaks of the damned, Wisd. 5. Plutarch in vit. Alex.
What has pride profited us? Thus Plutarch reports of Alexander, that being in
India, he caused his soldiers to make and leave behind them, bits and
snaffles, and horse-shooes of a huge bigness, and huge spears, massy shields,
big helmets, long swords, and other furniture for horse and man answerable,
that he might be thought some Giant; whereby thinking to deceive others, he
chiefly deceived himself; and surely, this spiritual guile is the worst of all
the rest, whereby while men deceive others in the profession, they deceive
themselves of their salvation.

CHAP. 27. Of the Cure of Pride: the first direction.
I Am now come to the cure of this dangerous and desparate malady, and here
should I consult with the wisest and most experienced about the cure thereof; I
doubt it would be to little purpose, because scarce a man can be found, that
has an experimental knowledge of the cure of it in himself: therefore I shall
gather some receipts out of the Scriptures, which may prove most likely for the
curing of this disease.

Direct. 1. Set before you the condition of your bodies and souls, and therein
you will find matter sufficient to abate your pride.

1. Concerning our bodies; the consideration of the matter whereof they were
made, Homo ab bumo.
should make us low and humble in our own eyes. Its reported of Agathocles,
that being advanced to the Kingdom of Cicily, Cur non humillimus cu^ sis humi
limus? though we have diversam vestem, yet we have eandem cutem.
and yet but a Potters son, he would not be served at his meals in plate, but
in earthen vessels; whereby he might be put in mind of two things: first, of
his beginning and pedigree from whence he came, but from the potters shop, of
mean parentage; and secondly of his end, that he should one day fail, and could
not last long, but himself and high estate was subject to casualty; yea perhaps
he might come to ruin suddenly, as an earthen vessel is sometime broken ere
any body be aware: Thus we see, he being an Heathen, used these considerations
to humble him: It is a foul shame for Christians to come herein behind him: now
to humble us we need but meditate on the matter whereof we were made, viz. not
gold or silver, the purest of metals, Non dicit Deus Adamo, e pulvere es, sed
pulvis es. Musculus.
nor yet of fire, air, or water, the more pure elements; but for the most
part, of earth, the grossest and basest of them all, the very bed and bread of
the Serpent; why then should base earth be proud? Abraham made better use of
this consideration, even checking himself, Genesis 18.27. Job 13.12.
and craving pardon for his boldness to speak unto God, being but dust and
ashes: and holy Job counsels his friends not to think too well of
themselves, and too ill of him; for says he, Mr. Weems says, that the body of
man is made not of the heart of the earth, which is rich in metals; nor of the
soil of the earth, which is rich in fruits, nor of the sand of the earth which
is good for ballast: but of the dust, the most unprofitable thing.
Your remembrances are like to ashes, and your bodies to bodies of clay; In a
word! as we were not made of gold or silver the purest of metals, no more were
we made of brass, iron, or steel, the toughest of metals, and the most
lasting; but of the earth, yea the dust of the earth, which is presently blown
away with every blast of wind: and as soon are the youngest and strongest of us
swept away from the places of our habitations, so that they shall know us no
more, if the breath of God once blow upon us; for we dwell but in houses of
clay, and our foundation is in the dust, Job 4.19. Why then should we pamper
our selves with all the dainties and delicates of flesh, fowl, and fish, that
the earth, air, and sea may afford us; when we our selves must ere long (and
we know not how soon) become a service and second course for the worms? or why
should we with Diotrephes, and such ambitious aspiring spirits labor to be
above others while we live, Willegesi, Willegesi, recole unde veneris.
Becolcerus in anno. 1011.
that must be laid level with the earth, nay lower then the upper part of the
earth when we are dead. I have read of Willegesius, who being the son of a
Carpenter, and afterward Bishop of Mentz, had this written in his bed chamber
with great letters, Willegesius, Willegesius, remember whence thou came. The
greatest will have no cause to be proud, if he remember whence he came, even
from the dust.

2. Consider that every man in the world is born a poor, naked, helpless
creature, and born to labor and trouble. Naked came I out of my mothers womb,
Job 1.21.
says Job; and this one thought well taken in, and fully digested, will lay
pride in the dust; And here I might show you how nature, which shows her self a
mother to other creatures, is but as it were a stepmother unto man, denying
him many of those natural helps wherewith they are endowed, sending him forth
weak and weaponless, wanting that natural instinct to feed himself,
Dentetimetur aper, defendunt cornua taurum.
when he is brought forth, and those natural instruments to defend himself,
when he is brought up: the very first voice and noise that man utters, is
weeping and crying, being as it were a Prophet and Prognosticator of his
succeeding misery; he comes forth weeping into a valley of tears, seeming to be
grieved, that he is a man, and not some other creature, ashamed because naked;
to weep because he is born to labor not to honor, Qui natus non est in
dolor, putet se natum non esse ad laborem; labor est in Action, Dolor est in
passione; and quid non eis grave, quibus vivere labor est? Bern.
for this is the common condition of all Adams posterity: In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread till thou return to the ground, Genesis 3.19. As it was
laid upon Eve and all her daughters to conceive in sorrow, so was it laid upon
Adam and all his sons to live by labor: Therefore Bernard says well to this
purpose: He that is not born in sorrow, let him think that he is not born to
labor; there is labor in action, grief in passion or suffering, and what is
not grievous to those to whom life it self is a labor? why then should we
paint our backs with gorgeous apparel, seeing we were but made of a piece of
earth, from whence we came naked, and whither we must go again naked as Job
says? and why should any man be proud of his possessions, and inheritances,
when as he is born to nothing but the bread of affliction and the waters of
adversity?

3. The consideration of the manifold pains, weaknesses, sicknesses, and
infirmities of the body, should much abate our pride. God takes away health and
strength many times from his dearest children, as from Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.1.
from David, Psalm. 41.8. and from Lazarus whom Jesus loved, Joh. 11.3. God many
times brings diseases upon our bodies to cure the disease of pride. Gregor.
praefat. in Moral.
Gregory tells us, that while he was expounding the tragical history of Job,
that he was afflicted with continual fevers; yet this good he thereby
gathered, that it so fell out, that by Gods Providence, himself being sick and
wounded, should expound wounded Job; these strokes upon his body made him the
better to understand, and with words the better to express the mind of wounded
Job.

God opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction: he is chastened also
with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain; and
the end that God aims at is, that he may withdraw man from his purpose, Job
33.16, 17, 19, 20.
and hide pride from man: bodily weaknesses many times bring down the pride and
stoutness of our hearts.

4. The frequent and serious consideration of death, to which the body is also
subject, is of great force to pull down pride, and keep the spirit very humble.
Death is the humble man's university; no man would be proud of bodily strength
or beauty, did he frequently think of death; this would make the stoutest to
strike sail, and cast down their proud crests in the midst of their greatest
jollity. O thou who art dust and ashes, why do thou wax proud? remember
whence thou art and be ashamed, where thou art and lament, whither thou art
going, Quid superbis pulvis and cinis? memento unde es and erubesce; ubi es,
and ingemisce; quo iturus es, and perhorresce. Bern.

One cried to Johannes Eleemosynarius being made Patriarch, Perfice sepulchrum,
perfice sepulchrum.


and tremble for fear, says Bernard. Let us constantly remember our end, and
we shall not do amiss. Let the meditation of the death of the body be to us, as
Philips Page, as Joseph's Sepulcher in his garden, a place of pleasure. Facile
contemnit omnia, qui assidue cogitat se moriturum; that man easily despises
all things, who daily thinks that he shall die. This use Paul makes of it:
seeing we brought nothing into this world, and can carry nothing out; having
food and raiment, let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8. Let us not
proudly aspire after great things here, because shortly we must die and leave
all behind us. Agnoscat homo se esse mortalem, and franget elationem. Aug.

2. Let us consider the state and condition of our souls, and hence we may
fetch matter enough to keep down our pride. Man was made an excellent creature,
made in the image of God, in knowledge, righteousness and holiness; but this
image of God in man is by his fall much weakened, and he that was by creation
the noblest creature on earth, is now become a vagabond on earth, a child of
wrath, an enemy to God: if we will view our selves in the glass of Gods law,
Romans 7.
we shall see our own vileness and deformity, and that in us, that is, in our
flesh there dwells no good thing; that there is nothing but vanity in our
minds, rebellion in our wills, ataxy in our affections, transgression in our
lives, that all our best righteousness is as filthy rags, that our souls are
the very proper subjects of misery, our hearts the very center of fears and
sorrows, and our minds the hives and receptacles of swarms of thorny and
distracting cares, which make man a slave to his passions, disturb his peace,
and make the best of his earthly comforts to be but splendid vanities and
golden delusions; the consideration hereof, and the miserable estate we are
liable to, will drive us out of love and liking with our selves; yea make us
with Job, Job 42.6.
to abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes; It is reported of Gregory
Nazianzen, Dr. Abbot on Jonah.
that when any thing fell out prosperously to him, whereby he feared that pride
might seize upon him or get footing in him, Quando pavo pedes subito inspicit,
statim remittit animum and circulum pennarum. Etsi enim habet homo, propter
quod exultet; si tamen inspererit suam originem and vitae suae conditiones,
statim remittet, etc. Franzius.
that he would presently set himself to read over the Lamentations of Jeremiah;
and whenever the like befalls any of us, or whenever we feel our selves
tickled with the itching humor of self-love, or self-liking, in regard of our
outward gifts or inward graces, let us enter into a serious meditation of our
foulest sins, and reigning deformities, that so we may nip this sin of pride in
the bud, and kill the serpent in the shell: when the Peacock spreads his
circled train, turning to the one side, and to the other, he struts it bravely,
but at last (as it were reflecting on his hoarse and hideous voice, and casting
his eyes on his black feet) he goes sneaking away and lets fall his fair fan of
feathers: so when we are apt to be pufft up with pride by reason of any thing
we have, and enjoy, or of any thing we have done or suffered; let us consider
the infinite temptations and weaknesses, Quomodo superbiat qui secum semper
sentinam portat? Hieron
and sinful imperfections, that continually attend upon, and accompany even our
best actions, and we shall find matter enough to empty us of our high and windy
conceits. Bees flying in the air do ballast their wings with little stones,
lest the wind blow them away; so when we are apt to be blown away with the wind
of pride, let our minds be ballasted with the thoughts of our sins.

CHAP. 28. The second Direction.
Direct. 2. LOok up to God, and thou will see enough in him to pull down thy
pride.

Gods greatness. Gods holiness. Gods goodness.
1. Consider the greatness of God, and the superiority of God above man, and
the power that he has over man: Ps. 95.3, 6.
the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods, therefore let us
worship and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker, says the Psalmist:
If man could do according to his will, and God would do according to his power,
Genesis 6.6, 7
who could stand? I will destroy man from the face of the earth, says the
Lord: The Original word is, as Pareus has it, Pareus in loc.
I will steep him as a man steeps a piece of earth in water, till it turn to
dirt, for man is but clay, and forgets his Maker, and his matter; none but God
can reduce man to his first principles, and original matter whereof he was
made; there is no dust so high, but this great God is able to give it a
steeping; God is always provided of a rod for his children, and of an ax and
sword for his enemies; though he does not always smite, yet he is ever ready;
Psalm. 7.13.
he has prepared instruments of death; his bow is bent and his arrows are upon
the string; therefore when thou walk in the ruff of thy pride, God can
stretch out his Almighty arm, and let fly a deadly arrow that may wound thy
soul for ever. Therefore when thou beginnest at any time to be pufft up, think
who thou art, and who God is; when thou think thou art something, look upon
the greatness of the most high God, and then thou will see thou art just
nothing.

2. Consider the holiness of God, and then look upon thine own sinfulness and
vileness, and thou will see little cause to be proud. Bishop Hooper said at the
stake, Lord, thou art heaven, I am hell; Thou art Justice, I am sin, was Luther
also wont to say. Gods holiness will show us our sinful spots and defilements.
When the Prophet saw a glorious vision of the Lord, Isa. 6.3, 5.
and heard the Seraphims proclaim the thrice holy name of God, he cries out
immediately, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips. How
shall I that am altogether unclean stand before this holy Lord God? The pride
of man must needs fall down before the holiness of God.

3. Consider the goodness of God; and that will abate our pride. When David
sent Messengers to Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.41.
to assure her he would be her husband, this makes Abigail low in our own
eyes: Let me, says she, be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my
Lord; shall David honor me to make me his wife, who am scarce worthy to be one
of his servants? So the consideration of Gods great goodness to man, is a
special means to humble him before the Lord. What am I, O Lord, that thou
should set thy heart upon me, Create me after thine Image, Redeem me by the
blood of thy Son, provide Heaven and Glory for me? the consideration of such
favors will make him have low thoughts of himself, and not quarrel with God,
when God bestows great mercies upon others. This was Jonahs fault: God had
delivered him and his companions in the ship, from the fury of two merciless
elements, viz. the air and waters, both which seemed to have conspired their
destruction, but are restrained by the overruling power of God; the Lord
apprehends Jonah, arrests him, and safely delivers him into his prison; yet
he is so far from being crushed or torn in pieces by the devouring jaws of that
cruel monster, as he is not once touched by his teeth; and he is safely kept
there forthcoming amidst many dangers in that dark dungeon, viz. First from
being choked by the noisome vapors of the fishes entrals: Secondly, from being
digested, concocted, and turned to his nourishment by the continual boiling
heat of his stomach; and lastly, he is not cast out into the sea to shift for
himself, and sink or swim as we say, but he is safely landed and set on shore;
and not only is he delivered, but a whole City consisting of millions of people
(by his Sermon brought to repentance,) delivered from some strange vengeance
which otherwise had seized upon them: Jon. 4.1.
but Jonah was very much displeased at it, and falls to expostulating the
business with God himself: and though God deals with him Socratice, and spurs
him a question, saying, Do thou well to be angry? to which question he is not
able to make any reasonable answer: yet Jonahs heart swells against God for
sparing Niniveh. Pride, self-love, and ambition, and standing too much upon his
reputation made him thus to do; and rather then he would be discredited and
thought a false Prophet, he would have Niniveh destroyed, Eccl. 41.17.
and all the people thereof perish: the son of Syrach tells us its a foul shame
to tell a lie before a Prince and men of authority, as he thought he had done;
but he should have done well to have staid among them, and rejoiced with them,
that God had been pleased to bestow such a blessing upon his preaching, and his
gracious pardon upon the place.

CHAP. 29. The third Direction.
Direct. 3. LEt one Christian labor to exercise love toward another. Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self: Austin says, Voluit deus unicum heminem
in principio formare, a quo omnes procederent ut tanquam fratres omnes inter se
invicem amarent. Aug. Si fratres sumus in quantum homines, quanto magis in
quantum Christiani? August. Sanctior est copula cordium quam corporum. Lumb.
senten. lib. 3. distinct. 29.
God would form one man in the beginning, from whom all men should proceed,
that all might mutually love one another as brethren: the son of Syrach urges
this very argument, saying, every beast loves his like, and every Christian
should love another: we see it verified in Wolves, Lions, Tigers, etc. and
shall they agree, and men disagree? we may observe it, that the very dogs that
live together in an house will not ordinarily fight one with another, but one
for another; and shall men agree worse then dogs in a family? its nothing but
pride that makes men swell thus one against another; and we have not only the
bond of nature, but of grace to bind us to this duty.

This is the command of the Lord Jesus, and the badge and livery whereby we may
be known to the world to be the Disciples of him who is the most admirable
pattern of humility and lowliness.

Diverse reasons why we should love one another as our selves, may be taken from
the similitude of the members of the natural body, where the Apostle tells us,
that as the body being but one, 1 Cor. 12.12.
has many members, so we being many, are all members of the same mystical body
of Christ.

1. The more noble and honorable members despise not the less honorable, and
those that are appointed to more base offices: as for instance, the head,
though it self be covered, and carried aloft, does not contemn the feet, though
they travel and trudge to carry the whole body about: no more ought the rich in
gifts, parts or estate, despise the poor; Mal. 2.10.
for they be their fellow members, made of the same matter, by the same Maker.
The rich Angels in heaven despise not the poor Saints on earth, but are ready
to perform the duties of love unto them, as appears by their carrying the
soul of the poor beggar into Abraham's bosom; Luke 16.22
and so ought it to be on earth, as James speaks; Jac. 2.1, 2.
not having the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons.

2. As the more noble contemn not the less noble, no more do the less noble
envy the more noble; and so it should be among us; for as the hands and the
feet grudge not that themselves are used and employed as instruments to feed
and defend the head and heart, no more must subjects and servants, and men of
meaner condition envy their superiors, and Masters the places that God has
allotted them, but content themselves with their own, and be faithful and
painful in them, as King David willed Ziba and his sons and servants to do for
his Masters son Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9.10.

3. If one member fail in performance of some duty, whereby another catches
hurt, the other does not in a rage run upon it and hurt it again; as for
example; if the foot chance to slip, and so the head catch a knock, it does not
presently persuade the hand to heat the foot; or if the teeth bite the tongue,
this were to seek the ruin and destruction of the whole body: no more ought we
in our mad mood furiously to rush one upon another, when we have been unawares
hurt one by another.

4. When one member is hurt, the whole body feels it, and fares the worse for
it; as for example; a thorn in the foot grieveth the head, yea the very heart;
so ought we to have a sympathy and fellow-feeling of the hurt of one another,
as Christ our head has of us all, as is evident by that speech he uses to
Paul before his conversion, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act.
9.4. signifying to us that the hurt that was done to his members on earth, even
reached him their head in heaven.

5. What good parts soever any of the members be endued with, they hoard not
up, nor reserve to themselves as Monopolies, but impart and employ them for the
good and benefit of the whole body, and the meanest member thereof; if a toe or
a finger be but fore, the eye looks, the head devises how to help it, and if
they be not able to do it themselves by their own skill, then they seek out to
others, and the tongue will play the Orator, and entreat, yea rather then fail,
and not have it, the hand will play the Almoner and reward; thus should we be
willing to afford our mutual help one to another, and so we would if we were
once persuaded of the necessity of this duty, that we ought to love our
neighbor as our self; but pride and self-love do so blind the eyes of men,
that they will not learn this lesson; 1 Gor. 13.4.
Charity suffers long and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not
it self, is not puffed up, says the Apostle.

CHAP. 30. The fourth, fifth and sixth Directions.
Direct. 4. SUbmit thy self to the Word, let it have its efficacy and operation
upon thy soul: pride cannot stand before the Word, when it comes in power upon
the heart; the Word is a hammer that breaks a heart of rock in pieces. Christ
compares the Gospel or Kingdom of God to leaven, Luke 13.21
which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal till the whole was
leavened. The Word like leaven alters the persons upon whom it works, and
makes them become like unto it: this woman here may fignifie the wisdom of Gods
Spirit working in, and with faithful and painful dispensers of the mysteries of
the Kingdom, or their care and conscience, pains and diligence; the three
measures or pecks of meal it seems was an ordinary leavening in an ordinary
family: Genesis 18.^.
Sarah leavened so much to entertain the Angels: some think by the three
measures of meal, are meant the three powers and faculties of man's soul, all
which the Word of God moderateth and tempereth, Pliny says, that for five
hundred and eighty years together, the custom at Rome was for women altogether
to be employed about this business, and that they had no men bakers.
viz. concupiscibilem, irascibilem, and rationalem, the concupiscible, the
irascible, and the rational: the concupiscible, that it may not lust after
things unlawful and vain, as David prays, Lord incline my heart to thy
testimonies, not to covetousness; the irascible, that it may not boil above
measure, and violently break forth beyond its bounds; Tu domine argum atare,
ego mirabor; tu disputa, ego credam. Aug.
and also the rational, casting down imaginations or proud reasonings, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, subduing the
pride of reason to the obedience of faith, 2 Cor. 10.5. Thus Austin: Lord do
thou dispute, I will wonder: do thou debate the matter, I will believe: and if
thou will not willingly yield to the Word, it will overcome thee, whether thou will or no: we read of the Synagogue of the proud Libertines and others that
disputed with Stephen, Act. 6.9, 10
that they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.
So the Apostle Paul, though he had many enemies, as the Priests of the Jews,
and the Philosophers of the Gentiles, yet he made invia pervia; where he could
not find way, he made way by this engine of the Word: what a rufling did proud
Arius keep in the Eastern Church for a while? but as Constantine reports,
Porteth, the glistering truth of the Gospel did overcome the Arians. Moses his
rod did devour the rods of Egypt, and the nearer Dagon came to the Ark, the
greater was his fall.

Direct. 5. Cum superbia tentat, cogita meliores. Ber.
When thou art apt to swell with the thoughts of thy own excellencies, think
not only on thine inferiors, but upon thine equals, and superiors; when we
compare our selves with others that are above us, as the heavens above the
earth, whose gifts and graces do as far excel and exceed ours, as the bright
sunshine does the dimm candle light, we cannot but be ashamed, and acknowledge
that there is no cause why we should magnify our selves above others, and
vilify, yea nullify others in comparison of our selves, but that we should
esteem of others better then our selves: this will make us lay down all vain
opinions of our selves, and to judge our selves from a right knowledge of our
selves, the least and lowest of all others. It is a speech of one of the
Ancients, August.
They that are in the view of the world better then others, must in their own
hearts esteem themselves inferior to others: Romans 12.10
this will teach us in honor to prefer one another. 2 Pet. 3 15 Alios
plerunque imitari nolumus, quia nos ipsos meliores credimus. Greg.
Peter and Paul had been at some difference, yet notwithstanding Peter
honors him with his title and testimony of beloved brother; and Paul looks
not altogether at his own honor, but is also careful of the honor of
inferior Preachers, as Sylvanus, Timothy, etc. therefore he joyneth their
names with his own in some of his Apostolical Epistles to the Churches.

Direct. 6. Set before you the examples of the godly that were men renowned for
their humility. Genesis 32.10
Humble Jacob says to God, I am less then all the mercies and truth which thou
have showed to thy servant. Luke 1.
And the blessed Virgin calls her self an handmaid of the Lord, not worthy to
be regarded. The poor prodigal says, I am not worthy to be called thy son: and
John Baptist says, he was not worthy to untie the lachet of Christ's shoo. Paul
says he was chief among sinners, Ephesians. 3.8.
and less then a Saint, less then the least, yea less then the least of all
Saints; and not worthy to be called an Apostle: and the Centurion says to
Christ, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof; Luke 5.8.
and Peter when he saw a miracle that Christ wrought, he fell down at Jesus
knees, saying, Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man.

Object. But you will say, This request of Peter seems very strange: for to
whom shall sinners go but to their Savior, and whom can they desire to have
come to them, and be with them rather then he that only has eternal life? this
was in a manner the suit of the Devils, Matthew. 8.29. What have we to do with
thee, Jesus thou Son of God? etc. Now it may seem strange that Peter a pillar
in the Church should utter such a speech contrary to what he had said, John
6.68.

Respon. You must not think, though the words sound almost the same, that the
sense is any thing alike; the devils out of servile fear and malice thinking
Christ to be come to torture and torment them (as he did even then make a
beginning to unroost and dislodge them) desire his absence: but Peter on the
other side, not through distrust or despair of his salvation, or weariness of
Christ's company (which doubtless was most welcome to him) but out of a feeling
of his own frailty and unworthiness, uttered these speeches, thereby signifying
not his weariness, but unworthiness of Christ's company, and therefore makes
this modest request. 2 Samuel 7.18.
Thus David says of himself in humility, who am I O Lord, and what is my
Fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto, that is, advanced me to this
Crown and Kingdom?

Hence we may observe a difference between the presence of God, and earthly
Princes, viz. that men grow proud to be admitted into their presence, and think
it the only grace and favor can be done them; Rex meus me semper habebat in
oculis.
and therefore the bragging Soldier in the Comedy could vauntingly say, My
King had me always in his eyes: and Haman thought no man in the Kingdom so
highly in favor, or so likely to be honored as himself, because he had been
laely graced at a banquet by the King and Queen; but when men come into the
presence of God, it fares otherwise, it makes them exceeding humble, as Job
in Gods presence abhors himself, and repents even in dust and ashes. When
Rebecca came toward Isaac, Genesis 24.64, 65.
and saw him, she lighted from her Camel, and veiled her self; and when the
Spouse of Christ comes before Christ her husband, she casts off all
confidence of her own righteousness, and desires to be shrouded and veiled
under the mantle-covering of Christ's righteousness imputed to her: thus you see
the better any men are, the meaner they think of themselves: now these great
examples are registered in Scripture for our imitation; therefore whenever
your hearts are apt to swell with pride, check them and chide them for this
disorder, by sending them to the examples of the most eminent Saints, to whose
humility the Scripture gives so large a testimony. And let me advise you
further to converse frequently with humble men; this is effectual to expel
pride: As Solomon says, He that walks with the wise shall be wise, so he that
converseth with the humble shall learn humility: The humble sheep will flock
together: humble men can converse together without censuring, quarreling, or
disdaining, and get much by conversing with others, whereas the proud care not
for communion, and if they converse with any, it is only with such as do
excel; if they sit at the feet of any, it must be at the feet only of some
Gamaliel.

CHAP. 31. The seventh Direction.
Direct. 7. ABove all, take the Lord Jesus for your pattern: Learn of me, says
he, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11.29. Hierom having read the holy
life and pious death of Hillarion, folding up the book said, Well! Hillarion
shall be the champion whom I will imitate. Discite a me; non ad Patriarchas,
non ad prophetas vos ego mitto, sed me vobis exemplum, me formam humilitatis
exhibeo. Inviderunt mihi altitudinem quam habeo apud patrem, Angelus and
Faemina; ille potentiae, illa scientiae: vos autem aemulamini charismata
meliora; discite a me, quia mitis sum and humilis cord. Bernard. Epist.
How much rather should we say so of Christ, He is the pattern that I will
follow. Christ is the Lilly of the valley, Cant. 2.1. Christ's example may serve
instead of all. Walk by Christ's humility, says Austin, if thou will come to
his eternity. Christ says Learn of me; I do not send you to the Patriarchs or
Prophets, but I set my self before you as a pattern of humility for you to
follow. He says not Learn of me how I made the heavens, and the stars, and
laid the foundations of the earth, and laid the measures thereof: he does not
say Imitate me in my forty days fast, in my walking upon the waters, stilling
the winds, healing the sick, raising the dead; in a word, not in any of my
miraculous, but in all my moral actions, especially in humility. So likewise
Joh. 13. having washed his Disciples feet, he told them he did it not in
officium, for any duty he owed them; but in amorem, out of love he bare to
them, and in exemplum, teaching them by his carriage toward them, how they
ought to carry themselves one toward another: His argument is very strong and
forcible; for if he, their Lord and Master, had showed himself so kind and
humble toward them his servants and inferiors, much more ought they to do the
like to their fellows and equals: now as they that intend to write or draw a
picture fair, must first look upon their copy, and view their pattern, and then
labor and endeavor to follow it: so let us first take a view and survey of
the humility of Christ, and then endeavor to conform our selves thereunto. The
humility of Christ is the medicione of man's pride, says Austin.

1. His humility appeared in taking our nature upon him; in taking our nature,
not in changing his own, Naturam nastram suscipiendo, non suam mutando, Homo
deo accessit, non autem deus a se recessit; and verbum caro factum est, non
deposita sed seposita majestate, instar solis sub umbra ad tempus latentis, and
se mundo non ostendentis. August.
says a Father; man came unto God, but God departed not from himself; and the
Word was made flesh, not by putting away, but by laying aside his Majesty, like
the sun that for a time lies hid under a cloud, not showing himself to the
world; and such, and so great was his love toward us, that though he were
equal with God, and might so have remained and continued, yet he even seemed to
strip himself of his own glory, and appear only in our infirmity; for he did
not cast away the nature of God, when he took upon him the nature of man; sed
mansit quoderat, and tamen assumpsit quod non erat; Phil. 2.7, 8. Zanch. in loc.
that did abide which was, and yet he assumed that which was not; and whereas
the Apostle says, that he was made in the likeness of men, or found in fashion
as a man; that is, as learned Zanchy expounds the words, in his whole nature,
Christ a great example of humility in his birth.
body and soul, being like to us in all things, sin only excepted, Heb. 4.15.
Now the great humility of God manifest in the flesh will appear, if we consider
his birth, his life and his death. There are many circumstances in his birth to
set forth his humility to us.

1. In making choice of a poor and humble mother; one that was of a mean and
low estate, as she her self confesses, Luke 1.48. Her mean estate appears in
diverse things.

1. In her marriage with Joseph a Carpenter, an handy-crafts man, a man of a
low and mean calling.

2. By their traveling without a handmaid, or any servant to attend them.

3. By her offering at her purification: she offers not a lamb for a
burnt-offering, and a turtle dove for a sin-offering, Luke 2.24.
as was required of the wealthier sort, Levit. 12.6. but two Turtles only, or a
pair of Pigeons, which was indifferent by the law. Maldonat.
Yea Maldonate the Jesuits conceit is, that they were only a pair of young
Pigeons, as being of less pains to find, and less price to pay for; whence
appears the poverty of Joseph and Mary: for however Chemnitius conceiteth,
Chemnit.
that therefore the typical Lamb was not offered, because the true Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world was present. Calvin.
Joh. 1.29. yet Calvin and all other Protestant writers that I have seen, do
make their poverty the reason thereof. Therefore the Popish painters are much
deceived, setting out Mary still in rich attire, like a Lady of great state and
pomp, thus feeding the peoples ears with fables, and their eyes with bables.

2. Consider the time of his birth. 1. He was born in the winter, Cujus in
arbitrio tempus erat, nasciturus tempus elegit molestius. Aretius.
the sharpest season of the year. He in whose power time was, being to be born,
chose the most grievous, says Bishop Babington; and in the night, to show, as
Aretius notes, that he being the Sun of righteousness, would by the warmth of
his grace, thaw those that lay even frozen and key-cold in the dregs of their
sins, and by the bright beams of his Gospel, enlighten those that sat in
darkness and in the shadow of death.

2. He was born in a time when the Scepter was departed from Judah, and the
Jews put under tribute by the Romans, when Augustus Caesar sent a decree that
all the world should be taxed, i e. all the Countries and Provinces within his
dominions, viz. the inhabitants of all their Cities and Villages should
assemble themselves to their head City, and there have their names taken,
Suetonius.
that according to their estates, a tax might be set upon them, to be yearly
paid to his treasury and coffers; and herein also appeared his humility in
being born under the tyranny of Octavianus. Consider the place of his birth, it
was not at Jerusalem the principal City of the land, Mic. 5.2.
but at Bethlehem a little City of David: the bread of life will be born in
Bethlehem, which signifies the house of bread, a place little among the
thousands of Judah, as the Prophet Michah terms it. But he might have been
born at some Aldermans house in this poor City, and have had the best respect
it could afford; no such matter; they must buy their welcome, and lodge in an
Inn; Well! there they might be well respected for their money, and have
convenient lodging -- It will not be had; they either came too late, or else
carry not that port as they may think to gain enough by them; their chambers
are either taken up, or at leastwise reserved for better guests; he was born in
an Inn to show himself a stranger on earth, and that we ought still so to
behave our selves, 1 Pet. 2.11.
as strangers and Pilgrims upon earth. But in what room of this Inn? even in a
stable; the other rooms are otherwise appointed; and in that stable both the
Asses provender, He that was the bread of life, is laid in a manger as the food
of beasts,
and the spotless body of this Lamb of God, were alike entertained in a manger.
Men by sin had made themselves unfit for the society of Angels, and became like
the beasts that perish; therefore he seeks us among beasts; this was a sign
given by the Angel to the Shepherds; Ye shall find the child swadled and laid
in a manger, Luke 2.12. This sufficiently confuteth all legends, that talk of
his being born in a cave not far from Bethlehem, where they say, many miracles
appeared to Joseph: Chemmit. harmon. part. 1. p. 274.
but these are but false and fabulous; howbeit they have been received, and too
much credited by too many of the Ancients, as Chemnitius shows.

4. The fourth circumstance of his humility at his birth, was the divulging of
his birth, to a few base and mean Shepherds: and here we may see a manifest
difference between the wisdom of God, and the wisdom of the world; for whom do
the great men in the world join in friendship to them, and make of their
councils, and employ in their affairs? Surely no Shepherds, and Neate-herds,
and husbandmen, whom their rude education and mean breeding utterly debarreth
of all such favors: to whom do great men send their Ambassadors with news of
state? not to mean men, but to their neighbor Princes; peradventure Husbandmen
at plough, and Shepherds in the field may see a post as he passes to the Court
before the King himself, but not any Nobleman shall be made privy to his
business, till he come to the King to whom he is sent; and the news shall be
stale, before it come to the ears of the vulgar and common people: But Christ
takes not this course; he does not send his Angel immediately to the Emperors
Court, nor to Herod, Pontius Pilat, and the Pharisees, and Scribes, or any of
the chief estates of the Nobility, that so they reporting it again might have
added the greater credit to it; this in worldly wisdom should have seemed a
course most convenient, but Gods ways are not ours: the Angel was sent to
these ragged messengers, to declare the birth of the Messiah unto, rather then
to the great ones of the world, to show the humility of him that was sent to
save the world, and therein to be an example of humility to us.

CHAP. 32. Christ a great example of humility in his life.
2. Christ's great humility appeared in his life, if we consider him In a
private condition, or In his public condition.

1. If we consider him in a private condition, his humility is manifest.

1. In his tender years, by his subjection to Joseph and Mary, Luke 2.52.
Venerabatur matrens cujus ipse; erat pater; colebat nutritium quem and ip se
nutriverat. Hieren.
yet this was not a subjection of necessity, but of humility, as Ambrose says:
in that he that was God was subject to man, it was for our example: he gave
reverence to his mother whose Father himself was; he honored him that gave him
nourishment, whom he himself had nourished: yea we read not that he showed
himself any more abroad after his disputing with the Doctors at twelve years
old, till he was thirty years old and began to preach, being eighteen years
after.

2. In following a mean trade or calling: we must not think he was idle, but
wrought with Joseph to help get his own and their living. Hillary thought he
wrought upon the trade of a Smith. Hugo thought that they were Masons; but
Justin Martyr and Basil say they were Carpenters, and for this we have
Scripture; so we have not for the other; Matthew. 13.35. Those that were equal
with Christ in years, but whom he far surpassed in wisdom, when they see
themselves in such sort out-stripped of him, say of him in scorn, Is not this
the Carpenters son? and Mark 6.3. Is not this the Carpenter, Dr. Jer. Tailor
on the life of Christ.
the son of Mary? Some say he was called the Carpenters son while Joseph lived;
but when Joseph died, which was before the public manifestation of Jesus unto
Israel, then he wrought in that trade alone by himself, and was called no more
the Carpenters son, but the Carpenter himself, as before was said by his own
Countrymen. Christ out of his great humility, took this mean calling upon him,
to leave us an example in this kind, to shun idleness, and to live in some
lawful calling; Joseph and Mary were of the blood Royal, and nobly born; yet
things being as they were with them, they held it no shame to bring up their
son to a mechanical trade: the old Patriarchs notwithstanding they were petty
Kings, yet brought they up their Children either in keeping Cattle, or tilling
the ground: Solon made a law, that that Father could challenge no reverence or
duty from his son, that had not brought him up in some calling, whereby he
might live and maintain himself; and among the Athenians and Egyptians the
fashion was that every year every man should appear before the Governors, and
show by what means he got his living, and all idle persons were banished: and
among the Massalians, they would admit none into their Cities, but such as had
trades to live by, and maintain themselves. What shame can it be for any man to
be skilful in some Art? Art is no burden, Ars non gravat artisicem.
but even a commendation and commodity to the Artificer: this Cato knew,
therefore he gives this wise Counsel,

Si tibi sint nati, nec opes, tunc artibus illos
Instrue, quo possint inopem defendere vitam.
If thou no wealth nor riches have
upon thy Children to bestow:
Instruct them in some Art or Trade,
from whence a livelihood may flow.
And this may be any man's case; for wealth may fail, had he never so much.

2. Consider Christ in his public and ministerial employment, and therein also
his great humility will appear.

1. In assuming to himself humble titles: The title of the Son of man. The
title of a servant.


1. The title of the son of man: that is the name by which he usually styles
himself, saying Whom say ye, that I the son of man am? the son of man came to
save and seek that which was lost: he that vouchsafed to take upon him our
nature, intituleth himself also by our name.

2. The title of a servant; and not only so, but the condition of a servant; he
was A servant to God, A servant to man.


1. A servant to God. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, Isa. 53.11. He came
to do such a piece of service, as all the Angels in Heaven, and men on earth
were never able to have performed; the greatest work must be done by the
greatest servant.

2. To man also he was a servant: for our sakes it was that he made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant: It had been much for
him to have taken upon him the form of a King; considering what an estate he
left for it, it had been an uneven exchange; but he does much more; of Lord of
all, he becomes a servant to all: as he came into the world without pomp, so he
carries himself in the world without pride. The whole life of Christ was
nothing but a service to others; therefore he says to his Disciples, when some
of them affected a pre-eminence above the rest; Mat 20.28
Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant, even as the son of
man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, etc. None sent for Christ
but he came unto them; none had any need of him but he attended them; he
visited the sick, touched unclean leapers, and served his Disciples, even to the
washing of their feet, Joh. 13.5.
yea such was his humility, that he washes the feet of him that betrayed him:
he was a great servant to us; he did our work and suffered our punishment. Upon
the consideration of this great example of humility, Guericus a holy man cries
out, Vicisti Domine, vicisti superbiam means.
Thou have overcome, O Lord, thou have overcome my Pride; this example has
mastered me; I deliver my self up into thy hands, never to receive liberty or
exaltation, but in the condition of thy humblest servant.

2. His humility appeared further in making choice of an humble society and
company of attendants; what were his Disciples but a company of poor fishermen?
he makes no choice of great Kings, or wise Senators, or eloquent Orators to
blazen his glory, or to be the trumpeters of his fame, but poor fishermen, men
of a mean calling, and of low esteem in the world: the men that he conversed
with were poor Publicans and the inferior sort of people, preaching much oftener
in the Synagogues of little villages, then in the Temple of Jerusalem; and it
was one part of the answer that he willed John Baptists Disciples return to
their Master, Luke 7.22.
that the poor had the Gospel preached unto them.

3. His poverty also shows his great humility, though he were the Lord of
glory, and the King of heaven, yet he laid aside his glory; though he were
rich, yet he became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. when he was come to his own finding as it
were, and had a family to look unto, viz. his twelve Apostles, he had not an
house to put his head into: The Foxes says he, Luke 9.58.
have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the son of man has not
where to lay his head: Luke 8.3.
he lived much upon the benevolence of many which ministered unto him of their
substance: he had not an horse of his own to ride upon, and therefore we read
that in his travels he either went on foot, or was very meanly mounted, viz.
upon an Ass, and that but borrowed, Matthew. 21. according to the Prophecy, Zech.
9.9. nay he had not at all times money to pay scot and lot; Therefore Peter
must go fish for money, before they can pay their tribute: nor has he a house
of his own to eat the Passover in with his Disciples, Mark 12. nor money in
his own purse to provide it at his own cost, Mat. 17.27 Paupertatem assumpsit,
and divitias non amisit, sed tantum abscondit. Intus dives erat, for is tantum
pauper, latens Deus in divitiis, patens homo in paupertate, and simul in uno
Deus and Homo, dives and pauper. Gorran.
but must borrow and be beholden to others: nor a Tomb of his own to be buried
in, but is fain to be laid in Joseph's of Arimathea, Matthew. 27. Now he became
thus poor to sanctify poverty to us, and make it the more tolerable by his
bearing of it. When Soldiers see their Captains partake with them in their
labors and travels, and to suffer hunger, and cold, and thirst alike with
them, it works much upon them, and is a strong argument to persuade them to
patience and humility. I have read of Alexander the great, that in his travels,
he came to such huge mountains of snow, as none of his company durst adventure
over, which when he saw, he alighted from his horse, and went over the tops of
them, which his company espying, some for love, and some for shame, all
followed him. What encouragement then may it be to Christians in poverty to see
Christ their Captain so exceeding poor, that was Lord of all the riches of the
world? may not every poor Christian say to himself, as he to his Disciples,
Joh. 15.20. The servant is not above his Master. The old Heathen Philosophers
could comfort themselves to think that nature was contented with very little,
and it was not much that they wanted; and shall not Christians comfort
themselves to think that all treasures are hid and laid up for them in Christ
their Head? the Popes unholy holiness that styles himself the servant of Gods
servants, advances himself above all his Lieutenants: But seeing Christ (his
Master as he says) was so poor, it is strange he comes to be so rich; and
seeing Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, as himself confesses, I wonder
whence Peter had such a large Patrimony to leave to his successors.

Besides, such was the humility of Christ, that he rejected honor when it was
offered him, John 6.15.
hiding himself when he was sought to be made a King; he that says My Kingdom
is not of this world, refuses the offer of an earthly Kingdom.

4. His moderation in all his gestures and carriage, shows his great humility.
Though Christ were a Prince, yet when he was born he was lapt in homely clouts;
and lest this might be imputed to the poverty of his Parents during his
minority, when he was a man, he wore a seamless coat; yea in his time, it was
thought that it was the prerogative only of great personages in Princes Courts
to wear soft raiment. Likewise we may truly say, that he was a mourner all his
days; for though he had facultatem ridendi, as every man has, yet we never
read that he laughed, but he wept often, and that not for himself; in him there
was no cause of tears; he wept for the hardness of the peoples hearts, Non
propter destructionem domorum, sed perditionem animarum.
Mark 3.5. and wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. not so much for the
destruction of their houses, as the perdition of their souls: Shall Jesus weep
for us, and shall not we weep for our selves and for our children, and for the
dishonours done to so pitiful a Savior? His humility likewise was discovered
by the words that he spoke, the people wondering at the gracious words that came
out of his mouth: his words were but few; he ever spoke very sparingly, and all
his words were without ostentation or affectation, and in his answers he was
very concise, and full to the purpose in all kinds, as appears by his
behavior and carriage, both standing at the bar to be judged by the
High Priest, Mat. 26.63, 64. and his sitting at bench to judge the woman taken
in adultery, Joh. 8.6, 7.

5. The miracles that he wrought, and the works that he did do in a most lively
manner, set forth his humility to us; When he healed the sick, cleansed the
lepers, opened the eyes of the blind, he charged most of them that they should
tell it to no man; Mat. 9.30.
lest any thing should be ascribed to him, as if he were ambitious of
vainglory, Luk 5.14.
therefore he attributes all to his Father: The words that I speak unto you, I
speak not of my self; And the works that he did he disowneth: but the Father
that dwells in me, he does the works, Joh. 14.10.

Quest. Notwithstanding Christ charged the leper that was cleansed, Luke 5.
that he should tell it to no man: Mark tells us, that he presently published
the matter, Mark. 1.45
which caused such a throng and press about our Savior, as he could not openly
enter into the Cities, and follow his function. Here a question may be
propounded, whither this leper did well or ill in this fact? David says, Ps.
107.32
Let men exalt the Lord in the congregation of the people, and praise him in
the assembly of the Elders: Isa. 12.4.
and the Prophet Isaiah bids us proclaim his name, and declare his doings among
the people; and when our Savior had dispossessed a man of a Legion of devils,
he bade him to go home, and show the matter to his friends, what great things
the Lord had done for him, and how he had compassion on him, Mark 5.19. And it
is like this man meant no more.

Answ. A particular precept coming in place, dispenses with the general rule.
And further I answer, that a good intention cannot excuse a bad action, as is
disobedience, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. we may guess at many reasons why Christ bids
him to tell it to no man.

1. Because there is as Solomon says, a time for all things; and the time that
he would have this manifested was not yet come, as he told his mother, John 2.4.

2. Non erat necesse ut scrmone jaciaret, quod corpore praeferebat. Hieron in
loc.
There was no need in words to publish what his cleansed body (being as it were
all turned to tongue) evidently declared.

3. It was absurd and preposterous he should boast of his cleansing, before he
was judged clean; therefore in the next words, he is bid to go and show himself
to the Priest; and if then he judged him clean, he might declare it to whom he
listed: this he was to do.

1. To confirm the truth of the miracle, they seeing it to be no fantastical
delusion, but a true cleansing.

2. That he might enjoy the benefit of his cure, and be again admitted into the
society of other men, which must not be till the Priest judged him clean,
Levit. 14. Here then you see that Christ in the Sermons that he preached, and in
the miracles that he wrought, sought not his own glory, but the glory of him
that sent him. And how humble was he in his practice, taking little Children to
him, showing that he that received a little child in his name received him?

CHAP. 33. Christ a notable example of humility in his sufferings and death.
THe sufferings of Christ, were either such as he endured in the course of his
life, or those that he sustained at or near the time of his death; in all which
you may see his great humility.

For the first, his whole life from his birth to his death, from his cradle to
his coffin was nothing else but a Tragedy, yea as it were one long continued
act of suffering.

To begin with his infancy, he is no sooner born into the world, but cruel King
Herod goes about to bereave him of his life, which that he might the better
effect, he cunningly enquired the place of his birth, and having learnt for the
general that it was at Bethlehem, he labored to learn in what house there,
pretending Religion that he would worship him, when he intended nothing but
treachery and his destruction: and being defeated of this his cruel purpose by
God himself, he makes a most merciless massacre of all the infants males of
Bethlehem under two years old, Praeslat Herodis esse suem quam filiu^.
yea and (as some say) of one of his own sons that was nursed there, where-upon
it grew into a Proverb, That it was better be Herod's swine then his son: thus
the Lord of life is fain to fly before he can go, to escape death. Afterward,
he that was the Lord of Glory lived in an estate of contempt, reproach, and
ignominy. Nay more then this, he cannot be let alone, or suffered to be quiet
and sleep in a whole skin as we say, even in this poor and mean estate of his:
but he is assaulted at all sides. First, by the devil himself, Matthew. 4. who
most strongly sets upon him with three hot encounters as hoping to prevail upon
him, because he was weak with his long fasting; but his skill failed him. Then
the Master of Fense himself being foiled, he sets his Imps and instruments to
work upon him, and that in diverse sorts and kinds.

First, they persecute him with their tongues, reviling him, and railing upon
him, giving him most taunting terms, calling him a drunkard, and a glutton, a
friend of Publicans and sinners; that he was an Impostor, Cheater, and Deceiver
of the people, yea that he was mad, and had a Devil, and cast out Devils by
Beelzebub: nor are they content with prating against him, but they will also
practice against him.

First, without any open violence they convent him before their Consistory, and
bring him coram in their Ecclesiastical Court, excommunicating and accursing
both himself and all his followers, or that did but confess him, or profess
themselves to believe on him: likewise they call a Council against him, John 7
49. John 9.22. Joh. 11.47.
as if he had been an arch-heretick. Nay further, they even proceed to use
violence toward him, Luke 4.29. where his unkind Countrymen go about to
tumble him down headlong from a steep hill. Item, John 7.45. the Highpriests
and Pharisees send their officers for him: nay more, they even go about to
stone him, John 10.31. Moreover treacherous Judas becomes of his servant to
attend him, a Sergeant to apprehend and attach him, of his pursebearer a
pursevant, and he is hired thereto with a very base bribe, and that not
offered, but asked; not paid, but only promised as is conceived, Matthew. 26.15.
They carry and recarry him from Annas to Caiaphas, from Herod to Pilate, from
place to place; and when Herod would have acquitted him, they still cry out
against him, and continue accusing him, yea even prefer a murderer before him:
and having prevailed with Pilate, they show him no pity, but execute him with
all mercyless cruelty and rigorous extremity, making him to carry his own Cross
as long as he is able to stand under it, John 19.17. Being come to the place of
his execution, they hang him between two Thieves and notorious malefactors, as
if he had been a Master of mis-rule, and ringleader in routs and riots, Matthew.
27.38. Luke 23.33. Thus our Lord Jesus humbled himself and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2.8, 9. Such
was his humility, that though he were the God of Angels, yet by his sufferings
he was made lower then the Angels, Heb. 2.9. Nor do his enemies content
themselves to put him to a most painful and shameful death, but also they add
affliction to him in the manner of it.

1. By mocking him at his arraignment, and mocking him on the Cross, contrary
to all humanity and civility, to mock a man in misery.

2. Being in the midst of his agony and extremity of pain, and crying out of
thirst, John. 19.28. they mingle him such a potion as would rather increase
then assuage his thirst, Matthew. 27.34. which some think would entoxicate a man,
and make him lose the use of his reason. But great was his humility and
patience to endure such contradiction of sinners against himself. Heb. 12.3.


3. They put a Crown of thorns upon his head, drove nails into his hands and
feet, and thrust a spear into his side.

But as one says, The pain of his body, was but the body of his pain; D.
Plaiser.
the sorrow of his soul was the soul of his sorrow, when he cried out, My God,
My God, why have thou forsaken me? Hae non voces desperantis, aut diffidentis
(Deum enim vocat suum) sed cum tristissima tentatione luctantis. Bucan Com. loc.
But all this while we must know he despaired not; for these were not the words
of a man, despairing or distrusting, for he calls God his God. We must not
think that the Godhead had wholly separated and withdrawn it self from the
manhood, but it was quaedam derelictio, ubi nulla fuit in tanta necessitate
virtutis exhibitio, nulla Majestatis ostentio. Bernard. A certain desertion,
where there was no exhibition of strength, no show of Majesty in so great a
necessity.

Now as this shows his great humility, so also his abundant love toward us;
for all this was for us; he had no sin, and therefore could not have been
touched with the punishments of sin, as were all those miseries that he
underwent. This Paul says for the general, that he that knew no sin, was made
sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. and in particular, he being rich, became poor for our
sakes, that we through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. His humility
was to procure our glory; he became weak, Isa. 53.4, 5. Humility is so hard a
lesson to get into the heart, that Christ was fain to come down, from heaven in
his own person to teach it. Adams.
that we might become strong; he was bound in swaddling bands to loose the bands
of our sins; he is clad in clouts and mean rags, to deck us with the rich robes
of his righteousness; he was born among beasts, to advance us to the society of
Angels; he was born under the tyranny of Augustus, to deliver us from the
tyranny of Satan; he came down from heaven to earth, to lift us up from earth
to heaven; he would be taxed and have his name taken on earth, that we might be
free Citizens, Quel medesimo affetto sia in vol, che fu ancora in Christo Jesu.
Ital.
and have our names written in heaven: In a word! he became the son of man,
that we might become the sons of God, Gal. 4.4, 5. He suffered death to redeem
us to life, Romans 4.25. Therefore let us learn of him to be meek and humble. Let
the same mind be in us that was in Christ Jesus; let the consideration of the
great humility of Jesus dismount us from all high thoughts of our selves. Phil.
2.5.
The heart of man is a proud piece of flesh; men stand upon their terms, and
think scorn to abase themselves to do good to others: But did we think
seriously of the great abasement of Christ, our pride would down. Shall Christ
our Prince and Master humble himself, and shall we exalt our selves? what
intolerable impudence is it, that where the King of glory made himself of no
reputation, there a silly worm should swell with pride? Shall God be abased,
and shall man be proud? certainly that man's heart is harder then a rock, whom
this high example cannot move to humility.

CHAP. 34. An exhortation to humility: The conclusion of the whole work.
LET every one now look into his own heart, and see what pride is there, and
when we have found it out, let us labor to humble our selves for it; as good
Hezekiah did, of whom we read, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. that his heart was lifted up;
and ver. 26. it is added: Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the
pride of his heart: Let Magistrates, Ministers, and all true Christians
exceedingly humble themselves for the pride of their hearts; and let every
faithful soul weep in secret places for the great pride of this Nation, lest
after all our glorious shows the Lord lay us aside as vessels wherein is no
pleasure: oh take heed of being lifted up with pride, when God is staining the
pride of all glory, and marring the pride of England, as he threatened to mar
the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem. Jer. 13.9.
It Is dangerous for a Mariner to have his topsails up in a violent storm; oh
pull down your topsails, Psalm. 78.5.
lift not up your horn on high; lest God pull you down, and you be sunk without
recovery; The Lord humble us, that he may exalt us in due time. You may be too
high, but can never be too humble. But this is not enough, there must be
humility as well as humiliation: a man may be humbled, and yet not be an humble
man: Gods judgments humbled Pharaoh several times, but his heart was not
humble, it remained as hard as ever. So Ahab was humbled; he rent his clothes,
and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted and lay in sackcloth, and went
softly; his very pace was altered: so that God himself takes notice of it: for,
says he to the Prophet: 1 Reg. 21.29.
See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? yet all this while Ahab was
not humble; for in the next Chapter you read, that he will go up to
Ramoth-Gilead to battle, let God say what he will to the contrary. Poverty and
misery may break a proud man's stomach, but not his heart; he may be as stubborn
against God as ever; inwardly proud, though outwardly humbled. There is an
humility likewise that is not good; a counterfeit humility, when a man is only
externally and complementally humble, his speeches, his gestures, his carriage,
are humble, but his heart is full of pride. This was Absaloms humility, who
rose up early and stood beside the way of the gate, 2 Samuel 15.2, 3, 4, 5.
Adoravit vulgus.
etc. And it was so, that when any man came nigh to him, to do him obeisance,
he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him: why was Absalom thus
humble? was it not to get applause from the people, and to steal away the
hearts of the men of Israel, and in the end to set up himself in the throne of
David his Father? A proud man like the Lion, coucheth and humbles himself,
that the poor may fall into his strong paws, Psalm. 10.10. as one renders that
place. This is called by one Vulpina humilitas, the Foxes humility. One
compares these to the little venomous serpent Cerastes, which to allure the
birds to come unto it, that she may feed on them, counterfeits her self to be
dead: So these proud counterfeits, seem to be very lowly and officious, putting
their hands under your very feet, when as their hearts are full of pride and
covetousness: Pride in it self is very odious, therefore it labors to shroud
and palliate it self under the mask of humility.

There is another kind of outward humility, a voluntary humility, that is, of
such as vow voluntary poverty, and seem to renounce and relinquish the world,
and betake themselves to a Monastical and Eremetical kind of life; such as
these have no warrant for it; that I can find; our Savior indeed pronounces a
blessing upon the poor; not on those that are outwardly poor in estate, Matthew.
5.3.
but on those that are poor in spirit, that have mean thoughts of themselves,
from which these men are far enough, placing an opinion of merit in these
courses: Nor are they truly poor; for howbeit they have the possession of
nothing, yet they enjoy and have the command of more then they that have lands
and livings, large rents and revenues: of such kind of Cattle, Albertus Duke of
Saxony said, that he had three wonders in one City; meaning three Monasteries;
whereof the Friars of one had Children, but no Wives: Non magnum est sua, sed
se relinquere. Ferus in Matthew. 5.
The Friars of the second had store of Corn, but no land: And the third had
store of money, and no rent or other apparent means to raise it: It is a
greater matter for a man to relinquish himself, then to relinquish his goods,
which indeed is the part of him that is poor in spirit.

But true humility is a grace seated in the mind or heart, whereby a man from a
right knowledge of himself walks humbly with God and man.

1. It will make a man disclaim all his own worth and excellencies in Gods
presence; it will make a man willing to be debased, that God may be glorified;
2 Samuel 6.14, 20, 21.
it will make men of honor, to lay aside their own honor to honor God; as
David when he laid aside his Princely robe, and put on a linen Ephod, and
daunced before the Ark of the Lord, though his wife Michal upbraided him with
it as a thing too low and base for his dignity; yet says he, it was before the
Lord, and therefore if I have been vile, I will yet be more vile then thus, and
will be base in mine own sight. Therefore one says, he is more astonished at
David's dancing, Gregor.
then at David's fighting: for in fighting he overcame but his enemy, but in
dancing he overcame himself.

Humility makes a man zealous in serving God, and yet when he has done what he
can, he accounts all as nothing: though he has done much, yet humility says I
have done nothing. Luke 17.10.
That of our Savior is the humble man's posie, When I have done all that was
commanded me, yet am I but an unprofitable servant: The humble man knows,
though afflictions are sharp and bitter arrows, yet they are shot from a loving
hand, and therefore to be endured. 1 Samuel 15.26.
I have done that which was my duty to do. Many pretend to be Gods servants,
but the humble man alone is the man that can be content to serve God in a mean
place or low calling. The humble man is wise to sobriety, not daring to rifle
Gods Cabinet, or too curiously to search for things too high and too wonderful
for him.

The humble man quietly bears the yoke, and is very sensible of the hand of God
when it is upon him, and cannot complain of Gods dispensation toward him. If
the Lord say (says humble David) I have no delight in thee; behold here I am,
let him do to me as seems good unto him: He lays his hand upon his mouth when
the Lord smites him, because it is his doing.

2. The humble man thinks meanly of himself: Christ calls the woman of Canaan a
dog: How does she digest this bitter pill? she says, truth Lord! yet even the
dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their Masters table; as if she had said,
seeing I am no better then a dog, I shall be contented to be served like a dog:
Matthew. 15.26, 27.
I desire not to sit at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, nor to be fed
either before the Children or with the Children; a scrap or crumb will serve me
a poor Gentile, I desire not a loaf, but a crumb of bread: I leave thy great
mercies and great miracles for thy own countrymen, thy peculiar people the
Jews: but Lord, I beseech thee show one mercy to me a poor Gentile, do one
little miracle for my sake, cast out one devil out of my poor daughter; spare
one crumb of mercy upon me a poor Canaanite: Accedens ad Christum, canis
vocatur; discedens a Christo, mulier vocatur: ipsa mu^^vit affectum; ipse
mutavit vocabulum. August.
If I be a dog; I am thy dog; and as a dog will be sometimes impudent, and not
cease bawling till he get something: so will I be importunate, and not cease
begging, till thou hear me, and heal my daughter: Now see what the issue was,
Jesus answered her, O woman, great is thy faith. Coming to Christ she is called
a dog, and departing from Christ she is called woman: she showing her self by
her faith and humility to be no Canaanite, but a true Israelite, he cease to
call her dog, and calls her woman; she changes her affection, and he changes
his denomination.

3. The humble man thinks highly of others, in lowliness of mind, Phil. 2.3.
esteeming others better then himself: Humility will make a man very officious
and serviceable to others: When there arose a strife among Christ's Disciples
who should be the greatest: his argument is, that they must not be like Pagan
Princes, Stulte and perperam regnum vobis fingitis; alia vobis med tanda est
ratio, si mihi operamsidelem impendere cupitis, etc. Sit haec vestia magnitudo,
excellentia and dignitas, fratribus vos submitterc: Calvin in Matthew. 20.
who often tyrannize, usurp, and abuse their authority over the poor people,
not considering what in equity and conscience they may do, but what by their
prerogatives and extremity of Law they can do, Matthew. 20.25, 26. he tells them
they must do otherwise, and not strive to advance themselves by ruling, but to
excel and exceed one another by serving and obeying: let this be your
greatness, and dignity, and primacy, to submit your selves one to another in
love: The greater any man is, the more ought he to humble himself in all
things: Honos and Onus must not be divided: and they that are in places either
in the Church or Commonwealth, must labor not so much Praeesse as Prodesse,
Acts 20.28. 1 Corinthians. 3.5. 1 Corinthians. 4.1. There is no place for Pride or
Ambition neither in Christ's Spiritual Kingdom on earth, nor in his Eternal
Kingdom in Heaven. Hinc Principes dicuntur Nedivim, Pagnin. 1 Samuel 2.8. viz. A
largiendo, and (...): and Reges Aegypti dicti sunt Pharaones, i. e. populi
vindices, and Rex Gerar Abimelech. i. e. Rex Pater meus, and inter Graecos
(...), and inter Latins reges, duces, imperatores, to put them in mind how to
carry themselves in their government toward their people: non alium in finem
vectigalia, stipendia, seu tributa illis penduntur, nise ut ad sumptus honoris
splendori necessarios sufficiant, Calvin in Harm. Evang.


Humility will make a man patiently bear and put up much contempt and reproach
from others, which they cast upon him: he that despises no man but himself,
regards not the contempt that others pour upon him: every cross word or
reproach gives the proud heart a deep wound, whereas the humble soul can bear
reproach without regret. He despises contempt, that affects no vainglory; he
accounts it his greatest honor (with the Apostles) to be dishonored for
Christ, Act. 5.41.
and to suffer shame for Jesus sake.

Humility makes a man not greedy of praise from others, nor take content in it
when others praise him: the humble man thinks so meanly of himself, that he
desires none should think or speak highly of him: Cum laudatur adfaciem,
flagellatur in cord. Chrysostom. 2 Cor. 3.1.
he dares not commend himself, nor chaunt out his own praises; he had rather
his works then his tongue should praise him: and as Chrysostom says; when he
is praised to his face, he is pricked to the heart: The humble man will silence
his own virtues and excellencies, and seeks to keep them as secret as his
thoughts, if he could, lest any man should think or speak of him beyond what he
sees in him, or hears of him.

The humble man has humble vestures, and humble gestures, Deck your selves
inwardly in lowliness of mind. Geneuens. in 1 Pet. 5.5.
humble carriage toward, and an humble conversation with others; his heart is
not haughty, nor are his eyes lofty; he speaks not proudly, his words are
humble; he walks humbly in that station wherein God has placed him, prosperity
does not puff him up; Adversity makes and keeps him very low and humble: The
humble man rejoices at his brothers welfare: The humble shall hear it,
Humilitatem insinuate. vulg. lat. in sinu habete. Gloss. interlin. But the
Original word signifies to deck and adorn.
and be glad, Psalm. 34.2. Let every man therefore labor to put on humbleness
of mind, Col. 3.12. and to be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. put it on as
Kings put on their Robes and Crowns, and as Soldiers put on their Armor,
Ephesians. 6.11. and we shall find it, and ornamentum and munimentum, both clothes
to cover us and keep us warm, and a corslet to defend us, it will be both
ornament, honor, and armor to us: As garments do adorn the body, so does
humility the mind much more; For as a fair woman has not a better ornament
then modesty, so has not a great man a better garment then humility.
as the body being naked and stripped of apparel is unhandsome and unseemly to
men, so a soul not clothed with humility is odious in the sight of God, Angels,
and men. By putting on humbleness of mind, the Apostle means, that Christians
should exercise and use this grace every day more and more: we put on and pull
off our apparel every day, but having once put on humbleness of mind, we must
never put it off again; our apparel is the worse for wearing, but humility does
grow and increase by being used: God gives grace upon grace to the humble
soul; where humility is, he gives more grace. Humility is a grace of
inestimable value; it is rarely found among men of honor and greatness; but it
is a choice grace where ever it is: and therefore as that Rhetoritian being
asked what was the chiefest thing in eloquence, answered, Pronuntiation; and
being thrice asked, did still answer the same: so of all the graces of a
Christian, if you ask never so often which is the chiefest; I answer still,
humility is the chief of all. The humble soul is dear to God; God looks upon
him with great respect, and thinks nothing too good for him. The Lord stops his
ears against the prayers of proud men: Elihu tells us, There they cry, Job
35.12, 13.
but none gives answer, because of the pride of evil men; surely God will not
hear vanity, nor will the Almighty regard it. A proud man is too full in
himself to receive any thing at the hands of God: the cry of the humble beggar
is soonest heard. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard and saved him out of
all his troubles, Psalm. 34.6. God hears the very desires of the humble, Psalm.
10.17.

Humility establishes a Christian in all disasters: the deeper the tree is
rooted in the earth, the stronger it stands against the fury of the winds: and
the lower a man is rooted in humility, the more he is established, standing
firm against all troubles and temptations; humility resists the greatest
evils, and overcomes the greatest difficulties. Humility puts a Christian into
a serene and calm temper; no storms, no tempests, no disasters can discompose
his spirit; such things may stick on the body, Excelsa est patria, humilis est
via. Aug. Super Johan. Mat. 18.4.
but cannot stick on the mind of an humble man: Besides, God will save the
humble person, or him that is not haughty, him that has low eyes, as it is in
the Hebrew, Job 22.29. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.3. and our Savior says, Whosoever humbles
himself as a little Child, the same shall be greatest in the Kingdom of heaven.
God does not reward any according to the places and dignities which they hold
under him, but according to the humility with which they manage them: the high
and lofty one does here dwell with the humble soul; Isa. 57.15.
and the humble Christian shall dwell with him in the high and holy place for
ever. The eight Beatitudes, Matthew 5. are like the steps of Jacobs ladder,
reaching from earth to heaven, whereof the first step is humility, called there
poverty of spirit.
What comfort may this minister to every poor Christian? What though we were
left poor, and born to nothing? or though we be fallen to decay by ill success
in the world, and brought to nothing as Job? yea though our calamities bring
contempt upon us, so as we be even trodden under foot, and trampled upon by the
Nimrods of the earth? yet if we can possess our souls in patience, and be rich
in grace, and poor in spirit; then however we be Nobodies on earth, yet shall
we be great Nobles in Heaven, Isa. 23.8.
even greater then the Merchants of Tyrus, who were honorable personages, and
no less then Princes and Peers of the Land. The least of Gods little ones in
heaven shall have greater honor, being sons and heirs to a King, Romans 8.14,
17. 1 John 3.1. and brethren to a King, Heb. 2.17. Qui exaltat se per
superbiam, humiliabitur per poenam; and qui humiliat se per peccaterum
confessionem, exaltabitur per gloriae remunerationem. Lyra in Luc. 14.
yea they shall all be Kings, Rev. 20.6. and in token of this royal estate and
Majesty, they shall have Palms and Scepters in their hands, and Crowns on their
heads, even Crowns of gold, Rev. 7.9. Rev. 4.4. On the other side how effectual
would it be to pull down the pride of men, did they consider that Pride is that
which has ruined many persons, families and Nations, and the rock against
which many have been split and suffered shipwreck: how foolish then is that man
that sees the woeful wrack that Pride has everywhere made, that yet will
adventure to hoise up his sails, and run his soul upon that dangerous rock? Let
no man then think himself safe, where so many have miscarried, and never any
yet escaped. I conclude with that of Solomon: Better it is to be of an humble
spirit with the lowly, then to divide the spoil with the proud, Prove. 16.19.

Humilitas in paupere grata est, in divite gloriosa: humilitas inter inimicos
blanda; superbia vero inter amicos ingrata; blanda and officiosa semper est
humilitas, in amicitiis grata, in contumeliis otiosa; non extollitur prosperis,
non mutatur adversis, non extorquet servitium, non requirit voces adulantium,
nisi quam se laudatione novit indignum. Valerius Episcop. in quodam sermon.

Sola, quae non solet gloriari, non novit praesumere, contendere non consuevit,
gratiam inventura est in oculis pietatis humilitas; non contendit judicio, non
praetendit justitiam quae vere humilis est. Bern. in Epist. 45.

FINIS.

