A DECLARATION OF Sir John Gaire Lord Mayor. Alderman Langham Alderman Adams
Alderman Bunce Sheriff Cullam.


With others Imprisoned by the Authorities of the PARLIAMENT AND ARMY.

Veritas Tactu. blazon of the City of London, used as a printer's device

7ber 30 Printed in the Year. 1647.

A DECLARATION of the LORD MAYOR, etc.
WEre it as lawful to utter truth, as unlawful to suffer for truth; to
compare the nearest of our thoughts with the most notorious of our actions, and
present them as in a Mirror to the public eye, we might then Declare; That as
we have engaged our selves in one sacred tie of Covenant, so therein we have in
all fidelity persevered, declining neither Law, Religion, King, Parliament, nor
Liberty, necessary in professing Christians properly natural to true subjects.

The Covenant binds all (without exception) within the pale thereof, to an
unite defense, and mutual co-assistance of each other; but as in the Divine
Law, the breach of one Commandment pleads the Offender guilty of all; so we
presume in this humane Law (the Covenant) the forfeiture of one branch brings
self-guiltiness on all the rest. We pray for mercy on this National Sin.

And seeing (with too transparent eyes) both Nature and Religion turned
Antipodes, acting themselves into a self-Antipathy (as if Man above all
sublunary Creatures was an only compound of contrarities; seeing the foundation
(on which next under heaven our hopes depend) of our Laws, our Religion our
proper Rights and Privileges (we say not Oaths and Protestations) blown up by
the very roots, by such a strong tempestuous violence, which bears down all
things before it, making the loftiest Cedar level with the lowest shrubs,
until it has vented it self into an universal destruction; that the
fearfully over awed and beguiled Multitude, may in the view of our present
condition be sensible of their own ruin; thus unanimously we unbosome our
selves unto the world; showing,

That in all our enterprises, since these unnatural and domestic Divisions;
we have endeavored to keep a good Conscience toward God and all men; and how
unsavory the fruit of these last six years have relisht with us, none, better
then our own souls, can attest; what forwardness for the public good; what
backwardnes in the enbrewing our selves in unknown alarums, especially of
blood; what assistance both in our persons and purses, for the cuting off the
neck of this unnatural War, and the closing up of all distractions in the arms
of peace and unity, (not done in closets nor promov'd in secret corners) the
whole City and Kingdom can bear witness.

And when we had exhausted our selves for the General of the Kingdom abroad
(the sword being by divine mercy plucked out of the hand of our enemies) hoping
then we should receive a sweet and blessed issue of all our travels finding our
own sword still drawn, yet no enemy to oppose, and too sad probation of
sinister reaches; we could not but reflect upon our selves, and apply our
endeavors to the safety of that wherewith God and the Laws had entrusted us at
home. Will any man suffer his estate and and livelihood to be entrencht on by
another that has no right thereto, and be silent? Have not we through many
generations, by the gracious influence of many glorious Kings been possessors
of an honorable and free CHARTER, the very sinew of the City and Fee simple of
our being; wherein, besides other privileges, that of the Militia, which we
account as chief, vi et armis to be wrested from us; and yet be accounted
enemies to others, whilst we endeavor to preserv our own? If such things pass
for Law, who can be master of what he has? What can the whole Kingdom expect
when those out of the very bowels of the City seeks her ruin?

Neither did we, by a self-defence, ever harbor the least thoughts of of an
embroyling War, as by our daily and incessant actings with the Parliament and
Army did appear; straining our selves to our utmost power and the highest key
of a pure conscience to qualify all things into a right sense by our
Commissioners; but all in vain; the returns of our endeavors with our hopes,
being but pills gilded over with specious glozes and pretenses; for we are not
ignorant, that though the Army came with Olives in their mouths, yet they had
swords in their hands, and death and destruction in their hearts; the greatest
part of them threatening, at a distance, the Sack and Plunder of the City: and
had we not cause then, not only to a Verbal, but a Virgal, a Martial defense?
yet (blessed be the Lord) not a sword was drawn, not a blow was given, and yet
we suffer as Enemies, that had made a way to our own peace, through a deluge of
the Armies blood. But (though a homely, yet) it is a true saying; He that is
willing to hang his neighbors dog, must say he steals sheep.

But yet that which we value above the richest price of Nature our Religion is
made an O^um, become a laughing stock unto many; who like tamping Lions (rather
then the Lamb of Christ) rend and tear down the pale of his fold, from a
Christian Conformity to a Platonical Community, and that unciviliz'd Liberty,
the flood-gate to a perpetual Confusion, and yet they and we are brethren: Do
they stand up for a Liberty? Why not we? No, we deny our own Liberty, that we
may be the the Lords Freemen. We say Religion charactered by the Laws of the
Land, and the finger of Gods Spirit on our Souls, this indeed was a grand
motive to our defense, (the cause arising not from our Superior but
Fellow Subjects;) But blame not us, lay the blame on Christ, under whose
Command (alone in this) we are; and if for this we suffer, we suffer with him;
and suffering with him, we know that we shall also reign with him.

The next Cause is his Majesty; (oh we bleed within, when we think, how many
souls in this Nation (excluding Scotland and Ireland) are shipwrackt on this
rock; to whom (though never so tyrannical) we stand bound by Nature, Equity,
Religion, by Oath, Covenant, Conscience, in all loyalty and allegiance; and
sha^ thi^ plead us guilty? Well, the Servant is not above his Lord, nor the
Disciple his Master; and when the head is sick, it is injustice in the members
not to condole.

So that now we call heaven and earth to witness, that we have not faild in any
thing that may plead us innocent; we have been more then servants to the
Parliament, more than votaries to the Army; less we were not, more we could
not be: we have procured the dislike of our Prince for partaking with his
people; we are slighted, for emptying our selves to make others full, and for
others liberty we stand imprisoned.

Here O heavens, and judge O earth the cause of the distressed! and because
with man there is neither truth, nor mercy, may the divine arm of justice
carry on these things unto a blessed issue; whilst from the bottom of our
hearts we unfeignedly do pray, That God would be pleased to pour Oil and Wine
into our Kingdoms wounds, to the everlasting peace and consolation of his
People; that his Majesty may with highest honor be enthrowned in his Kingdom,
and remain as a fixed star in the firmament of the Church: that the Parliament
may judge Righteous Judgment, and settle our Divisions into a peaceful
posture: that the Army (as hitherto) so they may still be faithful to their
friends, victorious over their enemies: and that the whole Kingdom may enjoy
that liberty which by Religion, Law, or Custom, they can claim.

FINIS.

