The Glorious EXCELLENCY OF THE Spirit of Adoption; OR, Of the Spirit of the
Son of God, derived to the Sons of GOD.

Wherein are many precious truths held forth, which are presented to all the
children of Truth, who are and shall be sanctified through the truth.

ISAIAH, 44.3. I will power water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
dry gro^nd: I will p^^r my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring. GAL. 4.6. And because ye are Sons God has sent forth the spirit
of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father. By M. G. Minister of the
Gospel.

London, printed by Jane Coe, for HENRY OUERTON. 1645.

To the Reader.
THou art here presented with a rich Cabinet of precious Jewels, the which if
thou do unlock by the Key of the Spirit, thou may both enrich thy inner,
and adorn thy outer man withal: for they are not appointed for Swine nor
Dogs; who will trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent those
that present them: but for the man who by the key of the spirit is able to
unlock them (to wit the man of which PAUL speaks, the spiritual man that is
able to discern spiritual things) and that by faith is able to eloath and
adorn himself with them; to these and no other shall it be advantageous: for
as the talent wrapped up in a Naptkin, and the precious ointment kept still in a
close box, and the treasure hid in the earth can do good to none until it be
opened and applied unto the several uses for which they are appointed; so,
neither can a Cabinet of spiritual Jewels and perals, be any way profitable to
any until they are opened, and unlockt by the spirit, who can lay open every
truth is it is in its self, and cause the simple to understand the sweet, the
high, and the glorious mysteries of it; whereas before it is merely foolishnes
unto him, and he cannot discern it. And therefore to you that have the spirit,
to you it is commended; but this let me say, that even you are to beware how
you come with a key of carnalitie to open it; for in the best there is
carnality, as appears 1 Cor. 3.3. and Romans 7.14.15. Oh therefore cast away that
key, for it is a false key, and can never unlock it; I mean the key of the love
of the world, which is contrary to the love of the Father, the key of Pride, of
covetousness, of self-conceitednesse, of strength of Parts, or man's wisdom,
and of any other thing that is contrary unto the fruits of the Spirit; and let
the spirit of Christ Jesus that is in thee, unlock it for thee, and open it to
thee, that so by faith thou may (by the help of the same spirit) partake of
the sweetness, and the benefit of it, and be gloriously adorned with it, that
thou may I say partake of the benefit of it; for he that is made a Pertaker
of these glorious Privileges, and Prerogatives that is herein held forth, is
unconceivably rich, and he that is adorned with the ornaments herein presented,
is all glorious within, etc.

But let no particular person whosoever he be, think that he is hereby
accounted either a dog, or a swine, or is excluded from a participation of
these Jewels and Pearls. Although in thine own apprehension, and the
apprehensions of others, tho^ art in as bad a condition a^ can be imagined; yet
I am assured that God has given his blessed spirit, even the spirit of
Adoption, unto those that have formerly been apprehended, to be as bad as thou
art; and who knows but in the reading of, or meditating on those lines, the
holy spirit may be given in unto thee, and then (though it be otherwise a dead
letter) it may prove a quickening word; As in the very reading of the Word in
former times, nay and in this present time, it has proved so to others. Now
that all that shall read, and meditate on this piece, may if they belong to the
Election of Grace, behold and see the visions of the glory of the Lord, that
are either here or any where discovered, and in beholding of them may be more
and more changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even by the Spirit
of the Lord: Is the fervent desire of

The Servant of Jesus CHRIST: M. C.

THE CONTENTS.
TWo parts in the text. p. 2. Three queries in the text. First, How the Spirit
may be said to be a Law? Answered. p. 4. Secondly, How the Spirit of life may
be said to be in Christ? Answered. p. 11. Thirdly, What does the Apostle mean
by the Law of sin and death? Answered. p. 14.
The General observation. p. 21. Two things laid open. First, that the Spirt
of life in Christ frees us from the Law. Secondly, the reasons of it, and ibid.
First, that the Spirit of life in Christ sets us free, as the Spirit is all in
all in Christ, in all his sufferings and actions, is showed. ibid. And
secondly, as the Spirit is all in all in his death. p. 23. And thirdly, as the
Spirit is all in all in his Resurrection. ibid.

Now this Spirit in Christ sets us free from the Law, first, as Christ
fulfilled the law for us. p. 24. Secondly, as Christ adjudged all our sins
against the law, to death upon the cross. p. 26. Thirdly, As Christ is the end
of the Law for Righteousness. p. 30
But secondly, The Spirit of life derived from Christ to us frees us; First,
declaratively. p. 32. Secondly, operatively. p. 33.
The necessity of our freedom from the law by the spirit of life in Christ,
is showed, first because else no flesh could be saved. p. 36. Secondly, that
the righteosnesse of it might be fulfilled in us by the spirit. p. 37. And
thirdly, that God might be all in all, and the Creature nothing at all. p. 38.
Three queeries more, First, whether the law is sin? Answered. p. 39. Secondly,
Wherefore serves the law? Answered. p. 40. Thirdly, whither the law were given
for a rule of life to the people of God? Answered. p. 44.
The uses are. 1. To rebuke and admonish those that really are Antinomians, and
against the law, who go about to make void the law. p. 56. 2. To discover the
sad condition of all that walk after the flesh. p. 60. 3. To invite poor
sinners to come to Jesus Christ. p. 65. 4. To discover the fondness of those
that seek to be justified by works; as all Papist and Papisticall spirits do.
p. 69. 5. To clear the Saints from that calumnious aspersion cast upon them of
being Aminomians, who ^n the contrary are such as establish the law. p. 72. 6.
To inform the Saints of their privileges. p. 76. 7. To exhort the Saints to
walk in the sight of Jesus Christ, and in the light, the purity, and the joys
of the Spirit. p. 83.

Imprimatur.

John Downham

Errata.
PAge 64. line 16. for they read thy, l. 23. f. the r. their, l. 26. f.
condition, r. condition, l. 29. f. wait, r. weight, p. 68. l. 6. f. ceifest, r.
chiefest, l. 22. dele into, l. 26. f. livig, r. living, p. 69. l. 2. f. befre.
r. before, l. 9. f. free, r. freed, l. 12. dele by the. p. 17. l. 15 f. was
justified, r. was not justified, p. 73. l. 19. dele by, p. 62. l. 7. dele mis.
p. 63. l. 4. f. course, r. curse. l. 20. for man crucified, r. man is
crucified, l. 26. f. Ghost, r. Ghost, l. 29. f. trough, r. through.

THE GLORIOUS Excellencies of the Spirit of Adoption.
Romans 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the law of sin and Death.
THis blessed Apostle, (not inferior unto any of the rest of the Apostles)
seems to be carried up always into Heaven (as once he was) while he was
upon earth, so that he tryumphs over all things as having the victory and is
not moved, nor in the least troubled for any of the sufferings he underwent in
the body, but glories in tribulation, and despises the world, for he is
crucified to it, and is as having nothing, yet possessing all things.
Pe^s^^ution, and Prosperity, Penury and Plenty are alike, (welcome) to him;
no Mutation and Change of sublunarie things can trouble his spirit, in a word;
his whole Conversation is in Heaven, though his person be one earth, and no
wonder; for he is filled with the Heavenly manifestations, the sweet
discoveries, and the glorious makings out of the mind of God and Christ,
(through the Spirit) unto him; as appears in all his Epistles (and especially
in this) wherein he holds forth the glorious Mysteries of the Gospel, which
in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men (as he him self says,
Ephesians. 3.5.) but now is made known unto the Apostles and Prophets through
the Spirit. Of which misterieis this Text holds forth a very blessed one: where
he tells us, that the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made him
and all the Saints free from the Law of sin and death.

Now in the words, here are two things contained, a Proposition, and a
supposition, Something by way of proposal, and something by way of supposall.
The proposition is this, that the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus
has set the Saints free. The supposition is this, that the law of sin and
death had brought us into bondage, from which this Spirit of life in Christ
has set us free, in which these two things are to be taken notice of.





1. be a law; or what is meant by the law of the spirit.

2.

3.





1. In the Authority of the Spirit.

2. In the operations or workings of the Spirit.

3. In the guidance of the spirit.



1. As it comes from God. 2. As it is equal with God in the first sense, the
spirit and the Law are one, but in the second, the spirit and the law differs.
But I say, the first part or piece of the Authority of the Spirit is this;
that it comes forth from the Father and the Son, and is sent forth from the
Father and the Son by way of embassage: and so our Savior says; I will send
the Comforter: He is a messenger sent from the Father, and the Son; and so
has mighty Authority. Hitherto the father works, and I work: but if the
Father works, he works by the Spirit, and so if the Son works he works by
the same spirit. Its the same Spirit comes from them both. And thus the Spirit
has Authority, and thus the law has also authority, (I mean the Law given of
God by Moses) for the law has all its Anthority as it comes from God, and as
it is sent sorth by God; so the law has true authority, and in this
Consideration they both agree; the spirit and the law, both have Authority as
they come from God, but then;

2. The spirit has another Authority, which the law simply considered has
not, that is this, the spirit has authority in its self, and from its self:
for the Spirit has as great authority as him that sent him. God is the Spirit,
and the Spirit is God, and the Spirit coming from the bosom of God, is God
himself; and the Spirit has equal Authority with the Father, and the Son,
and has power to work out of his own pleasure, and out of his own will; So
says the Scripture; The wind blows where it lists, so is every man that
is borne of the Spirit. The wind is sometimes in the East, sometime in the
West; no man commands it hither or thither, no man bids it go here or there,
but it goes where it will. It is even so with the spirit; He has authority to
lay hold of one man, and not another, to choose this man, and to give life to
that person, and so suffer another to lie under death and misery: for the
spirit has that prerogative, wherein he is not only as a messenger, but is
equal with the Father and the Son. And so the royal Authority of the Spirit,
exceedingly surpasses the law; though the law have also authority from God, but
then;

spirit comes with its law, it prevails against all, and takes place. The flesh
profits nothing says our Savior, it is the Spirit that quickneth. If the
spirit quickneth, it has life in it; and where life is, it is full of
activity, for life is manifested in this, in that it is full of motion,
quickness, and agilitie, and in beating off every thing that does offend it,
or anoy it. So the spirit being a spirit of life, it has a mighty power in it.
Although the soul be filled with sin, and guilt, and in that condition
clothed also with ignorance, which does so inviron the foul, as it cannot
stir in any other way, nor has the least motion of good in it; yet when the
spirit comes he bears down all, he destroys all; and therefore it is called
the spirit of burning in the scripture. And when Christ comes to Baptize, he is
said to Baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire; so that when the spirit
comes, nothing can stand before him, and he brings both light, and heat, and
motion in him; and is most powerful in operation, But then;

3. The spirit may be said to be a law, or to have a law in it, as it is a
sure, and true guide, and as it leads every soul in a right and true way. And
therefore our Savior tells us, The spirit of truth shall lead you into all
truth. And indeed the Spirit guides securely, and guides safely, guides surely,
and guides, Purely, for the spirit cannot err and he that has the spirit
knows the mind of God, and is guided to fulfill the mind of God, as far as
he has the spirit: for the spirit is a blessed guide, and a blessed rule, and
about the law: for although the law, its true is righteous, holy and good, yet
alas, it Cannot bring forth power, to enable the Creature, to walk suitable to
its self. It is only the Spirit has that power; and not the law. Therefore
the Spirit he is the law of the Saints he shows them the truth, teaches, them
the truth, and leads them in the truth, and gives them power to walk
according to the truth, for its the spirit that guides the Saints to Christ,
who is the truth its self, and so: The spirit guides the Saints, in the ways
of holiness, through the Spirit they mortify the deeds of the body, and live
through the spirit they are guided to deny themselves, to abandon their own
parts, and their own indowments, and their own righteousness, and to see all
in, and to fetch all from a Christ. Through the Spirit, the Saints put away the
garment spotted by the flesh; and forsake their vain conversation, wherein in
times past they walked through the spirit, the Saints are guided to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and holy, and Godly in
the present evil world; through the spirit they are taught to love with an
unfeigned love the household of faith: putting away malice and envy, and the
leaven of discention, and wickedness. through the spirit, the Saints are
guided so to walk, as to shine as lights amidst a crooked and perverse
generation. In a word: through the spirit, the Saints are guided (having
discliamed all their own righteousness) to do that, which the Jews, could
not do, by the light of the law; even to submit to the righteousness of
Christ, that is, to cloth themselves through faith, with the glorious robes of
the righteousness of the Lord Jesus; whereby they see themselves, complete in
him, and thus the spirit is a pure, and a sure guide, and in these three
respects, the Spirit may be said to have a law, and so much may suffice for
answer to the first queree. But;

2.



1. As he is the Fountain of life. 2. As he communicates the spirit of life,
unto all his people.
1. As the Lord lesus Christ is the fountain of life; as the fullness of all
life dwells in him: for so says the Apostle, It pleased the Father, that in
him should all fullness dwell, 1 Cor. 15.47, 45.
and the same Apostle also says, he is the Lord from Heaven, and that the
first Adam was made a living soul, but the second Adam was made a quickening
spirit: and therefore our Savior tells us, the flesh profits nothing; but it
is the spirit that quickens; and the words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life. There is such a fullness of the spirit in Christ,
that whatsoever Christ speaks is spiritual, and carries a spiritual
signification along with it: for indeed the spirit was in him without measure;
so that in him is life originally, or he is the fountain of Life; but then,

2. The Spirit of life is in him by way of communication, all that of the
spirit that is communicated unto us; is communicated unto us in and by the Lord
Jesus. Have we any life, any strength, any beauty upon us, any grace conveyed
unto us? It is all conveyed in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore
our Savior tells the Jews, that he was the bread of life, the bread of
Heaven, that came down from Heaven: And whosoever did eat of his flesh, and
drink of his blood, should live for ever: and he breathed the Holy Ghost on his
disciples; and poures upon every one that believes on him, rivers of living
water, rivers of his spirit; for he conveies fullness of spirituallitie, and
divine strength into them. That man therefore that has the spirit of life in
Christ, conveyed into him: through the spirit of life in Christ living in him,
is the most beautiful creature in the world: for he carries divine sweetness,
and beauty upon his spirit. And he that has this spirit, derived from Christ,
has true life in him: other men may be alive, and yet dead: but that man, that
has the life of Christ, through his spirit that works in him; such a soul
shall live for ever, such a soul shall never die; but it shall be in him, a
well of water, springing up unto everlasting life. It is impossible that such a
man should die; for this reason. He that receives the life of Christ, through
the spirit of Christ; he receives a true being, a divine nature and it is
unpossible, that one drop of the divine nature should perish. (...) very person
that has the divine nature, he has the spirit of Christ, he has Christ as he
raises persons from the dead; and as he delivers them from the power of sin;
and as he quickens them, as himself is a quickening spirit. And so much for
answer of the second querie; but,

3.

T 1. By the law of sin and death, he must mean the power of sin; or, 2. By
the law of sin and death, he means that law which gives sin a being, and
gives it power to destroy;


Now though the first of these may be here included; yet he mainly intends
the second in this place, as I shall show by and by: but if he do here any
thing aim at the first, in this place, it is, as sin is a law; and sin may be
said to be a law, under these two significations.

1. As it has a mighty power in (...), or, 2. As it has a certain kind of
confused rule.
1. It has a mighty power: for so says the Scripture; the flesh lusts
against the spirit; and where there is lust, there is love, and love is as
strong as death, either in good things or in evil: and so sin has its power;
but,

2. It has a kind of uncertain rule, and method: for there is a method in
pleasure, and lust, and sinful joy; after a carnal manner: and so sin is a
law; but that which the Apostle here means is.

2. The law which is the Law that occasions sin: which the law of the spirit
freeth us from, to this purpose observe but the 23. verse of the 7th. Chapter,
which runs thus. But I see another law in my membrs, warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity, unto the law of sin, Where we see,
the Apostle speaks of three laws.

1. The law of the spirit; which he calls the law of his mind. 2. The law of
Concupiscence: which he calls the law in his members; which he says brings him
into Captivity to the third law;
Which he calls the Law of sin: and is the law which occasions sin.

For here is law, against law; bringing into Captivity, to law. The law of sin
in his members, rebelling against the law of the spirit in his mind; or his
inward man, for says Paul, I do see another law, in my members: and this law
in his members, was the power of sin, working through concupiscence and lust;
carrying him contrary to God: rebelling says he against the law of my mind;
meaning against the law of the spirit in his heart, or the spirit in his heart
as a law. And so as he says in another place, The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, leading me captive to the law of sin; Meaning by the law of sin, here
in the last place: that law of which he speaks in the Text. The law of sin
and death; which is the Law that occasions sin, and death: or the Law of
Commandments, and this appears in the verse following the Text: For the Apostle
having said in the Text, that the saints are free from the Law of sin and
death; in the next verse he shows what that law is; in these Words.

For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh; God
sending his own Son, etc. What was that which the law could not do, that the
Son of God did for us?

Answer, 1. the Law could not make us holy.

2. The Law could not free us from sin.

3. The law could not free us from condemnation.

But one the contrary; it brought under guilt, brought us under the curse.

Now what law did this?

The law of Comandments, which (says the Apostle) was weak through the flesh.
And it may be said to be weak through the flesh, thus.

1. In that we are weak, and through the fleshare not able to walk exactly to
the law; nor to come up to the Rule of it in our conversation. And so are not
able to obtain life by it. Therefore God has given us life in another way,
even through his Son. or,

2 In that the law as it is written upon tables of Stone (though it be holy
just and good) has no power as it is in the Letter to convay its self into
us; to enable us to walk according to the rule it prescribes unto us. And this
law is styled the law of sin and death, in these three respect, which the
Scripture holds forth unto us.

1. In that it discovers sin. 2. In that it is the strength of sin. 3. In
that it brings men under the curse: and so liable to death.
1. It discovers sin; For the Apostle tells us, Romans 7.7. I had not known
sin, but by the law: For I had not known lust, except the law had said; Thou
shall not covet, and he tells us further: that where no law is, there is no
transgression. The law is holy, and therefore it discouers unto men their
unholinesse. And,

2. As the law discovers sin, and makes sin to be exceeding sinful, so it is
the strength of sin. The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin, is
the law, 1 Cor. 15.56. where were the strength of sin, were in not for the Law?
and,

3 It brings men under the curse, and under death. For so saves the Apostle, it
is written; Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, that is
written in the Book of the Law to do them: And so being under the curse, the
effect of the curse is death. and therefore says the Apostle; if you walk
after the flesh ye shall dye, and it is the very title that's given to the law
as though there were nothing else in it. The ministeration of condemnation: and
the ministeration of death. 2. Cor. 3.7.9. In the 7 verse the Apostle cales it
the ministeration of death, engraven in stones and in the 9. verse, the
ministeration of condemnation. Thus you see how the lawis held forh in
scripture to be the law of sin and death, now what this law being weak
through the flesh could not do: God has sent Jesus Christ to do for us, and
in us, and therefore he has freed us from that law, and given us another law,
even the law of the Spirit: that the righteousness of the law might be
fullfilled, by the spirit in us, as apears verse 4th. And now being freed from
this law, sin shall not have dominion over us; for we are not under the law,
but under grace; but again it further apeares, that the Apostle in the text
means the law of Condemnation: by comparing it with the precedent verse; where
the Apostle says their is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus;
now least any man should object against that truth, he gives this text as a
reason, as if he should say thus, There is no condemnation to us, that are in
Christ Jesus, because we through the law of the spirit, that is in him; are
freed from the law of sin, and death: and therefore there is no condemnation to
us, although others that are out of Christ, are under the law, and shall be
condemned by the law. We are under another law: the law of the spirit, which is
not the law of death, but the law of life: which is not the ministration of
condemnation: but of Salvation. And thus much for answer to those three
queeries. I shall now proceed to that one observation which is as it were the
sum of the whole verse, and that's this.

The general observation. That the Saints have obtained a freedom from the
law, by the law of the Spirit of life in Christ.
IN the prosecution of this point I shall; 1 Show how the Spirit of life in
Christ freeth us from the law. 2. I shall show the necessity of it.


1. I shall show how the Spirit of life in Christ sets us free from the law:
and this I shall do under a double consideration.

1. Showing how the Spirit of life as it is in Christ sets us free. 1 The
Spirit of life as it is in Christ sets us free as this spirit is all in all in
Christ in all his actions.
2. How the Spirit of life as it is in us, derived from Christ sets us free
but;
First, as it is in Christ. Its the Spirit in Christ, is all in all. In his
sufferings, in his death, and in his resurrection. I say the Spirit of life in
the Lord Jesus is all in all in every thing he did, in the justifying of
sinners. Without the Spirit, he could do nothing: for the flesh is weak and
Profits not: but the Spirit is all in all therefore when the Apostle tells
us, that by the righteousness of one man; the free gift of God came upon al
unto justification of life. Romans 5.18. but because this could not have been,
unless the Lord Jesus had been justified in the Spirit: he therefore tells us,
2. Tim. 3.16 that without controversy this is the mystery of Godliness, GOD
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit; seen of Angels etc. So that
the Lord Jesus, was justified in the Spirit. Now Christ is said, to be
justified in the Spirit two ways, 1. As he is justified in his person: as he
was found to be without all spot; and without all stain, as he was innocent
and holy. And, 2. As he was justified in his works: as they were all
complete, and perfect before God.


And so Christ is justified in the spirit, the spirit is all in all in him in
all his actions: and in all his sufferings. And,

2. As the Spirit is all in all in Christ's in his death.
The Spirit is all in all in his death. He offered himself (says the Apostle
Heb. 9.14.) through the Eternal Spirit without fault to God, he presented
himself as a complete sacrifice to God, through the Eternal Spirit: and this
indeed is the mystery of Godliness: that the Spirit does all in all in
Christ; in that he is justified in the Spirit, and through the Eternal Spirit
he presented himself a complete Sacrifice, without spot to God, flesh and
blood could never have done it: no it was the Eternal Spirit in Christ, is all
in all, and therefore we know the Spirit was poured upon Christ, without
measure. And,

3. As the spirit in his death, As the Spirit is all in all in his Resurrection
so in his Resurrection was all in all. Therefore the Apostle, Romans 1.3, 4
speaking of Christ, says he was made of the seed of David, according to the
flesh: but declared to be the Son of God, with power, according unto the spirit
of holiness, by the Refurrection from the dead, by the Spirit of holiness.
The Lord Jesus was gloriously discovered to be the Son of God: being raised
from the dead by the spirit of holiness. The Lord Jesus was gloriously
discovered to be the Son of God: being raised from the dead by the spirit of
holiness.

Indeed, had it not been for the spirit he might have layne for ever in the
grav, and never have, been discovered: but the Eternal spirit wrought
gloriously in him, in the resurrection from the dead.

Thus you see the Spirit is all in Christ. Now this spirit in Christ sets us
free from the law.
But now I shall show you how the spirit of life being thus in Christ all in
all, sets us free from the Law. And thus,

1. As Christ himself was subject to the Law for us, 1. As Christ fulfilled
the Law for us. Mat. 3.
and thus we shall find he fulfilled all the law for this end, Gal. 4 4, 5. He
was made of a woman, made under the law: for what end? To redeem them that were
under the law. And indeed he fulfilled the law, to the very uttermost. When he
comes to John to be Baptized; he says, ( John resusing to Baptize him) Suffer
it to be so now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteosnesse. The truth
is, it is not possible, that any person, that could not fulfill the whole law
should have bin a Savior of sinners, from the curse of the law. Therefore
says the Apostles, Heb. 7.26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy
harmless, separate from fins. And says he, verse 28. The law makes men high
Priests which have infirmity: But the word of the oath which is since the law,
makes the Son a high priest, who is perfected for evermore, for so the word is
in the Original, though it be other ways rendered, in our ordinary
Translation, so that the Son, the Lord Jesus he is perfected for evermore* he
has no infirmity as those Priests had, no failing, no spot, but is perfected
for evermore, and therefore he says to the Jews, which of you convinces me
of sin? Although he was a friend of publicanes, and sinners, yet he could not
be convicted of sin, for he actually never sinned: but was a Lamb without
spot, and that is the first consideration, wherein Christ has set us free from
the law, in that he has fulfilled the law for us. But,

2. The Lord Jesus hatht set us free from the law, 2. As Christ adiuged all our
sins against the Law, to death upon the Cross.
in that he through the spirit, adjuudged the offenses committed by us, against
the law, unto final and fatal ruin. He upon his Cross, adjudged all our
sins to death, that they should be carried all away, into the land o^
forgetfulness; never any more to be remembered. Now take away the offense; and
the law has nothing to do with you, take away the breaches, and you are free
from all the Curses of the Law. Therefore the Apostle tells us, that in Christ,
sin was condemned in the flesh. Christ did thus condemn sin as he took away
the power of sin, and as he took away sin it self: so that it could have no
voice against us. Now the offense being taken away, of what force is the law?
As suppose a man should live in a Kingdom, wherein there should be a law made,
that whosoever should do such a particular thing, (let it be what it will)
should snffer such a heavy punishmnnt, only the law maker, has power over
the law, to pardon such particular persons, as he pleases: Which if he do, the
law has no voice at all against them. They are free from the law. The law has
nothing to do with them, though all others are under the power of it, yet they
are not under the power of it for the law maker having pardoned these
particular persons; the law has no voice at all against them, and though the
law be powerful against others, yet it cannot against them: they then are free
from the law: the law may be a law to others to condemn them, but not to
these: their offense being pardoned. So the Lord Jesus Christ taking away the
offense, takes away condemning power of the law from us: and so we are not
under the law, but under grace, the law being taken away by Christ: for in that
Christ upon the Cross, adjudged all the breaches and trespasses of us,
committed by us, contrary unto the law to death, and destruction: we are free
from that Law, God sending his own Son in the flesh, condemned sin in the
flesh. How did the Lord Jesus Condemn sin in the flesh? Thus, The Lord Jesus
Christ coming in our nature, and taking our sin upon him; he condemned sin,
and suffered for it, in the flesh: and so took away the voice of sin, and the
power of sin, so that sin is as a condemned man, judged to death, and to be
destroyed. And if sin be taken away, I pray what is become of the law, the
strength of sin? The Apostle tells us that is (in the same manner that sin
is) taken away too, Romans 7.4. we are dead to the law, by the body of Christ;
that we should be married unto another, even to him who is raised from the
dead, etc. So then we are dead to the Law. For thus, They that live unto the
law, have either life from it, or death from it.

1. Life from it: but that we have not; for there is no life from it, but in
the fulfilling of it: but Christ is our life and we are justified freely by
grace, for by the works of the law, shall no man living be justified. Or in the
next Place, they that live to the law, have death from it; for the breach of
it, but we are free from the condemnation of it also: and shall not be
destroyed by the Law: so that we do not live unto the law, but are dead unto
the law. And if you shall ask how? The Apostle answers by the body of Christ.
How is that? Thus. The Lord Jesus Christ taking our nature upon him, in that
body ascending upon the Cross, he there blotted out the handwriting of
ordinances, that was against us, that was contrary to us, that stood cursing of
us; he took it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross. And this is a precious
mystery, which affords the Saints abundant consolation. Again in that the
Apostle says in the aforementioned place, that we are dead to the law by the
body of Christ: it is says he that we should live unto another: as if he had
said, we are not now to live any longer to the law; but Christ has therefore
freed us from living to the Law, that we should live unto himself: live as by
him, and through him; so to him as our first Husband being dead, we are no
longer to live to him: but being married to another, We are to live unto him;
and therefore says the Apostle we are dead to the law, our first husbnd, (to
what end) that we might be married to another; even to him who is raised from
the dead. And this is the further illustrated in the next verse, for says the
Apostle, Now being delivered from the law; that being dead wherein we were
held; It is that we should serve in the newness of the spirit, and not in the
oldnesse of the latter. So now here we see clearly, Christ having adjudged all
our sins to death upon the Cross in his own body; has also by the same way
freed us from the Law. But,

3. 3. As Christ is the end of the law for righteousness. Romans 10.4
And lastly, we are free from the law, by the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ, as Christ is the end of the law; for Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness, unto every one that believes. He is the end of the law for
righteousness. Righteousness could not be by the law, therefore the Lord
Jesus became the end of the law, to bring righteousness to us.

No man can perform the law or walk equivolent to it, and therefore Christ
must be the end of the Law, to bring in everlasting righteousness; that is
such a glorious righteousness; that is such a glorious righnesse, as abides
for ever. The whole law is summed up in Christ, whatever beauty, or glory, or
excellency appears in the law; It gives it all up ^o Christ.

As when many small sums, are gathered up into into one sum, they looze their
number and names in it: So the law, and the beauties of it, being as Several
small sums gathered up into Christ, they looze their name in him, and he is
their perfection. When the Gentiles do bring in their glory into the New
Jerusalem, they shall looze their glory in the New Jerusalem, and New Jerusalem
shall be their glory, so is it with the Law, Christ is the glory of it, and as
the beams of the Sun, end, and are summed up in the Sun; so the law is a
beam of God, and Shadows out something of Christ and of God: But when Christ
came, and took our nature upon him, it was summed up in him, and ends in him,
and in him it appers gloriously: So Christ frees us from the law, as he sums up
the law wholly in himself. If there be any beauty in the law, it is beautiful
as it is in Christ. The truth is, Christ is the substance of it all, and so a
believer sees all the beauty and glory of the law, as it is in Christ for him;
he having fulfilled all righteousness, and so for righteousness he is become
the end of it, to every believer, and he is not to have his righteousness in
the Law, but in Chriist. And thus now we see in these three particulars, how
Christ by the Spirit of life in him has freed us from the law.

Now in the Second place, 2. The spirit of life derived from Clrist to us frees
us.
we may see, how the spirit of life as it is in us derived from Christ, frees
us from the Law, and that is only in these two ways.
1. Declaratively. 2. Operatively.
1. 1. Declaratively.
The Spirit of life in us, frees us from the law declaratively: that is as the
Spirit of Christ in us declares us to be free from the law, and no more under
the law but under grace. For as our savior says, John 15.14. speaking of the
spirit: He shall reserve of mine and show it unto you: and John 16.16. The
Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, shall testify of me* so the
Spirit of Christ, as it is in the Saints, declares to the Saints the things
that are freely given to them of God, and testifies to them of the Lord JESUS,
that he has taken away the hand writing of Ordinances, that was against us,
that was contrary to us, nailing it to his Cross, and declares how the Lord
JESUS has freed us from all our sins, and presented us holy, and
unblameable, and unreproveable, without spot or wrinckle in the sight of God.
It is he that declares to us that the Lord Jesus has fulfilled all
righteousness for us: and in a word is become the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes. I say its the Spiirit in us that
declares these things, and many others unto us, and without the Spirit, no man
can comfortably and truly know the things that are freely given to us of God.
But then;

2. As the law of the Spirit of life in Christ, sets us free from the law
declaratively; so the Law of the spirit of life in Christ, as it is in us, sets
us free from the Law operatively, or by way of operation, therefore the
Apostle, Romans 8.11. tells us, that if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, he, that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you Now if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, but if he be Christ's, you
have the Spirit of Christ, and if you have the Spirit of Christ, it will not be
idle, it will notly still, it will quicken your mortal bodies; yea it will
mortify the deeds of the body, it will burn up all your corruptions, It will
through the declarations of the love of Christ and the grace of God, constrain
you to walk holily, and to deny all ungodliness.

In a word, the Spirit of Christ works in the Saints mightily, and by its
operations in us sets us free from the Law: and so says the Apostle, Romans 7.6.
We are dead to the law, says he, to this end, that we should serve in the
newness of the Spirit, and not in the Oldnesse of the Letter, after a more
spiritual and glorious manner then they of old could (being under the law)
do; for the Law was weak, but what the law could not do, the Spirit can
(...), having more abundant glory then ever the law had. The Spirit being able
to convey power into the creature to fulfill all that he requires of it; For it
brings life along with it, whereas the letter kills, Romans 3.6. Now the Spirit
freeth, us from the letter, in carrying us forth to worship God in the spirit.
In a word which is the mystery of the law of the Spirit, through the
Spiritual fulfilling of the law in us, it frees us from the law, which the
Apostle further makes clear Romans 8. When in the second verse, he had said we
were freed from the law, in the fourth verse he says, it is that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
fiesh but after the Spirit: So the Spirit in fulfiling the law, frees us from
the law, and freeing us from the law, fulfils the law in us. And thus we have
seen how the Spirit of life in Christ has set us free from the law.

And now am I come to show the necessity of the Spirits freeing (...) from the
Law: The necessity of our freedom from the law by the spirit of life in Christ
for these reasons.
Necessary it was;
1. BEcause if there had been no freedom from the Law by Christie then no
flesh could be saved; 2. Because else no flesh could be saved.
for the Law brings us under the curse: But now God sends his Son, and puts
his Spirit without measure upon him, that he might free us from the curse of
the Law. In what a woeful case, and in what a miserable condition had we been
in, every one of us, had not the Lord Jesus come and freed us from the curse of
the Law? But now, God has created Christ Jesus to be a blessing to the world,
to take away the old Covenant, and to make a new Covenant; else no flesh could
be saved, and it was impossible any man should have eternal life; for the
voice of the Law is, he that sins shall die. Now (as the Apostle says) all
have sinned, and it being so, that what the Law says, it says to them that
are under it, then assuredly unless we be freed from being under it, all must
die: so that we see a necessity of being freed from the Law, because else no
flesh could be saved. But then;

2 We are by the Law of the Spirit freed from the Law, for this end, that the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled and wrought in us through the
Spirit: And therefore the Saints are said to have the Law of God written in
their hearts, and to be all taught of God; and having the spirit, they are
said to grow up in the spirit, and to increase with the increase of God; and so
Paul tells us, he presses forward toward the mark: And the spirit is given to
the Saints, that they may all come to be perfect, even to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: And though it be true, the Saints have not
yet obtained perfection (to which they press) while they are here (as Paul
professes of himself, Phil. 3.12.) Yet the time shall come, when in the spirit
they shall be all presented perfect, and without spot in the sight of God: Not
but that we are so already, as God looks upon us all washed in the blood of
Christ; and though it be true that the flesh lusts against the Spirit now,
yet I say, we shall never cause growing up unto perfection, until we do attain
unto perfection; and therefore says the Apostle, when he who is our life shall
appear, 1 Ioh. 3.2.
then shall we uppear with him in glory, and shall be like him, as he is; for
then shall we attain unto a full perfection, when that which is in part shall
be done away, being then perfect. This was the glorious design of God, to make
persons righteous in Christ, as Christ had gathered up all truth and
righteousness in himself. So he being our Head should fulfill righteousness
and truth in us, by the Spirit. And that's the second reason of the point. But
then;

3. 3. That God might be all in all, and the creature nothing at all.
The third reason why we are freed from the law, through the Spirt, is this,
that God might be all in all, and the creature nothing at all. God has
gathered up all into Christ, that we might not be saved by fulfilling the law,
or by any other way, that he alone might be all in all, that the Creature may
not have whereof to boast; therefore he does all freely by his grace and by the
law shall no man living be justified; for if righteousness were by the law,
then might men have whereof to glory, but the great design of God is his own
glory, which he will not give to another, and therefore has he freed us from
the Law, and glorified the riches of his grace toward us that believe, in that
we through the spirit are freed from the law, which brought us under the curse,
that we should not be under the oldnesse of the letter, but be of the
Circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh.

I should here come to the uses of all, but there two or three queeries first
to be answered.
The first is, that which Saint Paul both makes and answers; having (Romans 7.5,
6.) declared this truth here hold forth in the Text, that we are dead unto the
law; and freed from the oldnesse of the letter, that we migot serve in the
newness of the Spirit; this queree he makes to prevent it in others.

Is the Law sin then?
To which the Answer may be in the Apostles words, God forbid? I say God forbid
that any man should so conceive, that that which was given immediately from God
is sin: No says the Apostle, the law, is Holy, and the Commandment holy, just
and good; It speaks nothing but holiness, and there is nothing but purity in
it. I need stand no longer in this to confirm the truth of the purity of the
law it is so apparent. But,

2. Gal. 3.19.
place also makes, and that is this, Wherefore then serves the law?
Answe. viz. To convince every man, and woman, of their miserable condition out
of Christ, and this it does as will appear if you consider this. That no man
can come into the presence of God, or be advanced to the beatifical vision, but
those that are pure, those that are holy; For (as the Apostle tells us) without
holiness, no man shall see God, so that no unclean thing shall stand in the
presence of the most holy God, for he is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity, and therefore he has given forth this Law as a rule for all to walk
by in general, (it being a holy Law) and has declared that in it he sets
before men, life, and death, blessings, and cursings; but man having in him by
nature, the seed and root of all corruption; has therefore a will to do evil,
but none to do good, and having first lost his first image, can never keep this
law, for all have sinned, and all come short by nature of the glory of God,
held forth in this Law; and therefore being in this condition, must (at last)
needs sink into the bottomless pit, and the burning Lake, where the Worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched; if there be not a Mediator stepping in
between, to bring in everlasting righteousness, in which sinners may stand
complete before God, and to redeem them from this Law, which because of sin
puts them into this deplorable condition: So that now all do see, may see, or
shall see, their miserable condition by the Law not having a Savior; and that
is now the use of the Law: And so much in effect the Apostle holds forth, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. Having spoken in the former verses of some that would be Teachers
of the Law, and turning from the Gospel, he bids Timothy to change them to
teach no other doctrine, then the doctrine of the Gospel. Now says he, the
end of the commandment is purity and love; the Law holds forth purity: But
some (says he) that would be Teachers of the Law know not what they say, nor
whereof they affirm: It seems they either did (as the Pharisees) seek
righteousness in the Law, or went it may be a little further, mixing law and
Gospel, preaching that men must be saved partly by the Law, and partly, by
Christ, or some such like doctrine. But positively to say what it was I cannot,
nor is it much material to our purpose. But says the Apostle, though they
know not what they do, yet we know what we do, and what the use and end of the
Law is; we know it is pure, and holds forth purity to all; and all that come
short of the purity thereof, are under the curse thereof, being out of Christ,
and not pure in him, and righteous in him, knowing that the Law is good, if a
man use it lawfully; that is, if it be rightly applied, if we preach the Law
and all the terrors thereof unto all that are out of Christ, and are not
righteous by him: Knowing (says he) that the Law was not made for a righteous
man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for ungodly, and profane, etc. the
law is made for these, and so it discovers their miserable condition unto them;
And so Paul says, the Law discovered sin to him, and he never knew sin before
the Law discovered sin him, and made i^ to be exceeding sinful. So that this
is now the use of the Law, it makes all the world to become guilety before God,
and declares to altheir miserable condition out of Christ. And so much for
answer of the second quaerie. But then,

3. Sinai?
Answ. The Law is not of Faith: That is, Justification by Faith in the Lord
Jesus, is not held forth in the Law, for the law is not of faith. Life by
Christ Jesus is not held forth in the law, but the man that does it shall live
in them: So that the law is not able to bring us to CHRIST, but the law was our
Schoolmaster until CHRIST; And therefore (says the Apostle) before CHRIST
came, the Saints were under the law, as under a Tutor or Governor; but when
the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons; and being sons, he has sent forth the spirit of his
Son, etc. So that CHRIST being come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster,
but being sons have the spirit of CHRIST JESUS now to be our guide: Whereas
before, the Saints were under the Law as a guide, as a Schoolmaster until
Christ. But this will more clearly appear, if you look upon the Covenant that
GOD made with them of old.

And this was the Covenant that God made with them, that they should observe
all the laws, and all the Statutes, and judgments that God had given them,
which are set down in the 20.21.22. and 23. Chapters of Exodus, in which i^
set down, besides the ten precepts, that were afterward written upon tables of
stone, Diverse other Laws and Ordinances, and then in the 3. verse. of the 24
chapter, it is said; Moses came and told the people, all the Words of the LORD
and all the judgments, and all the people answered with one voice, and said:
all that the Lord has said, we will do, and then verse 4. it is said, Moses
wrote all these words of the Lord, and Moses offered burnt offerings, and
sacrificed peace offerings, and took the Book of the Covenant, and read in the
audience of the people, and they said, all that the Lord has spoken will we
do, and be obedient. And Moses took the blood and sprinked on the people, and
said, behold the blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has made with us
concerning all these words, so that this was the Coveant that God then made
with his people, as appears also, Exodus 34.27, 28. Where the first Tables
being broken, Moses goes up again to mount Sinai, and the Lord there making a
recapitulation of those things, in the forementioned Chapters; he says again
to Moses, after the tenor of these words, I have made a Covenant with Israel:
and Moses wrote upon the Tables the Words of the Covenant, the ten
Commandments, which Moses the man of God (who also faithful in all his house)
again presses upon the people all along his whole fifth Book, called
Deuteronomie: declaring from the Lord, the blessings, and cursings, that did
attend the fulfilling and breaking of it. So that this was the Covenant, and
this was the rule by which they were to walk: but most Peculiarly the ten
precepts are said to be the covenant, Exodus 34.28.
as in the forementioned place; though yet the rest of the statutes, and laws,
and judgments were not excluded: so that this is evident that this is the
covenant, that God made with his people, when he took them by the hand, and
led them out of E^^pt and according to this rule they were to walk, in which
was set before them, life, and death, blessings, and curs^ings. But this letme
add; that though the Saints were under this covenant until Christ, yet
besides this they were under a covenant or a promise of free grace too, which
way given to Abraham; in that promise. In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed: which all the Saints, under the law believed: for says
the Apostle. The law which was four hundred and thirty years after could not
disanull it. And therefore the Saints, under their Ceremonies, saw a Christ
then, although but darkly, and in a figure, (as Heb. 9.9) yet all the Saints,
had an eye unto the Lord Jesus, though yet until the coming of Christ, they
were still held under the law, being then under that covenant, though now the
Lord has made a new covenant with his people, since the coming of Chirst in
the flesh, as we find Ier: 31.32.33.34. which is quoted by the Apostle. Hob. 8.
Behold, the days come says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the
House of Israel; not according to the Covenant I made with their fathers, in
the day that I took them by the hand, to lead them out of Egypt: (to wit the
Covenant before mentioned) which my Covenant they brake, although I was an
husband unto them, says the Lord; but this shall be the Covenant, that I will
make with them (says the Lord.) And surely this is a new Covenant; not
according to the tenor of the old Covenant, but a new Covenant, established
upon better promises: Heb. 7.11. and 8.6.
and therefore says the Author to the Hebrews, God finding fault, he says
behold the days come wherein I will make a new covenant, with the house of
Israel. Heb. 8.8. And verse 13. In that he says a new covenant, he has made
the first old: Now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish away:
So then it is not according to the old covenant; But this shall be the
covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days faith
the Lord: I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall
teach no more every man his brother, and every man his neighbor, saying, know
the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest
of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquities, and I will
remember their sin no more. This is the new covenant, and this is a glorious
new covenant indeed: And should I here go about to hold forth the glory of it,
though but in some perticulars, and show wherein it excels the former covenant,
having that in it, which never any former covenant had, this beings new
covenant: It would swell into a large volume; but because I am but answering of
this quaeric, Whether the Law were given for a Rule? I shall here speak but to
that only thus, that it was unto the Israelites before the coming of Christ:
for they were then under that covenant, though now, God has made 3 new
covenant with his people; and they are not under the old, that being (as the
Holy Ghost says) vanished away: and so all that are in Christ Jesus, are under
a new covenant, according to which they are to walk, which comes nothing short
of, but far exceeds in holiness and spiritualitie, the old covenant; and as
many as walk according to this rule, of the new covenant in Christ Jesus, peace
be on them, and mercy, and upon all the Israel of God.

But this let me add: That though the Saints be now freed from that Law, yet
they being spiritual, see a spiritual beauty and glory in it, they see it is
holy, and just, and pure; they see the Characters of the glory of God upon it,
and cannot have slight and undervalewing thoughts of it, as the manner of some
is, though they are not to have overvalewing thoughts, as to think to be
justified thereby, or to think they are to walk no further then that rule for
justification; this I say they cannot do, for the spirit in the Gospel, leads
them further then the Law; yea, it leads them to serve, in the newness of the
spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the Letter: that the Law might be fulfilled
in a spiritual (manner though they are not to tie themselves to that only; but
to go further) yet what is there in the law, that the Spirit in the Gospel
does not spiritually hold forth? Either in the ten Commandments, or all those
other Statutes, and judgments and ordinances, given to them of old? I say what
is there which is not spiritually held forth in the Gospel? Though not in the
outward Letter. Although the Saints do not now, nor are now, to fulfill it in
the Letter, as I might instance in circumcision and many other things yet all
these things are to be fullfild spiritually in them. And thus, though the
Saints are freed from the Law, yet they are to walk by a higher rule, and a
higher Law; the Law of the Spirit, and he is a pure and a sure guide. And he
that has not the Spirit for his guide, he knows not what it is to be united
to the Lord Jesus: for he that has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his,
and as many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God, and i^ is
the spirit of God indeed, that leads the Saints into all truth. That Spirit
that comes from God, leads them up to God. And thus have I briefly answered
this quaery, and showed by comparing the two covenants together, that the
Saints are free from the Law, and that they are not under that covenant; for
for that is made old. etc. So that they are not,

First, under the condemning power.

Nor secondly, are they to seek to be justified by the works of it.

Nor thirdly, are they to take the Law as it lies in the Letter, Romans 7.
in all the parts of it, as a rule to walk by.

But here, lest I should be mistaken by any slight or vain spirits, who may be
apt to conclude, that the Law is utterly to be cast aside now, and is no more
to be looked upon, but they may live as they list: I must further declare, that
though believers are now free from the condemnation of the Law, and though they
are not to take the whole Law as it lies in the Letter of it, to be the rule
of life (as was the Pharisaicall, and now is the Popish manner) yet this Law is
still to be taken as a rule as it is in the spirit: or as it is held forth in
the Gospel. For as I said before, the Law is spiritually held forth in the
Gospel: And so, not only the ten Precepts is to be taken as a Rule, and is
moral, but other Laws besides them (which were given with the ten Precepts)
are rules for Saints now, and are moral also; because the Gospel holds them
forth also. As for instance, that Law of doing good to our Enemies, Exodus 23.4,
5. and that Law that forbids oppression of the poor, and of the Widow, the
fatherless children, and of the stranger, Exodus 22.22, 23, 24 and 23.9. As
also that of keeping just weights, and just balances, and that of reverencing
the ancient and the gray head, etc. These and others, are I say moral as well
as the ten Precepts, because they are hel^ forth in the Gospel, and therefore
are they rules by which Saints are strictly enjoined to walk by. In a word, all
that which is written in the Law and the Prophets, is freely, and fully, and
sweetly to be embraced, and practiced by all believers, as the Gospel holds it
forth: And doubtless the Spirit of Christ does lead those that are his so to
do; whatsoever the practices of others are.

But now on the other side, I would not have any to think that those other
laws which are abolished in the Gospel (I mean in the outward litterall
observation of them) as those typical Ceremonial, and Leviticall laws, are
to be in the least practiced by Believers now; but we are to receive all laws
from the hand of Christ now, and not from the hand of Moses: As the Lord Jesus
now has explained them himself, and by his spirit in his servants in the
Gospel; and not as Moses laid them down.

And thus much in answer, etc.

Now by this time we see this truth clear. That the Saints have obtained a
freedom from the Law, by the law of the Spirit of life that is in Christ
Jesus. And it comes now to be applied in several uses: and it is of use to
both those two sorts of people, which do divide the world. Those that walk
after the flesh, and those that walk after the Spirit: First, those that walk
after the flesh: And,

1. Use. To rebuke and admonish those which really are Antinomians against the
Law and would make void the Law.
And truly they may well be said to deny the Lord Jesus; For were the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus Christ within, it would fulfill in them the righteousness of
the Law: and they would now serve (though not in the oldnesse of the letter,
yet) in the newness of the Spirit. Their spirits would be carried out into a
conformity to Jesus Christ, and the Glorious Image of God would b^- renewed in
them: in a word, they would be a new creature; If any man be in Christ, he is a
new crature. A new creature; What is a new creature? You may the better know it
if you look upon its contrary; The old man: which the Apostle describes, Ephesians,
4.22. Put off the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts.
Now if the Old man be corrupt, and deceitful, the new creature, or the new man
is holy, and pure, and senceare: Ye, the Apostle tells us, verse 24. it is
Created according to the Image of God, in Righteousness, and true holiness.
Let those therefore that thus despise the law, and therefore take liberty to
walk after the flesh, to fulfill the deceitful lusts of the old man; know
that they deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and if they so
continue, they have no part in him. Therefore I would beseech these persons,
seriously to consider, and deeply to pensitrate in their thoughts.

1. That the Law is an express character of the Glory of God: It had such a
glory in it, as made Meses the minister thereof, his face to shine, even by
reason of that glory that is in it: and can you have low thoughts of it? 2. The
law is Holy, Just, and and good: and dare you slightly to esteem of it? 3. It
was the delight of all the Saints since God gave it by the hand of Moses; It
was their meditation day and night, and sweet as honey unto them, ye sweeter
then the honey comb, and how then can you undervalue it? And,
Lastly, it is that that shines gloriously in the Lord Jesus, and that which he
fulfilled in every tittle of it: For he came not to destroy the Law, but to
perfect it, to fulfill it perfectly; that in his Righteousness who fulfilled
the Righteous law, all those that do belong unto him, and are drawn by a
supernatural work of God in their spirits, to believe in him, may be
presented without spot and wrincle before God! O therefore have high thoughts
of it, and set it up in your hearts, and let it be the sweet subject of your
meditations day and night, as it is in the Lord Jesus, as it is in him
fulfilled for you, if you do belong unto him, and as it shall be satissied
also (by the Spirit) who are his. And though you cannot now attain to walk in
the purity of it, and the perfection of it here; yet you shall be perfect in
the spirit, when you are unclothed of this earthly house, and clothed upon
with the house which is from heaven: when that which is perfect is come, and
that which is in part, shall be done away; So leaving these men, in these
contemplations, I come to the next use; And,

2. Use. To discover the sad condition of all that wal^e after the flesh.


1. Art thou such a one as walk in such practices as these, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, laciviousnesse, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, murder,
Drunkenness, revellings, and such like, and wallowest in these practices, as
Swine wallowes in the mire, with a kind of pleasing contentment? Then thou art
one that walk after the flesh. But,

2. Some may please themselves and think, that because they are not notoriously
such persons, therefore they are not such as walk after the flesh: but again,
Do thou mind the things of the flesh? Art thou taken up with carnal
contentments, and carnal pleasures? And though thou scornest the vile and
filthy practices of some, and do not walk in those wayas that are notoriously
evil, and base in the eyes of men; yet if thou delightest altogether in
carnal things, and when thou have thy honors, and a high esteem amongst men,
and delicious fare, and pompous apparel, and fleshly pleasures, and things
succeed according to thy mind, then thou art where thou would be, and art
like a worm always craw^ing upon the earth, and creeping upon dunghils, never
mounting up higher, nor having all thy delights and thy joys; nor placing thy
affections on the things above, nor do by faiths Eagle-eye pierce the
heavens, and see him that is invisible, as Moses did, and do not behold the
Lord Jesus, as thy treasure there, that there thine heart might be also: do
not behold him there, as having taken thy nature upon him, and having in it by
crucifying of it, and shedding his blood washed away thy sins, and is raised up
again, that thou might be raised also unto newness of life, and to live
together with him in glory. Now I say if this be thy condition, that thou do
not behold these glories to the joy of thy soul, and placest not thy delights
here, but mindest the things of the flesh only: then thou still walk after
the flesh. Romans 8.5. For they (says the Apostle) that are after the flesh, do
mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the spirit, the things
of the spirit. But then;

3. But do thou go yet further? And do not only despise fouler and grosser
sins? But do in some sort see a vanity in all the creatures under heaven,
and can find no contentment in them, and therefore labourest and seek by
thine own strength, to find out a way to please God; that so thou may
obtain the favor of God; and therefore endeavourest to walk innocently toward
all men, and though thou failest in many things, yet thou think by thy good
meanings to please God: so though thou can not do as others do; yet thou
please thy self in this estate, and think it is good. But this is still to
walk after the flesh: for here is no Christ, no spirit in all this. Again;

4. Although thou go further then all this, and do not only mean well but
as thou may think do well too; and art strict in observing the Law to thy
power, and art frequent in performing of duties, and observing fasts and in
giving largely to the poor: yet all these things, and many more may thou
do, and that out of a zeal toward God, and yet thou still walk after the
flesh. For Matthew. 5, 20. our Savior tells them; That except their
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; they
should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Though the Pharisees did strictly
observe the law, were frequent in performance of duties, made long prayers,
fasted twice a week, and were liberal to the poor, etc. And the Apostle
Paul, Romans 10.4. tells us, of the of the Jews that he could bear them
record, and they had a zeall of of God; Though not according to knowledge for
(says he) they being ingnorant of the Righteousness of God; and going about
to set up their own righteousness, which is by the Law, have not submitted to
to the righteousness of God, etc. And so though they had a zeal of God, in
the fulfilling of the Law; Yet being without a Christ, they are without a
spirit, and walk after the flesh.

Thus you have seen the Caracters of the men that walk after the flesh: and
they are next to be informed, of their woeful, and miserable condition from
this point, and the first word it speaks to them, is no less then this; They
shall die, die Eternally, it is the direct word of the Apostle Rom: 8.13. for
if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die eternally for they that walk after
the flesh, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God and of Christ Gal: 5.2. so
that your condition is deplorable; and the reason is: because you are under the
law, and all the curses thereof, so that fearful is your condition, for you
are gone no further (being but after the flesh) then, Agar, then mount, Sinai,
then mount, Ebal. you are no further then Agar, which is in bondage with her
children, you are still in bondage, and if their be any spirit in you, it is a
spirit of bondage, a spirit under which you may lie bound, till you drop into
hell. Again, you are no further then mount Sinai: the mount of fear, and
trembling, and you hear nothing but a fearful noise: so that horror and
trembling lights upon you, and fearfullnesse surprises you, and no wonder, you
are no further then mount Ebal. all the curses of the law are thundering
against you: for what says it. Cursed is every one that continues not in all
that is written in the Book of the law to do them. So that Dreadful,
fearful, and lamentable is thy condition, whoever thou art, and wherever thou
art, that walk after the flesh. To be carnally minded is death, death while
alive for thou art but as a dead carkase while thou walk up and down: thou
haste no spiritual life in thee, no spiritual joy in thee, no spiritual
peace, no true contentment nor joy in the holy Ghost: thy pleasures are dead
pleasures, thy comforts are dead comforts, thy life is a dead life for if thou
look upon thoy best comforts, and pleasures, thou shall find bitterness, and
sorrow in them a secret inward anguish in them: so that, they are not to be
compared with those living pleasures, and that glorious sweetness, and peace,
that Saints have in the spirits. And so may I say of all that thou inioyest. Ah
poor creature; h^w sad is thy condition! If it be bitterness in the be
gining, it will much more be bitter in the latter end. And how searfull will
that wait of vergence be, when it shall fully se^^e upon thee?

And now I cannot but bewail, and pity thy condition, and thy deplorable
estate: nor can I leave thee here in it. But,

3. Use. To invite poor sinners to come to Jesus Christ.
2. Cor. 5.20.
Yet he woes thee, and sends his messengers to we thee: And will thou not be
wood; And why? O hearken to his voice, and thy soul shall live! Why what says
he? Truly faithful sayings, and thus, I am come into the world to save
sinners, and dyed for the ungodly, What can thou now say? Though thou art a
sinner; yet thou art not exempted from him; Nay though thou art the chiefest of
sinners; and thy sins be of the deepest dye, though they be Scarlet, and red
like Crimson: yet is the Blood of the LORD JESUS able to make thee as white as
Wool, ye whiter then the Snow. Isa. 1.18. And now, why will thou not accept of
the LORD JESUS? O embrace him for thy Savior! But thou say, How shall I
dare to come to Christ, since I have nothing to bring him, norighteousnesse,
nor holy performances, nor good actions? But he will not be put off so; but
continues still to woe thee, and answers that Objection too, and says, Let him
that is a thirst come, and take of the Water of life freely, Revel. 22.17. Yea
without money and without price, Isa. 55.1. So that he tells thee plainly, he
expects nothing from thee he resolves to be free, and t^ show the riches of
his free grace unto thee.

And now behold he stands at the door, and knockes, and waits to be Gracious:
and now what can thou say, that thou do not hearken unto his sweet voice?
And why is not thine heart ravished with his love, and overcome with his
sweetness?

Can thou yet refuse to be married to the Lord Jesus? And to receive him into
thy bosom, that he may free thee out of thy miserable condition, and adorn
thee with glory? O receive the Lord Jesus, that he may take thee out of thy
rags, and filthynesse, and array thee with royal robes, and put a crown upon
thine head.

But me thinks I should hear thee say. How is it that I must receive him,
that so I may become his Spouse, and may be married unto him, and be his for
ever?

I Answer, Does his sweetness prevail upon thine heartt? and does his love
constrain thee indeed: and art thou so inamored with his beauteous
excellency, that now thy heart does thirst for him? And art thou as it were
cast into pangs of love for him, and longest thou to enjoy him, above any
besides him? Then be leeve that he is the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the World: Believe he came to save the ciefest of sinners, and that
he came to save thee, and to free thee from under the Law, believe that he has
washed away thy sins in his blood: and believe that he loves thee, and
delights in thee for his own sake: And this is all he desires: For if thou
can but thus believe thou art in a most glorious, and a most happy
condition: for thou have formerly had nothing that is good in thee; yet in
belleving (if thou do by the sweet workings of the Spirit in thy soul, truly
believe) thou have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and have the Spirit of Christ,
powered into into thee, as the Lord Jesus himself has said, John 7.38, 39.
He that believes one me, one of his belly shall flow rivers of livig waters.
And this says the Text, he spoke of the Spirit; and indeed, he that believes
on the Son, is at once possessed of the Father, the Son, and the Spirit; and
then, though thou could do nothing befre, yet thou may be able to say
with Paul, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.

And so much for this use, I come now to the next: And,

4. Use. To discover the fondness of those that seek to be instified by his
works, as Papist and Papisticall spirits.
Gal. 2 17. Romans 3.20
but says the Apostle, by the works of the Law shall no man living be
justified. And therefore when the young man in Gospel; that thought to be
justified by his doings, came to our Savious, and said, what must I do to
inheherite eternal life? Our Savior answers to his question, (because he
questions whither he might be saved by doing) and tells him what he must do,
and again says our Savior if thou will be perfect, meaning, if thou by
thine own strength seeks to be perfect, I will tell thee what thou must do:
having before told him that he must do all the works of the Second Table
toward his brother; Our Savior tells him further, he must go, and sell that
he had, and he should have treasure in heaven, and come and follow the Lord
Jesus: but that cast him into a sad fit, as being utterly unable so to do. And
certainly, unless men be able to fulfill the Law to the uttermost, is no
obtaining salvation by it. If thou failest but in one point, thou art guilty of
all, for there is no hope for thee (I mean) in the Law. How vain is it
therefore for any man to seek life by that which speaks nothing but death to
all, since all have sinned, and all come short of it.

Aagaine, consider that no man can come unto the Father, but by the Lord Jesus:
He is the way, the truth, and the life. God has determined to glorify and
magnify his free grace, that all might be of grace, that the Creature might
not have whereof to boast, and therefore, we are justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in CHRIST JESUS Romancs. 3.34. That the
creature might not have whereof to glory, and therefore the Scripture says
that Abraham was justified by works; but Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted unto him, for righteousness.

And therefore says the Apostle, to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted unto him for
righteousness, Rom 4.3.5. And in the 23. and 24. verses the Apostle tells us
again, that Abraham's faith being imputed unto him for rigteousnesse: It was
not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed, unto him; but for us also,
to whom it shall be imputed for righteousne; if we believe on him that raised
up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Be ashamed therefore of thy vanity, thou that
go about to establish thine own righteousness, being ignorant of the
righteousness of God: and be now informed, there is no other name under
heaven, by which thou can be saved, but by the name of Jesus Christ. And,

5. Use. To clear the Saints of that odious nickname of Antinomians.
branded with this contemtible title of Antinomians, or persons against the
law, by scandalous and wicked persons, and that (as it seems) upon this
ground; Because they profess they are saved by free grace, and not by the
works of the law, and instified in believing the promise of free grace,
without the deeds of the Law. That which I shall say for them in this
particular is this, that in this they do not make void the Law, but establish
the Law. And do I say so, or does not rather the Spirit of God by the Apostle,
Romans 3.31. say so: for the Apostle having been in the former ver. discoursing,
that no flesh should be justified by by the Law, but by free grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus; and that the Law is nothing in point of
justification, but it is all imputed to faith: says the Apostle, do we then
make void the Law through faith? God forbid; Yea we establish the Law. And now
you that cast these false aspersions on the Saints: How will you answer the
Apostle here? For you cast not this aspersion upon those that are in these
times only; but upon all that are saved by free grace, through the redemption
that is in the Lord Jesus, in all ages, and places. Now says the Apostle they
do not make void the Law, but they establish it. And now friend whosoever
thou art, that castest this title upon the Saints know, that if thou do not
see, that they establish the Law, it is through thine own ignorance thy
ignorance of the workings of the Spirit of JESUS CHRST, in those that believe:
for though the Saints now are redeemed from the Law, that they might not serve
in the oldnesse of the Letter: yet they now serve in the newness of the
Spirit: and though they be free from the Law; yet it is that the Law of the
Spirit might be put into them: for the Spirit of Jesus Christ works in them
mightily, both to will, and to do: and they are led by the Spirit of God, in
the ways of God. They are led by the Spirit in the ways of holiness, and
purity. And further they are led by the Spirit to do that which is above the
Law, and which the Law does not teach them also: as to believe in the Lord
Jesus, and to see themselves complete in him, and to behold the things that
are freely given to them of God; even that the Lord Jesus is made unto them of
God, wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption: not that they
can possibly slight the Law; (although they are carried in the Spirit beyond
it) as it holds forth any holiness, no, so it is their delight, so it is
sweet unto them. Although they seek not righteousness by it, but by the Lord
Jesus, who has fulfild it for them: which the Lord teach thee by his Spirit to
do, whoever thou art, that brandest any Saint with this title. And thus I
think I need not say more in this particular, to take off men, from casting
this Aspersion upon the Saints: and that for this reason: Because I do not
here speak unto those who have given up their names to Jesus Christ, who ever
they are, for they are not I hope to be charged herewith, nor are they so much
out of their way, as to give out such expressions of their brethren, in whom
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus is: or if they have through weakness, or
mismisinformation, herein failled, a word is enough for them; Their spirits are
so tender, and as for others, it is not much material, if they so break out
still; For the seed of the Bondwoman, be always enemies to the children of the
Freewoman: Only here they may see, though they cast this aspersion upon them,
it is but false.

And so much therefore shall suffice for that use. But,
6. Use. To inform the saints of their privileges.


1. You that walk afer the Spirit, this you see now is your privilege, that
though you were by nature under the course, and children of Wrath even as
others, being under the Law; Yet now you are free from the curse, and from
wroath. And, 2. That though you were once darkness; yet now are you light in
the Lord. And, 3. Though you were once strangers, and alians in your minds by
wicked works; yet now are you drawn nigh to God, by the death of his Son.
And, 4. Though you were once altogether defiled with pollution, and corruption;
yet now your old man crucified, and the deeds of the body are mortified
through the Spirit. And, 5. Though you were once in fear continuaily; yet now
have you continual peace (in some measure) and joy in the Holy Ghost, and why
all this, and much more? But, 6. Trough that privilege, which sums up all
others in it. In that you are translated out of the kingdom and the power of
darkness, into the glorious light and liberty, and Kingdom of the Sons of
God, in Jesus Christ.
1. I say your privilege and glorious prerogative is: that though you were by
nature under the curse, and Children of wrath, even as others: Yet now you are
free from the Curse, and from wrath, for the Lord Jesus was made a curse for
you, to free you from the curse of the Law. The Lord Jesus lay under the Wrath
of the Father, that you might lie down in the love of the Father; And that the
time of your blood might be a time of love to him: so though the Law may curse
others; yet it cannot curse you. For there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus. Who can lay any thing to thy charge, so as to condemn thee?
Surely none can: Neither Satan, nor wicked men, nor good men, nor thine own
conscience, nor Angels, Nay God himself will not, for it is he that justifies
thee; or rather Christ that died, and now being free from every curse, and
every condemnation. O how blessed is thy condition. But,

2. Look yet further upon thy privileges, and see that though thou were once
darkness; yet now art thou light in the Lord: though thou were in a state of
blindness, and ignorance, even as other gentiles walked, taking thy swinge in
the works of Darkness, yet now the Lord Jesus by his Spirit has been a
light unto thee; Who is a light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as others: so
that though thou were altogether kept under, and could not look up unto God,
being in darkness; yet now by the light of the Spirit, thou art able to behold
God in the face of Jesus Christ: to know the mind of God, and what is the
acceptable will of God, in some measure: and now thou see, and and discernest
spiritual things; for thou have now the Spirit, to teach thee to know the
things that are freely given to thee of God. So that,

3. Though thou were a stranger and an alian in thy mind, by wicked works,
works of darkness; yet now art thou drawn nigh to God by the death of his
Son, and though thou were once a stranger, yet now thou art of the common
wealth of Israel, Though thou were once a stranger, now thou art a fellow
Citizen with the Saints in Sion, though thou were once a stranger, and an
alian; yet now thou art of the Family of God, of the Household of God. And what,
a servant there? I and more: A Son, an adopted Son. Nay a fellow heir with
Jesus Christ: Nay more thou art a Spouse, a Bride, the Lambs wife. Thou art
married to the Lord Jesus. Now all the sweetnesses that are to be found in
these relations, are thine. Is it a great privilege to be a Servant to the
Kings person? Thou art so most eminently: Nay he makes thee his friend too. But
it is more to be a Son? Why; thou art so. It is more to be an heir? That is
thy privilege too. But is it more to be a Spouse, a Bride, a Wife? This is
thy Royal Prerogative. Besides many other relations, in which thou stand
through Jesus Christ: as to be Kings, and Priests before God, etc.

And all this though thou were once a stranger unto God, and an Alian unto thy
Fathers house: and were defiled with wicked works, so as thy person was
loathsome, yet even then wast thou received into love, and had these
privileges conferred upon thee: and all through the Lord Jesus, and the Spirit
of life working in him. But,

4. Thou that were once altogether daubed all over with black and bloody
stains of Corruption; yet have thou now that old man Crucified, and these
deeds of the body mortified through the Spirit, and although thy life were as a
sink, continually sending forth abominable corruption, that did even infect
the very air where thou did breath; Yet now, through the Spirit of Holiness
given forth unto thee, by the Lord Jesus; thou art still mortifying the deeds
of the body; and still crucifying these Corruptions. And that spirit that is in
thee, will never cease, until he has totally gotten the victory, over all thy
coruptions, and has set thee in a perfect State: even when thou shall lay
down this fleshly body, and this earthly tabernacle, so that still in the
mean time thou do increase with the increase of God and so thou shall grow
in the Spirit and decrease in the flesh. As John must decrease but Christ must
increase. So thine inperfections must decrease, and thy Christ in thee must
increase. And as the house of David must grow stronger and stronger, and the
house of Saul weaker and weaker. So in thee the Spirit must grow stronger and
stronger but the flesh must grow weaker and weaker, even till the flesh be
utterly overcome, and mortality be swallowed up of life. But then,

5. Though you were once in continual fear, and under a Spirit of bondage,
yet now have you continual peace and joy in the Holy Ghost: for you have not
received the Spirit of bondage, under which you were, while you were in the
bonds of Satan, and chains of darkness, I say you have not received that spirit
of bondage, to fear again: but you have received the Spirit of Sonship, whereby
you seeing God as a reconciled Father, do now serve him without fear (I mean)
slavish fear such fear as may in the least trouble or distract your hearts
with terror, or horror: for that is contrary to the Spirit of Sonship. And
Low can you now fear, that in the Spirit behold the Fathers countenance, as
being reconciled by the Lord Jesus unto him? no, you cannot, for,

6. You that were all your life time subject to bondage, even to the law, and
sin, and Satan; before the coming of the Lord Jesus into your souls, are
now freed from it, and are now in the glorious light, and liberty of the Sons
of God, in Jesus Christ: and now fear, I mean slavish, is cast away; not but
that there remains still a sweet fear, a filial fear, a fear of love: but
this is not a trouble but a solace to your souls: for it proceeds from
sweetness, and ends in sweetness; it proceeds from love, and ends in love. The
discoveries of love to thee, draw it as an effect of love from thee; so all
slavish or perplexing fear is banished now that thou art in the glorious
Kingdom of God in Jesus Christ: 7 Use An exhorta^ion to the Saints to walk in
the sight of Jesus Christ and in the light in the purity in joy of the Spirit.
for thou art brought into a kingdom of glory, being brought unto the Lord
Jesus: and in this, thou have all the privileges, that the most enlarged heart
can think upon, and these are your happinesses, who are dead to the Law, and
married to the Lord Jesus. And now,

7. Use.
ANd lastly, Is it so, that the Saints by the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
have obtained this glorious freedom, and these glorious privileges, and is it
thus, that the Saints of God have the Spirit of Jesus Christ? then here may be
a use of sweet exhortation, unto them: a four fold exhortation.

1. Always to be taking sweet views of the Lord Jesus. 2. To walk in the
glorious light of the Spirit. 3. To walk in the purity of the Spirit, and to
be fruitful through the Spirit. 4. To walk in the joys of the Spirit, and to
rejoice evermore. But,
1. You that are Saints seeing you have obtained this freedom, the text holds
forth by Jesus Christ, in whom you have such glorious privileges: Be exhorted
to be always taking a view of Jesus Christ, and contemplating of that which
Christ has done for you, and though yet, you know but little, be exhorted to
know more, and to grow in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Paul counts all things but dross, and dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ: so do you. It is your only happiness. It is life
eternal; and therefore he that knows most of Christ; let him improve all the
strength of Christ that is given unto him, in the use of all the means God
has for that end given to us, to know more. O let it be your continual
exercise, to study the Lord Jesus, and to meditate of the Lord Jesus: let him
be your meditation day and night. Let the Lord Jesus always be in your heart:
when you lie down, and when you rise up, in your going out, and coming in. In
all your discourses, let the Lord Jesus be held forth; when ever you have
opportunity. especially those which are called to the ministry, and have
opportunities according to their calling to speak in public, being made
overseers of a flock: be always I say holding forth the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the knowledge of the Lord Jesus unto the people, for how are they said to
be ministers of the Gospel, and ministers of Christ that are not continually
preaching Christ? but (as too many do) spend the time in which they should
preach Christ, in discoursing of points of controversy, and of the Civil Law,
and discoursing of the lawfullnesse of war, and the like never holding forth
the knowledge of Christ; or but seldom. I do not nor cannot object against
the lawfulness of such discourses: but I covet to have more of Christ held
forth, and to have the Lord Jesus set up in the hearts of all. And therefore
let this exhortation be acceptable to all, strive to know more of the Lord
Jesus: to know him in every particular. Dive into and take a view of all his
glories, and as you have opportunity, hold them forth to others; but
especially his death. Paul makes that, as if it were the sum of all the
Gospel he was to hold forth: Christ crucified, and therefore he tells us that
he desires to know nothing, and glory in nothing, but a crucified Christ. 1
Cor: 2.2. Gal. 6.14. And O how many, and how sweet are the benefits of the
Cross, and death of Christ? take a veiw of this in the text: how upon the
cross, he took away the handwriting of ordinances, that was against us, and
freed us from the curse of the law; being made a curse upon the Cross for us.
Oh therefore grow in the knowledge of a Christ crucified! And in a word, grow
in all the knowledge of of Christ know him in his death, and the fellowship of
his suffering, and the power of his resurrection: know him in his union with
thee, and relations to thee, etc. And still so prefer the knowledge of Christ
above all other knowledge; as with the holy Apostle and the holy martyr to cry
out: I desire to know none but Christ, none but Christ. And,

2. As you that are Saints, are to be exhorted to be always veiwing of your
Savior and to grow in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ: so having his
Spirit poured upon you: you are now to walk in the glorious light of the
Spirit, that it may appear, that you are children of the light: for this is
your privilege, that ye are now light in the Lord; the Lord Jesus is your
light, and your Sun. Oh therefore let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, shine you
amidst a crooked, and perverse generation, although the blind world walks in
darkness, yet do you walk in the light; in the light of the Spirit, in the
light of the Lord, and as in the day, being children of the light: bring all
your actions into the light, and let them all be according to the light. Let
the light of the Spirit in the Word, be the rule of all your actions, and of
all your holy performances, in every thing you do, search the Scriptures
whither it be so or no; try all things by the light of the Spirit, and hold
fast that which is good. Take up nothing upon trust from others, but be sure to
have a light from the Spirit, for what you do. And,

3. As you are always to be viewing the Lord Jesus and to walk in the light of
the Spirit: you are so also, to walk in the Spirit as to walk in the purity
of the Spirit: bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit. Let your conversation
be as in heaven, while you are upon earth, walk in the Spirit, and be
fruitful in every good word, and work, and quench not the Spirit, but be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. Let all your desires be, to be ever in the
performance of all holy duties. Let it be your meat and drink to be instant
in prayer, to Pray continually, to Pray without ceasing, to be continually
offering up spiritual sacrifices to your God in the Spirit; to hate the garment
spotted by the flesh, to contemn and despise the worlds vanities; love not the
world, nor the things thereof as they are in themselves, but set your
affections upon the things which are above. Thus Saints, walk you in the
spirit, that a sweet frame and disposition always may appear in you, in
doing good unto all, loving your enemies, blessing them that curse you, doing
good unto them that despightfully use you, and if it be possible, live
peaceable with all men, walk inoffensively toward them that are without, and
those within: yield to all men their due; be subject to the higher powers, even
the powers that are ordained of God, both Kings and Magistrates, as far as
the word warrants, being subject to the ordinances of men for the Lords sake,
so far as they are not contrary to the mind of God; and yield tribute to
whom tribute is due, honor to whom honor, and fear to whom fear is due. Be
of a meek and quiet spirit in every passage of your conversation. Let the love
of the brethren be in you abundantly, be as ready to do a brother good, as to
do thy self good, in honor preferring one another; simpathising with the
condition of others, and rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them
that weep, being tender hearted, and bearing one another burdens, forgiving
one another, even as God, for Christ's sake forgave you; and though there may be
differences in judgment among brethren; yet let there be a union in affection,
Considering that there are several degrees of light given out to several
saints: some have higher measures of light then others have. And what if thou
have more light then thy brother? do not despise him, because he is more
ignorant, for what have thou that thou have not received? but consider, that
though he be now other ways minded, God shall reveal it to such a one in his
own time: and besides it may be, thy brother which seems to be much inferior
to thee, in some things, may exceed thee in the knowledge of the mysteries of
Christ in some particulars. And again, though thy brother seem to be in
darkness unto thee, in some particulars; yet it may be, it is through thy
ignorance that do not see that light, that does appear to him: and though it
does not now appear unto thee; yet it may appear, though now it seem an
error to thee Therefore in the mean time, though you differ in judgment, yet
be one in afectition; and be followers of God as dear Chidren, and walk in
love as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering
and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling Savor remember how the Lord
Jesus has said: hereby shall men know that you are my disciples, if you love
one another. Oh therefore let the spirit of love sweetly appear in you, and
dwell in love. And let also humbleness, and lowlynesse of mind, appear in
you, and condesend to men of low estate; and so walk in the frvtes of
holiness, in the spirit: that it may apeere to all, that the Spirit of God,
and of glory rests upon you, and in the Apostles words, whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are of good report, whatsoever, things are
lovely, think one these things; for the spirit is powered upon you, now (says
the Apostle 1. Cor. 3.17, 18. the Lord is that Spirit, and where the spirit, of
the lord is there is liberty; and therefore you all, with open face, beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from
glory, to glory: even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

Lastly the last exhortation to the Saints, is: to walk in the joys of the
Spirit. The Spirit is your comforter and have you the comforter? why the^
should you be sad? why should thy heart be troubled? banish therefore (...)
sinful sorrow, and sadness from your hearts; you that are saints. Rejoice in
the Lord ye righteous, and let all the Children of Zion be joyful in their
kings yea rejoice evermore, and again I say rejoice, your God, has given you
the comforter for this very end: therefore be filled with joy in the Holy ghost.

Indeed had you not the spirit, you might be commanded to rejoice long enough,
and yet never be able to rejoice, but now the Comforter is come, now the Spirit
is given unto thee: What want thou now, to make thee joyful? does he not
take of the things of the father, and of Christ, and show it unto thee? does he
not reveal to thee even the bosom thoughts of thy God? No man has feene, or
can reveal the Father; but the son which came from the bosom of the Father:
and he by his spirit reveals the thoughts, of the love of your God unto you,
from all eternity ye, and the exceeding love where with he has loved you: he
reveals the glorious designs of God in the Lord Jesus for thee; and the
unsearchable riches of his grace. And if so, how comes it to pass, that you
that are Saints, some of you are so disquieted, and sadded in your spirits?
Walking as though you had still the spirit of bondage; which we have not now
received and your hearts are so filled with sorrow? Certainly this is not the
mind of your God; This is not a fruit of the Spirit, but of the flesh: for
the fruits of the Spirit, are love, joy, peace, etc. But these distempering
sadnesses, and fears come from the flesh: as you may observe it in your
selves, when you give way to the flesh, and live below, (and not a bove in the
spirit) as to the pleasures of the world, and upon creature comforts: sorrow
has seized upon you, and your hearts have bin filled with fear; for fear and
sorrow is natural to the flesh: but you have the Spirit, therefore rejoice ever
more, walking a bove the flesh; and always hearken you to the sweet voice of
the Spirit; and be you always singing, and making melody in your hearts to
the Lord, being filled with joy unspeakable, (...) and full of glory. Which the
Lord ((...) these times of horror, and fear to (...) godly men) give in
abundantly vn^^ all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ and his apearing and
coming.

Now unto the King Immortal all Invisible and the only wise God, be honor
and glory for ever and ever. AMEN.
FJNJS.

