A PRVDENT AND SECURE CHOICE.

Worthy of due Consideration being a sure Landmark to all those who have been
tossed to and fro in these wavering Times.

Written by H. G. Gent.

(...). Apoc. 2. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen and Repent, and do
thy first works.

Printed, ANNO DOM. 1650.

TO THE READER.
IT is the garb of this Age to guild the outside with fair pretenses. Yet
(courteous Reader) take me as J am, free from superficial actions: I have a
long time lived in this Sea of afflictions: and by these late Tempests have
been driven from my Harbor, to which I was wonted. I have found my Ship
uncertain; the Cable being feeble; and in all my search, and that no short
one, I never found a more sure Pilot, then this Prudent and Secure choice. Take
it, and thoroughly view it; and I doubt not but it will prove a safe ballast to
thee, as I hope it will to me; Containing all the Controversies, most briefly
and learnedly, between the Church and the Apostate members. Make it thy own,
and I doubt not but thou will return thanks to God. I had thought to have
made a larger Preface; but that had been, to have lighted a candle before the
Sun, which obscureth the Stars; wherefore pardon,

Thy most affectionate Friend, W. V.

A PRUDENT AND Secure choice of Belief. TO HIS DEAR PROTESTANT FRIEND.
Sr.
SInce it has pleased God to put a period to the common professed Religion of
this Nation, and that by Authority of PARLIAMENT; me thinks you stand at a
gaze what to resolve, especially observing what a laughter it has hatched,
never feathered, until the destruction thereof. You know that nothing can be
of greater importance then: he profession of a true Religion, though little
apprehended by such as rise no higher then sense can level, especially in
those scandalous confusions, where Truth may seem more excusably declined what
has been my clear and peaceable resolution, in the distempers give me leave
in love and friendship, to communicate, by these few Papers, to your self
whose Happiness I tender as my own: assured, that if you peruse them with
diligence and sincere love of Truth in this more then ever, you shall
experience me,

Your true Friend and Servant, H. G.

A PRVDENT AND SECVRE CHOICE.
CHAP. 1. The Question stated upon Suppositions prudently not questionable.
1. J Suppose first, That our blessed Savior, being to depart in visible
presence from this World, his last care was to leave his Church provided of
such as should sufficiently Teach, Govern, and advance it. To whom and their
Successors for that purpose, he promised his especial assistance and
protection to the end of the world. As my Father sent me so J send you, Joh.
20. verse. 21. Going into the whole world Preach the Gospel, Mark. 16. Here we
see the Apostles commission not only to go as being sent, but also to send
others their successors with the like Authority to be successively delivered,
since the Apostles, in their own persons could not go into the whole World.
Especially, if by the whole world, we understand both place, and time to the
end thereof. That also be left ample power for the perfect Government of the
same Church, that of Saint Math. ^8. deserves especial consideration: All
power is given to me in heaven and in earth, going therefore teach all
Nations. Where having said all Power is given to me, He presently practices
and gives the like, saying, Going therefore, etc. Moreover, that we may know
nothing is wanting to the perpetual government of his Church, and that justly
it may be assured to be directed, not so much by humane industry, as by the
Spirit of God, he promised, Joh. 14. And J will pray my Father and he will
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, the Spirit of
Truth.

2. It cannot be denied, but these places taken together enforce an eminent,
perpetual, and infallible authority of Christ's Church: for they are to be
understood as they lie or not, if they are, then there is a Church constantly
governing in a Spirit of Truth, even to the end of the World; if not, what Text
is there, that may not maliciously be wrested to a strange sense, by Tongues
sounding nothing more sacredly, then Scripture; witness the times experience.

Thus all Sectaries, though contrary amongst them themselves, avouch for their
undoubted warrant holy Scripture; when it is evident their Proofs are not out
of Scripture, but out of their private Judgments. It must then be confessed
hard to convince any thing by Scripture alone; Not for that it contains not
all necessary Truth, and instruction to Salvation, but because following
private judgments, we may err in the sense thereof.

3. J suppose there is a Visible Church, that bears the true marks of
Christ's promised Providence converting Nations, known throughout all the
World, renowned for continual Succession, knit in Unity, adorned with
unanimous consent of Doctors in all Nations, maintained by Councels, hated by
all, though disagreeing Sectaries, beautified with mukitudes of Holy men,
enriched with glorious Martyrs; finally Professing and teaching all Christian
piety; that justly it may be said, Here is the singer of GOD; this the light
here, God speaks to the world, in one and the same voice, by Christ, and his
Apostle, and succeeding Church, not dis-joynted by damnable Doctrines: for what
Age of men could so conspire with uniforme Contradiction to their venerable
Predecessors, and to their own ruin, embrace Errors hard to nature? Or, how
could a few be so prevalent, as by degrees to seduce the whole World, and that
without note! Sooner may the censurers be suspected of mistake, and the Church
judged better able to justifye their questioned Doctrines, then these not
disproved, to overthrow it.

4. Fourthly, J suppose, what Truth it self denounces Mark. 16. He that will
not believe shall be damned. This sentence doubtless extends to all
dis-beliefe of the Gospel sufficiently proposed, for before he said, going
into the World preach the Gospel. Which is not only his Resurrection (though
it was pronounced by occasion of doubt made, thereof) but many things which
he had to say to them, which then they could not bear away. However no
Christian will deny, but the disbeleif of Gods word is damnable, and this is
sufficient for my present purpose. Hence it follows, that amongst different
Opinions concerning the same Scripture, that part is less secure that denies,
since for Dis-belief, damnation is denounced, not for belief.

5. Fifthly, J Suppose, as consequent to what is said, That if any Article
commonly believed, be judged hard by any private man (and what prime article of
Belief is not hard?) It is not secure for him to condemn it, relying only
upon humane reason, though joined with private interpretation of Scripture (for
he may with the same breath deny all Mysteryes) and the most he can bring is
but a show of Probability not different from Arians and other confessed
Heritickes: consequently insufficient to disprove the contrary professed
Belief, though it be supposed but probably proved out of holy Scripture. But he
must produce clear Scripture; without addition, diminution, supposition, or
interpretation; since these are subject to doubt, and consequently in danger of
leading into dis-beliefe.

6. Sixthly, for my purpose, J require of Disbelievers only, an acknowledgment
of a moral Here (Reader) mistake not the Author, for whereas in many places he
uses the term, Probable, he takes them not for mere Probabilities, but for
infallible Truths. But giving thee the longer end of the staff, he desires
no more of thee.
Probability, in the proof, Beleivers bring out of holy Scripture; and this
cannot be denied to an ancient Church, consisting of Councels, and Learned men
in all parts of the Christian World, agreeing in one, without any alteration
evidently proved.

7. Finally, observe that the Christian world is for the most part divided into
Believers and disbelievers: believers rely on Gods eternal Truth, declared by
his Church, the most impartial interpreter of his Word, not looking so much
upon the hardness of the thing proposed, as the proposal; which if it fail
in one, all may be doubted, if it be sufficient to warrant one; it also
warranteth all, being equally the same to all Disbelievers are of diverse sorts,
pretending Scripture, but according to their private Opinions; hence it is that
they agree in little more then opposing Believers.

8. These Grounds supposed prudently not questionable: the question is among
all Religious, which is securely to be chosen? J answer The Ancient believing:
because it must be supposed at least to have Probable proofs out of Scripture
and to contain no hurt, in which case the Belief is justified. Disbelievers
though their grounds be as probable as those of the Arians, yet they are in
danger, because they dis-believe; according to this rule all particular Points
controverted are easily and clearly proved:

For Example.

CHAP. 2.
9. The real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of our Lords
Supper is securely believed, with danger denied.

TO justify this Belief, we have first the words of Christ promising John. 6.
My flesh is truly meat, and my blood is truly drink, he that eats my flesh,
etc. He that, contrary to the Ancient Church, will not believe this of the
real flesh of Christ in the Sacrament, induced by these obscure words, The
Spirit gives life, the flesh profits nothing; exposes himself to danger of
Disbeliefe with the Jews, and blasphemy; since verse. 56. It is said, he that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and J in him. And St.
Paul. Colos. 1. You which were in times past strangers and enemies, etc. has
he now reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death, to make you holy:
How then can these words, The flesh profits nothing without danger be
understood of the flesh of Christ? Is it not profit to us, that Christ dwells
in us, and we in him? That we are reconciled in the body of his flesh?

10. Secondly, we have the words of Christ performing: This is my body, take,
eat, do this, etc. Which words, if we wrest from the plain received, to a
figurative sense, we must bring clear Scripture for it, else our
interpretation is dangerous, denying so clear, and high a mystery of Faith,
upon humane Motives only.

Thirdly, we have the testimony of St. Paul. 1 Cor. 11. If these places be
obscure; we have besides the consent of Nations, for a Thousand five hundred
years, without notorious contradiction.

Finally, in Belief and Practice there is no impiety, but praise and honor to
Christ, who upon prudent grounds is supposed present, under the forms of Bread
and Wine, after the words of Consecration pronounced in the person of Christ:
he is received with Reverence, love, thankfulness, and lively remembrance of
his Sacred passion, etc. For denial of this Belief, we have but small
Authority, not one clear testimony of Scripture.

11. Only it may be objected, That if Christ be not under those forms of Bread
and Wine, there is danger of Jdolatry.

The contrary is manifest; for Idolatry gives divine worship to a Creature,
choosing such a creature or thing for God; but Beleivers adore, not Bread, nor
Wine, nor any Creature but Christ, God and Man, whom upon invincible Grounds
they suppose present Sacramentally, who in case he were not there, yet
Christians adore him, and not the Bread.

Know therefore, that Adoration consists of outward reverence, conjoined with
interior as of Body and Soul.

The outward is indifferent to God and Creatures, the interior joined with it,
makes the difference; Exterior reverence applied by our intention to a
temporal Lord, is but a Civil worship; the same applied by our intention to a
Saint, as a Creature highly in Gods favor, is a higher degree of honor, then
the former; yet within the limits of Worship, inferior to the worship of God.

It is likewise applied by our Intention, to God our Creator and Savior; thus
it is perfect Adoration, due only to God: whence our adorations are
distinguished only by our knowledge and esteem of the object adored.

He then that beleiveth that Christ is contained Sacramentally under the
forms of Bread and Wine, may securely adore, since his adoration, proceeding
from his Belief, by it transferreth the outward act from all Creatures, and
directs it to God, even in case in his immediate belief, he should possibly
be supposed mistaken. There remains no danger then in the Belief, but much in
the denial, He that will not believe, etc.

CHAP. 3.
12. The Sacrifice of Mass is securely believed, dangerously denied.

Mass is a complete performance of that Command: Do this in remembrance of
me, Luke 22. Wherein by the Priest, prayers are said for the Church, the holy
Scripture is read: all the parts and Ceremonies thereof represent the life and
passion of Christ; who by means of those words, pronounced in his Name, Hoc
est corpus meum, is duly offered in Sacrifice, to the honor of God and profit
of his Church. Whence Faith, Gratitude, and love to our Redeemer is daily
renewed, and the known Prophecy of Malac. chap. 1. fulfilled; From the rising
of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my Name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place a pure oblation is Sacrifized and offered to my
Name, according to ancient and common translation. Thus the Church always
from the Apostles taught and practiced. Securely J follow it; It is dangerous
to deny it.

CHAP. 4.
13. Sacramental confession and Absolution are securely practiced.

HEre a Christian, after due examination of his Conscience, with heartly sorrow
for his sins* and purpose to amend (which acts are necessarily required)
confesses his sins, and expects Absolution by the Ministry of an approved
Priest, what danger can there be in this? The Jews charged Christ of
blasphemy, Saying; who can forgive sins but God? Against Christ they sinned,
first denying him to be God, which sin he chastized by miracle. Math. 9.

Secondly* not believing a Power given to man to forgive sins: this also he
blamed; And that you may know, that the Son of man has Authority in earth to
forgive sins, etc. And the multitude glorified God who had given such
Authority to men; to his Apostles, John. 22. He says, Receive ye the holy
Ghost, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted to them, whose sins ye
retain they are retained, Math. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.

Questionless, the prime sense of these words imports a power given to men to
forgive sins: nothing then is presumptuously believed but received as a
merciful privilege, left by Christ to his dearly redeemed Church.

In opposition, J find no Scripture; but only admirations of a few denyers in
comparison of the Believers, though they deny not, but temporal Princes may
give Commission to subjects, to forgive Treasons against themselves dangerous
then is their denial.

CHAP. 5. Securely we believe one Church, under one Head thereof.
14. Necessary it is, in one Family one Master, in one City one Major, in one
Company one Captain, in one Army one General, in one Commonwealth one State,
in one Kingdom one King. And can it bear any color of offense, to believe
that in the most perfect Commonwealth, instituted by Christ, there should be
one flock under one Pastor? vt fiat unum ovile et unus Pastor. Where there are
two, not subordinate Governements, there is not one Commonwealth, and two
peaceable governing Kings, argue two Kingdoms, where then in Christians we
find diverse Spiritual governments, not subordinate; we must acknowledge
diverse Churches, yet we all say in one Creed, delivered by the Apostles,
conformable to what Christ promised, J believe the holy Catholic Church. Not
one if not subordinate to one visible head, who as he ordained a visible
Church, so he ordained a visible Pastor. That there may be made one flock and
one Pastor. Necessary for the preservation of Unity, and decent Conformity,
without which no Commonwealth is permaent.

15. I find this no where verified but in the successors of Peter, and the
Church adhering to them, clearly promised, Math. 16. verse. 8. Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock will J build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

Behold one rock, one Church, and that permanent, against all assaults: now
known by its singular Constancy, in the midst of continual assaults, John.
21. To Peter Christ said, Feed my sheep; which words imply the office of a
Pastor; that is, not only to provide nourishment, but also to Govern and
defend, without which it were not complete.

That also these words were spoken to Peter only, and consequently only to his
successors; It is manifest by that threefold Interrogation, Simon Peter love
thou me? Especially when he added, More then these. Whereby he excluded the
rest of his Apostles. To which when Saint Peter had answered, that he loved
him. Christ replied to him siingularly; Feed my sheep. That is, the supreme
dignity of Pastorship and Vicegerency J give you, requires a singular love,
and as you love me, so be a true Pastor in my Church.

Grant that by probable arguments all said may appear not evident, I will not
dispute it; yet the common voice of the World so long continued, expressed also
in the Creeds, may justify the Believers of one, holy Catholic, and
Apostolic Church: and not one, unless in one belief under one supreme
visible Governor; whom such as reject out of a persuasion, that they need
none, but Christ; make many Churches disagreeing in confused Beliefes, every
one equally challenging CHRIST for their Governor; securely then one Church
under one visible Pastor is believed, but with danger denied: He that will not
believe the Catholic Church, he that hears you hears me, he that
dispiseth you dispiseth me etc.

CHAP. 6.
16. Securely we commend our selves to the intercession of Saints.

TO justify this, it is sufficient if we prove it conformable to reason, and
no injury to Christ. Saint Paul commended himself to the prayers of
Christians; what must be answered in his excuse will secure us, since we go
to Saints, as Intercessors, not as Givers, and so truly go to Christ. You say
Saints cannot hear us. How know you this? Not by Scripture. It witnesses that
many Prophets saw objects, not only absent, but not existent until many
hundred years after their time, only by Divine inspiration, and shall we now
deny this to Saints enjoying God face to face? Nor by reason: for if their
hearing were by corporal ears, there might be some difficulty; yet since
their hearing is understanding, which is indifferent to conceive objects, as
well absent as present, this difficulty is vain, since we know not how our
soul understands, nor how our eyes see, or ears hear; What hinders then,
but that securely I may believe it.

CHAP. 7.
17. What is Secure concerning the making and worshipping of Images.

FOr a safe resolution in this Point, it is necessary.

First, to declare, what manner of Worship is pretended due to Images; and for
Example, J will discourse of the Image of CHRIST Crucified, whereby it will
appear, what with proportion may be said of the rest. The Worship then
pretended lawful, tends not to the Image, out of apprehension of Divinity
therein contained, but only out of a Faith in CHRIST; represented and imagined
to us by that Image, that is, believing CHRIST represented by it in manner as
the once Visibly appeared, worthy of all honor, which by his Image, as his
representative, I give him; Whence evident it is. First, that by such worship
CHRIST is immediately worshipped; that is, for Himself, and his Picture only
for him, both morally one object of the worship.

Secondly, that no honor due to GOD is transferred to a Creature, since God is
only truly Worshipped for himself, and no Creature religiously worshipped,
but for GOD.

Thirdly, that whatsoever honor exterior or interior, tends toward the
Image, is not for it, nor rests there (as in case of Jdolatry) but by our
Faith, and interior reverence is transferred to CHRIST, for whom and to whom
it is exhibited.

Since therefore perfect Worship consists both in interior, and exterior
acts conjoined; the interior giving life, and the very being of worship to the
exterior, the interior respecting Christ for himself, and the Jmage, only
for CHRIST; Jmage-worship differs infinitely from Jdolatry. In a word, the
worship here in question, is only an outward honor toward the Jmage,
proceeding from an outward reverence to CHRIST represented. As St. Mary
Magdalen worshipped Christ as Man, out of a belief of the Divinity in him, or
rather as some worship their Communion for the relation it has to CHRIST, by
their Belief: So in like manner, worship given to Jmages, is for the connection
they have with Christ himself.

The Question then is, whether the worship of Jmages thus understood, be
lawful?

18. ACcording to the new Translation of our English Bibles, the negative part
against the Believers seems justified, Exodus 20. Expressly forbidding both
making and worshipping any Jmage whatsoever.

But this Translation is evidently false, unless it mean Jmages with relation
to Jdolatry; For in the Law, what is forbidden to be worshipped, is also
forbidden to be made. Thou shall not make to thy self, nor Worship: But the
Law forbids nor Jmages to be made, as it appears by the Jmages in the
Temple, and Cherubims over the Arc, the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. Kings lib.
1. Chap. 6. verse. 23, 27, 29. (according to the English translation) Lions,
Oxen, etc. 1 Kings, chap. 7. verse. 29. Then likewise, it forbids not
Jmage-worship. Jmage then is a false Translation, unless it be understood with
relation to Idolatry, then it makes nothing against the use of Jmages declared.

Moreover, we have manifest warrant in holy Scripture, both for the making and
worshipping of Jmages, not reconcilable with the Law, if understood as the new
Translations import.

The Prophet David teaches, Adore the footstool of our Lord, for he is
holy. Was not the Arc a creature? Yet because God is holy, whose footstool
it was, it was judged worthy to be worshipped.

Joshua chap. 7. Fell prostrate before the Arc: what did he less then is
required in the worship of Images? Or did he break Gods Command?

We read, Exodus 3. 28. Genes. 18. Jos. 5. 14. Apoc. 5. and in other places,
How the holy Prophets adored GOD in Images, or in Angels representing his
Person, prostrating themselves before them, and though their intention was
directed to God; yet their outward act of worship was directed to those
sensible apparitions, or Jmages representing God to their Imaginations; wherein
they conceived God as represented, and those Jmages representing God morally
one object, in the same manner; as it happens in the honor of Jmages, and in
the worship of the figurative Communion.

19. Finally, it is manifest, by the end of the Law; that Idolatry, not
Jmage-worship is forbidden; which was, that the honor of GOD should be
unviolably kept, by giving Divine worship only to him: Therefore in the
beginning he said, J am thy Lord God, thou shall have no other Gods before me.
The reason also he added, why they should make no Idols; For J am thy Lord
God, a jealous God; That is, make to thy self nothing for thy GOD; for J am
thy God.

Jmages, J have proved were Commanded; therefore Jmages as declared, oppose not
Gods honor, consequently are not forbidden, else we must prove a manifest
contradiction in the Law. Thus the received use of Jmages is justified, and not
to be cried down by new Dis-believers, whose danger is apparent, until they
bring evident proofs.

It may be objected, that since Jdolatry has been begun, and maintained by
Jmages; and since men are prone to apply themselves most to Corporal objects,
the secure way is to abandon Jmages, at the least in Churches.

This is spoken without Law or reason: Law there can be none brought, since,
not Jmages, but Jdols, were the beginning of Jdolatry. Jmages J have proved
warrantable in holy Scripture.

Nor Reason; for whereas an Jdoll represents nothing besides it self, and so
is worshipped without any farther relation; an Jmage represents a true
object, distinct from it self; therefore moves a man to a reverence,
proportionable to the object represented.

Whence in reason, an Jdoll occasioneth Jdolatry, not representing any farther
object, whether our thoughts and honor may be transferred; when an Jmage of a
true object, necessarily draws our minds and reverence to something besides
it self. So that ask any simple Believer, whether he pray to the Jmage, or
put any confidence in it, he will answer, No. Ask him again, when he is
kneeling before a Picture, with his eyes fixed on it, whether he directs his
Prayer? He will answer to God, or some Saint represented, whose intercession
he desires. What hurt is in this?

St. Mary Magdalen prostrated her self, kissed and bathed with her tears the
feet of CHRIST, what justified that act? But the union which those Sacred feet
have with his Divinity, which yet she saw not, but apprehended by Faith? Though
between Christ and his Picture, there be not so immediate, yet there is a
moral connection sufficient to termine one moral act of Adoration. Securely
then J honor CHRIST and his Jmage as one moral object; therefore cannot
dishonor the Picture without danger of dishonouring the Prototypon.

CHAP. 8.
20. The like security is showed in all other Articles believed in general.

Who can doubt, but that Purgatory, Free Will, Merit of good works, by the
grace of God; Tradition, Indulgences, etc. are probably proved by Believers;
That also the Belief contains no hurt; securely then they are believed.
Probability also is the most Disbelievers can challenge; unsufficient to secure
them, since the contrary may be true and obliging to Belief; for though they
produce seeming places of Scripture, obscure Authority of ancient Fathers,
endless reasonings, and disputes; satisfactory to few, they can convince no
more, even in their own judgments, then a show of Probability, which all,
though contradictory, equally pretend.

If then there appear no harm, but probability in the Belief, Disbelievers
are in danger, being nearer to that sentence. He that will not Believe shall
be condemned.

Wherefore, if any endeavor to disprove any such Point of belief, by
Scripture, Reason, or Authority; unless they be so evident that they suffer
no Interpretation, or solution (which is not possible) J reject them as
impertinent, and proving an insufficient Probability, which to prevent endless
Contention J grant, and the most that can be expected. But withal asks,
whether they can deny, but that the contrary Belief is apparently proved by
great Authority, and probable places of Scripture: they must grant it.

Whence it must needs follow, That to Believe is secure, and to deny is
evidently dangerous.

Hence that Security which some pretend is manifestly proved to be vain.

They say, God obliges not men to impossibilities, since then at least, the
vulgar sort of people cannot discern those differences wherein Learned men
disagree; each one may securely rest in that he has been taught, believing
his Creed, etc.

If we rely only upon Arguments out of Scripture, the probability of the
Believer is only Secure, which is evident notwithstanding the disputable
Differences be not discernable; for who cannot discern a difference between
Believing and Disbelieving, which though they have equal arguments, yet they
cannot be equally Secure; Probability only securing Belief.

But that discourse clearly convinces the necessity of a Church, as a living
rule; For God obliges us not to impossibilities, but it is impossible for many
to judge between the monstrous differences of private men's interpretations of
Gods word; Therefore he obliges us not to the belief of his Word upon that
account: but has provided a Church, which for that end he protecteth, as is
before showed, Numb. 1. 3. Which we profess to Believe, when we say; J
believe the holy Catholic Church: Sufficient as J will prove to guide us in
our Belief, if there had been no Scripture written.

CHAP. 9. Grant to Disbelievers probability of Reason, yet their danger is
certain.
12. SOme may think that this discourse proves Believers secure, but not that
Disbelievers are in danger, if they be ruled according to the means and
capacity GOD has given them, and that such are not obstinate denyers of Truth,
consequently secure.

J grant that invincible Ignorance may excuse disbelievers, as such, from
sin; yet it follows not that final Disbeliefe (though invincible) can
consist with grace necessary to Salvation; but this J dispute not, nor against
these; but such as do or may discern a difference between Belief and
Disbeliefe, and who may see, that the grounds of Belief are at least probable,
and the practice harmless.

Notwithstanding, adventure upon the denying part, moved only by the same
motives, which they must suppose in confessed Heretics. Or, let any one
define what Disbelievers may be guilty, he shall either conclude these
Disbelievers J speak of, or else acknowledge that there never have been any.

22. Again, it may be urged, that if the Belief be supposed probably true,
then the denial is also Probable, then not damnable. J say the Belief is not
only probably proved; but out of the undeniable Probability, J show it is
sufficient to prove the Belief secure, which cannot be in the Disbeliefe,
though it be supposed to have Probability of arguments.

The difference is, because in the things believed, there appears no hurt,
and in case they be mistaken, Probability may justify their consent,
especially appearing greater then the contrary.

But Disbelieving upon probable seeming grounds (and what Heritique did not
think he had probable grounds?) leaves the disbeliever in certain danger of
denying Christ his Word.

First, because his danger is certain, in the same degree, as the Belief is
supposed probably proved: but the Belief is manifestly supposed to be, at
least, Probably proved.

Therefore the Disbelivers danger is manifest.

You will deny the first Proposition; because GOD obliges us not to the
Belief of controverted Points, though the one side be true; but you must
consider, who they be that breed the Controversy, and against what Authority;
For if every thing that is controverted, is not obligatory, it may be proved
we are obliged to believe scarce any thing: Or, can it be imagined, that
CHRIST leaving so strict a Command of Belief, would have the execution of it,
depend upon Probabilities of dispute? Manifest it is, that the Scriptures are
hard. Manifest it is, he left a Church to direct us, manifest also, is his
Command. Then manifest also it is, that private disputes cannot discharge our
obligation to Belief. See Numb. 25.

Secondly, the Disbelief is as certainly dangerous, as it is certainly not
evident (and more evidence is required to free the disbeliefe from danger then
is necessary to free the Belief) but the disbeliefe is certainly not evident;
Therefore, it is certainly dangerous.

The first Proposition is clear; for if there be not evidence, the contrary
may be true, obliging to Belief: That also the disbeliefe is not evident,
appears by its Novelty, Inconstancy, disagreements (for there is scarce any
Point of Belief but some disbeliever or other assenteth to it) and strong
opposition it has. Neither can the want of evidence in the Articles believed
warrant the disbelievers, who may observe a greater probability for the Belief,
else who could believe? Or rather, who could be charged of Heresy? However, it
is without question, that if Prohability excuse Disbelievers, much more it will
justify Believers: Who then would not be secure?

23. It follows, that although Disbelievers frame to themselves a probable
judgment, yet their danger is certain, because the contrary Belief is
doubtless probably proved; which may convince them, that they leave the secure
Belief, wherein there can be no danger, and choose that part, where on
CHRIST'S denunciation does fall: and danger known breeds an obligation to a
farther inquiry, and removes such ignorance, which alone can excuse error in
Belief.

It may be replied, that where there is Probability of the disbeliefe, it is
not faulty; because then Gods word is not manifest, consequently no injury to
God, not to believe it.

If Probability in disbeliefe excuse from fault, Jews, Arians, etc. are
excused; for they have a probability at least, that is, an esteem and liking
of their private grounds (in their Judgments probable) and since such
Probabilities may be found against any point of Faith, none can be obliged to
believe.

J confess, that standing in the Probability conceived, a man denies not to
believe Gods word, which then he does not know to be his Word, if his
Ignorance be invincible; yet because he cannot but know that the Belief is
as probably proposed, as Commanded, he is obliged to a higher search, which
certainly will bring him to more evidence of his danger and security of that
his Belief, by observation of a greater probability in the Belief, which
hereafter Numb. 26, 27. and 30. J will prove to be an invincible argument of
Truth in point of Faith.

Disbelievers finally flatter thamselves, that they believe GOD's word, and
deny only what they find not contained in holy Scripture.

But first, they must know what is Gods word, before they believe it; they take
not the way to know it, by interpreting Scriptures, according to private
Judgment, but by looking upon the rule God has left to the world.

CHAP. 10. A Rule is necessary to show what is to be Believed.
24. HItherto J have proved Belief secure; Disbeliefe dangerous, standing
only upon private Interpretation of Scripture; Prudence moving me to choose
that part, which is most remote from danger of CHRIST'S sentence.

Now since the obligation of CHRIST'S Command depends not upon Probabilities, J
will in these Differences arising from diversity of Wit, show a necessity of a
common Rule, without which Experience shows there is no agreement amongst
Christians, no Constancy, no true Faith; because resolved no higher than into
private Judgment, which alone makes Disbeliefe unexcusable, though it have
never so seeming probability.

God commands a belief of his Word under pain of Damnation; therefore must
be supposed to manifest to men, what is his Word, otherwise how can they be
obliged to believe it?

But he does not manifest, which is his Word, especially in controverted
Points, by holy Scripture, or private Spirit; therefore some other rule must
be supposed.

Private Spirit is not sufficient, because it is not universal, leading to
Unity, but multiplied with Contradiction, not discernable amongst so many
disagreeing Spirits, which is the true: and who can maintain his own meaning,
only true; and the rest false?

Moreover, a Rule is supposed a common and Secure direction, else no Rule;
which with a private Spirit implies a contradiction, private Spirits being but
private directions; and so private, that it is not known wherein they agree;
for to one it teaches one point of Belief, and denies the rest; To another
it teaches another Point, and denies the rest; to a third it teaches
another, and likewise denies the rest, etc. So that by some Spirit or other,
every point of Belief is taught, and every Point denied: How then is it a Rule?

Scripture also is unsufficient to declare its own sense, as appears by the
great difference amongst Interpreters left to their own judgments, and
contradictory Religions framed thereby; when some must needs be deceived of
their so assured Sense; and who they are who can sufficiently prove by
Scripture alone?

It is evident, that the presumptuous confidence of the sufficiency and
cleernesse of Scriptures alone, has caused these experienced Confusions and
will maintain them, if It be not laid aside.

And prodigious is the blindness which sees it not. For one may truly say,
there is nothing in the World, that more divides Scholars and Commonwealths
into monstrous differences, then the sense of Scriptures, left to private
Judgments; when every man's judgment is left free to guess what he pleases;
that looking this way only, no man can find any assurance of what we are to
Believe; What wonder then, if we have so many contradictory Doctors: Every one
the sole true understander of Gods word? Sole true impugner of Belief? Every
one disproving one Article, and proving another? Whence all Belief is proved,
and every Article disproved by their unfallible Rule, an evident argument of
the insufficiency of this course, and that the Scripture does not declare it
self; therefore it can be no Rule, to determine contradictory Opinions of the
sense of the same, consequently of it self, not sufficient what is Gods word.

25. J declare it evidently; for there is scarce any point of Belief, but some
disbeliever or other finds it in Scripture, then by their rule, they either
prove all points of Faith, or that Scripture is no Rule. For amongst them they
find out almost all we believe, in their undoubted Rule; yet looking upon one
another disagreements, they must say, It is no Rule: The same Scripture
regulating to them every point of Belief, and the same regulating their
disbeliefe in all: Which of these shall the World follow?

Finally, It is as clear, that resting upon private Interpretations of holy
Scripture no high mystery can oblige to Belief; because being subject to
Controversies, Probability must be supposed upon all sides; and why not in one
as well as in another? Then they do not appear Divine revelations,
consequently they oblige not to Belief, if then probable arguments against
Belief be sufficient to excuse the Disbeliefe, all disbeliefe is excusable,
consequently no Faith obliges; another Rule then is necessary.

The texts inducing to this confidence are weak: You shall not add a Word,
Deuteronomy. 4. Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. These things are written that you may
Believe, Joh. 20. All Scripture divinely inspired is profitable: They prove as
much against the Primitive Church, which doubtless was an infallible Rule, and
could not cease by the access of Scriptures. Neither do these Places say,
that all is written which CHRIST taught, or that what is written is divine
Scripture, or that it needs no Interpreter, especially not a Church, but a
private Spirit only.

But now we seem to deny with the same danger.

We deny not any sufficiency on the part of holy Scripture for it is the
undoubted Word of GOD, left to the interpretation of his Church. But only we
deny the sufficiency of our unmannerly Judgments that presume too high.

A Rule then is necessary to fulfill Gods Command, since he does not command a
saving Belief, and leave us so unassured of his Word.

CHAP. 11. The only unfallible Rule to know Gods word.
26. IS the Church holy, Apostolical, not hindered in her Continuance, nor
disproved in her Doctrine, which remains incorrupt, Though the gates of Hell
(as was foretold) breath forth malice at all times against it.

Of this the holy Scripture gives clear testimony, Math. ult. Teach all
Nations, behold J am with you every day even to the end of the World.

Math. 18. 17. If he shall not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a
Heathen and Publican.

Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me, and he that contemns you
contemns me.

Besides, the Church is called, Math. 5. The light of the World. Tim. 3. 15. A
pillar and firmament of Truth. These texts sufficiently prove a living and
infallible Rule.

Then you will say, The Scripture is the Rule whereby to know the Church,
consequently the only rule of all Belief.

True it is, The Church and Scripture give mutual evidence of one another: yet
the first Rule by which we know both Scripture and the sense thereof, is only
the Church: How then do we know the Church?

As the Apostles and Disciples knew CHRIST, by the Testimonies, from God of his
Mission; and as succeeding Ages knew their Predecessors even till this time, by
the providence of God, without interruption, never disproved; otherwise there
can be no true sense made of CHRIST'S Promises of teaching all Nations, of being
with it every day to the consummation of the World; of all being obliged to
hear it; of being a firmament of Truth and light of the world. That were there
no Scripture; as CHRIST was, and his Primitive Church was; so likewise in their
Successors, the same Church, even till the Worlds end, is an infallible Rule
to know what is to be Believed, until it be evidently proved; what Age first
began to conspire against their Teachers, by devising damnable Errors, hard
even to reason and sense, without encountering any public Opposers, even till
these last Hundred years, or thereabout; and without this Church we could not
be assured of holy Scriptures.

Certainly there is not any greater proof of Gods word, nor show of his
Providence, nor clearer means to discide Controversies, than the believing
Church we speak of.

What Authority can compare with it! the Disbelievers only because it
confounded their hardness of Belief, were forced to that poor shift of
adhering to a Church invisible.

If this be not evident, yet it is manifest that there is no motive of
disbeliefe comparable to it. See Numb. 3. 26. Hence J prove the Church to be
the only unfallible Rule whereby to know what is to be believed. GOD
commanding Belief under pain of damnation, must be supposed to declare
sufficiently what is to be believed: But if the Church be not a sufficient
rule, GOD does not sufficiently declare to the world what is to be believed:
Therefore we must confess the Church to be the sufficient Rule consequently
infallible.

The first Proposition is undoubted. The second evident, J have showed Chapter
10. That the Scripture is no sufficient Rule to determine the sense thereof,
private Spirit is also uncertain and not known, as J showed, Numb. 24. It
follows then, that either the Church must be the Rule, or that we have no
rule.

Moreover, who will have the Scripture the rule, mean, as it is interpreted by
themselves, not as it is interpreted by themselves, not as it is Interpreted by
the Church.

J ask them? Does their wit lead them to the true Sense? Or the bare Word? Or,
both? If the first, then their Wit is the rule: If the second, why does not the
bare Word regulate all sincere understandings, or how could the whole ancient
Church be so blind, as not to see it, if it erred as Disbelievers suppose? If
both; J ask again: Whether the Authority of some in this last Age disagreeing
in their pretended Rule, and granting it to teach almost every particular
Doctrine they deny, can be prudently esteemed comparable to the consent of an
Ancient Church, interpreting Scriptures uniformly, never yet evidently
disproved, nor questioned for dissenting from the Primitive, till of late.

27. Hence again, J prove the Church the only Rule whereby we know what is
to be Believed.

THat must be supposed to be the Rule, which is the most probable Proposal;
but the Church is the more probable proposal; Therefore it is the Rule.

The first Proposition is manifest, for where GOD commands Belief, he cannot
permit the contrary Error to be proposed with greater Probability.

That the Church is the more probable Proposal, has all proofs, except only
its Adversaries denial: what Authority, Sanctity, Antiquity, extent, and Unity
is comparable to it?

If you ask here, whether the Wit of men be the rule in the Church; J answer,
That the Church guided by the Spirit of GOD, is the rule.

How do J know this? By the Church it self, endued with such marks and tokens
of Gods presence in it, that prudently J cannot doubt it. See Numb. 3.

The Jews Law was to continue but until the Coming of the MESSIAH, yet in
respect of the great Authority thereof, CHRIST held them excusable adhering to
their Law, and denying himself to be the Messiah; had he not wrought such
Miracles, as no man ever wrought.

No wonder then, if the Church be a rule to Christian belief, until God work
Miracles to disprove it.

And of what nature had they need to be?

Disbelievers will tell you; They are the Church.

The new Church of Disbeliefe, not the ancient believing Church: They cannot
be of the Church, and by Disbelieving fight against the Church, which
consists of Believers.

Their first and only contention with the Church was because it Believed, and
they could not understand how. Yet they could never prove, when the Church
first devised that Belief; wherefore leaving it, they left also the Primitive
Church, though, in words only, they pretend to follow it.

Securely and prudently such a Rule is believed, with danger denied; maugre all
show of Reason to the contrary, since it can be but in show Probable.

CHAP. 12. He that leaves this Rule is in evident danger.
28. IT cannot be denied, but that it is Prudence to rely on such a Church,
believing it, rather then any private Wits or reason denying; therefore Secure.

It is evident also, that there is no other Rule, as J showed Chapter 10. Then
to forsake this Rule is to run into danger of errors in Belief, this also
is proved, Numb. 24.

You say, the Church has erred; therefore is not to be looked upon as a Rule.

What then? Are you sure none will say, that the Scriptures have been
corrupted? Grant they have not, yet who can be assured, that he only
understands them?

In the Church protected by CHRIST, you will suppose Errors without proof;
because you will have no Rule to contain your judgment within the bonds of
Humility, but you can produce no evident proof as you must confess.

Your calling some Scriptures in question, your Interpretations of others, your
questions how? Your modern disagreeing Doctors, your obscurities out of
Antiquity, which is all you can bring; are but the fruits of Wit, and argue
even in your own Judgments, but a Probability against the former received
Articles, invincibly credible.

First, Because the ancient and only known Church has constantly proved
them, by an Uniform interpretation of holy Scriptures, more prevalent than any
new Authority can be to the contrary.

2. Secondly, If they were devised since the Primitive Church, it is not
possible but it would have been Recorded by many, or some ancient Writers:
They being Articles, hard and of highest concernment.

3. Thirdly, Why shall the judgment of a few Denyers condemn a Belief
delivered by the same Scripture, interpreted by the same Church, as all other
Articles were.

29. BY these Proofs well pondered, those supposed Errors will appear
objects of a Christian belief invincibly Prudent, and they evidently credible:
First declared, not by a Parliament, but by General Councels, not in one
Kingdom but in many; not by a few dis-agreeing, but by a Consonant voice
throughout all Parts and times of the Christian world; what more Credible? Then
no Errors, then no marks of an apostating Church.

The Church then remains a Rule, this is at least Probable; then dangerous to
forsake it; Least he that hates it, hates CHRIST.

30. BEcause all that will not Believe what most prudently appears to be
CHRIST'S word, are in danger of denying CHRIST'S word.

But such are the forsakers of this Rule; therefore they are in danger, etc.

The major is proved; because CHRIST cannot be supposed to command Belief,
and permit the most prudent motives to Error.

The minor is certain; because the forsakers of this Rule have no other, nor
Church antienter then themselves, to warrant their Inventions.

The Church then remains not manifestly blemished; then not convinced to
differ from the Primitive: Then the only Catholic, then the deliverer of
GOD's Word, then a Secure rule; dangerous then to forsake it.

If all this be not evident; it is at least Probably proved, and free from
harm.

Securely then believed, dangerously denied; Since the authority of the Church
must appear more prevalent to justify those Articles (pretended Errors) then
Wit of man to blemish it by them.

The Conclusion.
31. THus have I showed the Security of Believers probably, at least,
conformable to CHRIST'S word: The danger also of Disbelievers, contemning the
Authority of an ancient Church, and as yet not convicted of Corruption in
Faith, nor so much as charged by any authority greater than it self; but such
as regenerate by her in CHRIST, did forsake her for liberty of life and Belief.
He that dispiseth it dispiseth CHRIST: Who will not hear the Church, let him
be reputed as a Heathen and a Publican. And choosing the disbelieving part out
of seeming Reasons, exposing themselves to needless danger of that Sentence,
who will not believe shall be condemned. For if the contrary Belief must be
supposed, at the least, Probable, then the Disbeliefe may be a faulty denial
of CHRIST'S word; consequently, it may deserve damnation. This is evident to
reason.

Moreover, since GOD has commanded a belief of his Gospel, I have showed by
Reason and evident Experience of the infinite contradiction of Interpreters,
left to their own private judgments or Spirits, an absolute necessity of some
living Rule; and that no other can be imagined than the Ancient, believing,
undisproved Church, against which all Arguments that wit can produce; if they
be not clearly evident, and beyond the degree of Probability (to which purpose
it will be necessary to disprove evidently all the proofs the said Church
has) they are unsufficient to overthrow an ancient received Church, declaring
and proving the contrary ever since the first Institution thereof.

Who then sees not, how much it concerns a Christian not rashly to deny what
is delivered by an ancient Church?

Upon true belief Gods favor depends, on this Eternal welfare; we expect
but one Death, one irrevocable Judgment, one eternity of Happiness, or
Misery: This is the effect of Disbelief; That is promised to Believers.

Shall a Christian adventure upon such extremities with seeming Probabilities,
and leave Security? Belief is secure void of harm. But to Disbelievers it is
said, Who will not believe shall be damned.

Graviter p^ccat (says St. August. cap. de Baptis.) qui in rebus ad Salutem
animae pertinentibus certis incerta praeponit. Heavy is his sin who in
matters concerning the safety of his Soul, prefers uncertain means before
certain.

Read and consider.

Farewell.
FINIS.
Errata.
COurteous reader, besides many slippes, I desire you in the 2, Epistle, line
15. to read for the these. page 3. l. 9, for the, these. ^ the 11, leave out
them, line 21. put in Secondly, p, 4, for fourthly, thirdly, etc, p, 7, for
religious, religions, p. 11, l, 8, for duly, daily, p, 12, l, 2, for heattly,
hearty, p. 14, l. 15. read permanent, l, 10, for 8. put 18. p. 15, l. 20,
insert two, before Creeds, p. 17. l, 18, for the read he, p. 19. l. 11 for is
it, p. 20. l. 18. for 28, 24, p. 26. l. 8. for 12, 21, pa. 25, l, 4, insert, to
show pa. 36, l, 22, insert true, p. 39, for (see number, 3, and the 26) see
number, 3, page 45, l, 15, put out first.


