TO The right honorable the Lords Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition
of Sir John Gayer Knight and Alderman of London;
SHOWS,
THat by the 29 Chapter of the great Charter, all Commoners are to be tried by
their equals; and there are 30 Sessions of Parliament which confirm the great
Charter, being a Statute declaratory of the Common Law; especially those
eminent Laws, wherein your Lordships had your shares in making of them, viz.
the Petition of Right in the 3o Caroli, and the Act for abolishing the
Star Chamber, and regulating the Council Table, in the 17. Caroli, in which
many Statutes are enumerated, That Commoners ought to be tried by their equals,
by Bill of Indictment or writ original, and by those of their neighborhood;
And all Decrees and Judgments made contrary thereunto, are declared thereby to
be null and void in Law, which bars al Presidents: And by several Declarations
and Ordinances your Lordships have declared, that Ordinances are no Laws, but
temporary, during the Wars; and the cause of necessity being taken away, your
Lordships have promised the free people of England, that they shall be governed
according to the known Laws of the Land, as it appears in the Ordinance dated
the 15 of January, 1647. And it is against the Law of God, Nature and Nations,
that any person or persons should be Judge or Judges, Examiner or Examiners in
their own cause, or to be tried any otherwise then by a known Law, for where
there is no Law there is no transgression. It is declared by Sir Edward Cook
that the Parliament cannot make a Law against the Law of Nature, which is
custom according to Right and necessary Reason. That Presidents are nothing in
comparison of the Common, and Statute Laws, being known Maxims in Law, A facto
ad jus non valet Argumentum; Gubernandum est legibus non exemplis: Articles are
nothing in Law but mere Innovations and Prerogative extrajudicials, especially
when ordinary persons are in question. The old maxim in Law is, Non
recurrendum est ad extraordinaria quando fieri potest per ordinaria. And your
Lordships are not only sworn, but have joined by your legislative power to
impose several oaths upon the free Commoners of England, to defend the
fundamental Laws of the Land. And I am confident your Lordships will be very
tender of the preservation of the great Charter, in which is wrapped up our
lives, liberties and estates. Your noble Predecessors being so glorious and
famous Instruments in assisting the PEOPLE, in purchasing the same.

The Premises considered;
Your Petitioner being a free Commoner of England, according to the known Laws
of the Land ( de Jure) claims his birthright, which is to be tried by God and
his Country, in His Majesty's Court of Justice, by the sworn Judges of the Law,
and a Jury of his equals of his own neighborhood, where the pretended fact was
done, the Courts of Justice being open.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. April 19th. 1648 presented to ye Lords
by him self but Refused --

