To the right Honorable, the Lord GORING, his ever honored Lord,
To the right Worshipful Sir John Rous, his most Noble Patron,
To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Jane Covert, his liberal Benefactor,
To the truly worthy and Worshipful, Master John Packer, his beneficent friend,
Lionell Gatford, B. D. etc. wishes all happiness both temporal and eternal.
Right Honorable, right Worshipful, etc.
ALthough my body be imprisoned, yet (I bless the Lord for it) my soul is
free; so free, that I fear not what man can do unto me. It Is not then to beg
your help for my enlargement, or to crave your support under my sufferings
during my restraint, that I thus address my self unto you. God is my refuge
and strength, a very present help in trouble; Therefore will I not fear,
though the earth be moved, and though the mountains be carried into the midst
of the Sea: though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled; though the
mountains shake with the swelling thereof, Psalm. 46. I have so much faith
(praised be the Author and giver thereof) as to believe that some mountains
shall be removed and cast into the Sea; Mat. 11.24.
and then perhaps the Sea (as upon the casting forth a runaway rebel, Jona. 1.)
will cease from her raging. But whether she do or not, I trust I shall never
be of so little faith, as overmuch to be afraid of mine own sinking. The true
reason of my flying to you at this present, is, in plain terms, this: What
externals soever I either now possess, or have hitherto subsisted by, I have
received from God by the hands of one, or more, of you; and therefore before I
am denuded or spoiled of what I have (which some have threatened) I would have
the world know where I had it; otherwise, I should suspect that my ingratitude
might betray it into their hands that are ready to catch at it. Something I
confess I have by your means, though from the same fountain, more then is
visible; and some thanks I must reserve for you, more then is expressable. This
poor, but sincere (Exhortation to Peace, sent forth in these times of
tumultuous insurrections, will, I hope, render me to you, and to all that shall
chance to peruse it, a true Son of Peace, and a peaceable Son of Truth. And
if no other return should be made you for what ye have adventured in so weak a
vessel, I am confident ye would not think it lost; so entirely do ye love,
and so highly do ye prise both those graces, in whomsoever you find them.
But if God shall vouchsafe, amongst many petitioners, to hear my prayers for
Peace, you shall be sure to feel that I am a Son of Prayer too, by the
blessing of Peace, which I shall never cease to pray for, upon you and all
yours, with as many other as love the peace of our Jerusalem. And this I am
assured ye will accept as the proper retribution of a poor prisoner, and

Your bond-servant, L. G.

Errata.
Page 5. line 14. (...) read (...). p. 8. l. last, dele of. p. 9. l. 8. for rag
r. ray. p. 12. l. 3. for as frees any suit, r. if they can find any such. p.
13. l. 5. for promise r. premise.

To all the Sons of Peace throughout the divided Kingdom of England: Lionell
Gatford B. D. etc. wishes Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father of peace,
and from our Lord Jesus Christ the purchaser and finisher of our peace.
WHen the sound of a civil war within the bowels of this Kingdom first
tingled mine ears, being neither (...) nor (...), neither without natural
affection nor without Christian compassion, I could not but take up to my self
the Prophets sympathizing complaint, Jerem. 4.19, 20. My bowels my bowels, I am
pained at the very heart, my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my
peace, because thou have heard O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm
of war, destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole Land is spoiled,
etc. But then knowing my self to be set a watchman to others, and so the crying
to, or within my self alone, when I saw the sword come, would not excuse me,
but that I stood obliged to lift up my voice like a trumpet and to give others
warning thereof, or else their blood would be required at my hands, Ezekiel. 33.6.
(And what will it profit a man, Prosper.
non pro suo puniri peccato qui puniendus est alieno; not to be punished for
his own sin who shall be condemned for another) I began to cast about, how I
best deliver mine own soul by helping to save others.

Whereupon, observing, that not so much the particular misunderstanding each
other in several passages and messages betwixt the King and His great
Council, as the General not-understanding of the Subjects loyalty and
obedience to their Sovereigne, clouded by the fogs and mists of false teachers,
exhaled from the bogs and creekes of Anabaptists and other Sectaries, had both
begotten and nursed up our miseries to that height of growth, whereunto they
are now come; I resolved, as well for the freeing mine own soul from the
guilt of others blood, as for the preventing others from further embrewing
their hands in the blood of their Christian Brethren, faithfully to impart to
this whole Nation, not mine own private opinion, but the public received
Doctrine of this whole Church, and the harmonious consent of the most eminent
Members thereof, as also the public Doctrine and unanimous consent of other
reformed Churches, and many renowned Worthies therein, concerning the Right,
Power, Honor and Dignity, of Kings and sovereigne Princes, and the loyalty and
obedience due unto them from all their Subjects; together with a discovery of
who and what sort of men have been the prime disturbers of Peace, and raysers
of Rebellion, since the first shining forth of the glorious light of the
Gospel, in those places especially where the Gospel has been propagated; as
also a supplement of satisfying answers to the maine arguments and objections,
whereby the enemies of this Kingdom and their own peace, would evade whatsoever
is asserted against them.

But this my intention was frustrated; for on Jan. 26. in the night, Master
Crumwell, Job 24.16.
a Member of the House of Commons, seized upon the Copy of that Tractat
composed by me for that purpose, as it was then in the press at Cambridge, and
fifteen or sixteen sheets thereof printed, and the same night with his Troops
he apprehended my person quietly reposed in Jesus-Colledge, Luke 22.13.
which with the Copy he transmitted hither to London, (...). Act. 25.27.
on the next Lords day following, and on monday Jan. 30, I was by the
Honorable House of Commons committed prisoner to Ely-House, where I am still
restreined without any charge against me, that I can yet hear of.

Now remembering holy Jeremiahs practice, Jerem. 36.
who when he was shut up in prison, thought not that an excuse sufficient for
not making known to the people those things which concerned them, but sent
forth a roll, written from his own mouth, to be read in the ears of all
Judah; I could not satisfy my conscience quickened with so good an example,
and encouraged with Gods gracious deliverance of him that set it, till I had
sent abroad something, whereby I might in some part inform the people of this
Land of their duty, and discharge mine own; and having nothing in a
readiness (now that my former intended treatise is strangled in the birth) so
seasonable and suitable for these tumultuous and distracted times, as this
exhortation to peace, I have adventured that amongst you.

You will find it indeed flatly opposite, nay fully contradictorie to
multitudes of exhortations, wherewith not only our parlours are pestered, 2 Timothy 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
but our very Pulpits are profaned in these perilous times. It must therefore be
your care with those noble Bereans, Act. 17. to search the Scripturs daily,
whether those things affirmed by those Salij or Priests of Mars in their
skipping vociserations, or these avouched by me a Minister of peace in this
slow-paced Sermon, be according to what is there recorded or not.

For my part I challenge nothing to my self, but weakness and unworthiness;
but by the grace of God I am what I am, and to the praise and glory of his free
grace be it ascribed, I have ever been orthodoxall in judgment, and
conformable in practice, to the established doctrine and discipline of the
Church of England, without swarving or digressing therefrom, either to serve
the times though never so turbulent, or to observe men's humors though never so
potent, during freely to reprove corruption and innovation in Religion and
religious worship, where I met with any such, when the Stentors or Baaling
cryers of these times durst not mutter against them, and always laboring
(though compassed about with many imperfections) to adorn Religion and the
profession thereof by faithfulness in my calling, and by unstainednesse of life
and conversation.

But for those, whose doctrine and practices this Sermon oppugnes; They brag
much of their light, bring them therefore into the light; To the Law and to the
Testimony, and if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them, Isa. 8.20. and he that says he is in the light and hates
his brother, he is in darkness even until now, 1 John 2.9.

They boast likewise that they, and only they, have the spirit; But beloved,
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because
many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. If they have the
spirit you shall know it by the fruit thereof. Now the fruit of the spirit is
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, Galat. 5.22, 23.

They desire also to make you believe, what it seems by Jobs answer, Cap.
12.2. his miserable comforters would have assumed to themselves, that all
wisdom is with them, yea, and shall die with them, if they miscarry; nay,
their very folly and madness is styled by themselves and their Favorites,
spiritual wisdom: But the word of God will try that too; For the wisdom that
is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy,
James 3.17.

For their holiness and righteousness none mayquestion it without the censure
of being a reprobate, for such a presumption; and yet the Scripture is a
touchstone that will prove the truth of that also, even by their love to peace:
For the fruit of Righteousness says Saint James, is sown in peace of them
that make peace, Cap. 3. v. 18. And where envying and strife is, (much more
where war and bloodshedding is) there is confusion and every evil work, v. 16.
And from whence come wars and fightings among you? (says the same Apostle)
come they not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members? Cap. 4. v.
1. But if you would see the holy war of the present times lively set forth,
read on, v. 2, 3. Ye lust and have not, ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot
obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not because ye ask not; ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.

In a word those new teachers, or teachers of news (as the most of them
deserve to be styled) would fain dream you into an opinion, that they are for
peace, as much, or more then any, only they would have peace with truth. But
who can believe them? when they make lies their resuge, and daily wrest and
pervert the Word of truth to encourage to war: without peace, truth cannot be
established, and so long as the people are given over to believe their lies,
it is impossible that peace should be obtained. Nay, had they been men of truth,
neither peace nor truth had been now unsettled, much less shattered into so
many pieces, as that it will be difficult to repair either, and no less then
a miracle to restore both to their former splendour and glory. Had your
Preachers dealt truly with you, I should not have needed to have sent this
sermon of peace at this time amongst you; for if some of them, when they were
consulted by you (as that I presume they were) concerning the lawfulness of
the present war, had not with those lying Prophets 1 King. 22. encouraged to
battle, with a Go and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver, not the City into
the Kings hands, but the King into the hands of the City; certainly our
Jerusalem had still enjoyed her blessed peace, and all that love her peace had
still flowrished in their envied prosperity. I am no accuser of my brethren,
but if from the prophets of Jerusalem, as the Lord once complained by that holy
prophet Jerem. 23.15. profaneness or hypocrisy, (for Gods Name is never more
profaned then by hypocritical prophets) be gone forth into all the land, and
both Jerusalem and the whole Land be ready to be ruined thereby; I conceive I
have authority sufficient even from the Prophet Jeremy to complain of such
Prophets, and that before the people, that so the people may yet at last beware
of them; only this I must tell the people, those filthy dreamers, (as Saint
Jude calls them) those false prophets (as the deceived people themselves will
ere long acknowledge them) who defile the flesh, despise dominion and speak
evil of dignities, Jude Epist. v. 8. teaching others to do the like, do but
dream such dreams as the people have caused to be dreamed Jerem. 29.8. and
although the prophet be a soole, and the spiritual man mad, yet the people
must remember, that it is for the multitudes of their iniquity, and their great
hatred, Hosea 9.7. Either the people being a rebellious people, lying children,
children that will not hear the law of the Lord, Isa. 30.9. have said to the
Seers see not, and to the Prophets prophecy not unto us right things, v. 10.
Or else they have shown themselves too well pleased with them when they have so
prophesied; but not a word more now either of Prophets or people in that way. I
am to present you with an Exhortation to Peace, and therefore I shall avoid as
much as I can whatsoever may exasperate any that are peaceably inclined. The
Prophets, Priests, Princes and people of Jerusalem, had all of them sinned
highly against God, and so provoked him, that he had made a breach amongst
them, which threatened utter destruction unto them, as you may read at large,
Ezekiel. 22. And yet God of his infinite mercy was pleased to seek, and to seek
but for one man amongst them all, to make up the hedge, and stand in the gap
before him, for the Land, that he should not destroy it, v. 30. How then should
we of this Nation, notwithstanding all our sins of Prophets, Priests, Princes,
and people, so resembling Judah's, as if coppied out by them (our rebellion
only excepted, wherein we exceed both them and the most of other Nations) how
should we be encouraged to seek to God to have our breaches made up, and to
approach boldly unto the Throne of his grace, Heb. 3.1.
that we may obtain mercy, and sinde grace to help in time of need? How should
we be quickened in our prayers, and best endeavors for the peace of our
Jerusalem, when the prayers and endeavors of one man is so prevalent with God,
for the making peace for a whole Nation, and for the averting destruction from
it? Whether our prayers prevail with God for the peace of our Jerusalem or
not, we our selves that so love Jerusalem as to pray for the peace thereof, are
sure to prosper; we have Gods Word for it in our Text. To our prayers then, to
our prayers with all possible constancy and fervency, and so to the Sermon with
all due reverence and submission, humbly beseeching our most gracious God,
whose Word is here tendered us, to make this his Word so effectual to us all,
that it may help to make us to pray more and more effectually for Jerusalems
peace, on which depends all our prosperity, Amen, Amen.

So prays A prisoner of the Lord, and your daily Orator, Lionell Gatford.
Ely-house, Feb. 1642.
Text. PSALM. 122. verse. 6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper
that love thee.


THE Scriptures (says Saint Paul) are able to make a man wise unto salvation,
2 Timothy 3.15. Liber psalmorum, etc. The Book of Psalms (says Saint Augustine)
comprehends in it as in an epitomie, or abstract, whatsoever necessary things
all other books of Scripture contain at large. Now amongst the Psalms the
Psalms of degrees are by many accounted Psalms of some degrees of excellency
above other Psames; and amongst the Psames of degrees (if there may be
comparatio gradus ad gradum, a comparing of a degree with a degree, where each
Psalm is in its degree so admirable) this Psalm of degrees out of which my
Text is taken is none of the lowest degree. The text it self. I am sure is one
of the sweetest and pleasantest strains in all the Psames. For what more
delightful and pleasing to God then prayer? the prayer of the upright (says
Solomon) is Gods delight, Pro. 15.8. and let my prayer, says David, be set
forth before thee as incense, Psalm. 141.2. that is let it ascend as a sweet
perfume and pleasant smell into thy nostrils; it being the peculiar honor of
prayer (as Dionisius Carthusianus has observed) to have the style of incense
attributed to it, for nulla justatia (says he) thumiamits comparatur nisi sola
oration, No other theological virtue is compared to incense, but only prayer,
at least not so properly. And this we find incited unto in the first word of
my text, pray, pray, etc.

Again, as nothing is more delightful and pleasing to God then Prayer, so
nothing is more sweet and acceptable to men (except they be men of Belial) then
Peace, Pax non re duntaxat amica, sed nomine quoque ipso jucunda, says
Nazianzen, Peace is not only lovely in the thing, but pleasant also in the
very name; (...), says Basil, the absolutest of Blessings; (...), says
Chrysostom, there is no Blessing equal to Peace; and the Scriptures make good
what they all say by putting Peace so often for all Blessings, as comprehending
all other Blessings in the bosom of it, as amongst other places, Psalm. 125.5.
But peace shall be upon Israel; and Psalm. 29.11. The Lord will bless his
people with peace: or as the ordinary translation reads it: The Lord shall give
his people the Blessing of peace. In both which places the word translated,
Peace, as expositors have observed, non tantum pacem sed reliqua bona omnia
complectatur et corpori et animo necessaria, does not only comprehend peace
within it is signification, but all other good things whatsoever necessary both
for body and soul, as it does also in sundry other places of Scripture. And
this we are called upon here in my Text to pray for; pray for the peace, etc.
The peace, what peace? not the peace of Babylon (though when the Jews were
delivered into the hands of the King of Babylon, and carried away captive
thither, they were commanded both to seek the peace of that City and to pray
for it, Jerem. 29.7.) but the Peace that our text exhorts to pray for, is the
Peace of Jerusalem; that is, according to the literal sense, the Peace of that
City which the Lord has chosen among all the tribes of Israel to place his
name there, 2 Chr. 6. as also to place the throne of David, and so of justice
and judgment there, 2 Samuel 5.5. both expressed in the three immediate verses
before my Text, as arguments to make way for the praying for the peace thereof.
Jerusalem is builded as a City, that is compact together, whither the tribes go
up the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto
the Name of the Lord; for there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of
the house of David, then follows pray for the peace of Jerusalem, etc. Or else
by the peace of Jerusalem, we may understand here, according to the mystical
sense of the words, the peace of Gods Church, in what Cities or Nations soever
it be planted; called Jerusalem which is above and the mother of us all, Gal.
4.26. the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. and that
not without allusion to that and the like prophecy of preaching the Gospel,
Esaias 2.3. Out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem: that is the Gospel shall first be preached, and so the Church first
planted in Jerusalem; and from thence the Gospel shall be published, and so
the Church transplanted in all the world: and therefore the Church having her
first rise, and beginning from Jerusalem, she might well bear Ierusalems name.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. I had once thought to have opened the other
part of the Text, ere I had let you further into the treasury of this: but me
thinks I see you impatient of being kept off any longer, from tasting of these
rarities which have been already presented before you: I forbear therefore all
super-addition of arguments to invite your attention to the Text, and fall
close to the unbowelling of it. The Text at the first touch falls into two
parts; a Precept and a Promise. The precept in the first words, pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem. The promise in the following words, they shall prosper that
love thee.

In the precept these five particulars offer themselves to our consideration.
1. The Act or Duty commanded; and that is to pray. Pray etc. 2. The object of
that Act; and that is peace, Pray for the peace. 3. The Specification or
determination of that object; not for all peace, nor the peace of all; but for
the Peace of Jerusalem. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem. 4. The party by whom
this precept is delivered; and that, as the title of the Psalm shows, is
David. David the King of Jerusalem take Jerusalem in the letter; but David the
son or citizen of Jerusalem, take Jerusalem in the mystery. 5. The party
unto whom this precept is recommended; and they are no where expressed, but
fully employed in the word precamini, or rogate, pray ye: all ye that have any
interest in or relation to Jerusalem, pray for the Peace thereof; so far the
precept extends: but the promise reaches further, and fetches in all those
that love prosperity, assuring them that they shall all prosper that so love
Jerusalem: wherein three other particulars require our observation. 1. The
subject matter of the promise; and that is Prosperity; they shall prosper. 2.
The condition of the promise; and that is, the loving Jerusalem so as to pray
for her peace; they shall prosper that love thee. 3. The extent of the promise,
collected from the persons unto whom this promise is made; namely, they, and
all they, and only they, that so love Jerusalem, as to pray for the Peace
thereof.

These are the parts of the Text, and these are the particulars of each part:
but for fear lest the Text might lose some of its strength and virtue, by
being chopped into so many small pieces. I shall forbear the prosecuting that
division and subdivision, and choose rather to give you the juce and substance,
if not, the spirit and quintessence of all these particulars, in these 4
propositions.

1 That the peace of Jerusalem is a thing most desirable, worthy of the best
prayers, and the prayers of the best.

2 That the prime means, both of procuring and preserving the peace of
Jerusalem, is to pray for it.

3 That it is the duty of all men, that have any interest in or relation to
Jerusalem, to pray for the peace thereof themselves, and to incite others to
do the like.

4 That they, and all they, and only they shall prosper, that so love
Jerusalem, as to pray for the peace thereof,

I begin with the first proposition: That the peace of Jerusalem is a thing
most desirable, worthy of the best prayers, and prayers of the best.

This proposition I shall endeavor to make good, both according to the
literal, and according to the mystical acceptance of this term Jerusalem;
and first according to the literal.

The peace of Jerusalem, as Jerusalem is taken for the place of Gods worship,
and the seat of justice, and judgment, was then, and so is, the peace of all
such places still, a most desirable thing worthy of the best prayers etc.

Tantum est pacis bonum (says Saint Augustine lib. 19. de Civitate Det cap.
11.) ut etiam in rebus terrenis atque mortalibus nihil gratius solcat audiri,
nihil desiderabilius concupisci, nihil possit melius inven^ri; such is the good
of Peace, that amongst earthly and transitory things, nothing is to be heard of
more acceptable, nothing is to be wished for more desirable, nothing can be
found out more excellent. (...), Chrysos ho^^ 3. in Coloss.
(says Saint Chrysostom) the mother of all good things, are the ground of all
joy: and as there is no man qui gaudere nolit, who would not rejoice; so there
is no man qui parem habere nolit, who would not have peace, is Saint Augustines
position in the book before cited cap. 12. and he there makes it good: and
it is so good what he there says, that I think it worthy both of our repeating
and observing, ipsi qui bella volunt (says that stout Champion of the Church)
nihil aliud quam vincere volunt, they that most desire wars, do therefore
desire them that may conquer and overcome: and so in the upshot, they desire
wars that may obtain a more glorious peace: for what is victory or conquest,
but the subduing and bringing into subjection those that oppose and resist? and
what is that when it is accomplished, but very peace? so that wars themselves
are waged upon an intention of peace, and peace is the desired end of all
wars. They which do most disturb the peace which they enjoy, and therefore
are accounted enemies of peace, yea of their own peace, they do not so
properly hate peace, as desire to exchange one peace for another; neither would
they that there should be no peace at all, but that such a peace should be as
they would. The most factious, seditious fellows that are, though out of their
factious, seditious spirits, they separate themselves from society and peace
with others; yet with their fellow-conspirators, they observe and keep an exact
kind of peace, or else they could never improve their conspiracies to so much
mischiefs as they do. Thieves and robbers could not either with the least
safety or success, infect and trouble the peace of others, unless they did
preserve a firm seeming peace amongst themselves: or if there be any such
beast of prey, that is either so powerful in strength, or so fearful by
nature, that he need not, or dare not commit himself to any companion, but
plots and acts all his robberies and other outrages himself alone, yet in his
own house, with his own family, he studies peace and quietness; and if any
disturbance chance therein, none more forward, then he to correct and vindicate
it, domus suae pacem si ita necesse est (says Saint Augustine of such a one)
etiam saeviendo componit, he composeth the peace of his house, if it be
needful so to do, even by tyrannizing and exercising cruelty on those that
infringed it. Nay, I will crave leave to step one step further with that
father; let us for once suppose such a monster as the Poets feigned their Cacus
to be, whom for his insociable savagenesse they called semi hominem non
hominem, but half a man not a man; one cujus regnum dirae speluncae fuerit
solitudo, whose lonesomenesse in a direful cave was his Kingdom, and whose
wickedness was so beyond other men's, that like the Devil he had his name
from it; (...).
one that took pleasure neither in the winning society of a wife, nor in the
recreating sports of children; one that would neither rule over others, nor
enter conference with them; one that would give nothing to any, but take from
all whatsoever he could, and could take whatsoever he pleased; yet this horrid
monster so abhorring all peace with others, does by his very solitariness and
detestation of all society, declare plainly that freedom from all molestation,
and so peace, is the prime scope and aim of all his desires. And that I make
not a fiction the uppermost step of my gradation, suffer me to tell you that
the very devils themselves, what inveterate, implacable cruelty soever they
bear against the peace of men, amongst themselves they conspire for peace, and
do to all admiration conserve it: Satan is not divided against satan, Mark 3.
and a whole legion of devils can dwell together, as one in one man, Mark 5.9.
Nothing therefore is naturally more desirable then peace, and there is none
that has all the impressions of nature so defaced in him, but that some peace
or other is beloved and desired of him; how much more desirable then, is the
peace of Jerusalem, as it is the place of Gods worship and service, and the seat
of justice and judgment to all those that love either? Where there is no peace,
the public worship and service of God does not only lose its beauty and
comeliness, but suffers much in its very essence and being. One thing (says
David) have I desired of the Lord that I will seek after, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord
and visit his temple, or enquire in his temple, Psalm. 27.4. but because David
was a man of war, and the time of his reign a time of war, he never could
obtain this his desire in any perfection, though he were most zealous and
earnest in it. David never so much as thought of building an house unto the
Lord, till he had some respite from war as appears, 2 Samuel 7.1, 2. etc. and
when he did think on it, God, who knew his thoughts, knew also that it was in
a manner to no purpose for him, upon whom wars were presently to return, to
undertake that work; for neither could that work it self be so well effected
in such times nor the public worship of God in that house if it should be
built, be near so well performed as it would be in more peaceable times. And
therefore observe how the Lord took off David from those thoughts, as David
himself relates it to his son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22. v. 7.8.9.10. And David
said to Solomon, my son, as for me, it was in my mind to build an house unto
the Name of the Lord my God; but the Word of the Lord came to me saying, thou
have shed blood abundantly, and have made great wars; thou shall not build an
house unto my name, because thou have shed much blood upon the earch in my
sight, behold a son shall be borne unto thee, who shall be a man of rest, and
I will give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be
Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness to I frael in his days, he shall
build an house for my Name, etc. Behold David, a man of war, though a man
after Gods own heart. and his wars no other then what God had approved; he
was inhibited the building of an house for Gods public worship and service,
only for this reason; because he had shed much blood and made great wars;
whereas the bloody reformers of these times cry up the laying of the foundation
of their reformation of Gods public worship in service in nothing but blood,
and that the blood of those who profess the worshipping and serving of God in
that public manner, and way; for the sounding and erecting whereof, many
renowned Mattyres were willing to lose their blood; so sarre are their thoughts
from Gods thoughts, and their ways from Gods ways. Observe further, how God
(to clear his own reason, of forbidding David to build him an house, that it
was therefore and therefore only, because he had made great wars and shed
much blood) at the same time, when he inhibited David for that cause, he gave
commandment to his Son Solomon to build him an house for his name, and
alleges the just contrary reason for that command, viz. because he should be
a man of peace and rest, and one unto whom God promised that he would give rest
from his enemies round about, and give peace and quietness to Israel in his
days. And he indeed undertook this work and so prospered in it, that he
finished it in seven years. 1 Kin. 6.38. The inferences from hence are many
and various according to the apprehension of several Expositors; but all that
I shall urge from hence, is but what I have already touched, That God by the
very time appointed by him for the building of his Temple, the place of his
public worship and service, signifies unto us, that times of peace are the
only times for his public worship and service it self, and that wars,
though never so just, do not only hinder it but do in a manner, yea and in a
great measure to, profane it: and what I say of the times of peace and war,
must of necessity reach to the places where peace or wars settle; and
therefore as the house for Gods public worship and service, was at first built
in time of peace, so 'twas built in a City of peace in Jerusalem, which is by
interpretation the vision of peace.

God may, I confess, be worshipped and served publicly in some Camps or
Leagers, yea in the midst of Mars-hill (as it is said, Saint Paul once preached,
Acts 17.23.) But alas the worship and service, that is usually performed unto
God in such places, has scarce a rag of that beauty and splendour, or a spark
of that zeal and vigor, wherewith it is adorned and inclined in places of
peace, unless they be such places of peace, as do not know what belong to
their peace, which indeed Jerusalem her self sometimes did not, Luke 19.42.

How beautiful upon the mountains (says the Prophet) are feet of him that
brings good tidings, that publishes peace, Isa. 52.7. The Apostle appplies
that saying to the Preachers of the Gospel, Fom. 10.15. How beautiful are the
feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, etc. The beauty and excellency
of preaching the Gospel is such, as neither the Prophet nor the Apostle could
express, and therefore they cry out in admiration thereof, quam speciosi
pedes, etc. how beautiful are the feet of him or them, that publish or preach
peace; and as there is beauty in the public preaching the Gospel, so there is
beauty in the public praying unto God, and praising of him, as also in the
rest of Gods public worship and service rightly performed; and therefore is
the whole worship and service of God in his house called, (as you heard but
now) by the kingly Prophet David, the beauty of the Lord Psa. 27. and the
beauty of holiness Psalm. 29.2. But beloved in what places is this beauty and
excellency of Gods worship and service to be found? Not in those places wherein
the sound of the trumpet, and alarm of war are daily heard; for what
agreement has the preaching of the Gospel of peace with warring and fighting,
or what entertainment can praying find, where killing and murdering are
professed, and who can hope to hear the voice of praising God, where cursing
and blaspheming his Name are so uncontrolledly practiced? it is a short but a
smart and pithy examination of the Soldiers Paternoster, which Erasmus takes
in his Querimoniae pacis, I will add but a little to it, and by it you may
guess how God is worshipped and served in those places, where such men keep
their Randevooze; quid quaeso orat miles, what, I beseech you (says Erasmus)
does the Soldier pray, or how? Do thou say Our Father? O impudent mouth!
do thou dare to call God father, who art flying at the throat of thy
brother to cut it or tear it out? Do thou say, hallowed be Thy Name, when
Gods Name is by none more blasphemed and dishonored, then by thee and thy
Comrades? Do thou say, thy Kingdom come, when none is a greater enemy to the
Kingdom of grace, and has less hope of the Kingdom of glory then thy self?
Do thou say, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, and yet when God
tells thee, that it is his will that thou should follow peace with all men, and
holiness, thou delightest in war and all manner of wickedness, refusing all
just conditions of peace and adhortations to piety? Do thou say Give us this
day our daily bread, and yet take away by violence and rapine, all the bread
and other necessaries of life, that thy poor brother has labored for in the
sweat of his brows? Do thou beseech the Lord to forgive thee thy trespasses
as thou forgivest them that trespass against thee, when as nothing but thy
brothers blood will satisfy thee, and his too who never did, nor would have
offended thee did not or had not thou first beyond measure provoked him?
Do thou pray not to be led into temptation, and yet accountest it
pusillanimity not to venture upon any thing, that thy lusts tempts thee unto?
And do thou supplicate to be delivered from all evil, and yet art never at
rest from plotting and practicing all the evil thy heart can invent, making it
thy trade of life, to live all thy days in that evil of evils bloody war?
What is all this praying but a mocking of God, and blaspheming of his Name; and
how then can praying, or any other part of Gods service, be performed as it
should in those places where wars rage? when the actors in that bloody
tragedy, being the only men of power and sway in those places, are so flatly
opposite in all their practices to what is commanded by God or desired from
him; I but will some Soldiers of these times say, you are quite mistaken in
us, we do not use the Lords Prayer at all, but we pray only as the Spirit
teaches us: but what Spirit is it. I beseech them? Whose teaching they follow
in their prayers, when they lay aside and despise the prayers which the Lord
Christ himself has taught them? Certainly it is not that Spirit of God which
helps our infirmities, and when we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, does it self make intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8.26. For that Spirit would never teach men to contemn and
reject that prayer Christ by the same Spirit has taught them, but on the
contrary would so instruct and quicken them in their pouring forth that and
other prayers, now slighted by them, that the using thereof once would more
effectually prevail with God, and more feelingly comfort themselves then all
the vain tedious tautologising bablings, that ever fall from them; besides men
taught by that Spirit would abhor to appear in any acts so repugnant to each
clause of that prayer. I confess for my share, that, as where I call to mind
the reigning sins of these times, such as blindness of heart, pride, vain
glory, and hypocisie, envy, hatred, malice, and all manner of
uncharitableness, fornication, and other such like deadly sins, sedition,
and privy conspiracy, false doctrine and heresy, hardness of heart and
contempt of Gods Word and Commandment, etc. I do not wonder to see and hear
of such multitudes, that startle at our set forms of public prayer, wherein
these sins are set forth, ripped up and prayed against with so much plainness
of expression and no less vehemence and ardency of devotion, and to desire
rather to use some loose prayers of their own, wherein they may take their
own liberty, and pray against those sins as frees any suit whereof others
are guilty, not themselves. So when I observe of what spirit many men are,
calling daily for fire from heaven upon their fellow brethren, or stirring up
what fire earth and hell can help them to kindle against them, I do not
admire that even the Lords prayer also is, which is composed of a spirit so
much contrary to theirs, laid aside by them. But it is a sad case in the
interim, that should either be given up to such a reprobate mind, or live the
least time in such an ungodly course of life, as not to dare to use that form
of prayer which Christ has prescribed, or if they do, their very using
thereof proves no better then a mocking or an abusing of him that prescribed
it. I do not condemn all Soldiers, nor all soldiers prayers, the faith of
that Centurion in the Gospel, Math. 8. Acts 10.
and the prayers of that Centurion in the Acts, and the faith and prayers of
many devout soldiers both before and since, would rise up in judgment against
me, if I should so judge them and their devotions: but the more devout
soldiers are, the more they will assent to truth propugned by me, that wars
are an enemy to public devotion, whatsoever interruption, private prayers
suffer by them; I do confess, we do not read that ever David was more
fervent or frequent in his prayers, then when he was encompassed or pursued by
his warlike enemies; but then it must be also acknowledged, that even in those
times, David prayed for nothing more then for such times, wherein he might
again, as formerly he had in times of peace, Psalm. 27. Psalm. 42. Psalm, 84.
present both himself and his prayers to God in Gads house, has holy Temple or
Sanctuary, the place of public worship.

The Scythians, who as Herodotus reports of them, did worship very many Gods,
did erect neither Temple, Altar, nor statute to any God, save only Mars the
God of war, intimating, that where wars are predominant, there all constant
public worship and sevice of God or whatsoever is called God is quite
cashiered. This we find in sacred records the Prophets prophesying to the Jews
the free liberty and happy enjoying of Gods public worship and service amongst
them, did commonly join with it or rather promise before it, some promise of
peace, Isa. 52.7. a place even now cited, How beautiful upon the mountains
are the feet of him that brings good tiings, that publishes peace, etc. and
then follows v. 8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, etc. There is little
or no lifting up of the voice of watchmen to be excepted in any place till
peace be proclaimed. So Nahum, 1.15. Behole upon the mountains the feet of him
that brings good tidings that publishes peace, then follows, O Judah keep
thy solemn feasts, perform thy vow, where peace is, there the public worship
and service of God may be performed with some solmnity; but where peace is not,
though men should divote themselves to it never so much, yet they cannot
perform it with any solemnity, nay scarce with any tolerable reverence: if
then there were no other reason of praying for the peace of Jerusalem, but its
being the place of Gods public worship and service, that alone is sufficient
to engage any man in that duty that desire to worship and serve God as he
should.

But then confider Jerusalem as it is also the seat of justice and judgment,
and so the force of the argument for the praying for the peace thereof is in a
manner doubled; let judgment (says the Prophet Amos) run down as waters and
righteousness as a mighty stream Cap. 5.24. that is, let justice and judgment
have their free course, and run in their own channel without chick, stop, or
outlet; now that cannot be but where God is pleased to grant peace to a place,
if God do not extend peace to a place as a river Isa. 66.12. Justice and
Judgment can never run down there as a stream: Righteousness and peace
(says the Psalmist) have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10. ('it is as true of this
Righteousness and peace whereof we are now discoursing as of any) and since
they first greeted, it can never be found, where ever this Righteousness was
without peace, though this peace has been in many places without
Righteousness. Just and strickt discipline may be and is observed in war, so
far as it may advantage either the design in hand or the whole Armies
safety, or the Commanders honor; but for common justice equally communicating
it self unto all men, it is only to be sound where peace is, (...) (says
Maximus Tyrius) war is the teacher or master of injustice. In wars, (...),
etc. (as that woman complains in Homer) they, kill men, they fire Cities into
ruinous heaps, they lead away women and children into captivity; or as Tacitus
described the iniquity of a war waged by Antonius, and is found true of all
wars, Non dignitas non at as protegebat, quo minus stupra caedibus, caeda
stupris miscerentur, etc. neither honor, nor age, nor ought else did protect
any, but rapes, war mingled with murders, and murders with rapes; hoarihared
men, and superanuated women, esteemed not worthy to be made a prey or spoil,
were drawn and dragged up and down the streets for sport and pastime, and
young and tender Virgins, together with youths of any comeliness and feature,
were even torn in pieces by the lustful Soldiers, and the Soldiers
themselves, many of them slain in their lusts by their own fellows, burning
in the same lusts with them. O the injustice of war, it is not to be expressed
with just expressions! it is a maxim of war, quodcunque libet facere victori
licet; it is lawful for the victor to do what him pleases, and victor or not
victor, (...) (as Euripides has it) he is accounted an ill Soldier that does
not some mischief; and if any that are injured or abused, prove so ridiculous
or rather so mad as to complain thereof, either to the General or to some
subordinate Commander, the best answer they can expect, is that of Caesar to
Metellus, when Metellus urged certain laws for not taking away the money in
Saturnes Temple, (...)). The time of war is no time for observing laws or
that of Caius Marius to some that accused him and his Soldiers of great
wrongs, (...). I cannot hear (says he) the laws for the noise of Arms the
rattling of drums, and the roaring of Ordnance, silence the laws and strike the
very Judges themselves deaf: If then it were but for Jerusalems being the seat
or place of justice there being the Thrones of judgment, the Thrones of the
house of David; Jerusalem deserved, and so do all such places still, the best
prayers and prayers of the best for the peace thereof.

Thus you have been shown the desirablenesse of Jerusalems peace as Jerusalem
is taken literally for that place which God had made choice of, to be the
place of his public worship and service, and the seat of justice and
judgment; now take Jerusalem in the mystery, as it signifies Gods Church in
what place or places soever it be planted or dispersed, and so the arguments
for the desirablenesse of Ierusalems peace may be doubled and trebled; but I
shall for the present choose rather to give you the application of what has
been delivered and reserve my meditations on the peace of Gods Church, till I
have liberty to enlarge them to some proportion befitting that subject.

If the peace of Jerusalem as Jerusalem is taken for the place of Gods public
worship and service, and the seat of justice and judgment were then, and so
the peace of all such places is still, a thing most desirable worthy of the
best prayers, etc.

In the first place, you may from hence learn what to think of them in part who
go about to disturb the peace of such places, yea and to banish if it were in
their power, all peace from them; I say you may from hence learn what to
think in part of such, for what heart so large, what thought so vast, as to be
able to comprehend what they deserve in the total? Blessed (says our Savior)
are the Peacemakers for they shall be called the Children of God, Math. 5.9.
And if the Peacemakers are blessed, we may conclude by the law of contraries
that surely the peace disturbers are accursed, and if they shall be called the
Children of God, these may be called the Children of the devil. And indeed
none but such cursed chidren of that accursed father, would ever have attempted
the disturbing of the peace of those places, wherein God is solemnly
worshipped, and justice and judgment duly executed. For what is the glory and
strength of a Nation but these two; the worship and service of God rightly
performed, and justice and judgment faithfully administered? The glory is
departed from Israel (says the wife of Phineas) for the Ark of God is taken,
1 Samuel 4.22. The Ark of God, being the sign of Gods presence amongst the
people of Israel, is styled the glory of Isriel: And what does now manifest
Gods presence amongst any people so evideutly and lively as the true worship
and service of God does? Nay what is there but that which makes God to be
present amongst any people? God himself I confess, or the presence of God
amongst a people, is properly the glory of that Nation, so Ierem. calls him,
2.11. My people have changed their glory for that as does not profit; so the
Psalmist, Ps. 106.20. Thus they changed their glory, etc. But this name may by
a metonimia be ascribed also to that which is the sign of Gods presence, and
so as well to Gods worship and service now, as ever it was to the Arc.

And that Gods worship and service is also the strength of a Nation as well as
the glory, no other Testimony need be produced then that, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. so
they strengthened the Kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon
strong three years, for three years they walked in the way of David and
Solomon, that is, they worshipped and served the Lord as David and Solomon had
done.

Then that the executing of justice and judgment is likewise both a strength
and a glory to that Nation that is blessed therewith, may be seen sufficiently,
either Isa. 1. from v. 17. to the end of v. 27. or Cap. 9.7. It being declared
in the latter place, that a Kingdom is both ordered and established by justice
and judgment, and in the former, that the want thereof is a main cause of a
Kingdoms ruin. Now this being cleared, that the worship and service of God
rightly performed, and justice and judgment faithfully administered, are both
the glory and the strength of a Nation; and it being at large demonstrated,
that neither of these can be performed where peace is not preserved; what can
we conclude less of those that labor to undermine and blow up the peace of a
Nation, wherein both those rich gemmes of a Nations glory, and firm pillars of
her strength are, then that they are Traitors to that Church and state? It
deserves to be reputed treason against a Kingdom, if any of that Kingdom
especially, should attempt ought against the peace of it, though the sound of
Gods worship and service has scarce been ever heard therein; of such
unspeakeable worth and excellency is peace it self: of what brand then are
they worthy, that have attempted the utter ruin of a Nations peace, (I need
not name the Nation) wherein God has been longer and more eminently worshipped
and served (to his glory not ours be it spoken) and justice and judgment more
strictly and duly executed, then in any one Nation whatsoever? To call their
crime high treason is too low a term for it; for take the crime in its true
altitude, and you will find, that it reaches from hell where it was first
contrived, to Heaven it self, against which it is complotted and so it is high
treason to the stretch of height, being treason against the most highest. Every
one sees, or at least may if he do not shut his own eyes or suffer others to
blindfold him, that the sacred Person of our most gracious Sovereign and some
of the best of His blood, and diverse of His Nobility, are (for what they lately
have been I tremble to recall) in imminent danger on the one part, and the
representative body of the Kingdom (as they themselves declare themselves) are
but in little less hazard on the other; and for ought any that are best
skilled in Arms know, ere the sword be put up again, the whole Kingdom may be
ruined. And this one would think is treason high enough, to contrive all these
into so much peril, the Lord discover the contrivers whosoever they be.

But alas who, who sees or is able to conceive, what blasphemy against God and
Christ, what scandal to Religion and Christianity it self, will from hence be
occasioned and that too too justly? For what first will the Heathen and other
Infidels say? Are these the Christians? are these they that glory so much in
their Lord Christ, and call themselves after his Name? Why they tell us, that
Christ was no warrier, no fighter, no revenger, no spiller of blood, etc. but
was the Prince of peace, whose government and peace is inseparable, as well as
endless; they tell us that Christ did no violence to any, no nor so much as
opened his mouth when he was afflicted and oppressed himself, but was led as a
lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep that is dumb before her shearers. They
would make us believe also, that Christ came into the world to make peace
between the world and his Father, and that at his coming the very Angels sang
of peace on Earth, and that all the time of his being here on earth he preached
peace, and a little before his return to heaven he prayed for peace, and at
his very leaving his Disciples, he left peace with them as his last legacy; but
he that should observe how little these Christians regard peace, and how small
a thing will provoke them to spill one another blood, to tear out one
another throat, or to do one another any mischief, cannot believe that
themselves do believe their Lord Christ to have been such a peacemaker,
peace-preacher, and peace-practiser, as they say he was. They call themselves
Christ's sheep and Christ their Shepherd, but did ever any man see sheep so
worrey and devour one another? Why Wolves or Tigers, Bears or Lions cannot
deal more cruelly with one another then they do. They call themselves the
Vine-branches and Christ their Vine; but was it ever heard that Vine-branches
did gall, oppress and vex one another as they do? Why briars and thorns do
not scratch and raze one another half so much. They say they are all members
of one and the same body, but did ever any members of one and the same body so
fight and quarrel with one another, so mangle and martyr one another? They say
they are servants to one and the same Lord, but did ever fellow servants so
beat and butcher one another? They say they have all but one faith, but would
any man think they had any faith at all, when they seek to supplant and ruin
one another so as they do? They say they are all baptized into one baptism,
but he that observes how they delight in one another destruction, might well
doubt whether they were dipped or besprinkled with the blood of the Lamb as they
give out, or with the blood of some beast of prey? They say they eat all of the
same spiritual meat, and drink all of the same spiritual drink, and indeed
amongst us Heathen, the eating together at one table is to us a strong tie of
friendship, and some of us as the Scythians by name have accounted no
obligation greater for the engaging us in all firmness of love and fidelity
each to other, then the tasting together a little blood in the same cup; but as
for these Christians, neither eating together at their Lords table, and that of
that bread which they say came down from heaven, can quiet their rising
stomachs, nor their drinking together of that cup, which they acknowledge to be
the cup of the new Covenant in Christ's blood, can allay their fiery spirits,
from taking up Arms one against another, to the spilling each others blood.
One of their Apostles tells them, that it is a shame for them to go to law with
one another, especially before us Infidels, but they are not ashamed to go to
war with one another, and that before us or any else. In a word they
complain of us Heathen, for offering our sons and our daughters in sacrifice
to devils, and yet they sacrifice daily their sons and daughters and
themselves and al to their own divilish malice and revenge. Assuredly these
practices will never gain us to be of their profession, and either let them
tell us of some other Christ, or let them never tell us that they are
Christians, for we shall be Infidels (as they call us) in that too, as in other
things, till we see a better agreement betwixt Christ's actions and theirs, and
betwixt their own profession and practices. Thus is Christ and Chriscianity
blasphemed amongst the Heathen; and what think you will our adversaries the
Papists say? Nay what will they not say that is evil both of us and our
Religion? I dare not speak what they will say lest some should say that I
taught them what to speak; but I will be hold to tell you what some of them
have said upon less occasion, as Doctor Kellison by name in his survey of new
Religion lib. 6. cap. 1. sect. 4.5. The reformers (as he calls us) urge nothing
so much as that we must obey Princes and their injunctions, but this they do
only when Ecclesiastical power calls them to an account, or when the Princes
laws do favourise their doctrine; and if any do mark their proceedings they
shall see that they honor not Authority, but love their herefies, (as that
railing Romanist calls our orthodox opinions) which if Princes will not like,
then they contemn and despise all Authority, and will not let to make a
mutiny, and stir up Subjects to rebellion; thus that foul mouth has slandered
us and our Religion upon no occasion given no not the least, for he feigns the
occasion upon the Protestants carriage toward Queen Mary, which to the
eternal honor of our Protestant Religion in general, and to the perpetual
renown of the anciently religious Protestants within the Counties of Suffolk
and Norfolk in particular, was so humbly and faithfully loyal, as it could not
well be transcended; and what think you then will such bold calumniators cast
on us and our Religion, now upon these sad and unnatural differences and
divisions between our most pious Sovereigne and his Great Council? I mourn
to think what a scandal our Religion is like to undergo, unless God do
miraculously interpose and compose those distractions. Offenses must come, but
woe be unto them whosoever they are by whom the offense comes, especially such
an offense as brings with it a scandal upon Religion. O pray then for the
peace of our Jerusalem; and pray that the prime disturbers thereof may be
discovered whosoever they are, and then I am confident, the Papists mouths
will be stopped from charging the Protestants with rebellion against their
Prince: for whatsoever they shall please to call our present division, (as
less then rebellion who can call it, that would not suffer his tongue to
rebel against his heart, or both against God and his King?) It will appear
upon discovery of the Authors thereof, that they themselves, especially the
Jesuits and their old friends the Anabaptists, together with the Brownists and
other Sectaries, like Sampsons foxes tied together by the tails, though their
heads look contrary ways, have been the maine, if not the only incendiaries
of these our never-sufficiently to be deplored tumults and insurrections; but I
shall not trouble my self or you further about this deep-laid and high-raised
iniquity. They encourage themselves in an evil matter, they commune of laying
snares privily, they say who shall see them? They search out iniquities, they
accomplish a diligent search, both the inward thought of every one of them, and
the heart is deep, but God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall
they be wounded, so they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves,
all that see them shall flee away, and all men shall fear and declare the work
of God, for they shall wisely consider of his doing, Psalm. 64, And then though
the crime it self may want a name, yet the Actors and complotters thereof, at
least the chief of them, will not want for such vengeance, as we hope shall
terrify others from ever attempting the like horrid enterprise.

Secondly, we may from hence also be informed what to judge of those, who if
they have not been the first movers, or prime contrivers in the betraying the
blessed peace of this Nation, wherein God has been so solemnly worshipped and
served, and justice and judgment so duly executed, yet they have been too
great encouragers and abettors of such traitors.

It was a complaint taken up by Erasmus against some Clergymen in his time and
in the times not long before him, that when any Princes were inclinable to
wars, Alius e sacro suggesto promittit omnium admissorum condonationem, etc.
One (says he) promises from the sacred pulpit, pardon of all offenses
whatsoever, to all such as will fight under such or such Princes banners, Alius
clamat invictissime Princeps, another cries out most mighty Prince, do but you
hold your resolution, for the favoring of this Religion, and God shall fight
for you, Alius promittit certam victoriam, prophetarum voces ad rem impiam
detorquens, another he promises certain victory, wresting the very sayings of
the holy Prophets to that most unholy business, Tam bellaces conciones
audivimus Monachorum, Theologorum, etc. such warlike Sermons (says that
Author) have we heard from Monks and other Divines; and I would we had never
heard the like from some of our Preachers; have not some of our Preachers of
late, run up and down from pulpit to pulpit and there lifted up their voices
like Trumpets, not to show the people their transgression and the house of
Jacob their sins, which they have a commission for, Isa. 58.1. but to sound
an alarm, and to incite to war; for which I believe they have no particular
Commission, and their general Commission I am sure is quite contrary, they
being sent to proclaim and publish and so to incite unto and persuade peace
and not wars: One he cries out in Moses words, Exodus 32.29. consecrate your
selves to day to the Lord, even every man upon his son and upon his brother,
etc. forgetting that though he be allowed to sit in Moses seat, yet the use of
Moses sword is denied him, much less has he the command thereof; besides
Moses though he were the supreme Magistrate, urged a particular command from
God for what he then incited unto v. 27. whereas this Levit excluded all
Magistracy, cannot show the least authority so much as from Moses for what he
calls for. Another makes bold with David's words 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise and be
doing; arise and be doing? What I beseech him? Would he have the people build
an house to the Lord? For it was to that purpose that David used those words to
his son Solomon: I am afraid Gods house is not so well beloved of him; no,
rather arise and be pulling down Gods house, orarise and be plundering thy
neighbors house: this I believe comes somewhat near his meaning, I am sure as
near as his does David's. A third echoes forth that bitter curse of the Angel
of the Lord against Meroz. Judge. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the
Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the
help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. And observe how
pertinently and punctually he applies it; the case of the Merozits as you may
read Judge. cap 4. and 5. stood thus, Iabin King of Canaan with his people the
Canaanites far greater and mightier then Israel, had twenty years together
mightily oppressed Israel; then Deborah a Prophetess in Israel, and one that
was supreme Judge in Israel, at that time, upon a particular express command
from God (besides Gods general command long before given for the utter
destroying of the Canaanites and making no covenant with them, and showing no
mercy to them, Deu. 7.1, 2.) calls to Barak to gather together ten thousand men
of the Children of Napthaly and Zebulum, the two Tribes that were neeerest him,
and to encounter with Iabins mighty Host at such a place, assuring him that the
Lord would deliver that great Host into his hand. Now because the Merozites
were near at hand, and yet would not come out and show themselves in the
assisting and helping forward this design, thus commanded by the Lord
(whatsoever cause else there were unrevealed) the Angel of the Lord denounced
this heavy curse against them saying, curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof, etc. against them, I say, the Angel of the Lord denounced
this curse, and against them only, though sundry other Tribes came not out to
this help besides them, as Ruben who abode among the sheepefolds, and Gilead or
Manassch, who abode beyond Jordan, and Dan who remained in ships, and Asher who
continued on the sea shore and abode in his breaches, Judge. 5.16.17. None of
these came to this help of the Lord, and yet they were at the most but reproved
or marked for it by the spirit of God, not cursed by the Angel of the Lord as
the Merozites were. Now compare our present case with theirs; does any
Idolatrous King and his people, far more mighty and potent then we, oppress
our Israel? Are he and his people, such as are commanded by Gods command, to be
utterly destroyed and no covenant to be made with them, nor mercy shown them?
Or is there any express particular command from the Lord at this present, for
the raising an Army against them, with an assured promise of victory over them?
And does the supreme Judge in our Israel call to any to put this command in
execution? Let all these or any of these be shown, and when they are, let him
blame those that do not come to the help of the Lord: but let him then also
take heed of cursing any more of them, then the Angel of the Lord commandes him
to curse, lest the curse fall upon his own head for cursing Gods own Israel,
and perverting Gods Word to the justifying his own cursing contrary to Gods
command. A fourth, he thunders out that curse Ier. 48.10. Cursed be he that
keeps back his sword from blood; but from what blood does he mean? Does he
mean from the blood of Moabites, whose King had formerly hired Balaam to curse
Gods Israel, Numb. 22. and whose daughters had tempted Israel to commit
whoredom with them, to the great provoking of the Lord against them, Numb. 25?
Does he mean from the blood of Moabites, whose Kings and people both, had at
sundry times sorely oppressed Israel, and are now themselves, for those and
other their impieties, destined to utter ruin by an express decree from the
Lord? Does, he I say, mean the blood of such when he rends his throat with
roaring out a curse against those that shall keep back their sword from blood?
If so, he does in something resemble the Prophet; yet it is not unknown to a
mean Divine, that the Prophets are not to be imitated in every thing which
they did or said; witness Elijah's act in calling for fire from Heaven. 2
King. 1. which when the Disciples of Christ would have imitated, Christ
severely rebuked them for it, Luke 9.54, 55. But alas is it not other blood
that this blood-hound hunts after? Is it not the blood of Christians? Is it not
the blood of Protestants? Is it not the blood of those that are of the same
blood with us? Nay, I pray God the best blood amongst us, the Blood Royal it
self be not too much hankered after by him. I am sure the sword would put but
little difference, and the bullet less, betwixt that and other blood in a
common battle, did not the Lord both of sword, bullet, and battle, in his
more then ordinary love and care of such blood, guide them all otherwise then
bloody men aim and intend them. Besides to whom is this charge given, not to
hold back the sword from blood upon peril of a curse, for that is also worthy
our taking notice? Is it to the Heathen such as the Babylonians were, to whom
the Prophet there speaks, or (as some Expositors would have it) who are there
brought in by the Prophet as speaking it themselves? No it is to Christians, it is
to Protestants, it is to Englishmen, that this new Prophet speaks; he would
have us, for whom Christ was made a curse, and shed his own most precious blood
to reconcile us to God, think our selves to be accursed if we should withold
our swords from that cursed act of shedding one another blood. Well then may
learned and pious O Ecolampadius his intimation given upon those very words, be
made our observation. Seditiosi hunc versum pro se trahunt, sed declarant, quod
Babylonijs similes sint, imo licet dicas inferiores, quod nullum habeant
mandatum a domino, etc. Seditious men wrest this verse to serve their own
seditions humors; but they herein declare themselves to be like the
Babylontans, those so much abominated cruel Heathen; nay thou may say far
worse then they, for that these have no command to take up those words, which
the Babylonians had. And thus what Ezekiel said of the Prophets of Jerusalem,
Ezekiel. 22.25, 28. is found by woeful experience, too true of too many of the
Prophets of this Nation, There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst
thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls, they
have taken the treasure and precious things, they have made her many widows in
the midst thereof. They have dawbed her Princes with untempered mortar, seeing
vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, thus says the Lord God, when the
Lord has not spoken. Or to take up the complaint of the Prophet Jeremiah, Cap.
5. v. 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule, or as it is in the
margin, take into their hands by their means, and my people love to have it
so, and what will ye do in the end thereof? What will ye do in the end
thereof? Nay, I leave that to God to dispose, and to you to expect. Only for
further caution to my self and fellow-preachers, suffer me in a word more, to
show how ill-beseeming and incongruous, if not wicked and pernicious, it is for
us Preachers of the Gospel, (suppose we did avoid those gross exorbitances
now mentioned) to encourage to wars, unless we have some special calling
from God thereunto. For what has a Preacher of the Gospel of peace to do with
war, except it be to preach against it? It Is said, that by the Law a Priest
should not have his vote in a cause of blood: I am sure it is incongruous (to
say the least of it) that a Minister, who is commanded both to pray daily in
the Congregation, Give peace in our time O Lord, and to dismiss the
Congregation with a benediction of peace, The peace of God which passes all
understanding keep your hearts, etc. should have his voice so deep in blood,
as to encourage any to the waging of war; wherein the blood not of one or
two, but of many thousands is often spilt in one battle. Tune codem ore quo
Christum praedicas bellum laudas, cademque tuba Deum canis et satanam? Do
thou with one and the same mouth both preach Christ that great Peacemaker,
that Prince of peace, and praise war? What is that but with the same voice to
trumpet forth the praise of God and of Satan? Whence did thou learn this
Doctrine, or what example had thou to preach such? It Is certain neither
Christ nor his Apostles; for they ever taught and persuaded to peace, as might
be shown by multitudes of examples, whereof thou can not be ignorant and yet
thou want no ignorance. Take we heed then, we that are Preachers, (and so I
wind up this lesson) lest whereas it is said of the Preachers of the Gospel,
(as you heard once, and again) How beautiful are the feet of him that brings
glad tidings, that publishes peace; the contrary be said of any of us, How
foul is the very tongue of such or such a Minister, that brings sad tidings,
that incites to war; certainly such a Preacher either mistook his calling,
or his commission, or both.

3 I have but a word more to add, and that is a word of Exhortation (for I am
unwilling to leave you with a reproof) that you would be pleased to suffer your
selves to obtain what is, or ought to be, most desired by you, your own peace
in the peace of our Nation; and to that end, that you would cast not oil, but
water on that fire, which now threatens the consumption, not of the Cedars of
Lebanon alone but the very shrubs and brambles of the Forest, at least be
persuaded to withold what fuel you can from it, for fear your selves be
suddenly made the fuel of it. You both see and hear, that unless you
purchase war at a very dear rate, peace will follow you, though you do not
follow it. And do you love blood heding so dearly, as that you will freely
part with that, which at other times drops from you as so much of your blood,
to help forward the spilling of others blood and your own too? O the
blindness and madness of such a people! none so blind as they that will not
see, and none more mad, then they that stop their ears at the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely. Who has bewitched you, or what people were
ever thus besotted? I cannot find in all sacred or profane history, (that
ever I set eye on) any example to parallel this. That obstinate sottishness
of the people of Judah and Jerusalem, set forth in a dialogue betwixt God and
the Prophet Isaiah Cap. 6.9, 10, 11, 12. comes the nearest this, of any that I
can remember; (I pray God it be not brought nearer in the conclusion) yet all
this resemblance is only in generals; but for particulars I challenge all the
encouragers to war (and they will streine hard for an example) to match it if
they can; and it is a strange obstinacy, whereof no record can show a president,
nor any false prophet feign one. O my beloved! (if I may call those beloved
that love not the peace of Jerusalem) bethink your selves in time, lest the
Lord bring upon you the fruit of your thoughts, Jerem. 6.19. That as now, when
the sword of the Lord would in all probability be quiet, Ier. 476.
and put up its self into its scabbard, and rest and be still, ye will not
suffer it, v, 7.
the Lord ere long give it a charge against you not to be quiet, till it have
devoured at least all those who desire that it may still devour. The
Husbandmen call for peace, that they may now in their season beat their swords
into plowsheares, and their spears into pruning hooks. The Merchants and
Seafaring men call for peace, that they may now at their accustomed time, go
down to the sea in ships and do business in great waters, bringing a rich
supply of all sorts of merchandise from all parts of the world. The Tradesmen
they call for peace, that they may recover their languishing trading ere the
spirits thereof be quite spent. Wives and Children cry for peace, that they may
not sit as widows and Orphans lamenting the loss of their dear husbands and
careful fathers. All that are oppressed and wronged cry for peace, that the
Judges of our Land, like Samuel in the days of peace, may keep their constant
circuites, 1 Samuel 7. v. 14, 15, 16.
and judge their causes in the ^^onted places. All the faithful and loyal
hearted Subjects call for peace, that they may see their Lord the King
delivered from the strivings of the people, and brought back again to his
house, and sit on his throne in safety and honor. The King himself calls for
peace, that his subjects may sit under their own vines, and under their own
figgetrees enjoying their wonted happiness accounted his. Nay the King of
Kings here in our Text calls upon all these to call and cry to him for peace,
that all these and many other blessings which accompany peace, may once again
return to us and settle their abode amongst us. Let us then in obedience to
Gods command, if not in the sense of our own present condition, hasten unto
with all speed, and ply with all importunity, that Throne of grace to which we
are thus graciously invited; and for Zions sake let us not hold our peace, and
for Jerusalems sake let us not rest, until the righteousness and peace
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that
burns.

Glory be to God in the highest, and on Earth peace, good will toward men.
FINIS.

