The Pathway to PEACE. OR, The only assured and most certain Means, whereby to
heal the sores, make up the breaches, remove the fears, prevent the ruin,
reconcile the differences, and put a final end to the manifold divisions of
this famous (though now much distracted) Kingdom.

By that faithful and painful Preacher of Gods Word, THOMAS GARDENER, late
Pastor of St Mary's in Sandwich.

PSALM. 147.14. He makes Peace in thy borders.

OR,

Who makes thy borders Peace.

IT is Ordered this thirteenth day of February, 1642. by the Committee of the
House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, That this book, entitled,
The Pathway to Peace, be printed.

JOHN WHITE.

London, Printed by J. R. for John Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop in St
Dunstans Churchyard, Fleet Street. 1643.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, THE MAYOR, THE WORSHIPFUL, THE JURATS His Brethren;
And the rest of the INHABITANTS Of the Town and Port of SANDWICH,

The Publisher hereof Dedicateth these First Fruits of their PASTORS Labors:

And wishes, That their ways may so please the Lord, that they may enjoy
Peace External, Internal, Eternal.

The Pathway to Peace.
PROVERB. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies
to be at peace with him.


THe righteous have so many and so exceeding great encouragements, to
strengthen them in the prosecution of a religious course of life; The godly
have manifold encouragements to strenthen them in their religious courses.
so sweet invitations, and strong allurements, with such glorious promises,
that if they be not very heartlesse cowards, they cannot but be resolute, in
the declaration of the powerful profession of the grace of Christ Jesus; for
to let pass those unspeakably sweet and comfortable promises of grace in this
life, and its consequents; and of glory hereafter, and its concomitants; not to
speak of them (for indeed they are inexplicable, and if I had the tongue of men
and Angels, I should but bungle in setting them forth unto you) I say, beside
these spiritual and heavenly blessings appropriated unto the Saints, there are
also many temporal privileges, which more peculiarly belong unto them; all
which compared together, makes their present condition (though outwardly never
so base and despicable) to transcend and overtop the Bay-flourishing estate of
the ungodly sons of Belial, though they bathe themselves never so plenteously
in the rivers of the pleasures of this life, and be never so much encompassed
with the restless desires of their own carnal heart. Amongst those promises,
this may not undeservedly be ranked, which the wisest of mere men propounds
unto us in this proportion of holy Scripture, which as a costly jewel in a
Ring of fine gold, or as a glorious glistering Star fixed in his Orb, offers it
self unto our consideration, containing thus much in effect; That when a man's
courses, The sum and substance of the promise here laid down.
proceedings, and all his actions; his carriage toward God, his intercourse
and conversation with men: When (I say) these his ways are so equally and
evenly levelled and squared, that they are well-pleasing to the eyes of the
Almighty, the Lord does su prosper him in all his affairs, that if he get not
the love and hearty affection of his enemies, yet at leastwise he so orders it,
that be makes them to be outwardly at peace with him.

The Division of the Text.
The words being thus unfolded, we may conceive two general parts therein:

1. An Exhortation to a godly life, viz. That our ways may please the Lord;
which is propounded by way of supposition, When a man's ways please the Lord.

2. A Motive to enforce the same, from the benefit ensuing thereupon; Our
enemies shall be at peace with us: When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes
even his enemies to be at peace with him.

The Exposition of the words with the particular observations included therein.
In these two general points, there are many particulars observable, included
as handmaids to the main point, and are wrapped about the body of the Text, as
the Ivy about the tree; But because they are not so directly incident to the
Text, I will but touch them, and so leave them.

What we are to understand by Ways.
Ways. Men actions, motion of their affections, and common course of life, are
usually called ways in the Scriptures, in regard of the near resemblance of
each to other; for as by the way which a man travelleth, we may conjecture
whither he goes, Eastward or Westward, so our actions show wither we are
going, to infernal Egypt, or to the celestial Canaan; whether to Hell or
Heaven: There Is no third way.

Man's ways. Men's ways of themselves cannot please God, Men's ways o
themselves cannot please God. Romans 8 7. Isa. 64 6.
for the most Reformed are abominable before the Lord. The very wised in of the
flesh is enmity against God; and, We all are as an unclean cloth, and our
righteousness is as filthy rags* We are therefore here to understand man's
ways sanctified and directed by the spirit of the Lord.

The ways of the true convert are pleasing ways.
Please the Lord. The ways of the true convert are pleasing ways, pleasing in
their own nature, as being the actions of divine grace in their Original, as
proceeding from an upright heart, and faith unfaigned; and in their effect, as
being very delightful and comfortable unto us in the performing of them; and
therefore in Scripture the ways of wisdom, that is, Prove. 3.17.
of him that is truly wise, are called ways of pleasantness, and King
Solomon admires this pleasingnesse of Christ's Spouse, saying, How fair, and how
pleasant art thou, O Love, Cant. 7 6.
for delights.

Again, The ways of the godly are pleasing to the Lord. Isa. 62.4. Though
distastefull to the wick^d. Prove. 29.27. Cant. 4.9.
The ways of a righteous man are indeed pleasing unto the Lord; and therefore
he calls his Church Hepbzibah, that is^, My delight is in her: But contrarily
they are unsavory and distastefull to the wicked, who find no more taste in
such ways then in the white of an egg. He that is upright in the way, is an
abomination to the wicked.

The Lord, The Object of all the righteous man's actions must be Jehovah, our
God. We must not regard our selves, nor the world. As we are the Spouse of
Christ, so we must behave our selves as the chaste Spouse, whose care is, how
she may please her Bridegroom, who has betrothed himself unto her; other men's
love she minds not: So we, if we can please God, no matter whom we displease.

The godly have many enemies.
His enemies. The godly have their enemies, not one, but many, enemies, in the
Plural number: Wicked Angels and men, men both without and within the Church.

The extent of Gods goodness to his.
Even his enemies, Or, his very enemies. This is to express the extent of Gods
goodness unto us, by way of emphasis; some are friends to the faithful,
others are enemies, others are Neuters, like Gallio the Deputy, Act. 18.16, 17.
caring neither for the wicked Jews, nor zealous Paul; now the Lord will not
only make such at peace with us, who as yet are indifferent, but even our very
professed enemies.

The wicked can never truly love the godly.
At peace. The wise man does not say, That the Lord will make his enemies love
him; no, for the unsanctified heart cannot truly love a righteous man, as
righteous (that is the property of the faithful soul) but he will make him at
peace with him; that is, Outwardly there shall be quietness, and profession of
love.

He makes; Its of the Lord, not from the wicked, when they are at peace with
the godly. Isa. 57.19.
namely, The Lord. It Is not any natural inclination, or virtuous disposition
the wicked have to the righteous, but the Lords work. He makes even his
enemies to be at peace with him.

Again, Who is the author, who works our Peace? It Is the Lord that creates
Peace for us, whether it be peace within, or peace without us. The wicked have
peace, such as it is, inward and outward, but not from the God of peace. There
were that prophesied, Jer. 14.13. Ezekiel. 13 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
That the Jews should have assured peace, whose Prophesies were found Lies; God
having said, That there was no peace for them. When the wicked shall say peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a woman
with child, and they shall not escape. This is the comfort of the faithful,
That what they have of these temporal blessings, it is from the Lord.

So long as our ways are pleasing to God, this promise belongs unto us.
When a man's ways, etc. This promise is warranted unto us, during our
continuance in well-doing: while our ways are so undefiled, that they be
acceptable before God. If we forsake this secure way, we forsake our own mercy.

Thus of the Particulars observable from the words severally confidered: Jonah
2.8.
Come we now to the two Generals of the Text, which have been already
propounded, namely 1. The duty of every Christian, To order his ways so, that
they may please God. 2. The reward of the duty; namely, That then the Lord will
make the enemies of these his friends to be at peace with them; Joh. 15.14.
both which may be reduced into this one Point, which is here chiefly aimed at,
and the principal scope of the whole Text; namely, That

The Doctrine.
When our conversation is pleasing to the Lord, and we so live, as walking with
God, he brings it to pass, that our very enemies are at peace with us.

This Doctrine will be sufficiently laid open unto us, if we shall examine, 1.
The truth of it by Scriptures. 2. The manner how the Lord does make our very
enemies at peace with us. 3. The reasons why he does thus show his love to his
Saints. Then 4. Answer such places of Scripture as seem to oppose this truth.
5. Make use and application of this comfortable promise.

The first Point.
The proof of the Doctrine out of Gods Word. Proved.
This we will express 1. Affirmatively, showing, That when our ways please
the Lord, he makes our enemies at peace with us. 2. Negatively, or by way of
contraries, to make the truth more evidently appear; namely, That when our
actions and life are displeasing to God, he makes our very friends at enmity
with us.

Affirmatively by examples.
Affirmatively, and that by sundry examples; for they are more familiar and
convincing.

The first is between Abimelech King of the Philistims, The 1 example Genesis
26.16.27, 28.
and Isaac the faithful seed of Abraham. Isaac was hated of this Heathenish
King, and driven away; yet in process of time, the Lord apparently showed his
blessings upon him, that the King could not but perceive it, and is constrained
to come and seek to make a League with him.

The second is of Jacob, The 2 example Gen 35.5.
who thought his sons had so tyrannously slaughtered a whole City of men, the
inhabitants of Shechem, that there could be nothing expected of upright Jacob,
but that the neighboring Nations should have revenged their cruelty, with the
like slaughter of him and his household; yet the terror of the Lord fell upon
the people round about them as they traveled, that they suffered them
peaceably to take their journey, without making any pursuit after them.

The third unto the Israelites, The 3 example Exodus 12.26.
when the Lord gave them favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, their cruel
enemies.

The fourth. The 4 example Jer. 39.11, 12.
This promise was also made good unto Jeremy, when (being ungently used of his
own people) in the general Captivity of the Jews, he was restored to liberty,
and kindly entreated of the enemies.

The fifth. The 5 example Genesis 33 4.
But never was this truth more completely accomplished, then when the Lord made
Esau at peace with his brother Jacob; for where there is hatred betwixt
brethren, its usually most extreme, Prove. 18 19.
as the wise man teaches; the brother offended is harder to be won then a
strong City, and their contentions are like the bars of a Castle. This is more
mavelous, if we consider, That he was even then in his march with four
hundred men toward his brother, to revenge himself of his long unforgotten
injuries, when he was reconciled unto him.

Negatively by examples.
Negatively. When we displease God, he makes our very friends at enmity with
us; whereof we have also pregnant examples:

The first, The 1 example 1 Samuel 15.23.
of Saul, because his ways were rebellious against the Lord, his own servants,
his own Tribe, his son in law, David, and his own son out of his bowels, all
were against him; Sam 22 7, 8.
yea, Jonathan did favor David, his greatest adversary, whereof he himself did
pitifully complain.

The 2 example
The second, of David, under whom the Lord had subdued all all his enemies, till
such time as he sinned against God in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, and then
the Lord raised against him his own darling Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.10.
to conspire against him for his Kingdom.

The 3 example
The third, of Solomon. All the while his heart was perfect with his God, he had
peace within his own Dominions from Dan to Beersheba; 1 King 4 24.
but after he multiplies women to himself and sacrifices to strange gods, then
God stirs up Hadad and Rezon, 1 King 11.14.23.26 28.
such as were formerly at peace with him; yea, even his own servant and
favorite Jeroboam.

The fourth, The 4 example 2 Chronicles. 24.18.25.
of Joash, who thrived while he did that which was right in the eyes of the
Lord; but falling to Idolatry, and hatred of Reformation, his own servants
conspired against him, and flew him.

Thus have we the truth of the doctrine, both affirmatively, and negatively.

The second Point.
THe manner how the Lord does make our very enemies at peace with us. The Lord
makes our enemies at peace with us, by changing their affections. Prove 21 1.
Genesis 41.38.39. 1 Samuel 29.6.9.
This he brings to pass diverse ways:

1. By altering and changing their affections (for he turns men's hearts as
the rivers of water, which way it pleases him) and working in them an
admiration of his hidden ones. Thus Pharaoh King of Egypt wondered at the
wisdom of Joseph, and his gift in the interpretation of dreams. So was David
admired of Achish King of Gath, an Heathen, as if he had been an Angel of God.
This effect was most illustrious in the Officers which were sent by the Scribes
and Pharisees to apprehend Christ, and went to seek him for that very purpose;
but when they came and heard him preaching to the people, they either forgot
their errand, or willingly disobeyed the command of their masters, and fell
into admiration of our Savior, saying, Never man spoke like this man. John 7
46 Converting them. Isa. 11.5, 6.


2. By converting their wicked hearts, to become godly Saints: for JEHOVAH, by
the power of his Word, can change the savage Leopard, into an harmless Kid;
and the ravening Wolf, into an innocent Lamb. Thus persecuting Saul, Acts 9.1.6.
who breathed out nothing but threatenings and slaughter against the disciples
of the Lord, was made a true convert, and a preaching Paul. And thus the
Jaylour, who once imprisoned, stocked, and whipped Paul and Silas, Acts 16.24
33, 34.
was converted to the faith, and became a friend to those whom formerly be
hated, washing their stripes, and setting meat before them.

3. By a divine terror which the Lord strikes into the hearts of their
enemies. Striking terror into their hearts. Gen 31.24.
Thus the Lord dealt with the fury of Laban, when he and his company pursued
after Jacob, in all probability, intending to offer violence unto him, he
charged him that he should not so much as speak ought but good unto Jacob. This
terror was wrought in Jeroboam, 1 Kings 13 48
by withering of his arm miraculously, when he intended evil against the man
of God, who spoke to him in the Word of the Lord, and thereby Jeroboam was
constrained to receive him courteously.

Destroying them.
4. By destroying them, that their irreconciliable hatred may perish with their
lives, if their heart be so hard that it will not be made pliable to his will.
Thus dealt the Lord with Senacherih, and his Host, 2 Kin. 19 35 37
when they encamped against his people, he slew him by his own sons, and of his
Army 185000 men by an Angel. Thus does the Lord with the enemies of his Church,
when they will needs band themselves against his anointed Ones. Isa. 8.9.
Let them associate themselves, they shall be broken in pieces; let them gird
themselves, they shall be broken in pieces, says the Lord by his Prophet.

5. By working (as we say) against the hair, when by permitting of the wicked
to be at enmity with us, Suffering them to do their worst.
he procures our peace and prosperity. Satan was at enmity with mankind, and
the Lord permitted him to do his worst: He thought to bring everlasting
contempt upon all mankind, Romans 5.15.
through Adams fall, but God made it an occasion of the greater exaltation of
his Church. God suffered the Egyptians to afflict his people; but the more
they were afflicted, Exodus 1.12. Deuteronomy. 23 5. Genesis 50.20. Romans 8.28.
the more they multiplied. Balaams curse was turned into a blessing. The hatred
of Joseph's brethren, turned to his greatest advancement. Thus all things
conspire for the welfare of Gods beloved ones. Thus of the manner how the Lord
makes our very enemies to be at peace with us.

The third Point.
The Lord does thus deal with his own, 2 Samuel 19.36.
WHy the Lord does thus graciously reward his servants. As B^rzillai said to
David, Thy servant will go with thee this little way, and why should the King
recompense it me with such a reward? So may we say in this case: Behold, we
have done the Lord this little piece of service, and why should be recompense
us thus bounteously? Surely not for this our service (for is it any pleasure to
the Almighty that thou art righteous? Or is it gain to him that thou make thy
ways perfect? Job 22 3. Luke 17.10.
And when we shall have done all those things which are commanded us, we may
say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do)
nor for the righteousness of our ways in pleasing him. Deuteronomy. 9 4, 5.
The Scripture teaches us another lesson. The main reasons are these:

For the manifestation of his goodness.
1. His goodness and kindness toward us free and undeserved, whom it
pleases to reward his own gifts, and to crown his own graces in us. 1 Cor.
15.10.
That we can do any thing well pleasing to God, it is his gift, and that while
we do thus please him, he makes our very enemies to be at peace with us, is
also from him, who neglects nothing that might be an encouragement unto us in
well-doing.

For the demonstration of his power.
2. The necessity of consequence; for if the Lord be once our friend, who can,
or dare be our enemy? This the Apostle shows: Having evidently demonstrated,
That God has reconciled us unto himself in Christ Jesus, and is become our
friend, he doubts not of the infallibility of this consequence, If God be for
us, who can be against us? Romans 8 31.
As if he should have said; I ask you all, if you can name that creature, that
can be at enmity with us; no, ye cannot: He is the Lord of Hosts, namely, Of
the Armies of his Creatures, and he rules over them with more then Imperial
Authority; And if he be on our side, the very stones of the street, Job 5.22,
23. Simil.
and the beasts of the field shall be in league with us. It Is not with the
favorites of the King of heaven, as with the favorites of the little kings of
the earth; These may be in great favor with their Prince, and yet one of the
subjects of the same Prince may lay violent hands upon them, even to the
deprivation of their life, as was long ago exemplified in Abner, who though in
league with King David, and entertained into his favor, 1 Samuel 3.27.
yet was treacherously slain by Joab, David's subject: Isa. 37.38.
Yea, even Kings themselves cannot in this case protect their own persons from
the injury of their own subjects; but those are in a more safe condition. And
in this respect, he that has a care that his ways may be pleasing to God,
has more security and safety for his person, then even the greatest Monarchs
that are without this care. The Lord is a sure Bulwark to all those that are
his precious treasure.

For the accomplishment of his promises. 1 King 8.49. 1 King 9.3.
3 That he might fulfill his promise which he made unto Solomon, when he prayed,
That if his people should sin against him, and he given over into the hands of
their enemies, that then if they should repent them of their evil ways, the
Lord should give them favor in the sight of those which had carried them
captives. How this prayer was heard of God, as the Lord testified unto him in a
Vision. Thus why the Lord does thus graciously reward his servants.

The fourth Point.
THe clearing of such places of Scripture as seem to oppose this truth, nay, to
imply the direct contrary; viz. when our ways please the Lord, our very
friends are at emnity with us. Thus Jeremiah's brethren, Jer 12 6. Jer. 15.10.
and they of his fathers house, dealt treacherously with him; and though he had
done no evil, yet every one cursed him, whereof he himself complains. Also
the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 59.15.
He that departs from evil, makes himself a prey. Our Savior also
foretold, That even they of our own household should be our enemies, Mat. 10.3,
36.
all which seem to thwart this truth.

For Answer unto these, and such like places, we are.



2. To confider, That as God has made this promise, so he has appointed the
use of all lawful means conducing thereunto. Thus Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
though he had a promise from Christ, (wrestling with him in the form of a man)
That he should prevail with man, Gen 35.8.
and consequently, with his brother Esau, yet he prepare; a Present, that he
might thereby reconcile himself unto his brother Esau. Thus also did Jacob send
a Present unto his son Joseph, who did then govern in Egypt under Pharaoh,
Genesis 43.11.14.
conceiving him to be his enemy. So must we use all lawful means to have the
good will of all men. Heb 12 14.


3. To comfort our selves: Forasmuch as however the wicked are at variance with
us for our sincerity, yet this enmity proceeds from their own hearts, and not
from God.

4. To conceive of all temporal promises made unto us in Scripture, that we
are not to expect them as absolute promises, but conditionally made unto us, so
far forth as they shall be for Gods glory, and our comfort and salvation; and
if promises be not sanctified to these ends, we are far better without them
then with them. Psalm 119.7^.
It Is good for us sometimes to be afflicted, sometimes to be persecuted of
enemies, that we might have the stronger evidence, that we are not of the
world, because it hated us: Joh. 15.19.
Yea, it is good for us sometime that we should be suffered of God to fall into
sin, though not in it self, yet be use it makes us more fervent in prayer,
more wary and faithful. It may be demanded, Whether we ought (being hated for
righteousness sake) to suspect that our ways are not pleasing to God, we
should rejoice when we suffer persecution for his Names sake. Matt 5.11 12.


As this promise made in this Text should not make us despair of the
uprightness of our ways,

The fifth Point.
THe Use and Application of this comfortable promise. This may be branched into
diverse particulars:

1. Is it thus, That the Lord, if our ways please him, will make our very
enemies at peace with us? Use 1* When our friends are at enmity with us, we
have then cause to suspect the upr^ghtnesse of our ways.
^hen what shall we think of our selves, when not only our enemies, but our very
friends are at debate and variance with us, and ready to do what mischief they
can unto us? When servants, children, and wives conspire against the Master of
the family? when Prince and subjects are against each other? Have we not here
just cause to suspect the uprightness of our ways, and that we walk contrary
unto God, and that therefore God walks contrary to us, and crosses us even in
those things which should be blessings unto us? Lev. 26 23, 24.
Yet we impute these things usually unto the second causes; as to the
wickedness and bad disposition of such as are become our enemies, as if the
Lord had no stroke in this. Who stirred up Absalom against his father? was it
not the Lord? yes, I will stir up an enemy against thee out of thine own house,
says the Lord to David; 2 Samuel 12.11
and yet we in such cases cry out upon the unnaturalness of children,
wickedness of servants, perverseness of wives, churlishness of husbands,
etc. whereas we ought principally to look up unto God, warning us of our sins
by such like castigations, intimating unto us thereby, That something is amiss
in the family, good duties are neglected, servants not instructed, Sabbath not
wholly sanctified, or something there is, not as it should be: This I am sure,
here lies the cause, Our ways are not pleasing to the Lord; Lam. 3 39. Use 2.
When our ways please God, our friends shall be at peace with us. Luke 15 20.22.
for man suffers for his sins.

2. Shall our enemies be at peace with us if our ways please the Lord? then
surely much more our friends, and such as have been well-willers of the
household of faith unto us in the time of our unregenerate estate, whether
fathers, brothers, or other friends. If the father bear a natural affection to
the prodigal, whilst he is wasting his substance amongst harlots, how much
more will he run unto him, when he is yet afar off, after he repents, and is
come to himself? As the Apostle speaks in another case not much unlike to this;
If when we were his enemies, Romans 5 8, 9, 10.
God loved us, and sent his Son to redeem us, much more now will he be affected
toward us, and save us?

3. If our enemies and our friends be at peace with us, then what can be
against us? Use 3. When our ways please God, nothing can be against us.
What can Satan, hell, death, and all the armies of darkness (for they also
are of the number of those, which shall, will they, nill they, be at peace with
us also) prevail against us? Oh how comfortable is the state of a Christian in
this regard! Come war, the sword, captivity, yea, and death is self, or any
outward calamity through enemies opposition, yet here a word of sure comfort,
That if our ways shall be so ordered, that we may have peace with God, he will
so bring it to pass (one way or other, as has been already showed) that our
enemies shall be at peace with us. The Lord will be that unto us, which he
promised to be unto his elect, under the Babylonish Captivity; Though I scatter
them into the furthermost parts of the earth, Ezekiel. 11.16.
yet I will be a little sanctuary unto them in the midst of their enemies. Oh
how ought this to stir us up to be undefiled in all our ways (especially in
these times of the general combustion of Gods Church, wherein the time is
come, 1 Pet. 4 17.
whereof Saint Peter spoke, That judgment should begin at the house of God)
that so in the times of distress we may have boldness toward God, and
challenge the Lord of his promise here, and in other places of Scripture, That
he would be a sanctuary to us in the midst of troubles, and that we may say as
good Hezekiah; Remember, Is^. 38.3.
O Lord, that I have walked before thee with a perfect heart, and fulfill thy
promise to thy servant.

4. Since it is a confirmed truth, Use 4. We must labor that our ways may
please the Lord. Psalm 120.7.
That they whose ways please the Lord, he will make their very enemies at
peace with them: Is there any that with David, are for peace, or that would be
freed from the grievances of outward enemies, here is the way chalkt out unto
him by Solomon, to strive that all his ways may please the Lord. Most of us,
when we seek the favor of others, try all ways; but this true way, this
comes last, or never into our minds; and yet sure I am, it is the most cheap
and husbandly of all ways.

Joh. 6 28.
What ways are those which are pleasing to God, as the Jews said to Christ,
What shall we do that we may work the works of God? For we may be deceived in
the choice of our way. Prove. 14 2.
There is a way (says the wise man) seems good unto us, and the end thereof is
death.

Answ. The Scriptures are the only lantern and light to direct us into the
true way; they must be our guide, Psalm, 119.105. Ways pleasing to the Lord.
and they will inform us that these are the ways must be our ways we must
walk in, if we will please the Lord; namely,

1. The way of faith (for without this (whatever we do) it is impossible to
please God) not only a bare knowledge of the lawfulness of such actions as we
perform to be pleasing to God, but also faith to do them, The way of Faith.
Heb. 11 6.
even for this very respect that God requires them; and yet so doing them, as
expecting only salvation by Christ.

2. The way of Gods Commandments; The way of his Commandments. Matthew 15.9. Psalm
119.1.3.
not man's inventions of Will Worship, nor humane prescriptions; they are all
vain, if we may believe him in whose mouth there is no guile: but Blessed are
they that walk in the Law of the Lord, and they do no iniquity that walk in his
ways.

3. The strait and narrow way: The strait and narrow way. Matthew 7 14.
Strive to enter into the strait gate; for strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way that leads unto life. This is not the way of the loose Libertines,
and profane persons of these times.

4. The old way. Stand ye in the ways, The old way, Jer. 6.16.
and ask for the old way, where is the good way, and ye shall find rest for
your souls. This old way is the way of faithfulness and truth, which are
called Gods counsels of old, as being that eternal truth of God, written in
the heart of Adam, in the state of inno^^^cy, and after revealed in Scripture,
and more briefly unfold^^ in the ten Commandments, opposed to the new devised
doctrines of the Popish Church, so strictly binding the consci^^ces of simple
people.

5. They must not be unequal and uneven ways (swelling with the high
mountains, The way of humility.
and pride and presumption, either of Gods mercy, or our own merit) but plained
and made equ^^ with a sanctified humilty of heart. When John the Baptist wa^ to
prepare the way of the Lord, Isa. 40.4.
he cried out, That every valley (of despair) should be exalted; and every
mountain (of pride and presumption) should be made low. These are the ways
wherein we must walk; wherein if we shall walk, we shall please the Lord; and
if our ways please the Lord, he will make our very enemies to be at peace with
us.

Laus Domino Christo. Amen.
FINIS.

