A TREATISE OF BAPTISM: Wherein is clearly proved the lawfulness and
usefulness of Believers Baptism; As also the sinfulness and vanity of
Infants Baptism. With many useful Instructions, concerning the same matter.

Grounded upon Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.

By ROBERT GARNER.

PROVERBS 10.9. He that walks uprightly walks surely: But he that
perverteth his ways shall be known.

PSALM. 119.126, 127, 128. It is time for thee, Lord, to work: they have made
void thy Law. Therefore I love thy Commandments above gold, yea, above fine
gold. Therefore, I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right: I
hate every false way.

Printed in the Year, 1645.

To the Churches of JESUS CHRIST, in London, and elsewhere, in all places.
BEloved in the Lord: My hearts desire to the Fountain of grace is, that you
may receive abundantly from thence a multiplication of grace and peace, and a
most rich enjoyment of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ: and
that in every thing ye may be strengthened by him with all might, and enriched
by him with all utterance, and with all knowledge, and replenished from him
with that wisdom which is from above, and enabled by him to walk in
holiness, love, and unity, and to stand steadfast in the Truth as it is in
Jesus: that in all things he may be glorified by you. Beloved, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ (whose I am, and whom I serve, in whom also I am your
Brother and Servant in the Faith and fellowship of the Gospel) having brought
to my hand some understanding and enjoyment of the doctrine of Baptism, and
the usefulness thereof as it concerns Believers, unto whom only he has
alloted it: I did account my self bound in duty to make you partakers of his
grace given to me, by recommending the same to your consideration, as it is
propounded in the following Treatise. And the rather I was willing to do so,
because (although I have seen the precious labors of some of my dear brethren,
to my edification, clearing the truth of the doctrine of Believers baptism,
and discovering the falsenesse of infants baptism, in way of answer to such,
or the arguments of such who pleaded so earnestly (though carnally) for the
same) yet I have seen no Treatise positively and directly declaring the
doctrine of Believers baptism, with the End and use thereof unto them. I
beseech the stronger Brethren not to account this undertaking arrogancy or
presumption in me, who am the unworthiest amongst the Saints. I have writ it,
and sent it especially for the instruction and confirmation of the weaker:
having confidence (through the Lord) that it will be of some such use and
advantage to them. Some things in this Treatise do not so directly concern you
my Brethren, as others, who upon several grounds (though but Sandy) are
otherwise minded: as will be manifest to such as read with understanding.
Nevertheless such things will not be useless unto you my Brethren. And so it
may please the Lord that they may not be without fruit amongst those, among
whom more especially they do concern: if the Lord in bringing this Treatise to
their hands, bring it to their hearts also. It is their instruction that I
desire. If any man think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him
acknowledge, that the things that I write unto you, are the Commandments of
the Lord. But if any man will be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Brethren pray
for me: Be mindful of the Brethren amongst us: Study to advance the Kingdom
of Christ in these parts: for there is a general backwardness to cast off
humane traditions, and to close with the Lord Jesus in his pure Ordinances.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. My love be with you all in
Christ Jesus. Amen.

Your Brother in the love and service and riches of the Gospel; ROBERT GARNER.

A Treatise of BAPTISM: Wherein is clearly proved the lawfulness and
usefulness of Believers Baptism: As also the sinfulness and vanity of
Infants Baptism. With many useful Instructions concerning the same matter.
Grounded upon Ephesians. 4 5. One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.
WHich Scripture holds forth to us this truth: to wit, The Lord Jesus has
given and commanded One Baptism of water under the Gospel to be administered
unto Believers only.

In holding forth this truth, it is needful to clear up these things: to wit,













These things (through the help of God) being cleared up will afford to us
some useful instructions, as flowing from thence; and will serve for a
Touchstone to make trial of that which is commonly called Infants Baptism.

What Instructions will naturally arise to us from these general heads, I
shall annexe them thereunto as I go forward.

The first thing to be cleared up is this: to wit, By baptism in this
scripture we are to understand the baptism of water. There is indeed a
threefold baptism which we read of in scripture. The baptism of water, Acts
8.36. and 10.47. The baptism of the holy Spirit or fire, Mat. 3.11. Mark. 1.8.
And the baptism of afflictions, Math. 20.23. Mark. 10.39. The first of these
was administered to all believers we read of in the Gospel. The second was
given by Christ, more especially to some persons, either before or after the
administration of the baptism of water, in what measure the Lord Christ was
pleased to dispense the same. And this is called the gift or gifts of the holy
Spirit. Acts. 10.45. and 19.5.6. The last of these is one time or other the
portion of all such as will live godly in Christ Jesus: though indeed some by
the appointment of God drink deeper of the Cup, and are plunged lower and
longer in afflictions then others are; yet so, as God always proportioneth
richer measures of grace and strength to greater measures of trials and
afflictions.

What has been spoken concerning this threefold baptism may serve (as I
conceive) to give some light to Heb. 6.2. Where mention is made of Baptismes:
not one only in the singular number, but baptismes, in the plural number.
This by the way.

Now the main Scope or Argument of the Apostle in the forementioned Scripture.
(Ephesians. 4.5.) will fully prove that the baptism of water is chiefly and only
intended there. He gives this exhortation to the Saints, verse 3. endeavor to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. He presses this
exhortation from the consideration of certain Unityes or Onenesses which were
the common lot or portion of them all and so are of all such as walk in the
paths of the Gospel. Says he, you are all One body, and one spirit, and you
are all called to one and the same hope: ye have all one Lord, and ye all
profess one faith in the same Savior: ye are all baptized with one and the
same baptism: you have all one God and Father, who is above you all, and
through you all, and in you all in a way of grace and power. And therefore do
you preserve an Oneness of heart and Spirit amongst yourselves keep or
preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Now this one baptism
which the Apostle makes use of whereby to strengthen his exhortation, must of
(...) be one of those three baptismes above mentioned; but first, it was not
the baptism of the holy spirit or fire: for it is evident, all these believers
were not baptized with the pouring out of the gift or gifts of the holy spirit
upon them: they did not all prophecy nor all spoke with tongues: but he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets for the edifying of the Body, verse. 11.12.13.
And secondly, it was not the baptism of afflictions: for we do not read of
any notable afflictions which all the members of this body did for the present
meet with. And therefore that exhortation could not be, or not so strongly
pressed upon them from either of these baptismes. And therefore this One
baptism here mentioned, is without doubt the baptism of water, wherewith all
the members of that one body, upon profession of one faith, according to the
commandment of that one Lord, were baptized.

And from this One baptism of water, whereof they were all partakers, as also
they were of many other Onenesses, he exhorts them to keep or preserve the
unity or Oneness of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

Instruction.
That useful Instruction which flows from hence, is to teach all the Saints,
who are under the profession of this one baptism, according to the
commandment of One Lord, upon the profession of one faith, to endeavor at all
times, 2 Cor. 13.11.
by all means to keep or preserve the unity of the spirit, the oneness of
heart and mind, in the bond of peace.

Trial.
And this that I have said, may serve as the first Touchstone for the trial of
Infants baptism, whereby the unwarrantablenesse and counterfeitnesse of the
same will be discovered: for if this one baptism engage all (without
exception) who are under the profession of it, to keep or preserve the unity of
spirit in that Body whereof they are members; to walk in a gracious, amiable,
wise, and peaceable manner in the Body: then surely Infants have no admittance
by the Lord to this Ordinance. Does the Lord any where lay such an engagement
as this is upon Infants? Or are they capable of such an engagement as this is?
Or does the Apostle intend them in this Scripture? wherein he says, ye are one
body, and one spirit, and ye are called to one hope: ye have one Lord, one
faith, and one Baptism: therefore do ye keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace. Whereby it is evident that not Infants or Infants of believers,
but believers only have entrance and admittance to the Lord to this ordinance.

And this remains now to be further proved in clearing up the two next
particulars, to wit; The baptism of water is an Ordinance of the Lord Jesus;
which is one of them; And this Ordinance of the Lord Jesus is properly and
peculiarly belonging unto believers, which is the other of them; These two, I
shall now prove jointly (...) in the mouth of two clear and faithful witnesses
wherein this is established, and shall prevail against all gainsayers. These
two witnesses are; First, the command of the Lord Jesus and of his servants
from his mouth. Secondly, the example of the Lord Jesus, and of the Saints in
Scripture, who have walked before us in the paths of the Gospel.

The first witness is the command of the Lord Jesus, and of his servants from
his mouth. And who shall contradict his commandment, unto whom all power in
heaven and earth is given? It is thus written, Matthew 28.18, 19, 20. And Jesus
spoke to his Disciples saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and earth.
Go ye therefore and make Disciples all Nations, (for so the words are to be
read) baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy spirit: Teaching them to obse^^^ all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. Wherein obse^^e this Order, to wit, first make Disciples, and then baptize
them, and then teach them to observe all other things that I have commanded
you. And let another Scripture witness to the truth of this interpretation,
Ioh. 4.2. Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John. First he made
Disciples, and then they were baptized. And the very same Commission of our
Lord Jesus as it is expressed by Mark in the 16. chapt. verse. 15.16. Does put
the matter out of all doubt, and is sufficient to convince such (if the Lord
please) as make, I know not what strange interpretations of that place of
Matthew. 28. And he said to them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved.
That is, such as are made believers through the power of God in the preaching
of the Gospel, let them be baptized; and he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved. Thus we see Matthew and Mark explaining each other concerning
the mind of the Lord Jesus in this Ordinance. Make them Disciples says one,
and then baptize them. Let them be believers says another, and be baptized.
And doubtless the Scripture foreseeing what contradictions would afterward
arise against this Ordinance of Christ (thus to be dispensed) through that
self-love, carnal fear, pride and worldliness, which too much possesses the
hearts of many: and what oppositions would be raised against the Saints for the
practice of it: did thus provide to clear up and confirm this truth to them
whose hearts God does persuade to receive in the love of it. To these
Scriptures may be added diverse others concerning the mind of the Lord Jesus in
the mouths of his Servants, Acts. 2.38. Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the Name of Jesus Christ. Acts. 10.47, 48. Can any man forbid water that
these should not be baptized which have received the holy Spirit as well as we?
And he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. Acts. 22.16. And
now why tarriest thou? (It is the command of the Lord Jesus by Ananias to Saul,
after that he appeared to him in a way of grace.) Arise and be baptized. Thus
we have the first witness speaking clearly, plainly, and fully to the matter,
Joh. 15.14
without any Deceitfulness, Darkness, or inticeing words of Man's Wisdom.

The second witness (agreeing with the former) is the example of the Lord
Jesus, and of the Saints in Scripture, who have walked before us in the paths
of the Gospel. We will set the Lord Jesus in the first place. Matthew
3.13.14.15. Then comes Jesus from Gallile to Jordan unto John to be baptized
of him: but John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? And Jesus answering, said to him, suffer it to be so now:
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him.
The Lord Jesus is herein an example to believers in those or the like respects:
first in his pains, He travaileth from Gallile unto Jordan to be baptized. He
is willing to take pains to fulfill his Fathers will. Secondly in his
forwardness, and that is employed in the word then. Then comes Jesus. That
is, when John had entered upon the administration of baptism: Then, when the
work was now in hand comes Jesus. He does not delay, but makes haste to
fulfill the will of his Father. Thirdly in his humility. He comes to John. He
disdaineth not, nor neglects the Ordinance of God, although to be administered
to him by one much inferior to himself. Fourthly in his holy and firm
resolution. He breaks through all oppositions which did lie in his way to
hinder him in his Obedience to his Fathers will. John forbad him. But the Lord
Jesus overcomes that opposition with this consideration, that it is an act of
righteousness, and therefore it behooves or becomes him to fulfill the same.
To his example, we shall add the practice of the Saints in Scripture. Acts.
2.41. Then they that gladly received his word were baptized. Acts. 8.12.13. But
when they believed Philips preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God,
and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and Women. Then
Simon himself believed also, and was baptized: And verses 36.37.38. of the
same chapter, the Eunuch said, see here is water, what does hinder me to be
baptized? And Philip said, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may.
And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Then
they went into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him. Acts
9.18. After that the Lord Jesus had appeared in a way of Grace to Saul, and had
sent him to Anamas, It is said, He received sight forthwith, and arose and was
baptized, Acts. 18.8. Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were
baptized. And we read further of four households of believers who were
baptized, Lydia and her household, Acts 16.14, 15. The Iaylor and his household,
verse. 33, 34. of the same Chapter. Crispus and his house, Acts 18.8. The
household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.16. Now if some shall yet continue to say, (as
many have already spoken upon their own imagination) that it is probable, there
were Infants in the household of Lydia, as well as them of grown years, and
therefore Infants were baptized as well as them. I give this twofold answer; to
wit, First, there is but one baptism of water: one in respect of that One
Lord, who has commanded it; and one in respect of that one subject, to wit,
believers; such as make profession of one faith, upon whom only that One Lord
has commanded it to be administered. And therefore we may boldly affirm, that
upon the same ground Lydia was baptized, upon the same ground also her household
was baptized; that was upon their diligent attention and subjection unto the
Gospel which Paul preached. And how this will agree with Infants, let the wise
judge. Secondly, it is much safer and more agreeable to the rule of heavenly
wisdom, and godly equity to interpret this one Scripture, wherein there is
some seeming darkness (and yet but seeming) by other clear Scriptures of the
like nature, rather then to entangle and lose our selves, and wrong the
Testimony of the Lord Jesus with our own imaginations. Let us then compare
spiritual things with spiritual. Let us try the baptism of Lydia and her
household, by the baptism of those other three households mentioned above. The
Iaylor and his household who were baptized, were such to whom Paul and Silas did
speak the word of the Lord, Acts 16.32. and such as believed and rejoiced in
God, verse. 34. He rejoiced and believed in God with all his house. And of
Crispus and his household, it is said, Acts 18.8. Crispus believed on the Lord
with all his house, and they were baptized. And the household of Stephanas whom
Paul baptized, 1 Cor. 1.16. He witnesses of them in the 16. chapter of this
Epistle verse. 15. they were the first fruits of Achaia, and have addicted
themselves to the ministry of the Saints. Now whether any of these Scriptures
teach to us either directly or by way of consequence, the baptism of Infants;
let the wise judge. And doubtless, Lydia and her household will speak as little
for that baptism: for such as were these households, such was Lydia and her
household also.

1 Cor. 11.1.
Thus we have the second witness agreeing with the former, (as the Lords
witnesses always do) speaking clearly, plainly, and fully to the matter also.
And in the mouth of these two witnesses, we have the second and third general
heads clearly and fully proved: to wit, Baptism is an Ordinance of the Lord
Jesus which he has given and commanded, as properly and peculiarly belonging
unto believers, disciples, or repentant ones. And this Testimony, which is from
heaven, shall stand immovable against the imaginary and counterfeit testimony
of all gainsayers. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is
greater.

That which I have said for the clearing and proving of these two general
heads, Instruction.
is useful to instruct us concerning the necessity of believers baptism;
some say, it is of no necessity: And they charge us that we put a greater
necessity upon it then is meet. To such I may answer; Of what necessity is any
of Gods Ordinances? For what necessity there is of others, the same necessity
there is of this. And truly we put no greater necessity upon it, then the Lord
Jesus himself has put upon it. Now I conceive, there is a threefold necessity
which the Lord has put upon this, as upon other Ordinances. First it is of
necessity to obey the Lord in this as in all other Ordinances. Secondly it is
of necessity to show forth the praise and honor of the Lord in this, as in
all other Ordinances. Thirdly, it is of necessity to seek the face, and
strength, and blessing of Christ in this, as in all other Ordinances. That the
Lord Jesus has commanded it to believers (and in that respect therefore it is
necessary) I have already proved: And that the Lord Jesus does manifest his
grace and strength to believers in it, I shall prove afterward, when I come to
show of what end and use baptism is (through Christ) unto believers. I shall
therefore request such persons to consider, that what necessity the Lord Jesus
has put upon a Church relation, upon hearing the Word, prayer, breaking bread,
and the like: the same necessity he has put upon the baptism of believers
also. I shall beseech such to take heed, that in charging us with folly, they
charge not the Lord Jesus also, Others there are (whether through ignorance or
malice; I leave to the Lord, and their own consciences) who endeavor to make
this way of the Lord odious, and believers odious in the practice of it. But
believers may answer such (as David did Michal when she reproached him for
dancing before the Ark:) It is before the Lord Jesus, who himself was baptized,
and has commanded all believers to walk in this way; Therefore I will glory in
this way, and account it a Crown to me: And I will yet be more vile then thus
(as you account it vile) and I will be base in my own sight: And though you
reproach me, yet of the Lord Jesus and of his servants, of them shall I be had
in honor. 2 Samuel, 6.20.21, 22.

Trial.
And further; This may serve as a second Touchstone or trial of Infants
Baptism: For if the Lord Jesus has given and commanded this Ordinance of
baptism, as properly and peculiarly belonging unto believers, or disciples, as
has been proved by two witnesses; then this does manifestly discover Infants
baptism not to be of God, but of men only. Search and try if this One Lord do
any where command Infants to be baptized: Or if he appoint baptism to any, but
upon profession of this One faith in their own persons only. Or if you have
any clear example in Scripture for Infants Baptism, or the baptism of any but
believers only. Mr. Marshall, in his Sermon upon baptism, seems to grant
that none but the disciples of Christ should be baptized, but then he turns
aside from the truth, by affirming that Infants in Scripture are called
Disciples. He alleges only Acts 15.10. In the first verse it is said, There
were false teachers came from Iudaea, and taught the brethren, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Now says Mr.
Marshall, To be circumcised after the manner of Moses, is for infants to be
circumcised as well as men. And these says he, as well infants as men, are
called Disciples, verse 10.

In answer to this, I shall show the mistake of Mr. Marshall and others who
follow him herein; from a twofold consideration.

First, These words (after the manner of Moses) respects not persons but
things: to wit, the keeping of the Law of Moses annexed to circumcision. And so
the words are thus to be understood: Certain men which came from Iudaea taught
the Brethren, Except ye be circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, ye cannot be
saved. And verses 5. and 24. will confirm this interpretation and this only:
where the same thing being repeated, it is thus said to wit, It is needful for
you to be circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, verse. 5. Ye must be
circumcised and keep the Law, verse. 24. So that the manner of Moses, respect,
not persons but things; to wit, the observation of the Law of Moses: which
thing the false teachers required of the same persons at the same time, whom
they commanded to be circumcised: which how it will agree with Infants, let the
wise judge.

Secondly, the very same persons whom the false teachers commanded to be
circumcised, are such whom James in the 19. verse s ith, are turned to the Lord
and such whom he with the Church writes unto to abstain from the pollution of
Idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood, verse
29. and such whom they call brethren, verse 25. and such who upon the reading
of the Epistle rejoiced at the consolation; These and these only are Peter's
Disciples, verse 10. And how these will agree with Infants which are Mr.
Marshals disciples, let the wise judge. The Lord teach him likewise to judge
rightly. I would hope that upon further consideration, he will be otherwise
minded: especially, if the Lord teach him to consider what is written, Luke
14.26, 27, 33. Whosoever does not bear his cross and come after me, cannot he
my Disciple. I do therefore (upon renewed consideration) bring back Infants
baptism to the forementioned Touchstone, which is faithful and precious, and
we may trust to it: for it consists of two faithful witnesses, wherein are no
deceit: whereby it is evident that the baptism of Infants, is merely and only
a device of man: seeing these two witnesses do agree in one, that the baptism
of water is properly and peculiarly belonging unto believers or disciples, upon
profession of knowledge, faith, repentance, and holiness, in their own
persons only. And therefore, as those two witnesses do require, justify and
commend the baptism of believers: so they disallow and disapprove Infants
baptism.

I shall now proceed as the Lord gives strength, to show what is the End and
Use of baptism unto Believers: and this I shall do by declaring what are those
privileges or benefits which the Lord Jesus gives to Believers in this
Ordinance: (for all the Ordinances of Christ are (through Christ) gainful to
believers) And indeed here is the marrow of the matter.

First, One privilege is this: to wit, Believers (in submitting to this
Ordinance) have the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit
called upon them therein. This is expressly commanded by our Savior, Mat.
28.19. Make Disciples all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit. And another scripture says, They
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And again, He commanded them to
be baptized in the Name of the Lord. All which comes to one and the same
thing: for through the Lord Jesus, believers have a glorious interest in the
Father, and in the holy Spirit. And this is expressed elsewhere, by being
baptized into Christ. Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27. Now to be baptized into Christ, or
into the Name of Christ, or in the Name of Christ, have one and the same sense
and signification in Scrpture. The meaning of all is this: to wit, Let them be
baptized in the Name of the Lord; that is, Let the Name of the Lord be called
upon them in baptism. Now his Name holds forth unto believers, especially two
things: Authority, and Grace: as such know to whom the Lord gives
understanding. And to have his Name called upon them in baptism, implies two
things. First, the Lord declares or promises to them, that he Calls or
Puts his Name, that is, his Authority and his Grace, upon them in baptism:
for these words, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit, carry the force of a promise in them: for in that the
Lord has commanded his servants to baptize believers in his Name, to Put or
Call his Name upon them in baptism he says Amen to it, he confirms the word
of his servants, he performs what he promises to them; Agreeable to what he
says by Moses Numb. 6.27. They shall put my Name upon the Children of Israel,
and I will bless them. Now the sum of what the Lord promises, or says Amen
to, and which his servants declares in his Name unto believers in baptism is
this, to wit, The Lord is your Father, and Master, and Lord, requiring honor,
and fear, and service, and Obedience from you: there is his Authority, And
not only so, but likewise promising loving kindness, mercy, truth, peace,
blessing, strength, teaching, and preservation to you: there is his Grace. And
indeed, as his Name alone is excellent in respect of Authority, so in respect
of Grace also. The second thing which is employed is this, to wit, Believers in
baptism do profess to put or call the Name of the Lord, that is, his
Authority and Grace upon themselves: for in baptism, there is, as it were, a
promise on their parts; And it is as much as if they should openly declare
before the Lord and his servants, thus we do now profess the Lord alone to be
our Lord, our God, our Father, and our Master: and our selves to be his
Children, his servants, his people and that we give up our selves wholly and
only to him, to serve him, to love him, to fear him, to honor him; there is
an acknowledgment of his Authority: and not only so, but likewise to depend
upon him, and to trust in him only for mercy, righteousness, peace, blessing,
strength, Wisdedome, preservation, and all good things; there is an
acknowledgment of his Grace. And thus, or to this purpose, believers are said
to put on Christ in baptism: as it is expressed by the Apostle, Gal. 3.27.

And thus as the Lord has taught me, I have showed you what it is for Disciple
or Believers to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. And therein, I have
briefly declared to you, one of those glorious privileges which the Lord Jesus
gives to Believers in baptism. And indeed, such to whom the Lord gives a
spiritual understanding, will acknowledge that this is a glorious privilege.

Instruction.
That which I have said for the clearing up of this privilege, is useful to
instruct believers, who are under the obedience of this Ordinance as believers,
to look upon their baptism neither as shameful nor beggarly, but as
honorable and precious through Christ, whose Name is called upon them in the
same. Therefore be not ashamed of your baptism, but own it continually, and
before all men, as an honorable and rich privilege to you through the Lord
Jesus.

And again, let Believers be instructed to walk answerably to this privilege
which the Lord Jesus gives them in their baptism. Let them in all things and
at all times, be subject to him as their Lord and Master: let them be subject
to none other in the things of Christ, but Christ only; whose Authority only
they have professed in baptism to be subject to. Let them in all their ways and
relations, walk according to the Lord Christ, whose commandments they have
professed to be subject to. Let them likewise look for all supply of Grace from
the Lord Jesus, that in his grace and strength, they may serve him in all
things, and at all times, that in all their conversation they may show forth
the praise and honor of their Lord and Master, whose Name is called upon them.

Trial.
Again, This privilege which Believers have in baptism through Christ, may
serve as a third Touchstone of Infants Baptism: for I thus conclude. Baptism
may lawfully be administered to none but unto such only, whom the Lord has
made meet to be partakers of such a privilege, as to have his Name called upon
them in Baptism. And who are these? But first such as know the Lord; such as
know the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit: such as know the Authority
and Grace of the Lord Jesus: such as know what the Lord declares and promises
to them, and what they promise or profess before the Lord and his people in
baptism: as I have above showed. Secondly, such whom the Lord has enabled in
some measure, to walk answerably to such a privilege, and such a profession,
as the Lord puts upon them, and they take upon themselves in baptism: from
thenceforth to walk as the servants of the Lord, whose Name therein is called
upon them, being subject in all things to him, and depending for all things
upon him only. Now then the baptism of Infants being wisely and sincerely
applied to this Touchstone, it will evidently appear, to all discerning, humble
spirits, not to be of God, but of men only: for has the Lord made them to be
meet partakers of this Ordinance? Do they know the Lord? Do they not want this
necessary thing? How then shall his name be called upon them? How shall his
Authority and Grace be declared to them in Baptism, and they promise and
profess before the Lord and his people, from thenceforth to be subject unto
him, and depend upon him, seeing they do not know him? Do not therefore such as
command and practice Infants baptism go a direct contrary course from the
mind of the Lord Jesus? I leave it to the consideration of the wise.

And hear I may take occasion to deal with such in a word or two, who plead
so earnestly for the baptism of the Infants of believers, upon this ground
because they are holy: to wit, say they, with a foederall holiness, by virtue
of their Parent or Parents being believers: which holiness, say they, gives
them a Right to baptism. Their alone ground is from the Apostles words, 1.
Cor. 7.14. else were your children unclean, but now are they holy.

I might answer, first that not such a holiness, neither any other but a
natural holiness, contrary to a natural uncleanesse, is there intended by
the Apostle, as will evidently appear to such to whom the Lord gives a
discerning Spirit.

Secondly, I might say, the Apostle speaks not the last word concerning
baptism, (neither was it to his purpose) in that Chapter.

But Thirdly, if I grant to them (seeing they are so earnest upon it) that the
Infants of believers are foederally holy, yet this will be no advantage to them
concerning the baptism of these Infants: seeing, I may affirm from the Lord
Jesus, according to clear scripture, that no holiness whatsoever can admit
any to baptism but a professed holiness, or knowledge, or faith, or
repentance in their own persons only. Yea, I may boldly affirm, that if the
Lord should witness from heaven to our knowledge, that such an Infant of such
Parents was an elect vessel, one ordained to eternal life, an heir with the
Lord Jesus of the Kingdom of glory (which is more then a foederall holiness)
yet it was in no wise warrantable or lawful to baptize such a one, till
afterward in time, the Lord did teach him to know himself, and he did
profess and declare himself to believe in the Lord Jesus. And this likewise
may in part give satisfaction to such who plead for Infants baptism from those
words of our Savior: Of such is the Kingdom of God. I conclude therefore,
that it is necessary that all such do know the Lord, and know their duty and
engagement, and privilege, who are to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. And
so much for this Touchstone and this privilege.

A Second privilege which believers have by Christ in their baptism is this,
to wit, by baptism they do enter into the fellowship of his Body, that is his
Church, with all the privileges and liberties of the same. Baptism is that
only orderly entrance which God has appointed for believers into the
fellowship of the Church of Christ. 1. Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. In which words we have
these two things proved, to wit, first that believers baptism is their
entrance into one particular Body, Church, or Congregation of Christ. By one
Spirit (speaking of Believers) we are all baptized into one Body. That is, We
that are Members in particular, diversely gifted and fitted, by that one and
the self-same Spirit, are all baptized into one body or fellowship, for the
mutual profit and benefit of each member, according to the proportion of grace
given, and divided to us by that one Spirit.

And secondly, as Believers by baptism do orderly enter into the Body or
Congregation of Christ, so likewise into all the privileges of that body. And
that is expressed in the latter clause of this verse, and in the verses
following. In this verse (says He) We have been all made to drink into one
spirit. That is, We as Members of One body, are all made to drink into one
spiritual benefit, or into one spiritual Communion, which believers have from
Christ in his Supper; According to that 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which
he bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ's? And in the verses
following of the 12. Chapter, He mentions other privileges of the Body,
which all the Members thereof do share in, says he, they are all helpful to
each other, and do all take care of each other: they suffer and rejoice one
with another. And as this Scripture holds forth this privilege which believers
have in baptism. So does that likewise in Act. 41.42. Then they that gladly
received his Word were baptized; and the same, day there were added about 3000.
souls. Where it is clear, that the entrance of all these believers, into the
union and fellowship of the body, was by baptism: they were added by baptism
or in baptism. And so we are to understand. Acts 2.47. and 5.14. and 12.24.
For God has appointed but one way, for the joining or adding of believers unto
his Body. Which sometimes is called an adding to his Church, and sometimes an
adding to the Lord; both which comes to one and the same thing: for to be
added to the Church of the Lord, or the body of the Lord, is to be added to the
Lord himself, in a mystical external union. And the same Scripture likewise
declares, that as they entered by baptism into the union and fellowship of the
body; so likewise unto the enjoyment of all the privileges of the body. For so
it follows; And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.

Instruction.
Hence I may take occasion to instruct believers, who have entered into the
Lords body in the Lords way, that they endeavor to walk closely with the body
in all love, helpfulnesse, carfulness, tenderness, and usefulness, as
becomes the Members of Christ's body.

Secondly, hence I may take occasion to satisfy such (if the Lord please) as
are opposites unto believers baptism, and their entrance into the Church by
baptism, and contend much for their entrance into a Church Estate by Covenant
or Contract, without baptism. Indeed there ought to be a sweet and firm
consent, harmony, agreement or contract, both in judgment and affection,
according to the Lord, amongst all those who are one body in the Lord; and as
it is unquestionable: so it is a desirable, a good, and pleasant thing: and I
shall plead for it as much as any. But that such a consent or covenant amongst
persons, is an entrance according to Christ, into the body of Christ, without
this one baptism, upon profession of this one faith, in this one Lord Jesus,
is not clear to me from the Laws and Statutes of this Lawgiver. That
Scripture, Esaias 56.4. and 6. verses, so much alleged for that purpose by men
of that way (whom in other things I much esteem) where the Lord says to the
Eunuchs, and the sons of the stranger that serve him, and keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of his Covenant, that he will give
them a glorious settled Name in His house, etc. Where they understand an
entering into a Church Estate by Covenant only. I say, I conceive, this
Scripture (which is indeed a Gospell-Scripture) will without any violation
admit of other interpretations, more spiritual, and more sweetly agreeing to
the Gospel of Christ, then their interpretation is. Why may we not say,
without wrong to this or any other Scripture, that by taking hold of the
Covenant here, may be understood in part, believers obedience to Christ in
baptism? For whatsoever Christ commands to his servants, may in a true
sense, according to the Scripture, be called his Covenant. But if we come up to
the spiritualnesse of this Scripture, I conceive, that by Covenant in this
place, we are to understand Christ himself. For as I said, this Scripture is a
Gospel-scripture. Therefore by Sabbath here, we are to understand the Lord
Jesus only, who alone is the Sabbath or Rest of Believers under the Gospel. And
to keep this Sabbath from polluting it, is to believe in him only unto
righteousness. For to do any work, I mean to seek righteousness, or peace, or
reconciliation with God by any work, is to pollute this Sabbath or this Rest;
by whom alone, such as believe in him, do and shall enjoy a glorious, an
everlasting rest. So likewise by Covenant here, we are to understand Christ
himself; and so he is called in the same Prophet. Esaias 42.6. I will give thee
(speaking of Christ) for a Covenant of the people, for a light to the Gentiles.
And chapter 49.8. I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the
people. Therefore, to take hold of his Covenant, is to believe in Christ only,
to embrace him, to cleave close to him, to obey him in all things, and to make
open profession, or confession of him. And to such indeed the Lord will give a
glorious and everlasting Name, which shall not be cut off, even a Name in his
house, better then of Sons and Daughters. And this I conceive to be the
special meaning of the Holy Spirit in this Scripture; which is in no wise
pertinent and proper for them, to bear them out in their Church Covenant, and
their entrance into the Church by it only. Thus much I conceived necessary to
speak by the way.

Trial.
Again, This that I have said concerning this privilege which believers have
in baptism, through Christ, may serve as a fourth Touchstone for the trial of
Infants baptism, whereby it is discovered not to be of God, but of men only.
For if all baptized persons according to the Scripture, were baptized into one
body, to wit, the Church of God, and all the privileges thereof, as has been
clearly proved, from the 1. Cor. 12.13, and Acts. 2.41, 42. (And doubtless,
there is but one and the same rule for all the Churches of Christ to walk by)
Then surely the unlawfvllnesse of Infants baptism is hence also proved. Are
they meet subjects to be joined or added to the Lords body, who neither knew
the Lord, nor his body, nor the privileges of the same? Are they meet to be
added unto the body in baptism, who are no ways meet to partake in the
privileges and liberties of the body? Who are no ways meet to walk with the
body in doctrine, in fellowship, in breaking of bread, in prayers, and in other
liberties? And surely according to the scripture, those who are added unto the
body, are added unto the present partaking and enjoyment, of all the
privileges of the body. Are they meet to be added to the body, who are no
ways useful, helpful, and profitable unto the body? Such who cannot care for
the body, nor suffer with it, nor rejoice with it, nor perform any office of
love or duty to the body? Surely, the body of Christ, according to the
scripture, is not made up of such unequal, unusefull, unhelpfull, unprofitable
Members. Has the most wise God made all the Members of the natural body
proportionable and useful? And has he not made the mystical body, the Church
of Christ glorious, in the proportion and usefulness of all the members? I
speak not now concerning the salvation of Infants: for that Infants dying in
their infancy may belong to the Election of Grace, and be saved, even the
Infants of believers, and unbelievers, of Turks, and Indians, who can deny it?
But the wise will understand what I say. I leave the use of this Touchstone to
their consideration. And so much for this Touchstone and this privilege.

Thirdly, Another privilege is this; to wit, Believers in baptism, through
the faith of the operation of God, have fellowship with Christ, in his death
and resurrection: by the power of which the strength of the body of sin is
more subdued, and they are more enabled to walk in newness of life. Romans 6.3
4, 5. Know ye not (says the Apostle) that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the
glory of the Father: even so also we should walk in newness of life. And
agreeable to this is, Col. 2.12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein also you
are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised
him from the dead. In which two Scriptures, acccording to the matter in hand, I
pray you take notice with me of these four things: to wit;

First, that in or by baptism, believers have a great engagement lies upon
them, to walk like such as are dead to sin, to the world, and to all humane
traditions whatsoever in point of worship, and to live to God in holiness, and
righteousness, and spiritual worship, according to Christ in all things.
Seeing that in baptism they profess themselves to be dead with Christ, and to
live with him, they ought from thenceforth, and from that time to be more
diligent to live accordingly. Thus the Apostle expressly speaks, Romans 6.6.
Where having relation to Believers burying and rising with Christ in baptism,
in the 4, and 5. verses: He says in this verse, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. Mind that expression (Henceforth.) And to to this purpose is that
exhortation to the same believers (and indeed concerns all professing or
confessing Christ) Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof. And as they have a great engagement upon
them from thenceforth not to be subject to sin and the lusts thereof: so
likewise not to be subject to any human traditions in point of worship: you may
understand some difference betwixt what I call sin, and what I call humane
traditions in point of worship, though these are sinful also. I say, Believers
baptism ingageth them from that time, or from thenceforth, to cast off all
these things. Thus the Apostle reasons, Coloss. 2.20. Wherefore if ye be dead
with Christ, that is, seeing ye are dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to Ordinances, after
the Commandments and Doctrines of men. Where he lays down this conclusion,
that they are dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, that is, from
all those things which were but Types and shadows of the Lord Jesus: And he
proves this from their profession in Baptism, verse 12. (for unto that it is
most evident he has relation) ye are buried with him in Baptism: And from
this conclusion he presses this exhortation by way of reasoning; Why, as
though living in the world, are ye subject to the Ordinances, etc. It is a
dishonorable thing, and altogether unanswerable, for such as have the Name of
Christ called upon them in Baptism, and therein profess themselves to be
buried with Christ, from thenceforth to serve any sin in the lusts of it, or
to be subject to Types and shadows of Christ, or any Ordinances which are
after the commandments and doctrines of men. Whereas on the contrary, it is an
honorable and a glorious thing for believers to walk up to that engagement,
which the Lord Jesus has laid upon them, and they have taken upon themselves
in that Ordinance.

Secondly, by baptism, believers have a great engagement lies upon them to
seek after, and set their affections upon things which are above, where Christ
sits at the right hand of God. Col 3.1.2. If ye then be risen with Christ, that
is, Seeing then ye are risen with Christ, set your affections upon things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. He here also lays
down this conclusion that they are risen with Christ; for so much the words
imply. And this he proves likewise (as he did the former concerning their being
dead with Christ) from their profession in baptism, verse. 12. of the second
chapter: (for unto that it is most evident he has relation) Buried with him in
baptism, wherein also, you are risen with him, through the faith of the
operation of God, and from this conclusion, he presses this exhortation upon
them. Seek after, and set your affection upon those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. As if he should say, seeing ye
profess your selves to be risen with him, you must ascend up with him also in
your affection, setting your mind upon those things which are above. It is a
dishonorable and an unanswerable thing for believers who profess themselves
to be risen with Christ in baptism, to set their affection upon things on the
earth. Whereas on the other side, it is a glorious, and an answerable thing for
such to set their mind, their joy and delight upon things which are above: to
live and converse with the Lord Jesus, in the bosom of his Father.

Thirdly, the Lord puts forth a glorious power to Believers in baptism, giving
in unto their hearts (in what proportion he pleases) the power of the death
and resurrection of JESUS CHRIST, acting faith in them to receive the same,
whereby they are in some measure enabled to perform that which their baptism
does engage them unto: Romans 6.4. We are buried with him by baptism into death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father:
even so we also should walk in newness of life. This Scripture has much in
it for the comfort of believers; Wherein this is laid down for a certain
truth, to wit, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of
the Father: even so (mark that expression, even so) we also should walk in
newness of life; that is, like as the glory of the Father was put forth in
raising his Son from the dead: even so, the glory of the Father is put forth
unto believers in baptism, crucifying the power of sin in them, and raising up
their heart and mind as it were into heaven to sit with Christ, to walk with
him in a holy and heavenly conversation, to live a new life, which the
Scripture, calls a newness of life. And therefore those words; even so we
also should walk in newness of life, does not only hold forth what is our
duty, but what is our privilege also, for they carry the force of a promise in
them, and are to be thus understood, to wit, even so we also through the glory
of the Father acted in us in our baptism, shall walk in newness of life. And
so it will agree with the 5 and 6 verses of the same chapter. For as we are
planted together with him in the likeness of his death, we shall be also planted
together in the likeness of his resurrection. And this is a greeable to that
other place, Col. 2, 12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein also, you are
risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him
from the dead. Wherein, I observe, that the same operation of God which was put
forth in raising Christ from the dead, is put forth unto believers, in baptism
(in such proportion as the Lord pleases) acting faith in them, through which
they rise with Christ, or partake with him in the power of his resurrection, in
a glorious measure. And this is so clear a truth, that Peter is bold to say,
(speaking unto believers) Baptism does also now save us (not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. That is the baptism of believers must not be
looked upon with a fleshly and carnal eye, as a washing of the flesh: but with
a holy and spiritual eye, as a holy and precious Ordinance of Jesus Christ: in
which Ordinance, he puts forth the power of his resurrection unto believers,
through faith saving them more richly then before, from the power of an inward
pollution or filthynesse, even a filthy polluted conscience with the
accusations of it: and working in them more abundantly an enlightened, holy,
good conscience: which answers or speaks good to them toward God. And whether
that Scripture in Heb. 10.22. may not agree much to this purpose, I leave to
the consideration of the wise. Neither do believers enjoy this fruit and
benefit in the present administration of baptism only: but this grace and
power of Christ in baptism, has an influence into after times also, even so
long as they continue in the estate of mortality.

The 4th. and last thing considerable to my purpose in the two Scriptures above
named, is this; to wit, Baptism thus considered, is part of that compleatnesse
which believers have in the Lord Jesus. Col. 2.10. Where the Apostle speaking
to believers, he says. And ye are complete in him. If ye ask in what manner,
or in what respects? he tells us in all respects, as it appears in the
following verses of this chap. and the beginning of the next. And amongst the
rest this is one; ye are buried with him in Baptism, wherein also, year risen
with him. And to the same purpose is that, Romans 6.5. Believers in baptism are
planted together with Christ (mark that expression, planted together with him)
in the likeness of his death, and in the likeness of his resurrection also.
And surely, herein is the compleatnesse of a believer, to be planted together,
and grow together, and live together with the Lord Jesus. And therefore such do
in part come short of their compleatnesse in Christ, who do yet come short of
being baptized as believers in the Name of Christ.

Thus much concerning the explication of the third privilege which believers
have in baptism; Wherein I have been the larger, that so I might (as the Lord
has helped me, and not without much comfortable experience, through Christ)
clear up the mind of God in it, partly for the instruction, consolation and
encouragement of believers; partly to be an Apology for them; and partly to be
another Touchstone or trial of Infants baptism.

First, partly for the instruction and encouragement of believers, who are
under the enjoyment of this Ordinance upon profession of faith in their own
persons. Much has been spoken to this purpose in the explication of this
privilege, as those that are spiritual may understand.

Exhortation.
I shall press this forward upon my self and them, with a word of
exhortation; I beseech you in the Lord that you receive not this Ordinance of
CHRIST in vain. Endeavor to walk up to that engagement which lies upon you
by baptism. Let not any sin therefore reign in your Mortal bodies, that you
should obey it in the Lusts thereof. Be not you subject to Ordinances, after
the commandments and doctrines of men. Be not ye in bondage to the rudiments
of the world, to such things that are but shadows of the Lord Jesus: for ye
are buried with him in Baptism. Endeavor to walk in newness of life, in a
holy and heavenly conversation at all times. Walk like such as are risen with
Christ. Do you ascend up with him into heaven in your affection. Set your
affection upon things which are above, and not on things on the earth. Walk
answerable to your profession, that this Ordnance of the Lord Jesus be not
justly blamed. And for your encouragement, be assured, you shall have a renewed
supply of strength from the Lord Jesus. The glory of the Father, the operation
of God shall be put forth; as need is on your behalf. Therefore, act faith
daily in the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, which is so richly made
over to you in this Ordinance, not for present use only, but for future profit
and benefit also, during the time of your sojourning in this present world.
Account your selves in all things to be complete in Christ, and that your
Baptism in his Name as Believers, is part of that compleatnesse which you have
in him. Endeavor in the strength of Christ to walk answerable to these
privileges, that the Name of the Lord Jesus may be exalted by you.

Apology.
Secondly, The explication of the former privilege, is partly to be an
Apology for baptized Believers (reproachfully called Anabaptists, truly called
Christians) against all those hard speeches, and grievous accusations, which
ungodly men, and many who are accounted religious also, do falsely speak and
charge against them: and that not privately only, but in public also, How are
they accused before authority! How are they openly charged to be movers of
sedition, troublers of the State, and such as the Land cannot bear! Yea some
are not ashamed to say, and that openly, that they are sensual persons,
walking after the lusts of the flesh, and many such like things as these are.
Surely, if such men did know what an engagement lies upon Believers in
baptism, to cast off the service and obedience of sinful lusts, and to walk
in newness of life, having their conversation as becomes Saints: As also
what strength they receive from the death and resurrection of Christ in
baptism, which has an influence into their whole life; I say, if they did
rightly know the pretiousnesse of Believers baptism in these and other
respects: they would be so far from speaking against them, that they would
speak for them, and would say to the^, we will go with you, and walk with you:
for we have heard that God is with you. Truly, I will not deny but some who
take this profession upon them, do hold forth and maintain some things very
erroneous. As free will, and power in corrupt nature to come to Christ: As also
a falling away from Christ, after they have once received him, or believed in
him; with other opinions also very dangerous. But there are but few so
erroneous who are under this profession; Neither dare the Churches of Christ
under this profession, hold communion with them: For we utterly disclaim these
opinions. Neither will I deny but that some who are under this profession, do
walk scandalously, loosely, sinfully, and altogether unanswerably to such a
profession. But we abhor their practices, and disclaim fellowship with them who
walk so; yet not mentioning such things without grief. But if Judas prove a
Traitor, let not the eleven Apostles be so accounted. If Ananias and Saphyra
prove dissemblers and lie to the holy Spirit, let not the rest of the Church
(who were of one mind and heart in the Lord) be accounted dissemblers. If some
branches in the Vine prove fruitless, let not all the branches be thought
such. If some Professors make shipwreck of that faith which they once
professed, let not all Professors be judged to be such. Thus much for this
Apology.

Trial.
Thirdly, the Explication of this third Privilege, may serve partly to be as a
fifth Touchstone of Infants baptism: whereby the unlawfulness and vanity
thereof will be further discovered. For according to this privilege of
baptism through Christ, I make this conclusion, to wit; Baptism may lawfully
be administered to none, but such whom the Lord Jesus has made meet to be
partakers of such a privilege in baptism, to have fellowship with him in
baptism, through faith, in his death and resurrection: that they may walk
answerably in some measure to such a profession, and such an engagement as they
take upon themselves in baptism: having their conversation from thenceforth
more holy and heavenly, as becomes such who profess themselves to be buried
and risen with Christ in baptism. Let then the baptism of Infants be
skilfully and sincerely tried by this Touchstone. Are Infants made meet to have
fellowship with Christ in his death and resurrection, in this or any other
Ordinance? Do they know Christ, or believe in him? Do they know any thing
concerning the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ? How then shall they have
fellowship with Christ in this or any other Ordinance, who neither know CHRIST,
nor believe in him? Are any persons meet to have fellowship with Christ in any
Ordinance, but such as know him and believe in him? I may therefore firmly
conclude, that as the knowledge of Christ, and faith in him, are necessary to a
worthy partaking in the Lords Supper, and a fellowship with Christ in that
Ordinance: So also they are necessary to a worthy and warrantable receiving of
baptism, and a fellowship with Christ in that Ordinance. And further, are
Infants made meet to have such an engagement laid upon them, as baptism lays
upon all those who are under the profession of it according to Christ? From
thenceforth and from that time, to show forth Christ's death and resurrection?
To walk like such as have professed themselves to be dead, and risen with
Christ in Baptism? Does not this Touchstone (with all the former) clearly
discover Infants baptism, to be only a device and commandment of men? Thus
much concerning this Touchstone, which I leave to the consideration of the
wise. And so much concerning this Privilege.

The fourth privilege (which is the last I shall name) which the Lord Jesus
gives to Believers in this Ordinance, is this; to wit, In this Ordinance, the
Lord Jesus by his Spirit acting in a believers heart, does more richly seal up
or confirm to him the free and full remission of all his sins, through the
blood of Christ. And therefore, observe it; Not only the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, but of the holy Spirit also, is called upon believers in this
Ordinance. And this is the proper grace or work of the holy Spirit, to witness
or confirm to us (by acting faith in us, more assuredly to believe) the
remission of all our sins by Jesus Christ. In baptism, as well as in the Lords
Supper (although in another manner) the precious death and resurrection of
Christ, is mystically, yet clearly set forth before believers. And the Spirit
of God acting faith in them, in this Ordinance, does not only clear up to them
more sweetly, the pretiousnesse of the death of Christ, but also confirm to
them more richly, their interest in the same: to wit, the remission of all
their sins, and their peace with the Father, through Jesus Christ. Hitherto,
I conceive, tends that of Peter to his perplexed hearers, Acts 2.38. Repent and
be baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins. He does not say, neither dare I say that baptism is a remedy to remit
sins: for then I should run into the mistake of such, who pleading for their
Infants baptism, do say: Baptism is a remedy to take away that sin, which
they as the sons of Adam have conveyed to them. But this Scripture, I conceive,
holds forth to us especially two things. First, that repentance and remission
of sins are preached and given only in the Name or through the Name of Jesus
Christ. There is sufficiency of grace and strength in the Lord Jesus, and in
him only, to give you repentance and remission of sins. And so it will agree
with what is written by Luke, 24.47. And that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem. Secondly, that the Lord Jesus does in baptism confirm or witness
unto Believers, in some comfortable measure, the forgiveness of their sins in
his Name. And therefore he commands them to be baptized, partly for this end,
that in baptism he may confirm to them in some measure, by his Spirit, acting
faith in them, the remission of their sins. For when a Believer is baptized
in the Name of Christ, and the Spirit of God acts faith in him in his baptism,
then is his heart more sweetly assured, that through this Name all his sins are
remitted, and he is at peace with God. And to this purpose, I conceive, we are
to understand that Scripture, Acts 22.16. Arise, and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord. Not that baptism does wash away
sins: for it is the blood of Christ only, received by us through the faith
of the operation of God, that washes or cleanses us from all sins. But
thus; Be baptized, and in thy baptism call on the Name of the Lord: that is,
act faith in the Lord Jesus, in whose Name thou art baptized, that through
faith in his Name in this Ordinance, thy heart may be further confirmed in this
assurance, that all thy sins are washed away in his precious blood. And to
this purpose, I conceive, we are to understand, Mark. 1.4. and Luke 3.3.
concerning John's baptism: Only John's baptism did point at Christ yet to come,
and that which Christ after gave in Commission, did hold forth Christ already
come. And this privilege or benefit, believers have doubtless found in
baptism. Hence it is, that the Eunuch after he was baptized, went on his way
rejoicing, Acts 8.39. He had found something of Christ in this Ordinance, which
gave him occasion of rejoicing. It was not a useless, but a gainefull
Ordinance through Christ to him. And so it was said of the Iaylor and all his
house after they were baptized: He rejoiced, believing in God with all his
house. Some increase of faith, and some witness of the Love of Christ, they
had found ministered to them by the Spirit in this Ordinance. And as it was
given to our Lord Jesus straightway after his baptism to see heaven opened,
and to hear the love of the Father witnessed from heaven to him by the holy
Spirit: Even so, the like mercy, in a less measure, is given to believers in
and after their baptism. Neither is this fruit only to be found in the
present administration of baptism: but in respect of this benefit (amongst
others) baptism has an influence into the whole life of a believer. And
truly, the grace of God is very observable in this respect: for by baptism or
straight way upon it, believers are called out to wrestle with Satan, as it
were in the open field: they are set as a But for Satan and the world to shoot
against; and therefore they had need be Armed with the strength and love of
Christ, given into their hearts by the holy Spirit in this Ordinance. Thus much
concerning the explication of this privilege.

Instruction.
Hence believers may be instructed, to act faith daily in the Lord Jesus, in
this Ordinance: and to expect a renewed power of the Spirit of God inabling
them in the faith to look often upon Christ therein. As also witnessing afresh
to their hearts in such actings of faith, the remission of all their sins
through him, in whose Name they are baptized; for baptism is not only useful
to believers in the present administration of it, but for future times also.
The comfort and benefit of it, through the power of the holy Spirit (whose Name
is called upon them therein) has an influence into the whole life of a
believer. Therefore let believers account their baptism to be of great use and
comfort to them through Christ, by the operation of the holy Spirit in them
therein.

Trial.
Again, the clearing up of this privilege, may serve as a fixth Touchstone for
the trial of Infants baptism, whereby the unlawfulness thereof will be
further discovered. I lay down this conclusion: to wit, Baptism may be
lawfully administered to none but to such whom the Lord Jesus has made meet in
some measure to be partakers of such a privilege in baptism; to have the
remission of their sins, through the Name of Christ, confirmed or witnessed
to their hearts, by the power of the holy Spirit, whose Name is called upon
them in this Ordinance. Are Infants meet to have repentance and remission of
sins preached to them through the Name of Christ? and to be baptized in his
Name for the remission of sins? are they meet to have remission of sins,
through Christ, witnessed to their heart in baptism, by the holy Spirit, who
neither know their sins, nor know Christ, nor know the holy Spirit, in his
gracious and comfortable operation? Therefore the baptism of Infants is not of
God: for I affirm (as I said before) that baptism can lawfully be administered
to none but such whom the Lord Jesus has made meet in some measure to receive
remission of sins in baptism; I mean to have the remission of sins,
through the Name of Christ, witnessed and confirmed to their hearts, in some
comfortable measure, by the holy Spirit, working graciously in them in that
Ordinance. And Surely at the least, it is needful that they know their sins,
and know Christ, and know the holy Spririt, and know his operations, when he
puts forth his grace and power in them. Now how these things will agree to
Infants, I leave to the Judgment of the Wise.

Thus much concerning the privileges or benefits which the Lord Jesus gives in
a gracious and meet proportion, unto believers in their baptism.

What I have said concerning these privileges (which are the sum of the fourth
general head which I propounded in the beginning of this Treatise) may serve
partly for instruction to such as desire to know what is the end, and use, and
profit of baptism unto believers: which is a thing to be considered; and
partly to blame such who (yiedling to ignorant and carnal reasonings) do
account believers baptism to be a burden; and (say they) Christ has taken
away all burdens from believers under the Gospel. That Christ has taken away
believers burdens, is a holy and sweet conclusion: but that believers baptism
is a burden, it is a carnal excuse, or a sinful Inference drawn from that
conclusion. We have not so learned Christ. We account his yoke easy, and his
burden light. I now proceed to clear up the fifth general head, to wit, What
is the duty, or what ought to be the carriage of believers in and after this
Ordinance. This I shall be brief in. It is recorded of the Lord Jesus that in
or upon his baptism, he prayed, Luke. 3.21. And the same counsel was given to
Saul concerning his baptism. Acts 22.16. Arise, and be baptized, and wash away
thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord that is, praying to the Lord, and
acting faith in the Lord in this Ordinance. What their duty is after this
Ordinance in the whole course of their life, I have before showed, in declaring
what Engagements lies upon believers by their baptism.

What I have spoken concerning this head, is useful to direct believers in
their duty, both how to enter upon the Ordinance, and how to behave themselves
after it according to Christ.

This likewise may serve for a Seventh Touchstone of Infants baptism, whereby
the unlawfulness thereof is further discovered. I lay down this conclusion:
to wit, Baptism can lawfully be administered to none, but such whom the Lord
has made meet to pray to him, and call upon his Name, in or upon the
administration thereof: and whom the Lord also has fitted in some measure to
walk answerable to those Engagements which baptism requires of us, from the
very time that we are under the profession of it. But how these things will
agree with Infants, I leave to the Judgment of the Wise.

The last general head to be cleared up is this, to wit, Whom the Lord Jesus
has appointed to be the Dispenser or Administrator of baptism to believers.
The Scripture teaches us, that whom the Lord Jesus has authorized and
appointed to preach the Gospel, them also in the very same Commission, and
according to the same time, he has authorized and appointed to baptize such as
believe the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus
Christ. Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.15.16. Acts. 8 12. and as it follweth in the
35.36.37.38. verses of the same Chapter.

If it be objected that the administration of baptism to believers was tied to
Apostles only;

I Answer. First, It is eviedent, Disciples did baptize before Apostles were
chosen. John. 3.22.23.24. When the Disciples of Christ were there baptizing, it
is said, John was not yet cast into prison. Now by comparing Mat. 4.12 with
Math. 10.2.3 4. We shall find that it was some-while after John was cast into
prison, before the Lord Jesus called the Twelve, under the denominaton of
Apostles.

Secondly, after Apostles were chosen, yet Disciples did baptize who were no
Apostles: as is evident by Philips baptizing of the Eunuch, Acts 8.3.8. and
Ananias baptizing of Saul, Acts, 9.10. compared with the 17. and 18. verses of
the same chapter.

Thirdly, the commssion to preach and baptize given by Christ to his servants,
was not given to them only or simply under the denomination of Apostles, but
Disciples. Math. 28. verse 16. compared with 19. And thus the promise of Christ
to be with his servants in the dispensation of these Ordinances, has an
Influence into all times, even to the end of the world.

Fourthly, The Scripture declares that the special or chief business which
Apostles are called to, is to preach the Gospel. 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, that is; The special or chief work
which Christ called me to do, was not to baptize but to preach the Gospel. From
whence we learn, that Apostles are not chiefly tied unto the administration of
baptism, neither is the administration of baptime tied only unto them.

Fifthly, The things of Christ were committed by the Apostles, according to the
will of Christ to faithful men, who should be able to teach the same to others
also. 2 Timothy 2.2. And doubtless, those who have a calling to teach them to
others, have a calling to dispense them to others also.

If any shall object, that for along time under the reign of Antichrist, the
holy and pure administration of baptism according to Christ was lost, so that
believers have it not by way of sucession from baptized persons, and therefore
their practice herein may seem faulty.

I answer. First, Was not also the Ordinance of preaching the Word, in the
simplcity and purity of it according to Christ, lost for a long time under the
reign of Antichrist? And yet what wise and humble man will refuse to hear the
Gospel preached in simplcity, and in a holy order, from such whom God has
gifted and called to dispense the same? And surely, those whom God does call to
preach the Gospel, those he also calls to baptize believers.

Secondly, we find that when the book of the law of God, and the pure and holy
administration of all Gods Ordinances was lost, under the Idolatrous reign of
Manasseh, (which was long) the servants of God in Josiah his reign finding the
same, and understanding the mind of God therein: they did not now lay aside
the book of the Law and the Ordinances of God, conceiting that they must look
for another Moses (by whom the Law was first given) from whole hands they
should again receive the Law, and the Ordinances appointed in it: but without
delay, they read the book, set themselves to seek God, renews the Covenant
which was found in the book, keeps the Passover, purges out all Idolatry,
and reformes all things which concerned the worship of God; as we may read at
large 2. Kings. 22 and 23. chapters. And in Nehemiah 8.1. We find the Children
of Israel, after their return from Captivity, being gathered together with one
consent, they require Ezra to bring forth the book of the Law of Moses, which
the Lord had commanded to Israel. They look not now for a new Moses to give the
Law again to them: but they look at the Lord, and look at his Law which he had
commanded to all Israel, and their only care was now to understand the mind of
God in it; and therefore they require Ezra to read it and to give the sense of
it. And it is observable, amongst other things, They found it written in the
Law, that the children of Israel should dwell in Boothes, verse 14. Which
Ordinance of God from the days of Joshua to that time had been neglected of
them: but they now understanding the will of God in it, presently set
themselves to the practice of it. They do not lay aside the book of the Law,
and continue in the neglect of what was written therein, saying, these things
belonged to our forefathers, or may concern future generations: but they look
at the Law of God, and all things written therein as concerning themselves
also. And surely it is a thing not blameworthy, but commendable in believers
(finding the Law of Christ, and the things he has therein commanded to all
Israel) speedily without delay, to set themselves to put the same in practice.

And for believers in some cases to be baptized by an unbeliever, the Scripture
is not with out warrant in this also. John Baptist an unbaptized person, be
baptized others. Yea the Lord Jesus came from Galile to Jordan, to be baptized
of John. The Son of God came to be baptized of John, a mean person, an
unbaptized person, And as it was in the first administration of baptism, so
also in the first recovery of the pure administration of baptism out of the
darkness of superstition, Believers may warrantably receive the Ordinance of
Baptism from an unbaptized person, whom they shall with one consent choose to
this work, being one gifted, and blameless; especially if he has instructed
them in this and other things, concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of
Jesus Christ.

And if some shall say, The Church is in the Wilderness, and therefore all the
Ordinances of God do lie as it were lost, being hidden from us, until the
recovery of the Church out of that estate. Their opinion being grounded chiefly
upon Revel. 12.6.14.

I shall propound by way of answer, what I conceive, in a few words. Her
wilderness condition, does not figure out or denote her darkness,
hiddennesse, or not appearing, or the loss of her Ordinances during that space
of time, to wit, a thousand two hundred and threescore days: but it teaches
us chiefly, a certain middle state or condition, wherein the Church was to
continue for such a season, somewhat like that of the Israelites wandering in
the Wilderness, after their deliverance from the face of that Serpent, or red
Dragon Pharaoh, until their entrance into the Land of Canaan: for I conceive
the allusion is chiefly, if not wholly taken from the dealings of God with
Israel in those times. This wilderness condition therefore of the woman, is
some middle state which God has appointed to her, and prepared for her to
continue in, until the time be expired when she shall enter into Canaan, all
oppositions being trodden under foot. And concerning this matter, there are two
or three things in this Scripture, worthy of our consideration. Rev. 1^


First, that during her condition in the wilderness she is called the Woman,
or the Church: That Name or Relation is neither lost nor hidden: but agreeing
herein to the estate of the Israelites in the Wilderness, being called the
Church in the Wilderness, and enjoying many precious Ordinances and
privileges of the Church of God; and yet not come up to that Glory and rest
which was before them.

Secondly, God appointed this Wilderness condition, this Middle State to her,
partly for safety, that in that condition, during that time, she might be
preserved from the face of the Serpent, verse 14. Even as God sent Israel into
the Wilderness to preserve them from the rage of Pharaoh, that red Dragon,
until such time as the promised Land was to be given to them: So God appointed
such a wilderness, (as it were a wandering, unsettled, wayfaring, travailing)
condition to the Church for such a time, that she might be preserved from the
overwhelming power of the red Dragon, until she come unto that glorious,
settled, peaceful condition of rest, which shall ere-long be given to her.

Thirdly, God does graciously provide that the Church shall be fed and
nourished during her wilderness condition: verses. 6.14. even as he did
graciously provide for Israel in the wilderness.

Fourthly, During her wilderness condition, she has many faithful children,
children of the youth, stout warriers, like Arrows in the hand of a mighty
man, who maintain the truth and honor of the Lord Jesus against such as join
themselves unto superstitious and erroneous practices. These are called the
remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ. verse. 17. I desire that this may be well noted, that
during her wilderness condition, she has a seed, a remnant who keep the
commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. And who can
warrantably say that these commandments of God are not the Ordinances of God,
and the Ordinance of believers baptism amongst other Ordinances? And who
therefore can say upon good ground, that during her wilderness condition the
Testimony of Christ is lost, and the commandments and Ordinances of Christ are
lost? seeing this remnant of her seed do keep the commandments of God, and
have the Testimony of Jesus Christ: that is, they practice his commandments,
and hold forth his Testimony. And thus they maintain the truth and honor of
the Lord Jesus, against such as join themselves unto superstitious practices:
even as the valiant ones of Israel did of old (during their wilderness
estates) mantaine the Lords honor against those who made them a God of their
own Earrings, and gave honor to it. Exodus 32.26.27.28.29.

Fifthly, during her wilderness condition, the woman and the remnant of her
seed, meets with much warfare and with many oppositions from the Dragon, for
keeping the commandments of God and the Testimony of Jesus Christ. verse. 17.
yet these oppositions are not so directly from the Dragon mentioned in this
chapter, as from the Beast mentioned in the next, who has the Dragons power
and venom in him, but yet would seem to be very devout: even as Israel in the
wilderness, after their deliverance from the Rage of the red Dragon, did meet
with many oppositions and many troubles: and not only from such as were more
manifest enemies, but from such also as would seem to be very zealous. Numb.
16.1.2.3.4 5.

Sixthly, the holy Spirit makes no mention in this Scripture of the not
appearing of the Church, nor the loss of her Ordinances: neither will it agree
to the condition of the Church of Israel in the wilderness, from whence (as I
said) I conceive the allusion to be chiefly taken.

Wherefore I see no reason why such a conclusion should be received: to wit,
that the Church is lost, and her Ordinances are lost, and therefore that we can
neither know, nor do any thing until the consummation of that time of the
churches being in the wilderness. Surely such an opinion does arise, and is
maintained from the policy of Satan, and not from the teaching of the holy
Spirit. Other things might have been spoken by way of answer to that objection,
but what I have said (I conceive) may suffice.

Thus much concerning the explication and clearing the last general head. What
I have said concerning this head is useful thus far: to wit, As well to
confirm and establish the hearts of the Saints who are under the practice of
this truth, that they through the Lords help, may stand steadfast herein against
all the wiles of Satan, unto the praise of God: As also to give satisfaction
(if the Lord please) to such who seem to make scruple at such like things as
these, to hold them off from the practice of this baptism, which they are
convinced to be a truth of Christ. But let such take heed of dallying with the
truths of the Lord Jesus.

And thus as the Lord has helped me, I have cleared up those six general
heads, which I propounded in my entrance into this matter: As also have laid
down in brief what useful instrustions are to be learned from each of them.

To conclude: It was not my purpose to answer all arguments particulerly, which
are alleged by many for the mantainance of Infants baptism. seeing that is
profitablely and sweetly done by others of the Lords witnesses. But what I
intended and propounded, I have (through the Lords help) in some comfortable
measure performed. Being fally persuaded that what I have written is the mind
of Christ, and may serve to convince all gainsayings, and overthrow all
arguments whatsoever, which are alleged for infants baptism: and to satisfy
all such, who have not a prejudice against the truth, and prefer other things
above the truth.

I do therefore exhort all such who profess to love the truth, and say they
desire to know and obey the truth: that they lay aside all prejudice, wordly
respects, self ends, carnal reasonings, and questions about words, which are
not to edification: and speedily, without delay, to give up themselves to the
obedience of the truth in this and all other things. And let them consider what
the Lord Jesus says, John 14.21. He that has my commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves me shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him.

FJNJS.

