THE COVENANTERS PLEA AGAINST Absolvers.

Or, a MODEST DISCOURSE, SHOWING Why those who in England and Scotland took The
Solemn League and Covenant, cannot judge their Consciences discharged from the
Obligation of it, by any thing heretofore said by the OXFORD MEN; or lately by
Dr Featly, Dr. Gauden, or any others.

In which also several Cases relating to PROMISORY OATHS, and to the said
COVENANT in special, are spoken to, and determined by Scripture, Reason, and
the joint Suffrages of Casuists. Contrary to the indigested Notions of some
late Writers; yet much to the sense of the Reverend Dr. SANDERSON.

Written out by THEOPHIIUS TIMORCUS a Well-wisher to Students in Casuistical
Divinity.

(...). Menander. LONDON, Printed for T. B. and are to be Sold in Westminster
Hall and Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

The Portraiture of his Sacred Majesty in his Solitudes, etc. Chap. 14. upon
the Covenant.
As things now stand, good men shall least offend God or me, by keeping their
Covenant, by good and lawful means, since I have the Charity, to think, that
the chief End of the Covenant in such men's Intentions, was to preserve Religion
in Purity, and the Kingdom in Peace.

To the Honorable The COMMONS Assembled in the PARLIAMENT of England. More
especially Such as serve for the Western Parts, and for the several Buroughs
in Cornwall.
Honorable Senators!
. 1. THE Name of a God has ever been esteemed so sacred, the Reverence of
Oaths so great, and the sin of Perjury so infamous, even amongst those who
knew not God, but knew by nature the things contained in his Law, that if any
man speaks at an advantage to his brother, he may promise himself the highest
improvements of it, who pleads, that the holy Name of the Lord may not be
profaned, that the highest security for men's says, may not be violated, and
that the guilt of Perjury may not be incurred.

. 2. This (Noble Senators) is the argument of the following sheets, and we
think our selves happy that we shall speak for our God, and for our own souls
before you, touching all the things whereof we are accused; and touching a most
sacred Oath which we have taken, with the highest Solemnities that ever
attended any public action; especially because we know that many of your souls
are bound in the same Bond with us, and that our selves were brought into it by
that Authority which God has now devolved into your hands, and that you are
expert in all customs and questions, which relate to the English Laws and
Liberties, and we know also, that you believe the Scriptures; We beseech you
therefore to hear us patiently.

. 3. We fear the great and living God, who has said, You shall not swear by my
Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God: Having therefore
at the Command of Lords and Commons Assembled in-Parliament, Anno 1643, 1644.
lift up our hands unto God, and sworn; that we would endeavor the extirpation
of Popery and Prelacy, that is, the Government of the Church by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellors, Commissaries,
Archdeacons, and other Officers depending upon that Hierarchy; we cannot go
back, either by endeavoring to build what we have destroyed, or by any
positive owning of any such Ecclesiastical Authority; though we acknowledge our
selves obliged by all sacred Bands, to be actively obedient both to the King as
Supreme, and likewise to the Parliament, in all things where he who is higher
than the Highest, has not by his Command superseded such our Allegiance, and
where the salvation of our immortal souls is not hazarded: And (which God
forbid) if any thing of that nature (should by any mistake) be commanded by
you, we humbly acknowledge it our duty (without any thoughts of rebelling
against you) to exercise our Faith and Patience, in suffering what shall be
imposed upon us, committing the cause of our souls to him who judges
righteously.

. 4. For our Consciences in this thing (most noble Senators!) are we this day
called in question, and judged for what we do in obedience (as we humbly
conceive) to the holy Law of God: For this Conscience sake in reference to our
Oath, are we accused by our Brethren.

. 5. Out of the Conscience of that Oath it was, that many of your selves have
suffered and done many things, both in opposition to the late usurpations of
Government, and for the restoring of his most Sacred Majesty; you have not also
wanted Companions in your Sufferings, from our inferior Orb, where many have
been found, who that they might keep their souls clear from so high a guilt, as
that of Perjury, have not only been content, to deny themselves advantages of
preferment, but to suffer the loss of Life, Livelihood, Liberty, to be Exiles
in a strange Land, and to forsake whatsoever has been dear to them.

. 6. We are now told (Right Honorable) that all your and our Sufferings upon
this account were in vain, for the Oath of God, which we so reverence, was ab
initio null and void; That the matter of it was sinful and unlawful, seditious,
schismatical, That the power imposing it, was unlawful, the design of it,
Rebellion and Faction, that it was a forced Oath, etc.

. 7. We know, and are assured, that this cannot be the sense of your Honors
concerning it: For whose were the Votes and Ordinances, by which our souls were
engaged in that Sacred Bond? Certainly by the men whose these were, our
Consciences are with child with this Oath, and we have so reverent thoughts of
your Honors charity, that you will so far contribute to our safe delivery,
that we shall not die for want of that help which you can give us.

. 8. Yet because not only our private Honor, but the Honor also of the
English Parliament and Nation are (as we humbly conceive) deeply concerned, in
our vindication as to this Point, we have thought it our duty, to lay at your
Honors feet a just Apology for our selves, and for the Oath which at the
command of some of your Honors, we have taken; together with our PLEA, in
vindication of the Parliament of England, from that Irreligion, which some have
charged upon them, in imposing an Oath contrary to the Law of God; that
Ignorance which others charge them with, for commanding an Oath contrary to the
Laws of the Nation; yea, from that want of common sense, which others impute
to them in the contrivement of an Oath so full of contradictions, both to
former Oaths, and within it self, that (forsooth) it must needs be felo de se,
and die, if not by the wounds of former Obligations, yet by the illfavoured
hands of its own nonsense or self contradiction.

. 9. As to our concernment (most noble Patriots) upon whom the ends of the time
of Reformation are come, we are not so much concerned now to enquire, whether
the imposing and taking of that Covenant, at first, were lawful yea or no? Our
Question is, Whether we having taken it, are not now bound to keep it? The most
therefore of Dr. Featly's and the Oxford Reasons against the Covenant, signify
nothing to our present case. Dr. Gawden's late Arguments signify as little,
many of them were considerable before the taking of the Covenant, but argue
insufficiently for the violation or irritation of it; but as to that Point, are
clearly (...).

. 10. It is agreed by the eminently Learned and Reverend Dr. Sanderson and all
Casuists, That an Oath may be unlawful respectu rei juratae, De Jur. prom.
prael. 2. Sect. 14.
or respectu actus jurandi; with respect to the thing sworn, ( i. e. the matter
of it) or in respect of the Act of swearing; What Oath soever a man takes
(unlawful in the first sense) does not oblige; But an Oath unlawful in the
second sense, when once taken, does oblige. Our question is not about the
lawfulness of taking the Covenant, but the necessity of keeping of it, by such
as have no desire to seal up their souls to damnation, and sacrifice their
honor to a reproach before the world. For, Perjurii poena divina est exitium,
humana dedecus (says Tully.)

. 11. Dr. Gawden, and one Mr. Rowland have expressly spoken (or at least
pretended to speak) to the true question, but with what success, the first has
done it, will be discerned by that excellent Answer which Mr. Crofton has
given him, which might have superseded any further pains, if there had been no
cause to add something to some Pleas made or further improved by others, and to
second Mr. Crofton with the Suffrages of Casuists, and especially, of Dr.
Sanderson in the case; and for the other, we judge him not worthy our notice.

. 12. It was Augustines opinion, that although Pelagius was fully answered, yet
every one should write against such a common enemy of the Gospel. It is our
Opinion, that those who any ways contribute, to bring souls under the dreadful
guilt of swearing falsely,, are such common enemies to Christianity, yea to
mankind (an Oath being the common security of the Sons of men) that those who
go about to invalidate it, having their hands against all men, deserve to have
all men's hands against them; as doing that which is not pleasing to God, and
contrary to all men.

. 13. We cannot but admire the Religion of our Late Famous Sovereign, Chapter the
First, a man of much sorrow and Afflictions, and to whom it was continually
suggested, that the Covenanting Party of the Nation were the Causers of them
(though indeed some of the Prelates were the true and proper cause, by
exasperating his Subjects, by their illegal and enormous actions) yet in the
midst of these sufferings, he is found thus speaking in his Meditations upon
the Covenant:

As things now stand, (...) page 86.
good men shall least offend God or me, by keeping their Covenant in good and
lawful ways; since I have the Charity to think, that the chief end of the
Covenant in such men's intentions, was to preserve Religion in purity, and the
Kingdoms in peace.

. 14. By which expression, not only your Honors, and all sober men may judge,
what an insufficient Plea in conscience they bring, to absolve us from the
Covenant, who plead his Majesty's dissent at first declared, and afterward
continued, as to the imposing of it upon others: But you may also discern, that
his Sacred Majesty had more Charity, for those of your Honors, who took that
Covenant, than our late Absolvers have, who can see no end in the giving or
taking of it, but Faction and Rebellion, and we know not what: As also that his
Majesty had more Godly jealousy for the souls of his people engaged in it,
that they might not be destroyed by Perjury, than some late Casuists, whose
proper Office it should be to watch over souls. The Lord lay not their sin to
their charge.

. 15. But (Right Honorable) above all things that they talk, there is nothing
(considered as a Reproach) more intolerable unto us, or (considered as an
Argument) more ridiculous to all that shall hear of it, than what they urge (in
order to the absolution of their credulous Proselites) from the high
presumptions of those, who having engaged in the same Covenant with us, so
horridly violated the Oath of God, in the murder of his Majesty (of Glorious
Memory) etc.

. 16. His Majesty (in the midst of his Exile) was pleased (in his Instructions
to him who is now Lord Chancellor) when he was sent Ambassador for him into
Spain, to do the Nation of England that Justice, as to declare those Actions,
(...) Actions only of an inconsiderable Faction of Miscreants; and your Honors
have been pleased to take (...) of his Majesty's justice in it; as likewise (in
your first (...) to his Majesty) to declare, That if the Parliament (the
Covenant-imposing Parliament) had not been broken by a mutinous Army, those
things could never have been done. Our Brethren know, that diverse of those who
took the Covenant, sacrificed their lives unto death, in opposition to the
violaters of the Covenant: That for their adherence to it, the House of Lords
was broken up, 200 Members of the House of Commons were secluded, that of those
who remained, the number was very few, that consented to those horrid actions;
that our Brethren of Scotland offered their lives and liberties in that
Sacrifice; that the Ministry of England openly declared against it, to that
height which caused the ruin of some of them, and made their whole Party
odious to the Usurpers, and such as they would never own or trust: And
therefore we cannot but think it a great want of Truth and Charity in our
Brethren, to charge those things so generally upon the Covenanting Party of the
Nation; who (we humbly conceive) have done more in order to the Ends of the
Covenant, relating to his Majesty's Concernments, in the day wherein the
Covenant was to be pleaded on their behalf, than any of those did, who now are
so free to lay these things to their charge.

. 17. It is a piece of new Divinity to us, that if five hundred take an Oath,
and five of them violate it, the rest are all absolved from the Obligation of
it: Yet the disproportion is far greater betwixt those who took that Covenant,
and those who so violated it, both as to their number and quality.

. 18. The Oath of God (Right Honorable) is upon us, and we are afraid because
of it; we have sworn to endeavor the Reformation of the Church of God in
England, in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to the example of the
word of God, and the best Reformed Churches: To endeavor the extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy: If this Oath be Obligatory, we cannot break it, without the
highest presumption of wickedness, and therefore must be Sufferers under the
old Constitution of Ecclesiastical Government, and Forms of Worship in England,
if it be restored. We know your Honors will be tender of enforcing any to
suffer for Conscience sake; and therefore humbly beg, that you would weigh our
Answers to the slighty and Atheological Pleas of those who pretend to prove the
Covenant void and not obligatory: What they say, appears to us to be against
Scripture, Reason, and the judgment of all sober Casuists, and we believe will
so appear to you.

. 19. The Princes of the greatest Congregation of England (Right Honorable) i.
e. The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, were those who swear, and who
engaged us to swear. If our Adversaries may be believed, the design of the Oath
was to engage the Scots in the Parliaments quarrel (His Majesty then living, as
we said before, had more charitable thoughts) sure it is, that it was a mutual
stipulation between the Scots and us. Casuists say, that my Oath does not bind
my Heir (which is true in some cases) but they as generally agree the real
obligation of an Oath, as to the person to whom we swear for their advantages.
We are sure, the Jews which were punished with three years Famine in Readiness
time, were none of those who had personally sworn to the Gibeonites, in the
time of Joshuah, yet God revengeth their Breach of their Fathers Oath upon
them. It may be worthy of your Honors consideration, whether the Obligation
contracted by Oath, by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, 1643,
1644. do not bind the Noble Lords with your selves, who this day make up those
Honorable Assemblies, though personally you never were engaged in it.

. 20. However, we know and believe, that your Honors will be so jealous for
the Glorious Name of God, so tender of the Souls of the People in these Nations
engaged in that Sacred Bond, and so afraid of the wrath of God revealed in his
Word, and by his Providence, against those who have made others Sufferers for
righteousness sake, and so careful for the Honor of the Nation, that you will
not by any Act of yours, contribute to any of these ends, which will all be the
certain consequents of the violation of that Sacred Oath.

. 21. For as it cannot be imagined, but that your Honors Authority,
establishing any thing contrary to that Oath, will be a temptation to many, to
break that sacred Bond; so it can as little be thought, but that there will be
many thousands in England, who will believe that nothing can discharge their
Consciences from the Obligation of the Oath of God which is upon them, and
therefore will be obliged to go cheerfully into the Prisons which shall be
provided for them, and to suffer any thing, rather than to sin against the Lord
by such a presumptuous transgression.

. 22. Besides this, we most humbly beseech your Honors to consider, whether
the things endeavored to be restored, have upon former experience proved, or
may probably be judged like to prove of such advantage, either to the civil or
religious interests of England, as may be fit to be laid in the Balance with
the laying aside so many hundreds (if not thousands) of Godly Ministers, and
the sufferings and undoing of so many peaceable and godly people as will be
laid a side, and made sufferers by the restoring of things in the Church to
their forms state, after an Oath taken to the contrary.

. 23. Many of your Honors, we know have not yet forgotten, how many hard
things were suffered in former times, by many Godly people in this Nation;
because in Conscience they could not submit to these things; how many of the
Kings Subjects were (to the weakening of the Nation) driven into Foreign Lands,
to the undoing of themselves and their Families; how by this means diverse
Mysteries of Trades of manufacture (in which the wealth of this Nation much
lay) were communicated to other People; all which things formerly were judged
worthy of Parliamentary Consideration.

. 24. We humbly beseech your Honors to consider, whether the same persons, in
most places of England, be not again endeavoring to be possessed (if they be
not already invested) with the same power, and whether (after twenty years
suffering) it be probably to be conceived, that they are less full of rage, Let
enquiry be made at Oxford, Cambridge Peterborough, etc.
than formerly: And if any has so much Charity, as to think, that their
sufferings have taught them more moderation, we desire your Honors would
enquire, what specimens they have any where already given of it. This we humbly
move to your Honors, that you may represent it to his Majesty, whose Royal
Grandfather was such a Zealous Defender of the free Grace of God, against
Arminians, and who himself has declared such a Zeal against vicious, profane
and debauched persons, that we cannot but believe him not truly informed;
either concerning the Principles or conversations of diverse persons, to whom
advantages are given against their Brethren.

. 25. We are not Right Honorable, against the use of an unimposed Lyturgy, nor
against Primitive Episcopacy; we can submit to both, we do not think the
Covenant was intended against either of these: But we are against the divine
Right of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. We believe, that in the Primitive Church
there might be Episcopus praeses; a Grave Minister, President over his
Brethren, living within a Circuit proportionate to his Ability for inspection,
and that without him, nothing was ordinarily done, in Ordination or
Jurisdiction: But that he alone could do any thing in either, we utterly deny.
We are sure, that in the Primitive Church, there was no Archbishops, Deans,
Deans and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons. We are
against those Forms of Worship, contained in the Service Book, ordinary to be
had; We believe they are not established by the Laws of the Land (as we have
heretofore in a Book for that purpose published) made evident to your Honors.
We are sure that we have lifted up our hands to God, that we will endeavor a
Reformation in that Point: We know that they are offensive in an high degree,
to the generality of godly and sober men, that there are many things in those
Books not to be justified in Divinity. We are not against the 39 Articles,
which is usually called the Doctrine of the Church of England: We are ready to
subscribe all of them, so far as they concern matters of Doctrine. But we are
against Arminianism, against which not only King James, (of Glorious Memory)
gave an open testimony, but the Parliament of England has also heretofore
openly declared: And in regard the Patrons of those Points, take advantage of
some doubtful terms in those Articles, as patronizing those their Tenets
(though the Kings and Parliaments of England have heretofore declared their
detestation of those Points) We could heartily wish a further explanation of
them: We are against moral and significant Ceremonies, such as the Surplice,
the Cross in Baptism, Bowing at the Name of Jesus, Cringing to Altars, etc. We
believe that these things are not only scandalous, and unprofitable (things
that perish with the using) but also unlawful and against the purity and
simplicity of Gospel Worship, and such, against which we are highly engaged by
the Oath of God which we have taken.

. 26. We humbly beseech your Honors, to compassionate the many thousands of
Souls in England, who must be Sufferers, to the undoing of their Persons, their
Wives and Children, if these things be restored again amongst us. We
acknowledge our selves obliged (if these things be established by your Act)
passively to obey, and rather to seek our bread in a howling wilderness, than
any ways to contribute to the disturbance of civil Authority. Prayers and
Tears are our only weapons. But oh! let not the Cry of the Innocents be against
the Parliament of England; because God has said he will hear their cry, and
help them. If our Brethren think that no Government may be set up in the Church
of God in England, but the ancient Form, and that the whole Nation is not
concerned in the Covenant, for which we plead, and themselves be not personally
engaged in it; let them enjoy their humors: But oh! Let them not by your
Honors, be clothed with power to suspend, silence, excommunicate, deprive
godly Ministers and people, (who are faithful Subjects to his Majesty, and pray
daily for him, and for your Honors) because they cannot comply with them in
these things, expressly contrary to the Oath of the Lord which is upon them.

. 27. We here lay at your Honors feet our Answers to their pitiful Pleas
against us, by which they would cajole us into Perjury. If our Brethren have
any more strong Arguments, let them bring them forth; only let us say with Dr.
Featly, Audiamus non phalerata sed fortia, we have had enough gay words. If
notwithstanding all which has been said, our Brethren by misrepresentations to
his Majesty, or to your Honors shall obtain any power against us, and shall
make their old Furnace yet seven times hotter (in which we yet trust his Sacred
Majesty, and your Honors will fail their expectations) We know that the God
whom we serve is able to deliver us: But whether he shall please to do it or
no, we dare not deal falsely in our Covenant with him.

. 28. But give us leave to plead with your Honors (as sometimes the Psalmist
did with God, Psalm. 30.9.) What profit is there in our blood? Suppose we should
with our Wives and Families be driven from our Possessions and Countries, to
seek our Bread in other Lands; Suppose that the Prisons erected for Thieves and
Murderers, should be filled with Conscientious Christians, lying there, because
they durst not forswear themselves, what profit would his Sacred Majesty or
your Honors have from the blood of Innocents? What pleasure in the ruin and
undoing of so many thousand Souls, only because in the matters of their God,
they differ from some men's sense? What loss would his Sacred Majesty have, by
pleasing all the more sober part of his Subjects, by a new unimposed Form of
Prayer, void of all offense? by multiplying the Bishops of England, so that
they may be able to do their work? by restraining them from their sole
Jurisdiction not to be justified, by any Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, or the
example of any Reformed Church?

. 28. We humbly leave our Groans before your Honors, begging the Spirit of
Wisdom and Government for every Soul in your great Assemblies, professing our
selves ready to hear any strong Arguments, which our Brethren have yet to
bring, to prove the Covenant not obligatory, and humbly desiring, that in so
Grave an Assembly, where hitherto not obstreperous Clamours, but Religion and
Reason have ruled, we may not be condemned, for not doing that, which we
profess we dare not do, because of that Bond, wherewith (at the Command of the
Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England) we are bound unto the
Great and Holy God, who has said, I will not hold him guiltless that takes my
Name in vain.

CIPPUS Titulus Perjurium: Carmen Steliteuticum Cromwellii. Carmen Protrepticum
Patriae.

O Faedus! o fides sacra!
O Nomen, and Numen Dei!
Rerum columna publicarum;
Tutela pacis, militum concordia;
Regumque civiumque nuptialis arrha;
Et hostium studentium diversa, par metus.
Quem nemo fecit irritum aut facturus est.
Te pactus ille victor, ille dux ducum.
Dextra ter ad coelos levata.
Quid non patravit arduum?
Post haec sed idem, conscio sub aethere,
Dextra ter in Scotos levata
Rem gessit haud bonam been,
3. Septembris.
Et Imperavit, and Obiit diem suum.
An ideo Fortis and Vafer lusit Deum?
Te sprevit, a te spretus est
Te rupit, a te ruptus est
Pessundedit te, pessum and est a te datus.
Cum stirpe tota
Oliva putris, perfidus Cromwellius
Infame nomen in futura secula
Gentes per has and exteras.
Injusta vota justus improbat Deus:
In vota justa seu vocetur Jupiter
Seu Mahometes sive Belus and Nebo
Adest Jehova, poscit and ratam fidem.
Hinc Sedeciam cepit Assyrius levem:
Templumque mundi sedit in cineres decus.
Hoc fulminantem vertit Annibalem retro:
Nec pejeratus Jupiter lapis tulit:
Hoc Vngarorum fregit infidam manum;
Regnique florem Turca falce messuit
Ducente Christo non suos contra suos.
Nec vis, nec arts numen eludent sagax:
Quodcunque Christo test pactum sanximus
Missum per auras carpit irredux iter,
Et implet aures invocati Judicis
Noctes diesque murmur aeternum ciens,
Ut nec subintrent bis ter horarum preces.
Ah! nequis in se vertat has Iras nocens,
Neu tam tremendo fulmini subdat caput!
An laedat idem, reddat, and surdum Deum?
In pejerantes, queis cubat sub pectore
Alenda vulpes, ipsa vel Clementia
III Decalogi Preceptum.
Diras minatur, sed nec exorabilis.
Miseris supersunt vota; felices probant;
Suscepta curis saepe sollicitos levant;
Neglecta rursus saepe securos premunt,
Sol, ante liquidi jura dediscet poli,
Facemque nocti commodabit mutuam
Nos quam negemus Carolis pactam fidem,
Satis superque vidimus frauds pias:
(Vt Trojae Laomedonta perjurum luit)
Cromwellium sceleris insons Anglia
Poenas tributo duodecennali dedit.
Tangamus Aras sanctius Plebs, and patres
Profana regni si qua pars adhuc manet.
(At nulla regni pars soluta foedere est
Tenemur omnis Ordo: Pastor, and Greges.
Et nasciturum spes in aureas genus.)
Juremus, omnes quod tamen juravimus,
Sacrae potentem Vindicem fidei Deum
Qui regis uncti texit Augustum caput
Semper daturos Caesari quae Caesaris
Vt and daturos esse quae Dei, Deo.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE ancient and just reverence of Oaths evinced from the light of
Nature, the revelation of Scriptures; the contempt of Perjury arguing Atheism
worse than that of Pagans Page 1. CHAP. II. The several Forms of verbal
Obligations, simple, and mixed; of a Promise, and Oath, a Vow, a Covenant, the
distinct nature of each; the Covenant proved to be a Compound of all, and
therefore highly obligatory p. 3. CHAP. III. Containing a Corollary from the
Premises, concluding the mistake of those who say, an Oath adds no special
Obligation beyond the Reason and Religion of the matter p. 10. CHAP. IV. The
further Obligatory virtue of the Covenant argued from the Solemnities of it,
arguing the violation deliberate and infamous p. 11. CHAP. V. Rules in general
concerning the interpretation of Oaths, those applied to the Covenant, and the
true sense of it evinced from them p. 12. CHAP. VI. The Absolvers pretended
Errors in the Covenant examined in part; The Covenant, as to the matter of it,
(so far as respects Prelacy) not contrary to the Word of God; the Plea of it
contrary to the Laws of the Church or State examined, and proved insufficient
for the irritation of it p. 19. CHAP. VII. The Absolvers Plea from Schism
considered; The Nature of Schism; No guilt of Schism by endeavoring to
extirpate Prelacy; Their Plea also from the supposed contradiction in the
matter of the Covenant to the matter of former Oaths, particularly the
Coronation Oath, the Oath of Allegiance, Supremacy, and Canonical Obedience,
answered and found vain p. 34. CHAP. VIII. The Absolvers Plea for the
irritation of the Covenant from the supposed contradictions in it self
confuted, and the Covenant (notwithstanding this suggestion) proved valid and
obligatory p. 42. CHAP. IX. Whether the Error of any man's Conscience that took
the Covenant can discharge him from the observance of it p. 45. CHAP. X. The
Absolvers Plea against the Covenant as Impeditivum boni, false, and if true,
not conclusive according to Casuists p. 48. CHAP. XI. The Covenant cleared from
any faults as to the efficient causes, whether external, or internal,
sufficient to make it void, being once taken; the Plea from the supposed
unlawfulness of the power imposing, if true, proved insufficient p. 51. CHAP.
XII. The Absolvers Arguments from the present dissent of the King who then was,
argued; the Case stated and resolved; the Rules applied to the present Case,
the Argument from hence for the irritation of the Covenant proved vain p. 53.
CHAP. XIII. Where the Absolvers Plea from the force attending the Covenant, is
considered, and proved vain. Oaths extorted by fear, do oblige in Conscience,
proved from Scripture, Reason, the Opinions of Dr. Sanderson, Aquinas, Azorius,
and all sober Casuists, for their Obligation. p. 57. CHAP. XIV. The Absolvers
Plea, from the pretended sinfulness of the End of the Covenant examined,
whether the deformity of the end of an Oath can make it not Obligatory: The
contrary proved. The Absolvers Plea from hence Atheological and vain p. 67.
CHAP. XV. Where it is proved, that the Bond of the Covenant cannot be suspended
by any Dispensation, altered by any Commutation, or dissolved by any Relaxation
of Parties p. 69 CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Limitations of the Covenant, common
to all Promissory Oaths, or particularly relating to this. What endeavor, as
to the mattter of the Covenant, is not required p. 73 CHAP. XVII. Wherein is a
sleighty notice taken of a Late Pamphlet, wrote by one Mr. Russel, called, The
Covenant discharged; and it is proved, that in stead of his finding the Snare
broken, as he says, he has but resolved to break the Bonds, and to cast the
Cords behind him p. 75.
The Covenanters PLEA AGAINST ABSOLVERS.
CHAP. I.
The ancient and just Reverence of Oaths evinced, from the Light of Nature,
the Revelation of Scripture. The contempt of Perjury arguing Atheism worse than
that of Pagans.

. 1. WHen we consider the superlative Religion, of those who knew not God, for
Fidelity, which was so sacred amongst the Sabines, that they made it an Idol;
in which superstition, the Romans did not only comply with them, but assigned
her a place in their Capitol next to Jupiter himself; teaching their Orator to
cry, Colunto illa propter quae datur homini ascensus in Coelum, Mentem,
Virtutem, Cic. de Leg.
Pietatem, Fidem; Let them worship the Stairs by which men ascend unto heaven,
Virtue, Piety and Fidelity: Insomuch that Augustine in his Book de Civitate
Dei, is put to the charge of a Chapter, to dethrone this noble Virtue a little,
by removing it from the Seat of God. When we find so much honesty in Livy, as
to determine, Livii Hist. l. 1.
That faith and Oaths were sufficient to rule a City, though there were no
Laws nor Magistrates; and Tully concluding, Cicero de Offic lib. 3.
that Faith should be kept with the worst of men, ne quaeratur latebra
perjurio, that there might be no Sanctuary for perjury in the world: We cannot
but fear lest the men of Tire and Sidon should rise up against this generation
and condemn it, in which not only the Godly men seem to be ceased, Psalm. 12.1.
but the faithful also seem to be failed from amongst the children of men.
They speak vanity every man with his neighbor; with flattering lips, and a
double heart do they speak.

. 2. But when we further read that the Heathens did not only hallow the name of
their Idol Fides or Fideus, and authorize it to be invoked in swearing, but
affirm also Quod affirmate quasi Deo test promiseris, id tenendum est jam enim
non ad iram Deorum -- Sed ad fidem and justitiam pertinet: That whatsoever men
promised to do before God, as a witness, that they should do, not for fear of
the Gods anger, but out of reverence to Faith and Justice. When we remember the
pretty stories of Jupiters Fountain of Tyana, the waters in Sardinia and
Bithynia, and the Acadine Well, mentioned by Aristotle; all which had their
several malignant Influences (as they fabled) upon such odious transgressors as
had broken their Faith once sealed by the contestation of an Idol; we are ready
to cry out sit anima nostracum Philosophis: Let our souls portion rather be
with those old Philosophers, than with those quibus (as Baldwin says) nec ara,
nec fides, nec ulla pactio firma est, to whom indeed nothing is firm, nothing
possible to be sealed. Hear oh Heavens! and be astonished oh Earth: Have any
people under heaven been so vile prostitutors of the Faith of men, or so
irreverent to an acknowledged Deity, that having sworn by those, who were no
Gods, they would go back, and despise their Obligation? Yet in these days, men
think it nothing, and that in Oaths taken by the dreadful name of the true and
living God, to mock, and play with their Sacred Bands, and (as Lysander in
Plutarch) to justify it as lawful as to cheat Boys with false Dice. And were
this done by the unhallowed rabble of men, it would not be such an astonishment
to us, as to see it done by Rabbis in our Israel, straining their wits upon
the Tainters of carnal Sophistry, beyond all due staples of reason, inventing
vain distinctions, and asserting unheard of Atheological Positions, and all to
cheat silly souls into the highest presumptions of wickedness almost
imaginable, and to publish these things in the face of the Sun; shining too in
the Noonday of Gospel Light.

. 3. Is it not the true and living God (whom we serve) who has said, Lev.
19.12.
You shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of
thy God, I am the Lord. Is it not he who curses, and no man blesses: Mal. 3.
who has said he will be a swift witness against him that swears falsely. And
again, The curse shall come into the house of him that swears falsely, by the
Lords name, Zech. 5.4.
and consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. Do not we serve
the same God, who so severely revenged the violation of the Oath to the
Gibeonites (into which Joshuah and the Israelites were cheated) upon all
Israel, and then upon the Family of Saul? who so severely declared himself
against Zedekiah for the violation of an Oath imposed upon him by a foreign
Prince, who had conquered his Brother, Ezekiel. 16.17.
though the Oath tended to enslave the people of God, to an Idolatrous Prince?
When we think of these things, trembling takes hold upon us, and we are ready
to say concerning such as discourse for the nullity and violation of Oaths, as
be did; Aut hoc non est Evangelium, etc. Either we are mistaken in that sacred
Book, which we have hitherto called the Word of God, and owned as the Rule of
our Faith and Life, or these men are not the Servants of this God, such as make
this Word a light to their feet, and a lanthorn to their paths.

. 4. What can it argue less than Atheism, or an high contempt of God, lightly
to esteem his sacred Name? for men to be of the profane temper condemned by
the Poet;

Nil metuunt jurare, nihil promittere parcunt,
Sed simulac cupidae mentis satiata libido est
Dicta nihil metuunt: nihil perjuria curant.
The truth and fidelity of a man was by the Heathen accounted so noble a piece
of the demesne and patrimony of a rational and virtuous soul, that if at any
time, a Regulus, or any other had pawned it to an enemy, they thought it worth
the redeeming at the price of their head. But if an Idol-god had been called to
witness the Obligation, they thought scarce any punishment severe enough for
him that presumed to violate it, as having broken the strongest Ligament of
humane society ( nullum enim vinculum ad astringendam fidem jurejurando majores
arctius esse voluerunt, says Tully) and denied that God who rules the world.
Juvenal could set it upon no other foot.

Sunt qui in fortunae casibus nunc omnia ponunt
Et nullo credunt mundum Rectore moveri
Natura volvente Vices, and lucis and Anni
Atque ideo intrepidi quaecunque Altaeria tangunt.
. 5. Can we therefore hold our peace at the reading of diverse late Pamphlets
tending to Absolve men from the Sacred Oath, first taken, by the Lords and
Commons Legally assembled in Parliament, Anno 1643. then by the generality of
the people of England, (at their command) with the highest solemnity
imaginable; after this by his Sacred Majesty (that now is) If printed Books and
Narrations be true.
Anno 1649, or 1650. who was pleased likewise by his Declaration (then emitted)
to approve it in every Branch thereof, and to ratify his Subjects taking of
it, in his other Dominions. After which, for any to put us upon an enquiry,
whether our Souls be bound with that Bond, must certainly be that Snare to our
Souls, against which Solomon of old gave us a Caution, and to tempt men to the
highest contempt and profanation of the Sacred Name of God.

. 6. But the presumption is yet aggravated in our apprehensions, when we
consider that this is done in a day, when a Righteous God is taking exemplary
vengeance upon them, who after they had taken that Sacred Oath themselves, and
been Instruments rigorously to press it upon others, could satisfy their
Consciences, in destroying the Person of the King, whom they (in it) had sworn
to preserve, and rooting out his Authority, which it obliged them to maintain:
We say, for men in this day, to bid others go and do likewise, appears to us,
like the cutting of a Purse in the face of a Judge, and an open proclaiming,
that we have no degree of the fear of God before our eyes.

. 7. Especially when we consider that the thing wherein some of this
Generation, would have that Sacred-Oath violated and contemned, appears to
us, the main business of that Sacred Oath, viz. the Reformation of the Church,
and Preservation of the Purity of Religion and Worship, to which most other
things in the Covenant, seem to us (according to the phrase of it) to be
subordinated.

. 8. This certainly should engage every true Englishman, who thinks himself
concerned in the honor of his Nation, and every righteous Lot more especially,
who must be grieved at the evil conversation of his Neighbors, to cry out, I
pray you Brethren do not so wickedly: And the height of the wickedress, will
be more evident, if we consider that Sacred Engagement, either in its own
nature, or under its more than ordinary circumstances,

CHAP. II.
The several Forms of verbal Obligations simple and mixed. Of a Promise, an
Oath, a Vow, a Covenant, the distinct Nature of each. The Covenant proved to be
a Compound of all, and therefore highly obligatory.

1. BEsides the natural ties of every soul unto God, by which (as a Creature)
it is bound in a duty of universal homage to its Creator, as it is directed by
the light of Nature, or Revelation in Scripture, and the natural obligation, of
Brotherly love, by which a man is indebted to his Neighbor, we are told by
Moses, Numb. 30.2. that we may either inhance this hereditary debt, or contract
a new one, to God, or men, by the words of our lips, binding our Souls in a
bond, which (without profaning our selves) we cannot violate. Which Bond,
according to the different seal affixed to it, or the different Parties to whom
it is delivered as our Act and Deed, according to the various matter, Form, or
circumstances of it, has obtained several names, and has more or less
obliging virtue.

. 2. There are 4 more noted Terms used in Scripture (and by Divines
interpreting Scripture) expressive of such Obligations: A Promise, an Oath, a
Vow, and a Covenant. A Promise (says Aquinas) is a rational Act of a man, Aqu.
22 aequ. 88. art. 1.
by which he declares and orders his purposes to another; as a Superior by
his precept orders others, as to what he would have them do for him: So by a
Promise a Superior, inferior or equal orders himself, as to what he will do
for others. This when made freely, is by Critics called, pollicitatio: when at
the importunity of another, promissio; either way, lex privata, it becomes a
private law, obliging the soul morally virtuous, or religiously good, to a
strict performance.

. 3. An Oath is a religious Act ubi Deus testis invocatur; where for further
security to others of what we believe, or have done or engage to do, God is
called in for a witness; which ought not to be, but in weighty matters, and in
doubtful matters: But all the future actions of men, being such as are
subjected to various accidents and contingencies, through the mutability of our
minds, the bottomless deceit of our hearts, and the power which temptations
from the world, the flesh and the Devil, have upon us, they are justly allowed
by Divines, both as to their matter and circumstances, to be the proper matter
of an Oath, whose formality lies in the invocation of the dreadful Name of
God, to attest the sincerity of our intentions, as to future performances;
which sacred invocation of the name of God, annexed to a promise, adds highly
to the obligation of it; for it being a piece of Divine worship, so to invoke
Gods sacred Name, the security is highly advantaged by such a Label annexed.
Let vain Orators cant what they please, it is determined by all Casuists which
we ever yet saw, Filiucii Mor. Quaest. tract. 25. cap. 4. q. 1.
That an Oath does add to a promise a special obligation. Filiucius, and others
make it an Article of our Creed, by telling us, that it is de fide to believe
that it does so.

. 4. A Vow (says Richardus) est propositi supererogative boni promissio Deo
facta propter bonum finem, ex deliberatione firmata. By which description,
nothing necessary by the necessity of a Divine Precept can be the proper matter
of a Vow; no it must (according to him) be supererogative bonum, some good
thing which God has not required at our hands; but we (not well understanding
what good thing can be assigned, which falls under no Divine Precept) do
rather close with their more ordinary and justifiable description of it, who
tell us, It is a promise made to God: And indeed thus it differs from a
promise, which may be made to men, and that as to the things of this world: A
Vow can only be made to God, and that in rebus Dei, in the things of God. Not
to trouble our selves with the niceties of the description of it, certain it is
that the Obligation resulting from it is great. Aquinas, Sayrus, Filiucius,
Layman and others, determine the obligation of a Vow, to exceed that of an
Oath; Aq. 22 ae q. 89. art 8.
because (says Aquinas) the obligation of an Oath arises only from that
reverence which we owe to the Sacred Name of God: But the obligation of a Vow
arises from that fealty which we owe to God, the violation of which is always
attended with irreverence. Not to dispute the strength of their ratiocinations,
we think this (which some Casuists have also hit upon) may be superadded: That
although in every Vow there be not a formal invocation of God (God being the
proper correlate, and as it were, a Party to every Vow, and therefore not
formally to be invoked for the contestation of it) yet there is in every Vow an
implicit calling God to witness; so that certainly the obligation arising from
a Vow is not beneath that of an Oath.

. 5. A Covenant (strictly taken) is a mutual stipulation of two or more
parties, and in that lies its specific difference, both from a naked promise,
and from an Oath and a Vow; all which maybe made by single persons: But the
nature of a Covenant is such, as requires at least two parties mutually
engaging each to other. This obligation may be either contracted with God, or
with our neighbor, and that concerning any kind of things, from whence are the
several sorts of Covenants treated on by Civilians and Politicians, concerning
which we shall speak nothing in this place. The Jews contracted a formal
Covenant with God, when upon the promulgation of the Law by Moses, they said,
whatsoever the Lord speaks, that we will do; whence it is (as we conceive)
that they are so often charged in holy Writ, with breaking Covenant; in the
violation of the Divine Law. And God having given us in his Word, an
everlasting Rule of righteousness, to the obedience of which we are engaged, by
immutable promises (although God has left off to speak from Heaven to us) yet
we are still left in a capacity to make formal Covenants with God, which we do
as often as we by solemn promises engage our selves to the stricter observance
of the Divine Law in whole or in part. The obligatory virtue of a Covenant
(separated from the additional force of an Oath, by which it may be also
further confirmed) seems to be increased from the mutual consideration, upon
which it is necessary that each part of a Covenant should be entered; which
makes every Covenanter to have a quid pro quo, and adds an obligation from
justice to a due performance; so that as he who breaks a naked promise, sins
against his Truth and Fidelity; and he who violates his Oath, highly sins
against that reverence which he owes to the sacred name of God; so he that
breaks a Covenant, sins against Justice, which every man is obliged to
maintain, as that which joynteth all humane society, and keeps the world in
order.

. 6. Now besides these simple bonds, which should be sufficient to hold
virtuous and religious men, there may be compounded Forms, in which there may
be a mixture of two or three or all of these: And reason will easily teach us,
that if any of these single cords, be sufficient to hold a soul which has any
value for Truth, any Reverence for the Name of God, or professes any fealty to
him, or in whom any love of common justice may be found, and who has not,
without regard either to God or man, without any conscience of Religion or
moral Honesty, taken up a resolution, to break all sacred bonds asunder, and
cast all cords behind his back: Certainly, when two, three, or all of these are
twisted into one cord, they must be stronger than Sampsons seven green withs,
and like Solomon's threefold cord which cannot easily be broken.

. 7. And if we mistake not, such is the nature of this sacred Cord (the
strength of which we are trying) The style of the whole is promissory, and
argues all the force of a promise in it: The Preamble to it concluding thus, --
With our hands lifted up to the most High God, we do swear; together with that
Clause in the last Paragraph -- And this Covenant we make in the presence of
Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, sufficiently prove it to be an Oath,
and to have in it all the virtue of that sacred Obligation: If a Vow according
to the common notion of it) be sponsio facta Deo in rebus Dei, a promise made
unto God in the things of God, who so reads the first second or last
Paragraphs, must certainly see much of a Vow in it: And if the imposing of it
under penalty, delivers any that have taken it, from the obligation of a Vow
(either through want of freedom or deliberation) yet certainly this will not
excuse the first Contrivers, and Composers. The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament at that time, did not only make a Promise, and confirm it with an
Oath, but vowed in it a Vow to the mighty God of Jacob, and stand concerned to
do according to the Vow which they have vowed. That it is a Covenant, both with
God, and men, is so evident, that he who runs may read it. So far as it
contains in it any promise made on our part, for the doing of those things
which the Word of God reveals to be his will concerning us, that we should
do, either relating to the Reformation of the Church, or our own personal
Reformation, or for the declining of what is contrary thereunto (of which
nature is much both in the first, second and last Paragraphs of it) it is
unquestionably a Covenant with God. Besides this, The King, Parliament, and
People of the Three-Nations, by it mutually covenant each with other, for the
performance of those things which respect them in their several stations,
either respecting Reformation, or the Preservation of each others mutual
Rights. The King covenanted with his People, that he will reform Religion, in
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, according to the Word of God, and the
example of the best Reformed Churches: That he will preserve the Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline of the Church of Scotland, etc. In this also the
Parliament joins with him, as also for the preservation of the peoples
Liberties; King and People covenant, to preserve the Privileges of Parliament.
The People covenant with the King, to preserve his Majesty's Person, Honor and
Authority, etc. Throughout the whole, there is a mutual stipulation of the
People of the Three Nations each with other.

. 8. So that if there be any virtue in a promise, from the truth of men by it
laid to pawn, and not to be redeemed without a just fulfilling of the thing
promised: If any Religion in an Oath, because of the Reverence we owe to the
Sacred Name of God, and because the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his Name in vain. If any Obligation resulteth from a Vow, because of the
Fealty which we owe unto God before, and above all others: If finally a man be
obliged to keep his Covenant, from the consideration either of truth or
justice; it all contributeth to the strength of this Sacred Bond, by which all
the Souls that have taken it in the Three Nations, are this day bound to the
Almighty, and each to other.

. 9. And certainly for those who are not so immediately concerned, but can
glory, that either they were not of age, or that they were only standers by,
when others thus obliged themselves; if there be any Ingenuity in them, any
Reverence of God, any Brotherly Love, or any good will to the Land of their
Nativity, they will be obliged to be jealous for their Brethren (who have thus
bound themselves) with a godly jealousy, lest whiles for such a presumptuous
transgression, as the violation of this sacred Bond must be, the wrath of the
Lord shall burn up the dwellings of Transgressors, their contiguity of
habitation expose them to the danger in which it is ordinary for the Justice of
a Righteous God to involve the neighborhood of sinners: To say nothing of
their concernment, in the profaning of the Lords Name, whose honor is equally
impeached by our Neighbors sins, as by our own: If they be Lots, their
righteous souls will be vexed with the evil conversation of their Neighbors:
If David's, their eyes will run down with rivers of waters because others keep
not Gods Laws. Which makes the bold discourses of some not only to grate upon
our ears, but to pierce our hearts, whilst we hear them not only content to
dispense with their own Engagements, but reviling others, whose Consciences
cannot allow them that Latitude, or who take themselves concerned, to warn the
souls committed to their charge, to beware of so great a sin as that of
Perjury. Nay, whilst we see them so ill employing their wits, and Pens, as to
invent strange distinctions, and assert positions contrary to all Divinity,
that they may not only break Gods Commandments themselves, but imbolden others
so to do, as if they had an ambition to be degraded into the order of such, as
shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.19.

CHAP. III.
Containing a Corollary from the Premises, concluding the mistake of those who
say, an Oath adds no special Obligation beyond the Reason and Religion of the
Matter.

FRom what has been already said, it is not hard to conclude, That a Promise, a
Vow, an Oath or Covenant, or any form of Obligation, compounded of two or more
of these, engaging us to any future performance, adds to any praevious
Obligation, which might before be upon us from the Law of Nature, or from the
Law of Gods eternal Righteousness: For whereas the matter of these may be
either impossible or unlawful, (in which cases the obligations are ipso facto
null and void, and we are only bound to repentance) Or 2. Indefinite and
uncertain, (in which case, the obligation must be adjudged and determined, when
the true nature of the matter appears to us.) Or, 3. Necessary, praeviously
required of us by some Divine Law. Or, 4. Lastly, Free and indifferent, neither
part being determined by the Divine Law. Certain it is, that where the thing
which we have promised, sworn, vowed or covenanted for, is such as is in our
own power: Our Promise, Vow, Oath or Covenant, creates in us an obligation, to
that part which we have so bound our selves for, and depriveth us of our former
liberty in it, and hence an Oath or Vow is called by Divines lex privata, a
By-law which man has made unto himself. And where the matter is necessary,
viz. such as Gods Law before has required of us, any of these increase our
Obligation. All Casuists (I think) are thus far agreed. Dr. Sanderson de juram.
promiss. prael. 3.. 6.
Ad quae praestanda vel injuratitenemur, (says Dr. Sanderson) jurati certe
multo magis tenemur. What we are bound to do although we had never sworn to the
performance, we are much more obliged to when once we have sworn it. Nor are
they the bare Words, Letters or sillables, of Covenants or Oaths, which as
Charms bind any man's Conscience: But it is the rational Act of the man, who
promises, voweth or swears, yea, his religious Act, which obliges him, and
that beyond the innate Reason and Religion of the matter, to the performance of
which he swears, voweth, or covenanteth. And for any to say, that nothing in
an Oath or Covenant, obliges, but the Reason and Religion of the thing to be
done, is indeed to destroy the use of all Oaths, and to abolish that Act of
Religion which is performed by them, and to assert that which certainly never
can be believed by any sober Christian, as being contrary to all Scripture and
Reason, and to the determinations of all Schoolmen, Casuists, and Divines of
any rank whatsoever.

CHAP. IV.
The further Obligatory Virtue of the Covenant argued, from the Solemnities of
it, arguing the Violation deliberate, and infamous.

ALthough (after thus much said) it might be needless to enquire if there be
any other auxiliary strength to be added, in plea for it, yet we cannot but
take notice of that known Maxim which we find in Sayrus, and other Casuists;
Sayri Clavis Reg. l. 5. c. 3.. 22.
Quanto crescunt solennitates, tanto majus est juramentum, by how much more
solemn an oath, by so much the greater is the obligation of it. Sayrus is so
confident of the truth of it, that he asserteth this, That an Oath made by the
Creature, if solemnly taken, is more obligatory than an Oath made by the
Creator, without such a solemnity: and determines him only infamously
perjured, who violateth a solemn Oath. But we think Dr. Sanderson has hit the
mark, in telling us, Dr. Sanderson prael. 5.. 12.
that the solemnity of an Oath contributeth nothing to the intrinsic value and
Obligation of it, but accidentally contributeth to its virtue, as it imports
deliberation in those that took it; and exposes the Violaters to a greater
Scandal: The truth of which is obvious enough to every vulgar capacity.

. 2. But if the solemnity of the Act, can any ways contribute to a Sacred
Bond, certainly the Covenant (for which we are pleading) is as much advantaged
as is imaginable for any thing of that nature. It was first solemnly debated,
branch by branch, and phrase by phrase, in the greatest Convention of the
Nation, and by a Reverend Assembly of Divines, then taken in the Parliament
House, and in that Assembly of Divines, by hands lifted up to the most High
God, after this, Printed, by their Order, and with their Names subscribed to
it. After this, by them ordered to be taken by all grand Officers of State, and
by all Masters and Fellows of Colleges, by all Ministers, and by all such as
should enter into the Ministry, and by the people in all Congregations: To
which purpose it is advantaged by an Exhortation to the taking of it, printed
with it by Order of the said Lords and Commons. After this, Ministers are
designed by the Countrey-Committees, to give it to the several Congregations
(having first preached a Sermon to quicken people to the taking of it) It was
then taken both by Ministers and people, with hands lifted up to the most High
God, in the face of the public Congregation. After this, ordered to be hung up
in Churches, and at certain times to be renewed, etc.

. 3. So that certainly, whether we consider the complex nature of the Covenant
in it self, having in it some ingredients of all sacred-Bonds, or the
Circumstances which attended the taking of it, never was there an higher
Obligation laid upon a Nation owning God, never a stronger Bond laid upon
Christian Souls. Poeni foedifragi of old grew into a Proverb; Let not Englands
Coat be so stained; for certainly it is not capable of a greater blot, than
that of a false and Covenant Breaking Nation.

CHAP V.
Rules in general concerning the Interpretation of Oaths: These applied to the
Covenant, and the true sense of it evinced from them.

IT may seem very unreasonable after sixteen years digestion of the Covenant,
to fetch it back into our mouths, that we may make a judgment of the true taste
of it, which the wise man foresaw, when he told us it was a snare after vows
to make enquiry: The corrupt humors of our stomachs (in this time) may have
much altered it or us from what at first we should have (possibly) pronounced
concerning it. And the more unreasonable, because the proper Interpreters of it
are ceased; The Lords and Commons who first imposed it (if the Rule be good,
ejusdem est interpretari ac condere) yet because there are not a few, who will
not believe it so edged a tool, but that it may be played withal, and who apply
to the Covenant, the Rabbinical Fable of Manna, which they say had a quality in
it which sured every Pallat, we cannot reasonably proceed further, till we have
enquired, whether indeed we hugged a Proteus, when we rejoiced in that sacred
Oath, or whether this be not an ill report, without any just cause brought up
upon a good action, that by it, the Adversaries of Reformation, might either
discharge others from its observance (under pretense of its uncertain sound) or
please themselves with a dream at least, that they shall be secure in the most
presumptuous violation of it.

. 2. Only in regard that Obligatio juramenti est onerosa, the obligation of an
Oath (if any at all) is exceeding heavy, though the luxuriant vanity of some
men's wits, and the strong predominancy of lust in others, constrain us to an
enquiry, yet we shall stand concerned to make it exceeding strictly and
narrowly, being under this assurance; That every soul which has taken it, is
highly engaged either to the severest observance of it, or to a more than
ordinary humiliation for his profane attempt to mock that God so solemnly, who
has told us that he cannot be mocked. Nor are we concerned to enquire the just
sense of every Branch in the Covenant, but only of the Second Article, in which
is contained the chiefest matter of our present Debate.

. 3. It is true, Molina, Tabiena, Sylvester, Layman, and Navarrus, and some
others (with what consistency to themselves, in other places of their Writings
may be judged by comparing Navarrus* his cap. 18. cum cap. 1^) maintain a
strange Principle, viz. That none is further bound by an Oath or Vow, further
than he would have obliged himself, if he had either foreseen or observed the
necessary, or contingent, issue of it: By which means they set up a Chancery in
every particular soul, to relieve it from the rigor of that [Lex privata]
private Law of an Oath. But Cajetan, Lopez, Sotus, and others, reasonably
oppose this licentious Principle, as that which lays a Foundation, to enervate
all sacred and civil Obligations -- quia saepe contingunt aliqua quae si
fuissent praevisa contractus non celebrarentur, nec ad eum eventum contrahentes
se obligassent. Hence Sanches limits that Rule, [That what would at first have
hindered our obliging of our selves by an Oath or Vow, had it been foreknown, or
had it first happened, will also discharge us (when known, or come to pass)
from our Obligation to the performance of it] To those things only which (had
they been first known) had made the entering into such sacred bond unlawful,
Filiucii Qu. m. tr. 25. cap. 8.
ratione materiae, inhabilis ad producendam obligationem, in regard of the
matter being such to which an obligation could not be created. Filiucius tells
us that an Oath must be interpreted, according to the nature of the act to
which it is annexed; because he who swears, intends to swear only that
which he promises, in the same manner and under the same conditions as he
promises. We much doubt the truth of this (which depends upon another
question, Whether an oath may not bind a man beyond his intention when he
swears) Undoubtedly an Oath may oblige a man beyond his private intention; and
in this we think all Protestant Casuists agree. That other Rule therefore given
by Casuists, is better, Juramenti obligatio est stricte Juris. That an Oath
must be strictly interpreted, quoad materia and verba permiserint; as strictly
as the matter and words will bear; and thus Filiucius agrees at last, and
Suarez with him. And it were a woeful shame for us Christians to dispute this,
when Tully tells us, Cicero de Offic. lib. 3.
that an Oath must be kept in that sense -- sicut verbis concipitur more
nostro. Yet Divines here ordinarily distinguish, betwixt spontaneous, arbitrary
Oaths, and such as are by others imposed upon us: and concerning each,
determine thus: 1. That such Oaths as we voluntarily take, must be interpreted
(ex ipsius jurantis mente) by our selves, best Judges of our own sense. 2. But
such as are imposed by others, must be by us interpreted, according to the
sense of those that imposed them upon us. Thus Dr. Sanderson rightly
determines, and quoteth Augustine in the case, Ep. 224, 225. He adds this
irrefragable reason; Because the end of imposing Oaths upon others, is to
create or beget to the Imposers, an assurance from him or those that take them,
that they will fulfill what they swear, or promise, which assurance none can
have who imposes an Oath upon another, if he that takes the Oath, have a
Latitude of interpretation left unto him, with a liberty to abound in his own
sense.

. 4. Yet both these rules must be limited; so, that neither our private sense
of our Spontaneous Oaths, nor yet the sense of those that impose Oaths upon
others, must be other then will comport with the just signification of the
words or phrases in the Oath, Vow, or Covenant, for this were to destroy the
simplicity necessary to every Oath, and indeed not to interpret, but to coin an
Oath, or new Obligation.

. 5. We must conclude then, That the sense of the Covenant (being at the will
of others imposed upon us for their security, that we would do as we there
promised) must be no other then what (comporting with the significancy of the
words in which it was conceived) was the sense of the Lords and Commons then
assembled in Parliament concerning it. And from a strict Obligation to the
performance of it in their sense, we see nothing can discharge the soul, unless
some public Declaration at the taking of it; we say public, for otherwise
there was a deliberate, voluntary deceiving the expectation of those that
imposed it: and we think Augustine speaks a great deal of reason, when he
tells us that -- Whosoever deceives the expectation of him to whom he swears,
can be no less then a perjured person. (Which passage Dr. Sanderson quoteth out
of him.)

. 6. Nor (that Parliament being now extinct) can we imagine how we should
better conclude their sense, then by considering the words themselves, in which
they expressed this obligation, and taking a view (so far as we can) of their
precedent and subsequent Acts or Ordinances. The words of the Covenant, so far
as concerns our purpose, are found in the 2d Article thus,

That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery and Prelacy, (i.e.) Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers, depending upon that
Hierarchy; Superstition, Haeresie, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues: and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in these three
Kingdoms.

. 7. The thing here Covenanted for, is an Endeavor to extirpate Popery and
Prelacy: That we might the better understand what they meant by Prelacy, they
tell us, It is the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all
other Ecclesiastical Officers depending upon that Hierarchy. Certainly he that
runs may read, and here is no great need of an Interpreter. We have not
Covenanted against Bishops (every Minister is a Bishop) but against the Prelacy
of Bishops; but in regard that the Prelacy of Bishops is of several kinds,
there possibly may remain a question, What Prelacy the Lords and Commons
intended in the Covenant?

. 8. There is a 1 Prelacy of Jurisdiction, and 2 a Prelacy of mere order. The
Prelacy of Jurisdiction is of two kinds; for distinction sake we may call the
first Pontifical, the second Paternal. The first is such a Prelacy, where the
single Prelate assumes to himself a sole power in Ordination and Jurisdiction;
and though (it may be in a complement) he calls in a Presbyter or two to his
assistance, yet it is ex abundanti, what he judges not himself obliged to do.
It is not reasonable to imagine that the Parliament intended only the
extirpation of this Prelacy; Bilson de Gub. Eccl. cap. 13.
for although Bilson and some others tell us, that the Presbyters joining with
the Bishop in the imposing hands upon Presbyters, was rather ad consensum than
consecrationem; Field of the Church, l. 5. cap. 56.
yet Dr. Field speaks more soberly, and tells us, There ought to be a
concurrence of other Ministers hands as well as the Bishops, in Ordinations,
they having an equal Ministry, and power of order with him. Nor had any such
Prelacy as this, ever any footing in England (other then what the arrogance of
some single persons gave it.)

. 9. We call that a Paternal Prelacy, where the College of Presbyters has a
Prelate who must concur with them (ordinarily) in Ordinations, and acts of
Jurisdiction. This (say the most sober men was all the Prelacy which ever was
allowed in the Church of England; we are sure this is all for which there can
be the least pretense of any divine or Apostolical authority.

. 10. The Prelate of mere order, nothing differs from a continued Moderator,
having no more power than his brethren in Ordination or Jurisdiction, but for
order sake praesiding amongst them.

11. There being no question but that the Covenant is to be interpreted against
the first; the question only remains concerning the two latter, Whether,
together with the Popish Prelacy of sole and single Jurisdiction, it was not
the design of the Lords and Commons then assembled, to oblige the people of
England to extirpate also that Paternal Prelacy, for which some plead, yea both
the name and thing of Prelacy, though merely respecting order in Ecclesiastical
Conventions? That we may make up a just judgment in the case, let us take a
view of their preceding and subsequent Acts.

. 12. Anno 1641. They had by an Act (wherein the King joined with them) taken
from the Hierarchy, all powers of inflicting Penalties, Fines, Amercements,
Imprisonments, or any corporal punishment upon any of the Kings subjects, for
any matter or thing whatsoever, as also all power of administering Oaths to any
persons in any case belonging to Ecclesiastical cognizance. In the year 1643.
the Covenant is made and imposed, in the terms before expressed. In the year
1646. they first establish the Presbyterian Government for three years by their
Ordinance (which 1648. they renew again, and make it sine Die.) In the year
1646. They (by their Ordinance) abolish, the Name, Title, Style and Dignity --
of all Bishops within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales. We must
confess, we should have been very inclinable to have judged, that the sense of
the Parliament imposing the Covenant, was against all manner of Prelacy, and
that they designed no less, than the engaging of the whole Nation upon the
highest security imaginable, to endeavor the total extirpation of all the
kinds of it; had we not been informed, that at that time, the scruple was made
by some Members in Parliament, and resolved (with the consent of our Brethren
in Scotland) that it was only intended against Episcopacy, as then established
in England, which gives us a Latitude, for a Prelacy of mere order (as a civil
constitution)

. 13. In the mean time, the Covenant apertly obliges us against Archbishops,
Deans, Deans and Chapters Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, etc. (there
is no ambiguity in those terms) And 2. Against all such exercise of Prelacy, as
is by any single person, arrogating to himself sole and single Jurisdiction, or
sole and single power in Ordinations. 3. Against all such exercise of
Prelatical power, as is taken away by the Statute of 17 Caroli, for the taking
away the High-Commission-Court. As to all these, the Parliaments sense is clear
enough, and can admit of no dispute. Nor is this a rigid interpretation of the
Covenant, but as favorable as the words of it can bear, or reason allow upon
the view of what has been already urged to evince the sense of the Imposers.

. 14. We conclude then, That our solemn Covenant was the highest security
wherein it was possible, that the Eternal God, could have us engaged to him; or
which the Lords and Commons, then assembled in Parliament, or our Brethren in
Scotland could then take of us, That we would in our Callings and Places
endeavor to root out that Prelatical form and exercise of Church Government,
which was exercised in England, by Archbishops (tyrannical) Bishops, their
Chancellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, etc. From which every reasonable
Christian must conclude, that if we fail in the performance, by establishing
that Government again, or desiring the establishment of it, by promoving,
owning, or countenancing of what we have thus solemnly sworn to extirpate: Not
only our Brethren will have an Action in the case against us for the violation
of our truth to them; But the Righteous God will also have a just action
against us for the irreverence showed to his most Sacred Name. And if ever any
of our Brethren with whom we are engaged, who possibly shall not be able, so
easily to obtain a discharge of their Consciences, shall be brought into a
suffering state, by those whom we (contrary to our solemn Oath) shall help to
set up, they will doubtless have a just occasion, to prefer a sad Bill of
complaint against us, to the just Judge of the whole Earth, who uses to hear
the cry of the Afflicted. And whatsoever we may now think, or talk in the
distempers of our mind, and in the rantings of our foolish passions; whenever
the day of Gods vengeance shall come upon us, according to his Word, Zech. 5.3,
4. Or whenever we shall have recovered our wits again, and we can give our
Consciences awaked out of sleep, leave to speak freely to us; it will be very
hard to relieve them, unless we can assign such an error in the Covenant (and
that too, as to the matter sworn) as will be allowed by the Divine Law, as a
sufficient discharge, as to our observance, and leave us nothing to do, but to
humble our souls before the Lord for our taking of it. It will therefore be
the just concernment of every Soul bound in that sacred Bond, to sit down, and
advisedly think (before they resolve upon the violation of such an Oath)
whether there were any such errors: And if those who think they have found
them, would avoid the Infamy, which else will fall upon them, they will stand
concerned, to set down these errors, and publish them to the world in plain
words of truth and soberness, not in the insignificant figures of wanton
Rhetoric, woefully blurred too with foolish passion, which may possible,
satisfy such as were before resolved to be satisfied, and make a Bumble
sufficient for the eyes of some silly souls, and give the wiser sort of people
opportunity to make themselves merry; but can never stop the mouth, or darken
the light, of a waky and well-informed Conscience.

CHAP. VI.
The Absolvers pretended Errors in the Covenant examined, in part. The
Covenant as to the matter of it (so far as respects Prelacy) not contrary to
the Word of God. The Plea of its contrariety, to the Laws of the Church or
State, examined, and proved insufficient for the irritation of it.

. 1. WE said before, that whosoever fancieth, an escape for his soul from the
obligation of the Covenant, once taken, must be put to the trouble, to assign
some error sufficient to discharge him, the sufficiency of which, must be also
judged by the Word of God, because from that an Oath derives its Obligatory
virtue. That there may be such errors in Oaths that we have taken is granted,
whether in this Oath, there be or no, is the question. If there be any, we must
find it either in the formal or material, or efficient or final cause: For we
shall hardly find any in any appendant circumstance, which will be of such
force.

. 2. And verily there is a variety found out (relating to the three latter
Causes) by such as have spent their time to seek them. They have sought false
witnesses against the Covenant, to put it to death, but we hope before we have
done, to prove not only that they have found none. (for their testimonies have
neither agreed to the Propositions of the Covenant, nor yet to the matters of
fact, relating to Divine Providence, nor yet each with other) but also to
discharge them from their useless employment in seeking knots in so even a
rush, by proving that none can be found, so that they must be forced to cut
this Gordian knot, because it cannot be untied.

. 3. As to the material cause. The matter of every Oath of Covenant being
either necessary, unlawful or indifferent: And each of these again being
possible or certain, or impossible, or uncertain. If the matter of the Oath (to
which we are speaking) be necessary, as commanded us by the Word of God; or
indifferent, where Gods Word has left us at a liberty, except it be
impossible, we are certainly bound to the performance of it, by our Oath, in
the judgment of all Divines that we ever yet met with. From whence every
conscientious Christian (by the way) must needs conclude thus.

1. If the Officers as to the external administration of the Church of Christ
under the Gospel, be so determined by the Word of God, That no Church under
Heaven, nor any other powers, can make any alteration in them, but only ratify
and confirm what God has there appointed. Then, unless we can find that
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, are the Officers appointed by Gods Word, for the
Government of his Church, we are most certainly obliged by our Oath, to
endeavor their extirpation: The reason is, because although we had not sworn,
yet we are bound as Christians, to endeavor in our place and calling, that the
Church to which we belong, have in it no Plants which are not of our Heavenly
Fathers planting, and according to our former rule, what we are bound to do
without an Oath, we are much more (having sworn) obliged to.

2. Suppose the Government of the Church be not so determined by the Word of
God, as to the external Administrators of it, but it be in the power of the
Magistrate, or the Church to add some Officers, not there mentioned, or to
choose what Form they please; yet we having sworn against this Form of
Government, and against these Officers, we cannot set them up nor own them, but
must, if they be imposed upon us, suffer under them: The reason is, because the
matter of the Oath was indifferent and libera, and Juramentum tollit
libertatem, we having sworn, it is to us no longer free.

4. No one can challenge the Covenant as giving an uncertain sound, at least,
not as to this Branch of it; What we swear to, was not the general will of
another, nor the unknown Rights, Statutes, and Privileges of a Society (yet
many Oaths of that kind are judged lawful by Casuists, and generally judged
obligatory though not without some exceptions) but the thing in this Oath is
expressed, Prelacy, and the particular species of Prelacy, set down as plainly
as can be imagined; so that there can be no escape, for any soul that fears
an Oath.

. 5. It remains therefore, that those who plead the non-obligation of this
Oath, and have set up this new trade of absolving souls from it, must assert
the matter of it unlawful, either primarily, or secondarily, either in its own
nature, or in respect of some accident.

. 6. Dr. Sanderson tells us, that an Oath (as to the matter of it) is unlawful
in its own nature, primarily, when it is contrary to the Word of God.
(Secondarily) When it is contrary to the just Laws of any community in which
we are involved: That an Oath may as to the matter of it be unlawful (ex
accidenti) when it hinders some good, or occasioneth some evil to our selves,
or to others, when a man's own Conscience judges it unlawful. Others add, when
it is contradictory to it self, or to some former Oaths, etc.

. 7. But the Casuists generally agree, that every unlawful Oath is not
presently void (if once taken) it will be necessary therefore not only to
examine, whether the Covenant (as to the matter of it). were unlawful, but
whether it were so unlawful, that it does not (now being taken) oblige, which
unquestionably it was, if (as some pretend) it were contrary to the Word of
God, in this particular; for no soul can be by an Oath bound to sin against
God, according to that known Rule, Juramentum non potest esse vinculum
iniquitatis.

. 8. But those who plead the Obligation of the Covenant (upon this account)
null, will easily understand, that they will stand concerned to prove from the
Word of God, That God has somewhere determined, that either his Church
Catholic, or his particular Church in England, should inalterably be governed
by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, etc. Which when they have done, we will freely
grant them that the Covenant in that Point does not oblige: But this is such a
task, as none we have met with durst undertake.

. 9. That therefore which they chiefly insist upon, is, that the matter of the
Covenant was secondarily unlawful, as contrary to the Laws of the Church or
State-communities in which we are involved, where we have two things to do, 1.
To examine, Whether what they say be truth. And 2. To examine whether it be
conclusive.

. 10. The Church is either Catholic and Universal, or particular: Either
Entitive, Ministerial or Organical. When we speak of a Church supposed to be in
a capacity to make Laws, obliging others, we must understand an organnical,
representative Church, either Catholic, or National, or Provincial.

. 11. The Catholic Church in this sense, must consist, of a due proportion of
Members sent from all particular Churches in the world, who meeting in a Synod,
shall determine, or have determined such and such things; and we do confess
(though we dare not assert such Laws universally obliging to all Christian
People to the worlds end) that we have and should have a great reverence, for
such constitutions. But we do not believe that ever any such an Assembly met
upon the earth, nor do we believe the world in a capacity to convene such an
one, we have indeed read of some Councils called General Councils, but besides
that, we find no such Law made by them, neither do we believe them to have been
such Assemblies, strictly considered.

. 12. They must therefore understand the National Church of England: Which may
be taken (as we said before) entitively, or organically. In the first sense,
The Church of England is the whole number of Christian people in England,
professing the Christian Faith: But when we speak of a Church making Laws, we
must not understand Church in this Notion; but must understand it considered as
organical; and then their power of making Constitutions or Canons, obligatory
to others, must be derived either from the Word of God, or from the Civil
Magistrate. What power can be pretended from the Word of God, must be bottomed
upon Acts 15. From whence all that is possible to be concluded, is this, That
particular Churches of Christians have a power given them by the Word of God,
to choose fitting Messengers, which being so chosen, and met together, may
consult and determine, in some Ecclesiastical cases. But certain it is, there
was never such a National Convention in England; so that we need not enquire
the matter of Fact, nor the force and power of such decrees, how far, and in
what cases, they do oblige either present or future Generations.

. 13. The power which any Synod, Convocation, or Convention met at any time in
England, can pretend to have had, must be either from the Pope before the
Reformation in the time of King Hen. the 8th. or by virtue of some Act of
Parliament since that time.

. 14. Our Absolvers talk so much of the Church of England, and the Laws of the
Church and Sons of the Church, by which they mean the Hierarchy (though it will
be hard for them interpreting the Church, in that notion to answer the Papists,
asking them where our Church was before Luther; for I am sure we had no
Protestant Prelacy before that time) that it will not be amiss for us to take a
view of the Church of England under this Notion, and consider what power she
had (and from whom derived) to make any Ecclesiastical Laws, that should be
this day so obligatory, that an Oath taken against them must be forthwith void.

. 15. We are indeed told by some Ecclesiastical Writers of King Lucius, who
about the year 170. was an Instrument of planting the Gospel in England, and
that he in stead of the Paganish Arch-Flamins and Flamins, established 28
Archbishops and Bishops, but the evidence of it is so feeble, that we find few
giving any credit to it, much less was the Nation so early christianized so
far, as to have any Synod so full, as to make Laws obliging the whole Nation:
Nor indeed is there any Authentic Records of any considerable English Synod
till near the year 600; then Pope Gregory sent over Augustine the Monk, to
convert the Britains, and he made have in his work, baptizing 10000 in a day.
This doubtless was the man who first founded Prelacy in England (himself being
the first Archbishop) in conformity to the Order of the Romish Church, whence
he came; we know that it is said by some, that when he came, her found here one
Archbishop and seven Bishops, but no such thing appears in his Letters, not are
their Names, or places of residence expressed.

. 16. This Augustine by Authority derived from the Pope, appoints Bishops,
calls a Synod, and enacteth Laws, etc. From that time, which was the year
586. to the year 1205. we have no Record of any Ecclesiastical Laws, made in
England, the Christians here were doubtless governed by the Popish Canon Law.
Although in that time there were 43 Archbishops of Canterbury (if we may
believe Chronologers) yet have we no Record of any obligatory Canons were made
by them.

. 17. Betwixt 1205. and 1414. were 14 Archbishops of Canterbury, beginning with
Steph. Langton, and ending with H. Checkly, these all made some Provincial
Laws, which are gathered together, and put into some method by Lindwood.
Within that time the Pope sending over two Legates; Otho, in the year 1226. 11
Hen. 3. and Othobonus, in the year 1248. which was the 32 Hen. 3. They also
each of them made parcels of Canons, which were after collected by Johannes de
Aton, and were all the Laws of the Church of England (as they call it) in
force. Nor do we read of any more done till the 25 Hen. 8. which was the year
1533. Till this time the Church of England was lost in the Popish rubbish,
(according to our Brethrens sense of Church, for the Prelates, there was none
other, no not one)

. 18. In that year the Reformation of the Church was begun by Parliament, who
made an Act (printed in our Statute Book,) forbidding any of the Clergy from
that time, to presume to attempt, allege, claim, or to put in ure, any
constitutions or Ordinances, Provincial or Synodal, or any other Canons; or to
enact, promulge or execute any such Canons, etc. or assemble to enact them,
without the Kings Writ calling them together, and the Kings Highness his
consent ratifying them, etc. So that, from that day, no Laws made by the Church
could oblige us, unless K. Hen. 8. first called the Churchmen together, and
then ratified what they Decreed.

. 19. As to all former Church-laws, the Parliament in that Act gave power to K.
Hen. 8. to call together 32 persons to review all old Canons, and to collect a
body of Canons out of them, being not contrary to the Laws of God, nor the Laws
of the Land, which when they had done, K. Hen. 8. was to confirm them; and
immediately upon the review of the old Canons, they were all by than Act
abrogated, and nulled, and so all Canons also after to be made contrary to the
Laws of the Nation, etc.

. 20. Before these 32 persons could be called, and meet and finish their work,
K. Hen. 8. dies. The former Act not giving power to the King his Heirs and
Successors to call the 32 persons, K. Edw. 3, 4 Ed. 6. cap. 11.
did not do it, till the Parliament meeting in the 3d and 4th year of his
Reign, by a new Act, gave him also power with the advice of his Council, within
three years to name the 32 persons, which his father should have named.

. 21. King Edw. the 6. by his Letters Patents, bearing date, at Westminster, 11
Nov. in the 5th. year of his Reign, authorizeth the 32 Persons (whose Names and
Powers may be seen by the Copy of those Letters Patents, prefixed to a Book
called, Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum.) They met, and within the three
years time, reviewed all, and compiled that Book called as aforesaid, (upon
which according to the Statute 25 Hen. 8. The old Canon Laws were utterly
abrogated; but before King Edward had confirmed this new Book, he died: So that
there was no Laws of the Church of England left in any force.

. 22. Q. Mary succeeds, she revives the old Popish Canon Law. Q. Eliz. after
her reviveth the Reformation: In her time, several Injunctions and Canons were
made. After her time, K. James summoned a Synod, Anno 1603. which made 141
Canons, but as Qu. Elizabeth's (to our knowledge) were never confirmed so much
as by the Royal assent, so the latter were never yet confirmed by Act of
Parliament, by which alone (we are told) that our Consciences can be obliged,
is perfect Laws.

. 23. It is observeable, That in the Statute 25 Hen. 8. authorizing such
Canons, as should hereafter be made in Convocations assembled by the Kings
Writ, being first confirmed by the King; It is not said, by the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, though in other parts of the same Act, those words are
added. It is very probable, that the want of those words in the following part
of the Act, concerning his Majesty's choosing the 32 persons to view the old
Canons, was the reason why King Edward did not do it (King Hen. 8. being dead)
till a new Act was made to the same purpose, to which latter Act, K. Edw. 6. in
his Letters Patents refers, not to that of 25 Hen. 8. Nor is it yet determined
whether a Kings confirmation of Canons, makes them Law (according to that
Statute of 25 Hen. 8. supposing that K. Hen. 8. his Heirs and Successors, as
well as himself were intended in the Statute) any longer than his Majesty's
Person lives, who so ratifies and confirms them. So that it is far from being
so clear, that we may adventure the violation of an Oath upon it, that we have
this day any Canons, or constitutions Ecclesiastical, of force, either by the
Laws of God or of the Nation.

. 24. But admit this, where shall we find any such Canon as this? That the
Government of the Church of God in England, is, and shall be by Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellors, Commissaries,
Archdeacons; so that it shall be unlawful, either for the People of England,
in their callings and places, to endeavor the extirpation of that Form of
Government, or for the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England, to move for, or to Vote the alteration of it, and to engage People
against it by an Oath: Something of this nature must be proved, before the
Covenant will be proved contrary to the Laws of the Church of England; and if
such a Canon could be showed, it is no Law; for it is contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of the Nation, giving power to the Parliaments of England, to
repeal or alter any Laws, Statutes, etc. And all Canons, contrary to the Laws
and Statutes of the Nation, are aforehand declared void and null by the
Statute, 25 Hen. 8.

. 25. By what has been said, appears the vanity of their Plea, who plead that
the Covenant is null and void, because against the Law; of the Church: Let us
come now to consider whether they speak more sense or truth, who pretend it is
void, because contrary to the just Laws of the Nation.

. 26. It being apparent from the former discourse, that there was no Canon Law
of England in any force at the time of the composing, imposing and taking of
the Covenant, the question only lies concerning the civil Laws of the Nation;
which according to the Statute, 25 Hen. 8. must give all the obligatory virtue,
which any Ecclesiastical deliberations can have amongst us.

The Laws of our Nation are usually distinguished into, The Common Law and the
Statute Law. The first is not written, and (...) uncertain, as may appear, from
the different senses of Judges in their Book-cases, its matter and form is no
other than the ancient Customs and Usages of the English Nation; which having
been retained for many years, have been so familiarized with the People of the
Nation, that by a common consent they have passed, and do pass for Law, till
they are cotrolled by Statute. Our Statute Law is made up of the several Acts
of about 260 Parliaments, and yet is capable of daily augmentation.

. 27. If those who plead the Covenant contrary to the Laws of the Nation,
mean, The Common Law of England, their sense is no more than this, That by the
constant usage of the Nation of England, the Government of the Church in that
Nation, has been by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Chancellours,
Commissaries, etc. and an Oath (imposed by the Lords and Commons legally
assembled in Parliament) taken by the People, tending to the destruction of
that ancient usage, is void and null, yea though the King of England (disliking
the first imposing of it) yet afterward, approves his Subjects taking of it,
and himself joins with them, and also takes it.

Yet neither will this evidence the matter of the Covenant contrary to Law. For
in the Covenant we have sworn, to endeavor the extirpation, etc. The Law which
must be contrary to this, must say, You shall not endeavor, etc. Now we appeal
to all the Lawyers in England, whether there be any piece of the Common Law of
England, which says to the Lords and Commons assembled in a Legal Parliament,
or to the People of England, concerning any custom or usage in the English
Nation, -- You shall not endeavor in your callings and places, the extirpation
and alteration of it: If there be, sure we are, the Statute 25 Hen. 8.21. does
control it, declaring a full power in the Parliament of England, with his
Majesty's consent, to dispense, abrogate, null, diminish, amplify any Laws,
etc. But there can no such thing be alleged.

. 28. So that here is no contrariety to the Common Law: Here is only, The Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament (by his Majesty's Writ legally) taking
notice that the external Form of Ecclesiastical Government amongst us,
according to a long usage of the Nation, in the times of Popery (viz. from
about the year 600. till the time of reformation, in the Reign of Hen. 8. and
since that time, after some regulation of it by Statutes) was upon experience
found at least very disconvenient to the reformed state of the Church amongst
us, and having power in them (with the Kings consent to be afterward had) to
abrogate, null, diminish, or amplify, any English Laws, usages, etc. agreeing
to extirpate this usage, and swearing, and causing the People of England to
swear with them, that they would in their callings and places endeavor to
extirpate it. Whether the King pleased to consent, or no, certainly, they had
power, in their callings and places to endeavor such a thing. The Covenant
engages no further: We cannot understand any contrariety in this to the Common
Law of England.

. 29. For the Statute Law of England, we shall only say this; That the
Statute Law which must be contrary to the Covenant, must speak to this effect;
The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament upon a Legal Summons, shall not
swear themselves, nor make others swear, to endeavor the extirpation of Popery
and Prelacy, i. e. the Church Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Where
to find such a Law we cannot tell: No, nor yet such a Statute, as positively
determines, That the Government of the Church in England is, and shall be by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Prebends, Chancellors, Commissaries,
etc. It is true we often in the Statutes meet with these Names, and we find the
Statutes supposing them, Ecclesiastical Officers, and telling us, That the
Kings of England formerly founded this Church in Prelacy (what kind of Prelacy,
and with what circumstances they say not) but we are at a loss for any other
(save this implicit) establishment by any Statute Law.

And we further believe, that the Spiritual Lords before the time of K. Hen.
the 8, would have taken it in foul scorn, that any secular powers should have
gone about by a civil Law to establish them: We have read of the heavy stir in
King John's time, when the King of England did but pretend to the Nomination of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and to what a base degree of condescension the
Pope and his children here in England, humbled their Sovereign for that offer.

. 30. The truth is no more than this: The Parliament of England in the
beginning of our Reformation, being engaged in prudence to drive no further nor
faster in Reformation, than (the Lambs could go) the present state of the
Nation could bear, which at that time was but very little, the Popish party
being then the greatest by far, the Reformed Party such as did but see (men
like trees) imperfectly discerning the things that differ in Religion, were
pleased to proportion the Reformation, accordingly, so as neither, the newly
Reformed Party might be lost by too much seeming innovation, nor the remaining
Popish party exasperated too far. Hence in matter of Doctrine, nothing was
agreed till the year 1562. which was the 4 of Eliz. not ratified by Parliament
till 1571. viz. 13 Eliz. (near thirt years after the first beginning of
Reformation) Hence in the matter of Worship, the same Lyturgy was continued,
which was used in the Popish Mass, only leaving out the Prayers to Saints, and
for the Pope; and the second Edition of the Common Prayer, Anno 5 and 6 Edw. 6.
was much amended in many things, from that 2 Edw. only in the business of
Kneeling at the Sacrament, Didoclavius observes, it was left at liberty by the
Common Prayer Book, 2 Edw. but commanded in the Edition of it 5 and 6 Edw. 6.
yet not without an excellent Rubric, to expound the usage of it (still to be
seen in the Common Prayer Book, Edit. 5 and 6 Edw. 6. viz. Anno 1552. but left
out in our ordinary Books, for what Reasons, let any one read and judge) As to
the Form of Church Government, the reforming Parliaments in the time of Hen. 8.
found one in being, and the persons exercising it, in great power; they
therefore thought fit not to dispute that Point, only to regulate that power,
which the former usages of the Nation, and the Canon Law, had invested them
with, requiring them, to seal with the Kings Arms in their Seals, to do
nothing without his Writ, V. Stat. 5 Eliz. 23.
etc. Other Parliaments since have denied them any assistance from the civil
power to back their censures, but in some particular cases, and forbade them to
administer any Oath, to fine, amerce, 17 Car.
or imprison any of the Kings Subjects, removing the Bishops out of the
Parliament House, etc. This is all the establishment we can find, that the
ancient Hierarchy of England, had by any Law of England.

. 31. But suppose they were so established, do our Brethren take it for such an
undoubted Gospel-Maxim, that an Oath taken against the Laws of a Nation, of
what kind soever, written, or not written, consonant to, or dissonant from the
Law of God, is forthwith null, and void, and no ways obliging? Do they believe
this such a truth, that men may venture the damnation of their souls upon it?
and venture, the curse of God cleaving to their house, till it has consumed
the timber thereof and the stones thereof, Zech. 5.3. upon the truth of it?
They may talk thus in drollery to their friends, or credulous Proselytes, they
may (to show their grandiloquence, and liberty of phrase) in laxe discourses
thus speak in Pamphlets; but we are so well persuaded of some of their skill in
divinity, and of their other Learning too, that we believe they know, that no
Scripture, no reason, no creditable authority, will justify any such thing,
and they would be loath, that their crime, in these swelling words of vanity
(by which the souls of people are ensnared) should be expiated, by that slight
penance, of any of their standing two or three days in any of our schools, to
defend such an atheological maxim, against what Arguments would be brought
against it, nor would we desire fairer play in our case.

. 32. 1. In the first place, they will certainly grant, that it is false, if
the Laws of the Nation to which an Oath pretended contrariant, be contrary to
the Laws of God: For the contrary assertion were to set up one Higher than the
Highest: So that if he who has taken the Covenant, does believe that the
Government of the Church in England by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Prebends,
Archdeacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, be contrary to Gods Word, suppose that
it be established by Law, or were so established, the Oath does bind against
the Law. And certainly if Gods Word establishes any Form, it is so, for there
is in it ne (...) quidem of Deans, Prebends, Archbishops, Chancellors, etc.

. 33. 2. In the second place, Our Brethren will certainly grant, that in case
the King had immediately consented with his Parliament, and imposed the
Covenant, though it had been, expressly, apertly, positively, against any Law or
Laws of the Nation, yet the Oath had obliged, because they altogether had a
power to suspend annul, and abrogate any Law. It is true, this Oath was only
imposed by Lords and Commons, the King at present not consenting: We are no
Lawyers, nor can we tell how far the power of Lords and Commons extends, as to
the suspending of the exercise of Laws, or giving of Oaths. But we have heard,
that 2 parts of the legislative power of England lies in the Lords and Commons,
and that they have of themselves given Oaths in many cases, in what cases, we
know not: After this, his Majesty declares, That those who had taken the Oath,
should least offend God and him in keeping of it. His Majesty that now is,
takes the same Oath, declares his approbation, etc. Shall it yet be told us,
that the Oath is void, because against the Laws, when all 3 States to whom the
legislative power belongs, have approved of it: Certainly they must have an
easy Faith, that part with it, to such kind of Assertions.

. 34. 3. But suppose there had been no such thing, but the Oath had been merely
spontaneous; Our Brethren speak without their books, in discharging men's
Souls, upon this Plea. Dr. Sanderson will tell them, that if the Law be
poenal, and has in it an election, either of doing the thing, or suffering the
penalty, an Oath will bind against the active part. Fortassis possunt dari
casus in quibus juramentum, quod videtur alicui legi communitatis aut
vocationis adversari et si non debuerit suscipi, De juram prom. prael. 3.. 9.
susceptum tamen potest obligare: ut exempli causa, in lege poenali
disjunctiva. He puts the case concerning the Law of a City; That he who is
chosen Mayor by the Freemen, shall hold, in case he refuses, he shall pay
100lb.

Suppose such a Law, and this Law respecting this City established by Act of
Parliament; A particular Citizen has taken a private Oath, that he will never
bear the Office of Mayoralty in that City, this man is chosen by the Freemen;
What shall he do? Not hold (says Dr. Sanderson) but pay his money; his Oath
will bind here against the active part of the Law: So that if there were 40.
penal Laws, which might seem to establish the Hierarchy against which the
Covenant is directed; the Covenant will bind us against them all, thus far,
viz, to suffer the penalty annexed for not owning them, rather than to own and
acknowledge them. But yet further:

. 35. 4. Let us examine the reason, why an Oath should not bind against Law:
There can be no other pretended, but the dominion which God has reserved to
Superiors over their Inferiors. So that if this which we call Law, be not
clearly an establishment of our Superiors, to whom legistative power belongs
(which mere usage and custom is not arguing no more than permission of
Superiors) or if the Law be an exercise of dominion in things ubi non habent
dominium; where Gods Word allows them no such dominion, an Oath will certainly
bind against such pretended Laws. Hence Azorius well notes, that boni mores
sunt varii, i.e. Azor. mor. qu. l. 11. cap. 6.
good manners or customs are various, some commanded by the written Law of God,
some by the written Canon Law, some by the Civil Law. And (says he) that
maxim, that Juramentum contra bonos mores non obligat. An Oath against good
manners, customs, laws, does not oblige, is to be understood, if it be contra
bonos mores juris naturalis, vel divini Scripti, vel Canonici, secus autem est,
si juramentum sit contra bonos mores jure civili institutos, i. e. against good
Laws or manners, commanded by the divine Law of God written, or by the Canon
Law; but it is otherwise, if those good manners be only commanded by Civil
Laws. Sanches. l. 3. cap. 9. Suarez l. 2. de jur. cap. 21. Layman tract. mor.
l. 4. cap. 6.
To the same purpose determine, Sanchis, Layman, and many other Casuists. The
reason why they add the Canon Law, is, because they believe their Church cannot
err; so that an Oath against their Church Canons, is to them equivalent with
an Oath against the Law of God.

. 36. 5. Yet it must be granted, that Oaths, in some cases, against Civil
Laws, may be void, but it is far from being granted, to be an universal Truth:
Abbas, Sylvester, Azorius, Molina, Lessius, Layman, Sanches, Suarez, all agree
that an Oath will bind against any civil Law, if the Law does obligare ad
paenam, non ad culpam necessario, i. e. oblige not necessarily to sin in case
of refusal, but to punishment (which is what we said before) nay the most of
them add further, that it will bind against them, -- ubi materia legibus
opposita sine peccato sieri potest; i.e. where the matter of it can without sin
be performed; being not contra jus natural aut divinum.

6. Bartolus, Bartolus de fide jussor.
the great Lawyer gives several Rules in the case.

1. He says, an Oath taken against the Civil Laws of a Nation, made chiefly
for a public good, will not oblige: which Rule, yet Azorius does not think
proved by Covarruvias or Imolas, the friends of Bartolus, in the case.

2. An Oath taken to confirm a Bargain. which Bargain is contrary to the Law,
will (says he) bind, till the Church absolves. As if one swears to pay an
Usurer more than the Law allows the Usurer to take; or to pay a Thief a Sum
of Money, to redeem his life, (supposing a Law to make such a Contract void)
yet the Oath would bind. Sayri claevis regia, l. 11. ca. 13.
Upon this case Gregor. Sayrus determines, That (supposing a Law) that all
contracts, for the payment of money won by play, shall be void, yet if one have
sworn to pay his Fellow-gamester, he is bound to pay it. He quotes with him in
this opinion, Navarrus, Bannez, Salon, Lopez, Med na, etc.

A third Rule he gives is this; 3. If the Oath be only contrariant to a civil
Law, made only for the advantage of him that swears, the Oath will bind
against the Law. We dare not justify all these Rules: But we will put a case
or two to our Brethren, who are so free of their pardons and absolutions in
this case. All know that it is against the Law of England, that a woman (under
Covert Baron) should dispose of her estate which she has in Jointure. Suppose
now her husband proves a Bankrupt, or be imprisoned for debt, or suppose the
woman, her self wants money, and she to furnish her self, or deliver her
husband, borrowes a sum of money, swearing to him of whom she borrows it, that
if God lets her live to enjoy her Jointure, some Deed which she makes (against
Law) for the security of the Creditor, shall be made good (though against Law)
Shall not her Oath bind her? The Law of England expressly forbids giving above
6lb per cent. for Interest: Suppose one swears, (in his necessity to give 8lb
per cent.) Will not this Oath bind, think we? in short, Azorius determines
bluntly; Quando contractus est solum jure civili interdictus, jurejurando
confirmatur: That an Oath will bind to fulfill a contract only forbidden by a
civil Law.

. 37. We are not altogether satisfied in the Popish Casuists reasons, for this
determination, we judge this question cannot be well resolved, without the
resolution of another very weighty question; viz. How far humane Laws bind the
Conscience; We do believe, that all such humane Laws as do necessarily tend to
preserve the Government, and tranquillity of a civil state, because they are
confirmed by the Law of nature, and the divine Law revealed, do apertly bind
the Conscience, so that an Oath taken against them, is forthwith void. But for
Laws, not plain and certain and express, nor having such necessary tendency,
to the being of a civil state, nor being so conformable to the Law of Nature,
or written Law of God, whether they lay such an hold on the Conscience as to
make void an Oath, we think deserves our Absolvers second thoughts, possibly
the taking of such Oaths, might be at first inadvised and unlawful, but being
taken, that they are voided by second thoughts, that the matter of them was
against Law, we cannot but a little doubt and believe our Brethren have few
Casuists, or other Divines of their minds in the case.

. 38. Nor yet is this our case, where the Lords and Commons legally assembled
in Parliament, to whom (though not solely) the legislative power belongs, do
themselves take, and require others to take an Oath, to endeavor the
extirpation of a Form of Government, which they apprehended inconvenient; which
it is true was established by the usage of a long tract of time, but no
positive Law was existent, directing it as the Government of the Church in
England (though several indeed supposed it) that an Oath so directed and
imposed, does not oblige against such a pretended imperfect legal
establishment, is we confess, a piece of divinity, the depth of which we cannot
fathom, nor yet believe that there is any truth in it. If any of our Brethren
in earnest think otherwise, they should do well to bring forth their strong
Reasons, or to tell us what one Divine, Ancient, or Modern is of their minds:
till that time, it is sufficient for us out of a reverence to the sacred Name
of God, to dissent from them in this notion, proved as yet, by no Scripture, no
reason, nor any creditable authority.

. 39. For what some tell us, that this Covenant was against Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, etc. they appear to us scarce to have read either. The
latter says not a word of the Government of the Church. In the former, there
is only this general Article; -- We have granted to God, Magna Charta cap. 1.
and by this our present Charter, have confirmed for us, and our heirs for
ever, That the Church of England shall be free, and have all her whole Rights
and Liberties inviolable: And may she not be so, though Prelacy by extirpated?
Are Archbishops and Bishops, etc. more concerned in Magna Charta, than Abbots
and Priors? Yet what are become of their Liberties? Was not the privilege of
Sanctuary, of making Canons, etc. some of those Rights? Yet are they not taken
away by Act of Parliament? Surely so may the Church Governors mentioned in the
Covenant.

CHAP. VII.
The Absolvers Plea from Schism considered. The nature of Schism. No guilt of
Schism, by endeavoring to extirpate Prelacy. Their Plea also from the
supposed contradiction in the matter of the Covenant, to the matter of former
Oaths, particularly, the Coronation Oath, the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy,
and Canonical Obedience, answered, and found vain.

. 1. OUR Absolvers foreseeing these easy Answers to their aforementioned
Pleas, or at least being aware, that if Prelacy be left to stand only upon a
Parliamentary Foundation, it will be liable to extirpation by succeeding
Parliaments, have not rested here, but raised their Plea higher; telling us,
That Episcopacy has no Original but from the Apostles, and looks very like an
immediate institution of Christ's, either preceptive and explicit, or tacit,
and exemplary, so that to abjure it, runs us upon a Rock of Schism, and dasheth
us both in Opinion, and practice, against the judgment and custom of the
Catholic Church, in all places and ages (till of later days) from the
Apostles days, with whom we ought to keep communion in all things of so
ancient tradition, and universal observation.

In these words, or to this sense they speak all.

. 2. It is very observable, that if there were any truth in this Plea, it would
not only conclude all our Brethren of the Reformed Churches, in France,
Holland, Geneva, Scotland, N. England, most parts of Germany, Schismatics:
(For that is nothing with those with whom we have to do) but it would also
supersede all civil power's thoughts for ever meddling with the Government of
the Church, for fear of violating an Institution of Christ, and the order of
the whole Catholic Church, and being posted up for Schismatics.

. 3. But is it so indeed? Or is this the noise of those who thunder thus,
because they cannot hope with any solid Arguments to do much; let us a little
consider these big phrases, and see what they signify.

The Papists have so enured us to this suffering under the reproach of
Schismatics, for breaking off from the order of their Catholic Church, that
we begin not so much to regard the Charge, or at least, not to believe every
one who calls out Schism and Schismatics; when they have nothing else to say.

. 4. Schism properly signifies, a Rent or Breach, which when it is from or in
the community of a Church, is very sinful, both because against the Command of
God directly, and interpretatively; but it must be from the Communion of a
Church walking according to the Divine Rule, otherwise (if the Churches
deviation especially be great) there is no great fear of any guilt by Schism, in
departing from it.

. 5. If indeed God by his Word, has any where appointed, that the Government
of his Universal Church, shall be by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Chancellours, Commissaries, etc. and the Church has always walked in that
order, we confess then that out Oath against it, is Schismatical: But we desire
our Brethren to prove this.

. 6. Nay if God has left the Church to its liberty, to set up what Form of
Government she pleases, and the Universal Church has at any time met in a
perfect General Council, and determined this inalterable Form, or by an
universal practice has kept to such a Form, there may be some color to charge
us, but neither shall our Brethren prove this to us.

. 7. We challenge all the friends of Prelacy, to make it good from any
authentic Record, that for three hundred years after Christ, there were any
such Creatures known in the Church of God, as Archbishops, Archdeacons,
Prebends, Commissaries, Chancellors. Pope Stephen indeed in the 3 Century, is
called the chief Bishop of Rome (in the fabulous decretal Epistles) but Cyprian
writing to him, calls him no more than his Colleague. In the 4 Century, we read
of Bishops, Elders and Deacons, Ambrose mentions them. Dionisius and Optatus
mention no more in this age. Hierom (in his Epistle to Nepotianus, tells us, l.
de Dign. Sacerdot.
that Bishops and Presbyters were the same, only the latter were the younger
men. Ambrose tells us they had one and the same Ordination. Indeed toward the
end of the 4 Century (which was 400 years after Christ) they began to multiply
Ecclesiastical Officers, then came in Readers and Exorcists, Subdeacons,
Archdeacons, and Archbishops, etc. But we have already forsook the Order of the
Church at that time, when it was woefully declined from its Primitive Purity,
and shall be no more guilty of Schism in going a little further.

. 7. We said before, that we find in Ecclesiastical story early mention of
Bishops, but not of such as ours were in England.

Our Bishops, 1. Lay claim to a sole and single power in Ordination and
Jurisdiction.

2. They are not chosen by the People nor Clergy.

3. They are attended with Deans and Prebends, Archdeacons, etc.

4. They execute their power by Lay Chancellours, Commissaries, etc.

5. They have used to exercise a power in depriving Ministers, suspending,
silencing, excommunicating, for trivial cases, not paying a Tithe Goose or Pig,
etc. Let our Brethren show us such an Episcopacy, (before Antichrist was up in
his Throne) if they can; if not, they vainly charge us with Schism, in swearing
to endeavor the extirpation of such a Prelacy, for which is no foundation, in
the practice, either of the Primitive or any Reformed Church.

. 8. We are further told (how truly comes next to be examined) that the
Covenant was void, because the matter of it contradicted former Oaths. They
mention four: of Allegiance, Supremacy, of Canonical obedience, and that taken
by the Kings of England, at their Coronation. If this be true, it is
unquestionably void, for Juramentum prius prejudicat posteriori: But
considering, that the Covenant was agreed and taken, by the Members of the
gravest Convention of the Nation, and by so many Reverend Divines, it will not
be amiss to enquire whether of a truth it be so or no, that if we find it true,
both King and Parliament and People, may all do obeisance to Prelacy, as having
unwarily suffered their grave and sacred ears to be nailed to the doors of its
house, and obliged themselves to be its Servants for ever.

. 9. As to the Oath of Allegiance, there is no mention of Archbishops nor
Bishops in it, we have only swear Faith and Allegiance to his Majesty; which we
hope we may give, and yet endeavor in our callings to extirpate Popery and
Prelacy, etc. If any one say, What if he shall command the setting of it up? We
would fain know of our Brethren, what we should do, if Popery should be
hereafter by any Prince commanded? But to speak directly. 1. We believe that
Prelacy had no just footing in England, but what it had by Authority of
Parliament. 2. We believe it in the power of King and Parliament, to suspend or
abrogate any Laws, and to engage people by Oaths for ever obliging, against
the matter of them. 3. We know both King and Parliament by their Act 17 Car.
did take away much of the Prelates jurisdiction. 4. We know that the two Houses
of Parliament did suspend all other power of Archbishops, etc. and engage the
people of England by Oath against the restoring of it. We assert the truth of
this no further then as we have received it by printed Narrations.
Which Oath his sacred Majesty afterward ratified and confirmed for ever. We
believe none can absolve us from an Oath but God only. Our Allegiance
therefore can only (in case of such commands) be showed, in our patient,
humble submission to such penalties, as shall be inflicted upon us, for not
yielding active Obedience, contrary to our Oaths.

. 10. So that a man might, and may bear Faith, and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, and yet take an Oath to endeavor in our callings, the Extirpation of
Episcopacy or Prelacy, in two cases.

1. In case our Allegiance to God, required such an endeavor of us in our
places.

2. In case his Majesty's command of submission to that Prelacy, comes after my
Oath to the contrary (ratified by himself.) And I can find no more in that Oath
which can be pretended as contradictory to the Covenant.

. 11. The next Oath which they mention, is that of Supremacy, This Oath was
established by the Statute 1 Eliz. 1. being devised to secure the Subjects of
England to the Supreme Civil Magistrate of England, from acknowledging the
foreign jurisdiction of the Pope. What can be fetched from this Oath must be
either from the first part; where having declared, that we do in conscience
believe the King is the only Supreme Governor in England, as well in things
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical as Civil, in opposition to any foreign Prince,
person, Prelate, State, or Potentate; and thereupon we renounce such pretended
foreign Jurisdiction, and promise Faith and Allegiance. Or else it must be in
the latter clause, where we promise to assist and defend all jurisdictions,
privileges, etc. annexed to the Imperial Crown of England. For the former part
we are not able to understand what in the Covenant is contrary to it? The
Covenant allows the King the supreme moderation of all Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual causes (if Gods word will allow it) for there is nothing any can
pretend against it, except they plead that then our Reformation cannot be
according to the word of God (which for our parts we think very false.) The
Covenant does not in the least acknowledge the Jurisdiction of any foreign
Princes, Prelates, etc. For the latter part, where we promise to assist and
defend the Jurisdictions and Privileges annexed to the Imperial Crown. So
says the Covenant; -- his Majesty's Person, Honor, and Authority --. Ah! but
the second Article must be contrary to this Oath, because it is the Right of
the Crown to choose Bishops, etc. (How this Plea will stand with their
Episcopacy of Apostolical right let them consider.) I would fain (to make the
business short) know, whether some of these Rights of the Crown may not by
consent of the King be parted with? and whether his Majesty when he took the
Covenant did not part with them? We had before only sworn to endeavor the
extirpation of these Officers, in all our callings by lawful means and ways:
(Such now as Petitioning the King, etc.) His Majesty that now is, at the
entreaty of his Subjects in Scotland, parts with this Right, by swearing to
extirpate those Officers, to the nomination of which he before had a right. May
not we now keep the Oath of Supremacy, and the Covenant too?

Nor can that general term oblige us any further, than to a defense, and
maintaining all such Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Rights, annexed to the
Imperial Crown, which are not contrary to the Word of God. -- But there needs
no more be urged against this vain plea; especially considering that very few
men in England of those that took the Covenant had ever taken the Oath of
Supremacy, which only belonged to Ecclesiastical persons, Graduates in
Universities, and public Officers. Which did not make the hundredth part of
those who took the Covenant in England.

. 12. The third Oath, to which (it is pretended) the Covenant is contrary, is
the Oath of Canonical Obedience, which concerns no more than such as were made
Ministers before 1641. or at least very few, so that much need not be said to
it now. Indeed all those, or at the least most of those that have been in the
Ministry twenty years, when they were Ordained, did promise, Reverently to
Obey their Ordinary: And after this (by what Law I cannot tell) did swear (at
least when they had Institution granted them by the Bishop to any living) that
they would obey him in things lawful and honest. And also did subscribe the 39
Articles, where the 36. Article does approve of the form of Consecration of
Archbishops, Bishops.

Here now is 1. a Promise of Obedience to the Ordinary.

2. An Oath to the same purpose.

3. A Subscription, that the form of the Consecration of Archbishops, etc.
contains in it nothing contrary to the Word of God. Now it is said, that he who
took the Covenant, bound himself in a contrary bond, which latter bond by that
reason is void ipso facto.

. 13. But (besides that, this Plea will absolve very few, as we said before) we
are not able to fathom the depth of this Argument, for the Absolution of any.
The Question is here, viz. Whether he that has subscribed, that the form of
Consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. expressed in the Common Prayer
book, contains nothing in it contrary to the Word of God; and who has promised
Obedience to his Ordinary, and sworn to it, may not (after this) take an oath
in his calling to endeavor the extirpation of the Government by Archbishops,
etc.

. 14. First, suppose that upon mature deliberation, the Ministers that
subscribed, and took that Oath of Canonical Obedience, find that it was an
unlawful Oath or Subscription, as obliging them to the acknowledgement of such
a power in the Church, as is by no means allowed in the Word of God, they are
in such a case only obliged to be humbled for their rash subscription and
taking of that Oath, and their Second Oath against them will hold valid.

Nay, secondly; suppose that that Oath of Canonical Obedience was imposed
without authority of Parliament: And the Parliament as soon as they took notice
of it, declared their dissent to it, and to all Oaths imposed without their
authority: Certainly this should go far with them, who make the like plea
against us, as to the Obligation of the Covenant.

. 15. But, thirdly; we will for once suppose the Oath materially good and
lawful as to the efficient cause; yet certainly the Oath is irritated and made
void by the Parliaments taking away of the matter of it. Nor do we understand
how any person by a promise or an oath to be obedient in things lawful and
honest, to this or that Governor, does oblige himself whatever evil he sees
in such a Governor, either through want of just title, or maladministration
of his trust, never, to endeavor to free himself from that servitude. If
indeed we had sworn in the Oath of Canonical Obedience, never to have
endeavored the Extirpation of the Government, then to have taken the Covenant,
had been to have sworn to contradictions, and the first Oath would have made
the latter void, unless the matter of the first had been proved to have been
unlawful, and so the first Oath had been Vinculum iniquitatis. But we shall
need add no more in answer to this Plea, which if it were good, could absolve
very few.

. 16. The next Oath, to which they pretend the Covenant to be contradictive, is
the Oath which the Kings of England take at their Coronation: We must confess
we are not so fit to speak to this (being no Lawyers) only thus much at first
offers its self.

1. That his Majesty who now is, has not taken it as yet, but has taken the
Covenant.

2. We cannot find, that the King does swear, to maintain and uphold the
Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, and never to consent to an
Act of Parliament for the extirpation of them, there is certainly no such
thing. Ah but he swears to defend the rights of the Church (they will say) and
Episcopacy is one of the rights of the Church. -- The Oxford men quote the
passages of the Coronation Oath, which they conceive the Covenant
contradicting: Thus He swears,

That he will keep, grant, and confirm the Laws, Customs, and Franchises
granted to the Clergy by the glorious King, See this Case of Conscience about
the Kings Coronation Oath excellently resolved by M John Geree.
St. Edward: And that he will grant and preserve unto the Bishops, and to the
Churches committed to their charge, all Canonical privileges, due Law and
Justice. And that he will protect and defend them, as every good King in his
Kingdom ought to be protector and defender of the Bishops and the Churches
under their Government.

. 17. We doubt whether both these clauses be to be found in any Coronation Oath
which our Princes have taken. If Mr. Prin gives us a true relation, neither of
them were promised by Edw. 6. We find them indeed both, the first in the Oath
which King James took at his Coronation in England: the second in the Oath
which K. Charles the first took in Scotland, they might (for ought I know) be
put together in the Oath which K. Charles the first took in England; where
there was certainly an alteration made in the forms of prayer lately used (some
were added which were omitted ever since Hen. 6. time, Reign of King Charles p.
20.
says Mr. Le-Strange) the same Gentleman avows there was no alteration made in
the Oath. 2. It seems strange to us that the Reverend Bishops, should put the
King to swear the Confirmation of the Liberties and Rights granted to the
Church by Edward the Confessor, many of which were before taken away by Act of
Parliament, as may be seen by comparing the Acts of Parliament since the time
of Hen. 8. with the Records of those Grants of Edw. the Confessor, which the
Reader may find in the close of Sir H. Spilmans Concilia Pambrittanica.

. 18. However it is certain that one thing which the King also swear, was the
Government of the Nation, according to the Laws of the Land made, or to be
made, so that his Oath for confirming the Churches Rights and Privileges must
be interpreted, as to those Rights which were, and should continue ratified by
the Laws of the Land; otherwise there was a manifest contradiction in the Oath,
as to those two passages.

. 19. For the Kings Oath, to maintain the Bishops and their Churches, it
contradicts not the Covenant, which strikes at nothing but Prelacy of Bishops,
Archbishops, Chancellors, Deans, Prebends, etc. Bishops and their Churches may
be preserved in England, though these be extirpated. But no more need be said
as to our present case; for the Oath which any former King of England took
concerned only himself. Obligatio juramenti est personalis non realis, (as I
think all Casuists agree.) His Majesty that now is, is obliged by no such Oath.

. 20. For the Contradiction which Doctor Featly assigns in the Covenant to the
Protestation (by which we swear to preserve the Liberties of Subjects (out of
which number Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters are not to be
excepted) it is not worthy of an answer; for by the same Argument (after that
Protestation taken) the Parliament could not have questioned any one Minister
of State, or any other person (at least not annull their office) which
certainly none will assert, since their Liberties, as Subjects, might be
preserved sure, and yet their Liberties as Prelates, abridged.

CHAP. VIII.
The Absolvers Plea for the irritation of the Covenant, from the supposed
Contradictions in it self, Confuted: and the Covenant (notwithstanding this
suggestion) proved valid, and obligatory.

. 1. HAving reconciled the Covenant to former Oaths, it is time that we should
reconcile it to it self: for, as through its fighting with its elders and
betters, it is possible an Oath may so lose its strength, that it cannot hold a
soul; so by hard conflictings within it self too, it is possible it may contract
that weakness; no man being bound to do things contradictory, which indeed were
impossible, at least in this case which we have before us. And this seems a
task reasonable for us, considering that the Adversaries of the Covenant, have
arraigned it of this before the world, and pronounced sentence against it.

. 2. I shall only premise this, That where a man by an Oath, Vow, Covenant,
obliges himself unwarily to do many things, though afterward he finds that
two of these things are contradictory, and the contradiction of them
discharges his observance, yet he will stand bound to do the other thing
contained in that bond. An Oath may be unlawful in some part, and yet
Obligatory; unlawful as to some part, and yet obligatory as to other parts.
Dr. Sanderson de Jur. prom. prael. 3. sect. 5. Aq. 22. q. 89.
Aquinas of old, and Dr. Sanderson tell us, that in case a man has sworn to
things which he finds impossible to be performed, yet he is obliged, ad
faciendum quantum potest, to perform as much of it as he can. So that those who
would discharge people from the obligation of the Covenant, as to the
extirpation of Prelacy, must show us, that there is something in the Covenant
contradictory to that particular, or else they say nothing to our purpose. By
reason of other allegations the first taking of the Covenant might be
unlawful, but (being taken) as to this, it will be found obliging.

. 3. Both for this, and the other Branches of the Covenant, we must confess our
selves to have so much reverence for the Lords and Commons then assembled in
Parliament, for the Reverend Assembly of Divines, for the Parliament and Church
of Scotland, for all those Ministers, and judicious Christians in England, who
so freely took the Covenant, that we are not easy to believe, that an Oath
upon mature deliberation, could have been swallowed and imposed by them, guilty
of so palpable a fault, as contradicting it self in any thing. But as to this
particular (which is only our concern to examine) Those that plead this, must
produce another branch of the Covenant, obliging us to preserve and maintain,
or at least not to oppose the Government of the Church in England by Prelacy of
Archbishops, and Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, etc. which for
our part we cannot find, but believe there is no such thing (as not in the
letter of it, so neither) by any just consequence to be concluded.

. 4. Whereas Doctor Featly assigns this seeming contradiction, in that, the
first branch binds us to a Reformation of the Church according to the Word of
God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches. The second branch binds
us, to the Extirpation of Schism as well as Prelacy. And the third, to preserve
and defend his Majesty's Person and Authority, without any diminution of his
just Power and Greatness; and to preserve the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom. And then he tells us, that Bilson,
Downham, Armagh, and others (never answered by any) have proved Episcopacy to
be most conformable to the Word of God. 2. That Prelacy is a means, if not the
only means to extirpate Schism: And thirdly, That the Government of
Archbishops and Bishops, are comprised (with the Rights and Liberties of the
Church) both in Magna Charta, and in the Petition of Right, the two great
Records of English Liberties.

The answer to all this we think is very easy.

. 5. To the first; what the Doctor meant by answering Bilson, etc. we cannot
tell; all the world knows there have been many have called their Writings
Answers to them. However, Bilson's, and the others Arguments have been answered
many times over. Besides that, it is one thing to say Episcopacy (against which
the Covenant is not directed) is conformable to the Word of God: Another thing
to assert, that our English Prelacy was. If any will undertake to prove the
latter, The Government of the Church most conformable to the Word of God, or
direct us to any who has pretended to a Scriptural proof of it, we dare
undertake he shall be answered, or the Covenant (by all sober men) confessed
null and void. But this is an hard task.

. 6. Supposing Prelacy were a means to extirpate Schism (which good effect of
it we never yet saw) yet if it were an unlawful, or inexpedient mean, and
there were better might be used, and more agreeable to the Word of God, we
might as well swear against that means, and for the extirpation of Schism, as
against the Spanish Inquisition (if it were amongst us) which yet will knock
down Schism by as good Club-law as ever Prelacy did. As to our case now, the
advancing of it will certainly make as great a Schism as ever was in any
Church, and those judged Schismatics must live with it, or else the most
bloody persecution of innocent souls must follow, that ever any Christian
Nation knew. The asserting of Prelacy, as the only means (by the Doctor) is
not only gratis dictum, not proved at all, but most falsely said, witness the
Church of Scotland, which under Presbytery has had fewer Schisms than we in
England under Prelacy have had, or are like to have.

. 7. For the last allegation: It is true, we have sworn to defend his Majesty's
Rights, the Parliaments Privileges, and the Subjects Liberties. But,

1. Surely they must be judges (we mean the King and Parliament) both of their
own Rights, and Privileges, and also of our Liberties.

2. They have also power to disclaim their Rights, and give away our Liberties
(we being included in them.) And if they will please to give away, or part with
their own Rights and Privileges, and to disclaim for some of us, some
particular Liberties, and then impose an Oath upon us; for ought we know, we
are bound up by such Oath, nor is there any contradiction to be found here. Nor
can we find the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, either in Magna
Charta, or the Petition of Right, asserted as pieces of the Liberties of
England: Nor were they such Liberties. Certain it is, Dr. Layton, Dr. Bastwick,
Mr. Prin, and many others, had no reason to judge so, no more had any other
person indeed, witness the proceedings in the High Commission, and Starchamber,
their frequent Excommunications of persons for not paying a tithe Goose; See
the Oath prefixed to Dr. Wrens and to Dr. Montagnes Articles, etc.
not appearing at their Courts, their Oath ex officio (their Churchwardens
Oath, impossible to be kept by any that took it) with many other things. God be
merciful to the poor people of England, if these horrid things be
appurtenances to their Liberties: If these be the things they have petitioned
for, in their desires so often renewed for the confirmation of Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right. But let those who make this Plea, write out the
words of Magna Charta, etc. upon which they insist, when they tell us such
pretty stories as these, and then we shall shape a more particular answer to
that cavil.

CHAP. IX.
Whether the Error of any man's Conscience that took the Covenant, can discharge
him from the observance of it.

. 1. HAving thus far cleared the Covenant (as to the matter of it) from any
guilt of unlawfulness per se, either primario, or secundario; and showed, that
it is neither contrary to the holy Laws of God, nor yet to the good laws of any
community wherein we are involved, that it does not bring us under the guilt of
Schism, nor at all thwart any former Oaths, nor yet kill it self by any private
quarrel of any member or branch of it with this, which is the matter of our
debate: we must in the next place enquire whether it be not unlawful, ex
accedenti. Thus (says our Reverend Dr. Sanderson) an Oath may be, ex errore
personae jurantis, or ex effectu malo rei juratae; from the error of the person
swearing, or some ill effect of the thing sworn: Either as it is impeditiva
boni, an hindrance of some good, or occasionativa mali, occasioning some evil,
either temporal to our selves, or spiritual to another, giving him just cause
of stumbling and scandal.

. 2. Every reasonable Christian will understand, that it is possible that an
Oath, as to the first taking of it, might be unlawful, upon some of these
accounts, which yet being taken, ought to be kept. Thus the Reverend Dr.
Sanderson determines concerning Oaths taken, De Jur. prom. prael. 3. sect. 13,
14, 15.
exposing our selves to some great temporal damage (which the Psalmist also
determines, Psalm. 15.) or which expose us to great temptations, and concerning
Oaths taken, which give scandal and offense to others. It may possibly be that
in regard of some such things it might at first have been judged unlawful for
some to have taken such Oaths, but being taken (says he) they are obligatory,
and ought to be kept.

. 3. There are therefore only two questions can be made here: 1. Whether an
Oath obliges where the matter is accidentally unlawful (at least presumed to
be so) either from the error of the person swearing; or, 2. when it appears
an obstacle to some good.

. 4. As to the first; the case is this, Whether (supposing the matter of the
Covenant lawful) if any man's conscience told him when he took it, that it was
unlawful; or if it now tells him so, he be yet obliged in conscience to do
according to his Oath.

. 5. This case Dr. Sanderson thus determines. 1. He says, That the soul that
takes an Oath, concerning which he is, when he takes it, persuaded in his own
conscience that it is unlawful (though it be an error of his conscience so to
judge) sins grievously. 2. He tells us, Such an Oath does not oblige (his
erroneous persuasion still continuing.) 3. But in case he has taken the Oath,
and his conscience be afterward better informed, his Oath upon his better
information obliges: Because in every Oath there is an obliging virtue,
natural and inseparable, etc.

. 6. There is no doubt to be made of the first and third Branch of this
determination, from whence this follows: That suppose any did take the Covenant
at first contrary to the dictate of his conscience, yet if since he has seen
his conscience was at that time in an error, he is by virtue of his first
taking of it perpetually obliged to a just observance of it. The only thing in
question here is this; Whether supposing that any, when they first took the
Oath, Were under temptations of fear or profit, etc. and so took an Oath, which
their Consciences told them was unlawful, and they, bona side, think so still.
This error of their conscience (supposing the matter of the Covenant never so
lawful in it self) does not discharge them from any obligation to do
according to what they have sworn to the most high God.

. 7. Dr. Sanderson says it does discharge him, and that such an Oath does not
oblige him. The reason he gives is this: Because an Oath cannot take away a
former obligation, nor superinduce a contrary obligation, to any which was
before upon us. But who so by swearing opposes the dictate of his conscience,
crosses that same dictate, which was a former obligation upon him, which this
subsequent Oath could not remove. He therefore concludes concerning such an
Oath, quin ipsum potius invalidum sit, and vim obligandi amittit. The term
potius speaks to us, that the Reverend Dr. doubted himself, whether indeed the
error of conscience made void the Oath.

. 8. It is a very hard case, the hinge of the question is, How far the dictate
of an erroneous conscience does oblige. We know Divines say with Dr. Sanderson,
that it does always oblige, ad non faciendum contra, Amos. Casus l. 1. cap,
4.11.
to do nothing against it. So also Dr. Amos concerning things that are but
lawful, i.e. which may be done, or not be done, he gives this reason for it,
Because a man is not bound to do all that is lawful. But suppose the thing to
be necessary, i. e. such as Gods Word obliges a man to do; and a man's
erroneous conscience tells him, that he ought not to do it; or having done it,
his conscience tells him he ought not to persist. What shall he do in this
case? We doubt whether in this case he be discharged from the obligation of his
Oath, by the error of his conscience. And this is the case; For when a man
has sworn, the fulfilling of his Oath is a thing no longer free to him, but
necessary, in regard of the many precepts of God charging him, to take heed of
swearing falsely, of taking Gods name in vain, etc. and that under the highest
penalties. So that he manifestly sins if he does it not. Now it seems to us
very hard to assert, That a man's error of conscience (which is his sin) should
absolve him from sin, and discharge him of the obligation of his Oath. We
suppose upon second thoughts, no sober Divine will maintain it.

. 9. The truth is, The misery of an erroneous conscience is very great. If any
man has taken the Covenant, and his conscience now tells him, that he took an
Oath, which at that time was unlawful for him to take, and being taken, is
unlawful to be kept. If he does not keep it, he most undoubtedly sins
against God, whose Oath he has violated, and whose precepts he has disobeyed,
and contemned his threatenings against such as swear falsely; and yet the Oath
seems (...), to him unclean. So that if he does observe it, he sins against
the will of God (says Dr. Ames) though not materially, and truly, yet
formally, and interpretatively, because what a man's conscience dictateth to
him, it dictateth under the notion of Gods will concerning him, whether it be
so or no. So that he is under a necessity of sinning contracted by his own
fault, and upon supposition, that he retains this conscience, which he is bound
to acquit himself of.

. 10. We presume this is the case of very few in truth. If it be the case of
any, we are afraid, that at the Great day they will find their Oath obliging,
notwithstanding the error of their conscience. If any only pretend such a
thing to get quit of their Oath, Let not our soul enter into their secrets!
unto their Assemblies, Let not our honor be united!

CHAP X.
The Absolvers Plea against the Covenant as Impeditivum boni, false; and if
true, not conclusive, according to Casuists.

. 1. WE are now come to the last pretense for the unlawfulness of the
Covenant, as to the matter, from which some would infer the non-obligation of
it. Some late Absolvers, have confidently told the world, That none are bound
to the Observance of Oaths, further, than till they see, that their Observance
would hinder some good, which might accrue from the violation of them; which
being once laid down for a Principle, it is but telling their Proselytes, That
their persisting in endeavors to extirpate the Government of the Church by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends, Chancellours,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, will hinder the great good, settlement, order,
Communion with the Catholic Church, etc. and they have presently discharged
all men's Souls, as they think, from the Obligation of the Covenant.

. 2. It were no dangerous matter, we think, to grant their Principle, and to
challenge all of them, to instance in any one particular piece of good, which
the restoring of this Government, would put us in possession of, more than any
other Government would do.

Is it conformity to the Apostolical or Primitive Church? We challenge them all
to prove any such Form of Government, either in the Apostles times, or for some
hundred of years after. Is it conformity with the Reformed Churches? Are there
any Bishops in the Churches of God in Scotland, Holland, France? Are there any
Archbishops, or any single Persons challenging sole power in Ordination or
Jurisdiction in any other Reformed Church whatsoever? Are there any Deans,
Prebends, Chancellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, etc. to be found amongst
them? Indeed in the Popish Church there are, no where else, we think. Is the
good they talk of, order, suppression of Schism and error? Will not Presbytery
do the same, think we? If not, what hinders? Certainly with the help of the
civil powers it will; without it, Prelacy can do nothing.

. 3. If we may judge by what is past, we have no great reason to promise our
selves any such eminent Good by Prelacy. Under that Government it was, that so
many godly, learned and able Ministers, were silenced, suspended, imprisoned,
banished, so many thousands of godly people, forced to leave their Countries,
imprisoned, hunted from one place to another, they and their Families undone,
and all, because they could not allow humane impositions in the worship of that
God, who is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, who requires
to be sanctified of them that draw nigh unto him, Lev. 10.3. and has revealed
his wrath of old against the Jews, for doing or allowing that in his Sanctuary,
which he commanded not. This is the good, England has formerly had by them:
For Deans and Prebends, all the good they did, was to eat up the Fruits of the
Land, enjoying profits and great Revenues, for no considerable Service at all.

. 4. But it must not be granted, That our apprehending the observance of an
Oath, as hindering some good which might accrue by the violation, will discharge
us of our Obligation to observe it. Indeed Gregor. Sayrus resolves that every
private person has a power to commute an Oath, for something better; but
Sylvester, and others, Greg. Sayri clavis reg. l. 5. ca. 8. n. 15.
oppose him, and think the Pope must first determine the good to be better.
Soto, Sanches, Cajetan, Panormitane, Arragon, and others: do allow some cases,
wherein they say, an Oath hindering some other good, is void. But they are all
agreed in several limitations.

1. It must be a greater good which is hindered.

2. This greater good must be no otherwise attaineable, than by the violation
of the Oath: For if we can keep our Oath, and obtain the good too,
unquestionably we ought to do it.

3. That melius bonum, that greater good must be certain, not doubtful and
disputable, and only possible.

4. They all agree, That the Oath thus irritated and made void must be only
made to God. For say they, if it be made to our Brother also, for his advantage
(much more if it be a Covenant made with him upon a valuable consideration) his
consent is necessary to the commutation, before the Oath can be made void. Now
when our Absolvers shall have showed us a good certainly greater than the peace
of Conscience, which may be had from the keeping of a lawful Oath; and make it
appear to us, that this good can no other way be attained, than by breaking our
Covenant, and that if we break it, we may certainly be put into possession of
it, and lastly, that all the people of Scotland and England, mutually engaged
in this Covenant, have consented to the violation, they shall have said
something; and till that time, this Plea consists of nothing, but aerie,
non-significant words.

. 5. To return to our eminent Dr. Sanderson; He determines this case more like
a Divine, than some others, Thus; -- Juramentum non esse illicitum aut
obligandi vim amittere praecise ob hoc quod videatur esse impeditivum majoris
boni, De juram prom. prael. 3.. 12.
i. e. An Oath is not unlawful nor does it lose its obligatory virtue precisely
for this, because it seems an obstacle to a greater good, unless (says he)
other circumstances also concur (as usually there do) which either evince it
unlawful, or non-obliging. He gives this reason, because in all cases, it is
not true that every one is obliged to do what is best. So that our Brethren
must desert this Plea, and find out something else to prove the Oath unlawful or
non-obligatory. And indeed to grant that the Prospect of a greater Good to be
obtained by the violation of an Oath, would discharge us from its observance,
is to open such a gap for all manner of perjury, as all might creep out at; and
to take away all manner of security, which either God could have of his
Creatures, or man of his Brother, by any verbal obligation whatsoever. But we
have said enough to prove, that nothing has been said against the matter of
the Covenant, sufficient to prove it either unlawful, or void and not
obligatory.

CHAP. XI.
The Covenant cleared from any faults, as to the Efficient Causes, whether
external, or internal, sufficient to make it void, being once taken. The Plea
from the supposed unlawfulness of the Power imposing, if true, proved
insufficient.

. 1. HAving hitherto cleared the matter of the Oath which is upon us, from any
exceptions against it, pretending to evince it so far unlawful, that we having
taken it, are not obliged by it. We come in the next place, to consider it as
to the efficient Cause, to clear it from any exceptions made against it, upon
that account; following the Method of the aforementioned Reverend Professor,
Dr. Sanderson, who in his Book, de Juramento promissorii has ((...) at least)
acquitted himself to all Learned and Conscientious men, whatever he has done
in his latter Book, de obligatione Conscientiae (which we have not so well
weighed.)

. 2. There are several cases which the Dr. puts, relating to the efficient
cause of promissory Oaths, under which he comprehends both the external and
internal cause, the Agent and impulsive causes. As,

First, Whether, and how far, the Oaths of Children, Fools, and Madmen, or
such as are drunk, either with wine or passion, are lawful, and oblige (none of
which concern us in this Discourse.) There are only 2 or 3 cases under this
head to be spoken to, viz.

1. How far an Oath may be lawful or binding, taken as imposed by an unlawful
Authority.

2. How far the Oath of one who is under the power of another, is lawful or
obligatory.

3. How far an Oath is lawful or obligatory to which we are forced, or into
which we are frighted through fear of danger, in case we refuse it. For all
these things are improved to the height against the Covenant, by our
Absolvers. They tell us, it was imposed upon us by an unlawful Power; That we
were Subjects, and could not take it without the Kings consent lawfully, and he
dissenting, though we have taken it, it is null, and does not oblige us: That
the generality were forced to it; yea that his Sacred Majesty (who now is) was
frighted into the taking of it, by the Scottish force and threatening, and is
therefore discharged from any obligation to it. How truly this is spoken, and
how consonantly to the judgment of Dr. Sanderson, and all sober Casuists, let
us now enquire.

De juram prom. prael. 4.. 7.
. 3. As to the former part of the first case, whether it be unlawful to take an
Oath from an usurped power? Dr. Sanderson determines it affirmatively, because
it becomes not a pious and courageous Christian to make himself a slave; yet
the same Dr. allows it lawful, if we cannot avoid it without great danger,
provided that the Oath be otherwise lawful, and, that we do not show too much
forwardness in the doing of it, but do it with some testimony of reluctance.

. 4. But how fat this is applicable to the present case, we are not able to
determine. Lawyers must first resolve us, whether the Lords and Commons of
England assembled in Parliament, have not a power to make a new Oath, and
impose it upon people, unless the King first consent: When that point of Law
is determined, the Doctors determination may be applied to it, which will much
help the Covenanters in Conscience, if the case be in Law determined against
them.

. 5. The third Conclusion of Dr. Sanderson's determination in the case, is
sufficient to our purpose: Qui juramentum susceperit, a persona justam
authoritatem non habente, Dr. Sanderson. ibid.
delatum sed nulla alia ex part vitiosum omnino teneri ad implendum quod
juravit, i.e. He who has taken an Oath from one who had no authority to give
it, if the Oath be not otherwise faulty, is fully bound to perform what he has
sworn. So that our Absolvers may see they are beside their divinity, in
discharging men from the Obligation of the Covenant, because those who imposed
it, (as they pretend) had no lawful power to impose it, for supposing that, the
Oath being taken (says Dr. Sanderson) does oblige.

CHAP. XII.
The Absolvers Arguments from the present dissent of the King, who then was,
Argued. The Case stated and resolved. The Rules applied to the present Case.
The Argument from hence for the irritation of the Covenant, proved vain.

. 1. WE are now come to our Absolvers strong Forts, whatsoever they talk, that
the Covenant is Schismatical, that it was against the Laws of the Nation, they
know, and are convinced in their own Consciences, that there is nothing in
these Pleas, sufficient to discharge any Conscience, and therefore being
pursued, hither they run, as to their strong Castle: It was unlawful, being
given and taken without the Kings consent, and is therefore null and void. Or
else, 2. It was a forced Oath, extorted by fear, and such Oaths do not oblige;
this is the Doctrine they preach to their hearers. How true it is, let us now
enquire.

. 2. The foundation of any case here; whether an Oath taken by an Inferior, be
void or obliging, lies in that known place of Scripture, Numb. 30. And indeed
Oaths so strictly obliging by divine Institution, it is reasonable that the
irritation or obligation of them should also from thence be determined: and by
the Scripture, we freely will be tried, it being the proper Bar for judgment in
things of Conscience.

. 3. That Chapter begins thus; And Moses spoke unto the Heads of the Tribes,
concerning the Children of Israel. This is the thing which the Lord has
commanded. V. 2. If any man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind
himself in a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth. This is the general Rule, and Law of God
concerning Oaths. But God is pleased to reserve some Cases: The case of a woman
in her Fathers house, v. 3. The case of a woman who has an Husband living, v.
6, 7, 8, 11, 12.

. 4. Concerning these cases, God thus determines, that if the Father of such a
Daughter vowing or swearing, v. 5. Or the Husband of such a wife, v. 7. shall
hold his peace at her, v. 4, 7. then such vows shall stand. 2. But if the
Father of such a Child, or the Husband of such a Wife, shall disallow it in the
day he hears thereof, v. 5, 8. then not any of their vows shall stand, v. 4.
but shall be of none effect, v. 8. But v. 14. If the Husband altogether hold
his peace at his wife from day to day, then he establishes all her vows, or
all her bonds which are upon her, he confirms them, because he held his peace
at her, in the day that he heard them, v. 15. But if he shall any way make them
void, after that he has heard them, he shall bear her iniquity.

. 5. Divines do grant by Analogy, in respect of parity of reason, that the case
is the same concerning Subjects in some cases, as to the Oaths they take,
without the knowledge or praevious consent of their Superiors, though it be
observable, that although Moses at this time was speaking to the Heads of the
Tribes, concerning the Children of Israel, yet he omits this case, as having no
special Command from the Lord in it, and it will be granted that in many things
wherein the Magistrate has not power over his Subjects, the Husband has power
over his wife, and the Father over the Child.

. 6. That the words of this Text are not to be understood in their utmost
Latitude, is universally acknowledged by Casuists.

Aq. 22. e. q. 89. art. 9 Filiucias tract. 25. cap. 9. Azor. mor. inst. l. 11.
cap. 10. Sanches. l. 3. cap 9, 11. Ames cas. l. 4. cap. 22. qu 11. League
illleg. p. 10, 11.
. 1. The matter of the Vow must be such wherein the Law of God has subjected
us to the power of our Superiors. Thus Aquinas, Sanchez, Azorius, Filiucius,
Dr. Ames, Dr. Sanderson, and indeed all others agree. Dr. Featly discoursing
against the Covenant, says, that to fulfill the express Command of God, no man
doubts but that a Covenant may be made, not only without, but even against
the Command of a Prince. And indeed the reason is evident, because the dominion
of the Superior, is the reason of the discharge or the suspension of the
obligation of such Oaths: But says Dr. Sanderson, there is none so much under
the power of another, but as to some things he is sui juris, in his own power,
and not under his dominion.

. 2. The Superior when he hears of his Subjects Oaths in such matter, must
declare openly his dissent. For says the Text, if he holds his peace, De jur.
prom. prael. 4.. 6.
he has confirmed the Oath. To the ratification of an Interiors Oath, a
praecedaneous express consent is not necessary, but a tacit consent is
sufficient.

. 3. The Superior must declare his dissent presently. The Text says, in the
day that he heard thereof. If he has omitted it but one day, says the Doctor,
he has ratified the Oath. Qui sero^fe nolle significat putandus est aliquandiu
voluisse. The dissent must be not only palam, but statim.

. 4. It must be a constant dissent. For suppose an Inferior has sworn an Oath,
and his Superior hearing of it, says to him presently, you shall not do it:
and the next day, or at any time afterward, says, he shall, or gives him
leave to do it, the Inferiors Oath will from that day bind again; the reason of
this is here: Because the Superiors power does not extend so far as to cancel
the obligation of an Oath, but only to suspend it. De Jur. prom. pr. 3. Sect.
10.
Dr. Sanderson says excellently, That there is in every Oath, a natural and
inseparable obliging virtue, the operation of which may be hindered; but that
impediment being removed, the Bowl returns to its Byas, the Oath binds; and
this as naturally, as water runs in its channel, when the dam is thrown down
that hinders it, or a stone moves to its center, when the thing that stayed it,
is removed. God himself cannot make a thing that is, not to have bin: The Oath
having been made, has its natural and inseparable virtue, the operation of
which, in some cases indeed, the Superiors dissent may hinder; but cannot
deprive it of its obliging virtue: So that though at first he dissents, and so
stops the Oath from its present working upon the Conscience, yet he cannot
destroy the nature of it; and when his dissent is removed upon second thoughts,
the Oath obliges.

. 5. If once the Superior has consenied, either tacitly or expressly,
praecedaneously, or subsequently, he can never by his dissent again, either
discharge us from the Oath, or suspend the Obligation of it. Dr. Sand. 16.
prael. 7. sect. 6.
In this case, says Dr. Sanderson, it is a true Rule, Quod semel placuit,
amplius displicere non debet: The reason is, because Gods Word in this case,
declares the Oath established for ever. Dr. Sanderson says truly, That if the
Superior has either consented to the Oath before the taking of it, or at any
time after the taking of it, he can never afterward make it void, or take away
its Obligation. An Oath is not a thing to be jested with. Ludere cum sacris
prophanum est.

. 6. To apply this to the present case of the Covenant: Is it clear, that
people are under the power of Magistrates so far, as to the things of God, that
the Magistrates may set up what Government in the Church they please, and under
what Officers they please? Or has not Christ in the Gospel determined the
Substantials of Government, as to Officers, and Rules of Government? If the
latter be true, Dr. Featly says, none doubts, but people may covenant without
their Superiors, to fulfill the Laws of God. If there be no Law of God in the
case, why do our Brethren plead Episcopacy by divine right, and not tell the
Parliament that they may alter that Form if they please.

. 7. Secondly, We must profess our selves no Lawyers, but may it be taken for
an undoubted truth, That the Lords and Commons legally assembled in Parliament,
have no power to impose an Oath upon people (otherwise good and lawful) without
the King of Englands consent first had? If it be so, we freely submit, and have
nothing to say against it; but then it will only follow, that it was sinfully
imposed and taken: not, that it does not oblige. If it be not so, the want of
the Superiors consent is not to be pleaded in the case

. 8. Did his Sacred Majesty in the day that he heard thereof, presently and
openly declare his disallowance of it? If not, it is ratified for ever. We have
heard indeed, but never saw his Majesty's Proclamation against it: We are sure
that Printed with Dr. Featly's Book, relates not to it, but to a former Vow and
Covenant quite of another nature.

. 9. However it is certain, that his Sacred Majesty (if that Book called (...),
be his, which we think none in their wits doubt) after it was taken, declares,
That good men should least offend God and him in keeping of it. Though inded
his Sacred Majesty liked not to impose it upon those of his Subjects, who might
in Conscience scruple it, yet he certainly ratifies the obligation of the Oath
in Conscience to those that had taken it. He was not willing (by making his
Peoples Oath void) according to Numb. 30.25. to bear their iniquity.

CHAP. XIII.
Where the Absolvers Plea from the force attending the Covenant, is considered,
and proved vain. Oaths extorted by fear, do oblige in Conscience, proved from
Scripture, Reason, the Opinions of Dr. Sanderson, Aquinas, Azorius, and all
sober Casuists, for their Obligation.

. 1. WE are told in the next place, that the Covenant was forced and extorted
by penalties, and that not only from Ministers, and Fellows of Colleges, and
from the vulgar people; but even from his Sacred Majesty: and therefore it is
null and void, and no Obligation can arise from it, it being against reason,
that from a wrong, any should raise up to themselves a right, any more than a
mere passivity in a rape, can oblige her that is so forced, to marry him who
has so abused her.

. 2. As to his Sacred Majesty, how truly any say this, we cannot tell, neither
knowing whether his Majesty did indeed take the Covenant in Holland, before he
came under the Scottish power; nor how he was treated in Scotland. If when his
Majesty came into Scotland, the Covenant were by them imposed upon his Majesty,
(he having not in Holland promised to take it.) Or (supposing that) if the
Scots used any rough and disloyal Arguments to fright his Majesty into the
taking of it (though indeed our Allegiance and reverence for his Majesty,
constrains us to think, that (according to Dr. Sanderson's determination of the
duty of a good and valiant man in such cases) no fear could ever have wrought
upon his Majesty, so far as to have engaged him in any thing, which his
Conscience told him was sinful and unlawful) yet the Scots are not to be
excused in point of Loyalty and good manners, to their Sovereign. For many in
England, there is no doubt but many Ministers and people (though not all, nor
the major part engaging) took it in such a fright. But we will at present
suppose all, viz. That both his Majesty and many of the people took it, as
being feared to it. The Question still is, whether such Oaths once taken
(however sinfully offered and imposed) do not oblige those who took them, to a
just performance.

. 3. Divines in this case do distinguish, betwixt simple promises, and Oaths,
betwixt natural and divine Law, and Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, and betwixt
metus levis and gravis, a light fear and fright, and a solid and weighty case
of fear, as where a man is threatened with the loss of his life, etc. in case he
take not the imposed Oath, Hence (says Baldwin) it is that Divines and
Civilians differently determine the case with respect to the difference of
Natural and Divine Law, Bald win cas. l. 2. c. 9. cas 12.
and that which is purely Civil and Ecclesiastical. And Divines here speak to
many cases; As that of a promise or an Oath made to a Thief upon the Road, when
for fear of a man's life, he promises the Thief a Sum of money. Whether he that
is imprisoned justly or unjustly, and goes out upon his Parol, swearing to
return, be bound by his Oath to do it, though his return shall certainly, or
may probably cost him his life, etc.

. 4. Divines also do here distinguish, betwixt such Oaths, if imposed by Lawful
Powers, and if administered by Usurpers. Sanchez says it is no question but such
Oaths do oblige, Sanches l. 3. cap. 9.
if the powers imposing have a just authority over us; and we suppose none will
deny this, for there are very few Oaths imposed by lawful Magistrates, upon
people, but policy directs them to annex a penalty in case of refusal, which as
it is more or less, ingendreth a lesser or greater degree of fear: And indeed
to deny this, were to take away all possibility of Magistrates securing
themselves by the Oaths of their Subjects: For it were no more, but for the
Subject to say he swear his Allegiance out of fear, and according to such new
divinity, he has absolved himself. So that (although the Scots had no power to
impose any such Oath upon their Sovereign under a penal fright, unless he had
first given them that power) yet as to all the People of England, in case the
Lords and Commons of England, legally assembled in Parliament, have any such
privilege to impose an Oath upon the people, although the King does not
consent; we say (which we profess our selves not to know) in case they have any
such lawful power, the Argument from force signifies nothing at all in the
case.

. 5. But allowing our Absolvers all advantage possible, supposing that the
Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England legally, have no such
power, but did injuriously impose it: The Question is, whether it being taken
at this disadvantage, does not yet oblige all that took it, to a just and
religious observation of it? To which we say;

. 6. The Third Commandment says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in
vain. This Commandment is further interpreted by diverse Scriptures, You shall
not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of the Lord
thy God, Lev. 19.12. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind
his soul with a Bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that has proceeded out of his mouth, Numb. 30.2. It was said of old time, thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thy Oaths, Mat.
5.33. And as to the penalty; I will be a swift witness against the Sorcerers,
and against the Adulterers, and against the False swearers, Mal. 3.5. And
again, The Curse of God shall enter into the house of him that swears falsely
by the Lords name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall
consume it with the timber thereof, and with the stones thereof, Zech. 5.3. It
is the observation of Filiucius, that the Precept is negative, and therefore no
pretense of force can discharge us from our obedience to it: Not to dispute the
force of his Argumentation, It is plain from those Texts, that every man is
severely obliged to perform his Oaths; and the express obligation of an Oath
appearing from Divine Institution, so highly onerosa, (as the Casuists speak)
loading the Soul with curses that neglects it. It cannot but to every sober
Christian appear, highly reasonable, that before we conclude, That Oaths
extorted by fear, are not obligatory, we should find either from Scriptural
Precepts or Presidents, a plain discharge from the obligation of them: Which we
think will be very hard to find.

. 7. Yet, if we mistake not, we shall find some Scriptural Instances, which
appear to us strong evidences to the contrary: We shall instance but in two:
That concerning the Spies sent by Joshua to Jericho, whose story we read Josh.
2. and 5. and that of Zedekiah, which we have recorded, 2 Kings 24. Ezekiel. 17,
etc.

. 8. As to the former we read, Josh. 2. That he sent two men to spy out
Jericho: The King of Jericho by some of his Ministers of State, gains
intelligence, that they were come, and to what end they were come, and that
they were lodged at the house of Rahab; he sends Messengers to Rahab, to
deliver them, she acknowledges that such were come, but says they were gone
again, (while in the mean time they were hidden in the top of her house) she
comes to them before they went to bed; and v. 12. requires of them to swear
unto her by the Lord, that as she had showed kindness unto them, so that when
they had conquered Jericho, they would save alive her Father and her Mother,
and her Brethren and her Sisters, and all that they had: They swear
accordingly. In the 6th of Joshua, you read that Jericho was taken by the
Israelites: V. 22. Joshua commands these Spies to go into the Harlots house,
and to bring out the woman and all that she had as they swear unto her. If
Joshua and the rest of the Israelites had been of the Religion of our late
Absolvers, how much might they have pleaded in discharge of this Oath?

1. As to the matter of it, there is an appearance of unlawfulness in it,
because of the Command of God to destroy the Canaanites, and not to pity or
spare them.

2. It was made without Joshua's advice.

3. It was imposed by an unlawful power.

4. The men could not but fear, that if they had refused, Rahab might have
discovered them, which had she done, they must unquestionably have died. But
that age it seems was not so cunning to quit themselves of Oaths. It is the
probable opinion of Magalianus, that the Precept of God for destroying the
Canaanites, was with an exception, to such of them as should express signal
kindness to the Israelites. And for other things they were to learn that an
Oath taken (otherwise lawful) was discharged by any such pretenses.

. 9. The second Instance is that of Zedekiah: The story is this; Zedekiah was a
third Son of Josiah. The Scripture mentions three Sons of that good King;
Jehoahaz (who succeeded Josiah immediately) Jehoiachim and Zedekiah, called by
his Father Mattaniah; Jehoahaz having reigned wickedly three months, was
overcome, and carried into captivity by Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt, where he
died (for ought we know) childless, 2 Kings 23.32, 33, 34.

The King of Egypt sets up in his stead Eliakim, a second Son of Josiah, and
turns his Name to Jehoiachim: he reigns 11 years. In his days
Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon conquers his Land; He dies also, and leaves
only one Son (mentioned in Scripture) Jehoiachin, called by the Prophet Jeremy
also Jeconiah (and so ordinarily by the 70 Interpreters) Jeremiah also in
contempt, calls him Coniah. (Domini nomen a Regis nomine avulsum fuit, says
Hierom.) This man died childless, according to that, Jer. 32.30. Write this man
childlesse. Where and when he dyed, the Scripture speaks not: probably he
died a prisoner in Babylon, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. The King of Babylon makes Mattaniah
(a third Son of Josiah, brother by Father and Mothers side to Jehoahaz (they
were both the sons of Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah, 2 Kings
23.31. chapter 24.18.) King in his stead. He took an Oath of Zedekiah by God, 2 Chronicles. 36.13. That this Oath was extorted by fear is past denial. Zedekiah was
of the Kings seed, Ezekiel. 17.13. Son of Josiah, Brother to Jehoahaz, Uncle to
Jehoiachin or Jechoniah. There appears naught to the contrary, but that he was
the right heir to the Crown. Jehoahaz, and Jehoiachim being dead (and probably
Jeconiah dead too) sure we are he had a right to his liberty: He could neither
have this Crown, nor yet his Liberty without taking this Oath to the Usurper
the King of Babylon: he must else have always lived a slave to a Pagan Prince,
and have been in daily danger of his life, and the more, as the refusing such
an Oath, would have rendered him to the King of Babylon as suspicious, for
hatching some design* for the recovery of his own, and his Countries Liberty.
He takes it. And it is very like that he had some about him of the complexion of
our late Casuists, who might tell him, it was an Oath against the Laws of
Israel, imposed by an Usurper, forced upon him as a Prisoner, and therefore did
not oblige. What ever the motive was, he brake it, and Ezech. 17.15. sent
Ambassadors into Egypt to give him horses, and much people. But observe how God
takes this, whether he also concurred, that Zedekiahs Oath and Covenant was
null and void. God declares his sense of it by the Prophet Ezech. chap. 17.
under the Parable of two Eagles and a Vine, from v. 1. to v. 11. he expounds
this Parable, ver. 11. and sequent. Say now to the Rebellious house, etc.

V. 12. Behold the King of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and has taken the
King thereof, and the Princes thereof, and led them with him into Babylon.

V. 13. And has taken of the Kings seed and made a Covenant with him, and has
taken an Oath of him, he has taken also the mighty of the Land.

V. 14. That the Kingdom might be base: that it might not lift up it self, but
that by keeping of his Covenant it might stand.

V. 15. But he rebelled against him, sending Ambassadors into Egypt, that they
might give him chariots and horses, etc. Might he not do so (notwithstanding
his Oath?) According to our new Casuists the Oath was null and void, Zedekiah
was a prisoner, the Jews in captivity, Zedekiah had never sworn to be tributary
to the King of Babylon surely, if it had not been to recover his rights, if he
had not been afraid of death, or imprisonment, or perpetual exile, certainly he
could not offend God in violating such a forced Oath. But it seems the thoughts
of God were otherwise; for the Prophet goes on: Shall he prosper? shall he
escape that does such things? or shall he break the Covenant, and be delivered?

V. 16. As I live says the Lord God, surely in the place where the King
lives, that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and whose Covenant he
brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall dye.

V. 18. Seeing he despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant, when lo he had
given his hand, and done all these things, he shall not escape.

V. 19. Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live surely, mine Oath that he
has despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense
upon his head.

Is it possible now that any owning the name of Divines, and Interpreters of
Scriptures, should tell us, that Oaths extorted by fear do not oblige?

. 10. Nor have our Absolvers any better encouragement from the suffrage of
Divines in the case, whether they be Ancient or Modern, Papists or Protestants.
Azorius tells us, it is Communis sententia, the common sense of Divines, that
Oaths so extorted do bind in conscience: Sanches says, that Quidam antiqui,
some old Divines did think they do not oblige, but who they are, we cannot
find. Aq. 21 ae. q. 89. art. 7. resp. ad 3.
Sure we are, that Aquinas, Sayrus, Azorius, Filiucius, Sanches, Al. Hales,
Bonaventure, Richardus, Gabriel, John Bacon, Panormitan, Durandus, Scotus,
Estius, Soto, Cajetan, Navarrus, Suarez, Valentia, Layman, Antoninus, Dr. Ames,
Dr. Sanderson, Baldwin, etc. all determine, that such Oaths do oblige. Some of
them indeed dispute, whether the violation of such Oaths be a mortal sin, or
only venial; whether they bind in foro Ecclesiastico, or no (according to Civil
and Canon Law) whether the Pope can absolve in the case or no; but that such
Oaths bind in the Court of Conscience, we find none doubting. There is indeed
in the Canon Law a case of a Bishop mentioned, from whom Count Arnulph took
some goods belonging to his Church, and made to swear, that he would never
endeavor the restoring of them. The Bishops case was brought before the Pope,
he determines the Bishops Oath void, and discharges him by a formal
absolution. It is true, that Bassianus, and some others conclude, that the Pope
determined the Oath void (in foro Ecclesiastico) because of the force he was
under. But the Glossator upon the Canon Law, and so Sanches and others,
determine better, that the reason why their Holy Father determined the Bishops
Oath void, was not because of the force (under which the Bishop was) but
because the matter of the Oath was unlawful, he might not alienate the
Churches goods, he being but a termer in them. And it seems that the Pope
himself judged his case such, that he stood in need of his Absolution.

. 11. But to leave the Authorities of men, which we must confess signify very
little to us in such a case as this is (the obligation of an Oath resulting
from divine institution.) Let us inquire what may be said in reason, either
for, or against the Obligation of such Oaths. We never read, or heard, nor are
able to fancy more than two reasons in the case.

1. Because, what one does under a force, he does not freely and spontaneously.

2. Because, he who by threatening forces us to swear to his pleasure, does us
an injury, and it is against all reason, that any should from a wrong, raise up
to himself a right. Both which reasons have been considered by the Schoolmen
and Casuists, and determined insufficient. Sanches tells us, Sanches l. 3. cap.
11. Filiucius mor. qu. tract. cap. 6. Suarez De Jur. l. 2. cap. 7.
that Spontaneitas non est necessaria ad obligationem Juramenti. Spontaneity is
not necessary to make an Oath obliging, and Filiucius tells us, coacta voluntas
est voluntas; A will compelled is a will still: Aliquis timoratus potest velle
jurare, says Suarez; one under a fear may will an act of swearing.

. 12. And for the latter reason, it is determined of no value; because the
injury done us by men, cannot discharge the obligation resulting from an oath
unto God. Dous jusjurandum sibi delatum non extorquet (says Azorius) God does
no man injury by forcing him, and hence they determine, Azor. inst. mor, l. 1.
c. 11 q. 14.
That a naked promise made upon a force does not oblige, because that is only
made to men, and no obligation to God resulteth from it, but an Oath does.
Though we must confess, rather to agree with Azorius, who says such promises
do bind, jure naturali and divino, by a natural and divine right, but not by
Ecclesiastical and Canon Law. But for Oaths in such cases, they generally agree
them obligatory: And hence Filiucius and others tell us, Filiucius u^sup.
That an Oath added to a Promise so forced from us, is not confirmative of an
obligation, but introductive of an obligation. They consider a promise two
ways.

1. As it contains an assertion or proposition relating to matter of fact to be
after done by us.

2. In its proper form, as it is our engagement to our Brother, tending to his
advantage: The Oath added to a promise forced from us, they say does not
confirm the promise in its proper form, not oblige us to do the thing, as the
doing of it is advantageous to our brother; but it obliges us to make good the
assertion or proposition.

. 13. The truth is, art Oath obliges by virtue of Gods Law, and the same Law
of God must provide exceptions to discharge the obligation of it. The Word of
God no where says, that the injury done us by our neighbor, or the want of
perfect liberty when we do the Act, shall discharge us from the performance of
it. We shall further offer several reasons against this novel Divinity
concerning the nullity of forced Oaths: Seven or eight we shall instance in,
most of which have been pleaded by Divines, and we shall give them their honor
as we mention them.

. 14. First in all Reason, an Oath into which a man is cheated, is less
obligatory than one by fear extorted. Sanches gives the reason, quia dolus
aufert consensum, a man in such a case cannot be said to have consented; but
that such an oath is obligatory, is plain from the instance of the Gibeonites,
upon which we have the Judgment of all the Princes of the Congregation, Jos.
2.19. (when the cheat was discovered) delivered in these words, We have sworn
unto them by the Lord, therefore we may not touch them, because of the Oath
which we swear unto them: God himself resolves this case, 2 Samuel 21.1.
punishing all Israel first with three years Famine, for the violation of their
Fathers Oath, and then Saul eminently, in the Sacrifice of ten of his Sons to
appease Gods wrath for the violation of that Oath. Ergo, Oaths extorted by fear
much more oblige.

. 15. Secondly, The injuries and infirmities of men cannot discharge any
obligation upon us unto God. But fear concludes only, the injury and infirmity
of men. We find the Schoolmen and Casuists generally agreeing in this.

That from every promisory Oath, there results a double Obligation. The one to
men whom the promise concerns; the other to God, whose Sacred Name is
invoked. Aquinas, Sanches, Azorius, Sayrus, Filiucius, all agree in this, and
most of them use it as an Argument to prove the Obligation of such Oaths. Men's
injury in forcing us, may diminish the Obligation to them, but it cannot acquit
us from our debt to God.

. 16. Thirdly, Every Oath which is licitum and possibile (lawful and possible)
does oblige, but fear does not make an Oath either materially unlawful or
impossible: Baldwin, Dr. Sanderson, with many others urge this Argument.

. 17. Every Oath to which a man consents (if otherwise lawful) is
(notwithstanding any pretense of fear) obliging; Baldwin and Dr. Sanderson both
urge this: The latter urges well, that the person so swearing, has his
choice, whether he will swear, or suffer the penalty like to be inflicted upon
him for refusing the Oath; the will cannot be forced: He that thus swears
(says Dr. Sanderson) chooses what at that time appeared best to him, and is
therefore bound by it: Gregorius Sayrus agrees in the same reason.

. 18. Fifthly, Because an Oath (notwithstanding any circumstance of force) may
be kept without any hazard to a man's Salvation. This Argument is urged by
Filiucius, the Glossator upon the Canon Law. It seems it was a Rule in Divinity
in former times (however forgotten now) That every Oath which any man had made,
and could keep without the hazard of his eternal salvation, he was obliged to
keep: In this Rule also agree Sanchez, Suarez, Molina, etc.

. 19. Sixthly, Because the performance of a Promise ratified by such an Oath,
is a virtuous action, supposing the matter of the promise lawful, though it be
not necessary, yet when we have promised it, the performance becomes actus
virtutis, for no act individuo is indifferent, whatever it may be in specie.
Sanches says truly, that it is not necessary to make an Oath oblige, that the
matter be necessary: it is enough if it be free and indifferent, and if no
more, yet an Oath makes it necessary as to us, and a Promise in such a matter,
says Cajetan (whose Argument this is, is a virtuous Act, and such must the
fulfilling of it be.

. 20. Seventhly, A multiplication of ineffectual causes, though it implies an
addition to their number, yet it adds nothing to their weight, says Filiucius.
Here are two causes in the present case, which may be pretended, why such Oaths
should not oblige. 1. The Injury. 2. The Fear. Both these are inoperative and
ineffectual singly; 1. Fear alone will not nullisie an Oath (as we said before)
an Oath into which a lawful power does fright his Subjects by penalties is yet
obligatory, and granted so by all. 2. The injury of an usurped power, will not
do it, without fear. Casuists agree, that Oaths (otherwise lawful) imposed by
unlawful powers (if once taken) do oblige. Now it is against reason, that these
two ineffectual causes should jointly do what it is granted, that they cannot
singly and apart: This is Filiucius his Argument.

. 21. Eighthly, Justice requires, that a condition (lawful to be performed by
me) should be made good to another, De Jur. prom. prael 4 Sect. 15.
when I have obtained the end, for which I so engaged. Dr. Sanderson speaks
like a Divine in this case; Every conditional Covenant, the condition being
fulfilled, obliges: Whence both he and others conclude, that if any man has
sworn to a Thief, that upon consideration that he shall spare his life, he will
pay to him such or such a sum of money, he is bound to pay it.

. 22. Ninthly (says Dr. Sanderson) We ought always to suspect our carnal
wisdom and reason, as contrary to purity of heart, and peace of Conscience. But
what can be called wisdom of the flesh, if this be not, to oppose our own
reason without any warrant of Scripture, to the express and severe Letter of
Scripture, concerning the Obligation of Oaths.

. 23. Lastly (says Dr. Sanderson) which is also observed by Baldwin in the
case, The Heathens stand upon Record commended to posterity, for the not
violating such Oaths: Amongst whom is Regulus (so highly as we remember,
commended by Augustine) and Pompnius the Tribune, honored by Tully, who yet
elsewhere seems to be of a different mind to Divines in this Case.

. 24. Upon these and the like Reasons, we (with the generality of Divines of
all sorts, and in all ages) conclude against the Sciolists and Novellists in
Divinity, of this present age, That Oaths extorted by fear, are (if otherwise
lawful, notwithstanding such frights, or pretended force) obligatory.

. 25. In which Conclusion Divines are so highly agreed, that they not only
determine, the Traveller bound to pay the sum of money, which he has sworn to
pay to a Thief, for the sparing of his life; but also That he who is justly
imprisoned, and in danger, yea, certain to lose his life (if he return to his
Keepers hands, having sealed his Parol with his Oath, that he might have a
liberty of breathing in the open Air) is bound in Conscience to return: Yea,
the most (though Vasquez, Corruvias, and some others dissent) determine him so
bound, though he be unjustly and unlawfully imprisoned.

. 26. We shall only add this; That if this new Divinity be allowed in the
world, that Oaths to which one is frighted, do not oblige; the widest
flood-gate imaginable will be set open to Perjury. It is but for any Subject to
say, he was (by the penalty annexed) frighted into the taking of his Oaths of
Allegiance and Obedience to his Superiors, and he will be discharged. But
enough for such a piece of licentious Doctrine, not fit to ba mentioned amongst
Christians.

CHAP. XIV.
The Absolvers Plea, from the pretended sinfulness of the End of the Covenant
examined, whether the deformity of the end of an Oath can make it not
Obligatory: The contrary proved. The Absolvers Plea from hence Atheological and
vain.

. 1. HAving thus far patiently heard the Clamours of our new Casuists, against
the Obligatory virtue of the Covenant, because of the supposed Failers, as to
the material and efficient causes of it, whether more external or internal. We
should in the next place, examine it as to the formal cause: Under which Head,
Casuists examine, whether those Oaths be Lawful or Obligatory, where no words
are used, or where men swear, not by the Living God, but by some Creatures, how
far the intention of him that swears is necessary? and discourse concerning
equivocations and mental reservations, with many others. But we do not find any
of them snarling at the Covenant upon any of these accounts, though we believe
too many of them had mentem injuratam. There Is only one case more relating to
the Causes of the Covenant, which needs be spoken to.

. 2. A great Absolver much improves a Fancy (in order to the irritation of the
Covenant) that the design of it was only to engage the Scots with the
Parliament; and the End of the Covenant being merely Politic and Unlawful, the
Covenant must needs also be void and null.

. 3. His Sacred Majesty, who had as much reason as any other to judge
uncharitably of the end in imposing, and taking that Covenant, yet was more
charitable: He (as we said before) professes himself to have so much Charity,
as to believe, that many good men's Intentions in taking that Covenant, was to
preserve Religion in purity, and the Kingdoms in peace.

. 4. But (for once) suppose that the End of the Covenant had some obliquity in
it, it is worthy the enquiring where our modern Casuists learned this Divinity,
that the obliquity or unlawfulness of the end of an Oath did render it (once
taken) void and not obliging; I am sure, De Jur. prom.. prael. 6. Sect. 14.
Bald. casus, l. 2. c. 9.
not of Dr. Sanderson, he teaches them the quite contrary. Baldwin would have
learned them to distinguish betwixt the unlawfulness of an Act, and the
lawfulness of the good might result from it: He would have told them, That if
an Adulterer had sworn, that if he should have a Child by an Adulteress, he
would then do some high Service for God, he is bound (having that child) to do
the good Service. If a Prince swears a Service to God, if he returns safe from
an unlawful War; he is bound by his Oath (returning safe) to do what he has
sworn. It is true, we may not do evil that good may come of it; but we are yet
to learn, that when an evil is done, we may not embrace, and do the good which
should come of it. A Failer in the end makes an Action unlawful or sinful to
him that does it, Sanches Op. mor. l. 3. cap. 9. n. 28. Cajet. in 22 ae. q. 23.
Molina de justitia.
but surely it does not nullify an Action done. Sanches, Cajetan, Corruvias,
Molina, Soto, Arragon, etc. all agree, that a man is obliged to the performance
of an Oath at first made for a sinful end. Sanches allows no dispensation in
the case (nisi solutio sit iniqua) unless it be sinful to do the thing which we
have sworn to do, which is nothing to the present case. Patrato crimine
obligamur, is their joint Suffrage. Dr. Sanderson gives this excellent reason
for it, quia etsi pactum fuit illicitum, res pacta licet, the thing sworn to do
is lawful, though the pact were at first unlawful.

CHAP. XV.
Where it is proved, that the Bond of the Covenant cannot be suspended by any
Dispensation, altered by any Commutation, or dissolved by any Relaxation of
Parties.

. 1. WE have yet one case more to speak to, which we little thought would ever
have been a question amongst Scholars, who call themselves Protestants, viz.
Whether supposing the Covenant obliging hitherto, his Sacred Majesty, Quisquis
vendicat sibi jus dispensandi in juramento assumit sibi potestatem divinam, Dr.
Sanderson.
or the present and succeeding Parliaments, severally, or jointly, may not make
it void and not obliging, by their Act or Acts to that purpose? We most freely
and humbly give unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and to the Parliament of England,
what is theirs; but to give them a power of dissolving the Obligation of Vows
and Oaths, is to give them what only belongs to God, and which was never yet
challenged by them.

. 2. The Popish Casuists have found five or six ways to quit men of Oaths. 1.
By Dispensation from the Pope or Prelate. 2. By Commutation. 3. By the power of
the Superior, according to Number. 30.4. By the Cessation of the matter. 1. By the
Relaxation of the Party.

Our Brethren cannot but know, that the power challenged for the Pope (as
Christ's Vicar) to dispense with Oaths, or to order the Commutation of them, is
most justly exploded and abhorred by all Protestants, who generally judge Oaths
de jure naturali, and so not to be dispensed with, save only by him who is the
God of Nature. Besides, as Dr. Sanderson well urges, Dr. Sanderson De jur.
prom. Prael. 7 Sect. 3.
it is to destroy the end of all Oaths, viz. the security aimed at in them, by
them who impose them, and to take away another right, which he has acquired
with whom the Covenant is made, confirmed by the Oath, yea, and the Obligation
to God also which results from every Oath, (according to Aquinas and the
generality of Schoolmen, and Casuists in the Case) and to subject the
Conscience immediately to an humane Judicature. All which Reasons of Dr.
Sanderson will strictly hold against any such pretended power of dispensation
in the case of Oaths.

. 3. The Learned Doctor determines the same against any commuting of the matter
of Oaths, for some other thing, which we judge, or is revera better. Neutro
istorum modorum s^lvi potest juramenti vinculum, aut obligatio tolli (says
that Reverend Person) and he says right, that the whole Doctrine of commuting
Oaths, and the truth of it, depends upon their dispensability, and both
Doctrines are most notoriously false, and destroyed by the same Reasons.

. 4. How far a Superior has power to suspend the Obligation of an Oath, taken
by those under his power, and whose matter is subjected to his power, and how
this irritation must be circumstantiated, and how long it lasts, and how little
relief is for us from hence, we have showed before, and may therefore pass it
over in this place.

. 5. A Fourth way by which the Gordian knot of an Oath may be untied, according
to the Schoolmen, is by the Cessation of the matter; in which case, all
Casuists, Popish or Protestants, judge the Obligation to cease. The Oath of the
Soldier to his General, cease, when he is not General, etc. The reason is
evident, because the root of it is pulled up: But this is no way applicable in
our case.

. 6. There is therefore no dispute, save only de relaxatione partis: whether
the Parties in the Covenant, releasing the Bond of it, it may not be dissolved?
We perceive that some think, that if it shall please his Majesty and the
Parliament to release those who have taken the Covenant, from the observation
of it, there needs no further care about it: To determine this business,
betwixt our Brethren and us, De Jur. prom. prael. 7.. 8.
we will refer our selves to Dr. Sanderson, and but translate part of his
excellent determination in the case.

First, (Says he) There can be no such release in Vows; in Oaths confirming
humane Pacts, Covenants, and Bargains, there may. The reason of the difference
is, because Vows are made to God, as to one Party. Now we showed before, that
the Covenant as to the first and second Branch of it, did partake of the nature
of a Vow, it was sponsio facta Deo in rebus Dei, a Promise made to God, as well
as to men, in the things of God, relating immediately to his Worship and Glory.

Secondly, (says Dr. Sanderson) If the Oath taken be [ in gratiam alterius] i.
e. for the honor, profit, or commodity of another, or the giving an homage to
another, it does not oblige, unless that other to whom we swear, accepts and
confirms it.

Thirdly, (says he) If he or they to whom such Oath is made, for his or their
profit and advantage, will have it stand good, no third person can discharge us
from the obligation of it.

Fourthly, (says he) If the person to whom we swear will release us the Oath
does not oblige us after such Release.

Fifthly, (says he) The Oath is in such case only discharged so far as he does
release it.

Sixthly, (says he) The Release of any Party in an Oath, only takes away the
Obligation of it as to his particular Interest, but prejudiceth no third Person.

. 7. From the Grave Determinations of this Learned man, by a review of what we
have already said in our Second Chap. concerning the nature of the Covenant, it
is no hard thing to conclude, what Lamentable Divinity they publish, that tell
us, that it is in the power of any man or men, to discharge us from the
Obligation of the Oath of God which is upon us.

1. The Oath confirming the Covenant, did not only confirm a Contract made with
King and Parliament, and with the Nation of Scotland, and our Brethren in
England, engaging with us, but it confirmed a Solemn Vow and Promise made to
God, in the things of God (for such certainly is the Government of his Church,
Reformation in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to his Word, etc.)
Now ab homine ea sola relaxari fas est, quae homini facta sunt, Dr. Sanderson
ibid. Prael. 7
(says Dr. Sanderson) Men can only release for themselves.

2. According to the Doctors sixth Determination; Supposing that God were not
interested as a Party, but the Covenant was a mere civil Pact between men and
men, yet all Parties must release, before the Relaxation can be good, as to the
whole Obligation. We have sworn to maintain the Kings Person, Honor and
Authority. 2. The Privileges of Parliament. If indeed his Majesty or the
Parliament shall please, in whole or in part, by any of their Acts to release
us, they may do it as to their own peculiar Concern and Interest: But we have
also in the Covenant sworn to the Nation of Scotland, and to our Brethren in
England, for their profit and advantage: and unquestionably our Brethren in
Scotlnnd, looked upon the Abolition of the English Hierarchy (as to its ancient
Form) as a thing highly tending to their advantage, and so did many in England,
both Ministers and People (who had woefully suffered under it) Now how a Release
should be good, unless from all persons and Parties concerned, we are yet to
learn. If any one say; What the Parliament of England or Scotland does, all the
People are bound up in. We Answer, Not as to releasing Obligations contracted
by Oaths. We presume our Brethren will not determine so in other cases, we have
sworn out the Popes Supremacy in England, we hope our Brethren will not say,
that an Act of Parliament, if (which God forbid) any such should hereafter be,
will discharge those that have taken that Oath, from the observance of it.

3. Concerning Dr. Sandersons 2, 3, and 4th. Determinations, there may be some
question: If a man swears to another for his advantage, we are apt to believe
the Oath binds in Conscience, though he to whom we swear, knows not of it, much
less apertly accepts and ratifies it. Suppose a man swears to breed up his
Child to Learning, or to a Trade, etc. we believe the Oath will bind, though
the Child does not like it, etc. There may also appear some doubt about the
power of him, to whom we swear, to release us in whole or in part, because as
we have said before, from every such Oath there resulteth a double Obligation;
1. To man. 2. To God. Now it does not seem reasonable, That man should
discharge Gods Debts. Dr. Sanderson (aware of this exception) answers, That in
a promise made, Dr. Sanderson ib. prael. 7.
merely far the advantage of another, and confirmed by an Oath, God is only
invoked, as a witness of the truth of our hearts in promising, and challenged
as a revenger, in case we violate our Faith so confirmed, but if the Party
releaseth us, our Faith is not violated, so that no injury is done to God in
it. We think this as much as can be said, whether sufficient or no, we will not
here enquire, this not at all concerning our case.

We conclude then, that as we can see no error in the Efficient, material,
formal or final causes of this Oath of God which is upon us, sufficient to
discharge us from the Obligation of it (considering things as they are now
stated, and that the Oath is taken) so we cannot believe it in the power of any
(save God alone) by dispensation, irritation, commutation, or relaxation, to
discharge us from an endeavor to perform it. The Compass of that term,
endeavor, remains yet to be measured by us, with a Reed from the Sanctuary,
and that shall be our last Task.

CHAP. XVI.
Concerning the Limitations of the Covenant, common to all Premissory Oaths, or
particularly relating to this. What endeavor as to the mattter of the
Covenant, is not required.

. 1. SUch is the Sovereign power of God over all, such the power which the
Divide Law has reserved to Superiors, such our own ignorance and infirmity (of
which yet in due time we may be convinced) and such the mutability of humane
affairs, that Divines reasonably say, that to all promissory Oaths, certain
conditions (though not expressed) are yet necessarily to be supposed, viz. Si
Deus voluerit, if God will (otherwise the performance will be impossible) 2. If
lawfully I may: Otherwise the Oath will be vinculum Iniquitatis, and make us
Debtors to Hell, 3. Saving the right of my Superior: For as we said before, God
has reserved to some Superiors, a power of irritation (or suspending rather)
such Obligations. 4. If things continue in their present state.

. 2. As the third must not be understood otherwise than we have before proved;
so the last must not be taken in its Latitude; For then (such are the
contingencies and vicissitudes of humane affairs) that very few promissory
Oaths relating to things to be done at any distance of time, would be found
obliging. It is true, if the state of the case be so altered, that it will be
sin for us to fulfill our Oaths, the Oath will not oblige, such is the instance
Casuists give of an Oath, to give a sword to one, who before he receives it
from us, proves mad. 2. And when the state of the case is so altered, that the
plain end of the Oath, and the expectation upon which it is founded, appears
frustrate (the Oath being only made to a Creature, for his or her advantage) it
may be a question, whether the Oath obliges yea or no? Such is that other Case
put by Casuists, Where one has sworn marriage to another, and before the time
of Marriage comes, he discerns she has been defiled by another (in which case
his refusal to marry, is little other, than a Bill of Divorce, allowed by Gods
Law in case of Adultery, as this is after such a Contract in Gods sight) But
none of these will at present gratify our Absolvers.

. 3. Some therefore have observed the express Limitations in the terms of the
Covenant: 1. We will endeavor, 2. In our Callings and Places. 3. So far as
lawfully we may. And God forbid the terms should have been any other. Far be it
from us to assert, that a man is tied by his Oath, beyond his endeavor, yea,
and lawful endeavor, and in his Calling too. We say that the utmost that any
conscientious Christian is by the Oath tied to, is, his utmost lawful endeavor
in his Calling, as a Parliament Man, as a Magistrate, as a Minister, as a
private person, according to his present capacity or future capacity, and if by
endeavoring, honestly and lawfully he cannot attain his end, it is his duty,
to sit down, and commit his soul and his cause to God, who doubtless will
accept the sincerity of his heart. Only we hope it will not be pleaded in Bar
to the lawfulness of endeavor in this case, that it is not lawful to endeavor
if the contrary shall by a Law be established: For it was never thought yet
unlawful, lawfully to endeavor the annulling, and regular repeal of a Law,
which was found grievous to the Subjects outward concern, much less to his
Conscience (as any Law must be after an Oath to the contrary, as to the matter
of the Law.) This being foreprized, our Brethren and we are agreed, as to this
Limitation. And we freely acknowledge ourselves obliged, either actively to do,
what Laws require, or like Christians, to suffer the penalties which they
inflict: Than which, nothing more was ever pleaded as the duty of good Subjects.

. 4. We do therefore conclude, professing, that we do believe it the duty of
every conscientious private Christian, who has taken the Covenant, when once
he has endeavored what in him lies, in all things (lawful to be done by him)
for the obtaining the ends of the Covenant, as to the Reformation of the
Church; If at last he should be so unhappy, as to see all his endeavors
frustrated, and (to put the case at the worst, which we hope will never be) he
should at last, see Popery set up ( i. e. the highest corruption in
Ecclesiastical Administrations) to sit down, and mourn before the Lord for it,
but not to make any resistance to the Lawful Magistrate, because he is the
Ordinance of God: We hope none would say in such a case, he were obliged to own
Popery, or that he might do it, but he is unquestionably bound to suffer as a
wel-doer, rather than to disturb the Civil Peace (What has Peter to do with
the Sword?) And if this be our sense of his duty in so high a case, every one
will conclude us (we hope) of that mind in case of the old Prelacy, which we
are told is the great Bar to Popery, whatever else is to be said against it.

CHAP. XVII.
Wherein is a sleighty notice taken of a Late Pamphlet, wrote by one Mr.
Russel, called, The Covenant discharged; and it is proved, that in stead of his
finding the Snare broken, as be says, he has but resolved to break the Bonds,
and to cast the Cords behind him.

. 1. WE had thought our work had been done, and sufficient Answer given, not
only to what our Absolvers had said, but also to what they reasonably could
say: But while these sheets were in the Press, we have seen a new Pamphlet;
Qualem proculdubio mundus literatus nunquam prius vidit, nec unquam posthac
visurus est. The Author has done well to tell us, it was wrote from his Study
at Chinkford in Essex, we should else have been so uncharitable, as to have
thought it had come from some other place; but he has neglected to tell us,
what Books are in that Study, for we cannot in any of our Studies, find any
wrote, either by Jews or Gentiles, Greeks or Barbarians, whose Divinity will
agree with the Authors Positions.

. 2. We do not think our selves beholden to the Author, for his promised
forbearance of Passion, for besides that, he now and then bestows upon us a
profane Scoff (according to the proportion of his faculty that way) as where
he tells us, that the Faith of removing and settling Mountains are two Gifts, the
latter of which we want, etc. In very deed the Author has consulted himself,
in not being too free with his passion, according to the Poets Caution, Carpere
vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. intending to publish such a piece as this to the
world, he stood concerned to take heed what measure he meted to others, least
it should be meted to him again, we think he is liable enough to have it even
pressed down and running over.

. 3. In diverse things we confess he has spoken truth: 1. As to himself, in
what he says, p. 57. intending to batter the Covenant, he has made his
approaches at a reasonable (indeed unreasonable) distance, such a distance,
that no shot has come near it. 2. As to the matter; as where he says, 1. That
none can release a Civil Contract, but the Parties with whom it is contracted:
That where an Oath is made to God, so that he is Judge and Party, only God can
absolve it, p. 14. And p. 15. He would not be thought to plead for a Papal
power in any, to discharge men from Oaths, etc. which would be enough for us,
who have already proved, that the Covenant was Sponsio facta Deo in rebus Dei,
a Vow made (though at the Command of others) to God, as to the things which
concern God; and giving unto God a right to exact the performance from us; as
also, That it was a mutual stipulation with our Brethren in Scotland and
England, with our King and Parliament, and according to Mr. Russel's own
Doctrine, if there were nothing of a Vow in it, yet all Parties must release:
So that what he says more, is to no purpose, because he argues ex ignoratione
Elenchi, and lamentably mistakes the nature of the thing of which he speaks.

. 4. But because though he seems to grant this, yet up and down his Book, he
scatters suggestions of another nature, and indeed maintains such Positions as
we are sure Dr. Gawden durst not justify, and runs into so abominable
mistakes, as if once believed by others, would make all Oaths no stronger than
strawes; we will add a few animadversions, upon what he says, entreating our
Brethren hereafter to bring forth other Champions, who may bring more credit to
the Church of England, than we conceive this Author in a capacity to do (if we
may guess at Leonem ex ungue.)

. 5. As to our Brother Crofton, whom he mentions in his Epistle, we conceive
him of age, and therefore shall only desire the Reader to take notice; 1. That
the Author can produce no Vote of Parliament in his terms, viz. That the Kings
Concessions were sufficient to establish a well-grounded Peace. The Vote passed
Die Martis, 5 Dec. 1648, in these terms:

Resolved upon the Question, That the Answers of the King, to the Propositions
of both Houses, are a GROUND, for the Houses to proceed upon, for the settling
the Peace of the Kingdom.

What is this to sufficient to establish? But suppose this Absolver had not
stumbled here, but the Vote had been as he would have it -- Why then (if you
will believe him) the same power that established the Covenant, tacitly
discharged it. For -- The continuation of Bishops was included (in those
Concessions we suppose.) This is again a most impudent falsehood. For the King
in terms granted as follows:

And we will likewise for three years confirm by Act of Parliament the Form of
Church Government you have presented to be used for the Churches of England and
Ireland, and Dominion of Wales. The Kings Concessions printed 1648. page 2.
Provided that his Majesty, and those of his Judgment, or any others who in
conscience cannot submit, etc. be not in the mean time obliged, etc. And that a
free consultation and debate be had with the Assembly of Divines at Westminster
in the mean time (twenty of his Majesty's nomination being added unto them)
whereby it may be determined by His Majesty, and his two Houses how the said
Church Government, and Form of public Worship after the said time may be
settled, or sooner, if differences be agreed. We wonder where Episcopacy was
here included? Sure we are, the Propositions sent were for the utter abolishing
of it. By this first Essay, the Reader may judge what to concluded M. Russel's
assertions, and to show that that Parliament never intended to annull the bond
of the Covenant. They no sooner met, anno 1659. but ordered it to be hung up
before their eyes in the Parliament House for a continual monitor to them. It
was urged by Mr. Prin, and doubtless highly prevailed, both with the
consciences of the members, and also of the friends of the Long Parliament, to
further the restoring of his Sacred Majesty, therefore surely it was not
annulled by that Parliament, 1648. in any men's understanding, but only
according to the peculiar intellect of this Absolver.

6. In the first Page of his Book we cannot but take notice, that though his
zeal appears high for the Religion of an Oath, it must not (he says) be
imposed without great Prudence, nor taken without great care, etc. nor handled
without great fear, etc. yet he has omitted one main thing, viz. this, Nor
violated without just warrant from Gods Word; Let that be put in, and we are so
far agreed.

. 7. In his second Page he seems to be wonderfully free, he will grant us (by
way of supposition) all but one point; he will suppose it to have been, 1.
Imposed by a lawful authority. 2. Not defective in Circumstances, 3. Clear from
Ambiguity. 4. Perfect in form. 5. Pious in the End. 6. Fair in the manner,
without fraud, violence, with deliberation, and consent. 7. As to the matter
lawful. Only he will not grant us, That it cannot be released by any humane act
or power. That it may not be said, This man has made us rich, we will yield
him all again, but the seventh, and if he will not give us that, we will buy it
of him, at a full price of Reason and Argument, (such as shall be current with
all divines) we will suppose that at first, it was not imposed by a lawful
authority. 2. That there was a defect in the Circumstances. 3. That as to some
parts there was Ambiguity. 4. That it was not perfect in the Form. 5. That the
End was not pious. 6. That there might be fraud or force, or too much haste in
the taking, or imposing it, and yet (what the Books in Chinkeford Study say we
cannot tell) our Divinity Books tell us, that an Oath taken (notwithstanding
all these) will oblige. As for what he hugs so fast that he will not grant it
us, though it were enough to tell him, all learned men that ever we heard of,
would; yet we will endeavor to unclasp his hands, and try if we can get it by
fair wrestling with this great Champion, being well assured, he will refuse
upon any fair ground to try a fall with us upon this issue, and that all
Divines, of judgment, will hiss at him that does it. But he tells us, Page 2.
That he will by sufficient arguments and testimonies prove that the same
specifical power, or an higher than that which imposed this Vow upon us, may
release us from the same either tacitly or expressly. When he has done that, he
must prove too that they have done it.

. 8. It Is Reason we should listen to this great undertaking, only we desire the
Reader to take notice, that himself, both here, and elsewhere calls it a Vow,
which according to all Divines is a solemn promise made to God in the things of
God. From such an obligation as this he undertakes to prove our discharge, and
yet as he tells us, p. 14. In those Oaths where God is judge and party there are
none that can release from the binding power but God alone; We would fain know
whether in a Vow God be not Judge and Party; and what Divines ever said
otherwise? Or to whom a Vow is made if not to God? And then let this Author
advise how to reconcile himself to himself, and he will be more likely to agree
with us.

. 9. The foundation of his Argumentation is, The power of men in some cases to
release the Bond of an Oath to their Neighbors. The truth of which we shall
declare in the words of Dr. Sanderson. Dr. Sanderson De Jur. prom. prael. 7. 7.
p. 229, 230.
Having first determined that none can discharge us from Vows. He tells us 2.
That if we swear for the good and advantage of our brother (merely.) viz. with
respect to his single honor, obedience, profit, etc. if he, to whom we swear,
(for such his sole profit, and advantage) will release us, we are discharged
from our Oath, and not bound in conscience to fulfill it: The Reason is,
because our Brother may yield us his right, and so we have paid the debt, which
done, we are not obliged. As for God; in an Oath made (praecise in favorem
alterius) merely for our Brothers advantage, God is only concerned as a witness
of our fidelity, and a revenger in case we be not faithful, but if our brother
has discharged us, we are not unfaithful, in not doing the thing, and so no
transgressors before God.

. 10. But although we have said this before, and now again to let our Absolver
know we have no such desire (as he suggests, p. 2.) to snare peoples
consciences, yet we do not think any thing of this is proved from the instance
of Abraham and his Servant, Genesis 24. which he makes the whole business of his
Book, how fitly will appear by giving the Reader a just view of the Text.

. 11. In the 24. of Genesis, Abraham calls the eldest Servant of his house, and
bids him put his hand under his thigh, and he would make him swear, That he
should not take a Wife for Isaac of the Daughters of the Canaanites, etc. But
v. 4. Thou shall go unto my Country, and to my Kindred, and take a Wife to my
Son Isaac. Ver. 5. And the Servant said unto him, peradventure the Woman will
not be willing to follow me unto this Land, must I needs bring thy Son again
unto the Land from which thou came? And Abraham said, beware that thou bring
not my Son thither again. v. 8. And if the Woman will not be willing to follow
thee, then thou shall be clear from my Oath, etc. After all this, v. 9. The
Servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his Master, and swear to him
concerning that matter. Here we have Abraham discovering to his Servant a
design he had to send him for a Wife for his Son, and for security of his
faithfulness, that he intended to put an Oath upon him, that he should not take
a Canaanite, but one of Abraham's Kindred. The Servant fearing the Oath of God,
desires before he swear, fully to know his sense, that he might not swear a
thing either impossible or unlawful, it might have been impossible to have
brought her without her consent, to be sure it had been unlawful (for two words
must go to make the lawfulness of such bargains,) Abraham tells him that in
that case (...) Thou shall be free from the Oath. i. e. My design is not to
engage thee in such a case, nor indeed could he engage him. After this the
Servant takes the Oath.

. 12. Now (Reader!) what do thou think this should prove? That which it
naturally proves is this; That an Oath does not oblige contrary to the declared
sense of the imposers before it is taken. But what is this to the thing in
question? It Is brought by this Casuist, to prove that Abraham had power to
discharge his Servant of his Oath when he had taken it; yea, and this is again,
and again, and again repeated, and made the foundation of all the discourse by
virtue of the Authors quodlibetical abilities, when as there is not a tittle in
the text looking this way, the passage being only an explication of the sense
of an Oath before it was taken; we cannot but believe, that either the Printer
or the Author has abused the World, in telling it, that such lamentable stuff
as this is, was attested by Dr. Gawden. We are ashamed to think what opinion
will by such scriblings as these be begot in the World, of the Church of
England? We shall need say no more we hope to any thing he urges upon this
foundation. He tells us, Jacob might have discharged Esau too of his Oath, nor
(though he has not proved it) will we deny it, it being only made to a man,
and for his advantage, which is nothing as to our case; he promised us more
examples, but p. he tells us he has none. Yet, p. 7. he has found out, such a
one as it is, and tells us (but take heed of believing him good Reader!) That
Mr. Crofton says, that we had our first president for the Covenant from the
Holy League; He that will read a little in Grimstons translation of the French
History, p. 823, 824. will quickly understand the nature of the Holy League.
And though this Gentleman betrayeth no such depth of Judgment, yet we know our
Brother Crofton is able to distinguish betwixt a League made by a pack of
Popish Nobles, not lawfully Convened, and that for the raising of a war against
their lawful Sovereign; and whoever else should oppose their ungodly designs.
And a Solemn Covenant made by the Lords and Commons legally assembled in
Parliament, for the reformation of Religion according to the Word of God, etc.
For his instance in Scotland, his question how the Scots came to be released,
needs no answer, till he has proved they were released at all.

13. In the next place, he argues from the abuse of the Covenant, here he tells
us of the abolishing the Brazen Serpent, the destruction of the Temple, etc.
when they were abused; he should have done well to have told us of the
abolishing of a Vow taken, because some that took it did not keep it, then he
had said something to the purpose; we shall not meddle with his quibling about
the unblest effects of the Covenant, we are sure that it has had some blessed
effects, and we are sure that his talk of abolishing the obligation of an Oath
lawful as to its matter, etc. is a parcel of unblest Divinity if it be good
sense.

. 14. For his next Argument, fetched from Eccl. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch,
etc. if he had understood that Scripture with the Context, he would have spared
that instance where Solomon (having instituted a Dialogue between his flesh and
spirit) brings in the flesh giving him that saving advice, we are yet to learn
how any can be Righteous overmuch. Solomon tells us there what his heart said
unto him in the days of his vanity, not what is our duty.

. 15. We see nothing more in his Tract till he comes to his notion, in which he
highly triumphs, That an Oath is no more than a Bond, where are parties, and
a witness. The taking of the Oath he says, p. 14. is a bringing of the trial
into Gods Court. Here he tells us, that in some Oaths God is a party, and a
Judge too. And from such Oaths he is so just as to tell us, none but God can
release us. But he will have the Covenant to be such an Oath where God is only
a Judge, (he forgot his being a witness too) not a party; (and it must be so
because he says so, for he adds not a word to prove it;) To omit his
impertinent discourse of Assertory Oaths, p. 15. (which is wild enough,) He
tells us, p. 16. That in promisory Oaths (such as he confesses the Covenant to
be) the Party sworn stands continually in Gods Court, and is upon continual
trial till he or they that put him upon trial are willing to withdraw, and so
he says we are at this time released from the bond of the Covenant. Question,
How does this appear? The same powers that imposed it are willing to put us
upon no further trial. p. 18. He distinguishes between making a Covenant
before God, and with God; and tells us there are but two ways now of making a
Covenant with God. 1. In the Sacraments. 2. By Vows. p. 19. He distinguishes
betwixt taking an Oath willingly; and taking it spontaneously, p. 19, 20. To
resolve the question, How the Parliament men, who have taken it, shall be
released? He wipes the Enquirers mouth with an Egg shell, telling us, That
every Parliament man has a private, as well as public capacity, and if the
Parliament repeal the Ordinance for the Covenant, it is then Void, and
Conscience is discharged, etc. To all which a short answer will serve the turn.

. 16. Casuists say, that an Oath is Lex privata, a private Law, which Creatures
lay upon themselves, or upon one another; The transgression of which is indeed
highly cognoscible before the Judge of the whole Earth, who in every Oath is
invoked, as a witness, and as a Judge and Revenger of our violation of our
faith. 2. In Oaths which are merely to assert truths, or confirm contracts
between man and man, wherein we make no bargain with God to do ought which
immediately concerns his worship and glory; God indeed is only invoked as a
swift witness, and as a severe judge, but is not a party, we only promise to
men for their advantage. 3. We deny the Covenant to be merely such, it was
partly a Vow, partly a Covenant, and that both with God and men, as we have
already showed, we do not understand what makes a Vow if it be not this, that
it is a promise to God, as to the things of God. When Abraham lifted up his
hands to the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth, that he would take
nothing from the King of Sodom, Genesis 14.22. We believe he made a Vow, and none
but God could release him, yet this was not purely in rebus Dei. We think they
have lost their common sense that say, those do not vow that solemnly lift up
their hands to God, promising an endeavor to fulfill his Commandments. 4. Nor
does it at all hinder, that the Parliament first commanded it, and then it was
taken, for on the Commanders part this still was a perfect Vow. 2. On the
peoples part it was still a Covenant with God, as well as with men; With God;
as to the things in it which concern Gods worship and glory immediately: With
men; as to other things, If the Command of the Parliament in a Critical notion,
hinder it (as to those commanded) from being strictly called a Vow, it yet
remains a Covenant with God confirmed by an Oath. There are examples enough in
Scripture of Magistrates commanding people to make and renew Covenants with
God, and of such spontaneous Covenants; so that it is false, that it was merely
an Oath before God, it was a Covenant with God. 5. It Is false that he says,
that a people can make a Covenant with God only two ways: 1. In the
Sacraments; 2. Spontaneously. They may be commanded by Magistrates to do it,
and do it in such obedience. Nor have any power when it is done to release them
as to what concerns God, Ez. 10.3.5. There is a president of such a Covenant
made with God at the command of Ezra. 6. It is true, we can do no action
unwillingly, but we may do something not freely and spontaneously; But suppose
we have once (whether spontaneously or no) made a Covenant with God, and
confirmed it by oath; we are bound by it, and God only can release it, for
there is a debt accruing to God. 7. The Parliament may indeed by rheir Act
hinder others, not engaged, from engaging, or at least forbear their obliging
men, yet free, to engage. But to say, that any Act of men can discharge the
debt already contracted to God is such Divinity as needs none to confute it.

. 17. We do therefore conclude, that this Theologaster has handled this
weighty subject weakly, and imperfectly enough (as he prophesied, p. 2.) if
nevertheless (we having now discovered his failings) any be provoked to handle
it, better and more like a divine, we shall be willing to hear what he says:
In the mean time we leave Mr. Russel to imitate the good example (as he calls
it) of that holy and learned Doctor, St. Augustine, viz. to retract, and
publish his retractations, least he have (at the Great Day) the guilt of more
souls sins to answer for than his own.

A Postscript to the ingenuous Reader.
REader, Least any should put a misinterpretation upon what we have said, we
have thought fit to let thee know, that we have not seen our Papers since the
third or fourth of October last, since which time (thou know) is come out
His Majesty's gracious Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs. In
reference to which we crave leave to add a few words, that thou may know,
that we are none of those who desire it may not pass into an Act, or think our
selves by the Covenant obliged to hinder so good a work.

The Covenant obliges us in our callings to endeavor a Reformation according
to the Word of God, etc. 2. To endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
i.e. The Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans,
Prebends, Chancellors, Commissaries. We suppose none dreams us to have
covenanted against names, but things, viz. exorbitances of power either
practiced by these men, or with which they were invested.

There were two things in point of Discipline, wherein, as to practice at
least, the Administration of Church Government here in England was heretofore
apparently against. Gods Word; a third, wherein it was against right reason.

1. The first was, That persons, not ordained, were trusted with the Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven, viz. Excommunication, etc. Such were Chancellours,
Commissaries, etc.

2. The second was, That Prelates arrogated a sole power to themselves, both in
Ordination, and in the Exercise of Jurisdiction.

3. That which was against Reason and Conscience was, that the Bishops charge
was such as an Angel from heaven could not have discharged with a good
conscience.

In matter of Worship, two things called for Reformation: 1. The frame of the
Lyturgie, against which there were sufficient exceptions. 2. The imposed
Ceremonies, those we mean which were mystical and Sacramental.

How far his most Excellent Majesty has taken care in these things is now
evident to all; and we are most humbly thankful to his Majesty, for his
endeavors in it, and to our Brethren, for their endeavors with his Majesty,
relating to it; what his Majesty has already done, is a great evidence to us,
that if hereafter it shall be made appear to His Majesty, that ought yet
remains to be farther done, in order to the fulfilling of the Ends of the
Covenant, He who (under these Circumstances) has freely and honorably done
this, will not be wanting to it, and we are not so hasty, as to think
Jerusalem can be built in a day. The God of Heaven requite into His Majesty's
bosom a thousand fold that love and tenderness to His People which He has in
this showed; and we are fully assured, that it will be no grief of heart to His
Majesty that He has thus far condescended.

As to the Common Prayer, we profess our selves not against a Lyturgy; and we
doubt not but His Majesty will appoint such persons to review our Lyturgie as
will agree in one, which shall not be liable to just exceptions; till that time
His Majesty grants a liberty.

But we can never be sufficiently thankful for the liberty His Majesty has
granted us, in reference to the Oath of Canonical Obedience, Subscription, and
the Ceremonies.

Though indeed, His Majesty has been pleased to deny something of this liberty
to Cathedralls, and to Colleges; yet we doubt not, but when His Majesty shall
truly understand, that the continuance of those Ceremonies in both those
places, makes the generality of sober and conscientious people never come at
Cathedral Churches, to attend the devotion which His Majesty has there
provided daily for them, and that were they abated, and, the Deans and Prebends
enjoined, in person, there to Expound Scripture, Preach, or Catechize, or read
Divinity Lectures there daily, instead of mere doing that which every Child
might do at home; and that not by themselves neither, but often times by mean
persons of no esteem with sober and good people. His Majesty will quickly
otherwise order things there, and not suffer so great a part of the Churches
Revenue to be consumed in such a way, as is not like to be much profitable,
while it is so little acceptable.

And when His Majesty shall truly understand, by His faithful Ministers of
State, that the retaining the Ceremonies in Colleges makes many sober,
learned, and conscientious young men leave the Universities, (at furthest, as
soon as they can but get a degree) and many of His Subjects resolve against
breeding their Children there, as not thinking those Ceremonies lawful; His
Sacred Majesty, who has thus far expressed so great a tenderness to his
People, will (as to these reserved Cases) also further provide for them.

In the mean time, though we must some of us profess our selves to be of the
number of those who dare not submit our Children to an Education in our
Universities (under those circumstances) yet we humbly submit to his Majesty's
pleasure: So we may sit in our houses and worship God in peace according to his
Will; we shall be content to purchase that our liberty with the denial of our
Children the liberty of ingenuous breeding, or at least paying for it in some
other places: hoping that his Sacred Majesty will in time also take this thing
into his mature deliberation.

But we must profess, that if His most excellent Majesty's gracious Declaration
had in every tittle fully answered the utmost of our desires, we should have
yet seen a need of some such Discourses as these are for these Reasons:

1. To recover to our God the due Reverence which the World has had, and ought
to have for his Sacred Name: The Violation of Oaths is in Scripture called, A
profaning of the Name of the Lord, Number. 30.

2. That the World may know, that all the Divines in England are not so meanly
versed in Divinity, as to assert, or believe, those Principles, concerning the
dissolving the bonds of Oaths, which some have lately vented amongst us, and
are, we are sure, to be justified by no Father, School-man, Casuist, or
Textuary, that ever we heard of in the World.

3. For the security of his Majesty, and all Princes, and Christian
Magistrates; for we believe, that it will be evident to all that duly consider
it, that promisory Oaths from their Subjects will be of little use to establish
their Thrones, if once their People believe, that they are discharged from
their Oaths, 1. If their Oaths were against The Laws of the Church: Or 2. If
they hinder greater good: Or 3. If they swear through fear of losing their
Estates, else, etc. Or, 4. For an evil end: Or 5. That the same Power, or a
greater than that which commanded them to swear, can in all Cases discharge
them. The Papist shall be free from the Oath of Supremacy by Principle, because
against the Laws of his Church; and as soon as seditious Subjects can but
persuade themselves, that a greater good will come by Rebellion than by
Obedience, and that the maintaining of a Monarchical Government is finis
turpis; he shall plead, his Oath of Allegiance was a forced Oath, and there is
an end of his duty, and his erroneous practice is justified by these erroneous
Principles.

4. Finally, (to say nothing of the Vindication of our selves from our
Antagonists reproaches) for the maintaining of humane Society, and keeping the
bonds of truth between man and man in their perfect strength; Of what use (as
to this) assertory and promisory Oaths are, every one knows: and we leave it to
every reasonable Christian to judge of how little use they will be found to be
if these Principles be once thoroughly drank in.

We shall only add, that since we read his Majesty's Declaration we are
troubled that we have had any occasion so much as to mention His Majesty's
Declaration in Scotland, (though it was never in our secret thoughts to do it
with any reflection upon his Majesty,) the sheets being some of them printed,
we could not blot out what was written; what is said was in the simplicity of
our hearts.

That paper was commonly exposed to sale, without any check; as we knew not the
Circumstances of his Majesty's first signing it, so neither knew we of the
Printing of it, nor any thing, but that it was free for any to buy or read it;
We are of the number of those (we confess) who cannon think our consciences
discharged from the Covenant; Our Brethren, who have undertaken to absolve us,
continually allege, that the Covenant, being taken without his Majesty's
consent, is void. There is a great show in this Argument, if 1. The Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament have not a power in any cases to require an
Oath upon people, except 2. His Majesty, or his Successors (at first
dissenting) did not afterward consent. In either of these Cases our Brethren
know that Argument is of no value. We (not knowing the powers and privileges
of Parliament, nor willing to dispute them; though to engage us to swear we
were told they had such a power) were not willing to insist upon that Plea,
(which must be made good by Presidents, or Law principles, not proper for
Divines) and therefore chose to mention the latter as sufficient to enervate
that Argument, (for our Brethren, whatever they say, will not stand to
justify, that Juramentum metu extortum non obligat;) we heartily wish our
Brethren would insist upon that Plea no more, they know they have a full answer
to it.

Having (good Reader!) thus far advertized thee, we have nothing to say, but
only to pray, that God would give thee a good understanding in all things, and
keep thee in awe of Oaths, as knowing that when once (as to the Religion of
them) thou have got a mastery over thy Conscience, nothing will remain sacred
to thee, and the strongest ligament of humane Society is broken; And this we
dare aver, That he who fears not an Oath, but can take every slight pretense
to quit himself of the bond of it, can neither be a good Servant to God, nor a
good Subject to his Prince, nor a good man to his Neighbor.

Blessed therefore is he who fears always, though the simple pass on, and
are punished.

FINIS.
WE are credibly informed, that when his late Majesty was Prisoner in the Isle
of Wight, he was under some fears that Violence should there be offered to his
Sacred Person, and he should be secretly murdered; which fear was no other
quam qui poterat cadere in virum fortem and prudentem, considering the
Principles and Complexion of the men in whose Custody he was; Hereupon he sends
for the Minister of the place, to which Carisbrook Castle belonged, by name Mr.
Jeremiah French, acquaints him with the danger apprehended, and desired to know
of him, whether he would be willing to endeavor his rescue if such an attempt
should be: He told him yes, he would willingly lose his life to preserve his
Majesty's; only he desired his Majesty to direct what way he should serve him
in: His Majesty replied, that the way he conceived as most probable to do the
work: was to prepare and engage the People before hand, that if any such thing
should be attempted by that part of the Army that was upon the place, the
People might rise to his rescue; and to that end, he advised to do no more but
Preach the Covenant, and press the Covenant upon the People. Mr. French did so,
and thereupon was apprehended, and brought up Prisoner to London, and for some
time endured very ill handling: This Story we had not from Mr. French himself,
he living above 100 Miles from us, but we had it from diverse credible
Witnesses, to whom Mr. French told it many years before the return of His
Majesty, that now is, to the possession of his Throne; And by this it appears,
how fully His Majesty was persuaded that the Covenant was one of the greatest
securities of his precious Life, and that those of his Subjects would be most
faithful to him who were most faithful to the Covenant.


