THE Book of Oaths, AND The several forms thereof, both Ancient and Modern.
Faithfully Collected out of sundry Authentike Books and Records, not heretofore
extant, compiled in one Volume. Very useful for all persons whatsoever,
especially those that undertake any Office of Magistracy or public
Employment in the Commonwealth. Whereunto is added a perfect Table.

Numb. 30.2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond: he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth. Heb. 6.16. For men verily swear by the
greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Printed
at London for W. Lee, M. Walbancke, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedle. 1649.

The Table.
A.
Attorney at Law. 29 Allegiance. 63 Attorney of the Augmentation Court. 85
Auditor of the Augmentation. 88 Alneger. 240 Allegiance of the Duke of York,
and other Lords in Parliament. 25 Allegiance of the Duke of York in Parliamen
to Henry the 6. 258 Allegiance of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal.
Archbishops Oath. 127 Articles Matrimonial. 271 Ahjure the Land for stealing
the Kings Venison. Attorney of the Court of Wards. 318 Auditor of the Court of
Wards. 321 Attorney of the first Fruits. 327 Auditor of the first Fruits. 329
Attorney of the Court of Survey. Approver banished. 208 Auditors of the Court
of Survey. 354 Auditor of the Exchequer. 376
B.
BRoker in London. 69 Beadle of a Ward in London. 76 Bishops Oath. 141 Bayliffe
to attend a Jurie. 204 Bail upon Suspicion of Murder. 207 Bishops
Renunciation of the Popes Bull. 243 Bull of the Pope Renounced. 243 Baron of
the Exchequer. 214, 381 Bayliffe of Shewers. 17, 361 Barwick Soldiers. ^56
Bishops Fidelity. 244 Bishops Popish. 275
C.
Council Privy. 143 Council Clerk. 6 Clerk of the Chancery. 9 Constable of
London. 75, 366 Clerk of the Chechue. 52 Captains of a Band. 53 Clerk of the
Parliament. 61 Constable in London. 19 Chancellor of the Augmentation. 80
Clerk of the Augmentation. 87 Clerk of the Council to the Prince. 96
Council of War. 112 Council of Wales. 12^ Controversy to be compounded in
Parliament, between the Duke of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Winchester 139
Council Privy. 4 Clerk of the Signet. 150 Comptroller of Calice. 185
Council of Calice. Captains in Zealand. 200 Chancell^ur of England. 211
Churchwardens. 393, 394 Council to Princess Mary. 109 Comptroller of the
Customs. 230 Customer. 223 Clerk of the Statutes. 236 Chancellor of the
Exchequer. 237, 380 Clerks six of the Chancery. 249 Clerks of the Pettie-Bagg^,
252 Commissioners f^r Sewers. 360 Controversy to be compounded in Parliament,
between the Duke of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Winchester. 254 Chamberlain
of the Exchequer. 388 Comptroller of the Kings Household. 280 Clerk of the
Court of Wards. 323 Chancellor of the first Fruits. 324 Clerk of the first
Fruits. 330 Cloths to be valued. 345 Clerk of the Signet. 150 Clerk of the
Liveries. 347 Clerk of the Court of Survey. 355 Clerk of the Pleas. 385
Comptroller of the Pipe. 387
D.
Deputy of Calice. 151 Doctor of Divinity according to the University of
Basil. 307 Decay of Castles and Forts, to be Surveyed and reported. 335
Deputie-Chamberlaine of the Exchequer. 392
E
EStates of the Subjects to be discovered. 337 Esquires for the Body. Evidence
against a Prisoner. 204 Evidence between party and party. 205 Evidence upon
Bills of Indictment. 204 Escheator. 228, 389 Examiner in the Chancery. 253
Estates of the Subjects to be discovered. 338 Estate of the Subject to be
examined. 340 Estate of the Subject to be examined. 341 Estate of the Subject
to be examined. 344 Estate of the Subject to be discovered. Earl in Scotland.
369
F.
FReemen of London. 22 Freemen of Merch^nt Adventurers. Francke Pleadge in
London. 67 Fealty. 232 Fidelity of a Bish^p. 144 Fidelity of the Pryor of S
John's. 270 Forrester of the Forest. 300 Fealty of the King of Scots. 305
Fealty of John King of England, to the Pope. 306 French Kings Oath. 92
Foreign Opposer to the Exchequer. 386
G.
GArnet the Jesuit. 365 Governor of Barwick. Garter King of Arms. 113 Great
Seal. 148
H.
HEralds of Arms. 119 Homage of an Arch Bishop. 127 Homage of the King of
Scots. 201 Homage of a Temporal Lord. 246
I.
JVdge. 9 Jurie to try a Prisoner at the Bar. 203 Jurie to try a Nisi Prius.
205 Inquest Grand. 206 Judge. 216 Justice for Works, Weights and Measures. 219
Justice to hear and determine. 295 Inhabitants rf Forests. 302 Justice of
Peace. 313 Ingrosser of the great Roll. 377
K.
KIng of Scots to King Henry 6. 201 Kings Oath. 1 Kings Oath. 3 King of France
to observe the Statutes of the Garter. King James his Servants. 108 Knight of
the Garter. 93 Kings of Arms. 115 Knights of the Round Table. 125 King of
Pol^^^a to the Turk. 126 Knights for the Body. Knight of Scotland. 371 Keeper
of the great Seal. Knight of the Bath. 199, 303 Kings Council and Judges. 363
King Edward the seconds Oath. 201 King Charles his Oath. 272, 292 Knight of the
Bath. Keeper of the Kings Papers of State. Knights and Squires. 136
L.
LEague and Covenant. 410 Lieutenant of Guysnesse. 159 Lieutenant of Calice.
170 Lieutenant of Ruisbanck. 179 Lieutenant of Hannues. 184 Lieutenant of
Newhaven. 192 Lieutenant of the Tower. 266 Loardisme renounced. 267 Lord of
Parliament in Scotland. 370
M.
MErchants for the true shipping Cloth to the Mart Town. 30, 31, 32 Marshall
of Barwick. 45 Master of the Woods of the Court of Augmention. 84 Messenger of
the Augmentation. 91 Marshall of Calice. 164 Marshall-Deputie of Calice. 193
May^r of the Staple. 241, 373 Master of the Rolls. 248 Mid-wives Oaths. 284
Master of the Court of Wards 317 Master of the Woods of the Court of Survey.
352 Messenger of the Court of Survey. 356 Master of Requests. Master of the
Ordinance for Barwick. 50 Mary Queen, her Council. 109 Marshall of Calice.
169
N.
NVn entering into the Cloister. 290
P.
POrter of Barwick. 48 President of the Council. 129 Privy Seal. 145 Porter
of Calice. 189 Portage of the Chancery. 242 Pursevant at Arms. 123 President
of Wales. 57 Prior of S. John Jerusalem. 270 Protestation. 405
R.
REquests Master. 15 Receiver of the Augmentations. 89 Ranger of the Forest.
296 Regarder of the Forest. 299 Receiver of the Court of Wards. 320, 332
Receiver of the Court of Survey 354 Register of the Kings Papers of Estate. 315
Remembrancer to the King. 383
S.
SErvants to the King. Seavenger of London. 21 Sheriff of the Counties. 24,
309 Servants for the true serving of their Lords. 33 Soldiers sworn for their
true service. 41 Supremacy. 66, 357 Scavengers of the Wards in London. 68
Sergeants to the Sheriff of London. 72 Surveyor of the Augmentation. Solicitor
of the Augmentation. Surveyer of the Woods in the Augmentation. 86 Surveyer of
the Lands in the Court of Augmentation. 81 Servants of the Kings Chamber. 132
Servants to the King. Secretary of State. 146 Sergeant to attend a Jurie.
Sheriffs of the Counties. 221 Sheriffs of Oxon, and Berks etc. 229 Steward of
Gascoigne. 232 Sergeant at the Law to the King. 245 Searcher in the Customs.
246 Sergeant at Law. 245 Succession of the Crown. 250 Seminary Priests. 302
Sheriff of a County newly altered. Succession of H. 8. and Queen Anne. 332
Sheep to be numbered and valued. 344 Surveyer of the Liveries. 346 Surveyer of
the Court of Survey. 348 Sub-Treasurer of the Exchequer. 375
T.
TReasurer-Clerk. 34 Treasurer of Barwick. 47 Treasurer of the Augmentation. 83
Treasurer of the War. 111 Treasurer of Calice 173 Tenants to the King in a
Court Baron. Tenants atturning to their Lords. Treasurer of England. Tronater
of London. 231 Treasurer of the Kings Household. 276 Treasurer of the first
Fruits. 326 Treasurer of the Court of Survey. 350 Treasurer of the Exchequer.
212
U
USher of the Exchequer. 40 Verderer of a Forest. 297 Vow and Covenant. 407
W.
WRiter of the Tables. 37 Writer of the P^ll. 39 Wardemote Inquest in London.
79
THE BOOK OF OATHS BOTH Ancient and Modern.
The Ancient Oath used and taken by the Kings of England at their Coronation.
THat he shall keep and maintain the liberties of the holy Church, of old time
granted by the righteous. Christian Kings of England; and that he shall keep
all the Lands, Honors, and Dignities, righteous and free of the Crown of
England in all manne^ holy, without any manner of minishments; and the rights
of the Crown hurt, decay, or loss, to his power shall call again into the
ancient estate; And that he shall keep the peace of the holy Church, and of
the Clergy, and of the People with good accord; And that he shall do in his
judgment equity and right Justice, with discretion and mercy; And that he
shall grant to hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his power
keep them, and affirm them, which the Flock and People have chosen; And the
evil Laws and Customs wholly to put out, and steadfast and stable peace to
the people of his Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his power.

The new Oath used, and taken by the Kings of England at their Coronation.
THe King shall then swear, King H. 8. corrected the old Oath with his own
hand to the effect of this: the Original is in the hands of Sir Robert Corton
Knight and Baroner. 1625
that he shall keep and maintain the lawful Right, and the Liberties of old
time granted by the Righteous Christian Kings of England, to the holy Church of
England, not prejudicial to his Jurisdiction and Dignity Royal, and that he
shall keep all the Lands, Honors, and Dignities Righteous, and Freedoms of
the Crown of England in all manner whole, without any manner of minishment,
and the right of the Crown hurt, decay, or lost, to his power shall call
again into the ancient estate; and that he shall endeavor himself to keep
unity in his Clergy, and Temporal Subjects; and that he shall according to his
conscience in all his Judgments minister equity, right, and Justice, showing
where is to be showed mercy; and that he shall grant to hold the Laws, and
approved Customs of the Realm, and lawful, and not prejudicial to his
Crown, or imperial Jurisdiction, to his power keep them, and affirm them
which the Nobles and People have made and chosen with his consent, and the
evil Laws and Customs wholly to put out, and steadfast and stable peace to
the People of his Realm keep, and cause to be kept to his power in those which
honor and equity do require.

The Oath of a Privy Councellor.
YOu shall swear, To the uttermost part of your cunning, wit, will, and power;
you shall be true and faithful to the Queens Majesty our most dear and
Sovereign Lady, and to her Highness Heirs and Successors, Kings and Queens
of England, according to the limitation of the Statute made in the year of the
Reign for the establishment of the succession of the Crown Imperial of this
Realm; You shall not know nor hear any thing that may in any ways be
prejudicial to her Majesty, or to her Heirs and Successors in form
aforesaid, or to the Commonwealths peace, and quiet of this her Majesty's
Realm; but you shall with all diligence reveal, and disclose the same to her
Majesty, or to such person or persons of her Highness Privy Council as you
shall think may, and will honestly convey and bring it to her Majesty's
knowledge; you shall serve her Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and
place of her Highness Privy Council; you shall keep close and secret all
such matters as shall be treated, disputed, debated, and resolved of in
Council, without disclosing the same, or any part thereof to any, but only to
such only as be of the Privy Council; and yet if any matter so propounded,
treated, disputed, and debated in any such Council, shall touch any particular
person sworn of the same, upon any such matter as shall in any wise concern
his fidelity, and truth to the Queens Majesty, you shall in no wise open the
same to him, but keep it secret, as you would do from any other person till
the Queens Majesty's pleasure be known in that behalf; you shall in all
things to be moved, treated, disputed, and debated in any such Council,
faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion, according to your heart
and conscience, in no wise forbearing so to do for any manner of respect of
favor, love, need, dread, displeasure, or corruption. Finally, you shall be
vigilant, diligent, and circumspect in all your doings and proceedings,
touching the Queens Majesty and her Affairs; all which points before
expressed you shall faithfully observe, fulfill, and keep, to the uttermost of
your power, wit, and cunning. So God you help, and by the holy Contents of
this Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Council.
YOu shall sweat, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Queens Majesty,
as one of the Clerks of her Highness Privy Council; You shall not know or
understand of any manner of thing to be attempted, done, or spoken, against her
Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown, and Dignity Royal, but you shall let and
withstand the same, to the uttermost of your power, and either do, or cause it
to be revealed either to her Majesty her self, or to her Privy Council; You
shall keep secret all matters committed and revealed unto you, or that shall be
treated of secretly in Council; And if any of the same Treaties or Counsels
shall touch any of the Counselors, you shall not reveal it unto him, but
shall keep the same until such time, as by the consent of her Majesty, or of
the Council Publication shall be made thereof; You shall to your uttermost
bear Faith and true Allegiance to her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors and
shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Preeminencies, and Authorities,
granted to her Majesty and annexed to her Crown, against all Foreign Princes,
Persons, Prelates, or Potentates, etc. by Act of Parliament or otherwise; And
generally in all other things you shall do as a faithful and true Servant and
Subject ought to do to her Majesty. So help you God, and by, etc.

The Oath of a Judge.
The Kings Justices shall be sworn, That they well and truly shall serve the
King and his People; and that they shall not assent to things that may turn to
his damage or dis-inheritance: nor that they shall take no fee nor Livery of
none but of the King, nor that they shall take gift or reward of none that has
a do before them, except it be meat or drink of a small value, as long as the
Plea is hanging before them, nor after for that cause: Nor that they shall give
counsel to none in a matter that may touch the King, upon pain to be at the
Kings will, body and goods; And that they shall do right to every person,
notwithstanding the Kings Lees, etc. And in like manner the Barons of the
Exchequer shall be sworn, and also Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and of
Assizes, and Goal Delivery, and Justices of Peace, before whom they have their
Commissions, in a certain form, as shall seem good to the Chancellor. Anno
2. Edw. 3.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Chancery.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, and his People, in the Office of the Chancery, whereto ye are Titled; nor
ye shall assent, or procure the dis-herizon or perpetual hurt of the King, to
your power: nor you shall do no fraud nor procure none to be done, to the hurt
of any of the people, nor in any thing that touches the keeping of the Seal;
And truly shall ye counsel the things that touch the King, when you shall be
thereto required, and the counsel that you know touching him shall ye
conceal, and it ye know the Kings dis-heritance, or his perpetual hurt, or
fraud to be done in things touching the keeping of the said Seal, you shall
put your lawful power to redress it; and if ye cannot do it, ye shall show
it the Chancellor or other that may amend it after your intent. And it shall be
added for the Clerk of course; And ye shall not bring, nor suffer to be
brought, to your knowledge, Writs, which ye shall make of the Court not sealed,
thereof to make execution; nor ye shall record none Attorney, neither by Writ
nor without Writs, without special License, if ye have not Lawfully examined
the party, and the Attorney in proper person, or at least he that shall make
the Attorney in proper person: nor no Writ which is of Commandment ye shall not
deliver to the Examinors, nor to the Seal, before the same Writ be commanded
to you, by a Commander that has power, if it be not to the Chancellor, or to
one of the Masters, which shall command you to make the Writs; and that all the
Writs which ye shall make, ye shall deliver them to the Examiner by your own
hands, or by a fellow that is sworn to the King, if your self be out of the
Court because of sickness, or cannot do it for some other necessary ca^se; And
that ye shall deliver to the Examiner no Writs written of any other hand under
your name as yours, nor you shall put no name upon your Writs. So help you, and
his Saints. Anno xviii. Edw. 3.

The Oath of the Kings Servants Yeomen by the Vice-Chamberlain.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be true to your Sovereign Lord King Hen. 8.
and to his Heirs Kings of England; and if ye have known any thing in times
past, or may know in time coming, that might be prejudicial to his Royal
Person, or to this his Realm, ye shall with diligence do it to be known,
either to his Person or to such of his Council as it may soonest come to his
knowledge; Ye shall from henceforth use your self in the Room, as one of the
Squires for his Body; ye shall be diligent in giving your attendance for the
same; Ye shall be obedient to the Lord Chamberlain, to the Vice-Chamberlain,
to all Gentlemen Ushers, and to all Yeomen Ushers, in all things that shall
appertain to your Room; Ye shall not depart this the Kings Court without the
Kings especial License, the Lord Chamberlaines, or the Vice-Chamberlaines in
his absence; You shall not from hence forward bear your service, nor be
retained to no manner of person, but only to the Kings Highness; Ye shall not
from hence forwards retain no man, otherwise than according to the Kings
Laws, except it be only for the Kings service. These Articles, with all
other, ye shall truly observe and keep; As help you God, and holy David, and
all Saints, and by this Book, etc.

The Oath of a Master of Requests, as it is outered in the Council Book, Anno
Eliz.
YOu shall swear, To be true Councellor to the Queens Majesty, as one of her
Masters of Requests; You shall not know or understand of any manner of thing to
be attempted, done, or spoken against her Majesty's Honor, Crown, and Dignity
Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your
power, and either do, or cause it forthwith to be revealed, either to her
Majesty's self or to the rest of the Privy Council; And you shall to the
uttermost bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queens Majesty, her Heirs,
and Lawful Successors; and shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Preeminencies, and Authorities granted to her Majesty, and annexed to the
Crown, against all Foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, and Potentates, etc.
by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, and generally in all things ye shall do as
true Counselors ought to do to her Majesty. So God you help, etc.

The Tenor of the Oath directed by King Hen. 8. and his Council, in the fourth
year of his Reign, to his Commissioners for executing the Kings Commissioners
and Instructions within the Dyocesse of York, for Mustering and putting the
Kings Subjects in a readiness for the Wars, and to understand the substance of
every man throughout England.
YE shall truly and plainly declare and show, as near as ye can, or may
possibly call to mind or remembrance, putting apart all color, fraud, or
deceit, of what value and substance ye be, as well in Money Plate, Jewels
Utensels, Stuff, and Ornaments of Household Stuff, Merchandises, of all
manner, sorts, and qualities, debts upon specialties, Obligations, Pledges,
Promises, or any otherwise, not only on this side the Seas, but also in any
outward parts; not forbearing thus expressly to show and declare, for any lucre,
singular profit; or advantage, prejudices, hindrances, losses, and damages
that may ensue unto you by the same. So God you help, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Bayliffe for the Sewers.
You shall swear, That you shall diligently, truly, and circumspectly peruse,
view, and search, from time to time, all and singular such damages, perils,
defaults, and reparations, that shall not at any time happen or chance to be
with in any of the Banks, Walls, Sewers, Throughs, or Slewces, within the
Precinct of the Level, as far as the limits of your Office shall extend, and
the same with all diligence, to the uttermost of your power, procur^ to be
presented unto her Majesty's Commissioners of Sewers, and the Jury that are or
shall be impannelled for such causes, that the same with all expedition may be
amended and repaired; and to do and execute all and every other thing and
things whatsoever that shall appertain unto your said Office, as nigh as God
shall give you grace. So help you God, etc

The Oath of the Constables within the City of London.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall keep the Peace of our sovereign Lord the
King well, and lawfully after your power, and ye shall Arrest all them that
make Contempt, Riot, Debate, or Affray by breaking of the said Peace, and lead
them to the House or Counter, and if ye be with-stood by strength of
mis-doers, ye shall rear on them an Entry, and pursue them from Street to
Street, and from Ward to Ward till they be Arrested; and ye shall search at
all times when ye be the Scavengers, or Beagles, the common noysomnesse of
your Ward; and the Beadle and Raker ye shall help to rear, and gather their
Sallary, and Quarterage, if ye be thereunto by them required, and if any thing
be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of this City, such defaults as
ye shall find there done ye shall then present unto the Mayor, and Ministers
of the City, and if ye be let by any person, or persons, that ye may not
duly do your daily Office, ye shall certify the Mayor and Council of the
City of the name, or names of him or them that so let you.

Ye shall also Swear, that during the time that ye shall stand in the
Office, and occupy the room of a Constable; ye shall once at the least every
Month certify and show to one of the Clerks of the Mayors Court, as well the
names as the fir-names of all Freemen which ye shall know to be deceased
within the Month, in the Parish wherein ye shall be inhabited, as also the
names, and fir-names of all the Children of the said Freemen so deceased,
being Orphants of the said City; and thus you shall not fail to do, as God
you help, etc.

The Oath of the Scavenger.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall diligently over ^ee that Pavements within
your Ward be well and sufficiently repaired, and not made too high in noysance
of your Neighbors; and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be cleansed of
Dung, and all manner of Filth for the honesty of this City; and that all the
Chimnies, Furnaces, Reredoes be of Stone, sufficiently and defensible made
against peril of Fire, and if ye find any of the contrary, ye shall show it
to the Aldermen of the Word, so that the Aldermen may ordain for the amendment
thereof; And thus ye shall do, as God ye help etc.

The Oath of every Freeman of this City of London.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
James, and to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord the King; obeysant and
obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises
and Customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless in that
which in you is; ye shall be contributary to all manner of Charges within this
City as Summons Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tillages, Lot and Scot, and to
all other Charges bearing your part as a Free man ought to do; ye shall
color no Foreign Goods under or in your name, whereby the King or this City
might, or may lose their Customs, or Advantages; ye shall know no Farraigner
to buy or sell any Merchandise with any other Forraigner within this City or
Franchise thereof, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof, or some
Minister of the Chamberlaines; ye shall impleade or sue no Freeman out of
this City, whiles ye may have Right and Law within the same City; ye shall
take none Apprentice, but if he be free borne (that is to say) no Bond-mans
Son, nor the Son of any Alien, and for no less terms then for seven
years, without fraud or deceit, and within the first year ye shall cause him
to be Enrolled or else pay such Fine as shall be reasonably imposed upon you
for omitting the same; and after his term end, within convenient time being
re^nited, ye shall make him Free of this City, if he have well and truly
served you; ye shall also keep the Kings Peace in your own person; ye shall
know no gatherings, Conventicles, or Conspiracies made against the Kings Peace,
but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power; All these
Points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep according to the Laws, and
Customs of this City to your power. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of a Sheriff of a County.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well, and truly in the Office
of the Sheriff of A. and do the Kings profit in all that belongs to you to
do by way of your Office, as far forch as you can or may; ye shall truly
keep the Kings Rights, and all that belongs to the Crown; ye shall not
assent to decrease, to lessenings, nor concealment of the Kings Rights, or of
his Franchises, and whenever ye shall have knowledge that the Kings Rights,
or the Rights of his Crown be concealed, or with-drawne, be it in Land, Rent,
Franchise, or Suits, or any other things; ye shall do your true power to make
them be restored to the King again, and it ye may not do it ye shall
certify the King, or some of his Council thereof, such as ye hold for
certain will say it to the King; ye shall not respite the Kings Debts for any
gifts or favor, where ye may raise them without great grievance of the
Debto^s; ye shall truly and righteously treat the People of your Sheriffewicke,
and do right as well to Poor as to Rich in all that belongs to your Office,
ye shall do no wrong to any man, for any gift or other behest, or promise of
Goods, for favor, nor hate; ye shall disturb no man's right; ye shall truly
acquit at the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the
Kings Debts; ye shall nothing take whereby the King may lose, or whereby that
Right may be disturbed, let, or the Kings Debts delayed; ye shall truly
return and truly serve all the Kings Writs as far forth as shall be within
your cunning; ye shall none have to be your under Sheriff, or any of the
Sheriffs Clearkes of the last year past; ye shall take no Bayliffes into your
service, but such as ye will answer for; ye shall make each of your Bayliffes
to make such Oath as ye make your self in that that belongs to their
occupation; ye shall receive no Writ by you or any of yours unsealed, or any
sealed, under any ^eale of any Justice save of Justice in Air, or Justice
Assigned in the same Shire where ye be Sheriff in, or other Justice having
power, or Authority to make any Writs unto you by the said Law of the Land, or
any Justice of Newgate; ye shall make your Bayliffes of the true and
sufficient men in the Country; also, ye shall do all your pain and diligence
to destroy, and make to cease all manner of Heresies, and Errors, commonly
called Lollers, within your Bayliffewick, from time to time to all your power,
and assist and be helping to all Ordinaries, and Commissaries of holy Church,
and favor and maintain them as often times as ye shall be required by the said
Ordinaries, and Commissaries; ye shall be dwelling in your proper person
within your Bayliffewick for the time ye shall be in the same Office, except
ye be otherwise licensed of the King; ye shall not let your Sheriffewicke,
nor any Bayliffewicke thereof to Farm to any man; ye shall truly set, and
return reasonable and due issues of them that be within your Bayliffewicke
after their estate, and their honor; and make your Pannels your self of such
persons as be most, next most sufficient, and not suspect, or procured, as it
is ordained by the Statutes, and over this in Eastchining and restrainder of
the Man's slaughters, Robberies, and other manifold grievous offenses that have
been done daily, namely of such as name themselves Soldiers, and by other
Vagarants, the which continually increase in number, and multiply so that the
Kings true Subjects may not be safe, yea ride, nor go to do such things as
they have to do, to their intolerable hurt and hinderance; ye shall truly
and effectually with all diligence possible to you, execute the Statute, and
the Statutes of Winchester, and of Vagabonds; these things all ye shall truly
keep, as God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of an Attorney at Law.
YOu shall do no falsehood, nor consent to any to be done in the Court, and if
you know of any to be done you shall give knowledge thereof unto my Lord Chief
Justice, or other his Brethren, that it may be reformed; you shall delay no man
for lucre or malice; You shall increase no Fees, but shall be contented with
the old Fees accustomed; you shall plead no Foreign Plea nor suffer no
Foreign Suits unlawfully to hurt any man, but such as shall stand with order
of the Law, and your conscience; you shall seal all such Process as you shall
sue out of the Court with the Seal thereof, and so the Kings Majesty, and my
Lord Chief Justice discharged for the same; ye shall not wittingly nor
willingly sue, nor procure to be sued any false Suit, nor give aid, nor
consent to the same, in pain to be expulsed from the Court for ever; And
furthermore, you shall use your self in the Office of an Attorney within the
Court according to your Learning and discretion; so help you God, etc.

The Oath of a Merchaut Adventurer.
FIrst, ye shall swear, To be true to our sovereign Lady the Queen her
Heirs and Successors, and if any thing may come to your knowledge intended
against her Majesty's Person, or Dominions, to discover the same to the
Governor of this Fellowship, or his Deputy, or some other in place convenient.

Secondly, You shall swear to be obedient and assistant to the Governor, and
his Deputy, and Fellowship of Merchant Adventurers; and to keep all Acts and
Ordinances by them made, or to be made, without doing or procuring any thing in
prejudice thereof, or else offending, duly to pay the penalties.

Thirdy ye swear, To conceal the secrets of the Fellowship, and to make
known unto the Governor, or his Deputy, from time to time, any thing which
you shall understand to be pretended against the Fellowship, or the Privileges
thereof.

Lastly you swear, That in no case you shall color or free any man's Goods
whomsoever, being either Stranger, or one free of this Fellowship.

The Oath of a Merchant Adventurer taken before the Poqueter, for the true
Shipping of his Clothes.
YOu shall swear, That all and every such Clothes, and other Commodities,
whereof you, or any of you have made entry, are already bought, and within the
Walls of London, being over and above all former Entries, and are not yet
Shipped, and they are also belonging to those men in whose names they be
entered, and their Partners, being free Brothers of this Company of Merchant
Adventurers; and that they are entered to be Shipped either for Stiade, or
Middleborough. So God you help.

The Oath which the Honorable George Lord Nevell, Baron of Abergaveny used to
swear his Servants by, at their first coming into his Household.
Ye shall bear your faith therewith, and true service next unto our Sovereign
Lord King Henry 8. unto my Lord and Lady of this place, whom ye intend now to
serve; also if ye know any hurt, harm, or hinderance to be done to my said
Lord and Lady to their Bodies, or to their Goods or to his Children by any
person or persons, ye shall give him knowledge, or some of his Council, as
soon as God will give you grace; Also ye shall not consume, nor waste none of
his Goods, nor suffer them to be wasted negligently by any other person, if ye
be in power to let it, or else give knowledge to his Officers that have the
Rule and Charge of his House; And also at all times ye shall be obedient,
requisite, and necessary, unto my Lords Officers that have the Rule and Charge
of my said Lords Household aforesaid, ye shall well and truly of your behalf
keep and perform, to the best of your power. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of Treasurer Clerk in the Ezchequer.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the King your Lord, in
your Office and Room of Clerkship, to the Lord Treasurer of England, within
this Court of the Kings Receipt and Treasury; And you shall uprightly behave
your self toward all his Subjects and Accomptants, for their speedy
expedition, without any unjust hinderance or delay, for affection, meed, or
dread; And you shall make no untrue Entry into any of the Kings Rolls, or other
Books of Receipt and exitus, commonly called the Pelles of Receipt and Exitus,
whereby the King our Lord, or any his Subjects, may be hurt or damaged. But if
you shall know of any error in them escaped, speedily to be amended; And you
shall from time to time make, or cause to be made to the Lord Treasurer of
England, true and perfect Declarations of all manner of Sums of Money coming in
and going out of the Kings Treasury, so often as the same Lord Treasurer shall
demand; And you shall safely preserve and keep the Kings Records, Leagues, and
other Writings lying in his Treasury, not suffering any of them to be harmed,
lost, or altered by your default, nor yet to be removed abroad to any place out
of the said Treasury, but only by Warrant or License from the Lord Treasurer
of England; And when any such License or Command shall be given, yet you shall
not rudely adventure the carrying thereof by water, if you may have convenient
passage by Land; And you shall to the best of your power conserve all the
ancient and laudable Customs of this Court, without permitting any new error
to arise (if you be able to resist it,) and where you are not able, you shall
speedily disclose it to the Lord Treasurer of England for reformation. Finally,
you shall in all things concerning this your Office, be obedient, faithful,
and true, to the Lord Treasurer for the time being and shall not bewray the
secrets of this Court; nor yet any waste make of the Kings goods, for any cause
So help you God, and all Saints, and by the Contents of that Book.

The Oath of the Writer of the Tallyes, and Counter Tallyes.
YOu shall swear, That you shall truly and faithfully write all the Tallyes
and Counter-Tallyes, otherwise called the Joyles of the said Tallyes, of all
manner of payments in the Court of Receipt to be made, and to give good
attendance to the same, helping to dispatch all manner of Accomptants,
according to the ancient customs of this Court; and to make Declarations for
the declaring of all manner of Receipts and Payments, there received and paid
from time to time, to the Lord Treasurer of England, or to the under Treasurer
for the time being; and especially to regard and so from time to time, unto the
Entries safe keeping, taking out, showing delivery, and laying up all manner of
Leagues, and other Writings of any other parties, which remain within the King
our Sovereign Lord his Treasury; to whom you shall be true, secret, and
faithful during the time of your being in the said Office. So help you God,
and all Saints.

The new Oath of the Writer of the Pell, made in the sixth year of King Edward
the sixth.
YOu shall swearee, That you shall truly and faithfully keep the Kings
Majesty's Book within this his Court, called the Pell, for the speedy
expedition of his Accomptants, for their surety; And you shall delay none of
the Kings Accomptants, for favor, meed, affection, or dread; and see all ways
that no untrue entry be made in the said Pell; And if you know of any error
done within the said Court, you shall show it to the Lord Treasurer, or to the
under Treasurer, without any delay thereof to be made; And the secrets of this
Court you shall nor bewray So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Usher of the Exchequer.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the Treasurer and
Chamberlaines of the Exchequer in your room of Ushership to the Lord Treasurer
of England, within this Court of the Kings Receipts, and shall diligently lock
and keep the doors of the Kings Treasury in due time for safety of his good;
And the same doors ye shall be ready to open again at all times, when the
same Lord Treasury and Chamberlaines, or other their Clerks, and Deputies,
shall have occasion to enter, and there shall give your attendance till their
departure And ye shall demand no unjust allowance for any necessaries or other
kind of thing by you bought for service of the King within this Court: And ye
shall, to your power, help and further all such the Kings Accomptants as shall
have to do in this Court. So help you God, and Holidome, and by the Contents of
that Book.

The Oath ministered unto the Soldiers serving under the Earl of Leicester in
the Low Countries.
WE do swear and promise, To do all loyal, true, and faithful service unto
the Queen of England, her most Excellent Majesty, and unto the Provinces and
Cities united in these Countries, and their Associates, under the charge and
obedience of the Right Excellent the Earl of Leicester Governor general of
the said Provinces and Cities, and their Associates, and of her Majesty's Army
and Forces within the same: and all lawful and due obedience unto the said
Governor, and to any other Superior that shall have charge under him for
Government in this Army. And further we do promise to endeavor our selves to
keep and fulfill all such lawful Ordinances as his Excellency has, or shall
set forth and establish for the better ordering of this Army, as much as
concerns us, so long as we shall serve under him. So help us God, by Jesus
Christ.

The Oath of the Governor of Barwick.
YOU shall swear, To be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth,
by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the
Faith, etc. and to keep and defend, to the use of her Majesty, her Heirs and
Successors, this Town of Barwick, and the Marchesse of the same, to the
uttermost of your power, and according to your Office; you shall not be absent
at any time from your Office, without her Majesty's special License,
containing in the same the names of such to whom your charge shall be committed
in your absence, except it be upon reasonable causes, to go into the Wardencie
of the East Marches, for the service thereof, or to some osher part of
Nortbuneberland, upon any your needful causes; at which time nevertheless you
shall depute the Marshall, or in his absence, the next principal Officer, to
take your charge of this Town: You shall cause all the Officers of this Town
to do their duties, or else see them punished without favor or delay; you
shall use the advice of all those which be Counselors of this Town for any
matter concerning the Government thereof, except the matter shall touch any of
themselves in which the same parties shall be excluded for the time; you shall
see that this Town, and the Garrison be provided of a convenient force of
Victual of all sorts from time to time; And that the Mayor and his Brethren
shall do their duties for the Commonweal of the same Town according to
their Jurisdiction. You shall administer Justice truly, and indifferently to
all manner of persons having any Cause depending before you; You shall not
admit, nor suffer to be admitted any manner of person to be of this Garrison
that shall be born out of the Realm of England or Ireland nor above the number
of forty that shall be borne within the Realm of Ireland; You shall at sundry
times visit the Gates and Posternes of this Town, the Locks and Shuttings
thereof, the Town Walls, Bulworkes, Ditches, Ordinance, Artillery, and
Munition, and the Houses of the Stoage of the same, and cause to be redressed
to the best of your power any thing therein amiss; Finally, you shall
quarterly puruse the Statutes and Ordinances heretofore made, and now remaining
in force for the Government of this Town, and them cause to be duly kept and
observed.

The Oath of the Marshall of Barwicke.
YOu shall swear, That you shall be faithful and true to our sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. You shall be obedient to the Governor of this
Town, for the good governance and defense of the same, and shall give good
counsel and assistance unto him, and all other Officers of the Town to the
uttermost of your power; You shall set the Watch of the Town, and visit it
from time to time, as to your Office belongs; You shall not imprison, or
present any person without reasonable cause and thereof you shall certify the
Governor of their names, and their causes. You shall suffer no person borne
out of the Queens Majesty's Allegiance without the Governors special
License, (and that not without good cause) to lodge in this Town above two
nights, or to continue above twenty four hours at any one time, nor shall
suffer any stranger to be lodged, but in convenient place to keep the same
person from the knowledge of the secrets of this Town. Finally you shall keep
and cause to be kept, all manner of Statutes, Laws and Ordinances, heretofore
made, and now remaining in force, for the good governance of this Town, to the
uttermost of your power.

The Oath of the Treasurer of Barwick.
YOu shall swear, That you shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. You shall be obedient to the Governor of this Town for the
good governance and defense of the same, and shall give counsel and assistance
to him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermost of your power; you
shall make no payment to Officer or Soldiers until Muster be had, viewed, and
taken by the Governor and Marshall of the Town, and the Count Roller, and of
the Checque hereof. Finally, Ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed
and kept, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, heretofore made, and
now remaining in force; for the government of this Town.

The Oath of the Porter of Barwick.
YOu shall swear, That you shall be faithful and true to our overaigne Lady
Glizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defendor
of the faith, etc. You shall be obedient and attendant to the Governor for the
time being in all things appertaining to the good governance and defense of the
same Town, and to him and to the Queen Council and Officers of the same
Town; You shall give faith full and diligent counsel, and them aid and assist
to the uttermost of your power; You shall safely surely and diligently keep
the keys of the Gates of this Town of Barwick, while they shall be in your
hands, and shall see the same Gates guarded and shut up at the times
accustomed, and as the Governor of this Town shall command, for the surety of
this Town; And at all times, as so one as the Gates shall be shut, you shall
bring the said. Keys to the Governor of the Town, and in his absence, to his
Deputy; you shall whenever any tidings or intelligences shall come to you by
Land, or by Water, that is meet to be known to the Governor of the Town, or
to the Council in his absence forthwith let them know the same; You shall
rear no new Customs or Taxes, to the vexation of any comers or goers, etc.

The Oath of the Master of the Ordinance for the Town of Barwicke.
YOu shall swear, That you shall be true and faithful to our sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. You shall be obedient to the Governor of this Town, for
the good governance and defense of the same; And shall give good council and
assistance to him, and all other Officers of the Town to the uttermnst of your
power; You shall se^ that the Ordinance, Artillery, and Munition be safely and
well kept from all danger of the Enemies, of Fire, or other misadventures to
the best of your power, and that the Ordnance and Artillery placed for the
defense of this Town be always kept in good repair, and he in readiness for
the use where the same is or shall be planted; You shall issue no part thereof
at any time but for the service of this Town, nor shall expend any portion of
your Office but by Warrant; Finally, You shall observe and keep, or cause to be
observed and kept all manntt Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances of this Town
heretofore made, and now remaining in force for the good governance of the same
Town.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Checque in Barwicke.
YOu shall swear, That you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the Grace of God Queen of England, Frane, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. You shall swear to keep^ truly the Books of Musters of all
the persons in the Town, and you shall keep true Record, and Report of the
time of all manner of persons departing from the Town, being either Licenced
for more the^ two days, or being Calha^er (...) or dilcharged of Service, and
of all such as shall depart without License and shall duly inform the
Governor of the defaults that you shall find and the same you shall Cheeque
in your Book, and the same Book you shall duly keep, and at the pay see the
Party thereof Taxed and default^e, and surther punished as the cause shall
require.

The Oath of Captains of Bands in the Town of Barwicke.
You shall swear, To be true and good to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, and
to the Governor of the Town, and shall keep your whole number being in your
charge without diminishing, or admitting of the same until you have certified
the Governor of the Town thereof, and that the Clerk of the Checque by the
Governors appointment have enrolled the same in his Book, and if any of your
Band shall escape away, or dye, you shall forthwith notify the same to the
Governor of the Town, and the said Clerk of the Checque; You shall not
refuse to come to common Musters at any time, upon the call of the Governor of
the Town, either being alone, or else having with him the Treasurer and Clerk
of the Checque; neither shall you bring to Muster any person but such as have
served in your Band, during the time for which he shall have pay; neither shall
you to your knowledge suffer any one to be in your Band that receives any man's
pay of our Treasurer in any other room or place within this Town, except it
be for the Tax work in our Fortifications, whereof you shall make privy the
Treasurer, and Clarke of the Checque; You shall see, and cause every your
Soldiers to be frequently Trained and taught the use of their Weapons, and
other Feats of War convenient for them; and at the least you shall cause the
same to be done every fourteen days in Summer once, and every twenty days in
Winter; You shall not permit any of your Band to take any more Victuals, or
other Wares within that Town then his Wages will discharge; You shall with
your Band Watch and Ward for the defense of this Town as you shall be
appointed by the Marshall and Governor thereof; You shall not depart out of
the Town and Marches further then the Orders of the Town do permit without
leave of the Governor of the Town, or in his absence by his Deputy, under
their Writings and Seal, mentioning the time of your leave to be absent, and
before your departure (if it shall be longer then for three days) you shall
present your self to the Treasurer, or his Deputy, giving notice unto them for
the time licenced you for absence, and at your return you shall also give
notice to the said Treasurer and Clerk of the Checque; You shall also be
obedient to the Governor, and to the other Counselors of this Town, and
shall obey all Statutes and Ordinances of the same.

The Oath of every private Sauldier in Barwicke.
YOu shell swear, To be good and true to our Sovereigne Lady the Queen, and
to the Governor of this Town for Her Ma^esties service, and truly (do as
much as in you shall lie, to) keep this Town always true English, and in
good obedience to the Governor, Marshall, and other Officers thereof; and you
shall be governed by your Captain within any Debate or Rebellion, and if you
shall know any thing hut, full to the state of this Town, or to any part
thereof, you shall forthwith disclose the same either to your Captain, or to
the Governor, or to one of the Courncell of the Town; You shall keep such
Armor and Weap^n as you are by your Captain limited to have without wilful
spoil, or selling thereof except it be to provide better; You shall keep all
other. Ordinances of this Town that man any ways pertain to you to keep.

The Oath of the Lord President of the Council in the Marehe^ of Wales.
YOu shall swear, To the uttermost of your power, will and ^unning, that you
shall be true and faithful to the Queens Highness, our Soveraign^ Lady, and
to her Heirs and Successors, and that you do utterly testify and declare in
your conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only supreme Governor of
this Realm, and of all other Her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in
all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal; and that no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate has, or ought to have
any Jurisdiction, Power Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority
Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm; And that you do utterly
renounce and forsake all Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and
Authorities; and do promise that from hence forth you shall bear faith, and
true Allegiance to the Queens Highness, her Heirs, and Successors, and to
your power shall assist, and defend all Juris^^ctions, Privileges,
Preeminencies, and Authorities granted or belonging to the Queens Highness,
her Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm.

2. You shall not know nor hear any thing that may in any wise be prejudicial
to her Highness or her Commonwealth, peace and quiet of her Highness Realm,
but you shall with all diligence reveal and discover the same to her
Highness, or to such other person or persons of her Graces Privy Council as
you shall think meet, and will soonest convey and bring it to her Highness.

3. You shall serve her Highness truly and faithfully in the room and place
of one of her Graces Council.

4. You shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated, in any Council,
faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion, according to your heart
and conscience, no wise forbearing so to do, for any manner respect of favor,
meed, displeasure, or corruption.

5. You shall faithfully and uprightly, to the best of your power, cause
Justice to be duly and indifferently Ministered to the Queens Majesty's
Subjects, that shall have cause to sue for the same, according to equity and to
the Order of the Law.

F^^ally, You shall be vigilant and circumspect in all your doings and
proceedings touching the Queens Majesty, and her Highness Affairs.

All which points and Articles before expressed, with all other Articles,
Signed with the Queens Majesty's Hand, and delivered to me the Lord President
of her Highness Council established in these parts; you shall faithfully
keep and fulfill, to the uttermost of your power, wit, will and cunning. So
God you help, and the contents of this Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Parliament.
YOu shall be true, faithful, and truth you shall bear to our Sovereign Lord
the King, and to his Heirs and Successors; You shall nothing know that shall
be prejudicial to his Highness, his Crown, State, and Dignity Royal, but
that you shall resist, to your power, and with all speed ye shall advertise his
Grace thereof, at the least some of his Council, in such wise as the same may
come to his knowledge; Ye shall also well and truly serve his. Highness in the
Office of Clerk of his Parliament, making true entry and Records of the things
done and past in the same; Ye shall keep secret all such matters as shall be
treated in his said Parliament, and not disclose the same before it shall be
published, but to such as they ought to be disclosed unto: And generally ye
shall well and truly do and execute all things belonging unto you to be done,
appertaining to the Office of Clerk of the Parliament; as God you help, etc.

The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare,
in my conscience before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the
Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any Power or
Authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms
or Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to invade or annoy him or
his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and
obedience to His Majesty; or to give License or leave to any of them to bear
Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
Person State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects within His
Majesty's Dominions. Also I do ^weare from my heart, that notwithstanding any
Declaration or sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted or to
be made or granted, by the Pope of his Successors, or by any Authority derived
or prie^ended to be derived from him or his Sea, against the said King his
Heirs or Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects from their
Obedience. I will bear faith and true! Allegiance to his Majesty his Heirs
and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power,
against all conspiracies and contempts whatsoever, which shall be made against
his or their Persons their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such
Sentence or Declaration or otherwise; and will do my best indearour to disglose
and make known unto his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and
treacher o^^ Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of (...) to be against
him or them, And I do further swear. That I do from my heart abhor detest
and al^jure, as impious and here^^ call, his damno^^ Doctrine, and Position,
this Princes wa^^ be deprived or Excommunicated of the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; And I do believe, and in
conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever has
power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by
good and full Authority to be lawfully administered unto me; and do renounce
all Pardons, and Dispensations to the contrary, and all those things I do
plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and swear according to these express words
by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of
the same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret
reservation whatsoever; And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgement
heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me
God etc.

The Oath of Supremacy.
J A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other his
Highness Dominions and countries, as well in all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal; And that no Foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction,
Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual
within this Realm; And therefore I do utterly renoune and forsake all
Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do
promise that from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the
Kings Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall
assist, and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, P^eeminencies, and
Authorities granted, or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and
Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the Realm.

The Oath of Franck Pledge within the City of London.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord, the
King of England, and to his Heirs Kings, and the Kings Peace ye shall keep,
and see that it be kept; And to all the Ministers of the City ye shall be
obedient, and at all times ye shall be ready to help the Officers of the City
in doing of their Offices, for resting of Mis-doers in keeping of the Kings
Peace, and for to follow them from Street to Street, and Ward to Ward unto the
time they be Arrested, and brought to one of the Counters; and if ye know any
Congregation, or Conventicles of any mis doers within the Ward, ye shall do
the Aldermen to weete thereof; and all other points within the Wardmoote ye
shall well and truly keep So help ye God and by this Book.

The Oath of the Scavengers of the Ward.
Ye shall swear. That ye shall well and diligently over-see that the
Pavements in every Ward be well and rightfully repaired, and not hausted to the
noyance of the Neighbors, and that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be kept
clean from Dung and other Filth for the honesty of this City and that all the
Chimnies, Redosses, and Furnaces be made or Stone for defense of Fire; and if
ye know any such ye shall show it to the Alderman, that he may make due
redress thereof; and this ye shall not seave. So help you God, etc.

The Oath for Brokers in London.
YE shall swear, That ye shall neither buy nor ^ell, nor other for you, any
manner of Merchandise by fraud or collusion to your own proper use within the
Franchises of this City nor without; And that ye neither make, nor do to be
made any manner Bargain between Forraigner and Forraigner or Forraigner and
Stranger within the Franchises of this City, nor without, upon pain of
forfeiture of one hundred pound to the Chamber of London, and losing of your
Office for ever; Also that ye buy no manner of Merchandise of any person
within the Franchises of this City, nor without to no persons use; that ye
bring the Seller and the Buyer together, making a rightful Bargain between
them if you be required; and, that ye shall neither suffer, nor counsel any
other person to use Brokeage within the said City, or the Franchises of the
same, but if he be admitted and sworn, and has found sufficient Surety to do
well and truly, and keep and observe all these Articles and Ordinances; and if
ye know any person so doing, ye shall open it to the Mayor, and Aldermen, and
else ye shall be deprived of your Office for ever.

Also ye shall be in no Liverie with any Person nor Host, any manner of
Stranger, or Alien, upon pain of losing of your Office for ever; Also ye
shall do all your Bargains that ye shall make between any manner of persons
to be written in a Book, and that ye shall have the same Book ready before
the Mayor, and Aldermen for the time being, at all times when he by them shall
be required to testify the Bargains aforesaid; Also that ye shall not be
dwelling harbored, nor lodged with any Merchant Stranger within the City of
London, or Liberty thereof.

Also ye shall make no manner Bargain of Usurie, nor exchange of Usurie, nor
any other false Chevisance nor untrue Bargain, nor Contract, nor meddle, nor
consent to the same in any wise, no such Bargain, favor, nor counsel, or
hide, but them disclose to the Mayor and Aldermen of the same City for the
time being, and this you shall not leave. So God you help.

The Oath of the Sheriff of Londons Sergeant.
YE shall swear. That ye shall well and truly serve the Sheriff of London
in your Office of Serjeantship, and the Franchises of London; Ye shall swear
and maintain to your power, and all manner persons that ye shall Arrest by
Plaint, Writ, or by Fray, or by any other lawful cause ye shall bring them
unto the Counter if ye be of power; Also ye shall warn no person to
agreewith the Creditors of their Debts but that a Plaint of such Debts be
lawfully made; Also ye shall w^rne no person on whom a Plaint or a Writ is on
in the Counter, and ye shall well and truly enter such Plaints as ye shall
have of your Clients or any other person; Also all manner of Mercements and
Fines that ye shall receive, ye shall well and truly bring them to the
Counter, and there to deliver them to the Sheriff, or to his Deputy; Also ye
shall not tarry, or delay none occasion, nor make none untrue Process; That
ye shall by virtue of your Office, fraud, or hate, or promise for your
singular avail; Also ye shall be no Lone day maker, nor maintainer of none
occasion; Also in all manner of Plaints that ye shall return good and honest
persons, and true, and not suspicious, nor procured by you, nor by your assent;
Also you shall counsel nothing whereby the Sheriffs, or any of their Courts
or Officers may be hurt in their availes; Also the common of the City
peaceably and gently ye shall entreat, and also to all other persons that have
his Patents of exemptions of any Office, or other Charges within the City of
the Kings grant ye^ shall do, summon them like as ye do other Freemen of
Inquests; Also, ye shall take no Yeoman into your Governance whilst he be
Officer with the said Sheriff, unto the time that ye show the said Yeoman
unto the said Sheriff, and by him so to be accepted; And also ye shall not
do away the said Yeoman in that being without a lawful cause, certifying, and
knowing to the Sheriff; And if that Yeoman be from you so voided, ye shall
take away the Liverie of the Sheriff, except, and in all other things your
Office you shall well and truly keep and bear you. So help you God, and by
this Book.

The Oath of a Constable in London.
YE shall swear, That ye shall keep the peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King well, and lawfully after your power; Also ye shall Arrest all them that
made any Riot Debate or Affray in breaking of the said Peace and ye shall
bring them to one of the Sheriffs Houses, or to the Counters of the said
Sheriffs, and if ye be withstood by strength of any such mis-doers, ye shall
ever rear up Hue and Cry, and ye shall follow them from Street to Street, and
from Ward to Ward till ye may Arrest them.

Also ye shall search at all times when ye shall be required by Scavengers,
or Beadle, for the common noyance of the Ward.

Also if there be any thing done within the Ward contrary to the Ordinance to
the City.

Also such faults as ye find ye shall present them to the Mayor and to the
Ministers of the City; and if ye be withstood with person or persons, that ye
may not do your Office ye shall present them to the Mayor, and to the
CommonCouncell of the City, with the names of them that so trouble you. And
this ye shall not leave. So help you God, and holidome, and by this Book.

The Oath of a Beadle of the Wards in London.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall well and honestly keep the Ward that ye be
Beadle in; And ye shall suffer no manner Ribbawdes, nor none of evil living,
nor hunters of Ale, nor women holding Brothels, nor none other Noyons other
women slandered of evil name, and of evil life, dwelling within the Ward, but
you shall certify the names of them unto the Alderman, to that intent that he
shall have them out within fifteen days; and if the Alderman do it not, ye
shall anon after the fifteen days ended, do the Mayor to weete; and if any man
make any fray, or draw any weapon against the Kings Peace, ye shall do the
Sheriff to weete, that they may make leavy by the Sergeants of such mis-doers
also; Ye shall return good and lawful men in the Hustinges before the
Sheriffs, and the Kings Crowner to the Quest, and not men suspicious, and
maintainers of persons of evil name; And the Return that ye make, ye shall
show them three or four days before the Husting, that ye may see the Return,
whether it be sufficient or no; Also ye shall see, that no Poulter, nor no
other Victualler, make no sale of Poultery, Corn, or Meal, or any other
Victual, in no privy place, against the Ordinance of the Mayer, but ye shall
warn the Mayor and the Sheriffs thereof; Ye shall be none Officer in Court
expedient during your Beadleship; Also ye shall brew none Ale, nor none for
you, to be no Regrater; ye shall keep no Bake-house; Also ye shall be no
Regrater of Victual, nor none hunter of Ale, nor partner with none of them:
And other things to your Office belonging ye shall well and lawfully keep. So
help you God, and Holidome, and by this Book.

The Oath of the Wardmoote Inquest within London.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King that
now is, and to his Heirs and Successors Kings of England; and readily ye shall
come when ye be summoned, to the Common Council of this City; but if ye be
reasonably excused; and good and true Council ye shall give in all things
touching the Commonwealth of this City, after your wit and cunning; And that
for favor of any person ye shall maintain no singular profit against the
common profit of this City; And after that ye be come to the Common Council,
you shall not from thence depart until the Common Council be ended, without
reasonable cause, or else by the Lord Mayors License: And also any secret
things that be spoken or said in the Common Council, without to be secret, in
no wise ye shall disclose; As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation.
Ye shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the Office
of the Chancellorship of the Court of the Augmen cations and Revenues of the
Kings Crown; And shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best
of your cunning and power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things
which may honestly and justly be to the Kings advantage and profit, and to the
Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the
Kings Seal, appointed to the Office; And also endeavor your self to see the
King truly answered of such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, which shall
or may arise or grow in your Office, and from time to time deliver with speed,
such as shall have to do for you; And that you shall not take nor receive of
any person any gift or reward in any Cause or matter depending before you,
wherein the Kings Highness shall be party, whereby any prejudice, hinderance
loss, or dis-herizon shall grow or be to the Kings Highness So help you God,
and all Saints.

The Oath of the general Surveyor of the Court of Augmentation.
Ye shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the Office of
the general Surveyor of the Court of the Augmentations and Revenues of the
Kings Crown; And shall minister equal Justice to rich and poor, to the best
of your power; And that ye shall diligently procure all things which may
honestly and justly be to the Kings advantage and profit, and to the
Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown; And also endeavor
your self to the uttermost of your power, to see the King truly answered of
all such Rents and Revenues Issues or Profits, which shall or may arise or grow
in your Office; and from time to time deliver with speed, such as shall have to
do before you; And that you shall not take or receive of any person any gift or
reward in any cause or matter depending before you, wherein the Kings Highness
shall be party, whereby any prejudice, hinderance, loss, or dis-herizon,
shall grow, or be to the Kings Highness. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his People in the Office of Treasurer of the Court of the
Augmentations according to the Orders hereafter ensuing; and ye shall
reasonably and honestly procure the Kings profit, and do right to all manner
of people poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office, and the
Kings Treasure; ye shall truly keep and dispend, and true Declaration and
Account make from time to time without any concealment, according to the
Ordinance made for the establishment of this Court: and further shall do every
thing that of right appertains to your Office. So help you God, and all
Saints.

The Oath of the Master of the Woods of the Court of Augmentation.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of the Master of the Woods of this Court of Augmentations,
in all things touching your Office, according to the Authority given unto you
by these Letters Patents, for the Kings most advantage; And ye shall do all
and every thing and things which you ought to do by reason of your Office
according to the form and effect of these Letter Patents So help you God, and
all Sainis.

The Oath of the Attorney, and Solicitor of the Court of Augmentations.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King, as his At
orney or Solicitor in all Courts, for and concerning any matter or cause that
shall cuncerne or touch the Possessions and Hereditaments limited to the Survey
and governance of this Court of the Augmentation, and procure the Kings profit
thereof; and that ye shall truly counsel the Kings Chancellor, and general
Surveyor of this Court, all things concerning the same, to the best of your
cunning, wit, and power, and with all speed and diligence from time to time at
the calling of the said Chancellor and general Surveyor or any of them, be
diligently attendant to assist the said Chancellor and Surveyor, or any of
them, with good advise and counsel, in the hearing and determination of such
matters and causes as shall depend before the said Chancellor and general
Survey or of this Court; And that ye shall not take any gift or reward in any
matter or cause depending in the same Court or elsewhere, wherein the King
shall be party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hindered, hurted, or
dis-herited; And further do all and every thing that shall appertain to your
Office. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Surveyor of the VVoods of the Court of Augmentation.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve truly the King in your Office of Surveyor
of the Woods within the Survey of this Court of the Augmentation; and to your
cunning and power shall truly do and execute all and every thing and things
which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to the forms and
effect of the Ordinance and Establishment of this Conrt, So help you God, and
a^l Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Augmentations.
Ye shall soeare, That ye shall well and truly ^erve the King in your Office
of Clerk of this Court of the Augmentation, and truly do and execute all and
every thing and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according
to the form and effect of the Ordinance made upon the erection of this Court.
So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of the Augmentation.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall well and truy serve the King in your Office
of Auditorship; and true Allegiance make to every person which shall be
Accomptant before you; Ye shall not take nor receive of poor or rich any Gift
or Reward in any Matter or Cause depending, or to be discussed in Court, but
such that shall be your ordinary Fees; and ye shall do all and every thing and
things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the form
and effect of the Ordinance made and established upon the erecting of this
Court of the Augmentation So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of the Receiver of the Gourt of Augmentation.
YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and
nothing conceal, but true Account make of all such revenues, Rents, Sum of
Money, and other profies wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged, by reason of
your Office; Ye shall make no Petition nor ask any allowance, but such as
shall be good, just, true, and reasonable; And ye shall do all and every thing
and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the
form and effect of the Ordinance made and established upon the erection of
this Court of Augmentation So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of Surveyor of Lands of the Court of Augmentation.
YE shall truly serve the King in your Office of Survey or of Lands within the
Survey of this Court of the Augmentation, and to your cunning, wit, and power,
shall truly do and execute all and every thing and things which ye ought to do
by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect of the Ordinance,
and establishment of this Court. So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Messenger of the Court of the Augmentation.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office of
Messenger of this Court of the Augmentation, as well in speedy serving all and
singular Process to you to be delivered, without fraud, covine, guile, or
deceit, as also making true and speedy certificate to this Court of the same;
And that you well and truly do and execute all and every other thing and things
which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office. So help you God, and all
Saints.

The Oath of Henry the third French King, for observing of the Statutes of the
Order of the Garter.
WE Henry by the grace of God King of Franoe and Polbgne do swear, vow, and
protest solemnly upon our Honor, and in the word of a King, That we shall
observe, keep, and maintain, the Statutes and Orders of the right Noble Order
of St. Geoege, called the Garter, so far forth as they shall not be found
contrary to our Religion Catholic, Greatness, and Majesty Royal, nor to
the Stat^tes and Ordinances of our two Orders of the blessed Holy Ghost, and
of Saint Mich^el. In witness whereof we have Signed this present with our
own Hand, and caused the same to be sealed with our Privy Seal at Paris the
last day of February, Anno 1585.

Henry
Prilart.

The Oath of a Knight of the Garter, at his first admission, as it was used in
the time of King, P. and Queen Mary.
YOu being chosen to be one of the Honorable Companions of the most Honorable
Order of the Garter, shall promise, and by those holy Evange ifts by you
manifestly touched swear, truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the
Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in the same contained, for so
much as to you pertaines and belongs. And further, That you shall help to
defend and maintanine, so much as in you lies, the Rights and Liberties of the
College of our blessed Lady, and Saint George the Martyr, wherein the
Honorable Order of the Ga^ter shall be founded.

The Oath ministered to them of the Kings Chamber by the Lord Chamberlain, in
the time of King H. 8.
Ia. B. swear by the holy Evangelist, That I faith and truth shall bear unto
our Sovereign Lord Henry 8 King of England, and of France, and Lord of
Ireland, and unto the Queen our Sovereign Lady his wife, and to their issue;
and in and upon the Office of C. D. I shall duly and truly await and attend,
unto which at this time I am admitted and received; I shall not know any
Treason or thing prejudicial compassed, attempted, or imagined, against our
Sovereign Lord, or Sovereign Lady or their Issue, or any of them, but I
shall incontinent upon the said knowledge discover it unto our Lord
Chamberlain, or unto his Deputy, if he have any, or in their absence to one
of their Ushers in the said Chamber; I shall not discover any secrets or things
that may happen to come to mine ears, that shall touch the Kings Council, or
the honor of his Chamber; And I shall be obedient unto my said Lord
Chamberlain, and unto his said Deputy, if he have any, and unto the said
Ushers and their Commandments diligently and faithfully observe and keep to my
power; I shall eschiew all manner of Riots, making of Bandies, Quarrels or
Debate either within the said Chamber, or without, but I shall forbid and let
all such inconveniences as far forth as I may; And also let the said Officers,
or one of them, have knowledge thereof; Also I shall not depart out of the
Kings Court, without License appointed and had of my said Lord Chamberlain, or
of his Deputy, if he have any: Which Premises, and every of them, with all
other Commandments to be given on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord, by
my said Lord Chamberlain or his said Deputy if he have any, or any of the
said Ushers, I shall faithfully observe obey, and keep to the uttermost of my
power. So help me God, and his Saints.

The Oath ministered to the Clerk of the Council to Prince Henry Son to King
James.
YOu shall swear, That well and truly you shall serve the High and Mighty
Prince ^enry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, in the
Office and Clerks of his Council and matters committed to you, or treated of
by his Council, to be kept secret, you shall faithfully keep; And you shall
not know nor understand, nor suffer any thing tending to the hurt or
dis^heriting of his Highness, be decreased by any means, so far forth as ye
may let it; and if ye may not let it, ye shall make it clearly and expressly
known to his Highness; And that ye shall do, and procure and purchase his
Highness profit in all that ye reasonably may As God you help. Perused and
examined by Mr. Stevens the Princes Attorney.

The Oath to be ministered to any of King James his Servants in ordinary or
extraordinary.
YOu shall swear, Faithfully and truly to serve our Sovereign Lord the King,
James of Great Bri^taine, France, and Ireland, his Heirs and Successore; You
shall serve him in the room and place of N. N. in ordinary; You shall know
nothing that shall be prejudicial to his Person, his State, his Crown or
Dignity, but you shall with all diligence make it known to the Lord
Chamberlain, Vice-Chamberlaine, or some other of his Majesty's mest Honorable
Privy Council; You shall be obedient to the Lord Chamberlain,
Vice-Chamberlaine, and Gentlemen-Ushers, in all matters tending to his
Majesty's service. So help you God, and Jesus Christ.

The Oath ordained to be miniflred to Princess Mary's Council, when her
household was established in the 17. year of King H. 8.

YOu shall be true and faithful unto the King our Sovereign Lord King Henry 8
and unto his Heirs and Successors Kings of England; And ye shall be faithful
and true unto my Lady Princess Grace; And ye shall, according to your wit,
discretion, knowledge, and experience, give unto her true and faithful
counsel in all things, as shall be demanded of you by way of good advice and
counsel; Ye shall also keep secret and conserve her said counsel, without
disclosing of the same to any person, except he be of the same Council; And if
the matter touch any of the said Council, ye shall not disclose the same unto
him; Ye shall not also promote nor further any matter in her said Council for
any Meed, Reward, Favor, Affection, or Displeasure; And in case you shall
perceive any thing to be done or attempted contrary to her Honor, Estate,
Degree, or Surety, ye shall to the uttermost of your power, withstand and let
the same. And generally, You shall do all manner of things that unto a good,
true, and faithful Councellor shall appertain. So help you God, and the holy
Contents of this Book.

The Oath ministered to the Treasurers of War, for the Receipt and Issues of
the three Subsidies, and three Fifteens, granted by Act of Parliament in the
21. year of King James.
YOu shall swear, That you being appointed one of the Treasurers for the
receiving of the three Subsidies, and three Fifteenes and Tenths, granted by
the Temporaltie, Shall not issue any part of those Moneys which shall be paid
unto your hands or unto the hands of any other by your appointment or consent,
without the special Warrants of those Persons which are by his Majesty
appointed to be of his Council for the Wars, and in this Act nominated, or
of five of them at the least, whereof two of them to be such as are of His
Majesty's Privy Council, under their Hands.

The Oath ministered to the Council of War, for the true employing of the
three Subsidies, and three Fifteens, granted by Act of Parliament in the 21.
year of King James.
YOu shall swear, That you being one of the Council of War chosen by His
Majesty, and nominated in this Act, shall make no Warrant for any Moneys to be
issued, which are given by this present Act, but for some of those ends which
are expressed in this Act; And that all such Warrants as shall be made by you,
shall mention in them that those Momies are to be employed according to the
true meaning of this Act; and to the best of your means you shall employ the
same accordingly.

The Oath ministered to Garter King of Arms at his Creation.
FIrst, ye shall swear, To honor and obey the Kings Highness, as first and
Sovereign of this most noble Order and after him other Knights of the same
Order, namely in such things as shall belong to your Office, which shall be
found reasonable. And because you be taken as here to be made privy of
Counsel, you shall swear, Always to he a man of silence, true and faith full
in all things here to be done, and shall in no wise disclose any part thereof.

Ye shall swear also, That ye shall be faithful and diligent to fulfill,
perform, and execute all things that shall be committed to your charge and
credit; and diligently to enqure of all the Noble Acts of all and every the
said Noble Knights of the said Order, and shall certify the Register thereof,
that he may put the same in perpetual Memory.

Moreover when any Knight of the said Order shall die, ye shall strait, upon
knowledge thereof, first make the Sovereign privy thereof, and after him the
other Knights of the said Order, to be made privy thereunto

And finally, ye shall swear, That ye shall trusy and faithfully use and
exereise this same Office. So God you help, and these blessed Evangelists.

The Oath of a King of Arms at the time of his Coronation.
YE shall swear by the Oath ye received when ye were made Herald, and by the
faith ye owe to our Sovereign Lord the King, whose Arms you be^re, That you
shall truly keep such, things as be comprised, in those Articles following:

First, when the King shall command you to do any Message either to Enwerour or
King, Prince, or any other Estate of what condition or degree soever he be of,
either within the Realm or without, you shall do it as honorable and truly as
your wit reason, and discretion shall serve you, and as greatly to the
advantage of your said Sovereign and his Realm, and true report bring again
to your foresaid Sovereign, of your Message that ye shall do, as near to the
charge to you committed, in word and in substance as your said reason shall
attain, always keeping your self secret for any manner of motion, except it
be to such persons as you are commanded to utter your Charge unto.

Secondly, you shall do your true endeavor every day to be more cunning than
other in the Office of Arms, so that ye may be the better furnished to teach
others under you, and execute with more wisdom and eloquence, such charges as
your Sovereign or any Noble man of this Realm shall (...) or give unto you by
virtue of the Office which his Highness will erect unto you at any time, not
discovering in no wise such as ye are commanded to keep close, unless it be
prejudicial unto the King his Sovereign Lord, and to this Realm.

Thirdly, you shall do your best endeavor to enquire of all the Noblemen and
Gentlemen within your Province or Marches, which should bear Coats in the
Field, in the Service of our Sovereign Lord or Commissioners and them with
their Issues truly to Register, together with their Arms as they may truly
bear, with their difference due in Arms to be given, and whether they hold
any service of Knights Fee, whereby they should do the King Service for the
defense of his Realm.

Fourthly, ye shall not be strange to teach Heralds and Pursevants of such
doubts as they shall move unto you howbeit you shall ask the Pursevants whether
he have moved it, and desired any of the Heralds to instruct him therein; and
if he say nay; ye shall limit him to one of them, or else ease him your self;
and if you cannot, then you shall show it to the Constable or Marshall: Also
you shall keep from month to month in your Marches your Chapters to the
increase of cunning in the Office of Arms, and the doubts which cannot there
be resolved and answered, you shall move to the Constable and Marshall.

Fifthly, ye shall observe and keep, to your cunning and power, all such Oaths
as ye make when ye were created Herald, to the honor and worship of Nobles,
and great increase of learning and good living, and namely in eschiewing of
slanders, and dis-honest places and persons reproached; and to be always
readier to excuse than to blame any Noble Person unless ye be charged to
speak truth by the Kings Highness, Constable, or Marshall. or any Peer
Judicial; Also you shall promise to Register all Acts of Honor in manner and
form as they are done, as far forth as your power and cunning can extend As
God shall you help, and by the holy Contents of this Book.

The Oath of a Herald at Arms, at the time of his Creation.
FIrst, ye shall sweere, to be true to the most High and Mighty Prince our
Sovereign Lord the King that here is; And if ye have knowledge or any
imagination of Treason, in Language or word, that moves to the derogative or
hurt of his Estate or Highness, who God defend, you shall in that case, as
honestly and as soon as shall be possible discover and show to his Highness,
or to his Noble and discreet Council, and it in no wise conceal.

Secondly, ye shall promise and swear, That ye shall be conversant and
serviceable to all Gentlemen, to do their commandments, to the worship of
Knighthood; and to excuse their Worship by your good Counsel that God has
sent you, ever ready to offer your self unto them.

Thirdly, ye shall swear and promise, To be secret, and to keep the secret of
Knights, Esquires, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, as a Confessor of Arms, and not to
discover them in no wise, except it be Treason, as aforesaid.

Fourthly, ye shall promise and swear. That if it fortune you in any Land or
Country to go or ride, and find any Gentleman of Name and Arms that has lost
his good in Worship of Knighthood in the Kings Service, or in any other place
of Worship, and is fallen into Poverty, ye shall aid, support, and succor
him, in that you may, if that he ask of you goods to his sustenance, ye shall
give him part of that which God has sent you, to your power, and as ye may
bear.

Fifthly, ye shall swear and promise, If ye be in any place where ye hear of
any debate or evil Language between party and party, that is not
worshipful, profitable, nor victuous, that ye report it not forth, but to
their worship, and to the best.

Sixthly, if ye be in any place where you hear debate or language dis-honest
between Gentleman and Gentleman, whereunto you are called as a Witness, or
required by Princes, Judges, or any other, unless the Law do so compel you,
ye shall not open without License of both Parties; and having license, ye
shall for any love, dread, or favor of any party, report the truth.

Seventhly, ye shall promise and swear, To be true and secret to all
Gentlewoman, Widows, or Maids; and in case be that any man would do them
wrong, or enforce them, or disherit them of livelihoods, and they having not
goods to pursue their Rights, if they require you of supportation, you shall
help them with your goods, wisdom, and counsel, and show their griefs to
the Prince and Judges.

Eighthly, ye shall swear and pronounce, That ye shall forsake all places
dishonest of hasfardie, and daily going to common Tavernes and places of
debate, and all manner of vice, and take you to virtues to your power. These
Articles, and all other Articles abovesaid, you shall truly keep So God you
help, and by the Cross of this Sword, that belongs to Knighthood.

The Oath of a Pursevant of Arms, at his Creation.
FIrst, ye shall swear, That ye shall be true to the most High, Mighty, and
most excellent Princess, the Queens most excellent Highness that now is; and
if ye have any knowledge, or hear any imagination of Treason, of Language or
word, that should sound to the derogation or hurt of her Estate and Highness,
which God forbid, ye shall in that case as hastily and as soon as is to you
possible, discover and show it unto her Highness, or to the Honorable and
discreet Council.

Secondly, ye shall also dispose you to be lowly, humbly, and serviceable to
all those States Universal, that be Christians, not lying in wait to blame, ne
hurt none of the said Estates in any thing that may touch their Honors

Thirdly, ye may dispose to be secret and sober in your Port, and not to abuse
in Language, ready to commend, and loath to blame, and diligent in your
service, eschiewing vice, and taking you to virtue, and true in your reports;
And so to exercise whiles you be in the Office of Pursevant, that your merits
may cause your more preferment in the Office of Arms in time to come, All such
Articles and things as belong to a Pursevant of Arms to keep, you shall well
and truly keep and observe. So God you help, and Holidome and by the Contents
of this Book.

The Oath of the Knights of the Round Table, in the time of King Arthur.
NOt to put off your Armor from your Body, but for requisite rest in the
night.

The search for mavelous adventures, whereby to win renown.

To defend the poor and simple people in their right.

Not to refuse aid unto them that shall ask it in any just quarrel.

Not to hurt, offend, or play any lewd part the one with the other.

To fight for the protection, defense and welfare of his friends.

Not to purchase any goods or particular profit, but Honor and the Title of
honesty.

Not to break faith promised or sworn, for any cause or occasion whatsoever.

To put forth and spend his life for the honor of God and his Country, and to
choose rather to die honestly than to live shamefully.

The Oath which the new King of Pelonia made to the Turk, in Anno 1573.
Promise and swear by the (...) ^nighty God merciful, and ^^^ng the maker of
Heaven and Earth, and of all things that are therein, by these holy
Evangelists, by holy Baptism, and by Christian faith, That all those that I
know shall be manifested to high and mighty Solomon, Emperor of the Turks,
whose Empire God certefie, I will be friend to his friends and enemy to his
enemies: I will be a redeemer of his Captives out of the hands of his Enemies,
there sh^^ be no fraud or deceit on my part. If I shall neglect thus to do, I
will be an Apostata, a forsaker of the holy Commandments, of the Gospel of the
Christians; I will say that the Gospel is false and untrue; I will cross both
Alter and Priest; I will slay Swine upon the Fount, I will deny the holy
Trinity, and will worship them; I will commit whoredom upon the Altar; and
will receive the course of the Saints even as God shall behold me from Heaven.

The Oath of Homage done and performed by an Archbishop.
IF your Homage by reason of my Tenure in the Manor of A. in the County of B.
become Leidgman of life and limb, and of earthly worship and faith and troth,
I shall bear unto you, to live and die against all manner of men; as God me
help, and all Saints. I shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth shall
bear to you my Sovereign Lord King H. and to your Heirs Kings of England, of
life and limb, and earthly worship, for to live and die against all people;
and diligently I shall intend unto your needs and bussnesse, after my wit and
power; and your Counsel I shall keep and leine, and truly I shall knowledge;
And the service due of the Temporalties of my Arch Bishopric B. C. the which I
claim to hold of you, and the which ye gave and yield to me; And to you and
your Commandments in that to me appertains and belongs, I shall be
obeysant. As God me help, and all Saints.

The Oath Appointed by Queen Elizabeth, in June 1579. to be ministered by the
Lord President of Wales unto the Council established in those parts, etc.
YOu shall swear, That to the uttermost of your power, wit, and cunning, you
shall true and faithfully to the Queens Highness our Sovereign Lady, and to
her Heirs and Successors; And that you do utterly testify and declare in your
conscience, that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm of England, and of all other her Highness Dominions and Countries, as
well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; And
that no Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have
any Jurisdiction, Power, Supremacy, Preem nence, or Authority: And do promise,
That from henceforth you shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queens
Highness her lawful Heirs and Successors, and to your power shall assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminencies and Authorities, granted
or belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom and Realm.

You shall not know nor have any thing that may any way be prejudicial to her
Highness, or to her Commonwealth, peace and quiet of this her Highness
Realm, but you shall with all diligence reveal and disclose the same to her
Highness, or to such other person or persons of her Graces Privy Council as
you shall think meet, and will soonest convey it, and bring it to her
Highness knowledge.

You shall serve her Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and place of her
Highness Council; You shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated
in any Council, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion, according
to your heart and conscience; in no wise forbearing so to do, for any manner
respect of favor, meed, dread, displeasure, or corruption.

You shall faithfully and uprightly, to the best of your power cause Justice to
be duly and indifferently ministered to the Queens Majesty's Subjects, that
shall have cause to sue for the same, according to the equity and the Order of
the Law.

Finally, You shall be vigilant, diligent, and circumspect in all your doings
and proceedings, touching the Queens Majesty and all her Affairs.

All which points and Articles before expressed, with all other Articles signed
with the Queens Majesty's own hand, and delivered to me the Lord President of
her Highness Council established in those parts, you shall faithfully
observe, keep, and fulfill, to the uttermost of your power, wit, will, and
cunning. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

The Oath that a G^ntleman Usher does give to any that is sworn the Kings
Servant in the time of H. 8.
FIrst, you shall swear upon the holy Evangelists, That you faith and truth
shall bear unto our most gracious and most dread Sovereign Lord and unto his
Issue Kings of England.

Ye shall be here sworn in and unto the room of a Gentleman Usher, or etc.
whereunto at this present time by the Kings Highness Commandment you are
admitted and received, you shall from henceforth truly and diligently attend
and wait.

Ye shall not know or conceal any thing prejudicial compassed, attempted, or
imagined, against our said most gracious and most dread Sovereign Lord the
King or his Issue, or any of them; but you shall incontinently upon the said
knowledge discover the same unto my Lord great Chamberlain, or else to Master
Vice-Chamberlaine, and in their absence, to one of the Ushers of the Kings
Chamber.

Ye shall not discover any secrets or other things that may touch the Kings
most Honorable Council, or to the Honor of his Chamber.

Ye shall be obedient unto the Lord Great Chamberlain Mr. Vice-Chamberlaine,
and unto the Ushers of the said Chamber, and to their Commandments fully, and
keep to the uttermost of your power.

Ye shall eschew all manner of Ryots, Rowtes, unlawful Assemblies, and making
of Bands, Quarrels, Debates, Strifes, Controversies, either within the Kings
Chamber, or without; and ye shall forbid and let the same, to the uttermost of
your power; And ye shall let the said Officers or one of them have knowledge
thereof without any further delay.

Ye shall not wear neither Liverie, Cognizance, nor Badge of no man's, be
retained of no man, but only to the Kings Majesty; nor ye shall not retain
contrary to the Statute

Ye shall not depart out of the Kings Court, without License had and obtained
of my Lord Great Chamberlain, or else of Master Vice-Chamberlaine, or his
Deputy in his absence.

All the which Premises, and every of them with all and singular other
Commandments whatsoever they are, or shall happen to be given you in charge,
on the behalf of our most Gracious and most Excellent Majesty by my Lord
Great Chamberlain, Master Vice-Chamberlaine, or any of the said Ushers; Ye
shall on your behalf observe, perform, fulfill and keep, to the uttermost of
your power. So help you God, and all his Saints, and by the Holy Contents of
this Book.

The Oath Ministered to the Kings Servants, as well Knights and Esquires for the
Body as others, in the time of Henry 8.
YE shall be from henceforth during your life natural, faithful and true, and
faith shall bear, and faithfully and truly ye shall serve the King our
Sovereign Lord H. 8. by the grace of God King of England and France, and Lord
of Ireland, and in earth Supreme Head of the Church of England, and to his
Heirs of his Body begotten, against all men that may live or die, of what
Estate. Degree, or Condition soever they be

Ye shall nothing do or at tempt that in any manner of wise may be hurtful or
prejudicial to our said Sovereign Lord, or to his Heirs; And if it shall
happen at any time hereafter, any thing to come to your knowledge, that in any
manner of ways be hurtful or prejudicial to our said Sovereign Lord, or to
his Heirs, or that may touch the surety or honor of their persons, ye shall
not only let it to the best of your power, but also in all have possible shall
show it to our Sovereign Lord, or to some of his Council attending upon his
Person, so that the same may come to the knowledge of his Grace.

Also ye shall not be, nor stand confederate, nor Banded, nor Band your self,
or yet be retained in any cause or matter, to, or with, or toward any manner
of person, of what estate, condition, or degree soever he be of privily or
openly; neither by Promise, Sign, Indenture, Fee, nor by any other manner of
wise whatsoever it be, otherwise then the Law will suffer or permit you.

You shall also diligently serve the Kings Grace in the room of N. N. and not
depart from the Court where his Grace for the time shall be, unless ye be
licenced so to do by his Grace, or by his Lord Chamberlain, or in his absence
by his Vice Chamberlain, and to be obedient in that they shall command you to
do within the Kings House, or elsewhere, touching the Kings service in that
appertains to the room of N. N. well and truly keep, and observe on your
behalf. So help you God, and all his Saints and by this Book.

The Oath ministered in Parliament to the Duke of Bedford, and other Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, for the according of all Controversies between the
Duke of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Winchester Chancellor of England, in the
fourth year of H. 6.
THat my Lord of Bedford, and my said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and each
of them shall as far forth as her cunning and discretion sufficiently, truly,
justly, and indifferently counsel, and advise the King, and also proceed and
acquit himself in all the said matters and quarrels withouten, that they or
any of them shall privily, or appert make, or show himself, or be party, or
parcel therein naught, being, or eschewing so to do for affection, love,
meed, doubt, or dread) of any person or persons, and that they shall in all
ways keep secret all that shall be conveyed by way of counsel in the matters
and quarrels abovesaid in the foresaid Parliament, withouten that they, or any
of them shall by word, writing, or in any wise open it, or discover it to any
of the said parties, or to any other person that is not of the said Council;
but if he have especial commandment thereto of the King, or of my said Lord
of Bedford, and that each of them shall with all his might and power by him,
and by his strength, and assist by way of Council, or else unto the King to my
said Lord of Bedford, and to the remnant of my said Lords, to put the said
parties to reason, and naught suffer, that any of the said parties by them, or
theirs, proceed or attempt by way of feet against the Kings Peace; nor help,
assist, or comfort any of them hereto, but let him with all her might and
power, and wi^hstand him, and assist unto the King, and my said Lord of Bedford
in keeping of the Kings Peace, and redressing of all such manner of proceedings
by way of feet and force.

The Oath of a Bishop.
J A, B, Doctor in Divinity, late Bishop of D. and now elected Bishop of L. do
verily testify and declare in my conscience, that your Majesty is the only
supreme Governor of this Realm of England, and of all other your Majesty's
Domions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Causes, as
Temporal, and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate
has, or ought to have any Jurisdictory power, superiority, preeminence, or
authority Ecclesiastical or Temporal within this Realm; and therefore I do
utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
superiorities, and authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall
and will bear true faith and allegiance to your Majesty, your lawful Heirs,
and Successors, and to my power shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preeminents, and Authorities granted and belonging to your
Highness, your Heirs, and lawful Successors, or united or annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this your Majesty's Realms; and further I acknowledge and
confess to have the said Bishop of L. and the Possessions there of your
Highness; and after the same I do my homage presently unto your Majesty, to
whom and to your lawful Heirs and Successors, I shall be faithful and true.
So help me God, and the contents of this book.

The Oath of a Privy Counselor, framed now in the time of King James.
YOu shall swear, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Kings Majesty,
and one of his Privy Council; you shall not know, or understand of any manner
thing to be attempted, done or spoken against his Majesty's Person, Honor,
Crown, or dignity Royal, but you shall let and withstand the same to the
uttermost of your power, and either cause it to be revealed unto his Majesty
himself, or to such of his Privy Council as shall advertise his Highness of
the same; you shall in all things to be moved, treated, and debated in
Council, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion according to your
heart and conscience, and shall keep secret all matters committed and revealed
unto you, or that shall be treated of secretly in Council, and if any of the
same Treaties or Counsels shall touch any of the Counselors, you shall not
reveal it unto him, but shall keep the same until such time as by the
consent of his Majesty, or of the Council, publication shall be made thereof;
You shall to your utmost bear faith and allegiance unto the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and shall assist, and defend all
Jurisdictions, Preeminences, and Authorities granted to his Majesty, and
annexed to his Crown against all foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates, or
Potentates, etc by Act of Parliament or otherwise; and generally in all things
you shall do as a faithful and true Servant and Subject ought to do to his
Majesty. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this book.

The Oath of the Lord Privy Seal.
YE shall as far forth as your cunning and discretion suffices, truly,
justly, and evenly execute, and exercise the Office of Keeper of the Kings
Privy Seal to you by his Highness committed, not leaving or eschewing so to
do for affection love, meede doubt, or dread of any person or persons, and ye
shall take special regard that the said Privy Seal in all places where you
shall direct unto, may be in such substantial wise used and safely, that no
other person without the Kings spec^all commandment, or your assent or
knowledge, shall more seal, or imprint any thing with the same; and generally
ye shall observe, fulfill, and do all and every thing which to the Office of
the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal duly belongs and appertains. So help
you God, and by the contents of this book.

The Oath of a Secretary of State.
YOu shall swear, To be a true and faithful Servant unto the Kings Majesty,
as one of the Secretaries of his Majesty's Highness Privy Council; you shall
not know or understand of any matter or thing to be attempted, done, or spoken
against his Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown or Dignity Royal, but you shall
let and withstand the same to the uttermost of your power, and either do or
cause it to be revealed, either to his Majesty himself, or to his Privy
Council; You shall keep secret all matters revealed and committed unto you,
or that shall be secretly treated of in Council, and if any of the said
Treaties or Counsels shall touch any of the said Counselors; you shall not
reveal the same unto him, but shall keep the same until such time as by the
consent of his Majesty, or of the Council publication shall be made thereof;
you shall to your uttermost bear faith and allegiance unto the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs, and lawful Successors and shall assist, and defend all
Jurisdictions. Preeminencies, and Authorities granted to his Majesty, and
annexed to his Crown, against all foreign Princes, Persons, Prelates,
Potentates, etc. by Act of Parhament or otherwise; And generally in all things
you shall do as a faithful and true Servant, and Subject (ought to do) to
his Majesty. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this book.

This clause above noted thus, C. C. is the same which is set down more
largely in the Oath of Supremacy, in the first Act of Parliament, in the first
year of Queen Elizabeth, which Oath must be taken at the same time with this,
and therefore is not needful to be here recited.



The Oath of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
YE shall swear, That well and truly you shall serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, and his people in the Office of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, and ye shall do right to all manner of People, poor and rich, after
the Laws and Usages of this Realm, and truly ye shall council the King and
his Council, you shall leave and keep, and you shall not know, nor suffer the
hurt or dis-heriting of the King, or that the rights of the Crown be decreased
by any mean, as far forth as you may let it, and if you may not let it, you
shall make it clearly and expressly to be known unto the King, with your true
advice and counsel, and that you shall do, and purchase the Kings profit in
all that you reasonably may, as God you help and by the contents of this book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Signet.
YOu shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Heirs and
Successors, Kings and Queens of England; and also you shall keep secret his
Council in all things you shall be privy unto concerning the Office of the
Signet, without uttering or disclosing the same to any person; and if you shall
hear, or know any thing either in word or deed which shall be in any wi^e to
the derogation or hurt of his Majesty's Person and Royal Estate, you shall it
let to your power as in you lies; and as honestly as is possible shall
discover, and show the same to his Highness, or to some of his discreet
Council. So help you God, and by the holy contents of this book.

The Oath of the Deputy of the Town of Calice, ordered by Parliament in Anno
XXVII. Hen. 8.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true unto our Sovereign
Lord King Henry 8. by the grace of God King of England, and of France, defender
of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the Church of
England; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or hurtful
unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or to his Town of ^a^i^e, or Marches of the
same; ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power, and in case ye
cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his Highness, or to such
of his Council as ye think will show it unto him: and ye shall safely keep
to the use of our said Sovereign Lord, and of his Heirs, and defend to the
uttermost of your power this his Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, as
much as to you by reason of your Office belongs; And in all things to be done
that touches the safeguard, defense, and good Governance of the said Town,
and Marches; Ye shall give as it shall need from time to time your true,
faithful, and diligent Counsel to the other the Kings Officers of the same
Town and Marches, and ye shall at no time be absent from your said Office
without the Kings special license obtained in that behalf; Ye shall well and
truly oversee the Marshall, and all other Officers his, and their Ministers and
Servants, and their Charge, and every one of them in his degree entreat in his
Office as appertains, not suffering any of them to do in his said Office, or
by color thereof, any excess, extortion, bribery, or exaction; and if any of
them be found, or approved in that case culpable, that without favor or delay
ye proceed to the punishment of them, and every of them to the example of
other; Ye shall do your devoyer at your power to the keeping of the Peace
among all estates, and other persons of what degree or condition soever they be
within the said Town dwelling, or thereunto from time to time repairing, not
suffering any Congregations, Assemblies, Commotions, or Conventicles to be made
within the said Town, against the said Peace, or against the good, restfull,
and Politic Governance of the said Town; And if any person of what degree or
condition soever he or they be within the said Town, that provokes privily,
or appartly any such Congregation, Assembly, Commotion, Sedition or Conventicle
as be found faulty thereof, either else that takes upon him any unlawful
maintenance, to the perturbance or violation of the said Peace, or against
right to oppress by might any person; Ye shall resist and let, with the
advice and aid of the residue of the Kings Council of the said Town, and do
such punishment thereunto as with reason may serve, without any exception of
person, not sparing so to do for favor, love, dread, or meede of any person;
And that as much as in you shall lie, to your power you shall foresee that the
said Town be sufficiently Victualled from time to time, as unto the same
necessarily shall appertain or belong; And ye shall oversee the Rule and
Governance of the Mayor, and Aldermen of the said Town touching all manner of
Victual and other things ^ppertaining to their charge for the Common Weal,
profit, and policy of the said Town, and if any default ye sinde therein ye
shall minister and show it unto them, charging them to amend and redress it,
and if they be therein negligent or froward, ye shall then by the said advice
purvey such remedy by your wisdom and discretion as can be though most
expedient with reason; And if you, and the said Counsel cannot provide remedy
in that behalf, that then ye shall disclose the some to the Kings Highness or
to such of the Kings Council as ye think verily will inform the Kings
Highness thereof with speed; And ye shall administer truly, rightfully, and
indifferently, Justice to all manner person and persons that shall have any
cause moved or depending before you in the said Town and Marches, without
having any manner of respect to any person for love, meede, cread, or favor:
And ye shall in time conveniable, after your said discretion, visit, and
oversee the Locks and shutting of the Gates and Posternes of the said Town,
and also the governance of the Watch, Tower walls, and Ditches of the same, and
generally all other things necessary for the surety, safeguard, and defense
thereof; And ye shall not appoint, nor admit any person or persons into any
room within the retinue of the said Town belonging to your Admission: but if
the same person or persons be borne within the Realm of England, Wales,
Ireland, the said Town of Calice, and the Marches of the same; and that the
said person or persons be not Artificers, except he or they be a Bowyer, or
Armorour, Fletcher, Crosse-bow-maker, or Smith, and the same person so by you
named not to be admitted to any such room, nor to enjoy nor exercise the same
room to the time he be viewed, examined, and enabled thereunto, as well by the
Treasurer and Comptroller, as by the residue of the Kings Council there then
being present; And you shall admit, nor suffer any Alien borne out of the Kings
obeisance, to take and inhabit any dwelling house within the Town of Galice
and Marches of the same as much as to you appertains, except the said person
be licenced by the Kings Letters Patents so to do under his Great Seals any
Grant, or Grants heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding; And ye shall
see surely to be kept, and safely and straightly cause to be observed as much
as in you lies all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be
made by the King our Sovereign Lord Henry 8 or by his Council authorized for
the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good orders of his Town of
Calice, and the Marches of the same doing due execution upon the transgressors
of any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the
persons so transgressing for affection, meede, dread, or any other cause
whatsoever; As God you help, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Guysnes, ordered by Parliament Anno 27. H. 8.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King Hen. 8. by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defender of
the Faith Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs, and if you shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial
or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or his Town of Caliee, or
Marches of the same, ye shall refist the same to the uttermost of your power,
and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his
Highness, or to such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; And
ye shall safely keep to the use, and behoof of our said Sovereign Lord, and
of his Heirs, and defend to the uttermost of your power the Castle, Town, and
County of Guysnes, by his Highness appointed and assigned to your safe
keeping, and in all things to be done that touches the defense, and good
Governance of the Town of Calic^, and Marches of the same; ye shall give from
time to time your true, faithful, and diligent counsel and assistance to the
Kings Deputy for the time being, and other of the Council and Officers of the
same Town and Marches, and ye shall be personally remaining, and be resident
upon your room and Office there, and atno time to be absent from the same
without the Kings special license obtained; And you shall well and truly
oversee that all the said Officers and Ministers of the said Castle and Town,
and County of Guyjnes, that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you
shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done all and every thing and
things that unto them shall appertain and belong concerning the sure and safe
keeping of the said Castle, Town, and County, and if any of them be found, and
approved to be remiss or negligent in doing his, or their duty, that then ye
without any favor or delay, proceed to the correction and punition of him or
them so offending; and that ye do your duty to your power to the keeping of
the Peace among all and every person and persons, of what degree or condition
he or they be dwelling within the said Castle, Town and County of Guysnes, or
thereunto from time to time repairing, not suffering any unlawful
Congregations, Conventions or Conventicles to be made within the said Castle,
Town, or County of Guysm^ against good, restfull, and Politic Governance of
the same, and duly to correct all and every person or persons so offending; and
that as much as in you shall lie, ye shall foresee that the said Castle be
furnished with Victuals, as with all other things appertaining to the safe
custody of the same that to you belongs of the duty of your said Office; And
that you truly, rightfully, and indifferently administer Justice unto all and
every person and persons that hereafter shall have any cause or matter moved,
or depending before you in the said Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes,
without having any manner of respect to any person or persons, for love, dread,
meede, malice, or affection; And that you from time to time as much as in you
is foresee, that the Kings Highness be not deceived, or defrauded in any of
his Possessions, Rents, Revenues, and Profits which to his Highness should
appertain within the said Castle, Town, and County; And ye shall no appoint,
ne admit any person or persons within the retinue of the said Castle; but if
the said person or persons be borne within the Realm of England, Wales,
Ireland, the said Town of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said
person be sworn to be true Leigeman unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and
unto his Heirs; And finally, ye shall observe and keep, or cause to be
observed and kept as much as in you shall be during the time that you shall be
Captain there, all manner of statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be
made by our said Sovereign Lord his Heirs, or Successors or by his or their
Council authoris^d for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good
orders of the Castle, Town, and County of Guysnes, doing due execution upon
the Transgressors offending any of the same Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances,
having no regard to the person so offending, for love, favor, meed, dread, or
other cause whatsoever. So help you God, Holydame, and all Saints, and by this
book.

The Oath of the High Marshall of Calice, ordained by Parliament in Anno 27.
Hen. 8.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King H. 8. by the Grace of God King of England and France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs; And if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial
or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or
Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power;
And in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his
Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye
shall be diligent obedient and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town and
Marches for the time being, in those things that to the service of the Kings
sure, good politic Government, and defense of the said Town and Marches
appertains, and in all things to be done that touches the defense,
safeguard, and good Government of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the
same, shall give as it shall need from time to time your true, faithful, and
dilicounsell to the Deputy for the time being, and to the Kings Council, and
Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid, and assist to the
uttermost of your power; and ye shall set, or do to be set the Kings Watch,
and that visit from time to time as unto your Office appertains, as it is
ordained to be used, searched; And ye can any better order or devize, ye shall
show it unto the Deputy, and Kings Council of the said Town and Marches, to
the intent it may be set in the surest, and stricktest way for the safeguard of
the said Town and Marches; and that ye present not, or do to be presented
nor imprisoned, nor cause to be imprisoned, any manner of person, Watch man, or
other without reasonable or just cause, and if any be imprisoned may be
delivered without Fees, or Costs paying. And that ye shall duly and truly
Arrest, and do to be Arrested, all, and every person and persons, according to
the Laws used and accustomed within the said Town, and also all and every
other person or persons that ye shall know to be fugitive, taking the Fees
thereunto limited and accustomed without excess; and also that you take
Surety, or do to be taken of each Prisoner, as well of the Plaintiff as of
the Defendant, to pursue, and answer as the Law will ordain, so that every
person that comes into the Kings Court may have full right; and if any person
by chance medsy, drawing Weapon, or smiting, that ye lead, or cause to be led
to Prison, there to remain according to the Laws Customs, and Ordinances of
the Town; And that ye Present every fault Presentable, and that ought by you
to be Presented by virtue of your Office, and if ye see any default, or that
ye be required of any person to take any distress for doing or cleansing of
the said Town that ye do it duly, and truly, and cause it to be done by the
Officers under you, so that no man have cause to complain thereof; And ye
shall make good and true Records of all manner of things that ought to be
Recorded t^king no other Fees for the same then of right and reason have been
used of old time; And ye shall not hold with no Party against the other, nor
none sustain; but ye shall be true Reverentary, and Reporter of all that
which belongs unto your Office of Marshall, and if ye hear, or weet of any
Mennaces or debate between any parties that ye take, or cause to be taken of
both said Parties Sureties, to the intent that the Peace may be kept and holden
for the said Town and Marches, and ye shall see surely to be kept, and
straightly cause to be observed as much as in you lies, all manner of Statutes,
Laws, Ordinances made, or to be made by our Sovereign Lord King Hen. 8. or his
Heirs, or by his Council authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition,
defense, and good order of this Town of Calice and of the Marches of the same,
doing due execution upon the Transgressors of any of the same Statutes, Laws,
and Ordinances, having no regard to the person so Transgressing for affection,
meede, dread, or any other cause whatsoever.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of the Castle of Calice, ordained by Parliament in
Anno 27. H. 8.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King Hen 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of
the Faith, Lord of Ireland and in Earth supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial or
hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or
Marches of the fame; Ye shall reside the same to the uttermost of your power,
and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his
Highness or unto such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye
shall give as it shall need from time to time your true, faithful, and
diligent counsel to the Kings Deputy of his Town, and Marches of Calice for
the time being, and to the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and
Marches, and them shall aid and assist to the uttermost of your power, in all
things to be done concerning safeguard, defense, and good governance of the
said Town and Marches; Ye shall safely keep true English to the use and
behoof of our Sovereign Lord, and of his Heirs to the uttermost of your
power, his Castle and Fortress of Calice, by his Highness appointed and
assigned to your safe keeping; Ye shall personally remain, and be resident
upon your said room, and Office there, and at no time to be absent from the
same without the Kings special license for the same obtained; And you shall
well and truly oversee that all Officers, Soldiers and Ministers of the said
Castle and Fortress, that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you
shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done, all and every thing and
things that unto them shall appertain and belong, concerning the sure and safe
keeping of the said Castle and Fortress; and if any of them be found and
proved to be remiss or negligen in doing his, or their duty, or duties, that
then ye without favor or delay proceed to the correction and punition of him
or them so offending; And that you do your duty to your power to the keeping
of the Peace among all and every person or persons; of what condition he or
they be dwelling within the said Castle or Fortress or thereunto from time to
time repairing, not suffering any unlawful Congregations, Conventions, or
Conven^icles to be made within the said Castle or Fortress, against good,
restfull, and Politic Government of the same, and duly to correct all and
every person and persons offending; And that as much as in you shall lie, you
shall see that the Castle and Fortress be furnished as well with Victuals, and
with all other things appertaining to the safe custody of the same that to you
belongs by duty of your Office, and that you truly, rightfully, and
indifferently administer Justice to all and every person and persons, that
hereafter shall have any Cause or matter moved, or depending before you in the
said Castle or Fortress, without having any manner of respect to any person or
persons, for dread, meed, malice, or affection; And ye shall not appoint, ne^
admit any person or persons within the retinue of the said Castle or Fortress,
but if the said person or persons be borne within the Realm of England, Wales,
and Ireland, or being English borne within the said Town of Calice, or Marches
of the same; and that the said person to be true Leigeman unto the King our
Sovereign Lord, and to his Heirs. And finally, ye shall observe and keep,
or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be during the time ye
shall be Lieutenant there, all manner Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, and
to be made by our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs, or his Successors, or by
their Council authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense,
and good Orders of the said Castle and Fortress, doing due execution upon the
Transgressors so offending any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances,
having no regard to any person so offending for affection, meed, dread, or any
other cause whatsoever. So God, etc.

The Oath of the Treasurer of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in the
27. year of Hen. 8.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Loveraigne Lord
H. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of the
Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs, and if ye shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial
and hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or
Marches of the same; Ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power
and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his
Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him;
Ye shall be diligent, obedient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town,
and Marches for the time being in those things that to the service of the King,
sure and Politic Governance, and defense of the said Town and Marches
appertains, and in all things to be done that touches the safeguard and
defense, and good governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the
same; Ye shall give as it shall be need from time to time your true, faithful,
and diligent counsel to the Deputy for the time being and to the Council and
Officers of the same Town and Marches, and them aid, and assist to the
uttermost of your power, and that to your knowledge, wit, and power, for as
much as in you is during the time you shall be in your Office, you shall
endeavor your f^lfe to see his Highness answered, and truly satisfied of all
Rents, Revenues, issues, Profits, and Commodities, as well casual as certain,
whatsoever they be or shall be which his Highness of right ought for to have,
or hereafter shall have, or be, or shall be to him belonging by any manner of
mean within the said Town, County, and Marches; and that he be in no wise
defrauded, or deceived thereof by your negligence or default; and that ye make
no payment of none Wages to none Officer nor other Soldier, unto such time as
due Muster be had, viewed, and taken, and the same comptrolled by the
Comptrollers Book for the time being; And ye shall from time to time, during
the time ye shall be in your Office, see all Artificers which be, or shall be
in Wages under your Governance and Rule, diligently, duly, and truly exercise
and occupy their Occupations, and Mysteries in the Kings Works, and that you
shall not appoint, or admit any person or persons into the Office or room of a
Spear, or other Soldier within your retinue, but if the said person or
persons be borne within the Realm of England, Wales, Ireland, the said Town
of Calice, or Marches of the same; and that the said person be sworn to be
true Leige-man unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and his Heirs, and be an
able person to serve the King, for the defense of the said Town and Marches;
And sinally you shall observe and keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much
as in you shall be during the time that you shall be in your Office, all manner
Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made, or to be made by our said Sovereign Lord,
his Heirs and Successors, or by his or their Council authorized for the same,
for the safeguard tuition, defense, and good Orders of the said Town and
Marches. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Ruisbanke, as it was ordained by Parliament in
Anno 27. of Hen. 8.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King Henry the eight, by the Grace of God, King of England. and of France,
Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the
Church of England, and to his Heirs; and if ye shall know any thing that
shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto
his Town of Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the
uttermost of your power, and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay
declare the same unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think
will show it unto him; Ye shall give from time to time as it shall need your
true, faithful, and diligent Counsel to the Kings Deputy of his Town and
Marches, and them shall aid and assist to the uttermost of your power in in
things to be done concerning the safeguard, defense, and good Governance of the
said Town and Marches; ye shall safely keep true English to the use and
behoof of our said Sovereign Lord, and of his Heirs, and defend to the
uttermost of your power his Castle and Fortress of Ruisbanke, by his Highness
appointed and assigned to your said keeping; Ye shall be personally remaining
and refident upon your said Office and Room there, and at no time to be absent
from the same without the Kings special license for the same obtained; And you
shall well and truly oversee that all Officers, Soldiers, and Ministers of the
said Castle and Fortress, that shall serve the Kings Highness there under you
shall diligently do, cause, and suffer to be done, all and every thing and
things that unto them shall appertain and belong, concerning the sure and safe
keeping of the said Castle and Fortress, and if any of them be found, and
proved to be remiss, or negligent in doing his or their duty; That then ye
without favor, or delay, proceed to the correction and punition of him, or
them so offending, and that you do your duty to your power to the keeping of
the Peace among all and every person and persons, of what degree or condition
ye or they be dwelling within the said Castle or Fortress, or thereunto from
time to time repairing, not suffering any unlawful Congregations, Conventions,
or Conventicles to be made within the said Castle or Fortress against good,
restfull, and Politic Governance of the same, and duly to correct all and
every person and persons offending; and that as much as in you shall lie you
shall see that the said Castle and Fortress be furnished as well with Victual
as with all other things appertaining to the safe custody of the same that to
you belongs by duty of your said Office; and that you truly, rightfully, and
indifferently administer Justice to all, and every person and persons that
hereafter shall have any cause or matter, moved or depending before you in the
said Castle or Fortress, without having any manner of respect to any person or
persons for love, dread, meed, malice, or affection; And ye shall not admit ne
appoint any person or persons within the said Castle and Fortress, but if the
said person or persons be borne within the said Realm of England, Wales,
Ireland, or being English borne within the said Town of Calice, or Marches of
the same; and that the said person be sworn to be true Leige-man unto the King
our Sovereign Lord and unto his Heirs; And finally, you shall observe and
keep, or cause to be observed and kept as much as in you shall be during the
time you shall be Lieutenant there, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and
Ordinances made, and to be made by your said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs, or
his Successors or by his or their Council authorized for the same, for the
safeguard, tuition, defense, and good orders of the said Castle and Fortress,
doing due execution upon the transgressors offending any of the said Statutes,
Laws, and Ordinances, having no regard to the person so offending for love,
favor, meed, dread, or other cause what soever. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Hannues, as it was ordained by Parliament, in
Anno 27. Hen. 8.
THe said Lieutenant shall take the like Oath as is ordained for the Lieutenant
of Ruisbanke.

The Oath of the Comptrollor of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in
Anno 27. Hen. 8.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King Hen. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defender of
the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of the Church of
England, and to his Heites, and if you shall know any thing that shall be
prejudicial or hurtful unto his Highness, or his Heirs, or unto his Town
of Calice, or Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost
of your power; and in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same
unto his Highness, or unto such of his Council as ye think will show it
unto him; ye shall be diligent, obedient, and as Tendant to the Deputy of the
said Town and Marches for the time being, in those things that to the service
of the Kings. Suer, good Politic Governance, and defense of the said Town
and Marches appertains; And that you shall not be absent from your said
Office without the Kings special License obtained in that behalf, and in all
things to be done that touches the safeguard, defense, and good governance of
the said Town of Cilice and Marches of the same shall give as it shall need
from time to time your true, faithful, and diligent counsel for the time
being and to the Kings Council and Officers of the same Town and Marches, and
them aid and assist to the uttermost of your power; And you shall so much as in
you is that due Musters shall be taken at all the whole retinue, at two
several times in the year before the paying of their Wages, and oftener if
need shall be thought by the Deputy and the Kings Council of the said Town to
be needful; and in as much as in you is, and shall be from time to time, ye
shall see that the Deputy, Soldiers and all other Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, be resident, attendant, and furnished as to them in every degree
appertains; and such as ye shall find defective, or faulty from time to
time; ye shall reform, and do therein as to your Office belongs; ye shall
also diligently and particularly oversee the Provisions made, and to be made of
all and every thing and things necessary and expedient for the Kings Works,
Buildings, and Reparat one within the said Town and Marches, and diligently
see that all Artificers, and Workmen, that from time to time shall be retained
in the Kings Wages, shall do their duties in all such things for the which
they are so retained; And that you from time to time, as much as in you is,
foresee that the Kings Highness be not deceived, nor defrauded of any of his
Possessions, Rents, Revenues, Woods, Waters, Customs, Forfeitures, and other
Profits, as well certain as casual, whatsoever they be which to his Highness
shall of right appertain. And that ye shall not appoint, nor admit any person
or persons into the room of a Soldier within your retinue, but if the said
person or persons be borne within the said Realm of England, Wales, and
Ireland, and the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, and the said
person to be sworn to be true Leige-man unto, the King our Sovereign Lord,
and to his Heirs; and to be an able person to serve the King for defense of
the said Town and Marches. And finally, ye shall observe and keep, or cause to
be observed and kept, as much as in you shall be, during the time that you
shall be in your Office, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made and
to be made, ut supra.

The Oath of the Master Porter, as it was ordained by Parliament, in Anno 27.
H. 8.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King Henry 8. by the grace of God King of England, and of France, Defender of
the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in each Supreme Head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs; and if ye shall know any thing that shall be pre^udiciall or
hurtful unto his Highness or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Callic^, or
Marches of the same; ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power;
And in case ye cannot, ye shall without delay declare the same unto his
Highness, or unto such of his Council, as ye think will show it unto him; Ye
shall be diligent obedient, and attendant to the Deputy of the said Town and
Marches, for the time being, in those things that to the service of the King
Suer, good politic Governance and defense of the said Town and Marches
appertains, and in all things to be done as touches the safeguard, defense
and good governance of the said Town of Calice, and Marches of the same, shall
give, as it shall need, from time to time, your true, faithful, and diligent
counsel to the Deputy, for the time being; And to the Kings Council and
Officers of the same To ^ne and Marches, and them aid and assist to the
uttermost of your power; Ye shall safely keep duly and truly, the Keys of the
Gates of this Town of Calice at all times, as to your Office appertains; and
if that you may hear or esp^ coming by Water or by Land any ^idings, you shall
do it to be known to the Kings Deputy of the said Town and Mar^^es with
diligence; And ye shall not raise nor suffer to be done or raised any new
customs which might turn to prejudice or hinderance of any person. And
finally, ye shall see surely to be kept, and straightly cause to be observed,
as much as in you lies, all manner of Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances made or
to be made by our said Sovereign Lord or his Heirs and Successors, or by his
Council authorized for the same, for the safeguard, tuition, defense, and good
Orders of this Town of Calice, and Marches of the same doing due Execution
upon the Transgressors of any of the said Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances,
having no regard to the person so transgressing, for affection, meed, dread, or
any other cause whatsoever, So God etc.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of Newenham Bridge, as it was ordained by
Parliament, in Anno 27. H. 8.
THe said Lieutenant shall take like Oath as is Ordained before for the
Lieutenant of Ruitbanke.

The Oath of the under Marshall of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament, in
Anno 27. Hen. 8.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
King Henry 8. by the grace of God King of England, and of France, Defend or of
the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme head of the Church of England,
and to his Heirs; and if you shall know any thing that shall be prejudicial
or hurtful to his Highness or his Heirs, or unto his Town of Calice, or
Marches of the same, ye shall resist the same to the uttermost of your power;
and in case ye cannot ye shall without delay declare the same to his Highness,
or to such of his Council as ye think will show it unto him; Ye shall be
obedient to the Kings Deputy for the time being, in all things to be done, that
touches the safeguard, defense, and good governance of the said Town of
Calice, and Marches of the same; ye shall give, as it shall need, from time to
time, your true, faithful, and diligent counsel to the Kings Deputy for the
time being, and to the Kings Council, and Officers of the same Town and
Marches, and them aid and assist to the uttermost of your power; Ye shall truly
fet, and do to be set the stand-Watch nightly on the Walls of the said Town at
the Castle hill, and shall suffer no person or persons to keep and furnish the
said stand-watch but such person or persons as shall be by you appointed and
sworn according to the Oath for the same devised; and also take sureties for
his or their Abearing in the Watch; And that ye neither present, nor do to be
presented, ne imprisoned, nor cause to be imprisoned, any manner of person or
Watchman, nee other whatsoever, without reasonable and true cause; And if you
find any persons in Chance medly, drawing any weapon, or smiting, that ye do
lead, or cause to be lead, him or them to prison without any let; And that ye
present, or do to be presented, every fault that belongs to your Office to
be presented duly and truly; and that ye take not, or cause to be taken any
other fees of any person or persons then of right and of reason have bin used,
and of old time accustomed, belonging to your Office; And also you shall not
hold with no party against other nor none sustain; but ^ee shall be true
Referender of all that that belongs to your Office of under Marshall and ye
shall nightly be in the Marketplace to take the Report of the Typpedstaves of
the furnish^ng of the Watches in the East and West Houses on the Walls, and
shall certify the same Report unto the Kings Deputy immediately. And all other
things do that appertain to your said Office of under-Marshall, during the
time you shall continue in your said Office. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of them that be or shall be made of the Kings Council of the Town
and Marches of Calice, as it was ordained by Parliament in Anno 27. Hen. 8.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall be good, true, and faithful unto our
Sovereign Lord King Henry the 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, and of
France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth supreme head of
the Church of England, and to his Heirs and ye shall be ready with good
attendance to come to the place of Council holden for the King, where it shall
be assigned and appointed by the Deputy of his Town, and Marches of Calice for
the time being, and not absent you therefrom without reasonable cause of
excusation, and that in all matters, causes, and questions that by the said
Council be, or shall be opened moved, stirred, or asked, you shall say and
utter your good advice, and opinion, clearly after your discretion and
understanding, showing, and giving in conclusion your true and faithful
counsel, not letting for favor, affection, love, affinity, hatred, wrath had,
or borne to any party, or for corruptions of any goods, or other things
whatsoever it be; And that all manner Languages, Reasons, Conclusions had,
moved, or uttered in the said Council ye shall effectually keep them secretly,
and not discover them in no wise in other form or manner then by the same
Council shall be ordained, devised, and accorded; and whereas you can devise,
think, or purpose any thing, form, or rule that might be evident to turn to
the honor, weal, and commodity of the King our Sovereign Lord or to the good
governance of this Town and Marches, ye shall at all times show, and move it
to the Council to the intent that it may be ordained and executed. These
things abovesaid, and every of them with all their circumstances and
dependances ye shall duly exercise, use keep and do from time to time during
your abiding in the said Council, with all the spirits of your good mind. So
help you God, and the Holy dame, and by this book.

The Oath given to a Knight of the Bath at the time of his creation.
GReat Worship be this noble Order unto you, and Almighty God give you Grace
well to keep it; you shall be strong in the Faith of Holy Church, you shall
releeve as right requires, Widows Maids, and Orphants; you shall love and
dread God above all things, you shall love the King your Sovereign Lord, and
him and his right defend to your power; you shall suffer no Extortion as far
forth as you may nor sit in any place where wrongful Judgment shall be given
to your knowledge; and as great honor be this noble Order unto you, as it was
to any of your Kin or Progenitors, before you or any others.

The Oath of the Captains and Soldiers serving the Estates of Zeland.
WE swear and promise, To be faithful to the Queens Majesty of England,
our Sovereign, and to the general united Provinces of the Low Countries,
especially to the Estates of this Province of Zeland, to the end to keep his
Town of Flushing, with the Forts belonging to the same for the assurance of
her Majesty, the profit of the said Estates, and the maintenance of the true
Christian Religion, as it is at this present exercised as well in England as in
the Town and Country of Zeland, and to yield all due obedience to our
Governor chief, and Captains. So God us help.

The Oach and Homage made by James the King of Scots, unto King Henry 6. in the
second year of his Reign over England.
I James Steward King of Scots, shall be true and faithful unto you Lord
Henry, by the grace of God King of England and France, the noble and Superior
Lord of the King of Scotland, which I hold and claim to hold of you; and I
shall bear you my faith and fidelity of life and limb, and worldly honor,
against all men; and faithfully I shall knowledge, and shall do to you service
due to the Kingdom of Scotland. So God help me, and these holy Evangelists.

The Oath of a Tenant that does Atturne to the Lord of a Manor.
YOu shall become true and lawful Tenant, and true faith bear to the Lord of
this Manor, for such Lands as you hold of the same Lordship, and do such
Customs and Services, as of right ye ought to do, saving the faith that you
bear to any other Lands So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath used in a Court Baron, to swedre any to the Queens Highness.
YOu shall be true Liegeman, and true faith bear to our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and to her Heirs and
Successors; You shall be no Thief, nor Thiefs Feir, but if you know of any,
you shall do the Queens Majesty's Justices to weet of them, as soon as you
can and you shall live by such good and true occupation as God lent you,
uprightly and truly, so far as God will give you grace. So help you God, and
by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath that is to he given to any Jury, before Evidence given in against a
prisoner at the Bar.
YOu shall true Deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
Prisoner at the Bar as you shall have in charge, according to your Evidence as
near as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of
this Book.

The Oath given to a Baylisse or Sergeant, that attends on any Jury or
Inquest at an Assize.
YOu shall well and truly keep this Inquest from meat and drink, fire and
candle; you shall not suffer any man to speak with them, neither shall you
your self speak with them, more than to ask them, If they be agreed, until
such time as they be agreed. So help you God, and by the Contents of this
Book.

The Oath for Evidence upon the Arraignement of the Prisoner at the Bar.
THe Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest against the Prisoner at the
Bar, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth as
near as God shall give you grace So help you God, and by the Contents of this
Book.

The Oath to be given by any jury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be tried.
YOu shall truly try this Suit of Nisi prius between party and party,
according to the Evidence as shall be given you in Court, as near as God shall
give you grace. So help you God and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between a party and
party, at an Nisi prius.
THe Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest concerning the matter in
variance, shall be the truth and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so
near as God shall give you grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of
this Book.

The same Oath that your foreman has sworn, you of your part shall well and
truly keep. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath of the great Inquest.
YE shall truly enquire, and due presentment make of all such things as you are
charged withal on the Queens behalf, the Queens Council, your own, and
your fellows, you shall well and truly keep; And in all other things the truth
present. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of indictment.
THe Evidence that you shall give to the Inquest, upon this Bill shall be the
truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; And you shall not let so
to do for malice, hatred, or evil will, nor for meed, dread, favor, or
affection. So help you God, and the holy Contents of this Book.

The Oath of such as are to be bayled upon suspicion for Felony or Murder.
J A. B. shall from henceforth during all my life, be true Liegeman, and true
faith bear unto our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, and to her Heirs and
Successors Kings and Queens of this Realm; and shall commit no Murder,
Treason, or Misprision of Treason, nor consent or agree to any such Offense,
nor shall know any peril or damage to his Grace, or to the Realm, or other
Dominions aforesaid, but shall reveal and disclose it with all speed unto such
as have the Laws in Government; nor shall commit any Felony or Murder, or be
accessory to any such Offense or Offenses; but shall live a good and an
obedient Subject during my life. So help me God, and the Contents of this
Book.

The Oath of the Approver banished.
HOc Audis due Coronator quod Ego, A A. sum Latronius equi vel Alterius Rei,
vel Homicidia, unius per homines vel Plurimorum and fell. Dom. Regis H. and quia
multa Mula, and Latricinia, Perpetram in hac Terra abjura Regnum H. Regis
Anglia, and deheo me festinare versus portum de etc. quem dedisse mihi, and
quod non debeo devertere ab altu via, et si faciam volo quod sivi captus sicut
latro and fell. Dom. Regis, ut quod apud etc. queram diligentur Transitum meum,
and non expectabo ibi, visi fluxum, et refluxum maris unum si transitus haberi
poterit, and visi Tanto Spatio abire potero, iho quolibet die in mare usque ad
genua tentane transire, and visi hoc potero infra, 40. dios continues, mittum
me iterum in ecelesium sicut latero and fell. Dom. Regis, sic me Deus adjuvet,
secundum judicium.

The Oath which Philip Duke of Burgoyne took, acknowledging, and promising to
obey King H. 5. as the right Inheritor of the Kingdom of France, After Charles
the first Kings Death.

I Philip, Duke of Eurgoyne, For me and my Heirs, swear, and make Oath upon
these holy Evangelists, to Henry of England, and Heir Apparent and Regent of
France, by the Sovereign Lord King Charles, that meekly and faithfully shall
obey the same King Henry, in all things that appertain to the King of France,
as to the Commonweal of the same Realm; and immediately after the death of
the said King Charles, our Sovereign Lord, we shall be true and faithful
Leiges to the said King Henry, his Heirs, and Successors; and furthermore, we
shall not be of Council, nor give our consent to no things that may be to the
prejudice of the same King H. his Heirs, and Successors, wherein they may
suffer any derogation or detriment of their bodies, of their Members,
Possessions, or Honors; And if we know of any conspiracy against him, his
Heirs, or Successors in all the have to us possible, either by our Letters, or
else by our. Trusty Messengers, to declare, That they may the better provide
to eschew the perils thereof.

When the Dukes Oath was thus finished, as many as were present there, both of
the Kings Council, and also of the Parliaments, Bishops, Lords, Knights, and
Commons, made the same Oath to the King. and 23 and 24. days of the same
month of May 14. the Chancellor of France, and many other Lords, Bishops,
Prelates, and Noblemen of the Realm gave the like Oath to King H,



The Oath of the Chancellor of England.
YE shall swear^, That well, All the Oaths marked with this mark, were Copied
out of an old Roll in Parchment, remaining in the Office of the Petty Bagg in
January, 1625.
and truly, ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord the King, and his People, in
the Office of Chancellor, and ye shall do Right to all manner of People, Poor
and Rich, after the Laws and usuages of this Realm, and truly ye shall
counsel the King, and his counsel ye shall-laine and keep and ye shall not
know nor suffer the hurt nor dis-heriting of the King, nor that the Rights of
the Crown, be distressed, by any meane^, as far forth as you may let; And if
ye may not let it, ye shall make it clearly and expressly known to the King,
with your true advice and counfaile; And that ye shall do, and purchase the
kings profit, in all that ye may, as God help you and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Exchequer
YE shall swear, That well, and truly, ye shall serve the King our
Sovereign Lord, and his People in the Office of Treasurer, And ye shall do
Right to all manner of People, Poor and Rich, of such things as touches your
Office; And the Kings Treasure truly, ye shall keep and dispend; And truly
ye shall counsel the King, and his counsel ye shall layne, and keep; and
that ye shall neither know nor suffer the Kings hurt, nor his dis-heriting nor
that the Rights of his Crown be distresled by any means, as far forth as
ye may let; And if ye may not let it, ye shall make knowledge thereof
clearly and expressly, to the King, with your true advice, and counsel: And
ye shall do, and purchase the Kings profit in all that ye may reasonably
do, as God you help, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Barons of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the the King, in the
Office of Baron of his Exchequer; And that truly ye shall charge, and
discharge all people that have Account before you; and that ye shall do Right
to all manner of People, as well to Poor as to Rich And that for Highness,
nor for Riches, nor for hatred, nor for the estate of no manner of person, nor
for any good deed, gift, ^e promise of any person, the which is made to you or
may be made to you nor by crafts. nor by Engines, the Kings Right, nor none
other persons ye shall disturb, let, nor respite against the Laws of the
Land, nor the Kings Debts, ye shall put in respite where that they may goodly
be leavied; And that the Kings Needs ye shall speed before all other, And
that neither for gift, wages, nor good deed, ye shall lain, disturb, nor let
the profit, and the advantage of the King, in advantage of any other person,
nor of your self; And that no things ye shall take of any person, for to do
wrong, or Right to delay of, for to deliver, or delay the people, the which
that have to do before you; But as hastily as ye may them goodly to deliver
without hurt to the King; And having no reward to any profit that might thereof
to you be made, then ye shall make to be delivered; And that whereas ye may
know any wrong or prejudice to be done to the King, ye shall put, and do all
your power and diligence, that to redress and if ye may not do it, ye shall
tell it, to the King, or to them of his Council, the which may make relation
to the King, if ye may not come to him; And the Kings Council ye shall keep,
and layne in all things: As God you help, and all his Saints.

The Oath of a Judge, endorso claus de Anno 20. Edw. 3. Part. prima.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve our Sovereign Lord, the
King and his People in the Office of Justice; And tfiat ye shall counsel, our
Sovereign Lord the King in his needs; And that ye shall not give any
connsaile, or assent to any thing the which might turn to hurt or dis-heriting
of the King by any way or color and that ye shall not know any hurt or
dis-herting of the King; but that ye shall make it to him known by you or by
some other person. And that ye shall do equal Law and Execution of Right, to
all the Kings Subjects Rich and Poor, without having regard to any person; And
that ye shall not take by you, or by any other privily, ne appart any gift, or
reward of Gold or of Silver, nor of any other thing, the which might turn you
to profit, But if it be meat or drink; and that of little value, of any man,
that shall have any Plea or Process hanging before you, as long as before your
self two Pleas and Processes shall be hanging nor after for that cause; And
that ye shall take no fees, as long as ye be Justice, nor Roab of any person,
great or small in any case. But of the King himself; And that ye shall not
give any counsel or advice to any person great or small in any case, where
the King is party; And in case that any persons in what estate that they be of,
come before you in Sessions with force and Arms, or otherwise, against the
Peace, or against the form of the Statute hereof made, for to disturb the
Execution of the Common Law, or for to Mennasse the people, that may not do
the Law; That ye shall do, Arrest their Bodies, and put them in prison; and
in case they be such as ye may not Arrest, that ye shall certify the King of
their names, and of their misdoing hastily, to that end that ye may thereof
Ordain remedy; And that ye shall not maintain by your self, nor by none
other privily nor openly, any Plea, or Quarrel, hanging in the Kings Course, or
else where in the Country; And that ye shall not delay any person of Common
Right, for the Letters of the King, or of any other person, nor for any other
cause; And in case that any Letters come to you contrary to the Law, that ye
shall nothing do for such Letters, but ye thereof shall certify the King; And
ye shall proceed to do the Law, the same Letters notwithstanding; and that
ye shall do and procure the profit of the King and his Crown, in all things
where ye them reasonable may do; And in case that ye be found in default
hereafter, in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the Kings will, of
Bodies, Lands, and of honor, to do thereof that that shall please the King.

The Oath of a Justice for Works, Weights, and Measure.
YE shall swear, That in your Office of Justice, of Labors, and of Weights,
and Measures, ye shall do equal Right to the Poor as to the Rich, after our
cunning, wit and power, and after the form of Statutes thereof made, and the
Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments, the which shall be made and to be made before
you ye shall do truly enter without any consealement or embeazling, and truly
send into the Exchequer; And that ye shall not leave for gift, nor for other
cause, but that well and truly ye shall do, your office of Justice in that
behalf; And also ye shall swear, that in your office of Justice of Peace, and
Labors, and of all other Articles contained in the Kings Commission to you
directed; Ye shall do equal Right to the Poor, and to the Rich, after your
cunning and power, and after the Laws, and Customs of the Realm, and the
Statutes thereof made, and the Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments, the which shall
be made, or happen to be made, and all forfeitures the which shall fall before
you, ye shall make truly to be entered, without any concealment, imbezling; and
truly them to send into the Exchequer; And ye shall not let for gift, nor for
other cause, But that well and truly, ye shall do your Office of Justice on
your behalf; And that ye take nothing for your Office of Justice of Peace to
do, but of the King, and Fees accustomed; And that ye shall not make, or
deliver any Warrants to the Parties, but ye shall them deliver to the
Bayliffes of the County or to other of the Kings Officers or Ministers of the
same to do Execution. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Sheriff.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve, the King in the Office
of the Sheriff of Bedford and Berks, and do the Kings profit in all things that
belongs to you to do by way of your Office, as far forth as ye can or may;
ye shall truly keep the Kings Rights, and all that belongs to the Crown;
ye shall not assent to Decrees, or passing, or to concealment of the Kings
Rights, or of his Franchises; And wherever ye shall have knowledge that the
Kings Rights, or the Rights of the Crown been concealed or withdrawn, be it
in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, or any other things, ye shall do pour
true power to make them be restored to the King again; And if ye may not do
it, ye shall certify the King or some of his Council thereof, such as ye
hold for certain will say it to the King; ye shall not respite the Kings Debts
for any gift or favor, where ye may raise them without great grievance of the
Debtors; Ye shall truly and righteously treat the People of your Sheriffewick,
and do right as well to poor as rich in all that longs to your Office; ye
shall do no wrong to any man, for any gift or good behest, or promise of good,
nor favor, nor hate; ye shall disturb no man's right; ye shall truly acquit at
the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any thing receive of the Kings Debts;
ye shall nothing take whereby the King may leese, or whereby that Right may be
disturbed, let, or the Kings Debts delayed; Ye shall truly return, and
truly serve all the Kings Writs, as far forth as it shall be in your cunning;
Ye shall none have to be your under-Sheriffe, or any your Sheriffs Clerks, of
the l^st year passed; Ye shall take no Bayliffe into your Service, but such
as ye will answer for; Ye shall make each of your Bayliffes to make such Oath
as ye make your self, in that that belongs to their Occupation. Ye shall
receive no W^it by you or any of yours unsealed, or any sealed, under the Seal
of any Justice save of Justice of Air, or Justice assigned in the same Shire
where ye be Sheriff in, or other Justices having power and Authority to make
any Writ unto you by the Law of the Land, or of Justice Neudigate; You shall
make your Bayliffes of the true and sufficient men in the Country: Also ye
shall do all your pain and diligence to destroy and make to cease all manner
of Heresy and Errors, commonly called Lollardries, within your Baylywick, from
time to time, to all your power; and assist and be helping to all the
Ordinaries and Commissaries of Holy Church, and favor and maintain them as
often times as ye shall be required by the said Ordinaries and Commissaries; ye
shall be dwelling in your proper person within your Bayliwick, for the time ye
shall be in the same Office; ye shall not let your Sheriffewick, or any
Bayliwick thereof, to farm to any man; Ye shall truly set and return
reasonable and due Issues of them that be within your Bayliffewick, after their
Estares and Honor, and make your Pannels your self; And over this, in
eschewing and restraint of the Manslaughters, Robberes, and other manifold
grievous Offenses that been done daily, namely, by such as name themselves
Soldiers, and be other Vagarants, the which continually increase in number,
and multiply, so that the Kings true Subjects may neither ride nor go to do
such things as they have to do, to their intolerable hurt and hindering; ye
shall truly and effectually with all diligence possible to you, execute the
Statutes, the whith ye shall have knowledge of These things all ye shall truly
keep, as God you help, you and his Saints.

The Oath of the Sheriff of Oxon and Berks, Cambridge and Huntington.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Sheriff of Oxon and Berks, and the Kings profit etc, ut supra usque ibi. So
God help you and his Saints, Et ^unc sic: And also ye shall swear, That the
Masters and the Scholars of the University of Oxon, and their servants, from
injuries and violences ye shall keep and defend by all your strength and
power; and the Peace in the said University, as much as in you is, ye shall
do keep; And that ye shall give your counsel, and help to the Chancellor,
and Scholars of the same University, for to punish the disturbers and Breakers
of the Peace there, after the privileges and Statutes of the said University
at all times when it shall be needful; And also ye shall put your help with
all your strength to defend the privileges, liberties, and customs of the
said University; And that ye shall receive all such Oaths of your
Under-Sheriffes, and other your said Ministers of your said County of Oxon,
as soon and anon as ye shall be at the Castle, or at the Town of Oxon, in
presence of any that shall be thereto deputed by the said Universitie; to the
which things, the King will that your said Ministers, be by you Arted and
compelled, As God you help and all his Saints: Consimile sacrum fac. Vio.
Cant. and Hunt.

The Oath of a Escheator.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office
of Escheator, in the Counties of Bed. and Bucks, and do the Kings profit, in
all things that belongs to you to do, by way of your Office, after your wit
and power, his Rights and all that longs to the Crown ye shall truly keep:
Ye shall not assent to decrees, ne to concealment of the Kings Rights, ne of
the Franchizes; And wheresoever ye have knowledge of the Kings Rights or his
Crown be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suites be in any wise concealed or
withdrawn, ye shall do your pain and diligence to withstand it, and to make
it be restored, and repaired; And if ye may not, ye shall say it unto the King,
or such of his Council, the which ye shall know for certain will say it unto
the King; Ye shall truly, and righteously Treat the people of your
Bailiffe-wick, and do Right to every man, as well to Poor as to Rich in that
that belongs to you to do; Ye shall do no wrong to any man neither for
promise, love, nor hate, nor no man's Right disturb; Ye shall nothing do,
whereby the King may lose, or whereby that Right may be disturbed le^ted or
delayed; Ye shall truly and right wisely return, and serve the Kings Writs;
Ye shall in your proper person make, or do to be made the exstents of Lands
and other Revenues, after their very value, and duly charge the Questes that be
returned before you, and receive the verdicts, and return them as often as
they been taken by you, and that within a month; Ye shall take no Bailiffe
into your service, but such as ye will answer for; Ye shall make your Bayliffe
to make such Oath, as it belongs to you to give him; Ye shall truly, and
right wisely yield Accounts at the Kings Exchequer, of all the Issues of your
said Bailiffewick; Ye shall take your Enquests in open places, and not privy,
and that by Indenture, after the effect of the Statute made thereof. As God
help you, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Comptroller of the Customs.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Comptroller of the Kings Customs and Subfidies, in the place of Customer, and
truly ye shall enter all the goods, and things customable the which shall come
to the said Port, or shall pass from the same; And that ye shall no gift take
for to do your Office, nor for any thing that may fall in disadvantage of the
King, nor any Merchantize, nor any other thing customable ye shall not suffer
to pass out of the said Port, without custom due be paid; And ye shall do
the Office your self, and dwell thereupon in your proper person, without
making any Substitute, or Deputy under you; And ye shall write the Rolls with
your own hands, and the Kings profit ye shall await, and do, in as much as ye
may after your knowledge and power. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Tronator.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office
of Tronator, in the City of London, and truly ye shall weigh and poyse the
Wool that shall come thither, and ye shall not suffer any Wool to pass but by
certain weight and poyse, ordained so that neither more nor less be put in
the weight, and poyse, but all only the certainty; And that all the Wool the
which shall come, ye shall do to be weighed, and poysed out, that for gift
nor favor of any person, ye shall not suffer any Wool to pass before that be
enterly weighed and poysed, and ye shall dwell and abide, upon your Office in
your proper person, without making of any Substitute or Deputy under you, And
ye shall wait and do the Kings profit, and Advantage all that ye may. As God
you help and his Saints.

The Oath of Custom.
YE shall swear, That ye shall make continual abiding in the Port of
London, and shall oversee the charge of Wool Leather and Woolfell, and all
other Merchandises and things Customable, and the number of Sacks in the said
Port, and in as much as in you is ye shall not suffer that the King have hurt
or loss there; and that true Account thereof ye shall yield; and of the Issues
of the said Customs, truly ye shall answer, without Fauxim or Fraud, to be
done in any point, As God you help and his Saints.

The Oath of a Justice to hear and determine.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King as Justice, to
hear and determine the wrongs and grievances done to the King and his People,
after the form of the Commission to you and to other your fellows thereof
made; And shall keep and lean the Kings Council and Right to your power; Ye
shall do to all People, as well to the poor as to the rich; And that ye shall
take no gift of any person to do wrong nor right to delay, and that for
Highness, nor for Riches, nor for hatred, nor for the Estate of any person,
nor for any good deed gift or promise, the which is made to you of any person,
or may be made to you, nor by craft or maligning Right ye shall not disturb,
nor respite against Reason, and against the Laws of the Land; but without
regard of any Estate or Person, truly ye shall do right to all People, after
the Laws aforesaid So God ye help and his Saints.

The Oath of a Justice in Air.
YE Justice in Air shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King
in the Office of Justice, and shall do Right to your power, to all People, as
well to poor as to rich; and that for Highness, nor for Riches, nor for
hatred, nor for the Estate of any person, nor for good deed, gift, nor promise
of any person that is made to you, or may be made to you, neither by craft, nor
by maligny, the right of any person ye shall not disturb nor respite, against
reason, nor against the Laws of the Land; but without having of regard of any
Estate or Person, truly ye shall do Right to every person after the Laws and
Customs of the Land; and that ye shall nothing take of any person for to do
wrong, or right to delay. So God ye help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Statutes.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Clerk of the Statutes, in the Town of B. and that ye shall be dwelling and
abiding upon the same Office in proper person, without making any Substitute or
Deputy; And truly ye shall enter the Recognizances the which shall be made
before you, and them that keep the greater party of the Seal, ordained for
such Recognezances to be taken in the said Town; And that ye shall not
receive, nor take any Recognezance without the presence aforesaid, that for to
do, be deputed and ordained, and that no manner of Recognezances, the which be
not taken by you, and them, together as it is aforesaid; And ye shall not enter
them, nor make them to be entered, and that all manner of Recognezances so
before yon, and them made, ye shall write and enroll with your own Hand, As
God help you, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office
of Chancellor of the Exchequer, and well and truly ye shall do all that
pertains and belongs to the same Office; and the Kings Business and needs
ye shall speed before all others; and that no writ of Judgment of any other
Place, but of the Exchequer it self, ye shall not enseale with the Stale of
the Exchequer, as long as the Chancery shall be 20 miles where the Exchequer
does abide.

The Oath of Fealty.
YE shall swear, That ye shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth
bear unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and to his Heirs Kings of England,
and truly ye shall do, and truly knowledge the services due of the Lands, the
which ye claim to hold of him, as in the Right of your Wife, and in the which
the King to you does yield. As God help you, and all his Saints.

The Oath of the Steward of Gascoygne.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall with all your wit, and withal
your power, ye shall keep the Office of the Stewardship, of the Duchy of
Guyan; And ye shall do right to all People, in that that to you appertains
and belongs, And the Towns Castles, Fortlots, and the Lands, and Tenements,
of the King our Sovereign Lord in that Duchy ye shall keep to the use of
him and his Heirs; And ye shall not deliver them to any person, but to him or
to his Heirs, or to the which shall bring you his Letters Patents, and his
Honor his Estate, his Rights, and his Seignory ye shall keep, and maintain
to all your power; and if any thing of his Rights, in what things soever it be,
be withdrawn or concealed, ye shall put to your true pain and deavour, that
to repeal and retain in due and right estate; and if ye may not that do; ye
shall do it to be known to the King. So God ye help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Alneger.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People,
in the Office of Substitute Lann your of the King; And that for favor nor for
hatred, ye shall not let; But that ye shall meet the Clothes, the which
attain and belong to your Office to meet truly, and them enseale with the
Seal of your Office; and that truly ye shall answer to the King of the
forfeitures of the Clothes, after the form contained in the Statute there of
late made; And that ye shall not tarry nor delay the people; in that that
appertains and belongs to your Office; And that ye shall use your said
Office without Fraud, Extortion, or Out-age, to be done to the people. As God
you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Mayor of the Staple, and Constable of the same Staple.
YOu shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his people
in the Office of Mayor, of the Staple of Westminster, to the which ye be
chosen, and truly ye shall Treat the Merchants of the same Staple, and equal
Right ye shall do to all people, as well to strangers as others after the
Ordinances thereof made, and the law Merchant. As God you help, and his Saints.

Like Oath shall make the Constable of the same Staple, of that that
appertains to their Office.

The Oath of the Portage of the Chancery.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office of
Portage of the Chan^^ry, and that ye shall be continually abiding upon the
said Office, and no time ye shall absent you, without especial leave of the
Chancellor, or of the keeper of the Rolls, and that for good and just cause,
and that ye shall not carry nor bear, nor suffer the Rolls to be carried or
borne to any place, but unto the place, to the same Ordained and Deputed; and
that ye shall not show them to any person, but by the Commandment of the said
keeper of the Rolls, privily or openly and that ye shall not assent that any
fraud or deceit the which may be done to the said Rolls, as by taking of
Coppie, or by the sight, to have of the said Rolls privily, nor in none other
manner; and of Fraud, or untruth that ye may know to be done in the said Rolls,
or any thing that appertains to your keeping of the said Rolls, ye shall
tell to the said keeper of the Rolls, without any concealment to do so. As God
ye help, and all Saints.

The Oath of a Bishops renuntiations of a Popes Bull.
I Renounce all the words comprised in the Popes Bull, made unto me of the
Bishopprick of B the which be contrary and prejudicial to the King our
Sovereign Lord, and to his Crown; and of that I put my humblement in his
grace, praying to have restitution of my Temporalties of my Church of B.

The Oath of a Bishops Fidelity.
ALso I shall be faithful, and true, and faith and truth shall bear to the
King our Sovereign Lord, and to his Heirs Kings of England, of Life and
Limb, and of Earthly worship, for to Live and Dye against all the people; And
diligently, I shall be entendant unto the Kings Needs and Business after my
with and power, and the Kings counsel I shall keep and lain, and truly I
shall knowledge and do the services due of the Temporalties of my Bishopprick
of B. The which I claim to hold of my said Sovereign Lord the King; And the
which he gives and yields me, and to him and to his Commandments, in that
that to me attaineth and belongs for my Temporalties, I shall be obeysant. As
God me help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Kings Sergeant at Law.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King and his people,
as one of his Sergeants of the Law, and truly council the King in his matters,
when he shall be called, and duly and truly Administer the Kings matters, after
the course of the Law, after your cunning; ye shall take no wages, nor Fee of
any man, for any matter where the King is party; against the King ye shall as
duly and hastily speed such matters, as any man shall have to do against the
King in the Law, as ye may lawfully do, without delay or tarrying the party
of his lawful Procesle, in that that to you belongs; ye shall be attendant
to the Kings matters when ye shall be called thereunto, As God help you and
his Saints.

The Homage of a Temporal Lord.
J Become your Leigman of Life and Limb, and of carthly worship and faith and
troth, I shall bear unto you, for to live and dye, against all manner of
folk, So God me help, and his Saints.

The Oath of a Searcher in the Custom House.
Ye shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of
the Searcher-ship in the Port of N. and do the Kings profits in all things
that longs to you, to do by way of your Office, and well and truly ye shall
make due search of all the Ships and Vessels, coming in or passing out of the
said Port, and truly answer the King of all that shall belong unto him, in your
said Office, without Fraud or Malign, after your wit and power, As God help
you and his Saints.

The Oath of a Sergeant at Law.
Ye shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the Kings people, as one
of his Sergeants at Law, And ye shall truly counsel them, that ye shall be
retained with after your cunning and ye shall not defer, tract, nor delay
their causes willingly forcovetousnes of money or other thing that may turn
you to profit, and ye shall give due attendance according. As God you help,
and his Saints.

The Oath of the Master of the Rolls.
YOu shall swear, That well and lawfully ye shall serve the King our
Sovereign Lord and his People, in the Office of Clerk or Master of the Rolls,
to the which ye be called; Ye shall not assent, ne procure the
dis-inheritance, ne perpetual damage of the King, to your power; ne fraud ye
shall do, nor cause to be made wrongfully, to any of his People, ne in any
thing that touches the Seal; and lawfully ye conceal the things that
touches the King, when ye shall be thereto required; And the counsel that ye
shall give touching him, ye shall not disclose; And if ye know any thing of the
dis-inheritance or damage of the King, or fraud to be made upon any thing that
touches the keeping of the Seal, ye shall put your lawful power that to
redress and amend; And if that ye cannot, ye shall advise the Chancellor or
other which may that amend to your power. As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the six Clerks in the Chancery.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People in
the Office of one of the six Clerks of Chancery whereunto ye be admitted, and
well and justly order your self in the same, according to your learning, and
truly counsel them that ye shall be retained with. And ye shall be diligent to
further the Kings business from time to time, as need shall require: And ye
shall not assent to any fraud or deceit to be had or done by you, or any by
your consent, in any of the Kings Records, whereunto ye shall have reeourse;
but well and truly ye shall entreat the same; And ye shall not absent your
self willingly, whereby the Kings businesses or any other shall be undone or
hindered, without special License of the Master of the Rolls, or his Deputy
for the time being. As God you help, and his Saint.

The Oath to maintain the Succession of the Crown of England.
YE shall swear, To bear faith, truth, and obedience all only to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved
lawful wife Queen Anne begotten. And farther to the Heirs of our said
Sovereign Lord according to the limitation in the Statute made for surety of
his Succession in the Crown of this Realm mentioned and contained, and not to
any other within this Realm, nor Foreign Authority or Potentate. And in case
any Oath be made or has been made by you to any person or persons, that then
you to repute the same as vain, and annihilated; And that your cunning, wits,
and uttermost of your power, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean; ye
shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said Act of Succession; and all
the whole effects and Contents thereof, and all other Acts and Statutes made in
confirmation, or for due execution of the same, or of any thing therein
contained; And this ye shall do against all manner of persons of what Estate
Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be; And in no wise do or attempt, nor
to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing
or things privily or apartly, to be let, hinderance, damage, or derogation
thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of means, or for any manner
of pretense. So help you God, all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of a Clerk of the Petty Bagg.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King and his People,
as one of his Ministers and Clerks in the Office of the Petty-bag, whereunto ye
be admitted; and well and truly order your self in the same, according to your
learning, And ye shall be diligent to further the Kings business from time to
time, as need shall require; And ye shall not assent to any fraud or deceit to
be had or done by you, or any by your consent, in any of the Kings Records,
whereunto ye shall have recourse; but well and truly ye shall entreat the same.
As God you help, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Examiner in the Court of Chancery.
YE shall swear, Well and truly, after your cunning and learning, to excuse
and occupy the Office of one of the Examiners in the Kings Court of Chancerie,
whereunto you are admitted; And duly, justly, and equally, ye shall examine
their Causes that shall be committed unto you, without any favor or corruption
of any person or persons to be had, otherwise than shall of right appertain
concerning the same; And ye shall be attendant as well to further the Kings
business as the same Causes from time to time, as need shall require; And ye
shall not publish, ne show the same Depositions to any person before publication
in the Court, without the Warrant of the same Court. As God you help, and his
Saints.

The Oath which the Duke of Bedford and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal took
in Parliament in Anno 4. H. 6. Nov. 10. for their sincere arbitrating of the
variances between the Duke of Gloucester and the Bishop of Winchester Lord
Chancellor of England,
THat my said Lord of Bedford and my said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
each of them, shall, as far forth as his cunning and discretions sufficent,
truly justly, and indifferently, counsel and advise the King, and also proceed
and acquit himself in all the said matters and Quarrels, withouten that they or
any of them shall privilie, or apart, make or show himself, or be party or
parcel therein, naught be leaving or schewing so to do, for affection, love,
meed, or dread of any person or persons; And that ye shall in all wise keep
secret all that shall be communed by way of Council in the Matters and
Quarrels abovesaid in the foresaid Parliament, withouten that they or any of
them shall by word, writing, or in any wise open it, or discover it to any of
the said parties, or to any other person that is naught of the said Council,
but if he have especial Commandment thereto of the King, or of my said Lord of
Bedford; And that each of them shall with all might and power, by him and by his
strength, aid and assist by way of Counsel, and tell unto the King, or to my
Lord of Bedford, and to the remnant of my said Lords, to put the said parties
to reason; and naught suffer that any of the said parties, by them or theirs,
proceed or attempt by way of Feet, against the Kings Peace; nor help, assist,
or comfort any of them thereto; but let them with all her might and power, and
withstand them, and assist unto the King and my said Lord of Bedford, in
keeping of the Kings Peace, and redressing of all such matter of proceeding by
way of Feet and Force.

The Oath Which the Duke of York, and Buckingham the two Archbishops, 11.
Bishops 6. Earls, two Viscounts, 18. Abbots, 2. Priours, 17. Barons, took in
Parliament, unto H. 6. in Anno 33. Nov. 25. for their Alleagiance unto the said
King.
I Promise unto your Highness, by the Faith and truth that I owe to God and
you, that I shall true and faithfully keep the Leigeman that I owe unto you
most Sovereign Lord, and to put me in my devoire to do all that may be to the
welfare, honor and safeguard of your most noble Person and Royal Estate,
Preeminence and Prerogative, and I shall at no time, will, or consent to that,
that might in any wise sound to the hurt, or prejudice of your said most noble
person, Dignity, Crown, or Estate; And over that I shall with all my power
resist and withstand all them, that will in any wise presume to attempt the
contrary. So God me help, and his Saints.

The Oath which the Duke of York took for his. Alleagiance to King Hen. the 6.
At the High Alter in St. Paul's Church London, in presence of the said King,
which is entered in the Parliament Roll. Anno 38. H. 6. Nov. 9.
I Richard Duke of York, confess and know, That I am, and ought to be humble
Subject and Leigeman, unto you my Sovereign Lord the King, H. 6. And ought
therefore to bear you faith and truth, as to my Sovereign and Liege Lord; and
so shall do all the days unto my lives end; and shall not at any time will,
nor at any thing be attempted or done against your most Royal Person; But
whenever, I shall have knowledge of any such things imagined; or purposed, I
shall with all the speed and diligence possible to me, to make that your
Highness shall have knowledge thereof, and ever do all that shall be possible
to come to the withstanding thereof, to the uttermost of my life; I shall not
in no wise any thing take upon me, against your Royal obeisance, that is due
thereto, nor suffer any other man to do, as far forth as it shall lie in my
power to let it; And also I shall come at your Commandment, whenever I shall
be called by the same, in all humble and obedient wise; But if I be let by
sickness, or impotency of my person, or by such other causes as shall be
thought reasonable to you my Sovereign Lord; I shall never hereafter take upon
me to gather any Routs, or make any Assembly of your people, without your
Commandment or License, or my lawful defense; In the interpretation of which
my lawful defense and declaration thereof; I shall report me at all time unto
your Highness, and if the case require, unto my Peers, nor any thing attempt
by way of faith against any of your Subjects, of what Estate, Degree, or
Condition they be; but whenever I shall be, or when I shall feel my self
wronged or grieved, I shall sue humbly for remedy unto your Highness, as an
humble and true Subject ought to have him to his Sovereign Lord; All these
things abovesaid I permit truly to observe, and keep by the holy Evangelists
contained in this Book that I lay my hand upon, and by the holy Cross that I
here touch, and by the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body; that I shall now
with his mercy receive, and over this I agree me, and will, that if I at any
time hereafter, as with the grace of our Lord, I never shall any thing attempt
by way of fact or otherwise against your Royal Estate, or obeisance that ought
thereto, or any thing I take upon me, otherwise then is above expressed, I from
that time forth be unable to all manner of worship, Estate or dignity be it
such as I now occupy, or any other that might grow unto me in any wise; And
this that I have promitted and sworn proceeds of my own desire and free
volunt and by no constraint or cohertion; In witness of all the which things
above written, I Richard Duke of York above written, Subscribe me with my own
Hand and Seal, this with my own Seal, etc.

The Oath which was taken in the Parliament at Coventry unto King Henry 6. Anno
38. Nov. 26. by the two Archbishops, sixteen Bishops, five Earls, two
Viscounts, three Dukes, (in the absence of the Duke of York) fourteen Abbots,
two Pryors, and seven Barons.
J A. B. knowledge you most High and Mighty, and most Christian Prince, King
Henry 6. to be my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, and right-wise by Succession
borne to Reign upon me, and all your Liege People; Whereupon I voluntarily,
without cohertion, promit and oblige me, by the faith and truth that I owe unto
God, and by the faith, truth, and Leigiance, that I owe unto you my most
redoubted Sovereign Lord, That I shall be without any variance, true,
faithful, humble, and obeysant Subject and Liegeman unto you my most redoubted
Sovereign Lord and that I shall be unto my lives end, at all times and places,
ready and attending at your calling in my most hearty wise and manner, as any
true Liegeman owes to be unto his Sovereign Lord, putting me in my true
undelayed endeavor, to do all that that may be unto the weal and surety of
your most Royal Person, of your most Noble Estate, and the very conservation,
and assurance, and continuance of Your most High Authority, Preeminence, and
Prerogative, To the weal, surety, and preserving of the Person of the most
Noble and Benign Princess Margaret the Queen, my Sovereign Lady, and of
her most High and Noble Estate, she being your Wife; And also to the weal,
surety, and Honor of the Person of the right High and Mighty Prince Edward,
my right redoubted Lord the Prince, your first begotten Son, and of the Right
High and Noble Estate of the same, and faithfully, truly, and obeysantly, in my
most humble wise and manner, honor, serve obey, and bear mine Allegiance unto
you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord during your life, which God the Father of
mercy for my most singular recomfort, preserve long in prosperity to endure;
and if God of his infinite Power take you from this Transitory life, me
bearing life in this world, That then I shall take and accept my said redoubted
Lord the Prince, Edward, your said first borne Son, for my Sovereign Lord,
and bear my true Faith and Leigiance unto him as my natural borne Sovereign
Lord, and after him, unto his Succession of his body lawfully begotten; and in
default of his Succession, which God defend, unto any other Succession of your
Body lawfully coming; And that I shall never at any time for any manner of
occasion, color, affinity, or cause, consent, give aid, assistance, or
favor, or agree to any thing, that I may understand, or know by any means
that may be prejudicial or contrary to the premises, or any of them: But that
I shall, as soon as I may have knowledge, put me in my undelayed devovre, in
most hearty and effectuous wise and manner, without color or faintness, with
my body, goods, might, power, counsel, and advertisements, to resist,
withstand, and subdue all them that would in any wise presume to do contrary to
the premises, or any of them. So God me help, and those holy Evangelists. In
witness whereof, I set to these Presents my Seal, and my Sign Manuell.

The Oath of the Lieutenant of the Tower of London.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty in
the Lieutenancie of the Tower of London, and the same Tower ye shall
faithfully and safely keep to the behalf of his Majesty, his Heirs and
lawful Successors; And the profit of the Kings Majesty ye shall do and
advance in all things that you, as Lieutenant of the Tower belongs; And the
Rights and Privileges of the Tower, that to the same lawfully appertain, you
shall keep and preserve; You shall hear nothing that may be hurtful to the
Tower, or prejudicial to his Majesty, but that with all convenient speed you
shall disclose it to some of his Majesty's Privy Council: In these, and all
other things that to a Lieutenant of the Tower belongs to do, well and
faithfully you shall, according to your best power and knowledge, perform,
fulfill, and keep So help you God etc.

The Oath ministered to certain persons for the renouncing of their profession
of Lollardisme, in Rich. 2. his time, vide Claus, Anno Rich. 2. Nov. 18. Dorso.
MEmorandum quod primo die Decembris, Anno Regni Regis Rich. 2. Post.
Conquestum 19 Willus Divet, Nichus Tailor, Nichus Poncher, and Will. Staynor,
de Nottingham, in Canc. prim. Regis Personaliter Constit. Sacram. divisim
prestiteriut, sub eo qui sequitur Tenore.

I William Deonet, before you worshipful Fader Lord Archbishop of York and
your Clergy, with my free will, and full advised swear to God, and all his
Saints, upon the holy Gospel, That for this day forthward I shall worship
Images with praying and offering unto them, in the worship of Saints, that they
be made offer; And also I shall never despise Pilgrimage, ne States of holy
Church in no degree, And also I shall be Buxim to the Laws of holy Church,
and to yhorne as my Archbishop, and to my other Ordinaries and Curates, and
keep your Laws upon my power, and maintain them; And also I shall never more
maintain, ne teachen, ne defend a Error, Conclusions ne teachings of the
Lollards, ne swich Conclusions and Teachings that men clepite Lollards
Doctrine, ne shall her Books, ne swich Books, ne hem, or any suspect or
defamed of Lollardie, receive or company withal wittingly, or defend in your
matters; And if I know any swich, and also I shall excite and stir all tho to
good Doctrine that I have hindered with my Doctrine, up my power; And also I
shall stand to your Declaration which is Heresy or Error, and do thereafter;
and also with Penance, yhe wooke for, that I have done for maintaining of this
false Doctrine inmyns me, I shall fulfill it, and I submit me thereto up my
power; And also I shall make no other gloss of this mine Oath but as the words
stand; And if it be so, that I come again, or do again this or any part
thereof, I yield me here comptable as an Heretic, and to be punished by the
Law as an Heretic, and to forfeit all my Goods to the Kings will, withouten
any other process of Law; And thereto I require the Notarie to make of all
this the which is my will, and instrument against me.

The Oath of Fidelity, by the Priour of St. John's of Jerusalem, in Dorso Claus,
Anno 14. Edw. 4. Nov. 5.
I shall be faithful, and true and faith, and truth shall bear to the King
our Sovereign, and to his Heirs Kings of England, of Life and Limb, and of
Earthly worship for to Live and Die against all people, and diligently I shall
be attendant unto the Kings needs and businesses after my wit and power, and
to him and to his Commandments, in that that to me attaineth and belongs I
shall be obeysant. As God me help and his Saints.

A Copy of Oath of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Kings
Council sworn for performance of the Articles Matrimonial, treated and had
between the High and mighty Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, and the highness
of the Infanta of Spain and their commissaries on both Parties, the 20 July,
1625.
I George Archbishop of Canterbury, do swear that I will Justify and
faithfully observe, so much as in me lies, all and each of the Articles which
are contained in the Treaty of Matrimony between the most Excellent Prince
Charles, Prince of Wales, and the most Excellent Lady, the Lady Mary Infanta of
Spain; And I do also swear, That I will neither Execute, nor cause to be
Executed any Law made against any Roman Cotholique, or exact any pain imposed
thereby neither by my selse, nor any inferior Ministers serving under me; but
in all things appertaining unto me, I will faithfully observe the orders of the
Kings Majesty in this behalf made and provided.

The Oath which King Chaarles took at the time of his Coronaion.
AFter the Sermon was done the Archbishop of Cauteebury came to the King and
with a low voice inquires of his Majesty, saying:

SIR, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the people of
England their Laws and Customs, to them granted by the Kings of England, your
lawful, and religious predecessors; and namly the laws, Customs and
Franchizes granted to the Clergy, and to the People, by the King Saint,
Edward, your predecessor, according and comformable to the Laws of God and
profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the
prerogatives of the Kings thereof, and to the ancient Customs of this Realm.

Respons, I grant, and promise to keep.

Sir, will you keep peace and agreement entierly according to your power both
to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?

Respons, I will keep it.

Sir will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and mercy in discretion and
truth, to be executed in all your Judgments?

Respons, I will.

Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws, and rightful Customs which
the Communalty of your Kingdom have, and to defend and uphold them to the
Honor of God, so much as in you lies?

Respons I grant, and promise so to do.

Legatur Admonitio, sequens ab uno Episcopo coram omnibus, Clars voce sic
dicendo.

Domine Rex, a vohis perdonaci petimus vnicuique de nobis and Ecclesiis omnis,
commssis Canonicum, Privilegium and debitam legem atque justitiam conservetis
and defentiones exhibiatis, sicut Rex in suo Regno debet, vnicuique Episcopo
and Ecclesiis sibi Commissis.

Respondet Rer. Animo Liberti, and devoto, promitvobis, and pardn^ quia
vnicuique de vobis, and Ecclesiis vobis Comissis. Canovicum Privelegium, and
debitam legem, atque justitiam servabo, and defensionem (quantum potuero
adiuvante Domino) exhibeo sicut Rex insuo Regno vnicuique Episcopo, and
Ecclesiis, sibi Comissis per rectum defendere debet.

This being done the King comes to the Altar, and laying his right hand on the
Bible, says these words:

These things which I have before promised, I shall observe and keep So God me
help, and by the contnts of this Book.

The Oath which all Piopsh Bishops swear unto the Pope, unde decretalls; Lib.
1. Tit. 14. Ca. 4.
I. D. Bishop, will be faithful, from this day forward, unto St. Peter, and to
the holy Church of Room, and to my Lord Bomface the Pope, and to his
Successors ellected Cannonically; and I will be an help to keep and defend
against all people, the Popedom, or Papal Sovereignty, and the rules of the
holy Fathers. So God me help and the holy Gospel.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Kings Household, in the time of H. 8. as it
is entered in the Black Book of the Household.
YE will swear, By that Book to be after your power and cunning, and good
worshipful and true Officer to the King our Sovereign Lord, whose high estate
is here present and diligent service to do him; as Treasurer of his honorable
Household, and be knowing and consenting to any thing that might be against him
in his body natural, or of his goods Temporal, but that you let it after
your power, or else to give hasty knowledge thereof to himself, or to such
about him that will do him wit, or to let it or amend it; And also such good
as ye shall receive of the King, by the Treasurer of England, or other Offices
for the Estate, and conservation of his Royal Household, and for the expenses
of it, you shall truly charge your self therewith, and true Account yield into
the Exchequer: full and whole, by every two years end at the furthest and no
concealment make; also to behave you truly and honesty, in making of all your
payments with favorable demeaning, cherishing love between the King and
people, and that such payments be made and used continually as the green Cloth
in the Countinghouse of Household; also that ye take oftentimes views and such
over sight of all manner of victual, and stuff, comprised within your charge
and parcel, in every Office, so that the utterance of it be guided to the
Kings most worship and profit; and that in all your Sessions and Judgments in
the Counting house, upon any matter, cause or thing to say and give your doom
truly, after good conscience, right, reason, and all the rules of this Court
will require between the King and party, or any other party or parties,
cherishing the good Officers, and punishing the evil doer, not by affect on or
love only, nor in anger or evil will but return truth to every party as nigh
as you can.

Item, ye shall neither ask, nor consent to any allowance but as shall be
rightful and due to be done, and that you demean you in charging, or
discharging of the expenses of Household, always to the Kings Household worship
and profit, and in your own person, to be example to other in the Court; All
such parcel of purveyance as shall be brought into the Countinghouse of your
time, be truly purveyed and parcelled by Indentures, betwixt such Officers, and
you by good examinations and searches in the Countries, as truly ye can charge
all the purveyors, and that it be duly opposed in the Countinghouse monthly for
the King; And also that he search, the good old rule worshipful, and
profitable of this Court used before time and them to keep, uphold, and better
if you can. As God help you, and by that Book

The Oath of the Comptroller of the Kings Household, as it is recorded in the
Black Book of the Household.
YE will swear, By that Book, to do unto the King our Sovereign Lord, good
and true service, and diligent after your power and cunning, as Comptroller of
his honorable Household, and not to know or consent to any thing, that may be
hurting to his Highness Estate, or to his body, or goods, but that ye shall
that after your power, or else warn them in hasty time that may let it, also
to comptroll the receipts and all issues, of the Treasurers Office of Household,
and that to record in pain Account into the Kings Exchequer, of the old form
of the Compting house; Also truly and justly, to help to make the prizes of
all manner of Stuff, Victual, and other purveyance for this Household, and
that you see and know it to be good and wholesome Victuals in every thing for
the King, and his Household, and for the Kings worship; Also that it be like
worth to the Silver, that the King must pay therefore, or better by your
wisdom and discretion; and also such Victuals of meat and drink be dampened
and annulled, so that it be not expended within the household, and to show comin
such matters as the green Cloth, before the Steward, and Treasurer, that it
may be understood, not done for malice, and then to counsel upon whom to cast
the losses of such mispurveying; Also ye to be consciently assenting in, and to
all due allowance to be made, or giving in the Counting house, betwixt the King
and his people, to apply your businesses, upon the good guiding and overfight
of all such manner of charges, and expenses within this Court and without also
belonging to this household, also in our parties to make due search and enquire,
of and upon the conditions of purveyance, and of their purveyance inward and
outward and of all the demeaning of the Officers of the Court, that there rise
no slander by their deeds, unto this famous Court and that you see that the
Officers under you for the King, put them in their diligence to take often the
views of the Offices, that the allowance of the Expenses, pass not their
charges of receipts; ye also to make Account of all the Treasurer of Household
charge, and discharge for all receipts, purveyances and expenses, and no
concealements make thereof but truly to ingrosse it, and to put into the Kings
Exchequer; and in your Office to attend, and preserve the Kings Worship and
profit, as nigh as you can devise; and ye to search, keep, and uphold the good
said Worshipful and profitable Rules and Statutes used before time in this
Court, and them to increase, and that this demeaning be example to all other
under you in this Court of good governance; And also that ye or your under
Clearke, or both, be at the Cowperage of Flesh, and at the departing of Fish,
at the service of the Kings Chamber and Hall, and to know the very duties of
Liveries daily in Household, and to see with the Almner that the Messes thereof
be smitten in a sufficient and according manner, after the old Customs, and so
to see it to the Kings Table, and to other Officers due: Also ye and your
Clerk truly, as often as it is requisite, shall take the Remanents and viewes in
Offices, and surely make the Book of Wine, and all present into the counting
House, as often as you be desired by the Steward, Cofferer, and Clerk of the
Green Cloth, which must needs ingrosse the great Account of the Household by
your Record. To all which things ye will conform, after your power and
understanding, So help you God, and by this Book.

The Oath that is to be ministered to a Midwife by the Bishop or his Chancellor
of the Diocese, when she is licensed to exercise that Office of a Midwife.
YOu shall swear, First, That you shall be diligent and faithful, and ready
to help every Woman laboring of Child, as well the poor as the rich; and
that in time of nessitie, you shall not forsake, or leave the poor woman, to
go to the Rich.

2. Item, Ye shall neither cause nor suffer any woman to name, or put any
other Father to the Child, but only him which is the very true Father thereof
indeed.

3. Item, You shall not suffer any woman to pretend feign, or surmize her self
to be delivered of a Child, who is not indeed; neither to claim any other
woman's Child for her own

4. Item, You shall not suffer any Woman's Child to be murdered, maimed, or
otherwise hurt, as much as you may; and so often as you shall perceive any
peril or jeopardie, either in the Woman, or in the Child, in any such wise,
as you shall be in doubt what shall chance thereof, you shall thenceforth in
due time send for other Midwises, and expert women in that faculty, and use
their advice and counsel in that behalf.

5. Item, That you shall not in any wise use or exercise any manner of
Witchcraft, Charm; or Sorcery, Invocation, or other Prayers than may stand
with Gods Laws and the Kings.

6. Item, You shall not give any counsel, or minister any Herb, Medicine, or
Potion, or any other thing, to any Woman being with child whereby she should
destroy or cast out that she goes withal before her time.

7, Item, You shall not enforce any Woman being withchilde by any pain, or by
any ungodly ways or means, to give you any more for your pains or labor in
bringing her a bed, then they would otherwise do.

8. Item, You shall not consent, agree, give, or keep counsel, that any woman
be delivered secretly of that which she goes with, but in the presence of two
or three lights ready.

9 Item, You shall be secret, and not open any matter appertaining to your
Office in the presence of any man, unless necessity or great urgent cause do
constrain you so to do.

10. Item, If any child be dead borne, you your self shall see it buried in
such secret place as neither Hogg nor Dog, nor any other Beast may come unto
it, and in such sort done, as it be not found nor perceived, as much as you
may; And that you shall not suffer any such child to be cast into the Jaques
or any other inconvenient place.

11. Item, If you shall know any Midwife using or doing any thing contrary to
any of the premises, or in any other wise than shall be seemly or convenient,
you shall forthwith detect open to show the same to me, or my Chancellor for
the time being.

12. Item, You shall use your self in honest behavior unto the woman being
lawfully admitted to the ^oome and Office of a Midwife in all things
accordingly.

13. Item, That you shall truly present to my self, or my Chancellor, all such
women as you shall know from time to time to occupy and exercise the room of
a Midwife within my foresaid Diocese and Jurisdiction of A. without my License
and admission

14. Item, You shall not make or assign any Deputy or Deputies to exercise or
occupy under you in your absence the Office or room of a Midwife, but such as
you shall perfectly know to be of right honest and discreet behavior, as also
apt, able, and having sufficient knowledge and experience to exercise the said
room and Office.

15. Item, You shall not be Privy, or consent, that any Priest, or other
party, shall in your absence, or in your company, or of your knowledge or
sufferance, Baptize any child, by any Mass, Latine-Service, or Prayers then
such as are appointed by the Laws of the Church of England; neither shall you
consent, that any child, borne by any woman, who shall be delivered by you,
shall be carried away without being Baptized in the Parish by the Ordinary
Minister, where the said child is borne, unless it be in case of necessity.
Baptized privately, according to the Book of Common Prayer: But you shall
forthwith upon understanding thereof, either give knowledge to me the said
Bishop, or my Chancell our for the time being All which Articles and Charge you
shall faithfully observe and keep, so help you God and by the contents of this
Book.

The Oath of a Nun, taking upon her a Monastical life.
TV igitur Primo Jurabis quod in castitate corporis te conservabis: Item tu
Jurabis, quod eis Obediens Abati Sci. Augustini comtuari, qui uunc est, and
Successoribus suis, qui and Tempore fuerint, in Omnibus, quae Pertiuent, ad
jurisdictionem quam eadem Abbas Habet, superte, vel habefurum sunt Successores
ejus.

Item, Tu Jurabis, quod eris Obediens and intendens Magistro, and Priorisse,
hujus Loci, qui pro Tempore fuerint in his, quam tibi ex part dicti Abbatis
Injungent-saluberituevel imponent haec omnia permittis Observaturam, quam diu
in hac domo, soror volueris commorari, and Beneficio bujus domus gaudere, sic
Deus te Adjuvet, and haec sancta Dei Evangelia.

The Oath taken by Edw. 2. King of England, at his Coronation, Anno 1. vide
claus November. 10.
SIre volez vous grauntere garder, and par vostre sorment, confermer an People
d'engleterre les leyes, and les custumes, a eux grauntees pur les Auncien Rois
d'engleterre voz Predescesours, duotenus and deotz a dieu and nement les leys
custumes, and les Franchisez guntez, an clerge and an People, Parle gloriens
Roll Seint Edw. vostre Predecessor.

Respens, Jeo lees grantee, and permit.

Sire, garderez vous a dieu, and Seint Eglise, and an clerge, and an People
Paes and acore, en dieu entiremt. selunt, vere Poer.

Respons, Jeo les garderai.

Sire, freez vous fear en touz v^s Ingementz, mele, and droit Justice, and
discretion, en Misericorde, and verite a vere Poer.

Respons, Jeo lefrai.

Sire, grant vous, a tenir, and garder, les leys, and les custumes, droit les
quieles, la comunante, de vere Royalme, Aura est in, and les defendres, and
afforcerez ad honor, de dieu a vostre Poer.

(...) Respons, Jeo les grant, and promitte.

The Oath taken by Charles the first, King of great Britain, at his Coronation.
AFter the Sermon done, the Metropolitan comes to the King, and does with a
low voice, enquire of his Majesty, saying:

Sir, Will you grant, and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of
England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your
Lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, The Laws, Customs, and
Franchizes granted to the Clergy, and to the People, (by the) glorious King
Saint Edward your Predecessor, according, and conformable to the Laws of God,
and Profession of the Gospel Established in this Kingdom, and Agreeing to the
Prerogatives of the Kings thereof, and to the Ancient Customs of this Relame.

Respons, I grant, and Promise to keep them.

Sir, Will you keep Peace, and Agreement, entirely, according to your Power,
both to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?

Respons, I will keep it.

Sir, Will you to your Power, cause Law, Justice, and Mercy, in discretion,
and Truth to be Executed in all your Judgments?

Respons, I will.

Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep, the Laws and Rightful Customs, which
the Commonaltie of the Kingdom have; And to defend and uphold them, to the
honor of God, so much as in you lies?

Respons, I grant, and promise so to do.

Legatur, Admonitio sequens, ab uno Episcopo, Coram Omnibus, Clara voce sic
dicendo.

Domine, Rex a vobis Pardonari Petimus unicuique de nobis and Eccliis, nobis
commissis Cannonicum Privilegium, and debitam Legem, atque Justitiam
conservetis, and defensionem exhibiatis, sicut Rex in suo Regno d^bet unicuique
Episcopo, and Eccliis, sibi commissis.

Responder Kex.

Anime L^benti and devoto promitto vobis, and Pardono, Quia unacuique de uobis
and Ecclesiis, vobis Commissis Canonicum Privilegium and debitam Legem, atque
justitiam servabo, and defensionem (quantum potuero adjuvante Domino) exhibeo
sicut Rex in suo Regno unicuique Episcopo, and Ecclesiis sibi Comissis, per
rectum defendere debet.

This being done, the King comes to the Altar, and laying his right hand on
the Bible, says:

These things which I have before promised, I shall observe and keep So God me
help and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath taken by such as are convicted for stealing the Kings Venison, and
therefore ordered to abjure the Land.
MAster Crowner hear you this, That I have offended our Sovereign Lord the
King in his Venison, for which cause I abjure the Realm of England, and
hereafter I shall never return into it again, without the leave of our
Sovereign Lord the King So God me help, and those holy Saints.

The Oath of a Ranger of the Forest.
YOu shall truly execute the Office of a Ranger in the Panralles of W. upon the
Borders of the Kings Forest of Waltham, you shall rechuse, and with your hand
drive back again the wild Beasts of the Forest, as often as they shall range
out of the said Forest into your Panralles; you shall truly present all
unlawful hunting and hunters of wild Beasts of Venire and Chase, as well
within the Pancallees as within the Forest. And those and all other Offenses
you shall present at the Kings next Court of Attachments or Swanmothe, which
shall first happen So God you help

The Oath of a Verderor of the Forest.
YOu shall truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King in the Office of a Verderor
in the Forest of W. you shall, to the uttermost of your power and knowledge,
do for the profit of the King, so far as it does appertain unto you to do; You
shall preserve and maintain the ancient Right and Franchizes of the Crown;
you shall not conceal from his Majesty any Right of Privileges, nor any
Offense, either in Vert or Venison, nor any other thing; You shall not withdraw
nor abridge any defaults but shall endeavor your self, you shall give
knowledge thereof unto the King, or unto his Justice of the Forest; Ye shall
deal indifferently with all the Kings Liege People; You shall execute the
Laws of the Forest, and do equal Right and Justice, as well unto the poor,
as unto the rich, that appertains unto your Office; You shall not oppress
any person by color thereof, for any Reward, Favor, or Malice. All these
things you shall to the uttermost of your power, observe and keep. So help you
God.

The Oath of the Regarder of the Forest.
YOu shall truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King, in the Office of a
Regarder of the Forest of Waltham; you shall make the Regard of the same
Forest, in such manner as the same has been accustomed to be made; You shall
range throughout the whole Forest, and through every Bayliwick of the same, as
the Forresters there shall lead you to view the same Forest; and if the
Forresters will not, or do not know how to lead you to make the regard, or
range of the Forest, or that they will conceal from you any thing that is
forfeited to the King, you your selves shall not let for any thing; but you
shall see the same forfeiture, and cause the same to be enrolled in your Roll;
You shall enquire of all wastes, purprostures, and asserts of the Forest, and
also of concealemente of any offense or trespass in the Forest, either in
Vert or Venison, by any Officers of the same Forest. And all these things you
shall to the uttermost of your power do. So help you God.

The Oath of a Forrester of the Forest.
YOu shall truly execute the Office of a Forrester or Keeper of the Kings wild
Beasts, in the Walk called P. within this Forest of W. You shall be of good
behavior your self toward his Majesty's wild Beasts, and the vert of the
same Forest; You shall not conceal the offense of any other person, either in
Vert or Venison that shall be done within your Charge; but as well the same
offense, as also all Attachments and Swanmothe, other you shall present at the
Kings next Court of Attachments or Swanmothe, which shall first happen to be
holden for the (...) Forest; And you shall, to the uttermost of your power,
maintain and keep the Assizes of the Forest, and in all things the Kings
Right defend, concerning the same, so long as you shall be Keeper there. So
help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Inhabitants of the Forest, being of the age of twelve years,
as the same has been accustomed and used in ancient time.
YOu shall true Liegeman be unto the Kings Majesty; You shall no hurt do unto
his Beasts of his Forest, nor unto any thing that does belong thereto, the
offenses of other you shall not conceal; but to the uttermost of your power,
you shall them reveal unto the Officers of the Forest, or to them that may
see the same redrest. All these things you shall see done. So help you God, and
Holidome,

The Oath of the English Seminaries of the Romish institution use to take.
I John Copley Collegiall of the English Seminary, duly considering the great
benefits which Almighty God has bestowed upon me, and that especially whereby
he has drawn me out of the Country infected with Heresy, and made me a
Member of his true Catholic Church; and desiring not to show my self
altogether ingrate unto Gods so great mercy, I have freely decreed to
consecrate, and offer up my self wholly unto his divine service, for attaining
as much as in me lies to the end of the said College; And I do promise and
confirm, by this mine Oath unto Almighty God, that I am, and shall be ever
most ready in mind, by the assistance of his holy grace, to receive in due
time Holy Orders, and to return into England, there to gain Souls,
whenever the Superior of this College shall think good by virtue of his
Office, to command me thereto.

The Oath of a Knight of the Bathe, as it was Ministered at the Coronation of
King Charles, Anno, 162.
RIght dear Brother, great Worship be this Order unto you, And the Almighty
God give you the praise of all Knighthood; You shall love God above all
things, ye shall be steadfast in the Faith of Christ, and the same maintain
and defend to your power; You shall love your Sovereign above all earthly
creatures, and for your Sovereign, and your Sovereigns Right and Dignity
live and dye; You shall defend Maidens, Widows, and Orphans, in their Rights;
You shall suffer no Extortion so far forth as you may, nor fit in place to
hear any wrongful Judgments given to your knowledge, And as great Honor be
this Noble Order unto you, as ever it was to your Progenitors.

The Oath of Fealty taken by John Balioll King of Scots, to the King of
England.
THis hear you my Lord Edward King of England, Sovereign Lord of the Realm of
Scotland, that I John de Balioll King of Scotland, which I hold and claim to
hold of you, that I shall be faithful and loyal, and owe faith and loyalty
to you, I shall bear of life and member, and of earthly honor against all
people; And lawfully I shall acknowledge, and do the services which I owe to
you, for the Realm of Scotland aforesaid; So God me help, and his Holy
Evangelists.

The Oath and Fealty, made by King John. to Pope Innocentius, Anno Dom. 1213.
Anno R. Joh. 14
John by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland, from this
hour forward shall be faithful to God, and to Saint Peter, and to the Church
of Rome, and to my L. Pope Innocentius, and to his Successors lawfully entering;
I shall not be in word nor deed in consent, or counsel, that they should lofe
life, or member, or be apprehended in evil manner: Their loss, if I may know
it, I shall Impeach and stay, so far as I shall be able, or else so shortly
as I can, I shall signify unto them, and declare to such persons the which I
shall believe, will declare the same unto you; The counsel which they shall
commit unto me, by themselves, their messengers, or their Letters, I shall
keep secretly, and not utter to any man, to their hurt, to my knowledge. The
Patrimony of Saint Peter, and especially the Kingdom of England, and Ireland,
I shall endeavor my self to defend, against all men to my power; So help me
God, and these Holy Evangelists, Amen.

This Fealty was done on the Eve of the Ascension of our Lord, in the year
Anno, 1213.

The Oath of a Doctor of Divinity, according to the practice of the
University of Basil.
Ornatissime, Vir, Sacrarum Literarum, canditate, D. Doctissime, Hodie coram
Amplissimo hoc concessu pormittis atque fidem das in conspectu Sacrosancti
Adorandae Trinitatis, cui te Hactenus Totum Addixisti, Consecrati studiis,
laboribus, Vigilliis tuis, quod velis doctrinam Puram, a Prophetis Apostelis ae
Patribus, Melioris Notae Acceptam in corrupt in Scolis Ecclesiisque docere;
Dogmata Pugnantia cum dei verbo: (quantum vis (...) habeant) nulla vel
Seminare, vel tueri per totam vitam eruditioni, ac gradui sermon, and
Actionibus morum gravitatem conjungere eam, que Theology docet, et sit avera
(...), comoda nostrae Reipublicae Symnasii; utilitatem, ac in Primis Ordinis
Theologici salutem (quantum in te fuerit) Perpetuo promonere Indignes,
Ambitioses, contentioses a dignitatis titula (quem docturatam Appellamus long
Abarcere, denique cum universis Fratribus sinceram, Religionem profitentibus,
(...)) insigne conjunctionis vinculum Color, Alere, aeternum, Amen.

The Oath of a Sheriff of a Count^e, according as it was reformed by direction
of the Kings Council, the 4. of December. Anno, 1625.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King, in the Office
of the Sheriff of the County of B. and do the Kings Profits in all that
belongs to you to do, by way of your Office, as far forth as you may or
can; Ye shall truly keep the Kings, and all that be ongeth to the Crown;
Ye shall not assent to decrease, to lesson, ne to concealment of any of the
Kings Rights, or of his Franchizes; And whenever ye shall have knowledge,
that the Kings Rights, or the Rights of the Crown be concealed or withdrawn,
be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, or any other thing; Ye^ shall do
your true power to make them be restored to the King again: And if he may not
do it, ye shall certify the King, or some of his Council thereof, such as
you know for certain will say it unto the King; Ye shall not respite the
Kings debts for any gift or favor, where ye may raise them without great
grievance of the debtor; Ye shall truly and righteously treat the people of
your Sheriff wick, and do right as well to poor as to rich, in all that
belongs to your Office; Ye shall do no wrong to any man, for any gift or
other behest, or promise of goods, for favor nor hate; Ye shall disturb no
man's right, ye shall acquit at the Exchequer all those of whom ye shall any
thing receive of the Kings debts; Ye shall nothing take whereby the King may
lose, or that right may be letten, or disturbed, or the Kings debt delayed; Ye
shall truly return, and truly serve the Kings Writs, as far forth as it
shall be in your cunning; Ye shall not have to be your Unde-Sheriffe, any of
the Sheriffs Clerks of the last year passed; Ye shall take no Bayliffe into
your service, but such as you will answer for; Ye shall make each of your
Bailiffs make such Oath as you make your self, in that that belongs to their
Occupation; Ye shall receive no Writs, by you, nor any of yours unsealed, nor
any Sealed under the Seal of any Justice, save of Justice in Air, or Justice
assigned in the same Shire where you be Sheriff in, or other Justices having
power or authority to make any Writs unto you, by the Law of the Land, or
Justice of Newgate; You shall make your Bayliffe of the true and sufficient men
in the Country; Ye shall be dwelling in your own proper person within your
Bayliffewicke, for the time you shall be in the same Office, except ye be
otherwise Licensed by the King; You shall not let your Sheriffe-wicke, nor any
Bayliffe-wicke thereof, to Farm to any man; Ye shall truly set, and return
reasonable and due Iusses of them, that be within your Bayliffe wicke, after
their Estate and their Haviour, and make your Pannell your self of such
persons as be most meet, most sufficient, and not suspect, nor procured, as it
is ordained by the Statute; And over this in eschewing and restraining of the
Robberies, Man-slaughters, and other manifold grievous offenses that be done
daily, namely by such as name themselves Soldiers, and by other Vagarants, the
which increase in multitude and number; So that the Kings true Subjects may not
safely ride nor go to do such things as they have to do, to their
intolerable hurt and hinderance; Ye shall truly and effectually, with all
diligence possible to your power, execute the Statutes of Winchester, and of
Vagabonds; All these things ye shall well and truly observe and keep, So
help you God, etc.

The Oath with is usually ministered to a Justice of the Peace, in the several
Counties of England.
YE shall swear, That as Justice of Peace in the County of S. in all
Articles in the Kings Commission to you directed, ye shall do equal right,
to the poor as to the rich, after your cunning, wit and power, and after the
Laws and Customs of this Realm, and Statutes thereof made; And ye shall not
be of counsel with any person, in any quarrel hanging before you, Ye shall
truly cause to be entered, without any concealment, or imbezelling, and truly
send them to the Kings Exchequer; Ye shall not let for gift, or other cause,
but well and truly ye shall do your Office of Justice of the Peace to be
done, but of the King, and Fees accustomed, and costs limited by the Statute;
And ye shall not direct, or cause to be directed any Warrant by you to be
made to the parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bayliffes of the said
County, or other the Kings Officers and Ministers, or other indifferent
persons, to do Execution thereof: So help ye God, and by the contents of this
Book.

The Oath of the Register, and Keeper of the Kings Papers and Records of State
in his Palace of White Hall at Westminster.
YOu shall swear, To bear faith and true Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty,
and him from henceforth truly and faithfully to serve in the place of Clerk,
Keeper, and Register of his Majesty's Papers and Records for matters of State,
established at his Majesty's Palace of White Hall; You shall do your
uttermost endeavor to keep and conserve the said Papers and Records, which
either now or hereafter shall be committed to your charge, from all harm and
damage; You shall not willingly suffer any of the same to be purloyned,
embezled, or defaced; You shall carefully and faithfully keep secret and
conceal, from the knowledge of others, either by writing or relation, all such
things therein contained as shall be fit, either for reason of State, or
otherwise for his Majesty's service, to be concealed and kept secret, except it
be to the Lords, and others of his Majesty's Privy Council, or such as his
Majesty shall be content to have them communicated unto; if you shall know of
private person, or persons, that have embezled, or do detain any such Papers
or Records which belong unto his Majesty, you shall do the best to recover
the same, and bring them to the said Office, and do all things else that
belong to the duty of the Clerk, Keeper, and Register of the said Papers and
Records; All these you shall well and truly perform and do, So help you God.

The Oath to be ministrrd to the Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shall serve the King in the Office
of the Master of the Kings Wards, and shall minister equal Justice unto rich
and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; And that ye shall
diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the Kings
Advantage and Profit, and to the Augmentation of the Rights and Prerogatives of
his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed to your Office, and also
endeavor your self to the uttermost of your power, to see the King justly and
truly answered yearly of all such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, which
shall, or may arise, grow, or be due to the King in your Office, and from time
to time deliver with speed such as shall have to do before you, And that ye
shall not take, nor receive of any person any Gift or Reward, in any case or
matter depending before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party,
whereby any prejudice, loss, hindrance, or disherison shall grow, or be to the
Kings Highness; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath to be ministered to the Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries,
as it is in the Statute 32. H. 8. Ca. 16.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King as his
Attorney in all Courts, for, or concerning any matter, or cause, that shall
concern the Possessions and Hereditaments limited to the Surveigh and
Governance of this Court, and procure the Kings Profit thereof; And that ye
shall truly counsel the King, and the Master of this Court, in all things
concerning the same to the best of your wit and cunning, and with all speed and
diligence from time to time, at the calling of the said Master ye shall
endeavor your self, for the hearing and determination indifferently of such
matters and causes as shall depend before the said Master; and that ye shall
not take any Gift or Reward in any matter or cause depending in the same Court,
or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be Party, whereby the Kings Majesty
shall be hurted or hindered, or dis-herited; And further, ye shall do to your
power, wit, and cunning, all and every thing that shall appertain to your
Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Receivergenerall of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in
Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 46.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his People, in the Office of the general Receiver of this Court; And
ye shall reasonably and honestly procure the Kings Profit, and do right to
all manner of People, poor, and rich, in those things which touch your Office;
And the Kings Receipt of his Money, you shall truly keep, dispend, pay, and
deliver, and true declaration and Account make thereof from time to time
without any concealment, according to the Act made for the establishment of
this Court; And further, shall do every thing that of right appertains to
your Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in the
Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 46.
YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and
true Allowance make to every person which shall be accomptant before you; And
you shall not take, or receive of poor or rich any Gift or Reward, in any
matter or cause depending, or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as
shall be ordinary appertaining to your Office, whereby the King shall be
hurted, hindered, or dis-herited; And ye shall do all and every thing, which
shall be appertaining to your Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

And all Particular Auditors, that shall belong to, and be appointed to the
said Court, shall take the same Oath aforesaid, before the Master of the said
Court of Wards.

The Oath of the particular Receivers of the Court of Wards and Liveries, as in
the Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 46.
YE shall swear, That ye trutly shall serve the King in your Office, and
nothing conceal, but true Account make of all such Revenues, Rents, sums of
Money, and other Profits, wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged by reason of
your Office; Ye shall make no Petition, or ask Allowance, but such as shall be
good, just, true, and reasonable; And also truly content and pay to the King,
all such sums of Money as shall come to your hands, and ye shall do all,
and every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office,
according to the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Clerks of the Council of the Court of Wards, as in the
Statute, 32. H 8. Ca. 46.
YE will swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Offices
of Clerks of the Council of this Court, and truly do, and Execute all, and
every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office,
according to the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

All Surveyors, and Feodaries, that shall be appointed by the said Master,
Attorney, Receiver general, and Auditor of the said Court, or three, or two of
them, whereof the Master to be one, shall take a corporal Oath before the said
Master, according to the form abovesaid.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the first Fruits and Tenths, as in the Statute,
Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 46.
YOu shall swear, That ye well and truly serve the King in the Office of the
Chancellour-ship of the first Fruits, and Tenths, and shall minister equal
Justice to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; And that
ye shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the
Kings best Advantage and Profit, and to the Augmentations of the Rights and
Prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed to your
Office, and also endeavor your self, to the uttermost of your power, to see
the King justly and truly answered yearly, of all such Rents, Revenues, and
Profits, which shall or may arise, grow, or be due to the King in your Office,
and from time to time, deliver with speed, such as shall have to do before you;
And that ye shall not take nor receive of any person any Gift or Reward in any
case or matter depending before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be
Party, whereby any prejudice, hindrance, loss, or dis-herison shall grow, or
be to the Kings Highness; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Treasurer of the Court, of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 45.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his People in the Office of the Treasurer of this Court; And ye
shall reasonably and honestly procure the Kings Profits, and do right to all
manner of people, poor and rich, in those things which touch your Office, and
the Kings Receipt of his Money, ye shall truly keep, dispend, pay, and
deliver a true declaration and Account thereof shall make, from time to time
without any concealment, according to this Act made for the stablishment of
this Court; And further, shall do every thing that of right appertains to
your Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Attorney of the Court of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 45.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King as his
Attorney in all Courts, for, and concerning any matter or cause that shall
concern or touch the Rents, Revenues, Profits, or Hereditaments, limited to
the Survey and Governance of this Court, and procure the King Profit thereof;
And that ye shall truly counsel the King, and Chancellor of this Court, in
all things concerning the same, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power,
and with all speed and diligence, from time to time, at the calling of the said
Chancellor, you shall endeavor your self, for the hearing and determination
indifferently of such matters and causes as shall depend before the said
Chancellor; And that ye shall not receive any Gift, or reward, in any matter
or cause depending in the Court, or elsewhere, wherein the King shall be
Party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hurted, hindered, or dis-inherited;
And further, ye shall do to your power, wit and cunning, all and every thing
that of right appertains to your Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditor of the Court of first Fruits and and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 45.
YE shall swear, That ye truly shall serve the King in your Office, and true
Allowance make to every person which shall be accomptant before you; And you
shall not take nor receive of poor nor rich, any Gift or Reward in any matter
or cause depending; or to be discussed in the same Court, but such as shall be
ordinary appertaining to your Office, whereby the King shall be hurted,
hindered, dis-herited; And ye shall do every thing appertaining to your
Office, So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Court of first Fruits and Tenths, as in the
Statute, Anno, 32. H. 8. Ca. 45.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office
of Clerk of the Council of this Court, and truly do, and execute all and
every thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office,
according to the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath taken for the surety of the Succession of the Kings Highness, by
Queen Anne, Anno, 26. H. 8. Ca. 2.
YE shall swear, To bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience, all only to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved
lawful Wife Queen Anne, begotten, and to be begotten; And further, to the
Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord, according to the limitation in the Statute
made for surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and
contained, not to any other within this Realm, nor for any Authority or
Potentate; And in case any Oath be made, or has been made by you to any person
or persons, that then ye repute the same as vain and Adnihillate; And that to
your cunning, wit, and uttermost of you power, without guile, fraud, or other
undue mean, ye shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said
Succession, and all the whole effects and contents thereof, and all other Acts
and Statutes made in confirmation, or for execution of the same, or of any
thing therein contained; and this ye shall do against all manner of persons,
of what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be, and in no wise
do, or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or
indirectly, any thing or things privately or appartly, to the let, hindrance,
damage, or derogation thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of
means, or for any manner of pretense; So help you God, all Saints, and the
holy Evangelists.

The Oath taken for the establishment of the Succession of the Crown of this
Realm, in the Kings Highness by Queen Jane, An. 28. H. 8. Ca. 7.
YE shall swear, To bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience, all only to the Kings
Majesty, Supreme Head in earth under God of the Church of England during his
life, and to his Heirs of his body, and of his most dear and entirely
beloved lawful Wife Queen Jane, begotten, and to be begotten and Procreated;
And further, to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord, according to the
limitation in the Statute made for surety of his Succession in the Crown of
this Realm, As the Parliament begun, and holden at Westminster the 8 day of
June, in the 28. year of the Kings most gracious Reign; And also for lack of
such heirs to such person or persons as the Kings Highness shall limit and
appoint to succeed to the Crown, by virtue and authority of the same Act, and
not to any other within this Realm, nor for any authority, power, or
Potentate; And in case any other. Oath be made, or has been made by you to any
person or persons, that then ye to repute the same as vain and Adninillate,
and that to your cunning, wit, and uttermost of your power, without guile,
fraud, or other undue manner; Ye shall observe keep, defend and maintain the
said Act of Succession, made in the said Parliament begun and holden at
Westminster, in the said 8 day of June, in the said 28. year of the Kings most
Royal Reign, and all the whole effects and contents thereof, and all things
that shall be done by the Kings Highness by authority of the same and all
other Acts and Statutes, made in confirmation or execution of the same, or any
thing therein contained; And this ye shall do against all manner of persons,
of what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or condition soever they be, and in no wise
do or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or
indirectly, any thing or things, privately or appartly, to the let, hindrance,
damage, or derogation thereof, or any part of the same, or of any thing or
things that shall be done by the Kings Highness, by virtue and authority of
the said Act, by any manner of means, or for any manner of pretense; So help
you God all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Commissioners appointed for inquiry of the decay of Castles,
Forts, and other places near Scotland, and for Reparation of the same. Anno,
2. and 3. P. 4. and M. Ca. 1.
YE shall swear, That to your cunning wit and power, ye shall truly and
indifferently execute the Authority to you given by this Commission, without
any favor, affection, corruption, dread, or malice to be borne, to any manner
of person or persons; and as the case shall remain, you shall consent, and
endeavor your self, for your part, to the best of your knowledge and power,
to the making of such wholesome, just, equal, and indifferent Laws and
Ordinances, as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent
number of your selves, being in Commission with you, for the making errection
and preservation of all and every such things as are contained and specified
in the said Commission, and the same Laws and Ordinances to your cunning, wit,
and power, cause to be put in due execution, without favor, meed, malice, or
affection. As God you help, and all Saints.

The Oath of such as were Sworn to declare the true value of their Estates,
toward the payment of the 15. Dismes and Subsidies, An. 2. and 3. P. and M.
Ca. 23.
I Shall faithfully, truly, and plainly, according to my knowledge, show unto
you the King and Queens Commissioners, and to others by you asfigned, the best
and greatest value of all my goods and chattells, and sums of money to me
owing, according to the grant of this Act of Subsidy, and truly answer to
that I shall be examined of, touching the premises, without coven or deceit;
So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath of such as were to make inquiry of the value of Goods and Lands of
such persons as were liable to the payment of Fifteenes, Dismes, and Subsidies,
Anno, 4. and. 5. P. and M. Ca. 6.
I Shall truly enquire, with my fellows that shall be charged with me of the
Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, and other places of the best and most value of
the substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limits of the
places, that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall
have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with
any sum of money by this Act of the said Subsidy, and of all other Articles
that I shall be charged with touching the said Act and according to the intent
of the same, and thereupon as near as it may be, or shall come to my
knowledge, truly to present and certify before you the names, fir-names, and
the best and uttermost substance and values, of every of them, as well of
Lands, Tenaments, and other Hereditaments, Possessions, and Profits, as of
Goods, Chattells, Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, without
any concealment, favor, love, affection, dread, fear, or malice, as near as
God will give me grace; So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath of such as were to make inquiry of the value of the Goods and Lands
of such persons as were liable to the payment of Fifteenes, Dismes, and
Subsidies, Anno, 6. Edw. 6. Ca. 7.
I Shall truly enquire, with my fellows that shall be charged with me, of the
Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, or other place of the best and most value of
the substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limits of the
places that I and my fellows shall be charged with and of other which shall
have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with
any sum of money by this Act of the said Subsidy, and of all other Articles
that I shall be charged with touching the said Act, and according to the intent
of the same, and thereupon as near as it may, or shall come to my knowledge,
truly to present and certify before you, the names, fir-names, and the best
and uttermost substance and value of every of them, as well of Lands,
Tenements, and other Hereditaments, Possessions, and Profits, as of Goods,
Chattells, Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, without any
concealment, favor, love affection, dread, fear, or malice; So help me God,
and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath of such as were to present names and best values of the substance of
such persons as were to pay relief to to the King, Anno, 2. and 3. Edw. 6. Ca.
36.
I Shall truly enquire, with my fellows that shall be charged with me, of the
Hundred, Wapentake, Ward, Town, or other place of the best and most value of
the substance of every person dwelling and abiding within the limits of the
places that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall
have his or their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with
any sum of money by this Act, of this said relief, and of all other Articles
that I shall be charged with touching the said Act, and according to the intent
of the same, and thereupon as near as it may, or shall come to my knowledge,
not only truly to present and certify before you, the names, fir-names,
additions, and the best and uttermost substance and values of every of them, of
their Goods, Chattels, Debts, and other things chargeable by the said Act, and
how many Strangers, Denizons, or not Denizons, being above the age of 7.
years, be refiant and dwelling within the limits of my charge, of what value
in Goods and other things chargeable to the payment of this relief they have
been, and whether they be householders, or servants, or otherwise, under the
rule and government of their parents, without any concealment, favor, love,
affection, dread, fear, or malice; So help me God, and the holy contents of
this Book.

The Oath taken by those that were to pay Relief to the King, Anno, 2 and 3.
Edw. 6. Ca. 36.
I Shall faithfully, truly, and plainly, according to my knowledge, show unto
you the Kings Commissioners, and to others by you assigned the best and
greatest value, or above of all my Goods and Chattells, and sums of money to
me owing, according to the grant of this Act of Relief, and truly answer to
that I shall be examined of touching the premises, without coven or deceit;
So help me God, and the holy contents of this Book.

The Oath to be taken by Parsons, Vicars, or Curats, and others, to declare
what number of Sheep were in their several Parishes, to the end, that the
King might be paid his Relief by the Poll, Anno, 2. and 3. Edw. 6. Ca. 36.
YE shall diligently enquire, and justly and truly present and certify us,
the Kings Commissioners, what number of Ewes? Wethers, and other Sheare sheep
there be within the limits of your charge whose they be, in what Town or
Parish the Owner dwells, of what condition or degree he is, and whether for
the most part of the year they be kept in several Pastures or Marshes or in
Commons, or Grounds, commonly used to be Tilled, As ye trust to be saved by
the merits of Christ's Passion.

The Oath of such as were to value Cloths, to the end, that the K. might
receive payment of Relief for every Cloth, Anno, 2. and 3. Edw. 6. Ca. 36.
YE shall faithfully and truly esteem, set the just price and value of all
such Cloths as shall brought to you to be viewed and praised, as ye shall in
your conscience think the same worth in your conscience to be sold when they
shall be wrought, and the same shall not suffer to be delivered out of your
custody till you have made of the Color, Kind, and Price thereof an enterie,
both in the Book of the Clothier, and also of the Alnager, or his Deputy, and
set your hands, or marks, declaring who was the Owner of the Cloth and the Kind
and Price thereof So help you God, and by this Book.

The Oath of the Surveyor of the Kings Liveries, Anno, 33. H. 8. Ca. 22.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly serve the King our Sovereign in the
Office of Surveyor of his Graces Liveries, and shall minister equal Justice to
rich and poor to the best of your power, wit, and knowledge, and that you
shall diligently proceed in all things which may honestly and justly be to the
Kings advantage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the right and
prerogative of his graces Crown, and from time to time deliver with speed such
as shall have to do before you^; And that you shall not take, nor receive of
any person or persons any gift or reward, in any case or matter, depending or
to depend in the said Court of the Kings Wards, wherein the Kings Highness
shall be Party, by reason whereof, any prejudice, loss, hindrance, or
dis-herison, shall or may grow to the Kings Highness his Heirs or Successors;
So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Liveries, as in Anno, 33. H. 8. Ca. 22.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord in your Office of Clerk of the Liveries, and truly do and execute, without
delay, fraud, or covin, all and every thing and thing which you ought to do,
by reason of your said Office, according to the form and effect of this
present Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the general Surveyer of the Kings Court, called the Court of
general Surveyer of the Kings Lands, Anno, 23. H. 8. Ca. 39.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in the said
Office of the general Surveyer of the Revenues of this Court, called the Court
of the general Surveyer of his graces Lands, and shall minister equal Justice
to rich and poor, to the best of your cunning, wit, and power; A^^ that ye
shall diligently procure all things which may honestly and justly be to the
Kings advantage and profit, and to the Augmentation of the rights and
prerogatives of his Crown, and truly use the Kings Seal appointed for your
Office; And also endeavor your self, to the uttermost of your power, to see
the King truly answered of all such Rents, Revenues, Issue, and Profits, which
shall or ^ay arise or grow in your office and from time to time deliver with
speed, such as shall have to do before you; And that ye shall not take, or
receive of any person, any Gift or Reward, in any cause or matter depending
before you, or wherein the Kings Highness shall be Party whereby any
prejudice, hindrance, loss, or dis-herison shall grow, or be to the Kings
Highness; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Treasurer of Office or Court of the Kings general Surveyer,
Anno, 33. H. 8. Ca. 39.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, and his people in the Office of Treasurer of his Highness Court of
general Surveyer; And ye shall reasonably, and honestly procure the Kings
Profit, and do right to all manner of people poor and rich in those things
which touch your Office and the Kings Treasure; Ye shall truly keep and
dispend, and true declaration and account thereof shall make from time to time,
without any concealment, to and before such per on and persons, as shall be
named and appointed by the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors for the
same; And further, shall do every thing that of right appertains to your
Office: So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Kings Attorney of the Court of general Surveyer, Anno, 33.
H. 8. Ca. 39.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King in all places,
for, or concerning any matter or cause that shall concern or touch the
possessions and Hereditaments, limited to the survey and governnance of this
Court, and procure the Kings Profit thereof; And ye shall truly counsel the
King and the Surveyer and Treasurer of this Court, in all things concerning the
same, to the best of your cunning wit, and power, and with all speed and
diligence from time to time at the calling of the said Surveyer and Treasurer,
you shall endeavor your self, for the hearing and determination
indifferently, of such matters and causes as shall depend before the said
Surveyer and Treasurer; And that ye shall not take any gift or reward in any
matter or cause depending in the same Court, or elsewhere wherein the King
shall be Party, whereby the Kings Majesty shall be hurted, hindered, or
dis-inherited; And further, do all and every thing that shall appertain to
your Office: So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Master of the Woods of the Court of general Surveyer, Anno,
33. H. 8. Ca. 39.
YE shall swear, That ye well and truly shall serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of Master of the Woods in this Court; And that ye shall
shake true sale and sales of all Wood, and under-woods belonging to your
Office, according to the authority given unto you by this Act of general
Surveyer, or any other Act or Acts to be made concerning the said general
Surveyers for the Kings most advantage, and nothing conceal, but true account
make of all such sums of money received for the same, and other Profits
wherewith ye shall be lawfully charged by reason of your said Office; Ye
shall make no Petition, nor ask any Allowance, but such as shall be good, just
true, and reasonable; And ye shall do all and every thing and things which
ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to the form and effect
of this Act; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Auditors of the Court of the general Surveyor, Anno, 33. H.
8. Ca. 39.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office,
and shall not take or receive of poor or rich, any gift or reward, in any
matter or cause depending, or to be discussed in the same Court but such as
shall be your ordinary Fees; And ye shall do all and every other thing which
shall appertain to your Office; So help you God and all Saints.

The Oath of the Receivor of the Court of the general Surveyance, An. 33. H.
8. Ca. 39.
YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King in your Office, and
nothing conceal, but true account make of all such Revenues, Rents, sums of
money, and other profits wherewith you shall be lawfully charged, by reason of
your said Office; You shall make no Petition, nor ask Allowance, but such as
shall be good, just, and true, and reasonable; and ye shall do all, and every
thing and things which ye ought to do, by reason of your Office, according to
the form and effect of this Act; So help you God, and by the contents of this
Book.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Court of the general Surveyor, Anno, 33. H. 8.
Ca 39.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office
of Clerk of the said Court, and truly do and execute, all, and every thing
and things which ye ought to do by reason of your Office, according to the
form and effect of the Act; And ye shall also be attendant unto the said
general Survey or from time to time, as they shall require you; So help you
God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Messenger of the Court of the general Surveyor, Anno, 33. H.
8. Ca. 39.
YOu shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King in your Office
of Messenger of this Court, as well in speedy serving all and singular
Processes to you, to be delivered without fraud, covin, guile, or deceit; As
also making true and speedy Certificate to this Court of the same; And that
you well and truly do, and execute all, and every other thing and things which
ye ought to do by reason of your said Office; So help you God, and all Saints

The Oath of Supreamacie, Anno, 28. H. 8. Ca. 10.
IT is Ordained and Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That all, and every
Ecclesiastical Judge, Ordinary, Chancellor, Commissarie, Official,
Vicar-Generall, Mayor, Bayliffe, Sheriff, Under Sheriff, Escheator, Alderman,
Jurate, Constable, Headborough, Thirdborow, Bursholder, and every other
Lay-Officer and Minister to be made created elected, or admitted within this
Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions, of what estate, order, degree, or
condition soever he shall be, from, and after the said last day of July, shall
before he take upon him such Office, make, take, and receive a corporal Oath
upon the Evangelists, before such person and persons as have, or shall have
authority to admit him; That he from henceforth shall utterly renounce,
refuse, relinquish and forsake the Bishop of Rome, and his authority, power,
and jurisdiction. And that ye shall never consent or agree, that the Bishop of
Rome shall practice, exercise, or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction
or power within this Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions, but that he
shall resist the same at all times to the uttermost of his power; And that from
henceforth he shall accept, repute and take the Kings Majesty to be the only
Supreme Head in earth of the Church of England, and that to his cunning, wit,
and uttermost of his power, without guile, fraud, or other undue mean; He
shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the whole effect and contents of all
and singular Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made within this Realm, in
derogation, execution, and extinguishment of the Bishop of Rome and his
authority, and all other Acts and Statutes, made, and to be made in
Reformation and coroboration of the Kings Power of Supreme Head in earth of
the Church of England; And this he shall do against all manner of persons, of
what estate, dignity, degree, or condition they be, and in no wise do or
attempt, nor to his power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or
indirectly, any thing or things privily or appartly, to the let, hindrance,
damage, or derogation thereof, or of any part thereof, by any manner of
means, or of any manner of pretense; And in case any Oath be made, or has
been made to him, by any manner of person or persons, in maintenance, defense,
or favor of the Bishop of Rome, or his authority, jurisdiction, or power,
yea, repute the same as vain and adnihillate; So help him God and all Saints,
and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of a Commissioner for Sewers, as in the Statute, Anno, 23. H. 8
YE shall swear, That you to your cunning, wit, and power shall truly and
indifferently execute the Authority given by this Commission of Sewers,
without any favor, affection, corruption, dread or malice, to be borne to any
manner of person or persons, and as the case shall require, ye shall consent
and endeavor your self, for your part, to the best of your knowledge and
power, to the making of such wholesome just, equal, and didifferent Laws, and
Ordinances, as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent
number of your fellows, being in Commission with you, for the due redress,
reformation, and amendment, of all, and every such things as are contained and
specified in the said Commission; And the same Laws and Ordinances, to your
cunning, wit, and power, cause to be put in due execution without favor, meed,
dread, malice, or affection; So God you help and all Saints.

The Oath of an Undersheriff, Bayliffe of Franchies, Deputies, and Clerk of
every Sheriff, and Undersheriff, Statute, Anno, 27. of Queen Eliz. Ca. 12.
I. A. B. Shall not use or exercise the Office of Under-Sheriffe corruptly,
during the time that I shall remain there, neither shall, or will accept,
rejoice, or take by any color, means, or device whatsoever, or consent to the
taking of any manner of fee or reward of any manner of person or persons for
the inpannelling or returning of any Inquest, Jurie, or Tales, in any Court of
Record for the Queen, or between party, and party, above two shillings, or
the value thereof, or such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, but will, according to my power, truly
and indifferently with convenient speed, impannell all Jurours, and return all
such Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appartain to be done by my duty
or Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office; So help me
God, and by the contents of this Book.

It is Ordained, That every Undersheriff, Bayliffe of Franchizes, Deputy, and
Clerk of every Sheriff and Undersheriff, and every other person and persons
which shall have Authority, or take upon him to impannell or return any
Inquest, Jurie or Tales, or entermedle with execution of Process in any Court
of Record, until he or they have taken the Oath of Supreamacie, as it is
Ordained in the first year of Queen Elizabeth; Together with the Oath
abovesaid.

The Oath given to the Kings Council and Judges of his Court of Requests, as
it is entered in an old Book of Presidents remaining among the Records of that
Court, Anno, 27. H. 6. Fo. 56.
YOu shall be faithful and true Counselor to our Sovereign Lord, Henry by
the grace of God, King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland, the 7,
and to his Council be diligently attendant, and due, and diligent attendance
he shall give to the same, and in every matter touching our said Sovereign
Lord, his honorable surety or profit that shall come to your knowledge, or
that shall be communed or treated in his Council; Ye shall to the best of
your wisdom, give plain and true Council, not letting so to do for meed,
dread, favor, or affection of any person, of what degree or condition soever
he be; the Kings Council, as long as it is Ordained to be Council, ye shall
conceal and keep secret, without disclosing it to any person, though he be of
the same Council, if it touch him, and that he may not be made privy there:
And if there shall come any thing to your knowledge, that may be hurtful
prejudicial, or dishonorable to our said Sovereign Lord; Ye shall let it to
the best of your power, and as soon as ye goodly may, show it to our said
Sovereign Lord, or such of his Council as ye shall think will show it to
him; All which premises, and every of them, ye shall well and truly keep and
observe; So help you God, and all Saints, and by his holy Evangelists, by you
bodily touched.

The Oath which was given by Henry Garnet the Jesuit, to Catesby, Piercy,
Christopher Wright, and Thomas Winter, and the rest of the Conspirators in the
Powder Treason, Anno, 1605. for secrecy, as perseverance and constancy in the
execution of their Plots.
YOu shall swear, By the blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now
purpose to receive, never to disclose, directly nor indirectly, by word or
circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep Secret, nor
desist from execution thereof, until the rest shall give you leave

The Oath concerning the Office of a Constable in the Country, Vide Dalton,
Title Warrants.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, in the Office of a Constable; You shall see, and cause his Majesty's
Peace to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your power; You
shall Arrest all such persons as in your sight or presence shall ride or go
Armed offensively, or shall commit, or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach
of his Majesty's Peace; You shall do your best endeavor (upon complaint to
you made) to apprehend all Fellons, Baretors, and Rioters, or persons Riotous
assembled; and if any such Offenders shall make resistance (with force) you
shall leave hue and cry and shall pursue them until they be taken; You shall
do your best endeavor, that the Watch in your Town be duly kept, and that
hue and cries be duly pursued, according to the Statute of Winchester; And that
the Statutes made for the Punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and Night
walkers, and such idle persons coming within your Bounds and Limits be duly
put in Execution; You shall have a watchful eye to such persons as shall
maintain or keep any common house or place where any unlawful Games is, or
shall be used; As also, to such as shall frequent or use such places, or shall
use or exercise any unlawful Games there, or elsewhere, contrary to the
Statutes at your Assizes, Sessions, or Leet; You shall present all, and every
the offenses done, contrary to the Statutes made, 1. Jacob. 4. Jacob. and 21.
Jacob. Regis, to restrain the inordinate hunting and tippling in Innes,
Alehouses, and other Victuallinghouses, and for repressing of drunkenness; You
shall true representment make of all Bloodshedding. Affraies, Outcries,
Rescuous, and other Offenses committed or done against the Kings Majesty's
Peace within your Limits; And you shall have a care for the maintenance of
Archerie, according to the Statute; You shall well duly execute all Receipts
and Wa rants to you directed, from the Justices of this County; And ye shall
well and duly, according to your knowledge, power, and ability, do, and
execute all other things belonging to the Office of a Constable, so long as you
shall continue in this Office; So help you God.

The Oath of a Duke and Earl in Scotland, to their King.
YOu shall fortify and defend the true and Christian Religion, and Christ's
holy Evangell presently preached in this Realm and shall be loyal and true to
our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and shall defend his Highness Realm
and Lieges from all Aliens and Strangers, at the uttermost of your power; So
help you God and by the Oath that ye have else made.

The Oath of a Lord of Parliament in Scotland.
YE shall give due andfaithfull Council to our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty's, Weal publicly in Parliament, as in all other places needful, and
secretly according to you knowledge, for the preservation of his Highness most
noble Person, his Royal Estate, Lieges, and Realm and Common weal thereof;
And shall never Heile nor conceyle any point of Treason or Crime Leismajestie,
that shall appear to be conspired against his said Royal Person but shall
incontinent, with all possible diligence reveal the same; So help you God, and
by the Oath that ye have else made.

The Oath of a Knight of Scotland.
1. I Shall fortify and defend the Christian Religion, and Christ's holy
Evangell presently preached in this Realm, to the uttermost of my power.

2. I shall be Loile and true to my Soveragine Lord the Kings Majesty, to all
Orders of Chivalrie, and to the Noble Office of Arms.

3. I shall fortify and defend Justice at my power, and that with favor or
feed.

4. I shall never fly from my Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, nor from his
Highness Lieutenants, in time of Mellay and Battle.

5. I shall defend my Native Realm from all Alieners and Strangers.

6. I shall defend the just occasion and quarrel of all Ladies of Honor, of
all true and friendlesse Widows, of Orphans, and of Maidens of good same.

7. I shall do diligence wheresoever I hear there is any Murderers, Traitors,
or masterfull Reavers, that Oppresses the Kings Laeges, and poor people, to
bring them to the Law at my power.

8. I shall maintain and uphold the Noble estate of Chivalrie, with Horse,
Harness, and other Knightly Habillements, and shall help and succor them of
the same Order, if they have need.

9. I shall enquire, and seek to have the knowledge and understanding, of all
the Articles and Points contained in the Book of Chivalrie.

All these premises to observe, keep, and faithful, I oblige me; So help me
God, by my own hand, so help me God, etc.

The Oath of the Mayor of London and Oxford, as it is entered in the Red Book of
the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve well and truly our Sovereign Lord the
King, in the Office of Mayoraltie in the City of London, or (Oxenford) and the
same City; Ye shall surely, and safely, unto the use of our said Sovereign
Lord the King of England, and of his Heirs, Kings of England, and the Profit
of the King, ye shall do in all things that to you longs, and the Right of
the King, and that that longs to the Crown ye shall truly keep; Ye shall
not assent unto decrees nor concealment of the Rights, nor of the Franchize of
the King or of the Crown, be it in Lands, Rents, or ^n Franchizes, or in Suits
concealed or withdrawn, you shall put your power to call it again; And if ye
may not do it, ye shall tell unto the King, or to those of his Council, of
whom ye shall understand for to be certain, that they shall enform the King
thereof; And ye shall truly and right-wisely treat the people of your Baylie,
and right ye shall do to every person, as well to Stranger as to privy, to
poor as to rich, in that that belongs to you for to do; And that for
highness, nor for riches, for gift, promise, favor, nor hate, ye shall no
wrong do to any person, nor to any man ye shall the right let; Ye shall not
take whereby the King may leese, or by which the right may be let; And also,
that ye may set good keeping upon the ^^ssize of Bread, Wine, Fish, Flesh,
Corn, and all other Victuals, and also of Weights and Measures in the said
City, doing sad and due execution upon the defaults that there shall be found,
according to all the Statutes thereof made not repealed, and that in all things
to the May or of the said City longing for to do, well and truly you shall
have you, and do; So help you God, and holydome.

The Oath of the Sub-Treasurer, as it is entered in the Red Book of the
Exchequer.
YE Shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in the room of
Under-Treasurer of this his Exchequer, and in the Receipt of the same; and well
and truly survey and order as well the Receipts of all sums of money, paid and
to be paid to the Kings use in the said Receipt, as the issue of the same; And
well and truly behave have your self in the same room; So help you God, and
all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of the Auditor of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red Book of
the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in
the Office of one of the Auditors of this Exchequer, during the time ye shall
have the same; And well and truly ye shall entreat, and with all goodly speed
ye shall rid such persons as shall be by this Court Assigned to Account before
you; Ye shall not take of any person, whereby the Kings Majesty may lose, nor
consent to any untruth; And right ye shall do to every Accomptant that shall
have to do before you, according to your wit and discretion, and safely and
surely keep such Records, Writs, and other Mynuments of this Court as shall be
committed for any time to your custody, without raising or imbezling of the
same; So God you help, etc.

The Oath of the Ingrosser of the great Roll, as it is entered in the Red Book
of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, Clerk of the Pipe.
That ye shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty our Sovereign Lord,
in the Office of Ingrosser of the great Roll, otherwise called the Clerk of the
Pipe of this Exchequer, and the Office, with all the Rolls, Records, Accounts,
and other Mynuments, being and remaining in the same, and that hereafter shall
be committed to your custody, and pertaining to the same Office; Ye shall
safely and surely keep, or do to be kept, to the use of our said Sovereign
Lord the King; And ye shall draw, or caufe to be drawn out of the Two
Remembrancers Offices, with all convenient speed, all manner of Femes, or other
Debts and duties to be engrossed; And all the said Femes, Debts and Duties, ye
shall set forth to be summoned at the next Liberate; And ye shall true entry
make of all Awards made by the Court upon any Opposall of any Sheriffs, or
other Accomptants, for and concerning any Femes, Debts or other the Kings
Duties; And the same Awards ye shall set out in the Scrowles of the Pipes; And
also, ye shall well and truly make and discharge, or cause to be made and
discharged, all Allowances and discharges the same Term, or the next Vacati^n,
before the first day of the next Term, without any further delay; And ye
shall not take of any person or persons, by promise, gift, reward, or
otherwise, whereby the King may lose, or be hindered, or his said Femes, Debts,
or other duties may be prolonged or detained by any time; or else by the which,
the right let to any manner of person and persons; And well and truly, and
with all convenient speed, ye shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, all
persons of all such things as the Court shall award, belonging to your said
Office; And all this ye shall do, during such time as ye shall be Officer in
the said Office, without fraud or guile; So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red Book
of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve well and truly the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of Chancellor of this Exchequer, and well and truly ye
shall do all things that appartaineth to that Office; And ye shall speed the
Kings Business before all other; And ye shall not enseale any Writ of
Judgment of any other Place then of the Exchequer, with the Seal of this
Place, whiles the Chancerie shall be 20. miles about the place where this
Exchequer is abiding; And also, ye shall swear, That if it fortune, that if
hereafter, by reason of your Office, to make any Clerks or Ministers, to
execute any Office or Place within this Court, ye shall make such Clerks or
Ministers, as ye will answer for at your peril, and such as shall be
sufficient, true, and intendant unto that to them shall appertain, in speed,
as well of the Kings Businesses, as of his people, after the form of the
Statute in that behalf, made in the Parliament holden at Westminster the
second year of the Reign of King Henry the fixed; So help you God, etc.

The Oath of a Baron of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red Book of the
Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That well and truly ye shallserve the King our Sovereign
Lord, in the Office of Baron of this Exchequer, and lawfully ye shall charge
and dischar^e the people that have to account before you, and right ye shall
do to all people, as well to poor as to rich, and that for highness for
riches, neither for hate, nor for the estate of any person, for benefit, gift,
nor promise of any person that may be made to you, or shall be made to you, ne
by Art nor Engine, the Right of the King, nor none other you shall disturb, ne
respite, contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Kings Debts ye shall not
put in respite there where they may goodly be Levied, and the Kings Bufinesse
ye shall speed before all other, and that for gift, wages, or benefit, ye
shall not conceal the Kings Profit or Advantage in advantage to other, nor for
your self; And that ye shall not take Fee, neither Robe of any person, but of
the King only; And ye shall have nothing of any person for to do wrong, or
delay the right, or to delude, or delay the people that have to do before you,
but in all that ye may ye shall deliver them; And there where ye may
understand wrong, or prejudice, to be done to the King, ye shall put all your
power and diligence to redress it; And if ye may not ye shall tell it to the
King, or to those of his Council which may show it to the King, if ye may not
come unto him; And the Kings Council ye shall keep in all things; So help
you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Kings' Remembrancer in the Exchequer, as it is entered in the
Red Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That you well and truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord,
in the Office of Remembrancer of his Majesty of this his Exchequer; And the
same Office, with all the Rolls, Records, and other Mynuments, now lying and
remaining in the same, and that hereafter shall be committed to your custody,
and appertaining to the same Office ye shall safely and surely keep, or do
to be kept, to the use of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and of his Heirs
Kings of England; You shall true Entry make of all Awards, and other things to
be entered in the said Office, and that with all convenient speed; You shall not
take of any person or persons, by promise gift reward, or otherwise, whereby
the Kings Majesty may leese or be hindered, or by which the right may be let,
to any manner of person or persons and all other things belonging to the Master
of the said Office to do, ye shall well and truly do, without fraud or guile;
So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Clerk of the Pleas in the Exchequer, as it is entered in the
Rea Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly intend, that which shall
appertain unto your Office in speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his
people, and all such rewards as do, or shall concern your Office, you shall
safely keep, or cause to be kept; And you shall true Entry make of all
Orders, Awards, and other things to be entered into your said Office, and that
with all convenient speed; And all other things belonging to the Master of the
said Office to do you shall well and truly do; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Foreign Opposer of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red
Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, his Heirs and Successors, in the Office of Foreign Opposer of this
Exchequer, and the Kings Business in the same ye shall speed and dispatch
before all other; And you shall faithfully and truly charge and discharge all
Accounts and people that have to do before you, and do all other things
appertaining to the said Office, and shall well and truly behave your self in
the same Office, without undue practice, fraud, or concealment, so long as you
shall continue in the same Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Comptroller of the Pipe in the Exchequer, as it is entered in
the Red Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly execute the place of the
Comptroller of the Pipe in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and shall
comptroll the great Roll of the Pipe, and the Pipes thereunto belonging; And
shall twice in the year (that is to say) in the Term of Saint Hiliarie, and
the Holy Trinity, yearly write into the Summons of the Pipe, all Femes and
Debts contained in the said great Roll, and well and truly behave your self in
the said Office of Comptroller of the Pipe, as long as you shall continue in
the same Office; So help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the Red
Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall truly serve the King our Sovereign Lord, in
the Office of one of the Chamberlaines of this Exchequer, and truly enter and
ingrosse, as well all manner of Receipts of Money received, and to be received
to the Kings use, at the Receipt of this Exchequer, as the payment of the same;
And also, you shall safely and truly keep, as well all Records, being in the
Kings Treasury, as all other things, Leagues, Truces Evidences, and Jewels, and
all other things being to the Kings Treasury, and all that hereafter shall be
committed to your keeping; And ye shall not assent unto deliverance of any of
the Kings Money, nor any other thing being in his Treasury, without sufficient
Warrant in that behalf; And ye shall not depute, or put any Clerk or
Minister to occupy any place or room under you in this Office, but such as
shall be sufficient, true, and intendant unto that to them shall appertain in
speed, as well of the Kings Business, as of his people, after the form of the
Statute in that behalf made, in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the
second year of the Reign of King Henry the fixed; And in these, and all other
things concerning your Office, ye shall well and truly have you, and do; So
help you God, and all Saints.

The Oath of an Escheator, as it is entered in the Red Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office
of the Escheator, in the Town of N. and do the Kings Profit in all that
belongs unto you to do, by way of your Office, after your wit and your
power, and his Rights, and all that belongs to his Crown ye shall truly
keep; Ye shall not assent to decrease, neither conceal the Kings Right, nor
his Franchizes; And wheresoever that ye have knowledge of the Kings Rights, or
of his Crown, be it in Lands, Rents, Franchizes, or Suits, that be concealed
or withdrawn ye shall do your true pain and diligence to withstand it; And
if ye may not do it, you shall say it to the King, or some of h^s Council
such as you know for certain will say it to the King; Ye shall truly, and
right-wisely, treat the people of your Bayly-wick, and do right to every man,
as well to poor as to rich, in that that belongs to you to do, by way of
your Office; Ye shall do no wrong to any man, neither for gift, promise, nor
hate, neither no man's right ye shall disturb; ye shall take nothing, whereby
that right may be disturbed, let, or delayed; Ye shall truly and
right-wisely return and serve all the Kings Writs; Ye shall in your proper
person make the extent of Lands, after their very value and enquests, to
return them as often as they be taken before you, and that within a month after
they be taken, ye shall take no Bayley into your service, but such as ye will
answer for, and ye shall do your Bailiffs to make such Oath as it belongs
to them; Ye shall truly and right wisely yield account at the Kings Exchequer,
of all Issues of your said Bayliffe-wick; Ye shall take your enquests in open
places, and that by Indenture, after the effect of the Statute thereof made; As
God help you, and his Saints.

The Oath of the Deputie-Chamberlaine of the Exchequer, as it is entered in the
Red Book of the Exchequer.
YE shall swear, That ye shall well and truly serve the King our Sovereign
Lord, as Deputy unto A.D. one of the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, in the
Office of the said Chamberlain of this Court, and shall surely join all such
Tables as any Accomptant or Debtor shall bring unto you to be joined with the
Foyles of the same, being in your charge and custody; And the same Tables so
joined, ye shall deliver over unto the Clerks of the Pipe, or the ingrosser of
the great Roll in this Court, and do all other things appertaining to the said
Office, so long as ye shall be Officer there; So God you help and his Saints.

The Oath to be ministered to all Churchwardens, and Sidemen, within the Dioces
of Salisburie, to present according to Articles published in An. 1616.
YOu shall swear, That all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and
gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside; You shall upon due
confideration of the Article given you in charge, Present all and every such
person within your Parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or made any
default mentioned in these or any of those Articles or which are vehemently
suspected or defamed, of any such offense, fault, or default, wherein you shall
deal uprightly, and according to truth, neither of malice, presenting any
contrary to truth, nor of corrupt affection, sparing to Present any and so
conceal the truth, having in this action God before you eyes, with an earnest
zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice; So help you God, and the
contents of this Book.

The Oath to be ministered to all Churchwardens within the Dioces of Bristol,
in the Visitation to Present according to Articles published in Anno, 1595.
YE shall swear, Calling Almighty God to witness, who sees into your
hearts, and knows your very thoughts, That you, and every of you, shall
diligently and faithfully perform and execute the Office whereunto he is
appointed, and setting apart all malice, hatred love, fear, or affection, to
any person or persons, shall diligently enquire, and truly present and
discover, all, and every such person or persons within your Parish, either
known, commonly reported, or vehemently suspected to have committed any
Misdemeanour, Fault, Default, Crime, Sin, or Offense, mentioned or specified
within any the Articles in this Book comprised, or in the same omitted, which
coming to your knowledge, are by Ecclesiastical Authority to be reformed; So
help you God, in Christ Jesus.

The Protestation.
I^ B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this
Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my
Allegiance, his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; as also the Power
and Ptiviledges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject
and every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in
the lawful pursuance of the same. And to my power, and a far as lawfully I
may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means endea^our to bring to
condign punishment, all such as shall either by Force. Practice, Counsels,
Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing
in this present Protestation contained. And further, That I shall in all just
and honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the
three Kingdoms of England, Sco^land, and Ireland; and neither for hope, fear,
nor other respect shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation.

The Vow and Covenant appointted by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, to be taken by every man, in the Cities of London, Westminster, the
Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and throughout the whole Kingdom.
IA. B. In humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the
calamities and judgments that now lie upon it; And my true intention is, by
Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of my own ways; And that I do abhor and
detest the said wicked and treacherous Design lately discovered, And that I
never gave, nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will according
to my power and Vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like
nature: And in case any other like Design shall hereafter come to my
knowledge, I will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best
conduce to the preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe,
That the Forces raised by the Two Houses of Parliament are raised and continued
for their just Defense, and for the Defense of the true Protestant Religion and
Liberties of the Subject against the Forces raised by the King: I do here in
the presence of Almighty God, Declare, Vow and Covenant, That I will,
according to my power and Vocation, assist the Forces raised and continued by
both Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their
consent; and will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath,
in what they shall do in pursuance thereof, and will not directly or
indirectly adhere unto, nor shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the King
without the consent of both Houses of Parliament. And this Vow and Covenant I
make in the presence of Almighty God, the Search of all hearts with a true
intention to perform the same, as I shall answer at the great Day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.

1. T That we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings the prefervation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of S^o^und, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of Engl^nd and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the Three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Con^unction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith Form of Church Government, D^rectory for Worship and Catechizing: That
we and our Posterity after us may as Brethren live in faith and love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery Prelacie, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries Deans, Deans and Chapters
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierachy)
Superstition Heresy Schism, Profaneness, and what soever shall be found to be
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness, lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the Three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity realitie and constancy, in our several
Vocations endeav^r with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and ^uthoritie, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our loyalty, and
that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
greatness.

4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have bin or shall be Incendiaries. Malignants or evil Instruments, by hindering
the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or P^rties amongst the people
contrary to this League and Covenant that they maybe brought to public
Trial, and re^eive condign punishment, as the degree of their Offenses shall
require or deserve, o^ the Supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively,
or others, having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoyed in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wifull Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the present Articles.

6. We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this Common Cause
of Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof, and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms and Honor
of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly
continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be
timely prevented or removed all which we shall do as in the fight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us And our true and unfeigned purpose
desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our power and charge,
both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to amend
our lives and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God, the serarcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people, and
encouragement to other Christian Churches, groningunder, or in danger of the
yoke of Antichristian tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Common wealths.

FINIS.

