A DISCOURSE OF Auxiliary Beauty. OR Artificial Hansomenesse. In point of
CONSCIENCE Between Two LADIES.

QVI SEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS.



Printed for R: Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1656.

THE PVBLISHER To the Ingenuous READER.
READER,
THIS Discourse (of which (as I am certainly informed) a Woman was not only
the chief occasion, but the Author and writer) coming to my hands, and seeming
to refer only to some ornamentall toys, fitter for Ladies cabinets and
singers, than for the rougher hands and severer eyes of this Martial age, I
had almost condemned, upon the view of the Title, to eternal silence; Partly
out of a Principle of piety, as loath to add to the vanity of a very vain
age: But, chiefly out of a worser temper which I had of a long time contracted,
by reason of many popular prejudices, and sinister censures, which had
vehemently set me against all things of Art, used by any women, whereby to
repair or advance the quickness of their complexions, or beauty of their
Looks, beyond that portion which God, and Nature had given them; Not that I am
a Cynicall or Stoicall enemy to that softer Sex, (which tempers humane spirits,
and societies with so much sweetness and civility) but (I confess) I was so
perfectly scandalized against all Auxiliary Beauty (which applies any coloring
or tincture to set off the Face) that I condemned this piece (after the mode of
vulgar and precipitant zeal) unread, and unheard, to be burned, as Judah did
Tamar, Genesis 38. 24. concluding it to be the Essay of some wanton wit and idle
pen; wihch was more a parasite to female fooleries and vanitys, than a lover of
pristine gravity, and sobriety.

Yet by a principle of innate Justice which I owe to Selfe-preservation,
(making me very loath to be hanged without a legal trial) I was secretly
ashamed to condemn it, till I had made some examination of its guilt. Hence I
ventured the loss of so much time, as to arraigne and read it: Which act of
high Justice (before I had far advanced) taught me, to my great reproach and
shame, how unjust Judges, how cruel Tyrants, Prejudice and Custom are, which
condemn all they disaffect, and disaffect before they understand; And are loath
to understand, contrary to prepossessions: Like Procrustes, either cropping or
stretching all new comers to the stinted measure of their wonted fancies and
opinions.

But, not trusting to the Balance of my own judgment (which now began by a
secret charm to be strongly inclined to approve the whole discourse, for its
manner, Ingenuous, and for its design Innocent) I put it to the Test of two or
three severe censors; persons of Socratick brows, and Catonian looks, wholly
bred up in Academicall Shades, and no way partial to the delights of women.
These having at first (as I did) with very much coins and prejudice began to
peruse it, yet, upon sober and second viewes, they laid aside their ponderous
brows; and exchanging their terrible frowns for unaffected smiles, with joint
and liberal suffrages they assured me, That never any thing on so slight a
Subject, was discoursed and written with more ingenuity, and elegancy; That,
although it undertook fairly to discuss things, which were but skin deep,
and superficial: yet it brought them so home, to a profound and notable case
of Conscience, that it could not justly be denied its weight, and place among
the more serious discourses of this Age and the more meritorious pieces of that
Sex: Having that in the Floridnesse, Candor, and acuteness of its disputation,
which might more then compensate the seeming slightness, and in
considerablenesse of the things disputed; Endeavoring by a gentler kind of
piety, and civiller sanctity (than were heretofore used in England) to
reconcile Ladies countenances, with their consciences: which some either more
rustic or rigid spirits, have (a long time) sought to keep at most deadly
fewds, and implacable distances, condemning all women (without miraculous help)
for ever to lie under the burden and discountenance of either natural or
accidental defects, not allowing them to use the least relief, never so
obvious in Nature, and not less innocent, than easy in Art.

The justice or injustice of which severitys is here so soberly and impartially
considered, That I do not only look upon it as a noble Essay, what great wits
can do in small matters: But (in good earnest) I esteem it a very necessary
debate, in a case so much (they say) practiced by many women of unspotted
worth, and honor: And yet so much censured, as sinful and abominable, by
others, of very warm and commendable piety.

This Discourse (as an impartial glass) lets the world see, what oppositions
and what solutions may be made in point of conscience, as to any artificial
helps of hansomeness; That accordingly every one may practice, either
cheerfully and discreetly using them as other innocent ornaments, if hereby
satisfied of the lawfulness, or wholly forbearing them, if they find the
Objections overweigh the Answers. It is pity sober women should be denied such
reliefs and advantages as Gods indulgence allows them: And it is a shame they
should use them (though never so privately and undiscernably) if God has in
Scripture or Nature and conscience forbidden them.

Besides, this great design of stating Ladies consciences in a case, so much
concerning their faces and looks (which they cannot but highly consider, while
they see themselves, or appear to others) some (it may be) will be pleased (as
I was) at that generous freedom and civility in it, which dare encounter and
discuss so popular and prevalent an opinion as that is, which (among us) deny
all Subsidies or aids to women's beautys, or complexions.

Lastly, finding it was none of the most dangerous problemes, which the
audacious liberty of these times has ventured upon, I conceived it might be as
worthy of sober persons leisure to read it, as of my pains to publish it:
These three motives, Consciscience, Civility, and Gain, meeting together,
tempted me, beyond all resistance, to make it, what I am

Ingenuous Reader, Yours to serve you

The Objections contained in this BOOK.
OBject. 1. Against all painting the face as unlawful p. 1. Object. 2.
Jezebels sad fate urged against all painting the face p. 5. Object. 3. Other
places of Scripture urged against painting the face p. 14. Object. 4. Urged
against all superfluous ornaments of women, and so against painting p. 25
Object. 5. Painting the face against the seventh Commandment forbidding all
Adultery p. 33 Object. 6. Painting the face argues an heart unsatisfied with
Gods works and disposings, Jam. 4. 7. p. 50 Object. 7. Painting the face a
badge of vanity and appearance of evil p. 77 Object. 8. Painting the face a
mark of pride, arrogance and hypocrisy. p. 96 Object. 9. The Fathers and
modern Divines much against all painting the face p. 105 Object. 10. Painting
the face very scandalous, and so unlawful p. 136 Object. 11. Painting the face
a thing of ill report, and so not to be followed p. 148 Obj. 12. Painting the
face unlawful, because doubtful at best, and not of faith, p. 174 Object. 13.
Of Peter Martyr against painting the face, from many Scripture instances p. 189
The moderate and charitable conclusion of the Dispute. p. 198
Eccles. 9. 8. Let thy garments always be white, and let thy head lack no
ointment.

Prove. 31. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that
fears the Lord, she shall be praised.

A DISCOURSE OF Artificial Handsomnesse, In point of CONSCIENCE, between two
Ladies.
MADAM,
1. Object. Against all painting the face as unlawful.
I Am not more pleased to see you look so well, beyond what you were wont, than
I am jealous (to be free with you) lest a person so esteemed, as you are for
modesty and piety, should use some color or tincture to advance your
Complexion; which indeed I take to be no better, than that odious and infamous
way of Painting; every where in all ages so much, and so justly spoken against
both by God, and good men; being a most ungodly practice, though generally (as
they say) now used in England (more or less) by persons of quality; who not
content with Natures stock of Beauty, do (not by a fine, but filthy art) add
something to the advantage, as they think, of their Complexions: but I fear, to
the deforming of their souls, and defiling of their Consciences.

I Do not only approve your Laps friendly Answer.
freedom; but I take it as some degree of special favor, that you speak your
thoughts to my face; and not after the secret censurings, or backbiting
whispers of some, who (less able to confute what they blame, than to justify,
what they suspect) arraign before the rash Tribunal of their judgments, every
face whose handsomness, they either envy, if natural; or grievously reproach,
if they think it any has thing artificial, beyond what themselves are wonted
to, or acquainted with; who (yet) in other things do as much contend against
the defects, deformities, and decays of nature, and age, as may be, by
washings, anointings, and plasterings, by many secret medicaments and close
receipts; which may either fill and plump their skins, if flat and wrinkled; or
smooth and polish them, if rugged and chapt; or clear and brighten them, if
tanned and freckled; only, in the point of color or tinctures added in the
least kind or degree they are not more scrupulous then censorious; As if every
one that used these had forsaken Christ's banner, and now fought under the
Devils colors.

Your Nobleness (Madam) is more just and civil, in giving me opportunity, to
answer for my self, that either I may confess and forsake what you suspect, if
you convince me of the evil of it; or continue with your good conscience to do
what you are jealous of, if I can assert it to be lawful and good.

First then; if I should deny what your LaP suspects, it would be very hard to
prove it; since, what you fancy as additionall, is not beyond the ordinary
proportion of what is natural to my age and complexion; Besides, the looks
(you know) of our Sex, as to palenesse or redness, admit as many changes, as
the Moon, by natural variations; which are, many times in women not more
sudden, than much to their injury or advantage: So impertinent must they needs
be, whose eyes are over curious, to find fault at Art there, where they have
no cause, but to commend Nature; unless they were made women's Confessors;
which I believe few are in this case; so that they must needs blame most-what
rashly, and often unjustly, because they only guess uncertainly

But, because I perceiv your LaP has a great zeal in this particular; (which I
must interpret a commendable and Christian tenderness, against any thing
suspected for Sin; (which cannot be small to a gainsaying conscience; whose eye
will not endure the least mote: any more than the heart can the least wound) I
will deal so liberally with your LaP as to grant you this supposall; whereupon
to fix any discourse, which may (as you think) batter down, with a mighty
Engine, all Auxiliary Beauty; or additionall Handsomnesse.

And truly, it is not my fear, but my request to you, (of whose pious abilities
the world has a great and just account) that your LaP would let me see, by
rational and clear arguings, what you have against it, beyond those vulgar
flashes, and easy flourishes, of some great sticklers and declaimers against
all such femal arts; (to which I have been much wonted) who with shame and
folly, as Solomon says, (even sometimes in the Pulpit, as well as in the
Press) resolve of matters of P. ov. 18. 13.
sin, and cases of Conscience, before they consider or understand them; Calling
for fire from Heaven upon all they dislike, as the disciples did, without ever
advising with Christ; which confidence has made many well meaning people, very
much startle at, and condemn Luke 9. 54.
all such complexionary adornings, as if they impudently outfaced God and man;
as if they fought with an high hand and brazen forehead against Reason and
Religion, Nature and Grace, Humanity and Christianity. After this rate of bold
Oratory, many women have been more scared then convinced; more distracted with
scruples and terrors, then satisfied with truth, as to the nature of many
things pretended to be sins and violations of conscience; which must be
measured, not by the bulk, but weight; not the noise, but force of men's words;
It Is not the cry, but the fleece, which sober persons regard.

. But I will in this rather suspect at present my own incapacity, than any want
of solidity or charity in the sermons and censures of so many, as bitterly
inveigh against all Artificial Beauty; hoping to learn from your LaP, what
may, upon just grounds, make me subscribe to their and your severities in this
point; Though, I confess, after some diligent search into other books, and
chiefly the holy Scriptures, I am as yet so remiss and charitable in my
censure of those little-artifices, used by many sober persons: that, as I will
not undertake to justify all those that use them; so nor dare I condemn all,
who may use and do the same things, with far different minds, and to very
distant ends.

2 Object. Jezebels sad fate urged against all painting the face.
TRuly Madam, I absolutely think (without any mincing or distinction) all color
or complexion added to our skins or faces, beyond what is purely natural, to
be a sin; as being flatly against the word of God; which I suppose you grant to
be the indispensable and unchangeable rule of all moral Holiness; from which
we may not warp in the least degree, upon any pretensions to advance our
honors, estates, healths, or Beauties.

First then if your LaP look into 2 Kings 9. 30. you shall see wicked Jezebel,
though a Queen, yet not tolerated, or excused; but foully branded and heavily
punished for painting her eyes or face: For which she was afterward, by a most
deformed destiny, justly devoured of dogs: as the most reverend Lord Primate of
Armagh, observes in his larger Catechism upon the 7th Command.

Which fearful stroke of divine vengeance; and censure of so learned and pious
a person, (making that her painting a most meritorious and principal cause of
her so sad destiny) are sufficient, I think, to scare the most adventurous
woman, from any such sinful and accursed practice.

Answ.
MAdam, as I allow your rule, the word of God; which is the only balance of the
Sanctuary, where sins are to be weighted: so I am not ignorant of that story,
to which your LaP (as all others in this dispute) do much refer: Nor am I a
stranger to that gloss or observation thence made against all painting or
tincturing of the face, by that most worthy Prelate; with whose so quick and
sharp a stroke I was (at first reading that passage) so startled, that I had no
rest, till I advised with another person, of great judgment and and sober
piety: who made it clear to me, That that excellent Bishop, however then he
thought sit (after the wonted oratory and freedom of some of the Fathers) to
make a a popular pass, or stroke of his potent pen, against what he might
suspect to be then much used, and abused too, in the English world; yet (for
certain) he was too wise and judicious a Divine, to fix that signal and heavy
judgment of God, only, or chiefly, (or indeed at all) upon Jezebels painting;
which was an after act; and as to that time or instant in the story, comes at
least 14. years behind that dreadful doom which was by the prophet Elisha
foretold upon the score of Naboths blood unjustly shed, and his inheritance
cruelly usurped: which is 1 Kings 21. 23. So that her 1 Kings 21. 23.
painting her eyes or face, mentioned in the place you urge, is indeed (among
other occasional circumstances) recorded, but to a far different end or use;
than either to lay the weight of the subsequent punishment, or the guilt of any
sin upon that act more than upon the other concomitant actions therewith
recited.

. Among which this of her painting is indeed set down chiefly, to show; That no
advantages of outward Beauty, natural, or artificial, (though set off with
the curiosity and Majesty of a Queen) are sufficient to make any person the
object of either love or pity: where foul and enormous sins have so debased and
deformed their souls to God; As Murder, Idolatry, and Oppression had done
Jezebels; For which sins (as is expressly said) that Tragedy befell her (which
was foretold long before she is brought in so dressed and adorned); which
thunderbolt of Gods vengeance she in vain sought to disarm or avoid by using
any charms, attractives or lenitives of outward beauty, if that were her
design: which truly is not very probable, at her years; and toward Jehu, a
declared enemy: Nor do indeed the actions of Jezebel signify (as that
gentleman told me) any amorous intention whereby to allure Jehu; since her
words reproach him with so just and bitter a Sarcasme as that is, Had Zimri
peace who slew his master!

So that Jezebel at this time seems rather resolved not so much to court, as to
scorn Jehu: disdaining to deprecate her ruin; or ow her life to such an enemy.
And therefore she puts her self into a posture of Majesty: as showing that
height and greatness of mind, which could own her self in the pomp and
splendour of a Princess, even then when she expected her enemy and her end;
That she might at least perish (as she thought) with the more reputation of a
comely person and undanted spirit; which abhorred to humble and abase it self,
after the manner of fearful and squalid suppliants in sackcloth; or to a bate
any of those accustomed ornaments, with which she used (as a Queen) to
entertain her self in her prosperity.

So that my learned friend concluded (in my opinion very rationally) that the
Lord Primates inference (for which she was justly eaten-up by dogs) may no more
be applied to this particular of Jezebels painting her eyes or face, than to
her adorning, or dressing of her head; or her looking out of a window, or her
speaking such words, as she did to Jehu's face: all which are recorded in the
same story, immediately before her precipitate ruin: which actions in
themselves cannot be branded for sins, nor are they noted there for such,
further than they may be relatively considered, as to the mind and end of the
doer or speaker, whereby to gratify pride, passion, or any other wickedness.
And in this respective consideration, not only Jezebels painting and dressing,
but her very eating and drinking, her sleeping and clothing, her native
strength and beauty, her civil honor and power might be relatively sins; as the
Scripture tells us, the plowing of the wicked is sin, and his praying is
abomination; So his prosperity becomes a snare, and his Prove. 21 4. Prove. 28. 9.
plenty a poison to his soul: when the good gifts and creatures of a good God
are by evil minds perverted to be weapons of unrighteousness, and instruments
of sin, to satisfy those lusts, whose inordinatenesse, and not 1 Pet. 2. 11.
their desire, fights against God and the Soul.

So then your LaP cannot be so blind, as not to see that the bare historical
narration of Jezebels painting her eyes, among other actions, (which you
confess to be innocent in themselves, and whereof you make no scruple) if it
did refer to any wanton design (which is very unlikely at that time, in a
Queen, whose proud and violent spirit might (now) justly be carried away with
other passions and transports than those of lust;) yet it does no way argue or
import the use of that, or other things therewith mentioned, to be in
themselves any sins; to all that then did, or after should, use the like
applications, words, or actions, out of far different minds, and to far
different ends; which are beyond all dispute the proper grounds and rules of
all moral denominations, as to good or evil, in those mediate actions, agents
and instruments, whose freedom in nature, falls not under any special
restraint of Gods command, forbidding them by any positive Law: (as he did many
things in point of food, clothes, fafashions, and other civil actions among the
Jews.)

It is a gross mistake in Architecture, to think that every small stud bears
the main stresse and burden of the building, which lies (indeed) upon the
principal timbers; And it is an horrible wresting of Scripture, to make every
recited circumstance in any place, to bear the whole weight of the story and
event.

You cannot think, that Dives went to hell, only because he was a rich man
clothed in Luke 16. 19.
purple and fine linen, and faring deliciously or sumptuously every day; All
which things many persons of as good as great quality, of no less virtue and
piety than honor and estate, daily enjoy without any blame. Nor was it Lazarus
his poverty and dunghill, or his sores and the charitable tongues of the dogs,
that brought him to heaven. The luxury, pride, and uncharitableness of the
one; the patience, humility, and sanctity of the other, made that grand
discrimination of their fates.

Nor may your LaP think, that the beheading of John Baptist, is any valid
argument Matthew. 14.
(however it be popularly used by some) against all Dancing, as if it were
absolutely evil and unlawful in it self; not only mixed of both sexes, but
alone and single, as that of Herodias was; who is said (there) to have danced,
not with, but before Herod and the company, (which yet I know your LaP and
other sober persons, not only use themselves, but also approve, as to the
breeding and behavior of their children: That sad event (which is odiously,
but fallaciously laid to the charge of Dancing) was the proper effect not of
the orderly motions of Herodias her feet; but of the inordinate strokes of her
affections; Her wanton pride and impious despite against, not so much the
person, as the doctrine of that holy man; who never reproved (that we read)
hers or others Dancing, (as to the civil custom of the country or Court) but
her adulterous compliances with Herod's lust: John was not a stumbling block to
her feet, but an eyesore to her eyes, and a corrasive to her ears, by his
chaste monitions, and holy severities. So, Herod's sudden crumbling into Acts 12.
22.
worms, may be justly urged against the pride and arrogance of any mortal in
Gods sight: but it is misapplied against the purple, Thrones and orations of
Princes. In like sort I believe Jezebels painting, and otherwise dressing or
adorning her self, set down in that place, to be no more prejudice in point of
sin, against a sober, modest, and ingenuous use of those things, than Leahs
bargaining with Rachel for her sons mandrakes, was any Genesis 30. 15.
charm or cause of her conceiving that night with child by her hired husband.

If all that Jezebel, or other notorious sinners mentioned in Scripture did, at
any time, in order to accomplish any evil design, is therefore to be branded
and avoided as a sin; we may not call a solemn assembly or keep a fast, because
Jezebel did both, in order to palliate with shows of Justice, and prefacings of
1 Kings 21. 9.
Religion her detestable murder and disinherison of Naboth. Nor may we use
fair words and affable gestures, because Absaloms ambition did abuse those
popular arts. We must 2 Samuel 15.
not kiss or embrace a friend, because Joab did so when he basely killed both
Abner and Amasa: As also Judas did when he betrayed Christ; Nay staves, and
lanthorns, and torches must not be used, because they sometime waited upon that
ungrateful Traitor. We Ioh. 18. 3.
may not weep, because Ismaels treachery did so, when he intended to slay
Gedaliah. In all Ier. 41. 6.
which cases the designs were apparently wicked and base; yet are not all
those concomitant actions such, much less these here recorded of Jezebel;
Whose aim (certainly) was not any allurement, but a defiance and affront to
Jehu; showing how little she was terrified by his presence, power, and
success: at which she appeared neither dejected nor deformed, after the manner
of those squalid suppliants, who poorly and pitifully stoop below themselves to
beg their lives; which she scorned to do, by any the least diminution, or
abatement of her wonted grandeur, glory, or splendor: As the mentioned
circumstances receive no credit or honor by Iezebels name, so nor any
disparagement, since different minds make the difference of manners: Nor is it
strange for the wicked to do the same things that worthy persons do to diverse
ends.

3. Obj. Other places of Scripture urged against painting the face.
BUt Painting the face (good Madam) is mentioned in two other places of
Scripture, as the practice of lewd and wicked women, and justly falling, not
only under the reproach of the Prophet and all holy men, but under Gods
dislike and displeasure; who not only abhorres to see the deformities of our
hearts, but also of our looks and outsides; when they are altered by any art
from what God and nature has made them; whose works must needs be best, and
beyond man's amendment: You see Ezekiel. 23. 40. how with a sacred taunt and irony
the Spirit of God reproves Ezekiel. 23. 40.
the Jewish Church in her lewdness and Apostasy: Lo, they come for whom thou
did wash thy self, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thy self with ornaments:
and satest in a stately bed, with a table prepared before it: So Jer. 4. 30.
Though thou clothest thy self with crimson, and Ier. 40. 30.
deckest thy self with ornaments of gold: Though thou rentest thine eyes (or
face) with painting; in vain shall thou make thy self fair, etc.

By which expressions, alluding to the customs of those times, the Lord seems
extremely to blame, and abhor those practices there mentioned, among which,
that of painting is expressed.

Answ.
IF these places be all the strength your LaP can produce from Scripture,
against any coloring of the face, or helping of the complexion; because this,
as other usual ways of comely, curious or stately adornings, are there
mentioned, as the practices of wanton and imperious women; yet your LaP will
not hence conclude, that only such women did then use those things, Who are
always so cunning, as not to render themselves notorious by any such outward
differences, from grave and sober women (as they say the common curtisans of
Rome are commanded to do, for distinction sake): But rather you must conclude,
that wanton women did cast themselves into the same outward mould, or civil
garb and fashion, wherein persons of honor and good repute appeared; not with
more beauty, state, or comeliness, than with chastity, gravity, and virtue:
For sin is generally so apishly crafty, as to hide it self under the colors
and masks of goodness and honesty; as well knowing, that it is not only
deformed, but very fulsome, if it appear impudently like it self.

Besides, if your LaP thinks the sharp style of that place strikes so severely
against all painting and complexioning as a sin, why may you not also by the
same severity destroy and disallow all other things there expressed in that
same tone and tenor; as dressing and decking your self with any costly and
comely ornaments; all sweet perfumes, all sitting on rich and stately beds,
with tables before them, etc. From all which I do not find your LaP or others
do abstain, either as to your person or your houses; who yet with great
eagerness single out and hunt to death, that one particular, there mentioned,
of painting the face, which seems to have no worser marks on it, than the rest
of the herd or company, which you are content to spare and preserve for your
use.

But (Madam) it is unworthy of your candor and discretion, thus to rack and
disjoint Scriptures, whose sense for the most part, is not to be taken in the
broken parts and severed or distracted limbs, but in the juncture and
entireness of the whole discourse; which shows the scope and design of the
Spirit of God; which is not either to condemn or commend every particular
mentioned in the procedure of any place, where yet the main design is to
commend or condemn, something there eminently proposed, and chiefly aimed at.

We read our Savior Christ commending the providence and self-preservation of
the unjust Luke 16. 8.
steward; but not his falsity and injustice: which yet is there brought in as
the fraudulent method of this worldly wisdom and forecast. So Jacob by his
mothers craft and imposture obtained the blessing from his cheated and Genesis 27.
aged father, beyond any revocation; yet the sinister arts there used, are not
to be imitated or approved, however the desire of a paternall blessing (which
was then solemn, and Sacramental) might be as commendable in him, as the
undervaluing of it was a profane temper in Esau: If commendable ends do Romans 3.
8.
not justify evil means in any, no more may evil ends in some blemish the use
of lawful and permitted things in others, who apply them to sober and good
ends.

These places are very general and loose arguments, to condemn all ingenuous
arts and helps of handsomnesse, either to the face and other parts of the body,
or to the adorning of civil State and Majesty. Nor do they any way amount to so
much as a positive Law, either Ceremonial or Political, such as those were
against linsiwoolsie garments, sowing with diverse seeds, abstaining from
swines flesh, and Exodus 11.
other beasts, birds, or fishes; which yet in their Acts 10. 15.
nature are not unclean or unlawful.

How much less can your LaP or any other, by the Chimistry of your wits,
extract from these places any drop or quintessence of a moral command; which
shall be ever binding to the Conscience, as from sin?

Truly, I cannot but believe, that the most holy God, who has not been wanting
to reveal his whole will to his Church in his written Word, so far as is
necessary for faith and good manners; who even in very small matters gave an
express law to the Jews, in things less pleasing to him, not in their nature,
but in their use or significancy among the Jews; such as were, the not cutting
the corners of their head and beards, the not Lev. 9. 17.
seething a kid in its mothers milk, the not cutting down fruit trees in a
siege, the not taking the old bird with the young, the not leaving their
excrements uncovered, etc. I cannot (I Deuteronomy. 23. 13.
say) but believe, that this gracious God would either in the Old, or New
Testament have positively and expressly forbidden all such additionalls to
Beauty, or helps to handsomnesse, both as to the face and other parts of the
body, if they had been in the use and nature of the things, as abominable to
him, as Idolatry, Theft, Lying, Murder, and Adultery: which some men have
passionately, but very impotently pretended.

Certainly his goodness would not, in a case of sin, and so high a sin (as some
clamor this to be) have only made such oblique and general reflections upon
it in this and other places, not as a thing any where forbidden; but only as a
general custom, used by many, and abused by some: Not perstringing the nature
of that more than other things there mentioned, but only setting forth how
far vain and vicious minds were prone to abuse those things to Gods
displeasure, which virtuous minds (no doubt) did according to the modes and
civil customs of the times and places, use soberly, without any offense to God
or man.

Who doubts but Queen Esther, a devout Est. 2. 12.
and gracious woman, might lawfully use, as we read she did, all those
purifications appointed her? That she applied to her advantage all the
attractives of sweet unguents and perfumes, of costly raiment and beautiful
colors, of rich and accurate dressings or lovely adornings, such as were
usual to the Persian delicacy, softness and luxury, hereby to win and confirm
more the kings affection and sensual love to her? Her using all these was so
far from being her sin, that it had been so far a sin not to use them, as
she had rather tempted God, than pleased him, by neglecting to use those means
which might (most probably) in ordinary providence conduce to those great and
good ends, which her holy, chaste and charitable heart intended to Gods glory
and the Churches good.

We read Rebekah (in the primitive plainness Genesis 24. 30.
and shepherdly simplicity of those times) accepted bracelets and other
ornaments, to be put on her arms, neck, and ears, without any disparagement to
her Virgin modesty; so Solomon's chief wife, and Queen, Pharaohs daughter,
turning proselyte, is brought in as Psa. 45. 9.
a type of the Church of the Gentiles espoused to Christ, and adorned with all
princely riches, and costly curiosities, that the king might take pleasure in
her beauty.

That, good and lawful things, both in Nature and Art, have been and daily are
abused by evil minds to evil ends, is no doubt or wonder, since where ever God
has his hand, the devil seeks to set his foot: And in that sense or aspect,
both the things themselves, and the abusive use of them, may be branded with
marks of Gods dislike; But this rather justifies and approves the sober and
honest use of them, as the right end of Gods creation and donation for man's
use. Our Lord Jesus bidding us, beware lest our hearts be overcharged with
eating and drinking: And his Luke 21. 34.
Apostle forbidding us wine wherein is excess: Also unlawful dalliances in
chambering and Romans 13. 13.
wantonness; yet they do not hereby deny the lawful and loving sportings of
Isaac with Rebekah; or the rejoycings with the wife of ones Genesis 26. 8. Prove.
5. 18.
youth; or the moderate use of meats and drinks, even to afestivall mirth and
satiety of wine: Which Christ's presence and bounty at a John 2.
wedding feast, supplying, by a miracle, great quantities of excellent and
inviting wines, (after men had well drunk) to an holy superfluity, do
sufficiently vindicate, as allowed to Christians, notwithstanding the morose
and cynicall severitie of some-spirits.

The Jews are indeed blamed for their unseasonable gluttony and Epicurean
profaneness, Isa. 22. 13.
under the reproaches of joy and gladness, slaying of oxen, killing of sheep,
eating of flesh, drinking of wine, and singing to the viol; which iniquity
(says God) shall not be purged from them till they die: Yet were not these
things in themselves unlawful, but therefore evil because unseasonable, and
used by unsanctified and impenitent hearts, then, when God called for fasting
and mourning, for sackcloth and ashes; which outward forms and signs of
penitence and humility, there required, are yet otherwhere taxed and highly
blamed, when they were but the masks and visards of hypocrisy: as in Ahab and
other Isa. 58. 3, 4, 5.
Jews.

If we should therefore think all things unlawful to be used, because they
have been or are abused, (which is a most pitiful piece of vulgar sophistry,
and superstitious fear) the devils and wicked men's encroachments would wholly
abridge us of all Gods bounty and Christian liberty: How have the Sun, Moon,
and Stars; yea almost every creature, on which are any remarkable characters
of the Creatours goodness, and glory, (in their beauty and usefulness) how (I
say) have they been ravished and abused by Idolatry, or other sensual
excesses? yet, must not wise and good men be therefore wholly divorced or
estranged from them; which were, as fond and irrational a part of
superstition, as to forbear to eat beef and veal; or their sawces, garlic and
onyons; because the Egyptians worshipped the Ox, and those herbs, as the Jews
did their golden Calf, after that example: Upon this principle all must abstain
from marrying, because some husband and wives have adulterously profaned that
holy covenant, and broke the vow of God which Mal. 2 14
was upon them.

We shall never be able to reconcile the clashings and diversities of the
Scripture style and expressions, sometime complaining of, other while
commending the same things, unless we distinguish of the same things, in their
several uses and abuses, as it were into their cross and pile, their day and
night, according as the mind of the user or abuser, either lightens or darkens
them.

For you cannot but read in Ezekiel that God (on the other side) sets forth his
transcendent Ezekiel. 19. 9, 10, 11, 12.
favor and bounty to the Church of the Jews, under all those names and
notions, which either a fond parent, or an amorous suitor are wonted to
express their loves to any daughter, or spouse and mistress; by bestowing on
them all the accomplishments and treasures of amorous delicacy, as sweet
washings, anointings, clothings with embroidery, silk, fine linen, forehead
Jewels, earrings, bracelets, necklace, crown, works of gold and silver,
precious in nature, (at least in humane esteem) and rare for art or
workmanship; by all which additionall beauties, provision was made to hide
deformities, supply defects, and set off the comeliness as of other parts of
the body, so of the Face also:

Which is the chief Theater, Throne, and Center of Beauty, to which all outward
array is subservient; every part of the body studying as it were to pay (by
adorning it self to its best advantage) some tribute of comeliness, as an
homage to the face: which is not only the Queen and sovereign of humane and
visible Beauty, but the Regent and directrix of the whole bodies culture,
motion, and welfare.

In that place then of Ezekiel, your LaP sees the rich Cabinet of feminine
ornaments, and additionals of Beauty, set forth, as the fruit of divine
munificence, and this under the Character or test of Gods approbation; who as
he has made all these things (both for their substance and accidents, their
matter and their forms, their mass and their colors good, in their natureor
kind:so, as to their use, he has fitted mankind with invention, knowledge,
fancy, skill, curiosity and art, many ways to apply and improve them; which is
also a good gift of God, and peculiar to mankind, unto whom God has thus
manifested, both by nature and art, his special love and indulgence, inviting
them by an holy use of his bounty, to praise and serve him, as his children,
with all faithfulness and cheerfulness; even in this valley of mortality,
which is the Churches continual infancy, and a Christians momentary minority.

. Nor do we find the Jewish Church, blamed there, or elsewhere, for using and
enjoying all these divine donations, even to the renown of her comeliness, and
to a perfection of Beauty, but only for that self pride and pomp, which drew
her to trust in her riches and comeliness, so as to seek other lovers, and
play the harlot against God.

4 Object. BUt we read, the same God, in the 3d of Urged against all
superfluous ornaments of women, and so against painting.
Isaiah, with displeasure reckoning up those many arts and instruments of
dressing and adorning, which either ingenuity and civility, or delicacy and
luxury had found out, and fashionably used, to gratify the curiosity, pride,
and petulancy of the women of Jerusalem, only with those additionall
ornaments, which do not pretend to be natural, as all paint and complexioning
does; wherewith we may very well conclude, God is much more displeased, then he
is with any of those things, which were but professedly artificial additaments
to nature, and not counterfeits of nature.

Answ.
IF the Lord had a greater displeasure against the use of any coloring or
complexioning of the face or skin, it is strange that it is not expressed in
this place, which is the Bill of women's ornaments, (and with some special note
of dislike) when in all probability the women of Jerusalem did as much use
that, as any other thing, as more nearly contributing to their Beauty; which
appears by those other places you formerly alleged: So little reason you have
to suppose it more offensive, than those other things here mentioned, that I
may better argue, It is not at all offensive in it self, because not at all
here expressed, where you think God purposely and particularly quarrels with
all things that were offensive in feminine curiosity: This of complexioning
being therefore not mentioned, because it may be used by many, as an help of
infirmity, without any pride or vanity.

. But I will not make any advantage of Gods silence in this particular, but
rather answer with more certainty; That God in this place enumerates all those
particulars, not as absolutely finding fault with, or forbidding the use of
them, but as reproaching the ungrateful pride and abuse of them, in those to
whom he had indulged so many superfluities: Therefore the Lord to prevent any
mistake, first gives the account of his displeasure verse 16. Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks, and wanton
eyes, etc.

Therefore, that is for their haughtiness and abusing of Gods bounty in nature
and art, he threatens to punish them by depriving them of those things; as he
does otherwhere of his corn, wine, flax, and oil; which the divine Hos. 2. 5.
indulgence had afforded, not to pamper wanton and proud minds, to rebel
against God, but to serve either natural necessities, or civil conveniences,
or ingenuous delights, or modest decencies, or honorable state; as befitted
mankind, in their sociable, orderly and religious living, to their own content,
to others benefit, and to the Creators glory.

God would not have threatened to deprive those women of all those things, if
they had been evil or poisons in themselves; for then it had been a mercy to
take them quite away; and a punishment to have continued them. Nor is the
menace of stripping them of all those ornaments, in order to scare them wholly
from the use of them (which are other where, as I showed you, allowed) but to
teach them, how to prize and use them with more humility and modest piety; as
things appointed to far better uses, than to serve sensual, impudent, and
impious either minds or ends; God asserts his right in all these (even so small
bagatellos, or toys, comparatively) That we may learn to take heed, not to
misapply these, or any other the least of Gods creatures to perverse and
sinister ends; of which a sober and good use may be made, to Gods glory, as
well as our own delight and content; while we own him in all, and bless him
for all, even the least help and ornament of life.

. It is an undoubted Maxim, both in Reason and Religion, That the Devils or
wicked Men's usurpation is no prejudice to Gods dominion or donation; nor to
that right use, and end of all things, which he has granted to mankind,
throughout the whole latitude and empire of his visible works. If all things
are therefore vain, sinful, and unlawful, which vain and wicked minds have
or do abuse, what I pray will there be left for sober and virtuous persons to
use or enjoy? They must neither eat, nor drink, nor clothe, nor dress
themselves to any decency, sweetness, costliness, or delight; Tamar an harlot
will dress her self with a veil of modesty, as well as chaste Rebekah. Genesis 38.
14. Prove. 7.
The wanton and cunning woman, whom Solomon describes so to the life, decketh
her self to all externe advantages, applies with all amorous civilities,
perfumeth her bed and chamber, pretends great love, offers her holy
festivities and peace offerings: at last wipeth her mouth with great
demureness and sobriety. Yet may we not think all these actions are hereby
made scandalous and unlawful to sober women, to chaste and loving wifes: We may
as well forbid the use of a staff and a signet to honest men, because Judah in
Genesis 38.
his blind and extravagant desires pawns them as pledges of his love to a
woman, whom he took and used as an harlot, not common, but incestuous.

Youth, riches, honor, beauty, strength, policy and cloquence might be all
arraigned and condemned before such unjust and unjudicious Judges, who would
cry down all use of things because of some abuses; which flow not from the
nature of the things abused, which are good, but from the malice of the
persons, or minds abusing that native good, which God diffused to every
creature.

Nabals churlish covetousness, Absaloms beautiful rebellion, Achitophels
politic treachery, Ioabs valiant cruelty, Iehus zealous ambition, Tertullus
his eloquent malice, are all carried upon the wings or wheels of Gods gifts,
and framing. Who sees not that the corrupt hearts of men often turn Gods streams
to drive the devils mill? What Truth so glorious which has not been sometime
sullied and eclipsed by the smoke of the bottomtess pit: the prejudices or
scandalous imputations of some black or foul mouths? On the other side, what
Error is so rotten and putrid, which some Oratorious varnish has not sought to
color over with shows of Truth and Piety? It is a great part of calm and
sober wisdom, to resolve all things into their rational and pure principles,
of which this is one. That what ever is in nature, is good in its kind; That
the goodness of all things in nature is reducible to a good end, in reason and
religion: That no person is abridged in a right and holy use of things, by an
others abuse of them: That the just use of things may be restrained, though the
abuse calls for reformation and the excess for moderation: That since God does
not annihilate what he has made (as all) good in nature, because of man's abuse
of things; no more have we any cause to annull or deny our sober use of any
thing, for others petulancy and abuse: What things vice or vanity are most
prone to usurp, as to the most sweet, fair and inviting delights of life, no
doubt, virtue and modesty may lawfully challenge, and vindicate to their
propriety.

We must not pull out our eyes because some men's and women's are, as S. Peter
says, 2 Pet. 2. 14
full of adultery; not think sight and light unlawful to be enjoyed, because
some employ them only to objects of sin and vanity: But we must the more
cautiously set holy bounds to all our thoughts, desires and actions, which may
have their occasion and fuel from the ministry of the eyes, but their
kindling and flames are from the inward inordinacy of the Heart: where sin is
(as our Savior tells us) first conceived and brought Mark. 7. 2.
forth, before it is nourished, suckled or swadled, in the gifts of God, either
natural or artificial: Heal that root and fountain, there is no doubt, but
the branches or streams flowing either from or to, will soon be pure and
healthful; What ever Gods indulgence offers us in art or nature, ought to put
us in mind, to ask that grace of God the giver, which may give us the right use
of all his sensible gifts, so as not to hinder us of his spiritual and
eternal gifts.

Thus have I (good Madam) with all plainness, freedom and integrity, furthest
from any thing of fallacy and sophistry, answered as I could, what you were
pleased to urge from Scripture-instances, which obviously mention painting or
coloring the eyes, among other customary ornaments of those times and places,
but with no token of Gods dislike, as to that particular, more then of other
wonted adornings, of the head, face, and the rest of the body; whereof your Lap
makes no scruple, as to any sin: So that what ever frown may seem to be in the
face of the words, do fall only on the abuse of that, as other things, to
sinful excesses, and inordinate satisfactions, beyond the bounds of civility,
modesty and honesty; But this does not amount to the force of any positive
command forbidding the use of that and other helps to handsomeness: Nor does
it import any dislike of outward comeliness when joined with humility and
holiness, conform to the divine mind, or will: which must be the only
touchstone of sin, and test of Conscience, wherein no great curiosity is
necessary to discern Gods meaning, as to things importing sin or duty.

. Which are (I think) always set forth in the holy Scriptures, not by dubious
reflections, oblique and obscure intimations; but by such clear direct precepts,
and autoritative sanctions, (in some place or other) as becomes the majesty of
the king of heaven, and is most proportionate to the dimness and infirmity of
humane understanding: Who shall never be charged for that as a sin, which he
could not either by innate principles of moral light, or by
Scripture-prescripts evidently see to be such. Nor is there almost any thing of
gross impiety, which does not discover to us its offensivenesse against God,
by that check, regret, and disgust, which it often gives to our selfs, either
before, in, or after the sin done: which I belief this never did or does to
any modest and judicious users of it, unless they be more scared and guided by
the ignis fatuus of popular superstition, than the clear and constant light of
true religion, which moves not by Fancy and Opinion, (as puppets do with
gimmers) but by Reason and divine revelation, as the Body does by its living
Soul.

5. Object, Pain^ing the face against the 7th Commandment forbidding all A
dultery.
BUt Madam I have been informed by some Divines and other godly Christians, that
all painting the face, or adding to our hand somenesse, in point of Complexion,
is directly against the 7th Commandment; which forbidding to commit adultery
with others, as the highest ascent or degree of sin, in that kind; does also
forbid all means and occasions, either necessarily tending, or studiously
intending, that evil End. All leading others, or exposing our selves into
Temptations of Amorous folly, by adding to our comeliness then, when either
God in our formation, or age and infirmity have brought us as it were into the
safer harbor or retreat or deformity, either natural or accidental: What
folly is it to seek to rig up our crazy vess^ll, or to expose our selves by art
on new hazards, by putting out again to that tempestuous and (often) naufragous
Sea, wherein youth and handsomeness are commonly tossed with no less hazard
to the body and soul too, then S. Paul's voyage was to the life's of himself and
his Acts 27.
company? What true hearted Israelite would have returned back to Egypt, when
God had brought them out into the wilderness, whose barrenness was
compensated with safety and Gods society; as Egypts plenty was corrupted with
Servility, Luxury, and Idolatry: Deformities may be as great blessings to our
Souls, as bolts and bars are to our Houses; which keep thieves not only from
rifling, but from attempting those that are thus fortified, with less inviting
looks.

Besides, if all Adultery and adulterating arts, (as injurious to others) by
the rule of equity and charity are forbidden to us, how much more any such
plots and practices, as tend to a Self adulterating; while we disguise and
alter our faces, not only as to Gods and man's aspect, but even as to our own;
so that we are not what we seem to be to our selves: and being once altered by
art from what is native we must look for another face, before we can find, or
see our selves in that glass, which at once flatters, upbraids, and deceives
us, while it represents our looks, other then God has made them and us;
Whereas the wise Creator has by nature impressed on every face of man and
woman, such Characters, either of beauty, or majesty, or at least of
distinction, as he sees sufficient for his own honor, our content, and others
sociall discerning or difference, whereby to avoid confusions or mistakes: So
as there shall not need any further additionals of art, which put a kind of
metamorphosis or fabulous change on Gods and natures work: Whose wisdom and
power (yet) purposely (no doubt) orders some to be less wellfavored, that they
may be as foyles to set off the beauty he bestows on others: as we see leaves
are to the brighter flowers, or clouds to the stars: Thus he makes black
night to commend the lightsome day, the winters horror to double the summers
welcome sweetness and serenity: So that in that variety, which God has chosen
to set forth his noblest Creatures (which are after his own Image) even mankind
in a kind of checquer work of some handsome and others unhandsome, some pallid
and others ruddy) every one (I think) ought to content themselves with that
color and complexion, as well as feature, which God has given them not only
in order to their particular subsisting, but as to the general symmetry of his
works; In which he has (as skillful painters do in their pictures) set forth
his more quick and lively colors (which are in some faces) by those deep and
darker shadows, which are in others; If the most accurate pencils were but
blottings which presumed to mend Zeuxis or Apelles works; who may presume to
add anything, where God has put to his last and completing hand, which is
both able and wise to do what he sees best?

Answ.
IMost willingly grant That the same pure and perfect God who has forbidden all
evil ends, or sins of the ripest age and highest Stature; has also forbad all
means desired by us to those ends; as to the immorality and perverseness of
the agents mind and intent: Whose first fancies and most infant conceptions of
sin, are sinful, if designed, approved, or delighted in: notwithstanding, he
has no power either to act, nor yet any matter whereupon to work, for the
accomplishing or carrying on of his sin, but only from the power, bounty and
goodness of the Creator; Who is good in all his works, though we have evil
hands or eyes; Yet, does not God tempt us to evil, by giving us those good
things, which we abuse to sin, by the inordinatenesse of our minds, more then
the activity of our hands, or outward enjoyment?

. It is indeed a great Truth your LaP urges, but very little to your purpose,
as I conceive; yea it makes directly against you: For if it be (as it is
confessed) most unlawful to abuse good things, to evil ends, or to gratify
any desire in order to violate Gods exp^esse Command: So where the heart is
upright, without any sinful warpings, as to piety, purity, and charity, it
must follow, that the use of any thing God has made and given to mankind, must
needs be good and lawful, both in nature and in art; Neither natures bounty,
nor the additions of modest and ingenuous art can be blamed, or so much as
questioned, where the heart is sound and honest; as in those loves or
complacencies, whose Chastity uses all kinds of ingenuous Elegancy.

If nothing can be materially evil, either in nature or in art, but only as
related to the inordinacy of the mind, will and intent of a voluntary and mor
all agent; it must necessarily follow that, as to the use of color and
complexion to the face, there can be no evil in it, as against the 7th
Commandment, where no adulterous, wanton, or evil purpose is harbored in the
soul of those that use it; but it is as (as all things ought to be) kept within
the bounds of piety to God, purity to our selves, and Charity to our
neighbors; Which holy limits must be precisely set, as in the use of this, so
of all other ornaments and enjoyments, afforded us by the Creators indulgence
in nature, which are as prone to be abused to Adulterous incentives as this;
yea far more, as being more inviting: yet are they not forbidden to be used
or enjoyed, but only confined to honest, pure and holy ends; not only the
last and highest of Gods glory, but also those of the creatures life, health,
delight, and cheerfulness.

. That in many countries, and almost in all ages fomething, which your LaP
would call painting, or complexioning, as washings, anointings, fomentations,
tinctures, and frictions, etc. have been used by very sober, chaste and virtuous
persons, both maids, wives, and widows, I think your LaP is not so
uncharitable as not to grant; Since even whole nations (not only the Jews of
old, but Christians also) have and do at this day, by customary and civil
fashions use it, without any reproach, scruple or scandal of sin; any more
then it is to wash their faces, to comb their hair, or to braid it, to anoint
their heads and faces, to perfume their clothes etc. which things do neither
necessarily tend, nor are studiously intended to any sinful end.

The Greek Churches generally, and most of the Latin Casuists (as I have heard
from Learned men and Travelers) do allow even this complexionary art and use
of adorning by some light tincture the looks of women, eminent for virtue,
modesty, piety and charity; when they are not recluse, or votaries: And yet
even these are not denied (as I suppose) those things, which may innocently
please themselves, even in their retirements: Where every one is yet a Theater
and society to themselves; and cannot willingly live at any odds with their
looks, or dislike of themselves.

Some use these helps, who are rarely seen of anymen; others of none but their
husbands; in reference to whose honest satisfactions, they use these customable
adornings of the Country, as a testimony of their love and respect, besides as
an attractive or conservative of their affections; which never receive greater
Checks, then when they meet with any object, that represents either sordidness,
negligence or undervaluing. Your LaP cannot think it unlawful for wives to
please and gratify their husbands, no less by quickening their complexion, then
by hiding any other defect and deformity, or using such ways of sweetness,
neatness, and decency (which are potent Decoyes to love) as may best keep
their husbands from any loathing or indifferency, also from any extravagancy.

To which end I have heard that S. Austins civility allowed those feminine
ornaments and elegancies of fine clothes, sweets, dresses and anointings to
wives, or such as would be wives, as far as the limits of chaste and conjugall
love extended: All which S. Jeroms rigor (who they say more loved, than
favored our sex) would less approve. Sure i lewd and and wanton women find
the use of such adornings to be advantageous to vicious ends; (which make all
things so applied unlawful) I see no cause, why sober and modest women should
despair, or be denied to turn them to a better use and honester account; since
they are, as apt for the one as the other; and fall as much under the power of
good as evil minds to have them.

If that oracle hold true (as it must, because Tit. 1. 15.
Divine) in all things of free and indifferent natures and use, (that is, upon
which no restraint of God special command is laid; as none is upon the
Churches Christian, in outward things) That to the pure all things are pure;
That nothing is unclean (that is, morally and sinfully) in it self; as the
blessed Apostle was persuaded by the Lord Jesus: These will include in their
large circumference, what Romans 14. 14.
ever is used to advance the complexion, or hide the defects of the face, as
well as any other parts of the body; both as to the nature of the things used,
and the Conscience of those, who purely, use them; Since we see that the
highest abuse of Gods creatures to Idolatrous services, and sacrifices (which
was the most provoking sin) did no way prejudge or hinder the liberty of a
believer to eat or drink of those things to far different ends. As there was
no Idolatry in eating things offered by others to Idols, if there was no regard
to 1 Cor. 10. 35. 27.
the Idol, (whose it properly was not) but to God, whose rightly it was; So nor
can I see any Adultery in the use of those helps to handsomnesse, where there
is no adulterous intent, or evil thought in the heart; whose prime moter or
spring (as to its end and purpose) being set true, to the measure of Gods will;
the outward wheels, motions and indications cannot go amiss; Since the end of
the command in that, as in all things, is a pure heart, faith unfaigned, and a
good Conscience. 1 Timothy 1. 5.

. What your LaP objects, That the use of any artificial beauty may be an
occasion to another sin, a snare, and temptation to them; Truly so may all
outward adornings (which have something in them of a complaisance and
takingnesse) yea and the most innocent native beauty may be made a bait to the
devils hooks: yet do I not think, your LaP will therefore, either deforme your
beauty, or not both own, esteem, and improve it, to your civil advantages;
Else in vain had handsomnesse been given (by God as a favor) to so many sober
women; who were as conspicuous for their beauty, as their virtue; being every
way compleately lovely; like apples of gold, set in pictures of silver: Such
were Sarah, Rebekah, Esther, Jobs daughters etc.

Thus I have (I hope) answered the weight of your LaP argument drawn from the
7th Commandment, which forbids only the abuse of things by depraved and
adulterous minds; not the use of them to sober and civil ends.

. As to the wit of it, which makes all mending the complexion or looks of our
faces to be a kind of Self-adultery; A metamorphosis of Gods work; A confuting
of his distinctions, set upon his creatures; A rekindling the fire, which God
has quenched, and adventuring again into the storm, whence one is happily
escaped etc.

. My first Answer is: That it is hard to extract one drop of spirits, or
quintessence of reason, and right argumentation (as to point of sin, and
stating the conscience) from many handfuls, and heaps of Rhetorical flowers and
parabolicall allusions; which are but light skirmishings, and not serious
contendings in matters of Religion; Such sparks and flashes of Oratory (which
are the main stock and strength of most opposers in this case) are rather like
the hedge-creeping light of gloewormes; than that celestial vigor of divine
Truth, whose beams have a star-like sublimity, and constancy of shining.

As to the change and Alteration, which is odiously called a Self-adulterating;
It Is true there is some little change of the complexion from a greater degree of
pallor, to a less, possibly to some little quickening of redness; yet not so,
as to make any greater change on the face, or cheeks, than is frequently made
by the blushings of those, that are of most modest looks and tenderest
foreheads; This makes no more a new face or person, (so as to run any hazard of
confusion or mistake) than usually befalls women in their sicknesses, and
ordinary distempers, incident both to single, and married persons; Who sometimes
appear pallidly sad, as if they were going to their graves; other whiles with
such a rosy cheerfulness, as if they had begun their resurrection; so that
this artificial change, is but a fixation of natures inconstancy, both
imitating its frequent essays, and helping its variating infirmities.

Nor does all this so terrible a change amount to more than a little quickness
of color upon the skin; It alters not the substance, fashion, feature,
proportions, temper, or constitutions of nature; which is often done, or at least
endeavored, by several applications, both inward (as to physical receipts,
of all kinds:) Also outward by more gross and mechanic arts, which strive by
many ways to conceal, cover, and supply natures grosser deformities, and
defects, even as to the very substance of parts, no less than to the additions
of borrowed ornaments. Thus the baldness, thinness, and (as both men and
women think) the deformity of their hair, is usually supplied, by borders and
combings; also by whole perukes (like artificial sculls) fitted to their
heads; Some highly please themselves in those artificial eyes, bands, legs,
noses, teeth and hair, which make up those breaches of the body, which age, or
sickness, or other accidents have occasioned, either to the inconveniency of
motion, or the deformity of their aspect: How many both men and women, who
pretend to high piety and strictness, do (yet without any scruple) by a
thrumb'd stocking, a bumbast or bolstered garment, by iron bodies, and high
heeld shoes, endeavor to redeem themselves, from that may seem less handsome,
and (vulgarly) ridiculous, or antic; levelling hereby the inequality of
crooked backs, and crump shoulders; setting up one foot parallel to the other:
filling out the leanness of their duindled legs, and the like; wherein Art
studiously and speedily, either encounters Natures enemies, or fortifies its
outworks against all assaults; or repaires its breaches, and every way kindly
comes in as its Second and Auxiliary to assist it against all infirmities
original or accidental.

. Yet this Quantitative Adultery, which by such patching and piecing of the
body, makes far more gross alterations, and substantial changes of nature,
your LaP and all persons of sound senses, do allow, in their daily use, (as
much as the Romans did Julius Cesars wearing of a Laurel Coronet, to hide the
baldness of his head) without any reproach to any ones honor, chastity or
piety; yea, how many grave and godly matrons, usually graffe or reimplant on
their now more aged heads and brows, the relics, combings or cuttings of
their own or others more youthful hair? Whence the weakness and
self-confuting invalidity of this flash or flourish against all use of art to
the face, appears: As if there were more adulterating in colors, than in
features; in quality, than in quantity; in a little tincture, than in solid
composures. Truly (Madam) a smile, or silence were the best and justest
confutation of such partial allegations: which allow the greater, and yet
scruple the lesser changes.

. Nor is there more solidity as to matter of sin or conscience, in the other
popular terror; of adulterating Gods and Natures workmanship, to his diminution
and reproach: For ingenuous Atifices, honest applications, and civil
alterations to the advantages of humanenature as single or sociall, in things
placed under our natural power, and left free as to our religious or moral
power, (that is, where no divine prohibition intervenes) These are no more to
be called, or counted any adulterating of Gods works, or reproach to his power
and wisdom; than it is to die woollen, linen or silk, out of their native
simplicity; Or to wash that scurfe and filth off, which rises naturally from
our bodies, by sweating or evaporation; Or than the polling of men's hairs, and
trimming of their beards, or paring their nails, which suffers not natures
excrescencies, to run out to that horror and uncomelinesse (like
Nebuchadnezzars when he had run long at grass) to which they would grow; where
art (we see) does daily turn, according to the several fancies and various
fashions of times and countries, those things which are but excrementall, to be
ornamentall to our bodies.

The same Sarcasme of Adulterating nature may be as justly used against all
sweet smells or sents applied to our hair, clothes bodies, or to our breath;
Not only as a delight, but as a remedy to the native rankness or
offensivenesse which some persons are subject to both in their breath and
constitutions; which not to cure, or alter by are is to condemn such persons
(otherways not ill company) to solitudes, by reason of those ill savours, which
make them fitter for cells, than for society. How impertinent and ungrate must
that superstition be, which out of a needless nicety of offending the God of
nature, (by altering any Characters or Impressions he has set on our bodies,
in color, favor or feature,) dreads to use, even those helps and remedies,
which both God and Nature have prepared, and liberally offered to our both
civil and religious use of them; not more to our own pleasure and innocent
advantages, (besides others sociall content) than to the glory of God; So far
is the use of such helps from any detriment or diminution to the Creators
glory, or work: Who often suffers Nature in its ordinary road or tract, to err,
or fail of those proportions which are most perfect and agreeable, purposely to
incite and exercise those gifts of art and ingenuity, which God has
superadded, in reason to mankind, above all those second causes and effects
which are moved by more blind instincts and confused impulses: Nor is the
wisdom, power, and goodness of God less manifested at the second hand, by
humane operation upon, and alteration of some works of Nature, than in the
first productions of things; yea that rational empire, liberty, dispose and
use, wherewith God has invested mankind, over all his works, in the inventions
of art and manufacture, does more magnify and set forth the munificence and
indulgence of God, than that substance and subject matter, which he offers to
us, as to other creatures in all those things, whose grossness and confusions
are only to be polished, distinguished, improved and disposed of by the art
and industry peculiar of man: Wherein if children of the world and darkness
are so polite, ingenious and industrious, in order to obtain evil ends; how
much more may the children of God, use their Fathers liberality in order to
their own, and others honest complacencies and compleatings?

Certainly, true piety permits us to pay an honor, love and reverence to our
selves, as well as to others; and to our bodies, as well as to our Souls: Nor
is the face more to be unconsidered, or neglected, than other parts of our
bodies; which we generally either protect from injury and contempt, or supply
their wants, or help in their infirmity by what ever art and means, we can
learn to be proper for their relief, without any fear or suspicion of sin.

. As to the jealousy of baiting anew the devils hooks, or leading our selves
and others into fresh temptations; when women seem to be in point of Beauty
faded and almost out of date; As to the fear of raising up new storms, when
the amorous tempest of youth is well allayed; Truly these are as babies or
children, rather pretty, than strong objections; and are then easily answered
and fully confuted, when the heart meditating no mischief, yet studies
comeliness: The honestest beauty in its native simplicity may be as a bait;
though it must not purposely set the devils traps or snares; Nay on the
contrary, the use of some pretty artificial reliefs to nature, may be a great
means to keep as our selves from the temptations of envy and discountenance,
(which is always attended with discontent) so others too, whom these honest
frauds and pious guiles may hinder from those by ways and extravagancies, to
which more curious eyes and touchy tempers are prone to run, if they be not
happily deceived, and so confined to sober and holy affections.

So that I do not see, but that in the ingenuous use of color and complexion
to the face, there may be the wisdom of the serpent, without the least of its
poison; Where the Dove-like innocence of the users mind preserves not only the
native goodness, which is from God in all things, that can be used, but also
the civil and moral goodness of their use, from all contagion of sin, while
the heart is kept within the confines of virtue and civility.

Though some vain and wanton minds may turn this, as all things, to a serpent;
yet others of modest tempers use it as a staff and stay both to their own
minds and others, whom they most value: and to whom they endeavor to give all
ingenuous content, even to the extent of their curiosity; without being any way
injurious to God, themselves, or others.

6. Object. Painting the face argues an heart unsatisfied with Gods works and
disposings. James 4. 7.
BUt (good Madame) laying aside the florishes of wit, and colors of speech,
(whereof I am not prone to be guilty) in plain English, ought not a Christian
to rest humbly content and satisfied with * the will of God, submitting thereto
without any such contending in patching and painting ways; which show a mind so
far unsanctified, as it seems unsatisfied with what God has ordered? Can it be
other, than an insolence and impatience flowing from a refractary and
rebellious spirit, which seeks to cure, remove, or cover, what God sees fit to
inflict on us and expose to others sight: Thereby, (as by the man born blind)
to set forth his glory in our deformity, John 9. 3.
or defects; which to remedy, what can it be but flatly to resist and
contradict his will? to run counter to Gods providence; which is his real
word, and as it were an Eventuall Oracle; which is sealed with the signet of
his hand, which is armed with power, and guided by wisdom? Which
confiderations may seem sufficient in reason and religion to forbid all
face-repairings to any alterations in any kind and in the least degree, if
there were no Scripture-testimonies flatly against those arts, which our
blessed Savior intimates to be beyond the moral, or lawful power of any one;
since he tells us we cannot (that is, we may not) make one hair Mat. 5. 35.
of our head white or black; if power of alteration be not granted us over
hairs, how much less over our cheeks or faces, our skins and complexions?
Again he tells us, that we cannot Mat. 6. 27.
add to our stature one cubit; Intimating that we must rest content with that
size to which God has seen fit to confine us in shape, stature, and feature,
since God does all things in number, meight, and measure.

Answ.
IT is most true, that a good Christian, who remembers himself to be as clay in
the hands of the potter, ought to carry in all things either a thankful
contentation, or an humble submission toward the will of God, (not only in
their natures, constitutions and beings, but also in those external
contingencies or events which are as it were the voice and dictates of
providence) So far, as not to use any means, forbidden by the written word of
God; whereby to remove or alter, what God has so inflicted upon them either in
mind, body, or estate.

But yet (dear Madam) this patience or contentedness of spirit, which only
forbids us all unlawful remedies, or wicked endeavors for relief, is no
hinderance to pious, and ingenuous industry, by which we not only may, but
ought to use all those means, spiritual, natural, and civil, (as prayer,
good counsel, physic, and the like applications, which are as holy, as they
may be wholesome) to remove or remedy any pain, sickness, maime, misfortune or
inconvenience, which happens to us in our health, strength, motion, or estates;
and why not (also) in our looks or beauties and complexions; wherein women do
think themselves much concerned, as in their riches, health, or almost life it
felf? So that many had as live die, as be much deformed; and would as willingly
part with their bodies, as their beauty, which is as the soul of the face and
life of women's looks. Certainly those honest endeavors which in fair ways
study to relieve or supply our wants in any kind, are no rude contestings with
Gods Providence; nor are to be called crossings or opposings of his will; but
rather they are servings and obeyings of it, in those dictates of reason,
prudence, and discretion, which God has given to mankind (as he has the
various motions and instincts to other creatures) in order to preserve our
selves from any evils, either falling or resting upon us; which voice of God
within us sounding with both reason and religion, is to be listened to and
followed no less, than those silent intimations, or blinder characters, we
read in providential events, which may admit of various interpretations, or
readings; But never such, as either cross, or put stop to those divine
directions, or permissions, which are given us, both in prudence and in piety
for our ease and help. Else we may not by a sacrilegious soberness seek to
cure those, whom God has seen fit to afflict with the highest temporal
misery, which is frenzy or madness; which deprives them of the noblest jewel
and ornament of the soul, Reason; Nay, we must not restrain them from any of
those desperate extravagancies, to which their distemper (which is natural and
providentiall) does dispose them; Which were indeed to be more mad, than those
poor creatures are; while having reason beyond them, we scruple to apply those
means which are proper for their good and our own, merely for fear, lest we
should contest against God, and contrariate his providentiall will.

So, by this paradox of superstitious submission, a sick man mustly and
languish under his sickness; sending a bill of defiance to all Physicians,
Chirurgions and Apothecaries, as so many bold Giants, or Cyclopick monsters,
who daily seek to fight against heaven by their rebellious druggs and doses,
prescribed in strange affected terms of art, and ill scribled bills, which seem
to be as so many charms or spells, and conjurations; So lame men may not either
use crutches, to supply the weakness of their legs, or to shore up the
tottering frame of their body: Nor may they, as the poor man in the Gospel,
covet to have the benefit of any suppling and healing John 5. 3.
Baths, which would by this argument rather seem enchanted by some evil
spirit, or Demoniack Water-nymph, than moved by the healing virtue of any good
angel.

By this soft and senseless fallacy of resting so satisfied with the events
and signatures of providence, as to use no lawful means, or industry, that may
seem to traverse the sentence or present decree; we may not rise out of a
ditch, or pit, when we are once fallen into it; nor so much as cry to Jupiter to
help us: We may not quench those fires, which casually seize on our houses; nor
extinguish those flames which Incendiaries kindle of faction and sedition in
Church or State; We may not row against any stream, nor ascend by any ladder
upward, when our native tendency is downward: We must not repair our decayed
houses, nor mend our torn garments; or honestly seek to recruit our decayed
estates; but content our selves with our ruined and illustrious houses; we must
wrap our selves (as we can) in our lazy rags, with the sluggard turning upon
the hinges of holy idleness; as those, that are providentially Prove. 6. 6.
condemned to eternal and irreparable poverty.

After these methods of holy ill husbandry, we must let our fields and gardens
ly oppressed under the usurpations of brambles, and the tyranny of all evil
weeds, which are the products of providence, as well as the best herbs and
flowers; yea Nature seems rather a stepmother and dry nurse to these, than to
the other: Nay, you may not by the inventions of artificial day, supply the
Suns absence, with Candle, or Torch light, nor dispell the horror of that
darkness, which providence brings over the face of the Earth in the night: you
may not seek to obtain your liberty, if once cast into prison, which cannot be
without a providence, since a sparrow falls not without it, upon the ground, as
Christ tells us. Mat. 10. 25.


. So many absurd and indeed ridiculous consequences do follow the fondness of
this argument: (that we may not seek to mend what God has made; nor alter what
he has ordered) That it is best confuted by continued sickness, lamenesse,
beggary, baldness, and deformity; under which not to have any sense, or having
a quick sense, not to desire and endeavor any remedy and redress, were such a
super-stolcall piece of Philosophy, as is not at all of kin to Christianity;
whose complexion is of a far more soft and tender skin, than that of the
Stoic, Cynick, or Epicurean; nor does Religion require stupor, but only a
patience, so far as is not transported beyond the holy and allowed bonds
granted to humane, and Christian industry, to relieve it self by Gods
permission, and blessing.

. The Providence of God however it declare at present his will and pleasure to
us by those events which are naturally less welcome and pleasing to us; yet it
does not so confine, and determine, either it self or us, as not to admit us to
use lawful means, of honest variations, and happy changes: Which your LaP
sees, are not more frequently applied by us than prospered by God with desired
successes: So far is it, that we should by any sad events be confined, only
to a silent and passive submission, (which is necessary and just indeed, when
our afflictions exceed the help of second causes) that we are rather obliged,
both in reason and religion, to use those means which may obtain blessed
recoveries; without violation of good Consciences, which are not injured, but
there, where God is diobeyed.

Nor is the divine goodness less to be seen, venerated and praised, in those
emendations, which follow to our ease and comfort, the lawful applications of
art, and ingenuity, than his power and Justice (or possibly his special
displeasure) may sometimes appear in those unpleasing events; which some would
fain set up (beyond Gods intent) as Idols, to such an unmovable fixation, as
if it were impious to endeavor to remove them, because providence has once
permitted them to take place, amidst the changes and contingencies incident to
this mortal and mutable state.

There may be holy contradictions, and humble contraventions, (as to Gods
silent providence, so to his declared will) either discovered by effects, or by
his express word. Thus Jacob wrestled with the Angel, and would not let him go
(when he desired) till Genesis 32. 26.
he had by a pious importunity and holy insolence extorted a blessing from him:
So Moses prays with extraordinary fervency, when God had bid him Let him
alone; Hezekiah Exodus 32. 10. Isaiah 38.
though under the declared doom of his instant and approaching death, yet is
not more bold then welcome, when by prayers and tears he seeks to repeal, or
at least reprieve the sentence already passed upon his life by the Prophet.

. Religion is no friend to Lazynesse and stupidity, or to supine and sottish
despondencies of mind, under the pretense of compliances with providence; as
afraid to remove the crosses or burdens incumbent upon us, (wherein the
sluggard might have some plea for his sloth:) For these befall us many times
(as indeed all necessities of life do) not more to exercise our patience, than
to excite our inventions and industry: Nor does the infirm life of man require
less active, than passive graces: The one to remedy what we may; the other to
bear, what we cannot cure.

But (Madame) in vain do I listen to your words, when I see your contrary
actions, by which you give your self the fullest answer and save me the labor;
Who (I beseech you) is more speedily, curiously, and earnestly solicitous to
encounter the afflictions, and cross events of providence, than your love and
care is; when any thing threatens, or urges upon the health, strength, sight,
hearing, shape, or straightness of your children, and nearest relations? yea
how auxiliary are you to your servants, and neighbors? how importunely do you
pray for remedy? how are you (as Martha) encumbered with receipts, plasters,
and medicines of all sorts; which you think most potent and soverain to remove
any pressure or danger?

Yea, as to those helps, which are most mechanic and artificial, having
nothing of native virtue, but merely such a formal application, as makes but a
show of help to natures defect; Whom did your LaP ever blame (if in other
things unblameable) for using a glass eye; which is but an honest mocking of
the world, while it pretends to the place and office of a natural one, which
God saw fit to take away, as to our own sight and use: But he did not withal
take away either our wits, our hands, or our freedom, to make and use, if we
list, a Crystal, painted eye, both to hide our own defect and deformity; also
to remove from others the less pleasing prospect of our blemish: When was your
LaP scandalized with any grave and sober matron, because she laid out the
combings or cuttings of her own or others more youthful hair, when her own
(now more withered and autumnall) seemed less becoming her? How many both men's
and women's warmer heats in religion, do now admit not only borders of forain
hair, but full and fair peruques, on their heads, without sindging one hair
by their disputative and scrupulous Zeal, which in these things of fashion, is
now grown much out of fashion. Your Laps Charity does not reprove, but pity
those poor Vulcanists, who balance the inequality of their heels, or badger
legs, by the art and help of the shoemaker; Nor are those short legged Ladies
thought less godly, who fly to Chopines, and by enlarging the phylacteries of
their coats, conceal at once both their great defects in native brevity, and
the enormious additions of their artificial hrights, which make many small
women walk with as much caution and danger almost, as the Turk danceth on the
ropes. Who ever is so impertinent a bigot, as to find fault, when the hills and
dales of crooked and unequal bodies, are made to meet without a miracle, by
some iron bodies, or some benign bolsterings? Who fears to set straight, or
hide the unhandsom warpings of bow legs, and baker feet? What is there as to
any defect in nature, where of ingenuous art, as a diligent handmaid waiting on
its mistress, does not study some supply or other? So far as to graff in
silver plates to cracked sculls; to furnish cropped faces with artificial noses;
to fill up the broken ranks and routed files of the teeth with ivory adjutants
or lievtenants.

. Yet against all or any of these and the like reparative Inventions, by which
art and ingenuity studies to help and repair the defects or deformities, which
God in nature, or providence is pleased to inflict upon our bodies, no pen is
sharpened, no pulpit is battered, no writ of rebellion, or charge of forgery
and false Coynage is brought against any in the Court of Conscience; No poor
creature (who thankfully embraces, modestly uses, and with more cheerfulness
serves God, by means of some such help, which either takes away its reproach,
or eases its pain) is scared with dreadful seruples, or so terrified with the
threatenings of sin, hell, and damnation, as to cast away (much against their
wills) that innocent succor, which God in nature, and art had given them; from
which they part with as much regret, as the poor man did from his darling lamb,
which the rich man's insolence, not his indigence; not his want, but
wantonness, forced from him: Rather we are so civilly pious in these cases, as
to applaud others, no less than please our selves, in those happy delusions,
whereby we conceal or any way compensate those our deformities, or defects in
any kind, which seem to us less convenient, or to others less comely, in this
our mortal and visible pilgrimage.

Only, if the face, (which is the Mctropolis of humane Majesty, and as it were
the Cathedral of beauty or comeliness, in the little world, or Poliiy of our
bodies) if this have sustained any injuries (as it is most exposed to them) of
time, or any accident; if it stand in need of any thing that our charity and
ingenuity in art can help it to, though the thing be never so cheap, easy, and
harmless: either to enliven the pallid deadness of it, and to redeem it from
mortmain, or to pair and match the inequall cheeks to each other, when one is
as Rachel, the other as Leah; or to cover any pimples and heats; or to remove
any obstructions; or to mitigate and quench excessive flushings: Hereby to set
off the face to such decency and equality as may innocently please our selves
and others, without any thought to displease God (who looks not to the outward
appearance, but to the heart) what censures and whispers, yea what 1 Samuel 16. 7.
outcryes and clamors, what lightnings and thunders, what Anathemas,
excommunications and condemnations fill the thoughts, the pens, the tongues,
the pulpits, of many angry (yet it may be well meaning) Christians, both
preachers and others, who are commonly more quick-sighted and offended with the
least mote they fancy of adding to a Ladies complexion, than with many Camels
of their own customary opinions and practices: Good men, though in other
things, not only of fineness and neatness, but even of some falsity and
pretention, they are so good natured and indulgent, as to allow their lame or
their crooked wives, and daughters, what ever ingenuous concealments,
reparations, Art, and their purses can afford them; yet as to the point of
face-mending, they condemn them like Paul's Church to sink under everlasting
ruins.

. The most of your plainer bred and as it were homespun Professors and
Preachers, who never went far beyond their own homes, can with less equal
eyes behold any women, of never so great quality, if they see or suspect her to
be adorned any whit beyond the vulgar mode, or decked with feathers more gay
and goodly, than those birds use, which are of their own country nest. In
which cases of feminine dressing and adorning, no Casuist is sufficient to
enumerate or resolve the many intricate niceties and endless scruples of
Conscience, which some men's and women's more plebeian Zelotry makes, as about
Ladies cheeks and faces if they appear one dram or degree more quick and rosy,
than they were wonted; so about the length and fashion of their clothes and
hair. One while they are so perplexed about the curlings of Ladies hair, that
they can as hardly disintangle themselves, as a Be engaged in honey; other
while they are most scrupulous Mathematicians, to measure the arms, wrists,
necks and trains of Ladies, how far they may safely venture to let their
garments draw after them on the ground, or their naked skins be seen: Here,
however some men can bear the sight of the fairest faces without so much as
winking, (where the greatest face of beauty is displayed) yet they pretend that
no strength of humane virtue can endure the least assaults or peepings of naked
necks, if they make any discovery or breaking forth below the ears. Not that
any modest mind pleads for wanton prostituting of naked breasts, where the
civiller customs of any Country forbids it; but some men's rigor and
fierceness is such, that if they espy any thing in the dress, clothes, or
garb of women, beyond what they approve or have been wonted to; presently the
Taylours, the Tirewomen, the Gorgetmakers, the Seamstresses, the Chambermatdes,
the Dressers, and all that wretched crew of obsequious attendants, are
condemned as Antichristian, and only fit to wait upon the whore of Babylon:
Nor do the poor Ladies (though otherwise young, and innocent, though as
virtuous as handsome: or if possibly elder, and every way examplary for
modesty, gravity and charity) yet they do not, without great gifts and
presents, (as by so many fines and heriots) redeem themselves from some men's
severe censures: And, if they do take any freedom, to dress, and set forth
themselves after the best mode and fashion, it costs them as much, as the
Roman Captains freedom did him; when indeed they are (as St Paul pleaded)
first born, not only in nature, but as to grace and the new birth; which Acts
22. 25.
is no enemy to what fashions modesty may bear; and which decency, civility,
and custom do require.

. Yet your LIP has often heard some persons in point of clothes, as highly
incensed against all such fashionable alterations, and various adornings, as
Saul was against Jonathans tasting a little honey; as if all these 1 Samuel 14 29.
things of feminine culture, art, and invention, were no less under a curse,
or execration, than Saul's rash vow and devotion had made that Honey; the
tasting of which enlightened Jonathans eyes, and the liberty of eat^ng it might
have refreshed the wearied spirits of his wandering Soldiers.

. Truly in these quarrellings of some severer spirits against all auxiliary
beauty, and helps of handsomeness in women, I observe, That commonly what they
want in force of arguments, rational or religious, they make up in clamor and
confidence: As the Pope is said to have expressed in his Bull against the
Knights Teutonick or Templars, when he confiscated their estates; Although of
right and Justice we cannot, yet out of our plenary power and will we do
dissolve them: So these many times in stead of convincing the judgments of
sober persons (like learned Divines and serious Christians) fall to cavillings
and menacings; to bitter, and scurrilous reprochings; Imagining that what
bumbast-stuffe or voluble rattling will serve to scare the superstitious and
easy vulgar (who have always an envy and malignity against their betters) will
also serve to resolve more serious judicious souls of those persons, who are
blessed with better breeding and exacter understanding.

. Such was that Sarcasme, which your LaP may remember was used by a witty and
eloquent preacher, whom we both heard at Oxford, who speaking against (not the
absolute use, but) the wanton abuse of women's curiosities in dressing and
adornings, instanced in Jezebels being eaten up of dogs; as showing, says he,
that a woman so polished and painted, was not fit to be man's meat. Which
expression had more of wit and jest in it, than of weight or earnest, and
might seem to repress either fondness or impudence, abusing such ornaments,
but it was not valid, as to the conviction of any sin, in the use of them.
Which many boldly assert, raising strange terrors and most Tragic outcryes; as
if every touch of coloring added to the cheeks, were a presage of hell fire;
every curled hair, or brayded lock, were an Emblem of the never dying worm:
Medusas head is not pictured more terrible with her snaky tresses, than these
men would represent every Lady (never so modest and virtuous) whose either
hair, or complexion, or tiring is not natively their own.

Yea so angry or envious is the rusticity or simplicity of some, against all
that either soberly please themselves, or civilly appear less unpleasing to
others, by the help of any artificial beautifyings, (though with never so much
discretion and modesty) that when they have nothing to object against the
intellectuals or moralls of women, they vehemently quarrel with their
artificialls, their dressings, clothes and fashions, their looks and
complexion; if they list but to suspect them, to have any thing adventitious to
them; liking them the worse, because they look well, and censuring them for
evil hearts, because they aim at having good faces; as if the heart received
sinful infection by any color, or tincture put to the face, more than it does
moral defilement by any thing that enters into the mouth: Against which error
our Savior expressly teaches us; counting those but Pharisaic all fools and
supercilious hypocrites, who judge and teach men otherwise; as we read, Mark 7.
18. Mark 7. 18.


. Yet by a like magisteriall rigor do some men seek to confine all women to
their pure and simple naturals: As if Art and Nature were not sisters, but
jealous rivals, and irreconcilable enemies against each other; whereas indeed
they are from the same wise God, and indulgent Father, from whom comes every
good as well as every perfect gift, as St James tells us: Who has given to
mankind James 1. 17. Exodus 31. 3.
as he did to Bezaleel, Exodus 31. 3. the invention, and use of many curious
arts: That man might know, how with most discretion and advantage to dispose of
and improve the great variety of Gods bounty, which is first set forth in
Natures either plainness or beauty, so as to court and please every of our
senses; and to accommodate every of our occasions, in those several ways and
methods, which man's industry likes best: who, although he cannot create the
matter and inward essence of things (but works only upon Gods and Natures
stock) yet he is in some sense a superficial Creator of several outward forms
and shapes, of various use and applications of things; far beyond that
rustic grossness, primitive simplicity and confusion, which either is in the
first rudiments or in the effects of Nature, before its materials are subdued,
softened, and digested by Art; which is as much the good gift of God, and tends
to his glory as Nature; and which to deprive mankind of, is to reduce them from
the politure and improvement of after times and long experience, to their first
caves and cottages, their primitive skins and acorns.

Nor may we think, that the God of Art and Nature, (who gives us liberally
(without any envy or grudging) all things to enjoy in 1 Timothy 6. 17.
a virtuous and sober way (that is, to good ends) has so curbed us up by
religious severities, as to forbid us the use and enjoyment of the fruits of
his wisdom, power, and paternall bounty, so as may best please our selves and
others, without displeasing him, who is to be glorified, even in that sensible
glory of beauty, feature, color and proportion, which is but superficial, and
must be done away, when a more durable and eternal glory shall appear; of
which it has some emblem, type and prefiguration, as the Tabernacle had of
Solomon's Temple.

. All which superstitious rigor and preciseness is not more contrary to Gods
munificence, and indulgence, than to the very nature and fancy of mankind;
which is so set beyond all creatures, that even grace and virtue themselves,
receive some varnish and gloss, a kind of silent commendation, by the
cleanliness and comeliness of our outsides; yea, we think to do an honor to
Religion, in its public services, by putting our selves, even as to our
vestures and gestures, into those forms and fashions, which we think are most
civil, reverentiall and comely: As nothing is more humane than the delight in
handsomeness, so it cannot be either irrational or irreligious, to hide those
our deformities, and defects, which we think are prone to diminish us in the
eyes and acceptance of those, with whom we do converse, either as to civil or
religious society.

If a civility both to the living and the dead invites us to wash the bodies
and faces of the dead (as they did Tabithas) (to which custom of being
baptized for dead, the Apostle Acts 9, 37. 1 Cor. 15. 29.
seems to refer, 1 Cor. 15. 29.) as forespeaking and hoping for an after
resurrection of the body, to an eternal purity and incorruption: Also we close
the eyes, and compose the countenances of our dead friends, so as may most
remove them from that ghastly and unpleasing aspect, which is in the vale and
shadow of Death: What (I pray) hinders, while we are living and among the
living, but that we may study to adorn our looks, so as may be most remote
from a deathfulnesse, and most agreeable by their liveliness to those, with
whom we live?

. If it was piety of old to repair the Temple of God; and is still good
husbandry to mend the decays of those houses of clay, in which our bodies
dwell; why should it seem Sacrilege to relieve these Tabernacles of our
bodies, which are the Hosteries of our Souls, and Temples of the holy Ghost;
so long as they may be in any decorum serviceable to them both?

Not that I am for those gross Soloecismes of Art, which by unseasonable and
unsuitable affectations (as so many pitiful props, and underpinnings) strive in
vain to skrew and set up lapsed and tottering age, to the semblance and
prospect of youthful beauty and vigor; when old women, and men too, with the
great neglect of their Souls adorning and preparation for Heaven, seek, as it
were by Medeas charms, to recoct their corpse, as she did Aesons, from feeble
deformities, to spritely handsomeness. When gray hairs are here Hos. 7. 9.
and there, it is fit the more to lay to heart our frail estate: but when the
pillars of the house do fail; when loud summons of aged Eccl. 12.
Infirmities, call loud upon poor mortals to make haste for heaven, and
eternity, to prepare to meet their God and adorn their souls (with aged and
devout Anna) for Luke 2.
their spouse and Savior Jesus Christ, in all those gracious augmentations of
piety and holy improvement of virtue, which may make them beautiful and lovely
in Gods sight: There is then no place or season to be curiously patching and
superfluously mending, to be painting, polishing, and pruning (beyond a
matronly comeliness or gravity, which is always lawful while we are alive)
our Gibeonitish carkases; those rotten posts, which are mouldring themselves
away; It Is impertinent to trim our cabin with cost and pains, when we are upon
shipwracking; or poorly to furnish a room, when the whole house is shortly to
be pulled down. To be deploredly old, and affectedly young, is not only a great
folly, but a gross deformity. It Is rediculous to spend much of a moments
remnant in contending with the invincible wrinkles and irreparable ruins of old
age, which nothing but a vizard can quite hide, or a miracle can wholly
overcome: It is fit for us humbly to yield to those decays and oppressions of
time, to which sinful mortality has exposed us; Many times we must be content
to be first buried even in the rubbidge and ruins of our own vile bodies;
Whose sad decays, incurable diseases, and irreparable deformities, ought to
serve rather as foyles, the more to set off and less to hinder our meditations
of eternal life, health and glory: Not impediments or bluntings, but rather as
Whetstones, to set an edge on our desires after higher and more permanent
beauty.

My plea (Madam) is only so far as Nature, and years may both sutably and
seasonably bear those discreet, and ingenuous assistances of Art, which may
give a decency and conformity to our education and other proportions of civil
life: Where specially there may be some such decays as are proecipitant as to
years, and exorbitant in one part beyond all the rest; through natural
infirmity, resting thereon; or by some outward occasion, that has befallen us;
Who doubts, but if, by the number palsy one leg or arm be as it were mortified,
while the rest of the body is yet strong and vigorous, we may by fomentations
and other convenient means seek to revive and recover it? Who scruples but that
if one or two or more gray hairs grow up on a youthful head (as is frequent in
some colors and constitutions) by an over early nonconformity to the rest of
our hairs that are round about; who (I say) scruples, but that they may
lawfully be plucked out? I confess I am prone (civilly) to gratify sober and
virtuous minds as long as they live, with those ornaments to their outsides,
which may keep them in all civil comeliness and cleanliness; which to
preserve is not only great discretion, but even good conscience; at least in
wives, who ought not to be either prodigal or negligent of themselves, as to
outward decency; so far as it may prudently be obtained, and modestly
maintained.

To these (I humbly conceive) that indulgence in point of artificial
handsomeness may be allowed, which was permitted by St Paul to Timothy, as to
drinking a little wine 1 Timothy 5. 33.
for his often infirmities; yet am I herein, as far from indulging vanity,
pride and wantonness, as the Apostle is there from encouraging riot, excess,
and drunkenness.

Nor would I only vindicate the innocent use of auxiliary beauty, from the
unjust suspicions and rash censures, of being absolutely and in the very nature
of the thing a sin, (which some assert, beyond what I can yet see, by my own
eyes, or the best spectacles they afford me) but my design is to have it so
used, as may no more blemish a modest woman's discretion, then burden her
conscience: That she may be not only commendable for the innocent purity of
her heart, but unblamable for the elegancy and decency of her hand; which uses
these as all things, not only lawfully, but expediently, piously and prudently,
conscienciously and becomingly; only to conceal or supply such defects, as,
you confess, may in many other cases admit the help of art, without any sin or
shame.

As for the words of our Savior, which your LaP cites, when forbidding us to
Mat. 5. 35.
swear by our heads, he signifies how little power we have of them, since we
cannot make one hair white or black: His meaning is not either to show the
impotency or unlawfulness of all humane skill, as if man could not, or might
not by any art change the outward color of his hairs; which is daily and
easily done; but our blessed Lord truly urges, that as to the inward
temperament, we cannot make one hair grow otherways than it does, either
black or white: All dies and tinctures do but alter the outward form or
color, by hiding what is native, from an internal, and (by us) unchangeable
principle; which is out of the reach of Art: So when our blessed Savior tells
us we cannot by our taking thought add to our real stature one cubit; he does
not hereby Mar. 6. 27.
deny the possibility, or lawfulness of setting our selves higher than
naturally we are, either by the heels of our shoes, or by patens, or seats,
and the like inventions; which seek to give an advantage of procerity and
comeliness to our stature; which if shrunk to a dwarfishnesse and epitomized to
a Decimo-sexio, makes the persons of men and women subject to be as little in
the eyes and esteem of others, as they are in their own inches or size; Nothing
is more obvious than for tall Goliath to despise little David: But as to the
augmenting of our seeming height and stature either by heels, or high crowned
hats, or seats, none are (I think) so silly as to be scrupulous: Nor do I
think it much to be doubted, but if in our youth, by sickness or fear, (in one
night, as I have read (in Mr Howells Epistles) befell a youthful man in the
Lowcountreys upon the false terror he had of being the next day executed by the
command of the Duke of Alva) our hair should turn white, (like snow in summer,
falling on green and florid trees) to a kind of monstrosity and deformity; such
an one (I doubt not) might lawfully redeem himself from the uncomelinesse of
such untimely accidents, either by dying their hair; or by using a peruque
suitable to their graver years; without any enterfeiring with our Saviors
meaning; which only shows the unchangeable bounds and principles of Nature,
as to Gods fixation and providence, in all things; but not to forbid the
ingenuous operations of humane art and invention, to which the works of God in
Nature are subjected, so far as they are manageable within the limits of
moral intentions and religious ends.

. So that I see no reason or authority Madam, that the preciser ignorance of
any has from heaven to set either our legs in the stocks, because we wear
Polony heels; or it may be Chopines: Nor yet, to set our heads in the
pillories, either because we wear hair which is not natively our own; or use,
it may be, some little color and tincture, which is not more adventitious to
our natural Complexions, than utterly a stranger to all wicked, and unworthy
intentions.

And thus I have not more largely, than fully (I hope) answered this objection
your LaP was pleased to make against all auxiliary handsomeness.

7. Object. Painting the face a badge of vanity: An appearance of evil.
I Do not (indeed) deny, but that in many cases, as lamenesse, crookedness,
blindness, baldness, want of teeth, and dwarfishnesse, the defects or
unwelcome deformities, incident to our bodies, may be artificially repaired or
covered, to the best advantages of our motions, and civil conversations:
Wherein the practice of very grave and godly Christians, no less than the
approbation (or connivence at least) of the best Ministers, do confirm me; And
truly it were as uncharitable to deny these innocent and ingenuous reliefes to
them, as to deny an alms to a poor man, or crutches to one that is lame.

But as to the helping of the color or complexion of the face in the least
degree, as I do not see it any way necessary or convenient upon a virtuous
account, so nor can I think it tolerable for any modest and gracious women, who
profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ; which your LaP knows is a doctrine of
such singular purity and modesty, that both the Apostle of the Jews and the
Gentiles (S. Peter and S. Paul) injoyne those holy 1 Timothy 2. 9. 1 Pet. 3. 3.
severities, even to women, as allows them none but modest apparel, with
shamefacednesse and sobriety in their looks, and gestures: Forbidding them
broided, or well set hair; also gold, pearls, and costly apparel: How much
more may you infer, do they forbid all painting, patching, and powdering;
which become none but proud, or light and bold women; who proclaim to the
world that they are not yet redeemed from their vain conversation; Whereof
these inventions of artificial 1 Pet. 1. 18.
beauty seem infallible badges; as being servient and accessory to all other
vanities; From all which we must needs be divinely forbidden by the force of
that one Apostolical Canon, Of abstaining from all appearance of 1 These. 5. 23.
evil; which may cast any blemish or reproach on the modesty, purity and
sanctity of Christian religion; Which (as Truth) needs none but its own native
beauties: But teaches us to turn (by an holy and humble Chemistry of patience
and contentedness) the very deformities and decays of the outward man, to the
advantages and daily renewings of the 2 Cor. 4. 16.
inward man.

Answ.
MAdam, I will not captiously reply upon your LaP, by putting you to plead for
your own and your childrens wearing of well set, curled, gummed, braided, and
powdered hair, according as the fashions vary: Nor will I retort upon your
gold jewels, earrings, and costly apparel: In all which your LaP, with many
other persons of honor and piety, seem either to have some dispensation for the
use of those things, which (by your own allegation) are more expressly against
the letter of those Scriptures, than any thing you have yet urged against
tincture or complexioning, which you so much dread and abhor.

Or else you must interpret those and the like negative places, in a soft and
right-handed sense, not in a severe and sinister meaning; Not as absolutely
forbidding all those and the like things, of riches and ornaments to all
Christian men and women, (for so even putting on of apparel would seem
prohibited, and we must run to an Adamitick nakedness or madness) but the
injunctions or exhortations are only comparatively, so as not to make them the
objects of their chief study, desire and delight; to the undervaluing and
neglect of those gracious and internal ornaments which only beautify the
soul, and are of great price in the sight of God; who only esteems those
things as our moral, full and real beauty, which do most assimilate us to
himself in true Holiness. Not, but that his bounty has given, and his
indulgence allows us, all things of outward splendour, riches and ornament; as
tokens of Gods munificent goodness to us: Also as ensigns of civillhonor, and
notes to distinguish the places and qualities of persons; yea further to
conciliate hereby from the vulgar something of majesty and reverence to their
superiors, either Princes or Priests.

So that since all wise and holy men have granted thus much as to the lawful
and civil use of those things, that are for fine clothing or costly adorning
our bodies, (notwithstanding those prohibitions, which are only limited and
respective as to the main end and design of a Christian) Truly I see no cause,
why they may not with as favorable an indulgence permit to women those modest
and discreet helps of beauty, as to the face; Since there is no letter of the
new Testament which bears any show of forbidding these, more than those; which
by a just candor of interpretation, are allowed.

Yea in particular, as to the advantaging of our faces, and adding to the
luster and beauty of our looks, our blessed Savior we see is so far from
being against the Eastern custom of anointing the head and face, Mat. 6. 16.
(which, doubtless, added something to the visible beauty and shining of the
countenance) that he bids the Jews, even in their fastings to use it, as at
other times (not peremptorily and absolutely) but rather, than by Pharisaicall
and affected abstinence from washing and anointing the face to belly a fast with
hypocritical sadness and sowrenesse of looks, Is, 58, 5.
which are not accompanied with humble and contrite hearts.

That these anointings of the head and face, were apparent, and tended to set
forth the beauty and cheerfulness, or serenity of their faces who used them,
is most evident, by Joabs forbidding the widow of Tekoah 2 Samuel 14. 2.
to use it when she was to personate a suppliant or mourner; and by Naomies
advising Ruth to use it in order to conciliate the love Ruth. 3. 3.
of Boaz to her.

Yea, although it is evident in histories, both sacred and civil, that the
custom of anointing, (oftentimes, no doubt, mixed with such tinctures as did
color, or paint the face and body) was usual among all nations, civil and
barbarous, Greek and Roman, Southern and Northern, East and West Indians;
Insomuch that the Picts here in Britannie had their Names from their being
painted; (not only as a terror to their enemies in war, but as an ornament
in peace) Though (I say) this fashion be almost Epidemicall and connate, or at
least customary to all nations (to which the Grecian and Roman Luxury added
(no doubt) what ever wit and art could devise, in order to the the setting off
of their beauties and handsomeness, according as each country fancied) yet we
never read, either the great Doctor of the Jews, or Gentiles, any where giving
any dash of their Pens against these customs, which were so frequent; No, not
there where regulations are set to feminine coverings, and adornings.

Nor do we find, that in the great pomp Acts 25. 23.
or princely parada used by Queen Berenice, and her train of women, (among
whom, no doubt, all the Roman and Asiatick fashions of improved beauty did
appear as; S. Luke intimates) we find not, the blessed Apostle, either at all
taken, or scandalized with that exquisiteness and glory: Of which he wisely
takes no notice; So far is he from finding fault, or expressing any dislike,
thinking it more becoming the Apostolic gravity to preach those great points
of Christian graces and duties, in righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, than by impertinent and unseasonable severity, to declaim against such
civil, and venial vanities as women use: which are such, not absolutely in
the nature and use of them, but in the mind and intention of the user of them.

Agreeable to which methods of Apostolical prudence, I think the heats of some
Preachers in their Sermons and writings were far better spent in urging the
great things of the Law, and Gospel (which have moral and clear foundations
in Scripture, and so make both easy and potent convictions in Consciences) than
with a looser zeal, and blinder boldness to inveigh most impetuously against
those things of externe mode and fashion, which will either cease to be doubted
of and used. when once they appear to a gracious heart, any way evil. Or else
they will cease to be suspected for evil; when once they are found to fall
under the lawful use, and management of an heart, that is truly good in its
holy ends and gracious habits; doing all things, as in the fear of God, so
far as it sees God allows: Also to the glory of God, as giving him thanks
for all things in Nature and Art, which are afforded to our necessity, or
delight, and ornament Securing it self in the use of all these things, by those
two great assertors of a Christians liberty, in use of outward things; The one
of the Apostle Paul, who assures us that nothing is of itself unclean, as to
any moral defilement: Romans 14. 14. Mat. 5. 11, 12.
The other of our blessed Savior, who tells us, that no externe applications
to our bodies defile us, but the inward fedities of the heart only; whose
emanations, if poisonous, poison all things through which they pass; but if
pure, they purify all things that come within their streams.

. As to that dash your Lap gives to this quickening of complexion, as if it were
an infallible token of a vain mind, by this vain conversation; It will then be
best taken off, when we both understand, what the Apostle means by vain
conversation; For either you must interpret it for flatly vicious and wicked,
or so impertinent and extravagant, as is not to be reduced to any rules, or
bounds of reason and religion; no, not under any intentionall piety, and
habitual or dispositive holiness: To which a gracious heart can and will
refer all things, even of superfluity, civility and decency, which are still
within the general order and proportions of Reason; and no less within the
skirts and suburbs of Religion: being then kept from the blemish or brand of
any such vain conversation, as is vicious, when they are short of sinful
intentions; and hold within the compass of ingenuous recreations and pleasures.

On the other side if your LaP opposes vanity to mere necessity, or fancy,
that by that expression of being redeemed from vain conversation, we are
forbidden all things of cost or comeliness, of bravery and elegancy, of
pleasure and recreation beyond what the mere necessities, or rigidest
conveniences of humane nature, and life requires; if this be your sense, truly
I think (under favor) the Spirit of the Gospel is not so Cynicall: God treats
his children with more indulgence. Besides your Laps own conversation makes me
believe, this is not the meaning of vain; for then you are apparently guilty of
as many forbidden vanities, as you have superfluities of cost and care, of
dressing and lacing, of curling and pleating; you must abate much in your own
person, and your childrens, in your clothes and furniture, in your buildings,
gardens, etc.

. But truly I think piety has so much candor in it, (especially out of cells
and cloisters) not only in Kings courts, but in meaner persons Mat. 11. 8.
houses, as to admit of costly and gorgeous apparel, of fine linen, and other
things at that rate and proportion; as to the beauty, ornament and elegancies
of life: Which things (even of a light and lesser nature) though they be not of
the immediate substance of religion, or solider parts of piety and virtue, yet
they are as the fringe and accessaries to them; like the feathers and colors
of the Dove, which add indeed Ps. 68. 13.
nothing to its internal innocence, but something to its outward decency; From
which religion is so far from being an enemy, in civil conversation, that
the Apostle exacts order and decency, even in religious duties 1 Cor. 14. 40.
and devotion. True piety is not pleased with sordidnesse or sluttery: nor is
Gods Spirit grieved with modest care and sober study of outward handsomeness
in all kinds.

. So that it seems to me no better than a straight-laced superstition, which
thus pinches Gods bounty, and Christians liberty; which makes Christianity such
a captive to unnecessary rigors, and pedling severities, as if it were never in
a due posture and habit, till its nails be pared to the quick, and its hair
shaven to the skull: Many things certainly are allowed to those, that are godly
in this life, not as they are Gods children so much, as they are the children
of men; that is in a condition of fraility, a kind of infancy and minority; In
which God (as Jacob) clothes his Joseph's, and his spouse too, not only with
garments of necessity but of beauty; variegated Ps. 45. 14.
and embroidered: And this he does, as to the honor of his bounty, so with no
blemish to his love, nor diminution to his childrens holiness: Of which
outward ornaments of sordidnesse are a very false measure; Though some silly
souls are prone to place much piety in their mawkingly plainness, and in
their censoriousnesse of others, who use more comely and costly curiosities.

It Is true, Salomons (now more severe, refined and sublimated) wisdom passes
his penitential censure upon all things under the Sun, To be vanity of
vanities; that is, apart Eccl. 1. 2.
from and in comparison of that true and eternal light, life, beauty, riches,
strength, love, honor, glory and happiness; which are only to be enjoyed in a
nearer union to, and communion with God the supreme and incomparable Good: Yet
he was far from diminishing or reproaching the Creators power, wisdom,
bounty and providentiall disposure of all things; who made them all very good,
in their forms, use and ends; However the sin of man has drawn over them a
black shadow of vanity, and of misery upon himself, until he be redeemed by
Christ, from that vanity of vanities, Sin; which makes all to be vanity and
vexation to impenitent sinners, while such, but not to an humble and holy
Christian, who sees, and adores God and Christ in all things; and no less in
this, which may add to the momentary comfort, and content of its looks, than
in other things, which are not therefore sinful vanity, because not of
absolute necessity.

As for the last place your LaP voucheth, of Abstaining from all appearance of
evil; which you think as a large net must needs include in its capacious
bosom, all these modes of auxiliary beauty: Even this, as all other
Scriptures, must be seasoned with the salt of a right and restrained sense,
lest it be corrupted, by a loose and false interpretation: else we must call no
man master or father; Mat. 23. 9. Mat. 6. 25. Joh. 6. 17.
nor take care for tomorrow, nor labor for our livings, etc.

It cannot be meant, that we must abstain from all those actions or things,
wherein evil minds do often appear, as most studiously, so most wickedly, while
they appear under the mask, colors, and pretentions of piety, virtue and
sanctity, by most affected and rotten hypocrisies: This were to forbid us all
those appearances, which most become us: For there is no form, or fashion of
holiness so severe, demure, and precise, but it often falls under the devils
counterfeit and imitation; we must not abstain from being and appearing as
Angels of light, because Satan transformes himself 2 Cor. 11. 14. Mat. 5. 16.
Isa. 5. 30.
to that appearance, our light must shine before men: though some call their
darkness light, and put the beams of light on their darkness: The Pharisees
pride and hypocrisy appears in Moses chair, in long prayers, in Mat. 6.
fastings and alms; we must not therefore wholly abstain from these: The sheep
must not flea off his skin because the wolf many times puts on its fleece: No,
our Savior teaches there, to add sincerity to the solemnity, and the power
of godliness to the form.

. I remember in my small reading of the Ecclesiastical stories, both ancient
and modern, that the holy severities of watching, fasting, hard lodging, course
fare, and homely clothing, used by Orthodox Christians, were usurped by most
damnable heretics and desperate schismatics, the better to cover over their
rotten manners and pernicious doctrines; They will often give all away to the
poor, in order to get greater estates by rapine: They will be, like John of
Leiden, reformers of Church and State, that by sacrilegious arts and rebellious
crafts they may mend their own fortunes; yet these fallacious appearances must
not deter good Christians from real charities, and just reformings.

So then, those appearances of evil, from which we are bidden to abstain, are
such, wherein sin and vice do generally appear as in their genuine and proper
colors: A Christian must not only avoid gross sins, with open and impudent
foreheads, but also keep a loofe from the very suspicion of those pregnant
sins, as well as from the spot; as Caesar required of his wife.

Further, the Apostles meaning may be this, that we must abstain from all sin,
which is notoriously and confessedly such, what ever fair semblances and
appearances it makes; where sins are so putrid and unsavory, that no fair
pretentions can so perfume them, as to make them pleasant to Christians, that
have their senses awake and exercised to discern true holiness.

. As to this duty then of Abstaining from all appearance of evil, Christians
must be first wisely and exactly informed, as of the natures, so of the
appearances of sins: That they be not gulled and deluded with the devils baits
and shows; nor yet scared with every scarecrow, and take every boil for a
plaguesore, or every scab for a leprosy; which superstitious fancies are prone
to mistake, not grounding their fear upon judgment, but guiding their
judgments by their fears; Not therefore abstaining, because God has
forbidden, but therefore imagining God has forbidden things, because they have
been accustomed to abstain from them.

Whence arises not real and true, but false appearances and misprisions of
evil, which falls not under the Apostles caution; whose aim is to deter
Christians, as well from misapprehensions of good or evil, as from
misapplications to them: Nor would he have us to abstain from other, than those
appearances, wherein evil commonly appears like itself, in its proper
colors, not only as to its malice and mischievousnesse; but also, as to its
disorder and impudence. For to avoid all those customs and manners civil or
sacred, in which sin and superstition may and often do appear, we must either go
out of the world, or not at all appear in it: As all is not good, which good
men do or say; so nor is all evil, which wicked men make show of: As infinite
shadows make not up one substance, so nor many appearances only, make up one
sin: It Is not what superstitiously appears as evil to weak and simple eyes, but
what really is and so appears evil to serious and judicious minds, which we
must avoid; else ignorance, superstition, and hypocrisy will (as I said)
obstruct, and put in a prejudice against all things, under the seemingnesse or
appearance of evil, which are not only allowed of God, but necessary in the
outward shows, expression of either civility or religion.

As in all other cases (then) so in this of Auxiliary beauty, it must first be
convincingly proved, that all use of such helps is in its nature a sin; that
none can use them in any case, or the least degree, without either breaking an
express command of God, in right Reason, or Scripture; or without a secret
purpose, and sinister intent to sin: That there must be either a sin in use of
the nature of the thing absolutely prohibited, or in the inevitable
depravednesse of the users intention, if in nature it be allowed; For the
nature of the thing, it is in vain cried down for sin, when nothing is produced
against it in Reason or Scripture; nor more pretended against it, than may as
well be urged against the use of many other things, as helps to natural
defects, or ornaments to civil life; of which they make no doubt, who must
deny this of tincture and complexioning; So that either they must condemn
other things (with this) which they approve, or approve this with other things,
which they do not condemn or disuse.

As to the end and intent of the user, I presume your LaP and others too have
so much charity, as not to censure or condemn all those for wicked and wanton,
who use any help to their complexions; Nor can you justly blot out or forget
all the piety, charity, modesty and gravity of those, who (otherwise constant
and conspicuous for those graces and virtues) have yet either undiscernibly as
some, or suspectedly as others, or declaredly as many, (according to the
general custom of countries) used such additaments to their faces, as they
thought most advanced the beauty or comeliness of their looks.

And however it be true that a tender conscience is prone to a commendable
jealousy, in the point of sinning against God, (whereof a good Christian
cannot be too cautious) yet it is as true, that in the Church of God there is
so clear a light, and constant a rule to discern good and evil, sin and no sin
by, that there is not any thing really a sin, but it is easily demonstrated to
be such; by such pregnant and constant testimonies of mor all light, or divine
truth, as our own consciences must needs consent unto them: Nor is it easy to
elude the pregnant convictions of immorality, which appear in all gross sins,
either as injurious to God, or our neighbors, or our own souls Against none of
whom (as far as I can yet find) this use of any relief or additament to our
colors and complexions, can or does offend, more than other things, of which
no doubt is made; so long as the heart is holy, and the mind pure; which yet
are either ingenuous reparations of Natures defects, or concealments of what we
think deformed.

. Nor can I see any cause, why we should think, God less allows us any
advantages for our looks, or faces, than for other parts of our bodies: Since
the greatest sweetness, honor, and agreeableness, as to humane society, are
(as waters in the Sea, or light in the Sun) gathered together by Nature, and
bestowed on the face of mankind; where to appear lovely or comely is no
appearance of evil, in nature; nor more in art, which keeps the decorum, and
ends of God and Nature, which I am sure are always good; Nor would God have
made any faces beautiful, if there had been evil in beauty, which yet evil
minds may abuse, as other good things, that are the fruits of Gods bounty and
indulgence, in Nature and Art: Which is all I have to reply, as to these
cautions scruples of vanity, and evil, which your LaP makes against all
Artificial beauty, or helps of handsomnesse, by way of color or tincture,
rather I suppose from vulgar or common jealousies, than your own convictions.

For sure if it had been so gross and palpable a sin, as some suspect and
report, it would not have been hard for so many learned, wise and holy men and
women, to have proved it to be such by undeniable arguments: whereas your LaP
shall easily perceive, if you look near to their discourses upon this thing,
that generally those who vehemently fight against Ladies faces, crying down all
auxiliary or artificial beauty, do it more by their Rhetoric, than their
Logic; they rather strike them upon the cheeks with their palms, then under
the eyes with their fists: They make them blush, but not black and blew, by
specious more than ponderous arguments, showing themselves in this point (for
the most part) rather pretty Orators than profound Divines; using not the sharp
two-edged sword of Gods word, but the blunt foyles of humane fallacies and
declaymings.

. All which amounts to no more, than a kind of verbal painting, or orall
coloring; which may be more dangerous to truth and conscience, than that which
they inveigh against, can be to the faces, or complexions of sober and modest
women, while they slide from the abuse of things, to decry the use of them;
Drawing conclusions from suspicions of evil, jealous of the honesty of all
minds, because of the pravity of some; Denying all ingenuous liberties, because
of some persons licenciousnesse; which is a vild and weak way of searching or
discovering sin: Especially, when it is I think a most infallible Truth, That
what ever may be abused, may also be well used; what is good in nature, may be
so in art: Since all things are in their kind, they may be so in their various
applications, which is their end, and best serve by the aptitudes, which are in
them, for such ends and uses.

8. Object. Painting the face a mark of pride, arrogance and hypocrisy.
BUt good Madame, though you may avoid other strokes made against all
artificial beauty, as to the nature of the things so used, yet as to the mind
of the user, it is not to be denied, but all adding of color and complexion to
the face, comes from pride, though it do not tend to wantonness; Having its
rise and temptation from that height of mind, which thinks we deserve more
handsomeness than God has thought fit to give us; Glorying inordinately in
that which is indeed below the greatness of a Christians spirit and ambition.
If it be allowed us to take any humble and modest complacency in those outward
gifts and ornaments, which God has bestowed on our persons, to which we have a
good title of divine donation, as natively and properly ours; yet sure it
cannot avoid the brand of arrogance, as well as hypocrisy, to challenge and
ostentate that beauty or handsomeness of complexion as ours, which indeed is
none of ours, by any genuine right and property; but only by an adventitious
stealth, a furtive simulation and a bastardly kind of adoption: So that if
painting be not rank poison, yet (as mushroomes) it seems to be of a very
dubious and dangerous nature; and to (be sure) it cannot be very savory,
wholesome or nutritive to a good Christian; If it be not in the pit of hell, it
may be on the brink; if it be not the house it may be the threshold of death;
if it be not of an intoxicating nature, yet it seems to be as a bush, or red
latice, which gives neither honor nor ornament to any beyond the degree of a
Taphouse or a Tavern: If nothing else could be said against it, this is
enough, that it is an Emblem or token of Pride and Self-conceit, which is bar
sufficient to all grace, and overdrops all true virtue.

Answ.
It Is true, nothing less becomes Christians than pride, since they profess to
follow the example of an humble Savior, who was content for our sakes to have
the beauty of his Isa. 53.
face marred, and to appear without form or comeliness, to expiate the
spiritual deformities, which sin has brought on our souls, and bodies too;
Yet since Christ came to repair nature, and not to destroy it; since his main
design is to reform our inward decays, without any wast or reproach to our
outward comeliness; since to be godly, it is not necessary to be ugly, nor does
deformity add any thing to our devotion, I see no reason, why we should
imagine, that Gods mercy to our souls, denies us due care and consideration of
our bodies: Or that, while he forbids us to be proud, by an overvaluing of our
selves or any thing we have, beyond our, and their due proportion, that he
requires us to be so abject and neglective of the outward man, as not to know,
value and use the gifts he has given us, for his glory, and our comfort of
life; which none can thankfully and rightly do, who does not see, or dare not
use what God in nature or art has afforded to them. So that it is not pride,
but justice and gratitude, that ownes and improves to right ends the fruits of
Gods bounty: Not a resting in them, or boasting of them, as our chief blessings
and happiness, but referring them as subordinate to superior ends; It does
not grieve God to see us pleased with our selves, and what we use of his
creatures, provided we abuse them not: There may be humble self-complacencies,
without pride; Nor have we cause but to joy in our selves, and what we do, at
all times and in all things, except then when our conscience tells us we offend
God.

Nor may the least suspicion of pride fall upon many women, who while they
modestly use help to their complexions, are the more humbled and dejected,
under the defects they find of native beauty, or lively color: The remedying
of which by artificial applications, can be no more temptation to pride, than
the use of crutches or spectacles, to those that are lame and dim sighted; or
the applications of other delights and ornaments to our outward man or senses,
with an humble agnition of Gods bounty and indulgence, to either our
necessities or infirmities.

Nor may it more justly be taxed for pride and arrogance, because in the matter
of beauty we challenge to our selves something as contributive to
handsomeness, which is not ours by a native, personal and individual title;
since many things belong to the use and service of mankind which are forain and
besides himself, not as usurped by his arrogance, but as accumulated upon him,
by the Creators bounty, who is willing mankind should serve themselves of all
his creatures various excellencies, in their strength, weight, light,
sweetness, warmenesse, tinctures, beauties, and colors; not only to
necessity and playnnesse, but also curiosity and gayness.

Otherwise, I know neither your LaP, nor any others who are so severe censurers
of all externe helps to beauty, would be so partial to your selves in other
things, as to allow your selves without any blame or guilt of pride, many
ornamentall actions as well as materials, both private and public, whereby to
set off your self in a far different posture of neatness and handsomeness, of
beauty and majesty, beyond what you have or are in the native desolation and
simplicity of your persons.

Else, why do you (without any scruple) choose such stuffes, such colors, such
Taylours, such laces, such tires, such fashions, as you fancy best become you;
You never are jealous of scarlet, crimson, or purple tinctures in your clothes,
wherein you please your self at present, more than in any other deader colors,
as best becoming you: Only you are scared with the least touch of such orient
colors on your face, though they become you never so much, and though you
think you need them not a little: Can such tinctures and colors of light be
honorable and graceful to your body, and only shameful and disparaging to
your face, when they are but the simple juice or extract of some innocent
herb, leaf, flower or root? Of which no other use (in food or physic) can be
made, as we see in many things of Natures store whereof no other benefit can be
made, but the extracting and commmunicating of their tinctures and colors,
whereto Nature does invite Art, and ingenuity.

Nor is indeed any thing (as I have heard) more easy and cheap, than those
applications, which advance or quicken the ruddy life of the face, which is
done with very little expense of time, without others pains or our own labor;
and no doubt both may, and very often is used, to very sober ends, by humble
minds, who venerate God in this, as all his creatures, whereof he has given
man the use and command, in all honest and virtuous ways.

And however God challenges his own right and propriety, where wicked minds
sacrifice to their own net, and glory in Gods flax, and wine, and oil, and
corn, as if it were their own Hos. 2. 5.
merit or acquisition; forbidding us ungratefully or excessively to use these
his gifts to his dishonor, and the detriment of our souls, while we pamper our
bodies, and our sensual lusts; yet where the heart is pure and grateful to
God, he no where commands, nor expects, we should neglect the body, (which is
Gods too) in the culture of it, for neutriment or ornament, for necessity or
decency, so far as we make these, no hinderance of holiness, and no designed
occasion to sin.

Nor do I see any reason, why this help to complexion or beauty in the face,
may not be used, as far short of any sinful pride, as any other adorning
your LaP uses; who though plentifully furnished with Natures stock of beauty,
(of which (like the rich man's barns) your Laps face has great store laid up
for many years) yet as I think you are not proud or conceited of it, to any
ungrateful neglect or affront to God the giver; So nor do I believe, you are
so great an undervaluer or slighter of it, as not to preserve it tenderly, and
thriftily; but fence it against Sun, dust, air, and fire, by masks, fannes,
scarfes and hoods; yea, if you find any decays by wrinckles, or roughness, by
freckles, or tanne, you speedily endeavor by unguents and washes, by forehead
cloths, and cere-cloths to clear and smooth your skin, to recover your fresh
and orient color; and to fetch back that Angel, which seems to have fled, or
to be flying from your face; which even sober and modest women are as loath to
let go, as Jacob was that Angel, with which he wrestled; because they think it
(and not unjustly) a great blessing among these little momentary ones, which
our dust is capable of.

Yet in thus doing endeavoring and desiring to preserve or recover your
beauty, neither your own heart, nor any others tongue is so cruelly austere, as
to smite you or accuse you for any pride, or arrogance, nor yet for any
inordinate esteem of this fading blossom, beauty: And truly since your plenty
and liberty exempts you from all envy of others handsomeness, why should you
deny your ptty and charitable indulgence to those, that do want native color,
or forbid them the ingenuous use of artificial complexioning, which may
innocently relieve them, without any sin or shame? since God and Nature have as
it were offered such helps, which are obvious, cheap, easy, and every way safe.
I do not believe your LaP wishes all your neighbors poor, that they may the
more value, set off and admire your riches: There may be greater pride in the
want of charity, and in severe censuring of others for pride in that, which
they use as from God, so in his fear, and to his glory; It is good to look to
the became in our own eyes of rashness and censoriousnesse, which is an high
arrogating of Gods judicial power, and ascending up to his Throne or
Tribunal, before we quarrel too earnestly with the mote in an others eye.

. Why should any be judged of Pride for that, wherein he ownes and venerates
God? praising him for his bounty, and keeping within his bounds: Since Gods eye
has been good to poor mortals, not only in native gifts, but in artificial
and adventitious supplies, why should any Christians eyes be evil? Repining
at, or disdayning another benefit; who want, what God has not denied; which
is, as if one should grudge them a plank to save themselves, who have made
shipwreck: It Is possible for Diogenes his Cynicall slovenlinesse to trample on
Platoes splendid garments with more pride, than Plato wore them. Nor is it any
strange effect of pride, to deny others that which may make them any way our
peers, or rivalls in handsomeness: which is as strong a leaven to puff the
mind, as any thing, and no less fermentive, when natural, than when
artificial; And indeed artificial helps of beauty carry with them their own
antidote, while they are monitors of our wants and infirmities, which (like the
swallowing down the stone) keep us from surfeiting of the cherries we eat.

We read no where in Scripture, that the beauty and bravery of colors, is
either forbidden or reproved, unless unseasonably worn, when God calls for
sackcloth and blackness of faces; Lydia a seller of purple (whose die or Acts
16. 14.
finer tincture was of more worth than the substance or stuff it self) yet is
not forbidden when she was converted to be a Christian, either to die, or to
sell any more of that rich and orient color.

Since other diseases or distempers incident to our faces are industriously to
be cured without any thought or blame of pride, as flushings, redness,
inflammations, pimples, freckles, ruggedness, tanning and the like; what
hinders, that palenesse, sadness, and deadness may not be remedied? since God
has given to mankind not only bread to strengthen, and wine to cheer man's
heart; but also oil and other things proper to make him a serene and cheerful
countenance: And Ps. 104. 17
where oil is not used, other things may be, according to that virtue and
property is in them to such an end; Against which honest liberty, I see nothing
wars so much as prejudice, and a kind of wontednesse to think the contrary,
because they never knew how innocent, as well as convenient, the use of such
helps is to sober minds, and more pallid looks.

9. Object. The Fathers and modern Divines much against all painting the face.
But (good Madame) although you may safely contend with my weakness of
understanding, and want of memory, which are prone to betray the strength of a
good cause; Yet I beseech you beware, how you dash against that great rock,
which I confess gives me such terror, as I dare not touch it, any more than
the people or beasts might Mount Sinai: I mean the uniforme judgment and
concurrent Testimony of very many learned and godly men; both the holy Fathers
of old, and the most reformed Ministers of later times, who (as I am informed)
almost with one voice, absolutely cry down and even damn to hell all painting
or coloring the face in order to advance the beauty of it, as a sin, not small
and disputable, but of the first magnitude: Which dreadful censure my self
have read (not without some horror) as in others of our English Divines, so
especially in Mr. Downams Christian warfare, Downams Christian Warfare c. 14.
the first book and 14th Chapter; where from the Fathers sense he calls
painting of the face, The Devils invention, absolutely a sin, not only in the
abuse but the very use; In the nature of the thing, and not only in the
intention of the doer; That it is utterly wicked and abominable, against the
law of God; The light of nature: Against self-shame and conviction; A reproach
of God, a perverting of his works in nature; A cheat of others, a lure and bait
to sin, a fruit of pride and vanity, poisonous to the body, and pernicious to
the soul; That it is the proper practice of harlots and lewd women; That it is
inconsistent with a Christian profession, and a good conscience.

He brings Tertullian arguing against it, as the Devils counterfeiting and
mocking of God, by seeking to mend his works, as if God needed his enemies help
to complete his creatures; So he cites S. Cyprian, telling the veiled virgins,
that the devil by these arts does but distort and poison what God has made
handsome and wholesome; He might have added many more (as I find other where)
in our English Authors, who produce the authority of S. Ambrose, S. Austin, S.
Chrysostom, and S. Jerome, against all additionall beauties.

Thus I perceive English Divines (for the most part) are as Boanerges, sons of
Thunder against these Complexionary Arts; Nor do I find any (almost) that are
Barnabasses, or sons of comfort, as to the use of it, in any kind, at any time,
or by any person, that pretends to piety; Which makes me wonder, how your LaP
has the courage, and confidence, to encounter such an host of Worthies, men of
renown; or whence you are furnished with such Arms both offensive and
defensive in this contest, beyond what I have heard or read from any one, in
defense of Auxiliary beauty; which must not seem to me any beauty, since to so
many pure eyes it appears deformity; so that a painted Lady is to be looked
upon rather, as some Specter or Empusa, than as an handsome woman.

Answ.
THis black and ponderous cloud of witnesses which your LaP produces against
all artificial beauty, from the suffrages of ancient and later Divines, did I
confess a long time so scare me, that I feared a Deluge of divine wrath, in no
case to be more unavoydably powered forth upon the soul, than in this of giving
any assistance to the face and complexion; So terrible presages of storms did
the thunder and lightning give, both from the press and pulpits of grave and
godly men; No soul was more shaken than I was, in the minority of my judgment;
when I had more of traditionall superstition than of judicious religion; and
valued more the number of men's names, than the weight of their reasons.

. But at length, finding by my greater experience in the world, that many, if
not most women of more polished breeding, every way virtuous, and most
commendable for all worthy qualities, yet did use more or less (privately, and
it may be less discernibly to vulgar eyes) something of art to retard age and
wrinckles, to preserve or recover a good complexion, to quicken that color,
which is the life of the face, and to dispell the death of an excessive
palenesse, notwithstanding what was with so great zeal and terror urged by some
against all such practices, which are not the less evil because less
discovered; I began seriously to examine the grounds of their opinions, who
were such enemies against it, and what dispensations in private those virtuous
and modest women had, who more or less used some art, without which their
beauty and good complexion would be much abated, if not quite destroyed.

And now out of that nonage and minority, which kept me in the wardship and awe
of men's names, and numbers, I considered, that these alone signify no more to
make up any reason, or to prove any thing a sin, (in point of conscience) than
so many ciphers can make up a sum which have no figure before them.

In matter of godliness, as to intellectual light and darkness, or moral
good and evil, it is not to be regarded, who, or how, or when men affirm or
deny any thing, but why? This made me at once curious and serious to examine,
what strong reasons were alleged by them: And on what grounds a thing so
small, easy, cheap, safe, (and for the most part both inoffensive to, and
undiscerned by others) should merit so bitter and odious invectives, so as to
be banished from all Christian society; which yet admits so many curiosities,
elegancies, superfluities, ornaments, and delicacies of life, in clothing and
dressing, in building and Cookery, in gardening and all adornings, by hangings,
pictures, carvings, guildings, and tincturings.

. And truly Madam after the best search and examining I could make of all that
was written, preached, or privately discoursed of by any men against
Artificial beauty, (as now by your LaP) it seems very strange to me, how, if
the case were so clear, as to a notorious sin, and so flagitious a crime,
(which not like the sly fox crops the grapes, but like a wild bore roots up the
very plants of all piety and virtue) How neither your LaP from them, nor any of
them from one another in a continued track, do ever produce such valid
Scripture reasons, or grounds of Morality (as to piety, equity, charity, or
purity) as may make up one solid and pregnant demonstration, rather then
multiply long and specious, yet dubious declamations; which are like ropes
drawn out to a length, but not bound or girt about things: having much in show
and extention, nothing in the binding or convincing power.

And such (I must freely tell your LaP and all the world) are all those sharp,
Satyricall, and popular invectives, which hitherto I have met withal any
where; To which your LaP has given as much (or more) edge and smartnesse, as
ever I found from any; For other where, one shall find, that those good men
(without any new strength of arguments) commonly use the same borrowed phrases,
those wonted flowers of Oratory, one after another, as so many corresponding
Echoes; by which they make loud and fierce Declamations against all artificial
helps to beauty, rather in a sequacious and credulous easiness, than after the
rate of any persuasive strictness, either from principles of right Reason, or
from Scripture-precept, and authority; with which your LaP began discourse upon
this subject between us, where I think your LaP found no such penetrating and
confounding thunderbolts, as were vulgarly imagined, to be cast in the faces of
all women, that any way helped the defect of their beauty, by ingenuous and
modest arts.

So soft and good natured, for the most part, are good men, as to be easily led
away by the authority and reputation of other men's names and opinions, which
(under favor) is but a credulous kind of superstition and presumption: The
sap, not the heart of Religion; whose grounds, as to matters of conscience,
binding or loosing the soul from sin, or to judgment, are not the fancies,
conjectures, or oratories of men, but the mind, will and oracles of God, whose
rule is, To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this
word, it is, because there is Isa. 8. 20.
no light in them; if they speak not contrary to these, there is no sin or
darkness in them.

I do humbly acknowledge, it becomes not the weakness of my sex to contend or
argue with those holy Fathers of old, men of incomparable learning and
sanctity; whom I wish I could as well study and read in their own writings, as
I do highly venerate their names, for that great authority which they have
justly obtained in the Church of Christ, by their zealous and industrious
pains to deliver to us the great things of God, and those weighty matters of
Religion, which are necessary to salvation.

Yet I know they were so holy, and humble men, as not to think themselves
infallible, nor to obtrude their opinions, as dictates; or their commentaries
for sacred texts, and their writings for indisputable oracles, upon the Church
of God, or any believers conscience; Who is there in these days of so observant
a respect to the Fathers, as to forbear as sin, all they forbad, or to perform
as duty, all they then required? I have heard, and read that every one of them
had their errors, greater or lesser, even in points of greater concern, then
this of Ladies beauties: That most of them were Antagonists in some point or
other against some other, of like piety and learning with themselves; Good and
great men are not set beyond mistakes; Nor is it seldom that passion, or
prejudice, or custom biasseth their judgments wide of truth; Like Eli, a
grave and venerable person, mistaking that for drunkenness in Hannah, which
was devotion; St Peter was dissemblingly 1 Samuel 1. 14.
divided between scandal and conscience from off the Jews and his judgment,
Gal. 2. 11. Acts 10.
in point of eating meats, and conversing with the Gentiles, till God better
informed him; The primitive Christians were dubious and abstaining from many
things under the notion of sin, till they were better informed of Acts 15. 20.
Christian liberty; It Is as easy for the conscience to shrink to an over-nice
and rigid strictness (as, Touch not, taste not, handle not,) Col. 2. 21.
as to be dilated to an over-stretched looseness.

But saving the merited honor and respect I bear to those holy men, what wise
man now urges all the primitive rigors of Discipline; yea or all the tenets of
Doctrine, which the Fathers sometime imposed on Christians, as their several
judgments: No doubt, the Fathers of the Church after the severity of those
times, when Christian Religion was most-what in or very near to the furnace of
persecution, did worthily study the extern honor and gravity of it, so as to
decry all those costlinesses, delicacies and softnesses, bestowed on clothes,
or houses, or bodies, or heads and faces, (which must daily prepare to mary
with the flames and fagots) as superfluous and less seasonable, and so no way
suitable to that Christian simplicity, mortifiednesse, modesty and humility,
which those times required, which gave daily summons to mortification, by the
sad and frequent alarums of others sufferings, and their own being exposed to
like hazards of death or persecution: So this of auxiliary beauty (among other
things) they might possibly then decry and deny with some vehemence to
Christian women, not as absolutely evil, and in it self unlawful at all
times, but as inexpedient and needless at those times; when (as precise
virgins) they had more need prepare the lamps of their heart for Christ, than
the beauty of their looks and faces for their suitors or husbands. Things may
be less wholesome to some tempers and constitutions, which yet are not in
themselves poisonous or pernicious.

How zealous were some of them for vowed and perpetual Virginity, even so
far, as sometime to speak less honorably of Marriage; yea to some bitterness
against second marriages? How do they exclaim against false hasire or peruques,
so against braiding or laying forth, and powdering, or coloring their hair?
Some against cutting or shaving close the beard; against cost, splendour, and
curiosity of clothes and diet etc.

Not that they thought these things evil in themselves, but they observed many
Christians made an evil (that is, a scandalous and unseasonable) use of them,
the abuse of which was not so easily regulated, as the use was utterly decryed;
Nor do they (as far as ever I could perceive, by what is urged out of the
Fathers by our English writers) oppose things of this nature, argumentatively,
so much as Oratoriously; Not denying the nature and use of them to some
persons, in some cases, and at some times, but only, that usual pride,
levity, or impudicity, which they observed or suspected in many, who (as they
represent it) used then such gross and dangerous dawbings of black, red, and
white, as wholly changed the very natural looks, and difference of the person;
Nor did it seem to them only vain and superfluous in most; also irreligious in
many; but very fulsome and even uncomely in all, that used so loathsome
fashions.

. Besides the greatest strictnesses of those holy Fathers seems to have been to
votaries or resolved virgins, in whom they thought it a kind of Apostasy to
return to those secular toys and curiosities of externe ornaments, and study
of worldly beauty, when they made a profession to abandon them, and to live
far above them, as studious, not to please men, but God.

Nor is it strange if those men, who generally chose celibacy or single life,
were more tetricall, or less indulgent in such things to women; whom they most
feared, because they less loved, or used their company; yea whose conversation
they sought wholly to avoid; casting what damps they could on their own
inclinations, by their distances from them, and Declamations not only against
all feminine arts and ornaments, but even against the very sex. Yet in their
more calm temper there is no question but they made great difference, as to
times and persons, in the use of the same things.

As the several censures and opinions of the Fathers must give way to the
Scriptures authority (out of which nothing of validity is produceable against
Auxiliary beauty:) So they may (without injury) be looked upon, as far inferior
to the joint suffrages or resolves of Counsels; without whose concurrence with
the Fathers sense, I can hardly think any thing a sin, or violation of that
modesty required by Ecclesiastical Canons, and the Discipline of the Ancient
Churches; From whom I find nothing ever cited by any writer against the use of
these feminine helps of complexion, as by a joint suffrage and determination of
the Church against them; Either looking upon such toys, below the
animadversion of so venerable Assemblies; or leaving them to the freedom of
every one, whose virtuous or vicious minds best resolved the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of them in particular cases and consciences: Whose nature and use
in general was (as all outward things) indifferent. I find no woman (otherwise
unblameable) either censured or excommunicated for her coloring and dressing:
Nor did the ancient Confessors, or Casuists (any more than at this day) either
examine or condemn the use of tincture and complexion to the face as any sin
in it self, but only in reference to the mind and end of the use.

Private men's opinions may not charge the soul with sin, in things of outward
use and fashion, where Scriptures and Councels are silent.

. Nothing is more usual than for single persons (otherwise very learned and
godly) to be strangely wedded, and vehemently addicted to their own wonted
modes, their customary opinions and fashions; of which they at length begin to
make some conscience, as if they ought ever to approve, and never to recant
what they have long liked or disliked, esteeming those things next to sin,
which are new, and unwonted to them.

. Which temper (I think) was not only observable in many of those holy Fathers,
whose venerable ashes I leave to their rest, (hoping to find them more friends
and suffragants to the virtues and modesty of sober women, than enemies to
their beauty, or condemners of those things, they sometime innocently use, to
conceal the defects, or help the infirmities of their faces in point of beauty)
But (I am sure) nothing has been more frequent, than such high and affected
severities taken up by some of the later and lesser edition of Divines, who
would be counted great Reformers of the times, because they were vehement
censurers and condemners of what ever they listed to dislike or not to fancy:
Thus many of them have not only followed the tract of some of the ancients, in
their strictnesses urged upon women, as to their dresses, fashions, clothes and
adornings; but they have horribly inveighed (at first) against many other
things of new, yet civil and convenient use, as against starch, especially if
yellow, (as if there were sin in that color) more than in white, or blew, to
which at length they were so reconciled, that they affected to use nothing more
in their ruffes and linen: How earnest were some preachers against careless
ruffes, yea and against set ruffes too? Both which, they (at length) came to
wear, rather than pickadilloes (which they thought had too much of the
Courtier) or little plain bands, which they liked not, because the Jesuits
wore such; How was Tobacco mistaken by many great Masters of the Pulpit and
peoples ears, before they generally fell to taking of it themselves, fancying
(at last) that they never had more devout meditations or sharp inventions, then
those which were begotten, or at lest brought forth by the midwifery of a pipe
of good Tobacco; which at last perfumed their clothes, their books, their
studies, and their Sermons: What enemies were some Minsters to peruques, to
high crowned or broad brimmed hats, to long clokes and Canonical coats, and
now to long cassocks, since the Scotch jump is looked upon as the more military
fashion, and a badge of a Northern and cold reformation?

. How have some cried down all dancing, which most sober persons now use? Many
are at discord with all music and singing with art and curiosity, in sacred
psalmody; from which neither David nor the devoutest Jews of old, nor the holy
Christians of former times did abhor; yea the highly adorned it, and devoted
it to Gods glory, as one of his special and diviner gifts to mankind; which
the Church knows best how to improve.

. How bitter have some been against all Iusory use of Lots, or any play with
chance; So against all playing at Cards, though merely recreative, as Bowls
and other sports are? Lastly against all Usury, or profit upon interest from
dry money, how vehement has the torrents of some men's judgments been? which,
yet, others reconcile of late (by some distinctions) with Gods Laws and a good
conscience, as finding that civil commerce cannot else be well carried on.

Some can digest the first fruits of a simple usary upon the principal, but by
no means use upon use from the same hand; which yet is but the same thing with
the first, unless it alter the case to put out the interest money to a new
hand, or continue it in the old.

. Such hasty and over early blossoms of precipitant censures and preposterous
zeal do often arise in very godly minds, out of a principle, not only venial,
but so far commendable, as it argues a cautious tenderness of offending God;
Which blossoms yet do often fall off in time upon further trial of truth, as
abortives to truth, never bearing ripe fruits, as to any thing of grace and
virtue, though they flourish (for a while) in the warm opinions and devout
fancies of some Ministers and others, till time correct and cool them; or
contrary custom prevailing confute them, as to those clamors they made against
them for sins, and a good conscience; when indeed the chief thing, that moved
their passion and prejudice was but unwontednesse and tradition, with want of
due consideration.

. And certainly if those eminent Heroes of Religion, (the ancient Fathers) will
give us leave to stand as Pygmies on the shoulders of such Giants; that we may
the better take a free, full and advised prospect of their private opinions;
much more freedom may I, or any one take to examine the magisteriall censures
and Anathemas, which those men use, who are of later edition and lesser print,
who bear themselves in some things, (as in this case of ayding the complexion
by any tincture) as much upon the name and authority of the Fathers, the
Fathers, as the Jews did upon The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord;
when yet they urge neither pregnant reason, Jer. 7. 4.
nor any Scripture proof from the storehouses of the Fathers, but only follow
them more by a credulous easiness of spirit, than by any discerning or
convincing power; using their bows and powder, rather than their arrows and
bullets; more repeaters of their popular Oratorious vehemencies than urgers and
confirmers of their argumentative strength; which either they find not in those
Fathers who have been vehement as to this point; or else they cannot tell how
to manage it.

. Yea I am informed by a person of learned integrity, with whom I conferred often
in this case, that one man of great repute, namely Peter Martyr, is so partial
an enemy against what he calls painting of the face, in any sort or degree,
that writing upon the occasion of Jezebels fate, against this Peter Martyr
Comment on the Kings.
practice in women, he not only urges, but stretches to a falsity, a story
out of St Jerome, as if it were a dreadful hammer by which to demolish all
painting, when indeed S. Jerome does not in that place so much as mention
painting the face; when he tells Laeta (in order to her daughters education,
becoming an intended Nun or Recluse) of a woman, who, having designed her
daughter to be a votary virgin, without her husbands consent; was by the
husbands command moved to alter the child's veiled dress, and over-grave habit,
to the wonted fashion and civility of other young Gentlewomen; as to clothes,
hair, gemms, etc For which deed (says S. Jerome; for painting her daughters
face, says Peter Martyr, besides the text and story) the mother was the
following night terrified with dreams and visions, and threatened with speedy
death, if she did not restore her daughter to the former mode of votall
habiliments.

. Truly the report seems fitted to the pulse and bent of those times, which
were high venerators of vowed virginity; But it is strange that a wife should
be threatened by God with death, for obeying her husband in such a thing; the
contrary to which ought not to have been carried so far on, without, or against
the husbands and fathers will: But for the more odium of the business, this
story is brought in by P. Martyr against all painting of the face, under the
name, but not from the true authority of S. Jerome.

. Your LaP farther instanceth in one of our later English Divines, to whom I am
no stranger: Mr. Downam a person of primitive piety, and great learning (no
doubt) whom who so shall read in the place you cited, crying down with so great
fervor all painting the face, (for so he calls, and counts all helps to
complexion) must needs be (as I was) much startled: fearing lest so great
Ordinances discharged with so much noise and terror, should be laden not with
powder only, to scare poor souls, but also with deadly bullets, to dant and
destroy them: Yet with the peace and favor of so good a man, even my
simplicity can easily discern (having often seriously perused that his vehement
discourse and rough Satyr against all helps of beauty) that there is more of
sound and terror, than of force or execution in what he there says against
them.

. The good man rather took it for granted, and indisputable, than seriously
pondered the grounds of other men's, and his own heavy censures, which rank it
in the number of absolute, and utter sins, of a gross nature; Never so much as
distinguishing between the thing done, and the end or mind of those that do it;
as if the sober relief of a pallid infirmity, or the modest study of outward
decency, were the same things with levity, pride, and wantonness. At the same
rate he might have inveighed against quenching ones thirst, or drinking to
cheerfulness, because of the sordid consequences of drunkenness, riot, and
debauchery.

. This worthy man, (after S. Cyprian) calls all painting or coloring the face,
an Invention of the devil; But he proves no such thing by any due reason or
authority, only he seems in this case to believe (what otherwise he wholly
disbelieves) that old fabulous fancy, which they say some of the Fathers had
from the Jews, of Devils being Incubusses, and that in their courtships to
women, they gratified them with these inventions which might help their
decaying beauties, and make those wanton devils still inamored of them; Which
frivolous and odious reflection (fitted to vulgar passions and capacities) has,
as no certainty, so no weight of truth in it; unless he fondly imagine with
some, that the race of the Giants before the flood, were of this progeny; which
(it is said) the Sons of God (whom he must interpret devils) begat Genesis 6. 4.
of the daughters of men, whom they took, because they were fair; and to whom
they contributed (it seems) this rare art of painting the face, to keep them
lovely. What sober person can dote so far, as to allow any such monstrous
fictions, and more monstrous productions?

. As for the rarity of these Inventions which by any color or tincture serve
to help the ruddinesse of the face or the liveliness of complexion; neither
Mr. Downame, nor the Fathers needed to rake the Devils Skull to find them:
Alas, it is a most easy, and obvious thing; hoth as to the things used, and
also as to the fancy of applying them to the skin or face, as well as in any
other ordinary ways of dying, coloring, or painting of things: Nothing is and
ever has been more natively common (as I formerly told your LaP) to all
nations in the world, than men and women painting and adorning themselves with
several colors, juices and tinctures, being an ordinary custom, and as
exposed to humane art and experience, as the stayning or dying of any clothes,
the making of any pictures or statues; To which the various and communicable
colors, afforded by Nature, in feathers, flowers, roots, herbs, beans,
stalks and wood, in flies also and fishes, do daily invite mankind to the
exercise of their art, and fancies in applying of them.

But (Madam) how sad a thing is it, to see grave men urge in matters of sin and
cases of conscience those putid fables and ridiculous fictions, which
themselves do not believe? What is this but like the rattling of hail upon
tiles, which neither wets with moisture, nor pierces with its strokes and
noise; Such downy feathers, as these, will never make up the ponderousness of
a millstone? And such as every gross sin must be (which sinks to hell) both by
its offense against Gods will, and by that shame, guilt, or conviction which
rises in our own consciences either before, in, or after the commission.

. His other heap of arguments are only assertory, not probatory: As, that it is
an absolute sin, in the nature and use of it; Which he should have made good by
some plain proofs, and pregnant instance of right reason or Gods word against
it: which he does not so much as offer at in the least kind; when we all know
that the formal malignity, or evil in all sin, is from the pravity or
contrariety of our wills against the holy will of God; either as revealed in
Scripture, or by the common light of Nature.

. In which last, what he seems to urge, as to the reproching and mocking of
God, the deception of others, and the belying our selves, I have already
answered, when your LaP instanced in them; Showing your LaP, that there is no
more done in this mending or ayding of the complexion, by sober minds and
modest persons, than is done in many other practices, of humane art and
invention; which help crookedness, lamenesse, dimnesse of sight, or any other
defect and deformity in nature; which no man is so foolish, as to impute to the
devils invention, or to count them any burtfull imposturage, injury or
indignity against God, our selves, or others.

. For his fear lest women should rather poison, or mar their faces, eyes, and
teeth by the use of such things, as help their looks; His care and charity to
women in this, is not so great, as his ignorance is of those innocent and
harmless applications, which are far enough from what rusticall jealousies
might possibly fear and imagine; as if women were so mad of a little color,
that they will venture upon uncorrected Quicksilver, untamed Mercury, the
invincible Aquafortis, or any such pernicious drugs; Which yet (sure) may be
used in their several kinds and qualities, without sin, if they had a
facemending virtue in them; But it is certain that tincture which women generally
use to quicken their complexion withal, is as safe and inoffensive to their
own health, as any flower; So that from this error can be no true ground
against it, as if it were self-indangering, and so offensive both to God or man.

. Lastly, for his censure, that all are proud, lewd, vain, and wanton women,
who use it in any kind, to any end; Truly it is as harsh, as rash: Nor is it to
be justified as to the truth of the assertion, if any ever did use it soberly,
and modestly; least of all can it hold in Christian charity, unless he had
known the hearts and intents of all those that ever used it, to be such as he
there expresses, when (alas good man!) it is very probable, he knew very few,
it may be not any one, that used it; Possibly he, with other men of the same
brow and severity, might suspect some unjustly, (which is ordinary in those
that cannot live well without censuring others for something evil) No doubt, he
highly approved others for very virtuous and good Ladies, who used some art and
quickening, while he was never the wiser, nor they the worse, either in his
opinion, or their own innocent intentions.

So that leaving the cloud and crowd of Authors and writers, of Fathers and
preachers, whom I shall ever respect and value, according to what I find of
godly wisdom and Christian charity in them; your LaP, must give me leave,
rather to look to the more sure word of God, and that light of right Reason,
which enlightens everyman, one in the world, both in the Church, as to the
knowledge of good and evil, sin and sanctity, vice and virtue: If Fathers or
others speak not according to this light, all their Oratorious polishings and
shinings, are but false beams, as the glistering of gloe-wormes; from humane,
not divine authority; which only can set a stamp of sin, upon our actions.
Neither the wit nor tongue of any or many men, can be a mint capable to coin
the least farthing sin, much less so large a piece and medaile as this man
pretends to make of any helping our complexion; which seems to him to be as the
talent of lead cast into the Ephah, where the woman fate; when Z^ch. 5. 8.
truly he proves it not by any weight of arguing (and bare words are but as
wind) to be so much as the dust of the balance; And truly I cannot yet see, but
that in the height of religious severity, it be put among those venial
vanities of humane life, of which no stricter account in point of morality need
to be given or exacted, but only that divine indulgence by which God in
innocent freedoms, as a father to his children, gives us leave to adorn and
please our selves, without any of his displeasure.

Nor may the violence and bitterness of some good men's censures, against all
auxiliary beauty seem strange to us; For nothing is more easy and frequent than
antique and popular errors, which either cry things up or down as some one or
more persons of eminency first fancied and opined; From whom, without any
further trial many receive for current, all that is stamped with their name;
Thence it grows so common and customary by the authority of time and
multitude, that even learned and sober men in following ages, are content to
swim down the common stream rather than trouble themselves to cross or
question such vulgar, and therefore authentic errors.

Which, I remember, my Lord your brother in one of his many excellent
discourses (meriting a far better memory and tongue than mine) observed to be
so frequent, both in politic and pious affairs, in things civil and
Ecclesiastical, because very few examine the marrow and inside of things, but
take them upon the credit of customary opinings: And what they hold even in
capite and co de too, is more by a superficial tenor of credulity, than any
pregnant proofs, and good evidences of Reason or Religion.

. Which easiness, if it be excusable to humane infirmity, in lesser matters,
where there may be an adherence in persuasion or practice to either side,
without any sin or notorious error, yet, in things highly charged with sin,
even to a more facinorous and notorious degree (as this of any painting and
complexioning the face is, by this worthy man and others) grave and godly
Divines should be very wary, what they affirm or deny; Least they be over
righteous, beyond what God imposes, or severe beyond Gods Eccl. 7. 16.
smitings, or uncharitably lay either heavier pressures on the consciences, or
harsher censures on the actions of others, than God himself does.

Men of never so eminent learning and piety may not either add or detract from
the word of God: least they be found liars, as Solomon speaks Prove. 30. 6. Nor
ought they to multiply sins by unreasonable, and unseasonable severities,
beyond what God has done; For such passionate and precipitant ways of
censuring and condemning in case of sin (where pregnant convictions in Reason,
or Scripture are wanting) besides, thatthey are most unworthy of a cautious and
well advised Divine; who (being in Gods stead, to people, ought not to pretend
Gods authority, where he can produce none) do not only charge the consciences
of Christians with needless burdens, and binds them to unjust bondages, but
they very much (also) baffle the credit, or honor of Religion; highly
diminishing the reverence due to the Ministerial profession, as to that
binding and loosing power of the Keys, which is principally committed Mat. 18.
18.
to them; For nothing makes people less prone to observe, or more ready to
disbelieve their words, as to the avoiding real sins, than when they find
them, so loose, superficial and but verbally imperious in feined, and forced
enormities, which are not convinced to have in them (if rightly tried and
stated) any iniquity against God or man, being injurious to neither, where the
heart is upright, as it easily may be, and no doubt always is, in modest
women, who generally use in some degree or other (as they best fancy) some
things, that they think best set off their outside and handsomeness to the
world.

Furthermore from such magisteriall rigors, infinite doubts, and scruples are
raised among weaker consciences, who dare less trust to their own judgments,
while they doubtingly use, or do those things, which they are loath to want, and
against which they see nothing proved, as evil; yet are they scrupulous and
afraid to use them, because of so much prejudice and clamor against them; So
that hence grows their snare, and sin too, while they want that faith in using
them, which is necessary to justify, not the nature of the thing done, but the
conscience of the doer; as the Apostle requires, Romans 14. 23. Whereas, Romans 14.
23.
in reference to the nature of the thing done: The Apostle assures us, that the
Kingdom of God, as to gracious power and peace, consists not in any of these
things of external use (as meat or drink and so clothes, colors, etc) Nor
ought the conscience in these to be set upon the rack and tainter, but rather
acquainted with its liberty, which being kept within the bounds of modesty,
sobriety, and Romans 14. 17.
innocence, needs not be scared with the scruple of sin.

. And indeed in this very case of Complexioning, I have heard, that many
learned and wise men, both at home and abroad who are more remote from vulgar
easiness, and credulity, do forbear to condemn (as sin) the use of those
things that are ingenuously, and innocently helpful to the beauty of modest
women, but, they rather examine, the true state of things, both in the nature
of what is used; (which must needs be good, as n the order of Gods creatures)
also as to the mind and intent of the doer, or user of them. accordingly they
determine; That all colorings added to the face, are so far sin or not sin
in the conscience of he doer; as their minds are morally, and intentionally
disposed, either to modest and ingenuous decency, which is commendable; or to
Lewdness, pride, and lubricity, which are blameable; And as they find the
things used to be in the cabanet, or storehouse of nature; Also the use of them
to be no where forbidden in Reason, or Scripture, as a relief to such defects,
or infirmities of beauty, as may befall the face: So they resolve that
according to the qualities and aptitudes, which are seen in those things for
such ends, they may lawfully be used, with humility, charity, purity, and
thankfulness; without any offense to any relations, wherein we stand obliged,
to God, our neighbors, or our selves.

We see in many cases that time and calmer considerations, together with
different customs, which (like the tide or flood) insensibly prevail over
both manners and minds of men, do often take off he edge and keenesse of men's
spirits, against those things, whereof they sometimes were great abhorrers,
reconciling their mortal feuds, and wearing off their popular prejudices: Few
men's judgments are so died in grain, bu^ they will fade, and discolor; being
most what only dipped by vulgar easiness, in common opinions: Nor do I see any
thing unlikely, but that upon second thoughts, and more exact view, a fair
moderation, and civil atonement may be mediated between Ladies Countenances
and their Consciences, by the intercession of judicious and religious persons,
both Ministers and others, who dare to be wise beyond the vulgar; and who have
patience to consider better of this case, than has been wonted.

It will (no doubt) appear, how little or no ground there has been for so
great reproaches or terrors of sin, in a case, no way more dangerous to the
soul, or body of a virtuous woman, than all other civil, and allowed
Ornaments are: Where by adding a little quickening and luster to her looks, she
is no way hindered from the Love of God or her neighbor, in chaste and
charitable ways; That where no cost is lavished; no time wasted, no good duty
neglected, no vice nourished, no virtue depressed, but only a civil decency
studied (which was never denied to holy women, (in ways agreeable to nature)
there can be no enmity to grace, nor compliance with sin.

10. Obje. Painting the face very scandalous, and so unlawful
BUt good Madame; Suppose Artificial beautifying of the face, be not in it self
absolutely unlawful, but may in some countries and some cases be used by some
persons privately, and soberly, without the confidence of sinning against God;
Yet what shall we say to the scandal and offense it gives, when known to many
zealous preachers and professors here in England, whose spirits are much
grieved, and offended, if they do but suspect (how much more if they palpably
discern) any Lady, or Gentlewoman professing godliness to use any paint or
tincture to help their complexions; Ought not (I beseech you) all worthy women
therefore abstain wholly from it, because it is a thing prone to grieve the
spirits of good people; Although they do not think it absolutely a sin: Is it
not better to want a little color in the cheeks, than to damp Gods spirit in
any ones heart; or to offend one of those little ones, as Christ speaks, Mat.
18. 6
by abating that good hope, and joy, they had in our graces.

The Apostles rule is, even to those, who were (as he was) fully persuaded of
the lawfulness Romans 14. 15.
of many things, as to their consciences (that they were of free and sinlesse
use in themselves) yet (says he) if thy brother be grieved, or stumbleth, or
is offended, or made weak by the use and exercise of this thy freedom, Charity
here forbids thee, to use this thy liberty, least thou destroy by it, those for
whom Christ died: Though things are pure, and lawful in their nature, and in
Gods general permission, yet they become then evil and unreformed, when they
give uncharitable scandals to others; So that the point of scandal (which is in
this very great and ordinary) seems bar sufficient, to keep off all painting
or artificial tincture from the faces of pious and charitable women.

Answ.
THe point of scandal, (which your LaP now makes your refuge in this dispute)
either given or received, has like a Labarinth so many windings and turnings,
so may perplexed cautions and distinctions, that it seems rather a maze to
loose the mind in, than any fair retreat, where judgment and conscience may
repose and secure themselves; None is so simple a sophister in disputing, about
things of dubious and indifferent nature, but when he is driven by reason and
scripture, from his strong holds, of prejudices and confidences, when he sees
the thundering Canons of his censures and Anathemas dismounted, or cloyed, he
then retreats to this of Scandal, and earths himself in this borough:
pleading, that he is scandalized with what you do, (or if he but suspect you do
it) though he give you no reason, against what you do; nor can indeed prove,
that you do, what (it may be) he suspects; Thus ignorance, superstition and
suspicion, will be ever overawing truth and Christian liberty, both in private
persons, and in public Societies, or Churches; Imperiously injoyning others
to forbear the use of they liberty, merely because this or that poor soul
says they are offended, though they give no reason why.

Thus the Pleaders of Scandal, I ke Soldiers of Fortune are engaging in every
quarrel, where they stake nothing against the liberty, peace, order, and
decency of others, but only their private fancy, opinion, and dislike; Who yet
are many times, most prodigal in giving others great and public scandals, by
using or disusing such things, as others no less quarrel at; often denying
obedience to public and lawful authority, in those things of which they make
any scruple, imperiously challenging this liberty to themselves; yea glorying
in their scandalous refractories to public order and constitutions; yet, they
deny this liberty to others in the same, or like cases; about things dubious
and indifferent, concerning which there is no precise, or express will of God
declared, but they are left to prudentiall freedoms, as to private men's use;
till the consent and wisdom of the public has confined and determined them
to one way for order sake, and uniformity, whereto private freedom (still free
as to the opinion of the nature of things) ought yet humbly and charitably to
conform it self, as to public practice; For the avoiding of public scandal,
and dissension; by reason of their deformity.

Between superstitious and insolent spirits, (who either dislike all that
others do different from them, or enjoyne others to tread in none but their
steps and to dance after their pipe) true Christian liberty (as between two
thieves) is crucified; Between the upper and the neither millstone, of Scandal
given, or taken, it is (together with Christian Charity) so ground to powder,
that a sober Christian has little left him, to do, say, or enjoy, whereat some
or other will not take offense.

Not only bad things, or doubtful, but even good things, and the very best,
are sometimes to some persons scandalous: So was Gal. 2.
the believing, yet ceremonious Jew, to the believing Gentile, and the
believing but inceremonious Gentile to the believing Jew, Christ himself, and
the whole tenor of the Gospel was a stumbling block to the Jew, and
foolishness 1 Cor. 1.
to the Gentile; Papists are offended with many things which protestants hold
and do, and contrarily, Protestants cry out of the scandals Papists give them;
So the most factions and schisines in the Church shelter their rents and
dissentions under the shield of Scandal by them taken, less minding the
scandals by themselves given to others; by which (as madmen with swords) they
lay about them, and smite all that come near them.

There is nothing so sober and modest, so civil and decent, so sacred and
solemn, at which ignorant, or capricious, or proud, and imperious spirits will
not take offense, who like nothing in use and custom, never so ancient and
innocent, unless they have first enacted or settled it, they must be fathers or
godfathers to it, either begetting or confirming it, else they will cry it down
as scandalous, spurious, impious, popish, and antichristian; Pretending they
have more cause to be scared with other men's shadows, and ceremonies, which
they fancy to be shaped, like Bears and Lions, than others have to be offended
with their paws, and jaws, the sharp teeth, and nails of those real beasts
and birds of prey, which they carry about them, calling their own rapines
religious, and their very sacriledges sacred: Yet highly offended, if others do
by word or deed vindicate their own liberties, customs and constitutions,
never so decent and ingenuous, against the rude novelties, and riotous
invasions of the others supercilious fierceness and injuriousnesse: one is
scandalized at my using my liberty though without any prescribing, urging, or
injoyning upon them; I am no less offended at their invading my liberty, by
needless stricknesses and uncharitable censures; which though they wound not
my conscience, yet they seek to weaken my credit.

Out of which perplexity or streights of scandals, both on the right and left
hand, I know no shorter or safer way to redeem a sober Christian, that desires
to live void of offense before God and man: Than seriously to consider every
thing (before he either practice it himself, or censure it in an other) by the
true notions and internal principles of good or evil, as morally and
conscientiously considered: The only way, as David tells us to cleanse our own
(or others) ways, Psalm. 119. 9.
is by taking heed to Gods word, regarding what in his precepts negative or
affirmative, either pleases or displeases him, whose revealed will is a
sufficient and infallible rule of all requisite holiness: According to which,
as I have just cause to be offended with my self, and others, in what I see my
self or they do, against the express will of God: So, where this does not
appear by any Scripturall reason, and demonstration, I have no cause, either to
scruple in my self, or to suspect as a scandal in others that, against which I
see nothing declared by God, but a natural, civil and ingenuous liberty left
me and others; which is always to be kept within bounds of modesty and
discretion, which sober and unblamable conversation is enough to satisfy minds
truly humble and charitable, who love not as Salamanders to live in the flames
of contention, or like Caterpillars to make their cobwebs on bushes and thorns.

And however in things assuredly lawful, (as to my private conscience) a
charitable and discreet tenderness becomes the modesty and gentleness of a
Christian, toward others, in those things which have possessed and persuaded
men either by contrary customs, or prejudices, and (it may be) by temporary
precepts of God, as in the case of Jewish ceremonies and externe observations,
(of whose abrogation some were not soon or easily satisfied) Also in the case
of eating things offered to Idols, (which some scrupled out of an abhorrence of
all Idolatry) which God had strictly forbidden: In these 1 Cor. 10.
and the like cases (I say) a condescending, for a while, and private
forbearance for fear of giving scandal is very fit, till I have used those
means which might best convince and instruct them of mine and their liberty,
given us now by God; Yet, if they carelessly, proudly, peevishly, and
obstinately resist or repel the pregnancy of my reasons, without giving any
valid answer to them, or producing ought of right reason, or scripture for
their continued scruples, scandals, and jealousies: They are henceforth to be
looked upon and treated, not as weak, but wilful.

Nor can I think it the duty of a Christian, for ever to indulge their folly,
fondness, and pertinacy of such forbearing to use those things, for which he
brings many pregnant reasons, from the nature, end, and aptitude of things,
from their own want, and capacity, also from Gods permission, of which I
presume where I find no prohibition, when as they produce little or nothing,
beyond a blind credulity a bayardly confidence, or animperious insolence, which
delights to find fault with others, and to domineer over them in some petty
things, for which at best they urge passion, prejudice, custom, other men's
opinions, or such popular stuff, of which there is no end, in which, what
reason cannot (at present) time will afterward easily confute, that crosnesse
and peevishness which often transports men against many things beyond the
measure of Reason or true Religion. As I have heard for certain of a Minister
of no small print and repute among the people, who took great offense at the
great sleeves of a Ladies new fashioned Gown, calling them antichristian,
ungodly, strange apparel, and such, as the Lord was displeased with; yet
within one year this good man's wife was in the same fashion, without any
scandal to her supercilious husband; So crasie are some men's judgments, and
so easy their censures, as to matters of scandal: where Novelty or
wontednesse sway more with them, than either Reason or Religion. Nothing less
becomes a grave and godly Christian than to multiply needless scruples and
scandals.

As to the pretended scandal which some say they take from women's use of any
Auxiliary beauty, truly where modest and sober persons use it discreetly, the
scandal cannot arise, either from the nature of the thing done, or the mind
and manners of the doer; (which in all things appear worthy of a good
Christian:) Nor can it arise easily from the certainty of their knowledge, who
are offended, but only from their impertinent curiosity, and suspicion: As the
first is rude and unwelcome; so the other many times false, always
unnecessary: It is seldom that any ownes their art to them, nor is it often,
that these inquisitive prayers can certainly conclude that to be used, which
they are so jealous of: So that if they could forbear their uncomely
inquisitivenesse, and impertinent curiosity, their scandal taken would soon
cease; which is more in their own eyes, than others faces, where any such thing
is soberly and discreetly used, without any haughtiness and affectation of
looks, or wantonness of manners; I believe for the most part, such things are
so used by all ingenuous persons, that these morose Inspectors of Ladies faces,
are never the wiser, unless they have more perceptive eyes than ever I had:
But if it were owned and confessed to them, what I pray are they the worse, or
why offended? Since neither have any of them as yet proved it to be a sin;
either from any positive Law of Gods word, or from any necessary inordinacy and
immorality of mind inseparable from the use of such things: Nor are they by
another use of it either urged, or tempted to use it, further than they want
or approve it: As for that depravednesse of mind which they fear may attend the
use of these helps of handsomeness: It is as objectable against all those
things, which either native beauty, or art afford; whereof no wise man makes
any scruple, yet may they be as much occasions to sin as this, whereof they are
so cautious: Evil minds as foul stomachs turn the best food to corrupt
humors; But we must not therefore starve our selves, by forbearing good
victuals.

. The work then that grave Ministers and other sober Christians have to do in
this and the like cases, of externe use of things; is not presently to cry down
every thing as wicked and abominable, because they are at first, through
inconsideration or unwontednesse scandalized at them, but seriously to examine,
what cause they have to be so scared and scandalized as from any moral evil
pregnant and inherent in the nature, or use of things: And accordingly to state
both their own censures, and others consciences: If nothing be found justly
offensive, they may not from fancy, or custom call that unclean, which God
has made clean: But rather Acts 10. 15.
banish away those sinister and silly scandals, which arise from the darkness,
weakness, or wilfulness of their own minds, which are no just bars against
another liberty, in things lawful; At which no wise person will be, nor good
body ought to be offended.

And in cases of so private and retired use of such things, as these are by
which women preserve or advance the handsomeness of their looks, wherewith
none are acquainted, and of which none can be assured, unless they list who
use them, as I see no cause to own the use of any such thing to them, (whom I
find not to have judgment or charity sufficient to interpret, or bear such
things well) so nor have I any reason to ask their leave, nor more to be shaken
with these scandals, which are needlessely taken by them, not willingly given
by me: Though others, rather out of obstinacy than sorupulosity, out of
peevishness, more than tenderness, do pretend scandal, more than they prove
it; yet, my care must be, in the use of such things seriously to assert my own
freedom as to my conscience; by being rightly persuaded both of the
Lawfulness of the thing, and looking to the innocence of my own intentions in
the use of it: Thus the Apostle tells us; Some Christians Romans 14. 5. 1 Cor. 10.
25.
lawfully might observe a day to the Lord, and eat meats offered to Idols, as
to their private practice, notwithstanding others doubted, and would be
offended, if they were acquainted with their so doing: Which yet was no
hinderance to another private liberty, grounded on Gods grand charter and
donation, which is, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; Nor is
any thing in nature denied us, where the use of it falls under the regulation
of reason, grace and virtue, which in these things of artificial beauty as in
all externe ornaments and enjoyments are strictly required, and being exactly
observed, do abundantly vindicate both the goodness of the things in nature
and the lawfulness of them as to mine or any others use of them.

11. Obje. Painting the face a thing of ill report, and so not to be followed.
1 Timothy 3. 7.
BUt suppose (Madam) these artificial helps of women's beauty, should not be in
the nature and use of them absolutely sinful: so as to violate the conscience,
yet, since it cracks women's credits, and exposes them to reproach, which the
Apostle calls the snare of the devil; It ought to be wholly avoided, not only, as
to others scandal and perception, but also as to our own private use; Since
the Apostles tenderness bids us, not only provide things honest before all
men, but also to follow things of good report; That we may not only be good,
but preserve the fragrancy Phil. 4. 8.
of a good name, which gives a great sweetness Prove. 22. 1.
to goodness, and is, as perfume to a good garment, or as incense to the
Temple: Consequently we ought to avoid those things, which are under any cloud
of infamy, or blasted generally with an ill report; (Though not so notoriously
convicted of immorality) I am sure the art and mode of adding any tincture or
color to the face or complexion, generally hears ill with us though it show
never so well done: and is not so much to the advantage of women's aspects, as
to the disadvantage of their reputation and honor, which is, and has been the
sense almost of all people in all times, that had any remarque for civility and
piety, yea the vulgar simplicity, is every where severe against those, that are
but suspected to use any such arts: No Lady or Gentlewoman is so commendable
for her piety, chastity, and charity; Eccl. 1^. 1.
But this comes in as a dead fly in a precious confection, when it is
suggested; O but she painteth; A little false color, though but fancied,
discolours all her other luster: Because it makes such generally esteemed, as
the cheats, deceivers and impostors of mankind; The greatest hypocrites and
Jugglers, because they use artifice and falsity in that, which they pretend,
not to say or to do, but to be; What credit can they deserve in other things
(which are far inferior to themselves) when they are not upright or sincere,
as to their very being, but by such disguises and dissemblings, make themselves
a real and visible (though a silent) Lie: Although their tongues do not speak
untruths, yet their hands make lies, and their Rev. 22. 15.
faces proclaim falsehood, which is abominable to God; yea as the Prophet
speaks of other Idolaters, Isai. 44. 20. So these self Idolaters, when they
take the fucus or false colors to sacrifice to the Idol of their looks, may
justly say, Is there not a ly in my right hand: No person but concludes, that
if God threaten to punish strange apparel, he will not spare strange faces,
which in spite of God Zeph. 1. 8.
and Nature will pretend to handsomeness, and make that to be which is not.

Yea, the self-guilt of every one, that uses such arts, though never so
soberly and discreetly (as you advise) is such, that they retire and hide
themselves, from the sight of others, while they apply their face-physicks, by
a strange riddle being ashamed to be seen doing that, which they purposely do,
to make them more worthy to be seen of others, if it be a practice of honesty
or ingenuity, why is it attended with shame and self-guiltinesse? which are
black shadows, following sin and unworthiness, justly meriting to be
entertained by others with reproach and disrepute, when they are self
discountenanced and condemned: As worthy actions bring forth honor, and are
accompanied with a generous boldness, so also they are followed with good
report, and clear reputation, which attends virtue as light does the Sun: If
the light then of Scripture were less clear, against all painting the face,
yet the rule of reputation which is common fame, the law of honor, and light of
nature, seems to discover the uncomelinesse and dishonor of this practice; The
voice of people in this and many other cases, is as the voice of God which is
often to be learned from the common notions, and suffrages, or sense of mankind;
which the Apostle ownes in the case of women's habits and adornings, as law and
dictate of natures teaching them, where Scripture is less evident; 1 Cor. 11.
None but persons impudent or foolish, will neglect what is generally said of
them; next our Consciences and our eyes our credit should be most tender;
especially in our sex, who have always a hard rask to play a second, or after
game at reputation, if a woman once dash upon this rock of reproach, she hardly
ever recrutes her credit (as a grave sober and modest person) though she should
not absolutely shipwreck her conscience with God; And truly Madam this sense
of common fame and repute, has always in the case of Ladies complexioning
arts so overawed me, that I neither durst ever use it, nor take their parts or
excuse those (otherwise very good women) who did or were but thought to use it,
yea, it seemed a note of godliness to me, to declaime bitterly against both
the thing and the persons, suspected or voyced to use it: when indeed I had no
cause to conclude that any such thing was practiced by them, further than I
heard it from more prying eyes and censorious tongues, which as it had been
hard to prove; so it may be there was no such thing: only in this as other
cases fame often over-ballances the truth of things; And our credit depends not
on what we do, but on what others list to think of us, or impute to us, which
should make all wise women the more cautious how they occasion any sinister
reports of themselves; which (like evil spirits) are easier raised, than
allayed; One spark often times kindles that fire, which many tuns of water cannot
quench.

Answ.
MAdame, I find your LaP, as a wary combatant, reserves your main forces to the
last, that so you may with the greater ease and advantage overcome your now
tired and least suspecting adversary; who might hope your strength had by this
time been well nigh quite spent, and exhausted; Truly your LaP seems to have
laid more in this last objection, than in any one you at all urged before, both
as to the weight, and the acuteness of what you allege against all acquired
or artificiallbeauty.

Yet since it is now brought up to so great a case and dispute of Conscience,
whether a sin or no sin; It is fit seriously to examine, whether the strength
of your LaP arguments do answer the show and pomp of them: many things are more
specious, than solid, having like vermin, a pretty kind of nimblenesse; which
comes far short of that real strength or useful activity, which is in more
noble and solemn creatures; I read there were many seeming spots and
appearings of leprosy, which upon the Priests due examination, were not found
to be any Leprosy of uncleanesse, or infection; As I am well pleased to hear
Levit. 13.
the freedom and force of your Laps objections, who omits nothing (I think)
that can with any reason be objected; So I shall be more pleased to find my
self in a capacity of giving your LaP those sober and solid answers, which may
give you most satisfaction; Since nothing is more uncomfortable in cases of
conscience, than to leave the mind tottering and unresolved.

First your LaP, urges against it, the evil report it generally has among
people; which I confess may be so far true, as you only listen, to what is
reported and censured here in your own country, among the mean and inferior
sort of people, for the most part; or those, that are either leaders, or
followers of the popular genius; who are commonly Giants in talk, and pygmies
in judgment; One wise and serious man overwaighs thousands of them, not in
bulk but in value, as one good Diamond does many loads of pebbles vulgar minds
will easily cry up to heaven, or down to hell any thing, either as they have
been accustomed to practice; or as they take it upon trust from those Masters,
who often symbolize, and comply with the vulgar humor and opinion in lesser
matters, that they may have them their disciples, and abetters in greater
interests and concernements.

A little matter will lure or scare the common people into civil and religious
fashions, if they have easy leaders and bold dictators;

I have formerly told your LaP; as to Starch, and Tobacco, so to black hoods,
and all foreign fashions, what potent and popular declamations were used by
some persons against them; So in religious forms, what ebbings and flowings
have been and daily are, as to the vulgar opinion, report and practice of
things: Sometimes seditiously destroying, other while pertinaciously retaining
Images in Churches, so about caps and hoods vestures and gestures, music and
organes, crosses and weathercocks; Steeplehouses and Churches, what fierce
conflicts, and counterscuffles have been among people of various minds; one
side giving a good report, the other imputing evil report to the same things;
Yea the use of public Liturgies or solemn form of Common prayers, singing of
Psalms; The recitation of the Creed, and concluding with the Lords prayer:
These are fallen under various reports, there are that cast so evil report on
them, as they are not pleased, scarce patient, to hear them used by others.

If one had, as many ears, as Argus is said to have had eyes, they would not
suffice, to hear the various reports, which at several times in several
countries are given about the same things, yea the same men and women, alter
their minds and reports, with their age, hamors, interests, company and
adherents, according as the wind blows, either for or against any thing of
civil or religious use.

. What an ill report do some give of Episcopacy, others no better of
Presbytery, and some worst of all of Independency, when yet each of these has
some great sticklers for them and applauders of them: many men, yea most are as
prone to speak evil of what they understand not, as dogs are to bark, at what
they see not, only because they hear others of their kind do so.

Therefore the Apostle (who knew well 1 Cor. 6. 8.
how to pass through good report and evil) does in that place, not only bid
us follow what things are of good report; But also what things are just and
true; For as a false report, (though good and favorable) cannot justify that,
which is truly evil, no more can an evil report justly blast, that which is
in it felf true and good; more than the shout and suffrage of the Jews could
make the golden calf a God, when they unanimously cried, These are thy Gods o
Israel. Exodus 32. 4.


So little heed is to be taken to the vulgar opinion or report of things, as to
the motions of the winds and clouds, which he that will Eccl. 11.4.
sow, Solomon tells us, must not regard; Popular lungs are seldom sound, or
their breath sweet; Their tongues may sometime hit on the right, as Balams ass
once spoke reason, Numb. 22. 22.
when it met with an Angel, but commonly the heard brayes rudely and ill
favouredly; with as little reason, order, or civility, (I need not say piety)
as those Ephesians cried up their great Diana: As if mere plebeian Acts 19. 34.
noise, dust, clamor, credulity and confidence were enough to make a Goddess;
or sufficient either to consecrate or execrate any thing, as divine, or
devilish.

So that the wise and holy Apostles direction to steer a Christians
conversation, by good report, is not to set up any popular vote, or vulgar
suffrage, for Christians card and compass, which he had found to be
vertiginous, heady, inconstant, and for the most part erroneous, one while
crying him up for a God, and presently stoning him for a malefactor; In both
extremes injurious and Acts 14.
false.

But his meaning is, that in things of less pregnant demonstration or rule,
for their morality and piety, Christians should follow in point of credit and
reputation of Religion the test, or suffrage, of wise, and goodmen; though
never so few, and possibly over born by the number of others who are weak and
wilful opiners, but not just arbitraters, of good or evil report, which must
be reduced to the standard of learned judicious, and unpassionate men's
suffrages; who give not their verdit of things, as good or evil, till they
have duly considered the nature of them, apart from vulgar prejudices, and
surmises, or obloquies and reproaches; with whom crucifige is as obvious as
Hosanna* The rabble as we read gave a better report of Barrabas than of Jesus:
The way of Joh. 18. 40.
Christian Religion was at first every where spoken against, as a novel and
pestilent heresy. The Apostle Paul heard no very good report of himself from
some people who cried away Acts 21.
with him, he is not fit to live.

The later ages reformation of Religion in these western Churches had from the
most of people, no very good report (at first) though never so just, and
orderly and discreet, but followed the fate of all things and persons, that
endeavor to rectify or reform vulgar errors, which is, to be evil spoken
of, when they offer the greatest good.

Christians and Christianity was to be martyred in their names, as well as in
their persons and lives; Christ denounces a woe, when all men speak well of
them, and a blessing Luke 6. 26.
when all men speak evil of them falsely: If evil report, as from the vulgar,
(who are very superficial judges of things, like cork, always swimming on the
top, never sinking to the bottom of things) is to be much regarded; for what
monsters should the primitive Christians have been looked upon, capable to
scare all modest and sober persons from coming nigh their doctrine, sacraments
and manners; When they were reported to kill and eat children, to worship an
asses head, to have early and incestuous mixtures in the dark; All which were
as false as they were abominable.

If the Echo of Common report be so often false in the greater matters of
Religion, where it concerns men to be most accurately informed, what they
believe or report: How little heed (I pray) may be taken to the common speech
and persuasion of people, in lesser matters, and in this one particular, which
is but a toy, or mote, in comparison, take it in any natural, civil, or
moral, notions, only the clamor and severe censures of some men, have made it
so considerable, because they urge it so highly upon the consciences of women
both as sin and shame; That truly it now merits exacter scanning, than (it may
be) it ever had, either by the vulgar, or those who are their most plausible
teachers and instructers.

And I believe Madame, that upon review of the evidences of reason or religion,
whereupon the verdict or report of wise and conscientious Christians should be
built, you will find, that the plebeian report, and ordinary sense of all
artificial beauty differs from that, of the more grave and better advised sort
of the world; yea and from the sense of the more serious, and better educated
part of the people in this Church or nation.

As I have been informed of those learned Divines, Scholemen and casuists,
beyond sea, so, I am persuaded the ablest Churchmen in England, in their most
deliberate sentence, dare pass no other censure upon those customs, (which
are so frequent among persons of more elegant culture and fashion, for the
advance of their beauty) than according to the true measures of morality and
honesty, which are the mind and end of the doer: Nor will righteous judges
pass any other report on those ingenuous artifices, which are auxilary to the
faces adorning, more than they do upon those, that adorn the head, hands, feet,
shoulders, or other parts of the body, according to their several infirmities,
necessities or conveniences: Namely that they are then good, when done to good
ends, and evil when to evil intents: According to these moral and internal
principles of good or evil, the censure, judgment, and report of things in
their nature and use, ought to be given, without any regard (in point of
conscience) to what the vulgar easiness and prejudice, or wontednesse either
opines or declares.

Nor is the report and judgment of all wise and every good man, always to be
taken as authentic, by their Oratorious heats, and popular transports, (when
possibly they would deny or discountenance an abuse, which is most unnecessary
in those things, that at best are not very necessary, but only tolerable and
convenient) but by their calm and sedentary determinations, not as standing
before the tribunals of humane opinion and applause, but as appealing to Gods
judgment seat, which is to be set up in every ones Conscience.

So that the Apostles direction, to attend what report or fame things have, is
to be understood cautiously, and strictly; not loosely and vulgarly; People
like unskilful Apothecarys and Mountebanks, often put the titles of Antidotes on
poisons, and poisonous inscriptions on wholesome Antidotes; Neither this nor
the like places in Scripture, which concern good manners, are to be swallowed
without chewing, we must not devour Scripture kernels, with the husk or letter
unbroken, and entire; For by such a fallacy, I might find (hard by your place,
alleged against them) a like place in favor of these feminine artifices,
because the Apostle commands Christians to follow all things that are lovely or
comely; Among which rank and number, Phil. 4. 8.
many esteem these helps to their complexion, else certainly they would never
use them; But this were rather to play with Scripture, than to apply it
seriously; and to make those holy directions, rather as Tennisbals tossed too
and fro in idle disputes, than as nails fastened by the masters of Assemblies,

Object.
BUt your LaP endeavors to give an account, why these complexioning arts
justly fall under such evil report, or so general an infamy among the meaner
sort of people: As being esteemed, a cheat and cosenage, a making and acting a
ly, a self Idolatry, a Christian personated with a Comicall face, fitter for a
stage, than a Church; That from a self shame and secret guilt, it affects
secrecy, that as a dead fly it corrupts the greatest commendations and
perfections of any woman.

Answ.
THese are still but sparks of odium and scorn which fly from the vulgar anvils
and hammers, which commonly both over heat and over labor, what they undertake
to forge or reform.

First then as to the deception, which you call a cheat; Truly it is not so
much in this of helping the palenesse or adding a quickness of complexion to
the face, as it is in other things of lamenesse, and crookedness etc. where
the substance (as it were) and figures, here the color only is a little
altered; yet these are used without any such odious clamors and imputations,
yea they are allowed and commended, as indulgences of humane pity, and
charity, to cover, conceal, or supply any defect or deformity in the outward
man; Which even Mr. Perkins himself allows, who (yet) as to the point of
complexioning Perkins cases of conscience
(which he calls painting) cries it down after the wonted rode, in few words,
and fewer arguments, as against the Laws of Nature, and Scripture, but of which
he produces nothing but that circumstance of Jezebels story, which I have
answered; And indeed that worthy man seems in this as in some other cases of
conscience, rather to pass them over with a popular and plausible easiness,
than to examine the true grounds, or to state them after the proportion of that
great learning and piety, which were in so excellent a preacher, yet should not
any thing (next clearing and stating the saving Fundamentals of Religion) be
more accurately done, than this work of resolving cases of consciences, many
make pretty Preachers, who come very short of profound casuists, or exact
confessors: To both which works he was rarely fitted, where he attended the
controversy, and made the Scruple his business, not contenting himself as in
this, with easy and ordinary answers, which have their authority from
wontednesse, more than truth, and from men more than God.

All ingenuous concealings, or amendings of what is originally or casually
amiss, or seems so, in our bodies and outsides, deserves not the least touch,
much less those black brands of cheating and lying, when only decency and
civility are joined to modesty and humility, which in this case may as easily
be done, as in any, without any indignity to God, or injury to man, yea every
one is well pleased, as in themselves, so in their children, and relations, to
be thus cheated and deluded, by the handsomeness of such a disguise, which
seems most native: The blessed Apostles piety justifies that laudable civility
of 1 Cor. 12, 23.
bestowing more abundant comeliness (by art) there, where nature has bestowed
least on the parts of the body: Nor is it any reproach, or infolence to Gods
workmanship, thus to say, or thus to do. Though, properly speaking nothing in
pure nature is uncomely, which God has formed even as to our vile bodies,
since every part has its form, and aptitude to the good ends appointed, yet
since sinful infirmities have befallen our bodies they are many ways subject
to diseases, defects and deformities, and nothing is denied us in piety and
civility, which may best rectify, remove, hide, or dissemble any such natural
or accidental pravity; For God has not so confined us in religious modesty,
as not to give us leave, to marry art to nature, and to use both those portions
and stocks, which he has given us to his glory and our own, or others sober
and chaste contentment; Nor is it other, than rustic or Adamitick impudence, to
confine nature to it self: and to strip our bodies, of all the additaments of
fair vestments, or other ornaments, of humane art, and invention; Such naked
and forlorn Quakers act a part much more cunning, false and histrionicall, than
those that least affect such pitiful simplicities.

. To call every thing a ly, which we make show of beyond the native propriety
of things, is such a gross and ridiculous severity, as deprive us of all we
wear besides our native hair and skins; All colors and dies given to clothes
of any sort, are also lies, all pictures and statues, lively representing the
originals are lies, all parables, metaphors, and allegories in our speech, must
be called lies, because, they are one thing in the native phrase or letter, and
another in their applied sense or meaning; yet are not these thefts, but
borrowings; not delusions, but allusions; not impious falsities, but elegant
flowers of speech; to which the nature and resemblances of things, as well as
humane fancies, have an aptitude and invitingnesse.

Such ridiculous austerity, would be a Satyricall Critique upon the very
Scriptures, upon the parables of Christ, and Apologies of many holy men, upon
the raptures of Moses, Job, David and others; which ascribe to God all humane
senses and passions, who yet is one simple and essential perfection; It Is not
more ridiculous than insolent, to deny the truth of the Scriptures, in their
holy tropes and hyperbolies, when it says the mountains skipped, and the sea
was afraid, or the valleys did sing, and clap their hands, etc.

How supercilious a piece of pedantry were it here to cry down the manner of
such expressions, because not native, but adopted to things: Nor does it in my
judgment argue much more gravity and discretion, (I need not say piety and
religion) to calumniate those things for frauds, cheats, lies and hypocrisies,
which art, ingenuity, and manufacture have invented, whereby to adorn nature,
in ways consonant to the modest ends and intentions, which are the holy
measures, and I think, the only confinements, of all things both in nature and
in art.

As to the cheat, which your LaP may fear should befall any man, when he thinks
he woes, and weds a native beauty, (when it is artificial in some degree) if
your LaP thinks it not only fit, but necessary in all other additionall
supplies, or concealments as to the bodies defects or deformities, to make such
ingenuous discoveries of the truth, as may afterward give least cause of such
exception, or complainings (as Jacob used, when he Genesis 29. 25.
found Leah instead of Rachell) truly I most willing advise and assent that
such as use such helps to their complexion) would use the same freedom in
telling it to those, whom it only conce^^s to know it; As for others
curiosities, there is no injury done if they be ever kept ignorant of that,
which to know would do them no good; nor yet any harm if they were as
charitable and discreet, as Christians ought to be.

The retirement or privacy used by sober women here in England, when they apply
any thing helpful to their looks or complexions, is no argument, of any
sinful shame; but of modesty, civility, and that discretion, which commands us
to do many things apart from any witnesses or spectators, which yet are no
sins, but only sensiblenesse and reflections upon those infirmities, to which
our vile bodies are subject; of which having no cause to boast, we rather choose
to veil them with secrecy, then to expose them to common view or knowledge,
and censure; Few persons being of so equal and humble minds as to bear their
own praises and perfections without pride, or another diminutions or defects
without scorn; Evil and envious minds are prone to turn many things to our
reproach if they discern them, of which being ignorant they are also silent.

. Furthermore although in England a commendable discretion is used by women in
concealing both their native defects, and their artificial additaments of
beauty or complexion, (of which many persons are more severe censurers, after
the vulgar vote and road, than judicious examiners) yet in other countries
nothing is more frequently done and freely owned; In so much that the whole
culture and office of women's adorning is with some expressed by this, My Lady
is not yet painted, that is she is not completely dressed, or ready: Few women
that value themselves, are willing to be seen in any discomposure or defect,
especially, if conscious to any defect: or so habited, as they think less
becomes them, which affected privacy and obscuring of themselves, is no stroke
of vanity, much less of sin; but is rather imputable to that prudent modesty
which so much becomes every sober woman, that my advise is to them, never to be
seen by strangers, or domestics in any way to their disadvantage, by
discovering either their defects, or their reliefs.

. Nor may this be called an histrionike parada, or stagely visard and
hypocrisy, while women seek to appear advantaged in stature, or in beauty and
handsomeness; so far, as modesty and virtue permit, by those borrowed
additaments, which art lends to nature; what is there in any civil order,
either of Church or State, which does not put on something Theatrick and
pompous, beyond that simplicity and plainness, which nature has put upon the
persons of men or women? Both civil and religious actions study to conciliate
to themselves a majesty, and reverence, by habits and ornaments; by comely
robes and costly vests; which though they are not of the internal and
essential glory, which is in magistratick or Ecclesiastic power and order,
(which are both Divine) yet they are so far, not only convenient, but almost
necessary, as they help to keep both laws and religion from contempt, and from
that vulgar insolence, to which seditious and Atheistical humors are subject.

Yea, who is there, or what is there almost in humane society, which does not
(in some sense) adorn a theater or scene of life, upon the stage of this world?
who is so open hearted and simple, but they either conceal their defects, or
ostentate their sufficiencies, short or beyond what either of them really are;
who does not as well advise for his fame and credit, as for his conscience; who
is there, if they were Anatomised, and every way exposed, to others censures,
in what they are or do, or pretend, but would come many degrees short of that
show they make? As there is no necessity to confess many sins to any but to
God, to whom only they are known; So in modesty, there is no reason for us to
own our infirmities to others, or the helps we use for our relief; when no
person is injured by what we do, nor at all concerned in it.

Lastly, as to that diminution of honor and esteem, which your Lap says
commonly follows, as a black shadow, the most virtuous woman, if this be added
after the catalogue of her virtues and good works; O but she paints, she uses
some art, or wash to her face, and complexion: It is first a very partial
censure, befitting vulgar and gross minds, (not wise grave and impartial
persons) in other cases of helping, or hiding any natural defect, (as by false
hair, a glass eye, bolstred shoulders, heightning heels, sweet smells and the
like) to charge no reproach upon any persons, otherways sober and modest, and
yet to do it, only in this, to those, who are every way of unspotted virtue,
and goodness; which receive no more prejudice or abatement by what show is
made (by art) of ruddinesse in women's complexions, than of tallnesse or
straightness, in their stature and feature, when naturally short or crooked;
Who is so impertinently severe, as to detract from any woman's honor and virtue,
by saying, O but she wears heels or shoes a handful high; She seems indeed
tall, and strait, but is really low and crooked etc. Nor does it set off from
the score of any man's worth, to allege, O but he uses a peruge, or uses such
sweet smells, as are not natural to his clothes or body, for which occasion
Isaac took his rise to bless Esaw: Or if this be childish, and ridiculous upon
these accounts, truly they are no less in my judgment as to this of
complexion, which we now dispure.

Nor is this black tail of detraction less unjust, than partial; Since no
justice will allow us to abate of merit and honor due to many, constant and
remarkable virtues, (which are evident and unquestionable tokens of worth)
merely upon the suspicion and jealousy (for so it is for the most part, vulgar
censures in this point of complexioning being rarely upon any certain
knowledge) of doing that, with all modesty and privacy, which is at worst very
disputable, whether it have any sin at all in it, or be beyond a venial and
civil vanity; For your LaP sees learned men, in several ages and countries,
differ as to their judgment of it; And truly those seem to me most masters of
reason, who own the nature of the thing, as all other things to be good in it
self, as gods creature, and measure the morality or immorality of the use or
abuse of it, by the universal standard, and rule of all humane actions, which
is the the mind and end of the doer, either conform or disforme to the holy
revealed will of God; who has no more declared any positive law against this,
than against all other ornaments of our bodies and lives, either natural or
artificial.

As for the commonnesse or vulgarity of these censures (which are you say) so
usual among the meaner sort of people, or those, who are of their seize and
last) what wise man or woman does not know, that nothing is more sly, touchy
and boglish; nothing more violent rash and various, than the opinion,
prejudice, passion and superstition of the many, or common people? How are they
swayed, even in their loves and hatreds, their persuasions and pieties, their
esteem or disesteem, most what by custom and prepossession; or by adherencys
and admirations of men's persons? How do they love an easy and superficial
censuring, rather than an industrious and strict scrutiny of things: How is
their ignorance an enemy to the knowledge of their betters? How does their
meanness, plainness, and rusticity bear a constant antipathy to the
politenesse honor and splendour of others? How they are naturally of levelling
humors, and envy others what ever they enjoy of estates, houses, or ornaments
of life, beyond their tenuity and cottagely obscurity: He or she lives nearest
the confines of Reason and Religion too, who is most remote from the charms and
snares, the sense and censures of the vulgar; Into whose minds, and over whose
consciences many things make intrusions and usurpations, which have no right or
title to that power and authority they exercise over themselves and others.

No wonder then if those, that are so subject to err customary errors in
greater matters, do so in this, which is so little and inconsiderable; we see
that wontednesse makes even Blackamores seem handsome to one another; And by
using to look on themselves in their glasses, even hard favored faces grow
reconciled to themselves, so far, as to think themselves tolerable, yea and
handsome too, by an happy heresy.

So little regard is to be had in cases of conscience to the dashes of vulgar
tongues and pens; Since we see that when nothing of consequence was objectable
to Christ, the community of the Jews, and supercilious Pharisees find fault with
his disciples gathering ears of corn on the Sabbath day as they passed through
the fields of corn, and were hungry; Mat. 12. 1.
so for his and their eating with unwashed hands. Many things not only
innocent, but commendable sometimes fall under the reproach of people: As there
are factions and parts taking in religious forms, so in civil uses; every one
seeking to advance his own side and way by depressing all others, with
reproachful censures.

Thus have I given your LaP the best answer, that at present, and thus on the
sudden I am able to every particular touch or stroke of your last objection;
which was twisted or combined of many smaller cords or threads, which I have by
unravelling so weakened, I hope, that they will no more hamper or bind a
judicious conscience, than the Philistines withs, or cords could do Sampson,
while his strength continued; Keep but the heart from sinful intentions, that
purity and integrity, as Sampsons locks, may be preserved unclipt, or shorn, by
any sinister and sordid lust; I do not see, how using such sober, modest, and
discreet helps to women's beauty and complexion need more fear the terrors of
some men's censures, than that holy Giant needed be troubled at the alarmes
given, The Philistines are upon thee Sampson: Who rowsing himself up in his
mighty and miraculous strength, defied or scattered them all.

12. Obje. Painting the face unlawful because, doubtful at best and not of
faith.
I Must confess Madame your LaP says more in vindication of these Artificial
helps of handsomeness, and better avoid all those odious objections made
against them, by my weakness, than ever yet I heard or read; Nor can I but
agree with your Laps just sense and expressions, how partial unjust judges of
things: How petulant and passionate censurers of persons and actions common
people are, and those masters of them, who have most of a plebeian stroke in
their temper and education; or who affect a vulgar empire, by vulgar easiness
and compliances: It Is true they frequently save or dam, as they are swayed, not
with judgment and charity, but with prepossession or fury, being content to
opine not with the wisest, but the most, glorying more in the number of their
abetters, than in the strength and weight of their reasons.

. But yet in this case, so much controverted, and so often concluded, against
your sense, by learned and godly men, I know your LaP is so humble and modest
as to consider, that your thoughts are but the thoughts of a woman; who is the
weaker vessel, of greater fraileties and less capacity: Therefore not to be
laid in the least balance of contradiction against those many worthy and
famous men, who very probably had more strong reasons, and Scripture instances
for what they thus eagerly and bitterly decryed, than either they have
expressed by writing, or we can now comprehend; nor is your LaP in any sort to
measure the validity of their arguments against it, by the infirmity of later
allegations, either by others, or now by my self who like Ruth have not so much
as the gleanings of those Boazzes large fields and plentiful harvests.

And yet, in the general prospect of the whole matter, does it not seem very
strange and improbable to your LaP that so many holy men should have been,
without due cause, so severe and so cross against our sex, in those ornaments
and reliefes of beauty, the confessions of which (though with all those sober
and moral restraints, which are justly imposed in all other enjoyments) had
been a very great indulgence and ingratiating to women of greatest quality and
best breeding, who might the easier been won to greater rigors of religion, if
in this they might have been allowed with the credit of Christianity and peace
of their conscience, what they generally so covet for the advantages of their
looks and countenances.

. I have observed in my days, that many preachers (otherways very
commendable) are less acceptable to Ladies of quality and gentlewomen of the
noblest and fairest editions, because of their severe and damning rigors
frequently uttered against all auxiliaries, of beauty, or set offs to
handsomeness; So scandalized at Ladies powdering, curling, and gumming their
hair; so jealous of their using any quickening to their complexion, though
neither they nor any other know of it; So impatient of any black patch, though
it be but a plaster to a pimple: That they degrade those from all degrees of
grace and virtue, modesty and chastity, whom they find, or suspect guilty of
these in the least kind.

I am sure some of them Thunder against all these and other like ornaments of
women, with the ancient terror; though as your Ladyship thinks, they do not
shine with the potent convictions and lightnings of the Fathers (but make their
auditors more afraid than hurt) yet ought we not by an implicit credulity
ascribe that honor to the Fathers and their followers, as not to doubt or
contradict their judgments, though we see not their grounds or reasons? And
will it not (at best) seem too great an arrogance for your LaP or any of our
sex, to contend in a case of Conscience, with so many of our own later Reformed
Divines; who have one from an other taken this point to be so clear and
granted, as a gross sin, that few or none of them ever went about, seriously
to discuss it or solidly to prove it to be any sin at all?

However (Madame in the last place) since it is a disputable point, and so
dubious as to conscience and practice, is it not wisdom to follow the safest
part, which is not at all to use any such toys and tinctures: In which
negative of abstaining there can be no danger; which may be great on the other
side of using; if either it should be a sin in it self, or at least go, under
such scruples and uncertainties, as can hardly be cleared or avoided as to the
conscience of the doer, where the opinions of so many eminent persons makes (as
you see) such potent batteries against it, what shield of persuasion can be
sufficient to defend us from great shakings and some impressions of terror.

Answ.
MAdam what validity your LaP is pleased to impute to my answers, is not from
any strength, or merit of my particular opinion, or expression; but from the
force and pregnancy of those truths, which are (it may be) a little retired
from the superficies of vulgar fancies and conceptions, possibly some, neither
search, nor discern them; others that find them, yet are hindered most what,
and even so overawed by popular fears and prejudices, that they dare not own,
or express them; as loath to seem wiser, than their forefathers, or themselves,
in former times, when (for want of better matter) they sometimes wast their
glass and fill up their hour, with bitter invectives against Ladies painting,
patching, curling, powdering, perfuming and complexioning; which may have less
evil in them, than some authors they study, and not so much vanity attending
them, as does the long hair, the loose cuffes, the large bandstrings, and
other fine things, with which some of these so rigid, yet very spruce and
Ladylike preachers, think fit to gratify as their own persons, so their kind
hearers and spectators: Somewhat wide of those pristine severities; which I
have been told, were required of the clergy; who by the Canons of the Church,
and customs of ancient times we denied to wear any silk, or softer garments,
not because they were sinful in themselves, but less suitable to the
strictness of that discipline which in those times holy men saw fit to exact,
especially of Ecclesiastics as most exemplary, for the restraining of those
prodigalities and luxuries, which in both Clergy and Laics would soon exhaust
that charity, which was then mostwhat expended, in relieving the poor; in
building and adorning Churches, in redeeming captives, and the like.

I do not less willingly own my weakness, than my sex, being far from any
such Amazonian boldness, as affects to contend with so many learned and godly
men, who have, and daily do express in this a contrary sense to mine, yet I
think it very venial for me to assert, if I can, both the ornaments and
liberties of my sex, (as to their persons and consciences) by answering
specious fallacies and producing stronger arguments: To which I doubt not but
all serious and impartial Christians (not captives to custom, prejudice, and
popularity) will at last subscribe; not as to the sense of a weak woman, but of
omnipotent verity and victorious truth, which though late, yet may at last, be
redeemed by the help of a woman, from that long captivity, wherein both it
self, and many worthy persons consciences were unjustly detained.

God often discovers as femall softnesses in some men's hearts, heads, and hands,
so masculine and heroic strength in some women's; we read two women famous, the
one for her conduct of the war, the other for her consummating it, by
destroying Sisera the chief leader of a great army; Another woman Judges 9. 33.
dashes out the brains of king Abimeleck; Another saves by her loyal prudence
the city Abell, from the miseries of a long siege, 2 Samuel 20.
and those punishments, which justly prosecute, as the heads, so the abettors
of sedition, against Lawful Sovereigns.

I know God has given both reason and Scripture to women as well as men; nor
have we less liberty granted to traffic in all truths both humane and
divine, though our talents and treasure may be far less, than the mass of
many men's readings; yet they may be as refined and digested; our two mites may
not be despised, which we offer to Gods Temple, if they have Gods Image and
superscription on them; coined and stamped in the mint of all religious reason,
the word of God; whence all things that concern faith or manners (as to
salvation and damnation) receive their authoritative stamp and value.

It is time for us, at length to get beyond that servility and sequaciousnesse
of conscience, (which is but the pupillage, minority and wardship of Religion,
inquiring and heeding, not what says the Lord, but what says such a Father,
such a godly man, such a preacher or writer: It is the privilege and honor of
Christian Religion for which the Bereans are Acts. 16. 10.
commended, to search the Scriptures, and examine by them even the Apostolical
doctrines; nor does our reformed Religion, (where it most merits that name)
unjustly glory, in that freedom, by which (as to matters of truth or error) of
sin, or no sin, it is redeemed from the slavery of man's private traditions; and
confined to the oracles of God; to whose general rule, sense, and Analogy, all
Catholic and unwritten traditions, as to the practice, discipline and order of
Religion do agree, without any enterfiering with the holy Scriptures, to which
in matters of internal holiness we are confined, though in things of externe
decency the wisdom and custom of the Church, is a safe and wholesome rule; to
which as we are by Scripture commanded obediently and unanimously to conform,
in things honest, and by general precepts allowed: So in matters of saving
faith and holy life, we must neither believe, nor act by an implicit faith and
twilight credulity, but from a well informed and rightly convinced conscience;
that forbids us to be, either Eccl. 7. 16.
profane or superstitious, either over righteous, or over wicked.

Solomon tells us, that the whole duty of man Eccl. 12. 13.
is to fear God, and keep his Commandments: Christ tells us, it is but a
Pharasaick pride and vanity to teach or urge humane traditions or Mat 15. 3.
opinions, for Gods Commands: And truly, after all that your LaP has smartly
urged in this case, I cannot but wonder, that neither Solomon in his various
sentences of the Proverbs; nor in his holy Satyr against humane vanities, in
Ecclesiastes: No nor yet, he that was greater than Solomon, either by himself
or his disciples, should ever particularly instance against all or any painting
or complexioning of the face: No nor God by Moses; where so many lesser
precepts are expressly given; sure they would not (all) have omitted this so
wholly, if it had been what some pretend such a flat and downright sin,
considering how obvious in all eyes and nations the use of it was and is.

. Sure learned and godly men ought not in wisdom, justice and charity, to
extend the cords or curtains of duty and conscience: beyond the stakes and
pillars of Religion; which are fixed by the word of God, whose service and
glory, needs not the fancies, fallacies, or flatteries of man's inventions, more
than a royal robe, needs beggars patch; It is not for sober men to enlarge the
Phylacteries of their own opinions beyond Gods precepts; nor to comment by
false and specious glosses either against, or beside his holy will in the word,
which must needs be a far greater sin, than any light applying of some
quickening wash or color to the face, in as much, as it is more dangerous to
injure the conscience, than to alter the skin: Ministers ought not to be as
hard hearted and rude handed Surgeons, who make their probe a punyard, and will
rather make a wound, where they search for one, then loose their labor; or
seem to want either skill, or patients.

. As to that practical faith, or assurance, of the lawfulness and liberty,
granted by God, both as to the thing done, and the doer, I presume my grounds
are safe and good, since I find that God has given us, as men and Christians
all things richly to enjoy: 1 Timothy 6. 17.
That no creature is forbidden (under the Gospel) to the pure of heart: That
there is neither moral light, nor Scripturall precept, against the ingenuous
and modest use of this, more than of other helps, of any bodily insirmity, or
deformity: Since, it may as well, as any thing be used soberly, thankfully, and
harmelesly, without any impediment to grace and weldoing, also without any
advantage or intentionall occasion to sin.

. So that I cannot but vehemently suspect (I leave it to wiser persons
peremptorily to conclude) that the dreadful rigors of some ministers and
others have in this case of Artificial handsomeness, been too magisteriall:
Their divinity relishes too much of inhumanity; and their piety carries with
it, too little Charity; while they state a case of Conscience more by the
wills, fancies and passions of men, than by the word of God, whose thoughts are
not as man's thoughts, nor his ways, as our ways, many things are highly Is.
55. 8.
esteemed of men, as sanctities, which God despises, and many things are
lightly condemned by man's imperious rashness, which God 1 Cor. 1.
does not condemn; hence the lawful use of many good things is denied by man's
severity and transport, where Gods benignity only forbids us the abuse of
them, and in so doing establishes the lawfulness of the use, which may in
this for ought I yet see, as well consist with a good conscience, as it did
with Salomons wisdom (amidst his domestic and native plenty) to send his navy
1 Kings. 10. 22.
upon long and foreign voyages, for gold, and apes, and peacoks.

. Besides this, I cannot but observe, the self confuting severity of these men,
of later and lesser Editions, who put such strict restraints on women's beauties
and adornings; when yet they allow the spiceries and curiosities, which
marchandizing brings from far, rather to gratify luxury, than relief
necessity: Nor do they quarrel at superfluous tables (unless they have but
puling stomachs) with the various arts of cookery, which like another Proteus
turns the native plainness of things into infinite forms and relishes, to
please and invite the palate, as Rebeccah did Isaacs blunt aged taste by the
savory meat she made for him, which it is said that holy man loved. Nor are
these Masters such batterers Genesis 27. 4.
or demolishers, of stately and elegant buildings; they can be friends with
goodly hangings and rich furniture, with accurate plantations, and harmonious
gardens; with picturings by pencill, or embroyderies: Also with the wearing of
silks, linen and woolen of various and orient colors; nor do they froun to see
women wear rich Jewels of all colors as Cornelians, Rubies, Saphirs, Emeralds,
and Diamonds, on their breasts, necks, ears, wrists and fingers; of which there
is no other use in narure, but only the borrowing and ostentating of their
several beauties and colors, by which to render us more conspicuous or
comely; As these fixed gemms have their aptitudes for our use on other parts of
our bodies; so truly have other diffusive tinctures, and colorings, their
fitness and almost propriety for the face; if they be discreetly applied.

. For both these (as all things else of externe ornament) may be so grossly
handled, and laid on, as they shall seem no more to ones advantage, either of
comeliness or discretion, than a Jewel in a swines snout, (as Solomon speaks):
Persons of worth and prudence, will in the first place keep their hearts in the
use of all such things from offending God; next they will preserve themselves
from being ridiculous among discreet persons: As those may easily be, who know
not how to distinguish a civil quickening or cheerful enlivening of the face,
(as of old times was done by their anointings) and a slovenly besmearing
themselves, like Bartholomew babies with fulsome dawbings; which proclaim,
though not foul, yet foolish hearts.

As for those causeless curses, and Anathemas, that God cannot or will not
know them, that no painted face shall see the face of God, or the like, which
as blind thunderbolts some men by a Papal authority, or popular facility,
promiscuously cast upon all never so modest, humble and virtuous women, who use
any relief to their looks, I believe, as Solomon tells us, they shall not come
upon the heads of Prove. 26. 2
those, who using this as other creatures of God, for those ends, to which they
have an aptitude in nature, do yet so watch over their hearts, as not to suffer
any outward momentary adornings, whatsoever, to leaven them; with any thing of
pride or sinful vanity; but always keep within the bounds of modesty and
chastity; to which cleanliness and decency are no enemies. And even in these
solemn terrors, by which some men seek to terrify poor souls, they run more
upon the stock of Satyricall wit, than solid arguments: As if Conscience were
only to smell on nosegayes or flowers, and not to be fed with serious and
divine truths, which are the food and physic too of the soul.

By the same fallacy, they may urge, that God will not know elderly men, in
their juvenile peruges, in their shaved cheeks, and bald chins, (which affect
youthful smothenesse, when gray hairs and wrinckles every where, call for
gravity of aspect, as well as manners) of which fatherly, prolixe, and
reverentiall beard is a solemn sign and majestic Emblem: May it not as well
be said God will not admit men or women to heaven, with all their pomp and cost
of apparel, since he made them naked, and yet not ashamed; Genesis 2.
yea may they not cry down eating, drinking, sleeping, marrying, recreation;
yet even that part of humane nature, which is flesh and blood in us, because
none of these things (either of 1 Cor. 15. 50.
vital use or infirmer nature) shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, or
come into the presence of God; when they shall indeed be superfluous, through
the bodies higher glory and perfection, which shall then exceed the shining of
Moses his face, and equal the transfiguration of Christ.

Yet are not these sinful enjoyments, or unlawful ornaments, in this state of
mortality and infirmity, to which mankind is now subjected, by reason of sin:
different states admit of different things: Many toys (in comparison) are
allowed us by our heavenly Father, while we are children here, which shall be
put away when we come to perfect age and stature in heaven: Though the whole
need no physician, yet the sick may lawfully use their skill and applications
to remedy their infirmities not only as to health and strength; but also to
the vigor and color of their looks; else, such as have the green sickness,
pallor, or the jaundese either black or yeallow; or any such deformity, may not
use means to cure themselves, both internal and external, for as neither of
them are forbidden; so I suppose both to be lawful in their kind and use.

. Like to the feebleness of such men's reasonings against all artificial
beauty, are their impertinent and wrested allegations of Scripture, whereby to
justify their severities, which no doubt your LaP has observed as well as I
have; though your discretion thinks not fit to urge them, being as easily
answered, as they are fallaciously alleged.

13. Obje. Of Peter Martyr against Painting the face from many Scripture
instances. Gal. 1. 10.
SUch as those, which I have read in an Author of no mean note, or obscure name,
who dreadfully and purposely inveying against all use of art to advance the
beauty or color of the face, with great gravity and vehemence; tells us, as
from the Apostles mind: That we cannot be the servants of the Lord, if we seek
to please men; therefore women may not use any such complexioning to please
their own, or their husbands, or others aspects: O weighty and profound
Divinity! by which neither wives may please their husbands, nor children their
parents, nor subjects their princes, nor servants their masters, nor tradesmen
their customers: But like the serpents teeth Christians must rise up to a
constant antipathy, and mutual displeasings of each other; else they cannot
please God* what can be more absurd in reason or ridiculous in religion? When
the meaning of the Apostle is, if by any ways, displeasing to God, I seek to
please men, or if I so seek to please men, as I neglect God, I cannot be Gods
servant: But in all such lawful ways as were neither against piety, nor
truth, nor charity, no man was more a pleaser of all men, to whom he became 1
Cor. 9. 20.
all honest things, that he might gain some.

So again, he brings; that Christians must 1 Cor. 5. 8.
keep the Passover, which is the feast of Christian conversation, in which we
partake of Christ, with sincerity and truth; therefore we may make no
simulations or shows of any thing, that is not really true, and such, as we
make show of; which not only debarres us of all helps of art against palenesse,
but of what ever may remedy baldness, blindness, lamenesse, crookedness, and
the like, which are at once both helps, and hidings of our infirmities, which
gloss is far wide of the Apostles sense, who tells us what leaven must be
purged out (not of all art and ingenuity of decency and civility) but of malice
and wickedness, of hypocrisy and uncharitableness, which may very much
embitter and abase the spirits of Christians even there, where their looks,
words and gestures are composed to most cynicall clouds and pharasaick frowns:
Where the heart is pure as to all maliciousness against God and man, there all
outward things are pure and lawful.

He adds, since God in the old law forbad to disguise the sex, by clothes, he
(consequently) Deuteronomy. 22. 5
forbids to disguise our persons by any change of our faces, or complexions:
It Is true, the God of order forbids the first, so far as it breeds those
confusions and reproaches in humane life and constant converse, which are
attended with very foul and wicked consequences; But in cases either of
declared mirth or necessary safety, which draw no injury, indignity, or
disorder of life after them, but are only occasional and innocent, I do not
think that text ought to be urged: To make such a change of our faces, as we
cannot be known to be the same persons (which yet is often done by sickness, or
distempers) as I think it not lawful in ordinary conversation, so no wise
woman does ever aim at it; so as not to be known to be her self, but rather to
be known as her self, with some advantages only or complexion, which alter not
the feature, but only quicken the color: But in case of life and escape, I
believe this good man, would not deny an innocent person leave, so to disguise
his looks by visard or color as might best deceive his guard or keepers, which
yet he might not once do, though to save his life, if it were an absolute and
gross sin in it self, as some pretend.

He further instances; that every one ought to glorify God in their bodies;
which (says he) no woman can do that uses art to 1 Cor. 6. 20.
her complexion: This is easily said, but never proved, against those modest
and sober women, who glorify God in a thankful, humble chaste, and virtuous
life, as well when they use this, as when they use any other helps or ornaments
to their outward aspect and comeliness; not abusing these by doting on them,
or resting in them, as the highest beauty and ultimate glory of a Christian,
but using and referring all to a higher end, and glory.

. Lastly he very gravely, and sadly tells 1 Cor. 6. 15.
us, as we may not make any members of our bodies (which are Christ's) the
members of an harlot; so nor may we, make our faces the faces of harlots, whose
property (he says) it is to paint their faces, if they think they need such
helps: The answer is, that it is no prejudice against honest women's use of
things, that dishonest use them; that helping the complexion, and setting forth
the looks to the best advantages by ingenuous arts and adornings is not the
property of harlots, but the study and care of virtuous women; though
accompanied with, and inferior to, that care they have of their souls adorning;
I believe this good man what ever he boldly guesses at, knew fewer dissolute
than sober women, who used such helps, far enough from his scandal or
perception: Nor can he say it is the property of lewd women unless he knew
none other used it, or could by better arguments, than by begging the question
prove it to be so by God forbidden, as no gracious woman can lawfully or
modestly use it; which he neither does, nor endeavors to prove, either by
apposite Scriptures, or pregnant reasons, from the nature of the thing used, or
the necessary pravity of the mind, using such artificial beauty; one of which
at least (if not all) should have been proved; which neither he nor any man
else that ever I saw or heard, has yet done: Contenting themselves with strong
presumptions, and weak probations, which poverty and tenuity of argumentation,
in a matter pretended to be a gross and notorious sin, is no way becoming
learned and grave Divines, who ought not to play with cases of Conscience; nor
adventure to create sins, calling light darkness, or darkness light, evil
good, or good evil. Isa. 5. 20.


How much more worthy of their holy calling were it for Ministers to meddle
less with Ladies faces and more with their hearts; rather encouraging them to
study all the holy ornaments of grace and virtue; also confining them to the
undoubted limits of sanctity, modesty, chastity and humility, (which none is so
impudent as to dispute against or question) rather (I say) than by little
Oratorious circles and sophystries, to seek to ensnare their Consciences, and
discourage their spirits, by endless and needless severities, against these
petty ornaments, which may (no doubt) be as easily kept in all sober, civil,
and harmless bounds, as any other things, by which art assists nature, and
adds by clothes, colors, jewels, and many curiosities, to the advantage of
humane honor, beauty, and majesty.

The mischief is, not so much, that many women are denied by these rigors the
use of such things, as would please and become them, in an innocent
cherefulnesse: But all that ever was said against these helps of beauty, seems
to many wise women, so weak and sinnewlesse, that being not convinced of any
sin in the use of them, they venture to use them privately: yet (not wholly
without some doubt and scruple, arising from the confidence and clamors of some
godly men against them) hence they are uncomfortably divided, and perplexed,
even in their greatest purity of mind, and holiness of life; while on the one
side, they are shaken and terrified by what such men forbid them, on the other
side they see not, but God and Nature allows it to them: Nor do even virtuous
women contentedly want (while they are capable of them) those things, that may
render them most acceptable to their own and others eyes; being loath to draw
the curtains of obscurity, or uncomelinesse quite over them, till it be dark
night, when they must hide their faces in the dust, in hope to recover that
perfect beauty, which shall admit no decays and needs no repaires.

What your LaP intimates in the last place, that it is safest in a case
disputed or dubious, rather to abstain, than use, what many deny, though many
allow; since there is no necessity of using it at all: I answer, there are many
things which are not absolutely necessary, which yet we would be loath to part
with or be disputed out of, under the pretense of superfluity and sinful;
since God allows us, not with niggardly restraints, but with liberality worthy
of divine benignity, all things richly to enjoy: even to delight, convenience,
elegancy and majesty: Nor are we in cases of conscience or scruples of sin to
tell noses, or mete by the pole, how many, but value upon what grounds men
affirm or deny things to be lawful or unlawful; Errors and Idols have many
times more eyes, and hands lifted up to them, than truth or the true God: One
Athanasius is recorded to have sustained the truth of Christ's Divinity, against
the sea and moles of all the world, pressing against him, as great waters upon
a firm sluice: Truth is not less it self because in solitudes; and error
ceases not to be error, amidst crowds and multitudes, if any be so weak, as to
be swaied and divided, more by numbers and Oratorious fervors, than by clear
and potent reasons; The penance they must do, for their want of judgment, is
to be deprived of those things, they doubt off, yet would willingly use, and do
desire, if they thought them lawful: But those, who are by a clear light of
Reason and Religion, redeemed from these scrupulosities, so as to see and enjoy
the freedom God has given them, as in the nature and fitness of his
creatures, so in the indulgence and silence of the Scriptures (which have set
us under the Gospel, only moral and internal bounds of holiness, by which
the heart circumscribes and limits the outward man, in the use of all things,
not as to their nature but their ends) these (I say) may as freely use their
affirmative freedom of using and enjoying according to their conscience; as
the other do the negative, who therefore forbear to use them because, they
either doubt, or conclude against their unlawfulness: For as no man's
dissenting may hinder the stating of my judgment, according as truth appears
to me, so more may their different practice hinder me from doing and enjoying,
agreeable to my judgment.

THus have I endeavored to give your Lap as full and as good an account of my
thoughts in this dispute or case, touching artificial helps of beauty; such as
humane invention have many ways found out; whereto as your LaP has given the
occasion, so I wish I were so happy, as to afford you any satisfaction; which
if a weak woman may in any degree be able to do in so disputed a point, how
much more may you hope for from learned and able men, if they have but courage
to declare their judgments in it.

As for your Laps particular; however you shall not need to think (yet) of
borrowing any helps from art, either to preserve or repair your beauty, (being
blessed with a great and lasting stock of handsomeness, for which you have cause
humbly to thank God) yet (possibly) by what I have answered to your several
objections, (not wholly void I hope of Reason and Religion) your LaP and others
by your candor, will be more favorable in their censures of those, whose
infirmity may invite them soberly to use, what they do not find God has denied
them; who (yet) had rather choose the most sad and sordid deformities (as Job on
a dunghill putrefying in his own sores) with a good conscience, than the
greatest pomp and beauty of Queen Esther, or Berenice, with the sting and
plague of an evil conscience: Nor do I doubt but many worthy women, who
discreetly use these little private helps to their looks, are very far from
that ungrateful impudence, which dares to displease God, by any thing his
indulgence allows them to please themselves with all, in sober and ingenuous
ways.

To the favorablenesse of your Laps future censure, (of those, who with modesty
and discretion, use these helps to complexion, by which neither themselves nor
other are hurt) be pleased to add the favor of your pardon, to the length of
my answers, which conscious to their weakness, I have sought as we do with
lesser threads to wind them the oftener about; that their length may make some
amends for the want of that strength in which they come short of stronger
twisted cords; if I may obtain the one, or both of these requests, I shall not
think any time, or your Laps patience, wholly lost, though I am not so vain as
to bost of any victory; or peremptorily to decide the controversy on my side,
which I leave to your Laps and others better judgment.

MAdame I must not only grant you your so well merited requests, which you
shall find The moderate and charitable conclusion of the Dispute.
have with me the power of commands, being so just and ingenuous: But I must
add those most hearty thanks, which I owe you for the generous freedom of your
discourse, which has the courage and ability to bring to the review of reason,
and true Religion, a case of Conscience, which few dare touch or try, contrary
to the common vote and credulity, which (for ought I see) may in this as in
other things it often does, prove a common error; wherein you deserve the more
applause, because in this I do not think you are any way partial to your self,
or so much pleading your own cause, as civilly affording a charitable relief
and protection to others, whose infirmity may require or use such helps.

For my self as I wish I may never need any such aides, so truly I should not
scruple to use Gods and Natures indulgence with those cautions of modesty and
discretion, which are necessary to accompany all our actions natural, civil,
and religious; which falling under the Empire of our will and choice, are
subject to the Judicature of God, and of our own Consciences.

Mean time your LaP has by the clearenesse and force of your reason, redeemed
me from that captivity, wherein by a plebeian kind of censoriousnesse and
popular severity, I sometime delighted, to disparage and lessen those, who are
reported or suspected to use any auxiliary beauty, notwithstanding I saw in all
things else their worth and virtue, every way commendable, immutable, and
sometime admirabl: So much have you made me a cheerful conformists to your
judgment and charity, which I find follows not easy and vulgar reports, but
searches the exacter rules of Reason and Religion; which lights, as they now
shine in the Church of God, I do not think have left mankind in the dark, as to
any thing morally and eminently either good or evil: In the discerning of
which, so as to follow the one and fly the other, I pray God ever guide us, by
his truth and grace.

Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled and
unbelievers nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
The End.

