A Discourse Apologetical; WHEREIN Lilies lewd and loud Lies in his Merlin or
Pasqil for the Year 1654. are clearly laid open; His shameful Desertion of his
own cause is further discovered; His shameless Slanders fully refuted; and his
Malicious and Murtherous Mind, inciting to a general Massacre of Gods
Ministers, from his own Pen, evidentlie evinced.

Together with an ADVERTISEMENT Concerning two ALLEGATIONS Produced in the
close of his POSTSCRIPT.

And a POSTSCRIPT concerning An Epistle Dedicatorie of one J. Gadburie.

By The-Gataker B. D. Author of the Annotations on Jer. 10. 2. and of the
Vindication of them.

LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitson for Thomas Newberry, at the three Lions in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

The Contents of the ensuing DISCOURSE.
LIlies Merlins mere Pasqils Page 1 His whole Answer, as usuallie, a piece of
mere scurrilitie 1, 6 His former grounds of his Art given by him deserted. 2, 6
Not a word of the good Angels that first taught it ibid. How uneqal a match for
any ingenuous person to deal with a Railer 3 By freqent railing, and being
railed at, men grow shameless ib. In such bickerings no honor to overcome; to
be overcome, no dishonor 3, 4 Star-gazers for money can tell that of trifles,
which of weightier occurrents they cannot 4 Jacob Behmens writings, of what
stamp 4 A Northern Lilie prophesied of by him 5 Lilies immodest and scurrilous
language unworthy regard 5, 6 To what purpose Mr. G. qotes Autors, Heathen, and
others 6 Some necessity imposed on him of answering some scandalous aspersions
7 A good name, fo what worth, and how much to be regarded 7, 8 Yet a good
Conscience to be preferred before it 8, 9 No good duty to be omitted for fear
of disgrace 9 A great grace to be disgraced for Christ ibid. Mark the Emperor,
tho a Stoic, how careful to clear himself from calumnies 9, 12 From the
imputation of Avarice, especially 10 What care and caution Ministers ought to
have in this kind ^0 The word (...) how taken, 1 Timothy 3. 6, 7. Ephesians. 4. 27. 10 A
common liars word, no slander 11 Infamous persons defamation, no infamy 11
Reproaches of such rather matter of praise, their praises of dispraise Page 11
The falsest reports, tho never so well cleared, leav some sear often behind. 11
Most folk suspicious, and prone to suspect the worst ibid. Mr. G^. resolution
to undertake this Apology 12 Lilies former slanderous Charge 12 An ill presage
to begin ill, with a gross untruth, especially 12, 13 So begins Li^ie, that Mr.
G. was sometime a stiff Prelate 13 14, 23 And that then he preached impudent^ie
for Sabbath-sports 13, 15, 19, 23 Of the three Names given the Day, which most
proper 14, 15 Mr. Gs. constant course of preaching for, and pressing the due
observation of the Lords day 15, 19, 22, 23 The Lords Day no Day for
complemental Visitations 15 Nor for entertainment of Clients 16 Nor for riding
Circuits, or hearing Causes 19 The change of the Lecture-times at Lincoln-Inne,
with the ground thereof 16 The Lords Day, Gods Mart, or Market Day 18 The
Christian Sabbath 14 15 King James his book for Sabbath-sports 20, 22 That Mr.
G. preached in defense of it, a notorious untruth 20, 21 Mr. Gs. Treatise of
Lots, and the subject matter thereof 21 How far forth Cards or Dice are therein
justified 21, 22 No liberty therein for Sabbath-sports allowed, but expreslie
opposed 22, 23 Another stander, that Mr. G. turned Presbyterian in hope of
Bishops and Deans lands 12, 23, 24 Mr. Gs. constant judgment both of Prelacie
and Presbytery 24, 25, 26 Men moderately minded suffer usuallie from extremes
on either side 26, 27 The frivolous pretended ground of Mr. G^. re^ol^ 27, 28
Mr. Carpenters scurrilous Relation of the Presbyters birth, and base condition
28, 29 His Historical untruth of its first birth 30 Li^^us latter slanderous
Charge against Mr. G. of covetousness Page 30 Seed of all sin in all, but some
more eminent then other 31, 32 This of covetousness Mr. G. most disclaims 32
Freqent shifting of charges deemed a note of Avarice or Ambition 32, 33 Mr. Gs.
settled Ministry in two Places only, for two and fifty year 33 His entrance
into his place at Lincolns-Inne 33, 34 His entertainment and ten years
continuance there 34, 35 His Salarie, what it was there 35 Places elsewhere
refused, during his abode there 36, 38 Ingenuous dispositions what they deem of
the good they do 38, 39 Their joy, when their kindness takes; grief, when it
misseth 39 40 Mr. Gs. waving the Degree of Doctor 41, 42. The general
disposition of Mr. Gs. Auditorie at Lincolns-Inne, not affecting noveltie, or
variety 43 The occasion of his removal to Rederith 44, 46 His chargeable
entrance there 47 His continuance there upward of two and forty year 47 His
means what for the first ten year 47 48, 49 Tithe upon houses formerlie paid
how came t^ thee intermitted 48, 49 How it, or somewhat in lieu of it,
recovered 49, 50 The whole sum, with the Addition then agreed on, far short of
what Lilie says he receivs 50 As much expended one year with another, as the
revenue of the place amounted unto 50, 51 Means of enlargment elsewhere offered,
and refused 51, 52 His natural disposition of what frame and temper 52, 53
Ambition and Avarice how far they prevail where they rule 53, 54. Every one
his own first and chiefest Flatterer 53 The result of the premises concerning
Mr. G. charged with either of these two Corruptions 54, 55 Avarice deemed the
peculiar vice of old age 55, 56 Why compared to a root 55 Why it, and pride to
the spleen ibid. Why against reason for men to grow in old age more covetous 56
Of M. Gs. wilful silencing himself charged upon him by Lilie, ib. His
artendance at the Assembly, and receipts there, p. 56, 57 His sickness that
took him off from that attendance, and for some time from his pastoral
employment p. 57 The occasion of his necessary surceasing to preach p. 58 His
receipt of 200 l. a year a notorious untruth, and what his receipts are p.
58-60 The reason of his retaining a Title, with his desire to be rid of it, p.
60, 61 The sum of Lilies slanderous assertions andaspersions; with a resolve of
future silence p. 61 Lilies malicious and murtherous mind and motion, to have
the whole Presbytery and Ministry removed by a general massacre. p. 62, 63
In the Advertisement.
TWo Allegations in Lilies Postscript. p. 64 The former, of one Cleavland,
wherein the late Assembly at Westminster is traduced. ibid. The latter, parcel
of a Latin Epistle, which Mr. G. must English. ibid. The A^tor of it, sometime
a Popish Priest ibid. By his own kind^ed suspected to be Popish still p. 65 By
some other censured another Spalatensis ib. Retaining still diverse Popish
conceits and opinions p. 65. 66 His wishes concerning School Divinity, and
Mystical Divinity p. 66, 67 His renunciation of Popery, with a transcendent
commendation of it p. 67, 68 His charging our Preachers with belying of
Papists. p. 68, 60, 70 His excusing and extenuating of Popish corruptions p. 69
His Confession of his Faith, no other then what he says any knowing Papist
will acknowledge p. 70 His Sermon no Sermon etc. what a Riddle p. 70 His
traducing our English Version of the Bible, and bespattering the persons
employed in it p. 70, 71 His reqirie of repair to some persons infalliblie
guided, for every reading and sense of each word in Scripture, for sure ground
of Faith p 71, 72 How this pulls to Rome p. 72 How i^ p^shes to Atheism p, 73 He
makes Gods Oracles mere Riddles and Intricacies, that may be turned any way p.
74 He charges the Independents with doing the like p. 75 In his English he has
the same in effect, which he professes to deliver, for fear of troubling weak
ones, in Latin p. 75 He invites an Answerer, ties him to Latin, promises to
reply so only, but fails p. 75, 76 He puts off his Answer with sqibs, and
scoffs, and impertinencies p 77 He is for satisfaction of his difficulty sent
home to himself, and some other p. 78 No good proof that not joined to Rome,
because he preaches as a Minister here p. 78, 79 His character impouring him to
exercise and cure strange diseases p. 80 His scruple about his Marriage ibid.
Tho no professed Jesuit, not free from Jesuiticall tricks p. 81 Writes himself
Independent, and his reason why p. 81, 82 Yet maintains Dependencie, and
reqires Episcopacie to the being of a Church p. 81 How partial herein for Rome
p. 81, 82 Acknowledges Lilies practice and profession condemned in ancient
Councels p. 82 Lilie and he wherein alike p. 82, 83, 91, 92, 93 Hatred of any
thing rises from the love of some other thing: Man's hatred of God from
self-love p. 83 The ground of Mr. Cs. hatred of Presbytery ibid. Many
preferred out of disaffection to some others p. 84 So Mr. Carp. Schismatical
and Heterodox Separatists, before Presbyterians and Calvinists ibid. His
collation of Presbyterians and Independents p. 84, 85 His gross abuses of
Scripture p 85 His manifold scurrillous terms given to the Presbyterians,
^ainous charges, and abandoning of them p. 85, 86 His Lucian-like dream of a
dance in a Mask with the P^e-dish p. 86 His absurd deduction of Kirk from (...)
a tail p. 86, 87 B. Kings censure of Henoch Clapham p. 87 Mr, Carp. bringing
the Pulpit upon the Stage, and the Stage into the Pulpit p. 87, 88, 89 His
traducing the Presbyterians and Genevians, and defring them as Jesuits p. 90
His charitable affection professed to the Anabaptists p. 90 Malicious and
murthero^s mind to the Presbyterian party p. 90 Priest lie character how poor
a curb to cruelty p 90, 91 His solemn abrenunciations of our Presbyters and
Preachers p. 92, 93 His Latin peec^s in Lili^, at his reqest Englished p. 93
An humble Address to the Higher Powers p. 94, 95
In the Postscript.
J. Gadburies Epistle to Mr. T. G. p. 96 His charge of him with scurrillous
language p. 96, 97 With pretending to teach Hebrew, having little skill in it p.
97, 99 Mr. Gs. access to Mr. Aylof^ house p. 97, 98 His employment there p. 98
M. Aylofs Wife, what manner of woman, and how affected p. 98 99 Her daily
retirement how managed p. 98 In all Arts and Sciences the more men know, the
more they know their want of knowledge p. 99 100 Gadburies pretense of a
contradiction in Mr. Gs. words p. 100 His hellish misconstruction of them p.
100, 101 His scurrillous terms and aspersions of the Ministry ibid. Mr. Gs.
entrance into the Ministry p. 101, 102 Why Lilie and Gadburie may j^stlie be
termed Sycophants and Helhounds p. 102, 103 Mr. Gs. resolution to meddle no
further with them p. 103 How little, or nothing rather, of truth, they have
been able to discover against Mr. G. in his life the one, in his writings the
other p. 103, 104 His idle Qerie answered here and elsewhere p. 104
A Discourse Apologetical, concerning some notorious Falsehoods in LILIES
Merline for the year 1654.
NO sooner did Lilies Pasqil (for no other then such are his Anniversary
Merlins) for the year 54. come flying abroad, but being informed, that therein
after his wonted guise he had again fallen foul upon me, I was desirous to have
a sight of it, that I might see what he had said in his own defense, concerning
those things that I had charged upon him, both in mine Annotations, and in my
Vindication thereof, and what he had returned to my fresh charge, or pursuit in
the latter, of my first charge in the former. But when it came to my hands upon
perusal of it, I soon perceived, that I had proved a true Prognostes, and much
truer then Lilie; albeit I had not at all consulted with the Stars, as he
professes and pretends to do; nor indeed was there any need at all that I
should.

For in the first place I found that to be true, which I had foretold, that Lily
would, if my Vindiciae ever came to his hands, put off all in the same manner,
as he had all other before, whom he was pleased to take notice of, that had
written ought against himself, or his Trade, with a few scurrilous Jeers; and
just so he does here; to wit, in these terms, An impudent Pamphlet writ
against me by that old silenced or dumb Minister, containing twenty six sheets
of scolding.

Nor found I that also to have fallen out otherwise then as I had presaged,
(according to the advice that I had given him as a friend, and foresaw that he
would be so wise as to follow) to wit, that he would wholly let slip, and bury
in silence, whatsoever had been formerly with so much confidence averred by
him, concerning the pretended grounds of his Art and Trade; how the good Angels
(such as he consults with) were the first Teachers of it, and that by them it
was revealed to holy men. (such no doubt as himself and his Associates now are)
which tho both in the Annotation, and Vindication being instantly urged, and
eagerly pressed upon, his credit lying at the stake, out of some authentik
Record, one or other to make good, unless he would be reputed (as otherwise he
justly deserves, and by his silence may deservedly be deemed to acknowledge) to
be a coyner and broacher of fictions and fables, to gain credit thereby to his
cheating Trade, and to gull poor people with, by telling them such fond tales,
and frivolous stories, as himself well knows, and his own Conscience (if he
have any at least,) told him, that he had no proof at all for: Yet throughout
the whole heap here of his frivolous Calculations, fabulous Relations,
ridiculous Predictions, forged and coined, like the Sabine, or Jewish Dreamers,
dreams, to comply Sabini qod volunt somniant. Festus. Qaliaeunque voles Judaei
somnia vendent, Juven.
with the current, and fit the fancies of those whom he would cury favor with,
and scurrilous girds at those whom he desires to disgrace or deems to be out of
grace with some great ones, he has not one word, wise or other, concerning
this matter, that so nearly concerned him; much less ought to confirm that his,
as groundless, so still deserted, and least guardless, assertion, upon which he
made choice before to bottom the tottering Fabric of his whole Trade.

After a survey therefore taken of it, I was at a stand with my self, in doubt
whether I should assay to deal at all further with so shameless a creature, who
knew not how to reason, but to rail only. The rather having been told by
diverse of my friends, that I had already stooped too low, and graced him too
much, by entering into the Lists with so base a fellow, unfit for any man of
gravity or ingenuity to deal with: And that they could not therefore without
indignation, read my name in the Frontispice of my book, as having ought to do
with Lilie.

And indeed as one in the Greek Comic says, (...) Menander. Cyril. adv.
Julian. l. 7.
(...), Dura nimis est ingenuae cum meretrice contestatio. It is a very hard
task for an honest woman to be driven to contest with a common strumpet: And
the reason of it, is well rendered by that Noble Roman Censor, when he Plutarch.
in Caton. Major.
told a lewd fellow that railed on him, (...). There is an unequal encounter
between thee and me; thou have herein the odds of me; for it is a rife matter
with thee to hear ill language from others, and as ready a matter to return the
like again; whereas with me it is both unpleasant to do it, and unwonted to
hear it. In like manner, may I well say, does the case stand here between Lilie
and my self. I shall herein willingly yield him the bucklers; I list not to
contend with him in scurrilitie and bad language; herein, I confess, he has
the better of me. But as he said sometime of a Dicer, Aleator qanto in art
melior, tanto pejor est; the better Syrus Mim.
Dicer, the wors man: So he that is the best at railing, is the worst in
disposition; and as bad and foul language is a practice very rife with him, so
it seems that no less frequentlie he meets with his mates, and it may be
sometime with his matches, being repaid in coin of the same stamp with his own,
having the like language returned him from others. For he makes grievous
complaint elsewhere of scurrilous Mercuries, that vie it with his scurrilous
Merlins, and overload them with their multitudes, and that may seem to have
befaln him, that Seneca says of Vatinius, De Sap. Constant. c. 17.
Convitiis assiduis depudere didicerat. That by frequency of hearing bad
language, tho not undeservedlie, from others, he is grown to that height of
impudency, that he has stripped himself of all shame, laid aside all
ingenuitie, and abandoned himself to the baiting of every one that comes in
his way; laying at them with broad language, and the worst of words, without
all regard whether they deserv well or ill, or whether that wherewith he
bespatters them, be true or falls.

In this manner of contestation and debate therefore Lilie and I are not even
matches. Neither have I been accustomed to entertain others with foul language;
neither have I, I thank God, been much encountered with it my self; not so much,
at least, as many others, by much better then my self. In this regard
therefore to go forth into the field, and enter the lists on such (...)ns,
wherein the encounter is so uneqal, and yet better be beaten then beat; I
concluded that it was best to lay down the cudgels, or to let them lie rather,
and leav Lilie to rant and rail at his pleasure.

And indeed for his scurrilous girds, broad terms, and bad language, I was well
content; and rest still resolved, so to do. Let him rank and reckon me by name
in the list of the mute, dumb, and old doting Priests, which the late Comet
says, must be routed, or rooted out. And yet by the way, as one sometime
demanded of one of his accomplices, How it came to pass, that they, who take upon
them by the Stars, to tell every draggle-tail'd Girl that comes to them to
enquire after a Silver Spoon lost, what was become of it, and which way it was
gone; yet could not by their star-skil foresee and foretell the Scotch Kings
defeat at Worcester, his escape by flight, and which way he was fled: So would
I fain know of this great Star-master, how it comes to pass, that he who by
this Comet can foretell us of such great matters to be effected by it, could not
by the Stars foresee and foretell us of the coming of the Comet, and how long it
should last, being a matter of so great importance. But let this go for a
Parenthesis, return we to our task. Let him tell me, That I prove all I write on
Jer. 10. 2. by Strabo, Pliny, Lucian, and Cicero, etc. else I might go sleep.
Bid me go write another Commentary on that Text, and prove mine Annotations
Canonical by Strabo and Cicero, two pure Heathen Autors. Let him tell me, that
in my late Vindication with much scurrilitie I qote Lucian (...) Scoffer,
Papias and Balbus, two Logger-headed Grammarians and Heathens against
Astrology, and so play the fool in producing the judgment of men disaffected to
the point in qestion. Let him style me a covetous wretch, whose slanderous Pen
would make the world believ, that Jacob Behmen was a Dutch Wizard; whereas his
divine works give a beginning to new discoveries of knowledge; (to wit, telling
us, what God did before the world began; of an endless number of transactions
before this world was created, and of two co-infinite and coeternal ones, God
and the Abyss; of which elsewhere more at large.) But this Wizard is no Wizard,
forsooth, but a true Prophet, and his writings Divine works or Oracles. For he
foretold long since, that a Lilie should blossom to us in these Northern
Countries, and should grow to a great flourishing tree among us, if we do not
destroy it with the Sectarian contentions of our learned men, while we contend,
and dispute, and wrangle with it. Thus Lilie of him, out of him. And can any
wiseman, think we, doubt, whom this Prophecy concerns? who no marvel then, if
he cannot endure, to hear J. B. termed a Wizard, any more then himself. But
these ar all but petty sprinklings, and slight dashes of his he sparrows qil.
Let him tell me, breaking out into broader terms, and far larger letters, making
use of his great Turkies Text Pen; That I am an old, covetous, stiff-necked
Churl, who having given over preaching, now like a child teach, or am taught a
new mode of spelling to my Proselytes, and cant the art of lying and scolding
to the Wives of Billingsgate, being my self unmarried. Yea, to these let him
add as many more reproachful epithits as he will, and load me with as many
more contumelious terms as he pleases; all this wind shall shake no corn at all
with me: As Symmachus sometimes, (if my memory fail me not,) Nullius
neqitiatanti est, ut ^^t^ me o digna sit. None of all his scurrilitie, at the
most, and the highest, shall mov me one jot. I shall but smile at the man's
simplicity, and laugh at his folly, if he be so silly, as to suppose any
that read him so senseless, that they can by him be induced to believ the
things to be true and real, that here he writes of me. So that herein he does
but (as Jude speaks) foam out his own filth, and (as Jude 13.
Solomon of the foolish) proclaim his own folly. For mine own Prove. 12. 23.
part, I account them but as words of course with Mr. Lilie, and as Bio said in
the like case, am no more affected with them, then as Plut. design. profect.
if he bid me, Good morrow. No^ would I blot paper with such base unsavory
stuff, save only to let those see, who it may be have not light on his Book,
or looked into it, what sweet flowers of his usual rhetoric they are like to
find it fraught with; and that such as otherwise do not so well know him, may
judge of the man by the manner of his writing.

To call a man Theif, or a woman Whore, I have heard some say, will bear no
action at Law; but to say, You are a theif, and stole such a matter from such
an one; or, You are a whore, and were taken in bed with such a man, will. And
the reason hereof seems, because those general and indefinite terms ar deemed
stomackful words only, whereas in the other there is a charge with particular
matter of fact. Had this Railer therefore kept himself within this compass, and
contented him with such general, base, and foul terms, I should never have
troubled either my self with writing, or any other with reading these lines.
For as for those particulars, that he snaps at, concerning some Autors that I
qote, how sorry, poor, idle, frothie, frivolous, yea, and falls, his exceptions
and allegations ar, will soon appear unto any, that shall be pleased to take so
much pains, as to consult the Annotations and Vindication of them that are
every where together abroad.

For example, All I write on Jer. 10. 2. he says, I prove by Strabo, Lucian,
Pliny, and Cicero; whereas of Lucian I have not any one word there; the other
three I cite joyntlie, only to show, That Astrologers were ancientlie termed
Chaldeans; and Pliny apart, to show, What antiqitie of observation the Heathen
Diviners pretended for their superstitious divinations by the flight of fouls,
and from the bowels of beasts; That in my Vindication I qote Lucian, a Scoffer:
But to what purpose? To prove ought in controversy by him? No. But to show,
That an Impostor in his times used the like shifts that Lilie now does, tho in
some kind more wisely, and warily then he. But I qote also there, two
Logger-headed Grammarians and Heathens. If his meaning be in sensu composito,
that those two Grammarians were Heathens, it is false; they were both
Christians, tho they lived in an obscure and corrupt age. But what do I cite
them for? To show, that they were sounder, coneurring therein with the learned
of other, and better ages, in the notation of some words, and distinction of
some terms, then some of Lilies Patrons, and Advocates; and the more shame then
for them, professing much learning, and charging others with ignorance, to come
short in such petty matters of such Logger-headed Grammarians, as their Client
says they were. Or, if he mean in sensu diviso, that I qote other Autors, that are pure Heathens (as elsewhere he says of Strabo and Cicero) against
Astrology. I might demand of him, Whether Strabo and Cicero ar more pure
Heathen, or any that I qote against Astrology, then Thales and Solon, whom
his Advocate qotes for it; or whether Hermes, Proclus, Plotinus, Ptolomie,
Albumazar, Hali Rodoan, Baranzanus, etc. be any better then such, whom he
qotes for his practice, and on whose authority, next to his good Angels, of
whom by his silence, he now seems ashamed, he principally rests and relies. I
qote Heathen Autors indeed; but to what purpose? To show, that the wiser sort
even among the Heathen discovered the vanity and folly of this pretended
skill: As Clemens, Augustine, and others of the Ancients, produce the like, to
show, that the wiser sort of them disavowed the multiplicitie of their
counterfeit Deities. Yea, but I play the fool in producing the judgment of men
disaffected to the point in qestion. Not, I hope, when I produce them to prove,
that they are not all such silly Ignoramusses, as Lilie and his Advocate would
bear the world in hand, that tax his trade, and that it is not out of mere
ignorance that they disallow and condemn it; unless he can prove, that they are
all also such Logger-heads, as he says those two were.

But in all these particulars thus specified, and here carped at, there is
nothing of much moment, nor ought that contains in it any matter of scandal.
One or two other things there are, wherewith albeit they no way at all concern,
either my Charge against him, or his Defense of his own Cause, wherein he is as
mute as a fish; yet he strives what he can, to asperse my good name,
endeavoring to fasten some particulars upon me, that may tend unto scandal;
which I suppose therefore, it may concern me to take notice of, and to clear my
self from his false imputations: that which diverse of my Friends also have
incited me to do.

One of the wisest of mere men, that ever was since the fall, tells us, (...)
That a good name is a matter Eccles 7. 1.
of more worth, then a precious ointment; (which were said to be (...) and
(...), very highly prized in those parts) Matthew. 26. 7. John 12. 3. Prove. 22.
1. Live. l. 3.
and more to be esteemed of then riches and much treasure. And a Heathen man
therefore says, Famae and fidei damna majora sunt qod q^ aestimari possunt;
That the wrongs a man receives in his good name and credit, ar greater damages
then can be valued. We have a common saying among us, That for a man to have a
bad name, it is as good, or bad rather, as to be half hanged. But the Greek
Orator goes further then so, and says, (...) Dio P^us. orat. 46.
(...), That it were not a greater penalty for a man to be stoned to death or
burnt qick, then justly and deservedly, to live in disgrace: And the Greek
Father, (...), Greg. Naz. cont. Arian.
That death it self is more tolerable then disgrace: Yea, the Apostle Paul
himself professes to be of the (...)* 1 Cor. 9. 15.
(...), that it were better for him to die, that any man should take his life,
rather then his glorying away from him. And he admonishes all Christian men to
be very charie in this kind, following (...), such things as ar of good Phil 4.
8. Romans 12. 17. 2 Cor. 8. 21.
report; providing (...) not good only, but goodly, as the word properly
signifies; honest things, as we render it, not in the sight of God only, but
in the sight of men also; Caventes and nobis a peccato, and ill is a scandalo,
as Bernard speaks; being careful to shun, as the offending of God by any
carriage* B^rn. de temp. 74. 1 Cor. 10. 32.
simply evil, so of giving occasion of offense to man, by any course that may
prove scandalous, (...), says Clemens of Alexandria, That they may not only
Clem. Paedag. l. 3. 11. Julian. de Viduit. c. 12.
be faithful in regard of God, but of credit also in regard of men. Hence it
is, that Julian says, No^ is necessaria est vita nostra, aliis fama nostra;
that Our good life is needful for our selves, our good name for others, as well
as our selves: And Austine, Opus est bona fama apud homines, bona conscientia
apud Deum. Need have we as well of a good report with men, Aug. ad fratr. erem.
sermon. 52.
as of a good conscience toward God. According to that of the Apostle
concerning himself, that it was his constant endeavor and Acts 24. 16.
exercise to keep (...) a conscience free from offense; that is, from giving
occasion thereof unto either, both toward God and men; and therefore, Qi
conscientiae fidens famam Ibid.
negligit, crudelis est. For a man, says he, relying upon his conscience, to
be retchless and regardless of his good name, it is a kind of cruelty both to
others, and to himself.

In which consideration, that renowned Roman Emperor Mark Antonine, albeit with
the Stoick's he reckoned, (...) M. Anton. l. 2. sect. 11.
(...), fame and report, good or bad, in rebus mediis; among those things that
were neither simply good, nor evil of themselves; and does therefore admonish
men to rest principally (as the Apostle also professes that he did) on the
inward testimony of their Id. l. 4. sect. 12. and l. 6. sect. 2. 22. 1 Cor. 4
3, 4.
own conscience; contenting themselves with that, where the other cannot be
had; yea, advises them to be content to sustain reproach and infamy for the
keeping of a good conscience, and to be willing to part with the one for the
retaining of the other; doing that that they know to be their duty, (...), tho
it may Id. l. 5. sect 3. and l. 11. sect. 16.
be deemed infamous, or (...), tho they shall be defamed for the doing of it,
as Pythagoras before him. That which not our Apostle only resolvs with
himself, to steer 2 Cor. 6. 8.
his course according to his card and compass, (...), passing as well, and as
willingly, through good report, and evil report; tho by some repu^ed (...), as
an imposter, and a counterfeit, when he was in truth nothing less: 2 Cor. 13 7.
Se^. Epist. 8^.
But Seneca also, Ad honestum consilium per mediam infamiam tendam: I will
break, says he, through the midst of infamy to the accomplishment of an
honest act; adding withal, That no man in his judgment sets an higher rate on
virtu and well doing, then he, Qi boni viri famam perdidit, ne conscientiam
perd^ret; Ibid.
Who hazards the loss of being reputed a good man, that he might not loose the
realitie, and conscientiousness of it. And elsewhere inciting his friend to the
like resolution, he tells him. Saepe justus esse debebis cum infamia; and tunc,
si sapis, mala Id. epist. 113.
opinio sic parta delectabit: That if he will do as he should do, he must
oft-times do that which is just and upright, tho he shall be ill thought of* or
ill spoken of for it; (that which Antisthenes, Epict^t l. 4 c. 6. Anton l. 7.
sect. 36. Plut. Apophth. Dio Prus. orat. 47.
as some, Alexander, as others, used to say, (...), that it was the lot of
Kings to hear ill, when they did well;) and that, if he were so wise as he
should be, an evil report, or evil repute so gotten, should be so far from
daunting or disturbing him, that it ought rather to delight him; as it is said
of those two Apostles, Peter and John, after they had been baited Acts ^5. 41.
and beaten in the consistory, they went away, (...), rejoicing, that they had
been graced so (...) ^lega^s. Casaub.
much as to be disgraced for Christ; and of Moses, that he reckoned, (...) the
sustaining of reproach for Christ, H^b* 11. 36.
a greater honor then all the treasures or royalties of Egypt could afford.

Yet notwithstanding all this, of that worthy Emperor does Julius Capitolinus,
report, That he was famae suae curiosissimus, J. Capit. i(...) Ma^c.
exceeding chary and regardful of his good name; in so much, That male
loqentium dict is vel literis, vel Sermon respondebat; Ibid.
he was careful to return answer, either by word of mouth, or in writing, unto
the sayings of such as had raised evil reports of him. Among other things, he
says, Nihil aliud magis timuit and deprecatus est qam avaritiae famam; do qa
se multis J. Cap ibid.
epistolis purgat. He was solicitous to devolv and depel from himself nothing
more then the note of avarice; (cast upon him by some, it seems, as on Pius
before him, for his frugalitie, and moderating of public expenses, that he
might nor be overburdensom Vid M. Anton. l. 1. sect. 16. and l. 6. sect 30.
to the subject) whereof he labored to purge himself in diverse of his Epistles.
So careful ar good men, and have ever been, both to gain, and to retain a good
report; and the Apostle reqires it, as a matter of much concernment in a
Minister of the Gospel, (...), That he have 1 Timothy 3. 7.
a good report, even from those that are without; that he may be the fitter and
better able to do good, as well on those without, by converting and bringing
them in, as on those within, by confirming and building them up, having a good
repute with, and being well thought of by either: To which purpose he adds,
(...), That he may not fall under Ibid.
reproach, and into the snare of the calumniater or slanderer; as the same term
would be also rendered in the same Chapter in those words, Not a novice, (...),
lest being puffed up, he fall under the censure of the calumniater; Ibid. V. 6.
Ephesians. 4 27.
as also in those words elsewhere, (...), nor give place to the calumniater,
back-biter, or talebearer: Such as ar wont by falls reports, as with fuel, to
Prove 26. 10, 12.
foment and seed the fire of anger and ill will, where they find it already
kindled; as also ar persons so affected no less prone, lying in wait to that
purpose, to take occasion by any flying, tho never so falls report to traduce
Gods Ministers, and blast their credit, all they can. And as all Christian
people therefore, so Christian Ministers much more, ought to be very charie
and tender of their reputation: As the Apostle Paul apparentlie shows himself
to have been, when he takes so much pains, and spends so many almost whole
Chapters, in the Vindication of it, against those falls brethren, and
counterfeit Apostles, who had at 1 Cor. 9. 2 Cor. 10 and 11 and 12 and 13.
Corinth endeavored to wrong him therein. And I suppose some necessity lies
upon me at present also to do.

For howsoever Lilies words ar, as we use to say, no slander; he is so well
known to be a most notorious lier, and one that regards not what he says; and
it is a received rule in the Civil Law, Mendax semel, mendax semper
praesumitur. He that has been once taken in a lie, and much more, one that
has been often taken (as he has been) in falls tales not a few, is never after
to be credited. And again, A bad man's reproach is no dispraise. The
commendation of such, is sometime rather deemed a kind of dispraise, making the
party whom such commend, suspected to be like those by whom he is commended.
And Seneca therefore, Non est infamia infamari ab infamibus. It is no infamy
Sen epist. ^2.
for a man to be defamed, by those that are infamous themselves; And therefore,
says he, as it is mere fondness for a man, Laetari, Ibid.
qod ab eis laudatur, qos non po^est ipse laudare, to rejoice when he is
commended of those, whom himself cannot commend. So is it mere madness for a
man, Vereri ne ab infamibus infametur, Id. epist. 91.
to fear being traduced and defamed, by those that are infamous themselves, and
he well knows to be such. Yet because, as Medius, one of Great Alexanders base
Parasites, and among his Sycophants, a chief Master, is reported to have
delivered this lesson to his Scholars, (...) Plut. de adult.
That they should boldly and confidentlie, touch or twich, and snap or bite
men with calumnies or slanders, not regarding how untru, how unlikelie they
were; for, said he, (...); that is, as Seneca De ira. l. 3. c. 6.
renders it, Cum vul(...) sanatum est, manebit cicatrix. Tho the party bitten,
lick the wound never so whole again, yet some scar will remain upon the place
that was hurt. And the Poet therefore, when he had said, Conscia men's recti
vulgi mendacia ridet. Naso Fast. l. 4.



A good conscience sets light by, and laughs at folks lying reports. Subjoyns
yet withal,

Sed nos in vitium (and so, in vituperium) credula turba sumus. People ar
commonly over-credulous, too prone to entertain evil reports, and to conceiv
evil surmises; too many men ar naturally of a suspicious disposition; and as
the Mimik has it, Seqiorem in partem strenua est suspicio. P. Syrus.

Suspicion is wont to warp and bend more strongly to the worst side. Whence
that saying so freqent in most men's mouths, There is seldom any smoke, but
where there is some fire; and yet in truth, there is smoke often, yea, and much
smoke, such as the by word relates to, even a great smother of foggie fumes,
raised by slanderous tongues, where no small spark of fire, or ember of truth at
all is to be found.

The premises seriously considered, and all things well weighed, after much
debate to and fro within my self, at length I resolved to follow the precedent
of that thrice noble and renowned Emperor; the more noble and renowned and
worthy of imitation, because so Philosophical, and tho no Christian, yet
Christian-like in moralities, as well for practice as precept; and by some few
lines at least, to clear my self from those soul, but falls aspersions,
wherewith this Sycophants calumniating pen has endeavored to stain my good
name; the rather, for that my courses and carriages, having lived in an obscure
corner, may in that regard be less known abroad; and my former works and
writings, whereby some things objected here ar to be cleared, being now either
wholly out of print, or not easily procured, may not be obvious or read^e at
hand for others, to make use of in the trial of the present debate.

The slanderous charges then of this Sycophant are principally two. The former
of them is thus delivered by him.

Mr. Gataker formerlie a stiff Prelate, preaching impudentlie for the Liberties
or Sports of the Sabbath, viz. Cards, Dice, etc. Afterward in hope of Bishops,
Deans, or Chapter-Lands, a pretended Presbyterian; since its decay, the poor
m^n is mute, etc. For what follows will be best fitted to his after-charge.

Principiis omen inesse solet. Beginnings ar deemed ominous. Ad limen
offendere, or, In portu impingere. For a man to trip at the threshold, when he
is going abroad, and a ship to strike on the bar, or run on ground, when it is
setting out to sea, have been by old said Saws, pronounced to be but bad signs,
and to bode little good. This charge therefore appeering with an apparent lie
in the foretop, gives no good presage of that, that ensues: For when or where
was Mr. G. ever a Prelate, can Lilie tell, think we? or any man else? and how
could he be a stiff Prelate, that never was any? This is therefore a manifest,
and conspicuous falsehood to begin with; and as the Greek Tragoedian sometime
said. (...). Eurip. Ae^l.

That which goes for a ruled Case in the Civil Law, Malum principium malus
finis seqitur. A bad beginning is wont to bring forth a bad end. And the like
is entered as an Axiom in Pett. Fons R^g* Jur. Leo Imp. ad Maurit. Ep. apud
Great. Cause. 1. Q(...). 1.
the body of the Canon Law, Principio q(...) sunt inchoata malo, vix est ut
bono peragantur exitu. Those things that are ill begun scarce ever end well.
According to that, Rarus principii est exitus bonus mali.


A bad beginning seldom comes to a good end. Where yet the Gloss upon the place
goes further then the Text, and says, Vix. Jo. Sam. Glos. ib.
i. Nunqam. Scarce ever, that is, Never. And the great Philosopher to the same
purpose sticks not to say, (...) Aris(...) (...). E^hic. l. 5 c. 1.
(...). It is impossible; but that that which is faulty at the first, should
prove il at the last. And that ancient Father, and stout Champion of Christ,
Athanasius, seconding Aristotle herein, yea, going further yet then he, (...)
Anton. Melis. l. 1. c. 16.
(...). That that has a bad beginning, can never be deemed sound in ought, as
being all stark naught. And Seneca therefore, from Bio an ancient Greek of
great note, thus determines the point, Let every man set it down for a
position, S^^. de tr(...)qil. c. 15.
and know it to be an undoubted truth, which Bio sometime said, Omnia hominum
negotia similia init iis esse; That all men's affairs will prove good or bad,
according as their beginnings are. And yet more expreslie and particularly to
our present purpose, I sidore the Egyptian, one of Chrysostoms chief Isid. Pel.
l. 2. epist. 229.
Scholars, (...). He that in the beginning swarveth from the truth, will in his
proceedings roll further away from it, and end at last with some foul and
shameful catastrophe or other. Lilie therefore beginning his charge thus with a
notorious lie, foretells those that read him by what they find in the front
or forehead of it, how little truth they may look for in the residu of his
ensuing relation, and that as it begins, so the progress of it shall be, and the
close answerable to either.

But Mr. G. says he, formerly a stiff Prelate. I might demand of him, if Mr.
G. were ever a Prelate, stiff or slack, how or when was he deposed, or by what
means came he to be beref^ of his Prelacy? for now sure, it is well known, he is
none: But to let that pass. When he was such an one, what then did he? Why,
When he was such a Prelate, he then impudentlie preached for the liberty. of
Sabbath sports. Very true indeed, if you take it in sensu composito, it is a
most certain and undeniable truth; when he was the one, he did the other. But
take it in sensu diviso, as he intends here and does, that I was once a
Prelate, and that I did sometime so preach; and the one is as true as the other,
either of them a most shameful, or shameless lie rather, both as falls as God is
true But, as he sometime said, Qi semel verecundia fines transierit, eum ben^
and gnaviter impudentem Cicer. ad Luceium.
esse oportet. When a man has once gone beyond the bounds of truth and
modesty, it stands him upon then to break further out, to grow impudent to the
purpose, and to lie beyond measure.

For what proof can he produce of Mr. G. so preaching, or who ever heard him
preach for Liberty of Sports on the Lords day? or, for Liberty to profane the
Lords day, in one kind or other? Nor let any take exception, as some have
done, that I style it the Lords day, rather then the Sabbath. I remember a
Speech of Dr. Oldisworth, my worthy Friend, living then in mine Honorable
Patron the Lord Hobarts house, (as eager an urger of the strict observance of
that day as the most) upon occasion of discourse of some debate then about it.
The day, said he, has three Names in common use given it, the Sunday, the
Sabbath day, the Lords day. The first an Heathenish name, the second a Jewish,
the third a Christian; and why should not, said ^e, this last be preferred
before either of the former. And the first indeed is a name that came at first
from the Heathen, yet is it found used by Justine Martyr in his Apology to the
Roman Emperor, in behalf of the Christians, mentioning it as the day of (...)
their meeting; no^ dare I utterlie condemn the use of it: The Sunday for the
name of a day, the first day of the week, as it is termed Acts 20. 7. any more
then Bethshemesh (tho from an idolatrous or superstitious at least, original)
the Suns house or place, for the name of a City, 1 Samuel 6. 12, 13. The second
may be termed Jewish, because a term peculiar to them in times past, but common
to us now with them, tho differing in the day, and supposed by some to be by
the Evangelist, Matthew, 24. 20. used of our day; which tho it seem not so
probable, yet may qestionless not unfitlie be used of it, seeing it is, and
ought to be a day of holy rest unto us, as was their Sabbath then to them,
Isa. 58. 13. The third and last, is the name peculiar to Christians, not common
either to Heathen or Jews with them; that which the Lords beloved Disciple
gives it, the Lords Day, Revel. 1. 10. (...), the Lords day, fanctified and set
apart for the Lords service, as (...), the Lords Table, 1 Cor. 10. 21. and
(...), the Lords Supper, consecrated and set apart for the memorial of Christ,
and by his Institution; which to me therefore, seems the fittest term for it.
But call the day by which, or whether term of them you please, I have,
wheresoever I exercised my Ministry, as occasion was offered, been a constant
pleader for, and ins^ant presser of the du observation of the day; as that
which I ever esteemed to be a main pillar and support of the practice, yea, a
principal means both of the maintenance and advancement of the power of Piety,
among Gods people.

It is a Rule prescribed by some of the great Masters of Physic, Medicus
m^rbos observet epidemios, That a Physician shoul* observe what diseases ar
rifest in the t^mes or places he lives in, and apply his studies and courses
princ pallie to the cure of them. And according to that direction, appliable to
our Function, considering the freqencie of abuses among people in mispending a
great part of that day in most places where I came, I did the rather usuallie
bend my self in my teaching, to dissuade and deter those that I spoke to, from
those abusive courses, whereby I perceived the day, or any part of it, to be
commonly profaned by them.

To this purpose, before I came to Lincolns Inn, while I lodged in the House of
that Religious Knight, my worthy Friend and Kinsman, Sir William Cook, near to
Charing Cross, being reqested to Preach now and then at Martins in the Fields,
and having taken notice how the Gentry, many of them thereabout spent much of
the Lords day in Complemental Visitations, I took occasion one day, out of Isa.
58. 13. to handle the Doctrine of the Sabbath or Lords day; and among other
things endeavored to show, That it was not to be spent in such Civil
Complements, but in Religious Employments. And this I remember the rather by a
good token, which it will not be amiss to relate. It fell out the Lords day, next
ensuing,, that an ancient Gentlewoman, one of that Congregation, being returned
home from the Afternoon Exercise, while she sat in an upper Room, ripping off
some Lace from an old Garment, which she intended to make use of otherwise,
heard a Coach to make stay on the other side of the street, and looking out at
the Window to see whose it was, when she espied a Lady her Niece, whom it
staid for, entering it, to go abroad in it for such purpose. Oh, qoth she, to
her waiting Maid, then attending upon her, did not my Niece N. hear Mr. G. the
last Lords day, and is she now going out to visit again. Whereupon one of that
Family afterward occasionallie meeting me, thus merrily saluted me, Sir, when
you Preach next of the Sabbath, be pleased to tell our Gentlewomen, that they
must not ^it ripping Gold-lace off their old Peticoats upon the Lords day; and
withal told me the story. But for which, I should not in likelihood have
called to mind again that Sermon being preached so long since.

At my coming to Lincolns Inn, there was on the Lords day one Lecture only at
seven in the morning, nor had there been any other before. There being settled
some space of time, when I observed that diverse of the great practisers spent a
great, if not the greatest part of the day, the Afternoon especially, in
entertaining of their Clients, I took occasion in my teaching, to step a little
aside out of the road I was then in, to speak somewhat of that subject,
endeavoring to show them, That it was as lawful for the Husbandman to hedge and
ditch, or to follow his Tillage on that day, as for the Lawyer to employ it in
consulting with, and attending his Clients. And I pressed the point so far,
that through the good hand of God, going along with it, and carrying home his
own Ordinance to the hearts of the hearers; it made so deep an impression upon
them, that upon a motion made by some of the chief ones at the next meeting
after it, a consultation was had, what course might be taken for the future
prevention of so common and irregular a practice: And after advice therein
taken with me, it was by common consent, agreed on, That the Morning Lecture on
the Lords day, should be drawn down to the usual hour in other places, and the
Wednesday Lecture transferred to the Afternoon of the Lords day. Which,
howsoever it were a matter of much more labor to my self to speak twice in one
day (which, as I am informed, in the French and Dutch Congregations is seldom
or never done; and some of my Successors have complained of, and blamed me, for
giving way thereunto) and by means thereof I was abbridged of that liberty of
hearing others abroad, which I had formerlie enjoyed; yet for the atcheiving of
my main ay^ herein, of gaining a more du and diligent observance of the day, I
right willingly dispensed with mine own ease and advantages, and condescended
thereunto. And this was the ground of the alteration of the Lectures in that
House; which, I suppose, in that manner, in which, upon this occasion they were
then settled, continu still to this day.

During mine abode at Lincolns Inn, the time approaching for my taking the
degree of Bachelor in Divinity, I procured a course at St. Mary's in
Cambridge, for mine English Sermon; the first and last that I ever preached
there, having never had the boldness before to appear in that place. This fell
out to be the very next day after Qeen Elizabeth's decease; which being not
known yet at Cambridge, the Qeen, as still surviving, was at the Forenoon Sermon
solemnlie prayed for by him that preached that day at Kings College: But about
Noon the report came down of the Qeen departed this life, and King James
proclaimed, which caused an exceeding great concours of people at the Afternoon
Sermon, though it were no Lords day: When by advice of the Vice-Chancelor, in
regard that no public notice of it was as yet sent down, I conceived my
Petition for the King, in a kind of circumlocution, For the present Supreme
Governor, without expression of his name: At that branch of my Prayer, the
tears trickling down my Cheeks, and scarce any one dry eye in the whole
Assembly, as I was afterward informed. This Sermon then had on 1 Timothy 6. 6. at
the reqest of some Friends, who had seen some Copies of it, was many years
after published under this Title, The Gain of Godliness; wherein is extant the
ensuing passage concerning the Lords day, p. 36-38.

For worldly wealth, men can toil and moil all the week long, and yet ar they
not weary, they think not the whole week long neither; but for the heavenly
gain, for the spiritual thrift, we have but one day of seven, and we think that
to much too; we think the day all to long, the labor all lost, and the whole
time cast away, that we employ and spend to this purpose: We say as the profane
Jews sometime said, When wil^he New Moon Amos 8. 5.
be past, and the Sabbath once over, that we may return again to our worldly
affairs? Yea, many among us have not the patience to tarry so long, but spend
a great part of the Sabbath, that is Gods Market, or Market Day, for the
getting of this spiritual Gain, either about their worldly affairs, or their
bodily delights.

The Sabbath day, I say, is Gods Market Day; and those that seek to take away
the Sabbath, attempt to put down Gods Markets, and so do the Devil good
service, whatsoever their intent be. As freqenting of Markets makes a rich man,
so keeping of Sabbaths makes a rich Christian; and as we count him a bad
Husband, that follows game on the Market Day, so may we as well count him a
spiritual unthrift, that spends the Sabbath in that sort.

But may some say, When we have been at Church, and heard the Sermon and
Service, is not Gods Market Day then done?

I answer, If the Sabbath be a day, then it is not so soon done; Gods Market
lasts all day long. Yea, grant the principal, because the public of it be
past; yet, as Market-falks returning from Market, will be talking of their
Markets as they go by the way; and be casting up of their penny-worths, when
they come home; reckon what they have taken, and what they have laid out, and
how much they have gotten. So should we, after we have heard the Word
publicly, confer privatelie of it with others, at least meditate on it by our
selves; and be sure to take an account of our selves, how we have profited that
day, by the Word that has been spoken unto us, and by other Religious
Exercises that have been used of us. And us the Marketman counts that but an
evil Market Day, that he has not gained somewhat on, more or less; so may we
well account it an evil Sabbath to us, whereon we have not profited somewhat;
whereon we have not either increased our knowledge, or been bettered in
affection; whereon we have not been further either informed in judgment, or
reformed in practice; whereon we have added no whit at all to our Talent. Thus
then and there.

After my leaving of Lineol^s Inn, being reqested by my Right Honorable Lord,
the Lord Hobart, to bestow a Sermon on them one Lords day at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet, before the Judges and Sergeants at Law of that House: I preached
unto them on Psalm. 82. 6, 7. That which came forth in Print shortly after,
about the same time with the former, under the Title of Gods Parley with
Princes. In it page 12-14. these words may be seen and read;

Here let me more particularly, as from God, and in Gods Name, entreat you, to
have a special regard of observing Gods Sabbaths. You that are to see them
observed by others, ought you not much more to observe them your selves? Your
carriage is a kind of censure; that all men fix their eyes upon; that most men
shape their courses by. If others then shall see you riding in your Circuits on
the Sabbath, will they not think within themselves? And why may not I ride as well
on the Sabbath to a Fair, as the Judge may to the place of Assize? If they shall
be warned to appear before you for some hearing, by themselves, or by their
Counsel upon the Sabbath, will they not be ready to argu from the works of your
calling, to the works of their own? And why may not I as well be about my work,
as they about theirs? And in truth (to speak plainly as the thing is) why may
not a Smith as well work at the Forge, or an Husband man at the Plough, as a
Judge sit to hear Civil Causes on the Sabbath? The one hinders the
Sanctification of it, as well as the other.

And if it be alleged, That the one is (as before was proved indeed) more
specially Gods work. So were the repairing of a Church, which yet the Mason or
Plummer may not work about on the Sabbath; no more then Besaleel or Aholiab
might Exodus 31. 2, 6, 11, 13, 15.
about the work of the Tabernacle; for the furtherance whereof, God would not
admit, or give way to the least violating of his Sabbath. Thus also there.

Yea, but Mr. G. tho he pleaded so hard for restraint of work on the Lords day,
yet he preached as earnestly for play, and in particular, if Lilie may be
believed, for Carding and Dicing upon the Lords day. For so run the words of
his charge here, Preaching impudentlie for the Liberties or Sports of the
Sabbath, Cards, and Dice, etc.

Which parcel of his Charge being of the same stamp with the rest, is not
unlike some short skirt of a beggars coat, made up of a few sorry snips and
shreds, unhandsomlie stitcht up and il-favoredlie patcht together; having
reference, in part to King James his Book of Liberty for Disports on Sundays
and Holidays, and in part to my Treatise of the Nature and Use of Lots; but so
blended together and entermingled the one with the other, that they make a mere
medley.

For, as for the former, King James indeed in the year 1618. the Sixteenth of
His Reign, publ shed a Declaration, wherein he gave Liberty, for some Disports
that might be used on the Sabbath or the Lords day. But what ones were they,
that therein he gave way to? Cards and dice? etc. No: There is not one word or
title at all concerning them in the whole Book; but they are expressly therein
named these, Dancings men or women, May-games, Whit sun-Ales, Morrice-dances,
Rush-bearings, setting up of May-poles, and other sports therewith used. These
ar the Disports by name there designed, wherewith leav is given and authority
to solemnize and celebrate the Lords day. An Act il-beseeming so prudent and
understanding a Prince. And such, it may seem, as afterward himself was ashamed
of, and unwilling to own: For I have heard it reported, that when a Copy of his
Works gathered together, newly printed, and richly made up, was presented
unto him, before any of them should go abroad, having upon the opening of it,
lighted upon this piece, not without expression of much indignation he tore it
out with his own hands, and gave strict charge to have it done out of the whole
impression, where now none of it appears. Which if it were true, (for I dare not
confidentlie avow it, having it only by hearsay) the greater and more
grievous was the sin and shame of those great Prelates; who whither to please
the King and Court, or to cross, vex, curb, and ensnare the Conscientious
Ministers; not then only approved the practice, but long after renewed afresh
the memory of it, and pressed his Son King Charles to revive it again, and to
enjoin the publishing of it by the Ministers of the Word in their several
places, upon pain of suspension; which not a few of them sustained for the
refusal thereof.

Now in defense of this Declaration, and in justification of such Sports used
on the Sabbath, whereas this Lier affirms, that I preached, it is a most
notorious untruth; for neither did I ever speak, write, or preach word in
defense or allowance thereof, or of any such Sports used on that day; neither
was that Declaration ever published first or last, either by my self, or any
assistant of mine: Yea, that I did in writing directly oppose, and expressly
condemn it, may appear plainly by what was before related, tho preached indeed
before that Declaration came out, yet printed at first two year after it, Anno
1620. and reprinted without alteration of ought, in the year 1637.

But pass we on to the other Book here related to, my Treatise of the Nature
and Use of Lots, which is girded at in the terms of Cards and Dice, shuffled in
under the disguise of Sabbath Sports, there by to wind and screw in my Treatise
within the verg and compass of the subject matter with allowance, admitted in
that other deservedly abhorred Book. True it is, I acknowledge it, and am not
at all ashamed to own it, that I published sometime a large Treatise of the
Nature and Use of Lots, having in the Pulpit before, more briefly delivered
somewhat of that subject; and I published it the rather, being by diverse of my
Reverend Brethren, unto whom I had imparted the sum of what I had delivered,
encited so to do: To refel the misreports that some other, from whom, in some
particulars I dissented, had raised concerning the Doctrine therein taught by
me. In this Discourse I make it evidentlie to appear, that a Lot in the genuine
nature and ordinary use of it, (and with extraordinary, without special
commission and injunction, we have nothing to do) is no sacred matter, nor
divine Oracle; and may therefore be used indifferently, as well in light and
ludicrous, as in more serious and weighty affairs: And that in regard hereof,
Divisorie and Lusorie Lots, ar lawful and warrantable; Consultorie and
Divinatorie, unlawful and damnable: And that it is therefore as well a
superstitious conceit on the one hand, to condemn any game in regard of a Lot
used in it; as it is on the other hand, a superstitious and irreligious
practice, to make use of a Lot, for the discovery of Gods will and purpose,
either what he would have done by us, or determines himself to do. And in this
judgment I still rest, having, as occasion has been, sufficiently and fully
(as I conceiv) refelled and answered the Arguments and Objections of all, who
have either published ought herein against me, that ever came to my hands, or
by writing dealt in private with me: So as that I have not received any further
Reply from any one of them; yea, I have so far forth convinced some of the
greatest and most eminent among them, that they have been enforced to
relinqish, and have refused to own, that ground, which together with the most
of the other party, they had formerlie with much confidence built on; to wit,
That in every casualtie there is a special and immediate providence: (Seeing
the palpable absurdity thereof plainly discovered) but in room thereof have
endeavored to introduce another new conceit, no less absurd then the former; as
may be seen in the Second Edition of that concerning Lots in English, Chap. 4.
page 52-59. and in mine Antithesis to Dr. Ames his Theses in Latin. Nor do I
any further justify any Game, Sport, or Pastime, depending either in part,
or in whole upon casualtie, (of which kind Cards and Dice indeed ar) if they be
any way abused, or found otherwise faulty; save only, that they are not
therefore evil, or to be condemned, because there is a Lot in them.

Yea but, tho I did not preach for Morris dances and May-games, yet I did
impudentlie Preach for Carding and Dicing, on the Lords day. For so much do
this calumniaters words import, That I preached impudentlie for Sabbath sports,
as Cards and Dice, etc. So by his Et Caetera, indeed showing himself not
unwilling to have those other also understood.

I need say no more here, but sit liber judex, Let my Book decide it; that my
Treatise of Lots, I mean, wherein that may be found, which I shall here thence
transcribe, directly opposite to either, Chap. 9. where I give Cautions for
Game in general. Sect. 4. p. 293. and 295.

Page 293. Recreations are to be used as soberlie, so seasonablie. Recreation
is good, when it is seasonable, when it comes in his du time; else, as it is
with fish and fowl, when they come out of season, that is evil, that is good
otherwise. Now then do men use Game and Recreation unseasonablie, when they
should and ought to be otherwise employed, either in the works of their special
Callings, or about the holy things of God, (to wit, as it follows more
particularly and fully, Page 295.) when they should be tending the holy
things of God, either in public or in private. And thus, it is a sin to follow
game on the Sabbath, as the Jews used to do, and do yet to this day; and as the
Popish sort ar noted ordinarily to solemnize their Festivals. For this is not
to sanctify or consecrate the Sabbath as holy to the Lord. The Sabbath indeed
is a day of rest, but of holy rest; of rest not to worldly recreations, but
to heavenly meditations; of rest to religious and spiritual employments. It is
sacrilege therefore to follow game on the Sabbath; at such time as we (...)old
be plying the service and worship of God; it is time stolen from God, that we
spend so on our sports: Which it were less sin therefore for us to spend on
some serious affairs, according to that which one of the Ancients well says,
Melius est Die Sabbati arare qam saltare. Aug. in Psalm. 91. and 32.
Melius tota die foderent, qam tota die luderent. It were better for a man in
such manner on the Sabbath, to plough then to play; and to dig and delv, then
to dance all day. For the lighter the occasion of sinning is, where all other
things are eq^l, the greater the sin is. Where I cite also among others, in the
Margin, the words of Robert Grosthed, ancientlie Bishop of Lincoln, on the
Decalog, Dies t(...) a Christiano expendi debet in operibus sanctis. The whole
Lords day Christian people ought to spend in holy employments. And this, as it
was at first, both preached Anno 1618. and printed Anno 1619. which was not
long after that Book of Liberty, or Licentiousness rather, came abroad; so it
was in the year 1627. reprinted in a second Edition, with Addition and
Emendation of some things, but without any Retractation, Subtraction,
Qalification, or Alteration of ought in this point. And let this therefore
remain, as an impudent calumny of a shameless Sycophant, upon record, That Mr.
G. Preached impudentlie for Liberty of Sabbath Sports.

But this, says he, Mr. G. did formerlie, when he was a Prelate. Of some
Province, it may be in Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia; where Mr. L. in a trance
be-like, being there one of his Auditors, heard him preach thus. But afterward
(to wit, since he either left or lost his Prelates place) in hope of Bishops,
Deans, or Chapters Lands, he became a pretended Presbyterian.

He would, at least, have men believ* that I was sometime Prelatical; but have
of late turned my coat or my copy, and gaping after some fat gobbets of the
Bishops or Deans Lands, pretended to be a Presbyterian. A calumny as falls as
its Father is, or as his former Brat has been convinced to be: And such as he
shall never be able to make good, tho his Master, that sets him on work, join
with him in it.

For my judgment concerning Church Government, it is the same still that ever it
was, since I first began to enqire into matters of that nature. A duly bounded
and well regulated Prelacie joined with a Presbytery, wherein one as President,
Superintendent or Moderator (term him what you please,) whether annual or
occasional, or more constant and continual, either in regard of years, or
parts, or both joyntlie, has some preeminence above the rest, yet so, as that
he does nothing without joint consent of the rest, (a module or pattern, whereof
I am informed to have been sometime represented unto the late King, by two
worthy persons, men of eminent parts, and moderate minds, the one a Prelate,
the other in some kind Prelatical, which had it been accepted and established,
how advantageous it might have proved, it is not for me to define; but as is
reported, was then disallowed and rejected by some great Prelates, and others,
by whom the King was most swayed.) Such a manner of Prelacie, I say, I never
durst, nor yet dare condemn. But such a Prelatical power, as was here
constituted and exercised among us, wherein Bishops and Archdeacons were
enabled and ordinarily used by their Chancellors, Officials, and Surrogates,
mostlie mere Civilians, assuming to them any sorry fellow in Orders to fit by,
as a cipher or a shadow, to pass the highest and heaviest of all
Church Censures, besides Civil Penalties in their Purses, on the Persons both
of Pastors and People, and for trifles and trivial things, mere matters of
Ceremony, oft-times silence, suspend, and deprive, while scandalous, idle, or
insufficient ones, were little regarded or looked after; Visitations being by
either usuallie held once only in a year, and then rather of Course and
Custom, or to receiv Procurations, then to any effectual Reformation of ought.
Such a Prelatical power so constituted, and so executed, I never could effect
or approv; and truly much less, when I came to see the manner of it, which I
had heard too much of before, when living so long in a Pastoral Charge, I never
in all my time saw the face of a Bishop personally present in Court, or
Archdeacon but once, (tho both constantly exacting Fees of us.) And observed,
how things were shuffled up, when Presentiments were made, and in that manner
managed; without any course taken to bring any Delinqent, to a serious sight
of, or sincere sorrow for his sin; that their Visitations might well be deemed to
be held, as one ancientlie complained, Non tam morum, qam nummorum gratia;
Rather to empty men's Purses, then to mend their manners.

And my judgment thus formed, I accordingly passed my vote, and gave my
consent with others, for the removal of that Body of Government, that was then
established with us. Yet (which I then also did not forbear to profess, as well
in deliverie of mine own sense, as in endeavor to give satisfaction to others,
seeking to me for advice,) withal conceiving, That howsoever such a System or
Fabric, as was then represented, were justly and deservedly deemed not
unmeet to be dissolved and demolished; yet if any piece of timber or
stone-work were found sound and useful in that frame, it might still be
retained, notwithstanding ought, condescended unto and agreed upon in that
Article.

On the other side, I could not but affect and approv of that Form of
Discipline settled in the Reformed French and Dutch Churches, wherein the main
course of Government is ordinarily exercised, carried on by a constant
attendance of the Ministers in their several Congregations, having for
inspection of men's cariages, some of the discreetest and most understanding
among their people, in way of assistance, adjoined unto them; which might well
be a special means, both to ease the Minister of much labor and distraction,
and to further the Reformation of things among the people amiss. Matters more
weighty, that reqire further advice, being referred unto, and transacted by
the joint concurrence of the same persons of both sorts before mentioned,
either at set-times or occasionallie convening to that purpose. Herein I was
the rather confirmed by the successful fruits and effects that this Form of
Government is reported to have produced, for the advancement of piety and
repressing of disorders in some places, where it has been established, even by
the confession and acknowledgement of some Papists themselves, who (as I have
formerly elsewhere showed) have given Testimony thereunto. See Vindicat. p.
17, 18.
Tho it cannot be expected that any Churches should enjoy such a flourishing
estate, in regard of outward accommodations and secular endowments, where the
Civil Powers do rather d^stast and dis-favor, then affect the Profession. And
this way therefore I gave my Vote in the Assembly, as diverse other, if not the
greater part, did; not as deeming it absolutely necessary, but as agreeable
to Gods Word, and such as I conceived might be most advantageous for the
carrying on of Gods work, with hopeful expectation of a successful issu, had
that Form of Government, as it was from the Assembly to both Houses
propounded, been soundly established, and backed by their Authority, who had
begun to erect it.

My deportment therefore and carriage herein, did no way swar^ or warp from my
former judgment; which both in times past I held, and do still retain, as well
concerning Prelacie, as concerning Presbytery, even the same that at present I
here ingenuouslie and freely profess. In regard whereof also in those
fore-passed troublesome times under the Prelates, I maintained a good
correspondence, and some inward familiarity with the moderater sort on either
side; as well with some few of the Prelatical party, who tho stiff for the
Ceremonies legallie established, yet misliked those innovations that in the
latter times began to creep in; nor did approv the carriage of businesses with
that rigor and extremity against such as refused conformity, being pious and
peaceable; as also with diverse of those, of the Presbyterian party, that
either openly opposed, or were known to condemn as well the Ceremonies as the
Prelacie, as things altogether unlawful, and deemed the Presbytery such as
before was described the only true Government of Christ. Howbeit, by this
means that befell me, which that noble Historian sometime said, (...), Vtrinque
caedi mos est in medio fitos: Those that dwell in the middle, between two
adverse parties, ar wont to be beaten Thucydid.
on both sides; and that Gregory that bears the name of the place where his
Father was Bishop, tho he never enjoyed the Bishopric it self, a man of a
modest and peaceable disposition, tho as zealous and eager as any against
Heretics, complains of the times ^e lived in, that amidst the vehement
dissentions and violent oppositions, with much eagernes upheld and pursued by
either against others, even between and among those, that were otherwise
Orthodox, (...), All that are peaceable and keep in the mean, because they run
not out Greg. Naz. de pa^e orat 3.
into the one or the other extremity, suffer ill from either party. So fared
it then with me, by endeavoring to walk evenlie, so far, as with safety of
conscience I could, between two extremes on either hand, it was my lot to incur
il will, and to suffer from the overeager on either side; from the one party,
because I came not up wholly to them, and because some of their people
repaired to my teaching, while they either taught not at all, or very seldom
themselves, and substituted such as taught so unprofitablie, that their people
could receiv little benefit by them; which they therefore being vexed at,
wrought underhand against me, and sought to procure a restraint of my
Ministry; wherein yet, through Gods goodness, their plots and designs were so
frustrate, that save once, and that for a very short time only, they never
took effect according to their as well endeavors, as desires; and again from
some of the violenter sort of the other party, such of them especially as
endeavored to work a Separation from our Assemblies, being deeply taxed by
them of unsoundness and insinceritie, because I complied not in all
particulars, either for opinion or practice with them, nor did encite and
animate others to do as they did. Mean while I have endeavored to shape my
course, as near and as evenlie as I could, by the card of Gods truth discovered
in his Word, and the compass of mine own Conscience, from thence informed and
directed thereunto, without declining to any bypath, either on the right hand,
or on the left. In which tenor the Lord in mercy and goodness be pleased still
to keep me, and to lead me on to the last, which must needs be ere long.

But what was it, think we, says this my Traducer, that from a professed
Prelate, induced me to turn a pretended Presbyterian? It was the hope forsooth,
says he, of some Bishops or Deans Lands? And how does that appear? Why? since
its decay the poor man is mute.

I marvel much, when or where I was ever discovered, either formerlie, or of
late, to gape after such gobbets. The time was, when by occasion of some
employment about the Edition of a learned man's works of another Profession,
left by him to be first surveyed and perfected in part by me, and then
published with the joint advice of an ancient Doctor very intimate with the
Archbishop that then was, and living mostlie in house with him, I had tender of
preferment made me by the Doctor at first from him, and upon presentment of the
work by word of mouth, after seconded in the presence of some great ones, if I
would have been biting at such baits; which I fairlie waived, considering what
hooks might lie hid under such profers, and how many have been taken therewith
to their prejudice in matters of greatest concernment.

Nor, had I been greedy of any such fat collops, out of the Bishops or Deans
Lands, would I have refused one of the prime places in the Universitie, of
which, further hereafter, wherein no such snare was, when it was freely
offered me, being in yearlie revenue, I suppose, not below diverse Deanries, if
not above some meaner Bishoprics.

But the proof subjoined, is well worth the observing; tho he jabbers so, that
one can hardly tell from his words, what he would have. Since its decay, says
he. What Is decay, think we? the decay of the Presbytery? or the decay of the
Lands? or, what other decay is it? For we have need of some Oedipus, to aread
us his riddles. But, since its decay, (be it what it will be, or what ever he
will have it to be) the man, says he, is become mute. His meaning is, it may
be; (for we must go by guess, as the most and the best ar said to do of his
trade) that since those Lands he looked after, and lived in hope of, ar gone
another way, and so he sees his hopes frustrate, the poor man (and yet not
very poor, if, as he affirms, he receivs still from his Rectorie Two hundred
pound a year) is grown mute. But sure, if he had fallen from the Prelatical to
the Presbyterian party, or pretended only so to do, in hope of getting some
such Lands thereby, one would think, he should now again desert that party,
when he perceivs that there is nothing to be gotten by adhering thereunto, yea,
when he sustains, as shall hereafter appear, no small damage thereby, and be mute
indeed, in forbearing to speak or write ought in behalf of the Presbytery,
especially now seeing, finding, and feeling it to be a course so
disadvantagious. But the man finds it to be otherwise, to his grief, it may be
in part; for neither am I yet so mute, but that he hears on both ears from me,
much more, I suppose, then he can well endure to read, or is willing to hear;
nor have I sealed up my lips yet, from owning and pleading for the Presbyterian
party. For which cause also, belike he styles me, as before a stiff Prelate,
so now a stiff-necked, or (as one of his Vouchees is pleased to style me) a
stiff-hearted Presbyterian; R. Carpenter, Adve. t. p. 436.
who, tho the Presbyterians be under a cloud with him, and with the State too,
as he deems, yet persists still in defending of them against his calumnies; and
is neither mute nor meal-mouthed with him, for his shameless, immodest, and
malicious, dealing with them.

That his Vouchee, Auto^, or Advocate (call him which you please, of whom
before, and further hereafter) in a Pamphlet full of scurrilitie, and not free
from Popery, tells his Auditorie a Tale, or a Parable, as he terms it, That
the Church of England in the nonage of this latter age, being with child,
brought R. Carpenter, S^rmon and no Sermon, etc. p. 176 178.
forth her eldest son, the Bishop; who grew apt to learn, and to make a good
Scholar; and to him she gave her Lands: Speedily after she brought to light
another boy, the Prebend; and to him she gave goodly houses annexed to
Cathedral Churches, and fit pensions: She grew big again, and with more have
then good speed, brought into the world, a poor, weak, rash, dull, simple boy,
the poor Curate, accordingly provided. For having already given away Lands
and Houses, she gave him freely the Wallet behind the door. Then having for
many years laid down her humor of Childbearing, at length the humor took her
again, and she conceived, bore with great pain, and brought forth in a fright,
with much trouble and imminent danger of life, her last boy, to whom she gave a
most hard Greek name (...). I will not call it Nomen absoletum (obsoletum, it is
like he meant) and velut rubigine infectum, a name grown out of use, and
rustie, but confidenter dicam; I will say with courage, (and he had need of some
courage or confidence at least, as his Latin sounds rather, to utter so
notorious an untruth) that it was never acknowledged before in the pretended
sense. His education was mean; for he was not brought up to much learning; yet
experience and practice wrought him into a pert, but a most unhappie Knave, in
the sense of all English, new and old; one that could act a part notably, and
make faces and mouths, etc. This being his Mothers fourth and last child, and
having before given her Lands to the first, her Houses to the second, her
Wallet to the third; and having nothing left to bestow on him, she left him to
shift for himself.

I let pass his scurrilitie for the present, related only here to present the
Reader with a taste beforehand, of what he shall further hear more in the close;
only this now. If it be as he says, that the poor Presbyter is left so
needy, nittie, bare, and wors then beggarly, without House or Land, or so
much as a Wallet to go a begging with, but is utterlie abandoned by his own
parent, and left to the wide world to shift for himself; then sure I, who was
never yet (I praise God) acqainted with shifting; what himself has been, I
know not: Tho he report as truly as some other things here, whereof that of
the name Presbyter never acknowledged in the pretended sense, til bred and
brought forth here: And how do they then, himself among others, fetch the
pedigree of it from Geneva? that I should say, He came over hither, with never
a penny in his purs. But if it be, I say, as he says, I surely must needs be
either a stark fool, in pretending to Presbytery, or a stiff and fast friend
to that party, or the former rather, because the latter, if preferment and
lucre be the end of my pretension, in adhering still so close to it, and
pleading so much for it, when it is in so low, bad, bare, base, dejected, and
despicable condition, even below the Beggars Wallet.

And thus having dispatched this former scandalous charge, wherein the principal
point charged upon me was Profaneness, I shall proceed on to his latter
slanderous aspersion, wherein the main matter objected against me, is
Covetousness.

That old covetous Churl, says he, the Parson, Rector, or rather Receiver of
the Tithes, Profits, and all Appurtenances of Church duties at Redriff, near
London, that is now mute and has willingly silenced himself from Preaching,
receivs Two hundred pounds per annum, and yet Preaches not for it.

The Noble Emperor beforementioned, was more careful, as was above related, of
clearing himself from the imputation of that most hateful vice of Covetousness,
then of any other crime. And I shall accordingly, treading in his steps, take
somewhat the more pains herein; reqesting my Readers patience and pardon, if I
shall seem to detain him overlong, in relating somewhat more particularly, and
a little more largely, tho not so necessarily otherwise, both mine entrance
into, continuance in, and receipts from, the places of my set led Ministry,
from the first to the last; nor am I sorry, that by this shameless Sycophants
palpable slanders, I have occasion given me of rendering some account to the
world, of diverse passages in my Ministerial employment, whereby it may appear,
how free I have ever been from any such fordid disposition.

It was by some ancient Philosophers held, that in every generation Aristot. de
genesis annimal. l. 4. c. 3
or production of ought, there was a (...), a general mixture of the seeds or
principles of all things: and of the affection of anger, a grave Author says,
that there is in it (...), a general mixture of the seeds of all other evil
affections. But of man's Soul we may truly say, that it is by nature Plut. (...).
like an untilled soil: as il weeds of all sorts pomiscuously growing in the
one, so wicked and corrupt affections of all kinds harboring in the other; so
that it may well, not unfidie be termed a (...), a seed-plot, or (if you will)
sentina, a sink, and commonsewer of all sorts o^ sin. Howbeit, as Seneca also
well observes; Stultus omnia vitia habet; sed non in omnia nature a Sen. de
berefic. lib. 4 c. 26 and 27
pronus est. Omnia in omnibus vitia sunt: sed non omnia in singulis extant.
Omnia omnibus insunt; sed in qibusdam singula eminent. The foolish heart of man
though fraught with all manner of vice; yet is not by nature alike prone or
addicted to all. All vices, tho existent in all, yet are not extant in each
one, but some of them are more eminent then the rest in some, and other of them
in others. As in a ground untilled, tho great variety of weeds, there is
usuallie some master weed, some one among the rest, that is rifer and ranker
then any of the rest. And as it is in the body of man, that although in some
degree or other, more or les, there be a mixture of all the four humors, not
any of them wholly wanting; yet there is some one of them predominant, that
gives the domination, in regard whereof some are said to be of a Sanguine, some
of a Phlegmatic, some of a Choleric, and some of a Melancholic Constitution;
so is it also in the soul, tho there be a general mixture and medlie of al
evil, and corrupt qalities; yet is there some one usuallie more powerful and
prevalent, that swayeth and shows forth it self more eminentlie and
evidentlie then any other of them do: and from this therefore, more
frequentlie and apparentlie discovering it self, is the denomination wont to be
given, whereby some ar styled ambitious, some covetous, some lascivious, some
envious, some malicious, some haughty, some hasty, and the like. Yea,
according to this consideration, even after the gracious work of regeneration,
there remains as a smatch of all sin in some degree or other, so more freqent
sproutings out of that master corruption, that bare most sway before, even in
the most renewed, and best reformed; as in a piece of ground, even after the
best and most accurate tillage, some seeds and roots of those noisome weeds,
wherewith it was formerlie much pestered, w^l still remain, and will be springing
up, be it never so sedulously and assiduously managed. Hence it is, that, not
Proclus, or Proculus rather, an old rotten Heretic, as some Popish writers
Bellarm. de Council. l. 4. c. 9. and Bishop. ag. Perkins. Method de resurr, apud
Epiphan. hoeres. 64. Sect. 28.
would have it, but Methodius, an ancient Bishop, and valiant Martyr, compares
inbred corruption in man's heart to a wild fig tree growing upon the wall of some
goodly Temple or stately Palace, whereof albeit the main trunk of the stem be
broke off, and stump of the root plucked out, yet the fibrous strings of it
piercing into the joints of the stone-work will not utterlie be extracted, and
will be ever anon shooting and sprouting out, until the whole frame of the
building be all dissolved, and the stone-work thereof dis-joynted and pulled
all to pieces. But of this more elsewhere.

Howsoever therefore, I dare not presume to challenge to my self an immunitie
from the common condition of all Adams sinful posterity; but must needs
acknowledge in my self a general taint, and that a deep one, of all sin
whatsoever: Yet for this particular corruption of Covetousnes, wherewith this false traducer so freqentlie upbraideth me, and so virulentlie charge me, I
hope, I may in the sight and presence of God truly and sincerely profess,
that it, of all other, ever had the least power over me, or in me; And I hope,
there are none, that have thoroughlie known me, but will testify for me, how
far my courses and carriages have always been from giving cause to suspect in
me a mind subject thereunto: Wherein therefore I shall endevor to clear and
approv my self, not to them so much as unto others. Canon. Apost. qi dicuntur,
can. 13. Council. Sardic. can. 1. Carthag. 3. can. 38 Brace^^. 2. can 6. pelag.
2. apud Gratian c. 7. q. 1


I find in diverse Ancient Canons and Councels a restraint of remoovals of
Ministers from Charge to Charge. And howsoever I make no qestion, but that in
many cases it may be, not lawful only, but even necessary, in which Cases the
Canon says, Non mutat sedem, qi non mutat mentem. He changes not his seat,
that changes not his mind. The meaning I suppose is, that he comes not within
compass of that change which the Canon inhibites and condemns. I would rather,
speaking more plainly, say, as he, Coelum, non animum, so, Sedem, non mentem,
Flacc. lib. 1. Epist. 11.
mutat, In such cases a man, tho he change his Charge, yet may not change his
affection, tho he retain not still the same seat, yet may he retain still the
same mind and disposition; and such changes therefore do not necessarily argu
any evil or corrupt habit in the heart; yet freqent removals upon unnecessarie
occasions have been ever esteemed to have some smatch, as one of the Ancients
observes, Aut avaritiae, ant ambitionis; Either of Hosius in Conc. Sardic.
^varice or ambition: And that the rather, says he, Qia nullus hac in re
invent us sit, qi de majore ad minorem transier it; Because never ani^ had been
found to remov, but from a less place to a greater, from a poorer to a richer.
And indeed to remov often from place to place for some small advantage thereby to
be achieved, no other consideration of moment reqiring or enforcing a change,
may give just suspicion, either of an unsettled brain, or of a covetous
disposition.

Now for mine own part, I cannot be charged to have been faulty in this kind.
In two places only have I exercised a settled Ministry for these Two and
fifty years, seated Ten years in the one place, and Forty two in the other.

The former place, wherein I was seated, was the worthy Society of the
Professors, Practisers, and Students of the Common Law of this Land in Lincolns
Inn. For mine entrance whereunto, that I may not be taxed of ambition for
undertaking such a place at so few years, after so famous men, as had with much
credit formerlie held and discharged it, I shall to free my self from that
aspersion, give a true account how I came to it. Having upon some occasion
obtained License of discontinuance from the College, whereof I was Fellow,
from the Earl of Kent, and the Lord Harrington, the Countess of Sussex her
Trustees for the founding thereof, and abiding now with Sir William Cook, my
Kinsman, at London, the Preachers place at Lincolns Inn became vacant;
Whereupon a Gentleman of that House, to me a mere stranger, but of my reverend
and inward Friend Mr. Stocks acqaintance, at whose Church he had sometime heard
me Preach, together with him repairing to me, acqainted me with the business,
encited me to put in for it, assuring me, that by the Lord Chief Justice
Pophams mediation, whom he knew to favor me, it might easily be obtained. I
was very avers to the motion; albeit, that Mr. Stock also instigated and
encouraged me thereunto. But my counter-plea to them both was, That I durst not
adventure, so young and raw, to look so high. While we were to and fro debating
the business, in that very conjuncture of time, Dr. Mountague, Master of the
College, being come up to the City about some College affairs, was pleased
to vouchsafe me a visit, desirous to draw me back to the College; and telling
me, That he had prevailed with the Lord Harrington to allow a Salarie for an
Hebrew Lecture, which he would have me to read. But being informed by Mr.
Stock, upon what account they were with me, he earnestly pressed it, that I
should in no wise refuse it; it would be a grace to the College, to have the
first that went out of it, to settle in a place of that note; nor should I need
to seek or su for it, or to be seen at all in it: He, being the next day to
attend the Lord Popham about a College business, would break the matter to
him; which being accordingly performed by him, his Lordship immediately sent
his Secretary to the chief of the House; by whom being invited to Preach the
next Lords day with them, I was within few days after chosen their Lecturer.
And indeed had it been of mine own seeking, I could hardly have satisfied or
justified my self in a spontaneous undertaking of such a charge. For the truth
is. I was but young, and seemed younger then indeed I was. In regard whereof,
it might not altogether undeservedlie have been deemed of me, that I had flown
out of the nest, before I was well fledged; and that it had been better for me,
as David willed his Ambassadors returning from the Ammonites, to have stayed at
Jericho among 2 Samuel 10. 5.
the sons of the Prophets, until my Beard had been better grown. Nor may it be
amiss here, to recreat my Reader, with a plain Corydons censure, about that
time, past on me. Mr. Leigh, afterward Sir James Leigh, and Lord Treasurer, was
that year Reader at Lincolns Inn, and having his family in Town, both he and
his wife heard me Preach one Lords day at Martins in the Fields. Whence after
return from the Sermon, Mistress Leigh was pleased to ask an old Servant, with
whom, by reason of long continuance in the family, they were wont to talk more
familiarlie, How he liked the Preacher; who returned her this blunt answer,
That he was a pretty pert Boy, but he made a reasonable good Sermon. Not many
weeks after Mr. Leigh returning from Lincolns Inn, told his wife, he would tell
her some news, That Young man, said he, whom you heard at St. Martins, is chosen
our Lecturer at Lincolns Inn; which the old fellow standing by, when he heard,
asked Whether the old Benchers would be taught by such a Boy as he. Howbeit, it
pleased God so to dispose of it, that I was courteously entertained by them;
nor was my youth in contempt with them, but I received as much respect from
them as I could desire, yea, much more then I could expect. Which kind and
courteous usage tied me so fast to them, (as to such bands may that of him in
the Comic be wel-applied, Qam Plaut. Menaeth. 1. 1.
magis extendas, tanto adstringunt arctius, The more they are let out, the
straiter they bind, the stronger and faster they hold.) That they kept me a
longer time with them, then any one, yea, then diverse put together, that had
been before me, had made stay among them. For, as I have been informed, Mr.
Cha^k, who is said to have been the first settled constant Preacher at Lincoln
Inn, as Dr. Crook at Greys Inn, and Father Lever (for so by my Father, and
others, I always heard him styled) at the Temple, continued not above eight
year with them; being removed, as was suspected, through the secret undermining
of one of prime note then in the House, who upon a private grudge, wrought
underhand with the Archbishop for his removal. After him successively followed
Mr. Field, Mr. Eglionbie, Mr. Crakenthorp, Mr. Pulley; whose times all put
together, ar said scarce to have made up so many years, as amounted to my Ten.

But it may be surm sed, that either the largeness of the allowance, or the
want of means to mend my self, kept me so long with them.

Surely, neither of both. For my Salarie for the first five years or
thereabout, was but Forty pounds per annum; yet as much as any of my
Predecessors had formerlie received. Howbeit after, when I married, and had a
Family in the City, they raised it to Threescore of their own accord, without
any motion of mine; but withal they reqested me to Preach once a day in the
Vacation time, when any store of company was in the House; as in the two
shorter ones constantly, and in the two longer, until the solemn Readings were
over, usuallie there was. That which I also was right-willing to do, making
mine abode in the City, whereas formerlie I was wont to spend the Vacations
with a Knight, my Kinsman, in the Country.

Nor wanted I opportunity more then once or twice, while I staid there, to
have mended my means, had I been eagerly bent, or had but a mind thereunto.
For I had places more then two or three offered me, both from Gentlemen in the
House, and from others abroad.

First, The Lectureship at the Rolls being vacant, offer was made to me of it
from Sir Edward Philips, then Master of the Rolls, by Sir Robert his Son, and
Mr. Whitakers his Secretary, who both used to hear me; supposing that I might
well enough discharge both, being no farther asunder, and but for once a day
with either, and that at the Inn at seven in the morning; which I waived,
willing to reserv my self wholly to the place where I was. But this was no
motion for removal; some addition to my means only: That which follows was,

After that my Morning Lecture was reduced, or deduced rather, to the ordinary
hour in most places, Mr. Masters Master of the Temple (for that Title his place
there bare) his own Lecture continuing at the wonted hour, used, after that
dispatched, to repair to mine, as I did to Dr. Leyfields at Clements, until
that course was in the Inn altered, as before has been related. Mean while the
Lecturers place falling void at the Temple, he by a wile drew me to Preach one
Afternoon on the Week Lecture day there; And shortly after (I little dreaming
ought of his intention therein) repaired to me with a motion from some of
special note and power there, to remove thither; withal assuring me, that the
place would be of double value to me, to what I had where I was. But my Answer
to him was, that I would not on any terms shift from one Inn of Court to
another.

Much about the same time, that hopeful Prince Henry, whose life in likelihood
the sins of this Land, and of those times shortened, keeping his Court at St.
James, where abode with him that Mirror of Nobility, the young Lord
Harrington, and attended on him that Religious Knight Sir Robert Darcie, these
two with some other Gracious Ones of His Graces Court, freqented my Ministry
in the Afternoons especially; which for some space of time I then spent in
handling of some Points in Controversy between us, and the Papists, being
informed that diverse Popish Priests, or Sprites, if you please, hanted the
House, and were very busy in laboring to pervert the young Gentlemen. The
Notes of one of those Sermons Sir Robert Darcie, by mine inward and entire
friend, Mr. Bradshaw, got from me, under the Title of The Popes Pride, and
Papists Idol. This he and the young Lord imparted to the Prince; and upon such
further terms of recommendation, as they were pleased to adjoin, and his good
opinion of me, as they conceived, thereby produced, they took the boldness by
my worthy Friend Mr. Hildersham, and Mr. Jacob joining with him, to solicit
me to come and Preach one day before the Prince at his Court; not doubting to
prevail with him to bring me in to be his Chaplain, and by the assistance of
Bishop Mountague, then in favor with the King his Father, to procure for me
that place of constant attendance in that kind about him, that was sometime
designed to Mr. John Burges, had not the design miscarried by a Sermon which he
preached before the King, and cost him much trouble. Unto which motion, I
desired by them to be returned, after thankful acknowledgment of deep
engagement to those worthy persons, for their good opinion of me, and affection
to me, That as I deemed my self unworthie of so great a favor, so I well knew my
self very unfit for such an employment, being naturally of a very bashful
disposition, and finding in my self a great indisposition and aversness to
Courtly attendance, and reqested therefore of them, that no motion or mention
might be further made of ought in that kind.

Among others of note that were there my frequent Auditors, by reason of the
Vicinitie of his House in Holborn, was the Right Honorable Lord Rich, Father to
the present Right Honorable Earl of Warwick, whose freeness and
conscientiousness in the donation and disposal of such Ecclesiastical places as
he had interest in, is to all that knew him not unknown. In his gift a living
of good valu being vacant, which after one Dr. Tabor, Dr. Harris enjoyed,
notice was given to me of it, with signification that I might have it, if I
would accept of it, but my answer was, That I desired not to undertake a
Pastoral Charge, nor to leav Lincolns Inn. And indeed the times under King
James, contrary ^o expectation, and to what most men, tho on weak grounds (as
to me (...)er seemed) promised unto themselves, especially after that formal
Conference at Hampton Court, proving more troublesome, then formerlie they had
been, made me the rather willing to rest contented with a small portion in a
privileged place, then by removing to a place of larger revenue, to attract
more distraction, and expose my self to the hazard of greater disturbance. In
reference to this refusal, that Noble Lord, being present at a Sermon at
Lincolns Inn, wherein I took my leav of them, being then upon departure (tho
constrained afterward for some unexpected occasion to stay a Term, or two
longer) demanded of some of the Ancients of the House, among whom he there sat,
Whether I were leaving them; as marvelling, how my mind came to be changed from
that which I had formerlie professed.

During the time of mine abode there, there lived much in the House, not as
Practitioners in the Law, but as Associates with the Bench, two worthy Knights
of eminent parts for variety of lerning and reading, Sir Roger Owen, and Sir
William Sidley; and I was for their entire affection much beholden to them
both. Sir R. Owen would gladly had me seated in Shropshire, where my Father
was born in an ancient House, the name whereof our Family bears, being
allied unto most of the ancient Gentry in that County; wherein also a Living
of good revenue was offered me by a Merchant, that Contrey-man by birth, in the
City, if I would have gone to it. But Sir W. Sidley was very desirous rather to
draw me down into Kent, and to that purpose, a great Living, not far from the
place of his chief residence, falling void by the Incumbents decess, tho being
not in his own gift, but in the gift of one, whom he had special interest in,
presuming thereupon, he offered to procure it for me. This motion to waiv, when
I alleged my loathnes to leav Lincoln's Inn; he replied, that his intent was
not, that I should leav my place there; that in Kent would afford means to
maintain an Assistant, who might for the Term time discharge all there, while I
was employed here. But I told him, the burden between both would be too heavy
for my infirm shoulders to bear. And so that business broke also off.

Men that are of a free and ingenuous disposition, are wont to conceiv
(according to that of the Mimik, Beneficium dando accepit, qi digno dedit)
Publ. Sir.

that they receiv a benefit themselves, in doing others a pleasure. That which
even a cruel Tyrann (tho in all likelihood dissemblinglie) professed sometime
in these words; (...) Phalaris Epist. 17.
(...). In giving to good men, I make account that I receiv a greater courtesy
by much from them, then I bestow upon them; And that M. Antonin. l 7. sect. 74.
truly noble-minded Emperor, (...), that a benefit rightly bestowed was no
less advantageous to him that gav it, then to him that received it. And no
marvel then if with such (...), It is a pleasure to do a pleasure, Ibid. sect.
13.
and a delight to exercise themselves in well-doing; Yea, as an ancient grave
Author, (...) Plut. de vit. Epitcur. Id de convict. trincip. cum Pbilos. Id ibid.
(...), It is a more cheerful thing to do good, then to have good done one: and
the inward joy of the mind is greater, more pure, more immixt in that, then in
this; Since that (...), there is some kind of bashfulness often in receiving, but
mere cheerfulness with such in giving. And on the other side, hence it comes to
pass, which the same Author also observes, (...) Id de Socrat. Genio.
(...), t(...)t as it is matter of much joy and gladness to them, when their
gift is received, and their kindness accepted, as it is with an Archer,
desirous to show his skill in shooting, when he has hit the white or cloven the
peg; because they do (...), as that Noble Emperor speaks, M. Anton. l 7. sect.
23 and l. 9. sect. 42. Sen* de Ren. l. 1. c. 2. and l 4. c. 13.
that is, as Seneca expresses it, dare ut dent, or, ut ne non dederint, their
main aim in giving, is, that they may have given, in doing a courtesy, that
they may have done one a good turn; so, because that cannot be, unless the gift
be received, and their kindness accepted, it is no less matter of grief unto
them, and they are wont to take it ill, when it so falls out, that their gift
is rejected, their kindness refused; as it is in such case to the archer, when
he misseth the mark he shot at; (that which made the Indian, Plut. in Apoph.
reported to Alexander to be so expert in that faculty, that he could at a
great distance shoot through a narrow Ring, refuse before the King to show his
skill, tho his life lay upon it, fearing, lest through disuse, he might fail in
the design) because they miss of that which was their main aim and end in that
their assay, not taking effect according to their desire, to do the party a
pleasure. And thus indeed it fared with that Noble and Noble-minded Knight Sir
W. S. before mentioned, who acquainting some of the Bench with what had passed
between him and me, he seemed to them to relate it not without some show and
semblance of reg(...) and offense, as not so well resenting my refusal of his so
free and kind offer; that which I was informed of by Mr. Tho. Hitchcock one of
the Bench, and of those to whom he had broken his mind concerning that
business; and who merrily afterward in familiar discourse was pleased to put
the fool upon me for it. For being a man of a pleasant wit, at the Table
sometime disposed to be merry (as his manner often, but without offense, was)
upon occasion of such discourse as came in the way, he told those his
fellow-Benchers that were in the same Mess with him, that he had in his Study
a Book called the Ship of Fools, and that they should all three of them go into
it, one for refusing a large fee offered him in a great man's cause, which he
liked not, another, for returning his Clients Fee, having waited at the Bar;
when the Cause could not be heard; a third for some other such like matter,
which I now remember not; and being demanded by one of them concerning me,
being in the same Mess, whether I were therein to bear them company too: Yes,
(quoth he) he must in upon a double account; First, He sits here among us, and
takes a great deal of pains with us for a small confideration, and being by Sir
W. S. offered a far better Place elsewhere, he refuses to accept it, when it
may be he may sit long enough here, ere he have the like offer made him again;
and again, what he here receivs he lays out in Books, and cannot read over the
one half of them, when he has done. To the latter whereof, I replied merrily,
waving the former, that a Workman that makes use of many Tools, must buy some
to ly by him, tho scarce in seven year he have use of them, that he may have
them at hand when he shall need them, and may otherwise hardly get them
elsewhere. And if Mr. Lilie shall think good to put me into the ship, for taking
so much pains to wash my self from his groundles espersions, I shall not be
angry with him for it, nor troubled at all with it.

Diverse of these both offers and refusals were not unknown to the Body of the
Bench, who therefore at one of their meetings, some speech falling in
concerning me, by joint consent agreed to take a course for the procuring of a
Prebendship for me either at Paul's or Westminster; for the effecting whereof,
Mr. Attorney General, Sir Henry Hobart, undertook to make use of his utmost
power, when opportunity should be; as also for the providing of one, in room of
their old Reader entertained to be Dr. Whites Curate at Dunstans, that might
ease me of my pains with them in the Vacations; which to encourage my stay with
them, they caused Mr. Rondolf Crew, afterward Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, to give notice of to me; and withal to testify their affection to me,
admitted and entered me in their Leagier Book as a Member of the Society;
which to some of my Predecessors in the place had not been done. The latter
indeed of their resolutions took not its desired effect, through the humorous
disposition of one that was recommended unto them; but was afterward effected
for those that succeeded me. The former could not so sudainly be compassed; and
my removal prevented the accomplishment of it; that which I am not sorry for.

Much about the same time, my time came in the University, for taking the
Degree of Doctor in Divinity: which being known in the House, diverse of the
Ancients with whom I was most familiar, incited me to the undertaking of it;
alleging that it might be a step for me to further preferment, or (as other
some phrased it) a stirrup to help up into the Saddle; which mention of the
Saddle might well have minded me of what one in the Greek Comik speaking to an
old man, that would needs be a Cavalier, says, Eupolis Amicis.
(...)
(...)
that he did not wisely, nor advisedlie, in listing himself in a Regiment of
horse, and getting up into the Saddle before he had got skill to manage his Horse
well, that he might sit sure in the Saddle. But to encourage me hereunto, they
assured me, that the House would no doubt contribute liberally toward the
charge of my Commencement; withal relating what they had sent as a gratuitie to
Dr. King, when he took that Degree, because the House stood part of it in his
Parish, and diverse of them used to hear him, and he was wont before he was Dean
of Christs-Church in Oxford, to bestow a Sermon once or twice a year upon them,
as he did also twice at two solemn Festivals in my time, when he was Bishop.
But I told them merrily, They must first make me a Doctor-like maintenance, ere
I would take the degree of Doctor; that threescore pounds a year would not
maintain that state, that the Degree of a Doctor reqired. And being afterward
by some of my friends blamed for letting slip that opportunity, and some
others, wherein the Degree might have been had, with more ease and less charge
then ordinary, as at the time of His Majesty's visiting the Universitie, what
time were diverse created Doctors without attendance to keep Acts; and not many
years after, when the plague was hot in the Town there, not a few, that would
adventure thither, obtained the Degree, without wonted performance of Acts, or
usual charge of entertainment: Unto them I made answer, That if ever I took the
Degree of Doctor, I would so do it, as that I would not be styled either a
Royal, or a Pestilential Doctor; which by names were in common speech given
unto those that had taken that Degree, at either of those times. As also to
others, who demanded of me, why I took it not together with three other of my
Reverend Brethren here about the City, coming short of Dr. Gowge. Dr. Tailor.
Dr. Sibbes.
me all more or less in age, and in our Universitie standings much more, all
three now at length deceased before me; I returned answer then as merrily, that
I was of that Old Romans mind, who used to say, He would rather have people,
when he was gone, Cato Censor. P^ut. in pracept. polit. in Apophth. (...) Cat.
Maj.
enqire why he had no statu set him up, then why he had any; So I would rather
have men hereafter demand a Reason, why I took not the Degree, then to mov
qestion why I did. As also, according to that of the Philosopher, who being
urged by his Thales. Laert. l. 1. Stob. ^it. 68.
Mother to marry, when as yet but young, told her, (...), it was not time yet;
and again pressed by her, when further in years, (...), it was past time then: To
some that many years after renewed the former motion to me, I returned, That I
was now superannated, and having waived the Degree, when I might have had it at
thirty five, would not now sure seek or look after it at threescore. At which
year also giving over mine Anniversarie Visitation of the Free School at
Tunbridge, which (at the reqest of the Worshipful Society of Skinners in
London, the careful and faithful Trustees of Sir Andrew Jud, the Founder
thereof) I had constantly for many years together discharged, in taking my
leav of them, I told them, that being now Sexagenarius, I might by future
repair thither, run the hazard of being Depontanus, or De ponte dejectus, as
men of those years ancientlie Festus. Cicero pro Qu^^.
were at Rome.

But I digress to far, and yet these digressions as analecta qaedam scattered
here and there by the way, I suppose will not be unpleasing to a Reader of no
over-rigid and unpleasant Disposition, nor offensive, I hope, to any.

But, e diverticulo in viam, to return again into the road. By what has been
related, concerning the means of my maintenance at Lincolns Inn, but withal,
the courteous entertainment there constantly afforded me; it may appear, that
it was neither the largeness of the stipend that staid me so long with them,
nor yet any disrespect, or discontent, that moved me, as some before me, to
leav them.

For the truth is, for mine Auditorie there, the generality of them, were not
a people that affected change, either noveltie or variety; but rested
wel-satisfied with my constant course and tenor of teaching; and very seldom
therefore brought in any to Preach in my room; in so much (I may truly say
it) that scarce above Twelv Sermons in all my Ten years with them, were
preached there by any beside my self. Nor were they addicted to stray much
abroad, one or two taken much with Dr. King, then Dean of Christ-Church in
Oxford, and Parson of St. Andrews in Holborn, used to repair thither to hear
him, when they knew that he preached; and some few would now and then step to
Paul's Cross. Among whom that pleasant Gentleman before spoken of, tho it were
not freqent with him, being missed one day at Chapel by some of those that
used there to fit near him, and coming late into the Hall at dinner, and being
thereupon demanded by one of them, where he had been straying abroad; I have
been, qoth he, at Paul's Cross. Thou wentest thither sure to hear some news,
said the other: No truly, replied he, I went upon another occasion; but I
learned that indeed there, which I never heard of before, how the Ass came by
his long ears; for the Preacher there told us a story out of a Jewish Rabbin,
that Adam after he had named the Creatures, called them one day again before
him, to try whether they remembered the names that he had given them; and having
by name cited the Lion, the Lion drew near to him, and the Horse likewise, but
then calling to the Ass in like manner, the Ass having forgotten his name, like
an Ass stood stone still; whereupon Adam having beckoned to him with his hand,
so soon as he came within his reach, caught him with both hands by the ears,
and plucked him by them so shrewdly, that for his short wit he gave him a long
pair of ears. Upon this story told them, one of them told him, he was well
enough served for his gadding abroad; he might have heard better and more
useful matter, had he kept himself at home. But this by the way, not to
lengthen, but to lighten the tediousness of this long discourse, undertaken not
so much to repress Lilies lying tongue, as to render an account of my courses,
for better satisfaction both to others, and to my self.

But if neither enlargement of means drew me, nor discontent from mine
Auditorie drove me away from them, what was it then that either caused or
occasioned my removal? This also I shall truly and sincerely relate. The
Rectorie of Rotherhith, or as it is commonly called Rederith, becoming vacant
by the decease of the Incumbent, there was some stickling in the Parish about a
Successor. For the legal right to present being presumed to rest in two
Orphans, tho it was afterward discovered to reside in a third party, diverse of
the better affected in the Parish began to negotiate with the Guardian and
Friends of those two children under years, and from them having obtained a
promise, that none should be presented to it, but such an one as they should
nominate, repaired unto me, and were earnest with me, that I would accept of
it. But I acqainted them with my resolution of not leaving the place where I
was; whereupon they departed, and made trial of bringing in some other. But in
prosecution thereof, they found the passage so obstructed, that they were not
able to proceed.

For a person of no parts, but of very scandalous life, while the Doctor
Incumbent lay sick, had been tampering with the same parties, with whom they
were then dealing, before them, about the sale of the Patronage, and the Mother
of the Orphans had received somewhat as a gratuitie from him, to deal with them
and their Guardian, to bring the business about. And albeit, that the Incumbent
dying, ere ought was transacted, the negotiation in regard of any power to
present that could thereby accrue unto him, if they had proceeded then therein
with him, would have been of no effect; and the money were returned him, that
the Mother had taken of him; Yet he persisted in pursuit of a troublesome suit,
to draw them to some agreement with him, whereupon he might be presented by
them, being underhand backed and fed with money by two Tenants of Sir H.
Hobart, then Attorney General to King James, who occupied a great qantitie of
Land held from him in the Parish, and had covenanted with that party to have
it tithe free, if he were once possessed of it. The difficulty was much
improved by a Caveat they found entered in the Bishops Office, by a Gentleman,
one of the Petti-Bag, who pretended a Title; as also for that Mr. Attorney
solicited by his Tenants, and not well understanding what manner of fellow he
was whom they dealt for, did in their behalf somewhat countenance their
proceedings, and was indeed desirous himself to deal for the Patronage, having
much Land in the Parish, with intent in some future vacancie, thereby to have
opportunity of preferring a young Scholar, who was then Schoolmaster in his
Family. Those wel-minded persons therefore, fearing that either that
scandalous party would be obtruded upon them, or some other might chop in,
while they were bickering with him; as it had fallen out in a former vacancie,
wherein one by a wrong title got in, and held the place full two years ere he
could be ejected; and supposing withal, that if I would accept of it, Mr.
Attorney would not only surcease to countenance the other party in that
business, but would also help to clear the way for my entrance; repaired to Mr.
Stock, whom they knew to be inward with me, reqesting him to deal with me, and
persuade me to embrace the motion by them formerlie made to me. Who thereupon
tendering the condition of the place, accompanied them to me, and was very
earnest with me in it, pressing hard, what a miserable estate that people were
likely to be in upon my refusal, whereas they where I then was, were able
enough to furnish themselves again, to their own contentment upon my removal. At
his importunity, upon such grounds seconding and backing their suit, I
condescended so far forth, as to make an assay to try how Mr. Attorney would
resent the business, and how far forth he would interpose in it. To this
purpose I made use of Mr. Crew, afterward Lord Chief Justice, a man of tried
and known integrity, to break the matter to him. Unto whom his answer was,
That he would do any thing in his power, that should be to my content, and
willed that I should come to him. So I did, and told him, that I had upon a
motion made to me from some Inhabitants of Rederith, engaged my self to come to
them, and settle with them, if the passage were free, the clearing whereof they
supposed might depend much upon him. Who, after some Speech had, how glad he
should have been of my continuance with them, and in part blaming himself, that
nothing had yet been done for the enlargement of my means, If they mean, said
he, reallie, as they pretend, and you deem it may be behoveful for you, let
them procure you a presentation, and upon sight of it, you shall see what I will
do. This being signified to them, they having by some counsel been informed,
that albeit the Father had by will beqeathed the perpetual Advocation to his
younger Sons, yet the right thereof by course of Law rested in the Eldest, which
for some causes was as yet deemed fit to conceal, drew him to join with his
Brethren, and brought me a Presentation under the Hands and Seals of them all
three; which being represented to Mr. Attorney, he forthwith wrote a Letter to
the Bishop, whereby all obstructions were removed, and I admitted without
further ado to the place. After it was noised in the House, that I was upon
removal, diverse of them repaired to me, of whom some out of their private,
offered to engage themselves for such a further supplement, to what I there then
received, as should eqal the Revenue of the place motioned to me; others
endeavored to persuade me to retain the place still, being for the Term time
only; to which purpose also some of my Reverend Brethren in the Ministry
were instant with me. But to the former I answered, That I had passed my word
to come to them, and that upon other grounds then means of maintenance only;
to the other, That the burden would be too weighty for me: And truly soon I
so found and felt, being compelled to continu but a Term or two with them,
until they were fitted to their mind. Howsoever diverse of those that succeeded
me, held other places together with it, some in the Universitie, and some in
the City; and indeed my Reverend Father-in-Law Mr. Charles Pinner, whose
Daughter I was to marry, by all means dissuaded me from harkening unto those
that would have persuaded me thereunto, affirming, That either place reqired a
whole man. Who was also right glad, that by my removal I had escaped the
promised preferment to a Prebendarie; nor was he sorry, when he understood,
that Mr. Attorney had proffered me the Title of being his Chaplain; which I
willingly accepted, being but a titular matter, reqiring no constant
attendance, only a visit now and than, and a Sermon sometime upon some
special occasions, the rather that by his power and countenance, I might sit
the more qietlie, and exercise my Ministry more freely, in such a place
especially, where he had Lands of much value, and Tenants deemed to be of the
greatest ability; but my Reverend Father in Law, because it might, he said,
Keep me from being Chaplain to any Bishop; for he used to say, That as the
times then were, a Prebends place, and a Bishops Chaplainship, were two shrewd
snares: Both which, I bless God for it, I hereby escaped.

Nor indeed were my means so much, as many imagined, improved by removal to
the place where as yet I abide, and have now for full forty and two years
resided. For besides that I came to a dwelling house wilfultie much mangled and
defaced by the late Incumbents Widow, out of mere spite and spleen, not so
much against him that was to succeed, being then uncertain, as against some of
the Parish, with whom her Husband had had much contention, and the Wharf before
it (a chargable piece) ready to drop down; toward the charge whereof albeit
some two or three contributed somewhat, yet the main matter came out of mine
own purs; and the first fruits that were to be paid; as also that the main
Fabric of the Church supported with Chalkie Pillars, of such a bulk as filled
up no small part of the room, and were found very faulty, threatening a fail,
if not a fall, unless speedily prevented, to the ruin of the whole; which to
remov and place strong Timber Columns in the room of them, would prove a very
great charge; albeit, the repair of the Body of the Church were no way
chargable upon the Rector, yet to encourage others to a freer and larger
contribution thereunto, I lanched out of mine own accord so far, having as yet
received little benefit of my place, that none out-went me, few to speak of
came near me. Add hereunto, that not long after this a ship firing on the
River, just against my house, much endangered it, being covered, as from its
first building it had been, with Reed; which to prevent the like hazard that
might, (as it did also some time) after ensu, I therefore took away, and in
stead thereof (which was no small charge to me) covered it all over with Tile.
These things, I say, set aside, which yet shrewdly drained my small stock,
because they were not a constant charge; come we to the Annual Revenue in
either place, and see what addition was made by this latter to the former. In
the place that I left, I received Threescore pounds by the year clear: In the
place I came to, finding it a troublesome business to take up Tithes, being
paid, except some four of the Parish, by Butchers and Grasiers mostlie, living
either in the Borough, or in the City, I let out my whole Tithe and Gleab for
One hundred pounds by the year. Whence deducting the Annual payments of Tenths
and Subsidies to the King, the Procurations to the Bishop and Archdeacon, the
Assessments for the poor, wherein I was rated as deep as any in the Parish,
for his personal estate, the yeerlie Salarie to the Curate whom I found in the
place, the same that the Doctor had before allowed him, which, tho in regard of
his mean parts I could have in my teaching, no help or ease from him; yet in
respect of his poverty, having a Wife and Children, I was fain for diverse
years to continu unto him, until he could furnish himself with some place
elsewhere, and when he left me, larger means to one of better abilities, from
whom I might have some assistance in the work of my Ministry. These
disbursments, I say, deducted, and laid altogether, the improvement, I suppose,
will appear to have been no such great matter.

And this was the main matter that I enjoyed here for Ten years together; not
receiving ought of constant payment from the main Body of the Parish, save
from some three or four for the Land that they held. There had indeed been
ancientlie a Rent-tithe paid upon the houses; as in the neighboring Parishes
also then was, and still is: And that even then also, as by the Church-Book
appeared, under some not-preaching Ministers, when the Inhabitants besides that
payment were fain to maintain one to Preach with them at their own charge. But
this had been intermitted, and my Predecessor, after some years enjoyment of
it, by his own miscarriage of the business, put beside it. For there falling
o^t much contention between him, and some of the chief of the Parish, they set
some of the poorer sort on work to deny him payment thereof. Whom he thereupon
sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, and made proof there by sufficient witnesses
of the constant payment of it, for above Threescore years past. But when
sentence was ready to pass, a Prohibition came out of the Common Pleas.
Whither the business being transferred, the Doctor not well advised, joined issu
amiss with them, and so being cast in the Suit, was debarred from recoverie of
ought for himself, tho it were no bar unto any his Successor.

For Ten years it thus lay asleep or dead rather after his decease, and mine
access to the place. Nor did I receiv a penny all that while in lieu of it,
from the main body of those among whom I constantly exercised my Ministry.
But having sat so long qietlie, and my charge increasing; and being informed of
a Record in the First Fruits Office, whereby it appeared, that in the valuation
of my Rectorie, taken upon Oath in King Henry the Eighths time, the Tithe on
Houses was included as a third part of its valu at a certain rate, according to
which valuation I paid my yeerlie Tenths to the King for it; I made a motion to
my people, that since it was agreeable to conscience and eqitie, that the
Minister of the Word, who took pains constantly in the exercise of his
Ministry with a people, ought to receiv a constant maintenance and
consideration for it from them; And that, as I conceived, even by the Law of
the Land, such a particular consideration was du unto me, and had from time to
time been made good to my Predecessors; My reqest therefore was, That I might
without suit, or trouble, either to them, or my self, with mutual love and
agreement, receiv it, or somewhat in an eqitable manner proportionable to it.
To this the answer of the most was, That for my self they were well content, and
willing to do somewhat that way; but they knew not who might come after me, and
were loath therefore to oblige themselves to ought as a du.

While thus the business hung in suspense, and nothing done, good words only
given, that seemed to be as a dilatorie plea; some of the better affected,
moved, that without breach of Charity, or offense taken on either side, a
Trial at Law might be had, in a peaceable and amicable proceeding, whereby the
right of the demand might appear what it was, and either side rest in the issu
thereof. To this purpose a ^uit was set on foot by a Bil in the Excheqer
Chamber; Wherein it was evidentlie showed, and in a fair and solemn hearing
made to appear, That such a Tithe as was beforementioned, was du to the Rector
of Rederith; as also it was discovered, (which Mr. Noy then but a young Lawyer,
pleading in my behalf, so cleared, that all the Barons* to the Lord Treasurer,
reqiring their opinion therein, attested that he was in the right) that the
Doctor, my Predecessor, had miscarried in his suit by joining issu amiss, and
the judgment therefore given against him, nothing concerned us, our plea being
on a diverse ground. Upon the cause thus heard, a Decree was passed, to put me
in Possession of the Tithe upon the Rents of Houses, as in other the Neighbor
Parishes it had been, was then, and is still paid. Howbeit, when it came to be
demanded, some being willing to pay, and some refusing, to prevent further
suits, that might after arise, it was by mutual consent on both sides agreed,
that the business should be referred to certain Arbitrators on either side
chosen, and what was by them concluded, should by a new Decree in the same
Court be confirmed; which was accordingly done, and an Agreement so made and
ratified, that in lieu of Tith on Houses, Forty pounds should be paid me
yeerlie by Ten pounds a qarter, to be assessed upon the wealthier sort of
Inhabitants, the poorer people being spared, and to be gathered by the
Churchwardens for the time being, and by them qarterlie paid in to me. Which
yet for the most part came short more or less every qarter, as by my Receipts
may appear. And this, when fully paid, added to the former, was the greatest
sum that I yeerlie received all the time of mine Incumbencie; which yet comes
nothing near to that, which this man's slanderous tongue says I receiv. And I
may truly and boldly avow it, That during all the time of mine abode in this
place, what in maintenance of my Family, (nor was either my self or any of
mine ever noted for excess, either in daintiness of fare, or in costliness of
attire) in affording a competencie to an able Assistant for me in the Work of
my Ministry, (whereof three of Mr. Jos. Simonds. Mr. Edw. Goodal. Mr. John
Grail.
eminent parts have within these few years, not long one after another
deceased, and some other yet survive) and ^o a young Scholar to write out diverse
things for me, whereof some lie still by me, and some are abroad; in enlarging
of my House, which was somewhat scantie, (but is now very near as large again
as I found it, as may be guessed by the number of Chimneys in it, which were no
more than four, when I came to it, the Doctor making only a Summer House of
it, and ar now no less then twelv) for the more convenient lodging of mine
Assistant and Scribe, and a Student one or two, such of our own Country as had
left the Universitie, and were fitting themselves for the Ministry; or
Strangers, that from forain parts came over, to learn our Language, and observe
our Method of Teaching, (whereof I was seldom without some, and might have had
more, had my House been more capacious) and gaining a room of more capacity
for the bestowing of my Library; in reparations of my dwelling House, and the
Wharf before it, which was no small charge; in furnishing of my self with Books,
which to a Scholar and Minister at as the tools of his trade; in releif of the
poor, wherein I shall spare to speak what I added voluntarily in a constant
course (besides what upon emergent occasions) unto that I was assessed; in these
and the like put together, with what went to the higher Powers, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, as before; I spent, Communibus annis, one year with another,
all that ever I received in right of my Rectorie, as by proof sufficient I
could make to appear.

Yet neither did I want opportunity to have enlarged and advanced my Means,
while I abode here; no more then I did, before I came hither.

I had not sat many years here, when Dr. Featlie coming to abide in the
Archbishops House at Lambeth, offered me in way of exchange for this, a place
of far greater value then it, tho more remote, because mine nearer at hand; To
whom I made answer, That here I was fixed, and desired not removal, and that
the vicinitie of it to the place of my Nativitie, made me the rather to affect
it.

That which I shall add, is a matter of no great moment; yet men
covetouslie-minded, ar ready to catch at, and lay hold on ought that may seem
any way advantageous, that may bring in gain, tho never so small, and add ought
to the heap; they are wont to have that of the old Epik often in their mouths,
(...) Hesiod.
(...), That light gains makes heavy purses. From Dr. Winnith, Dean of Paul's,
by Mr. Cooper of Thomas Apostles, his Allie, was the Lecture at Paul's offered
me upon Dr. Days leaving it, it being but on the week day, and for the Term
time only; and I could, if need were, name the man, who having two Pastoral
charges in the City, yet had not refused it, but undertook it, and held it to
his dying day; but my Answer was, That I found work enough at home for my
weakness to wield well: And he found me* very weak indeed at his access to me;
but it was in the long Summer Vacation; and he doubted not, but I might recover
strength enough ere the Lecture was to begin; but I to waived it.

Nor did I want means of attaining further preferment by the favor of Bishop
Mountagu, Master formerlie of the College whereof I had been Fellow; who also,
when I visited him now and then, being become our Diocesan, would ask me, why I
came not about some place of preferment, supposing as he said, my means here
not to be great, and that I lived in an obscure corner. And I remember, that
being called over by the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, to whom, as
before was said, I had some relation, lying then very sick, and reqested to
stay a Sabbath day with him, I heard at the public Assembly in the forepart
of the day, Dr. Done one of my Successors at Lincoln's Inn, then lately
preferred to the Deanrie of Paul's; When after my return from the Sermon, his
Lordship having demanded of me whom I had heard? you see, said he; how some of
your Successors rise, and why do not you seek for some Prebend at least? which
he supposed might be with no great difficulty attained, withal intimating a
forwardnes still to be employed on any occasion in that kind, whenever
opportunity were offered, as well as while I was at Lincoln's Inn with them;
Unto whom I sincerely and seriously then professed, that might I but qietly
hold and enjoy what in the place of my present abode I had, I could, and (as I
supposed) did live, as comfortablie and contentedlie, if not more, then most,
not of the Prebends or Deans only, but of the Bishops also, even the
Archbishop himself not excepted. And truly what the Heathen man sometime,
speaking in his Heathenish style and tone, said, Dii been fecerunt, inopem me,
qodque pusilli
Finxerunt animi. Flac. 1. l. Sat. 4.

the same with some small alteration may I say of my self, that I acknowledge
it often as a favor of God, animi angusti atque pusilli qod fecerit, that he was
pleased to frame me, not of an haughty, bold, cut-stretching, and
selfe-confiding spirit; but of a low, bashful, streitned, self-diffiding, and
in some sort pusillanimous disposition; For I suppose that this my native frame
has been a means (God so disposing it) to keep me from such undertakings, as
might bring with them grievous inconveniences, and expose to sore temptations,
which otherwise I might have been subject unto, and peradventure foiled with;
and which the lower I kept, and the les I looked after great matters, the les
was I endangered to be assalted with, and to fall by, as I observed in my time
not a few to have done, to their scandal some, to their utter overthrow others;
while their very raising proved their ruin. Upon which consideration, neither
did I ever make, or desire to make any further use, either of the Bishop my
constant friend's favor, save to keep my self and mine Assistants free from
such undu molestations, as Ministers in those times were subject unto; or of
that my deservedly much honored Patrons power, either while he was Attorney
General, or Lord Chief Justice, save for the procuring of the qiet enjoyment of
a few Tenements in Rederith, purchased with some moneys which I had in marriage
with my wife, being therein disturbed by a busy fellow, as also diverse others
of my neighbors were, who groundleslie sought to find flaws in our estates, and
drew money from other of them; and for the restoring of me to my liberty, and
free use of my Ministry, (when for a short time I had been imprisoned in the
Fleet, whence, in the Kings absence I was released by the Right Honorable Earl
of Manchester then President of the Privy Council, through the mediation of
S^r Charles Montagu, Brother both to him and the Bishop then decessed; and
afterward by his Majesty's special command for a longer time confined to my
house, and so restrained from my Pastoral employment, in reference to an
Epistle, or Preface prefixed to Mr. Eltons Catechism published after his
decesse, in which business others far greater then my self, even the Archbishop
himself, were aimed at) which yet by his intervention with some great ones near
about his Majesty, was effected in my behalf.

It is commonly said of such as are greedy of the world, that they desire to
gripe more then they are well able to grasp, and are ready to undertake more
then they are able to undergo, or to go thorough with. And men of aspiring minds
and spirits, ar wont to be over forward, either to obtrude themselves into, when
they cannot otherwise be compassed, or to embrace. when they are tendered to them
by others, such places as ar of respect and repute, albeit they find and know
themselves altogether unfit and unable to discharge them. Yea, it is observed by
a grave Author, (...) Plut. de Adul^^ dignosc.
(...), that each one usuallie, is the first and greatest flatterer of himself;
and that other folks flatteries could never fasten upon men, if men did not in
the first place flatter themselves, and were willing therefore to be flattered
by others. Yea, so far does th^s desire of repute, above truth or desert,
prevail with persons so affected, that other men's votes and opinions of them,
either fawninglie fained to sooth them up in their vain fancies and fond
conceits of themselves, or reallie and sincerely, according to their
apprehensions and opinions, but erroneous and groundles, concerning them and
their endowments, conceived and expressed do so bewitch them and work them to
such an overweening and over-valewing of themselves that they deem themselves
worthy of, and fit for any place or employment of reputation and credit, tho
their wants and weaknesses well weighed might easily inform them the contrary.
Had I therefore been either covetouslie affected, or ambitiouslie minded, I
would never have resused (as conscious to my genius its aversnes to, and
spirits unfitnes for such a place, I did) the Hedship of one of the principal
Colleges in that University, whereof I was sometime a Member, being as it is
well known, while I sat in the Assembly at Westminster, both freely offered,
and designed me by that Noble Earl of Manchester, who had then the disposal of
such places there in his power, and eagerly with much importunity urged by
diverse of my Reverend Brethren of the Assembly, and the Heds of other Houses,
(which some of them yet surviving ar able to testify) to accept of it,
alleging, when I pretended mine unfitnes for such a place and employment, that
of my abilities and fitnes for it others must judge; It being a place both for
repute and Revenew so far beyond this that I here held, and being put to my
choice, whether I would leav this for that, or keep this still with that, as
some others then did, and so yet do; (and that one among others, who preaches
against taking of Tithes, as one mark of a falls Teacher, when yet he either
exacts, or at least receives Tithes himself, and against Universities
remanding them back to the pit of darkness from whence they came (says he) at
first, when as himself holds the Hedship of a College in the Universitie, and
receivs the maintenance belonging to it.) Yea, my self sometime persuaded one
of those that succeeded me, advising therein with me, upon some important
considerations, as I conceived them, to do that which my self yet refused, and
durst not do.

To draw this long Discourse then to a brief sum, by what has hitherto been
related, it may easily appear, how far I have been from giving any just
ground for Lilie or any other to charge me with, or suspect me of, a mind
covetouslie affected, or ambitiouslie disposed, either by often flitting from
place to place, or by taking and holding diverse places together, (which either
yet in some cases, I doubt not, but a man lawfully may do) or by exacting with
extremity, what has been du to me. Whereof further yet more anon.

But my mind, it seems, is altered with my years; and I am grown more gripple
and covetous, at least, in mine old age, then formerlie I have been; And it is
true indeed, that Avarice is Rolloc, in 1 Timothy
commonly deemed, Morbus(...)senum proprius, The peculiar vice of old age. And
the Philosopher therefore makes it one of the Characters of Old Men, that they are (...), illiberal Arist. Rhetor. l. 2. c 13.
and close-fisted; yea, the Old Man in the Scene confesses as much,

Ad omnia alia aetate sapimus rectius: Ter. Adelph^ 5. 3.

Solum unum hoc vitium affert senectus hominibus,
Attentiores sumus ad rem omnes qam sat est.
For other matters men by age grow wiser; but this one vice old age brings with
it, that it makes men generally more worldly then is meet. It is reported by
Ammian, that Julian the Emperor was wont to say, Fiscus ut lien, That the
Excheqer Ammian. Hist* l.
in the State, was as the Spleen in the Body: When it grew great, the main
Body grew less. And some other, tho I remember not who, have said of pride,
Fast us ut lien, fastus ut fiscus, Pride in the Mind, is as the Excheqer in the
State, as the Spleen in the Body. When other Vices ar decayed, then Pride
uses to get head; yea, it feeds upon, and gains growth by the decay of other
Vices. But what they say of Pride, the same others of Avarice; hither drawing
that of the Apostle, where 1 Timothy 6. 10. Rolloc. ib.
he compares this evil affection to a root, Qia ut radix hyeme vim succumque
retinet, cum reliqae plantarum parts vigorem viroremque amiserint, says that
learned Scot: Because, as the root in Winter retains its sap and force, when
the other parts of Stob. Tom. 2. tit. 115. Anton* Melis. l. 2. c. 17. Laert. l.
8. in Pythag. Gal. de Dogm. Hip. and Plat. l. 8.
the plant have lost all their wonted vigor and verdure: So this vice in old
age, which the Ancients call (...) Hyemem vitae, the Winter of man's life,
retains its force and strength, when other vices become more invalid and less
vigorous. For, as the same Author well, Libidinis ignis paulatim extinguitur, and
cum senectute consenescit: At avaritia augescit continu^, and cum senectute
juvenescit, qando vitia senescunt reliqa. The heat of lustfulness abates by
degrees, and waxes old with old age; whereas Avarice is still growing, as some
say of the Crocodile, Plin. l. 8 c. 27. qo^ refutat. Scal. de subtle. exerc.
196. sect. 7 Aug. de temp. 246. Cic. de Senect.
and in old age is young and lusty: Et in frigidis senibus vehementius
inardescit; Yea, in cold old-men burns hottest, says Austin; And when
prosuseness and looseness cease, then this corruption of covetousness begins to
creep in. So that, howsoever it be a thing contrary to reason, says that
famous Orator, Qo minus viae, eo plus viatici, For a man to encomber himself
with larger provisions, the less way he has to go; And a strange madness,
says that Ancient Father, for a man to be then Aug. ibid.
most eager of scraping and gathering goods together, when he is soonest to
leav them; and to endeavor with most travel to lay on load, when he is nearest
to his journeys end. Yet, it seems, this mad folly and unreasonable affection
has, among many other, surprised and seized on Mr. G. that like those of whom
Plutarch speaks, who ar of the mind, That unless they Plut. de avar.
add daily to the heap of what already they have, (...), they shall want meat
to feed them while they live, and money to bu^y them when they are dead: So he,
tho he be, (...), in vespera vitae, in the evening of his life; yea, Arist.
Poet. c. 21.
as Empedocles, (...), ad occasum, at the very Sunset; (...), Pedem alterum
in capulo, or as we Lu^ian. de Sectis. Pomp. Eigest. l. 40 tit. 5. l. 28.
Diogen. Adag. ^13.
use to speak, In sepulcro, habens, And have one foot in the Coffin, or in the
Grave already; yet as the Proverb has it of the Athenians, (...), Atheniensis
moriens porrigit manum, An Athenian can put out his hand to take money, even
when he lies adying: So (it seems) is it with him; he is now grown more gripple
and greedy of the world then ever. For whereas heretofore, when he did most,
and had most, he neither reqired, nor received more then an hundred and forty
pounds yeerlie; now the old covetous Churl, when he has willing lie silenced
himself from Preaching, he exacteth and receives Two hundred pounds per annum
from his people, and yet preaches not at all for it. For so this lying
Sycophant most untrulie affirms.

Where first a word or two concerning my wilful silencing my self, after that
of my Receipts. It is well known that in the year 1643. I was called to sit in
the Assembly of Divines, and others of either House at Westminster. Where
notwithstanding the remoteness of my place, for above two years and upward, I
attended as constantly as any other of the Assembly; and yet neglected not
therefore my Pastoral employment, but preached still constantly every Lords
day, save when some of my Reverend Brethren and Colleages did now and then, yet
not freqentlie, afford me some help. For which my attendance, albeit some of
the Antinominan party buzzed it into the ears of my people, that I received an
hundred pound a year; and by Ordinance of Parliament indeed we were to receiv
each one of us Four shillings a day; yet I never either demanded a penny, nor
when I was sometime a Committee, and in the Chair, for the distribution of such
sums of money, as they came in, did I ever set apart, or cause to be set apart,
any part thereof for my self; regarding the indigence of some who had been
either plundered, or driven from their places; and the just claim of others, who
upon good ground reqired as of right du to them, a proportionable share in the
moneys brought in; nor did I ever receiv of what was by others unsought to
assigned me, so much as half the charge of my Boat-hire (setting aside other
expenses) amounted unto.

From this employment I came home, arrested with a sharp fit of the
Wind-Colick, the violence whereof, after grievous and tedious pains undergone,
and not suddenly removed, so loosed and weakened the whole frame of my feeble
body, that it constrained me to keep Bed for a long time together. After which
extreme weakness, when I had recovered so much strength, as but to sit up a
little, by some cold taken, I fell back into such a deep and dangerous relapse,
as made my recoverie very doubtful, not to my friends alone, but even to the
Physicians themselves. This affixed me for a longer space of time, then before,
to my Bed; mured me up a far longer time in my Chamber, and confined me yet a
far longer time to my House. And this, I suppose, was no willing or wilful
silencing of my self.

Howbeit, so soon as I had gotten any degree of strength, and was able to
creep or craul out to the Public Assembly (of my own people, I mean; for unto
that at Westminster, I was never able to return) I returned to my wonted course
of Teaching, and therein continued for some good space of time, until by
intention of speech a vein opening in my Lungs caused such a flux of blood, as
that, when it could not otherwise be staid, I was constrained by advice to open
a vein elsewhere; which double expense of blood could not but exceedingly
weaken one of my years, never of any strong constitution, and by a foregoing
malady brought so low as I la(...) been. Notwithstanding, after that I had for
some few months forborne preaching, supposing that all in my Lungs was now
perfectly closed up and healed, I betook my self afresh again to my wonted
employment, and persisted therein, until either the former or some other vein
in the same part, reserated the second time, and with more violence disgorging
it self then before, I was enforced to have recours to the former remedy
again; but found it a work of more difficulty now by that course (albeit a
double qantitie almost of blood to what before, was then drawn from me) and
other means adjoined thereunto, to effect a restraint, and repress the efflux,
then formerlie it had been. And I was then told by the Physician, that I must
wholly forbear Preaching, unles I would wilfully make away myself; and this
is the wilful or unwilling silencing of my self from Preaching. Which howsoever
I therefore forbear, that I may not thereby make my self guilty of
self-murder; yet do I not wholly neglect my Pastoral employments, so far as
with safety I may perform any (for this voidance of blood does at times still
surprise me, tho not with such vehemence, as at those other times it did) in
Administration of the Sacraments with such short Collations as ar suitable to
the present occasion, in Visitation of the sick, and other like Offices, as
ability serves, and my weakness will permit.

Yea but, When I preach not at all, yet I exact, or at least receiv from my
people Two hundred pounds a year.

Suppose that being now unable to preach, and take those pains with my people
that formerlie I had done, I should yet admit from them, some good portion of
that which I did formerly receiv; especially at mine own charge providing and
procuring some able persons to perform what is reqisite to be done, but am not
able to do my self; (that which I have been careful of ever since this
infirmity has held me, so far as in me lay so to do) suppose, I say, I should
so do, I am of the mind, that no ingenuous people would deem it a thing unjust
or uneqal, or could upon any eqitable ground deny it to one, that had spent
himself and his strength among them, and upon them; so long as God was pleased
to continu ability to him. Sure I am that by Gods own Ordinance and
appointment, the sons of Levi, who had undergone the service of the Tabernacle,
until they were fifty years Numb. 4 3. and 8. 25, 26.
old, should then, growing in years, be discharged of a great part of their
wonted service; and yet were not then to lose their livelihood, or their part
in the Tithes and other annual allowances to that Tribe and Function assigned,
albeit they did no toilsom work for it.

But whether I reqire it or no, certain it is that I receiv it, and that it is
no less then two hundred a year.

Belike, tho I be not so gripple to exact or reqire it; (and where is the old
Churls covetousnes then?) yet my people ar now grown on a sudden so wonderful
open-hearted and open-handed, as to bring or send at least in to me more by
much then ever at any time they afforded me. And Qis nisi mentis inops oblatum
respuat? what a folly were it for me to refuse and return it? what a
discourtesie had it been not to receiv and accept so large, or lavish rather, a
courtesy, so freely and profufelie tendered? As upon my refual of that Place
in the Universitie beforementioned, which was then conferted on a worthy
Brother far fitter for it then my self, whom to the great loss not of that
College alone, but of the whole Universitie, and the no less grief of al his
well-affected Brethren of the Ministry, unto whom his worth and parts were
known, the Lord has lately taken from us; when upon the publication thereof
in the Assembly, he out of his ingenuous modesty stood up, and made an
Apology for himself, that he had not sought for the place, as I verily beleiv
he had not, and by the party Mr. S. M.
that published it to clear him therein, it was averred, that if that Reverend
Father (so was he pleased to style me) that sat over against him, had not
refused it; he had not been thought upon for it. As I say, an ancient Doctor
now decessed, Mr. P. S.
said then to me, as we went out of the Assembly, I would my Lord of
Manchester would have graced me with the refusal of the Mastership of Trinity
College; as intimating that he would also have refused it, as I did: so say I
here, I would my people would have graced not me with the refusal of so great a
sum (which I am well assured I should never have-received) but graced themselves
with the free tender of so much as was du to me, or so much at least as would
have amounted to that which he received from me, who officiated for me, to try
whether, or how far forth I should have accepted of it, or received their free
offer. But this on a liers, Lilies word, I should say, they that list may
beleiv. What I receiv is soon-known; for it comes not to me by many hands, nor
need I fear, or be loath to have it known what it is; I receiv qarterlie, for
all the Tithes of the grounds, Seventeen pound ten shillings, and for all my
Gleab, five pounds ten shillings; which all put together, will not make up One
hundred a year. For as for Tithe-rent for houses formerlie paid, I have for
diverse years past not received one penny, nor ought in lieu of it; the
pretense of the most is, that I admit not all promiscuouslie to the Lords
Table, but according to Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf enacted, nor as
yet, that I know, repealed, reqire of those, whom I admit, some account of
their Faith, but of neither sort, the one or the other do I in this kind receiv
ought, tho recoverable in the Court of Excheqer.

Now out of the sum above specified, which I receiv quarterlie, do I
constantly issu thirteen, and sometime fourteen pound a qarter unto him that
performs those Offices for me, which with safety my self cannot. Whereunto
when there shall be added, what in right of my Rectorie I part with in Tenths
and Taxes to the State, Assesments for the poor, with other like necessary
payments, wherein I stand as deeply charged, as if I enjoyed the whole, and as
when I received most; it will easily appear how smala portion or poor a
pittance rather, of what I receiv, comes into mine own purs. So that I may well
say of my Rectorie, as Luther sometime of Free Will, it is Titulus sine re. I
hold a bare Title of a Rectorie; a sorry pittance of ought that may fitly
bear that name.

But why do you retain the Title then, may some say, if you reap no more
benefit by it?

I Answer, It is much against my mind, as not a few well know. I have a long
time been desirous to divest my self of it: I made diverse years since my mind
known to my people, concerning my not willingness only, but ernest desire, in
regard of mine imbecillitie, to resign it, and reqested them to take some
speedy course for the bringing in of a faithful and able Pastor, under whose
Ministry my self might live comfortablie together with them. One was
nominated by the party, who bears the Title of Patron. Some exceptions were
taken against him, and I earnestly pressed to retain the Title, til such an one
might be had as was generally approved. I growing daily as more weaklie, so
more weary of the Charge, have since that time again, and that some good space
of time since, caused it to be motioned to the party, in whom the right of
Presenting is deemed to rest, that if he would nominate any one that should
for Life and Abilities be approved of by the Classis whereof I am an useles
Member, or by any three of them, I would, upon their approbation signified,
readily resign; But of any such I could never yet hear from him. I am now put
in hope that another way the burden may be wholly taken off from my shoulders,
and one of better Abilities placed in my room; the day whereof I long to see,
as that which will be a day of liberty, and much ease of mind to me.

Thus having, I hope, to any, not totallie closed, or wilfully winking eye,
evidentlie discovered, the notorious untruth and vanity, of those slanderous
calumnies, that this lying Varlet has endeavored to fasten upon me,

That I was sometime a Prelate.
That I preached then for Sabbath Sports:
That I have willingly silenced my self from Preaching.
That I receive Two hundred pounds by the year, tho I preach not for it.
I shall from henceforth willingly silence my self from dealing any further
with him, and leav him to his Father and Master, with whom he deals, and
whose work he does, even to him who was the first coyner of lies, and is the
Father of John 8 44.
Liars, to receiv his Child's Portion from him, together with them (among whom
he seems ambitious of a principal place) who by their forging and loving of
lies, show manifestly Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15.
of what Stock they are descended, and what House they belong unto.

I shall only add, for further manifestation, not of his virulent and
slanderons language only, but of his malicious and mischievous mind, that he
may show himself to be a right. Scholar, and a genuine Child of him, that was
not a Liar only, bu^ a Murderer from the beginning, what he has in the close
of his February Observations, where these words ar found.

The Common Law near this time, or the practical part thereof, seems somewhat
curbed; -- whilst malicious Presbytery, without a general Massacre, never will.

And yet further to show the extent of this his murtherous mind to reach not
the Presbytery alone, but the whole body of the Ministry, and his longing
desire, impatient of delay, to have some such bloody and barbarous design, or
hellish project put in execution out of hand, as in his last years close he
complained of them in these terms, We are eternally plagued with a mutinous
and self-seeking Clergy, whose avarice has no bounds, or pride any limits.

So thus now he concludes his Mayes Observations,

The Saint-seeming Divine underhand undoes both People, Authority, Soldiers
and Themselves, by crawling, and creeping, and stealing Men's affections from the
present Army and Government. Parliament of England, how long will thou susser
these to reign?

Thus this gallant-spirited (as he seems to account himself) or rather
murtherous-minded man (as he may justly and deservedly be deemed) like
another Haman, who because stout Mordecay Ester 3. 5. 6.
the Jew will not bow to him, thought scorn to wreck his wrathful rage upon him
alone, but would have the whole Nation of the Jews rooted out and destroyed; so
he, because T. G. a stiff-necked Presbyterian (as he is pleased to style him,
and some other of the like strain) will not stoop to him, would have the whole
Presbytery, yea, and Ministry to be murdered and massacred, and encites
(what in him lies, nor I hope will he pretend without good warrant from the Book
of Heaven, where in the Stars he finds it entered and engrossed, so to do)
either the Higher Powers (for to the Parliament of England he calls for it) like
tyrannous Saul, or the rude and rash multitude and the Souldierie (whom Sam.
22. 16, 18
he says they undo) like so many Edomitical Doegs, not to fall soul upon and
murder some fourscore or thereabouts of Gods Priests in some one City, but to
massacre and make away so many hundreds of Christ's Ministers dispersed through
al parts of the land, as being such, as without a general massacre of them
cannot be curbed. And I shall only propound it in sober sadness to the sage and
serious consideration of those Worthies who have the Rains of Government in
their hands, whether such hellish Counsels and devi^lish Designs as these do
conduce to the settling of peace in the Nation, or ar documents fit to be
instilled into peoples, and Swordmens minds; or rather whether the publishing
and divulging of such projects as found written and enrolled in the Celestial
Records being permitted to pass without check or control, may not prove in
time, means of working much mischief, and of drawing down the wrath and
vengeance of God upon the whole body of the State, Read Jer. 26. 15. and 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17.

An Advertisement concerning two Allegations in Lilies Postscript.
HEre when I had laid aside my Pen, casting mine eye occasionallie on this
Vatlets Postscript, I chanced to light in the Close of it, on the Allegations
of two Autors in some respects not unlike himseif, the one writing in English,
the other in Latin; together with a task imposed by him upon me to English the
latter; which, though neither of them concern me in particular, yet for some
considerations, I shall not stick to relate either, and at so kind a friends
reqest, so far forth to gratify him, as to English the latter, with a little
overplus thereunto.

The former Author, one Cleavland, a man to me, either by sight or hearsay,
tongue, or pen, utterlie unknown, futher then his friend Lilie gives me notice
here of him, in some Satirical Libel (it seems) is pleased to term the late
Assembly at Westminster (as he, who himself styles it a Synod of
Presbyterians, as if it consisted of none but such, relates him) A Flea-bitten
Synod, An Assembly brewed of Clarks, like Royston Crows, or Friars of both
Orders, black and gray.

The latter, left for me to English, is parcel of a Latin Epistle of one
Carpenter, a man whose face I never saw, save in the Frontispice of one of his
Books, of which also, save by this occasion, I never before saw leaf or line.
Yet before I come to fulfill Mr. Lilies suit here, I shall not think much, or
deem it much amiss, to entertain my Reader, with a Character of the Author; and
that mostlie, or wholly rather, from his own words and works, relations and
writings, which, till upon this occasion, having never before seen or sought
after, I have now lately in regard of this task by his friend Lilie imposed
upon me, made enquiry for, and after the sight thereof procured, have taken
some pains to peruse.

The man was sometime a Popish Priest (so himself acknowledges) Adve^t. Obj* 1
p. 423.
of which sort we have had in these later times, Counterfeit Conveits not a
few, who pretending conscience, as did that Arch-turncoat of Spalata, come over
hither to do more mischief by lurking and working underhand among us here, then
they could do by abiding further from us abroad, and such a one he confesses
himself, that Anabap. washed chap. 42. p. 154
some of his own kindred (whom therefore he styles Jewish Presbyterians)
suspect him to be; yea he complains of, or exclaims rather against one, (whom
he calls a man of pufpast, like that fat Ibid. chap. 86. p. 343. 346.
bellie-mountaind Bishop) who lighting on one of his Works, said no more of it,
but wrote only upon it, Spalatensis. And for my part, I shall herein pass no
other censure upon him, then what my Reverend Father in Law Mr. Charles Pinner,
a man of a qick and piercing judgment, did sometime, after the reading of some
of that Arch-dissemblers Pamphlets, when they came first abroad, and were
generally entertaind with much applause, pass upon the Author of them, That the
man, so far as might be gathered from his writings, seemed not yet well washed
from his Popish dregs. And the self same I conceiv may be as well said of this
man, notwithstanding his washing of the Anabaptist over and over, that he is
not yet well washed from his Popish conceits and opinions. For in the same his
Washing-bowl, wherein he washes and Barbs the Anabaptist, he sorrowfully
confesses, that when he first came from the Papists, he was more fired on with
passion, then Cha. 41. p. 152
drawn with Devotion. And in some of his first Sermons he made here afer his
coming over, to insinuate himself into favor with Archbishop Lawd, (who at
first, as I have heard Dr. Low report, held him a loof off, and set light by
him) by a public profession of his approbation and wel-liking of those
Imnovations that he had here brought in, he professed (as is avowed by persons
of good credit, who themselves then heard him) that he found our Church at his
return in a far better condition then when he left it; and that no man
religiously affected would refuse to bow to the Alter. Again in the fore
mentioned work he informs Cha. ^2. p. 121*
his Reader, that in these our Western parts there are more ebbings and
flowings, more sea-alterations and wave-motions of Religion, then elsewhere; and
the Church of Rome holds Truth fast many times when others wretchedlie betray
it. And he does, he says, sincerely confess, that even in that his Discourse
(concerning Ibid.
Baptism) he walks beyond ordinary walkings, upon the grounds of the Church of
Rome; as indeed he does, both in admitting a wide difference between the
Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ, and the efficacy and effects of
either, Chapter 30. As also in avowing infalliblie an infusion of Habitual Grace,
and Perfection of Sanctification in Baptism of Infants, Chap. 18. 19, 21, 25.
And both in coining such a character in Baptism imprinted on the soul as no
Sacrament in the Old Testament had, Chap. 14. In stating the necessity of
Baptism unto Salvation, ne cessitate medii, Chap. 89. to which purpose also he
alleges from a counterfeit Justine, who concludes, as he says, in the
rebound, after much bandying of the business, that baptized Infants Cha. 74. p.
268.
are saved, unbaptized Infants are not saved, leaving us to save our selves as
we can. Again, for unwritten Traditions, he tells us, In verbo Sacerdotis
Christiani, in the word of a Christian Priest, we must be Cabalists in some
sense, Cha. 29. p. 107.
and receiv with a plavdit, the distinction of Gods Word into written and
unwritten. He wishes further, that when he came over, he could have transferred
from Rome into England, and our Universities two precious Jewels,
School-Divinitie, and Chap. 102. p 372.
Mystical-Divinitie. Of the former whereof, to wit, School-Divinitie, wherein all the Body of Popish, Erroneous, Superstitious, Prodigious, and Idolatrous
Dictates and Doctrines ar couched and maintained, and which consists, for a
great part of it, of fond, frivolous, Chap. 40. ^p. 144, 146.
and fruitles debates, whereof some himself touches in his Washbowl. For as
for the sober, sounder, and useful part of School Lerning, our Universities
want it not, and his wish therefore is herein needles, as the learned Works of
our Writers that deal in Controversies, do evidentlie show; albeit that in
their English Practical and Didactical Discourses they discreetlie forbear to
make use of it, because it is not so congruous to popular apprehensions. But of
that Romish School-Divinitie, which he wishes derived from Rome into our
Universities, he thus speaks, I follow the Discourse of mine own heart, in the
deep Tracts of School-Divinitie (the Title of Doctor Profundus, belike, he may
challenge) the strength and marow whereof I find after long use to be
superlativelie strong and useful, above the marrow and strength of Lions; although
the crassipelles thick-skinned Preachers (such ar all ours to this Dr.
Subtilis, that he may have Scotus his title too) dabling and wading in the
shalow, think Cha. 87 p 356
shalowlie of it. Of the latter, to wit, The spiritual Magazine of Mystical
Divinity, as he terms it, thus; The defect Chap. 102. p 379.
hereof has rendered the leaders of these wretched and leaden people (thus he
reckons our Protestant people in comparison of the Papists) wretchedlie
deficient, and altogether sinking within themselves. Where as hereby they might
have made better and stronger use of their strong (or strange rather)
imaginations (mere humane fancies) as the mystical Divines have taught; Such,
to wit, as play and sport themselves with Gods sacred Oracles, and exercise
their wanton wits, in writhing and wrigling them to and fro, (...), like some
Puppets, or Engines, artificially framed, that with screws and devices may be
turned into what shapes and figures men lust; That which he, and some other of
his strain, yea, to many of our Novellists among us to freqentlie practice,
and whereof in these his writings he has given such absurd, immodest,
irreligious and ridiculous Paterns and Instances, as were sufficient to make
any modest, religious, ingenuous, or judicious persons to loath and abhor it:
Not unlike herein to that great Frenchman, a man otherwise of eminent parts,
who Mr. L. C.
commending to Scholars and Students this kind of study, propounds withal for
a Sample such a piece of a fantastical Jew, as would make any pious Christian
man's stomak to rise within him at the reading of it. But of such stuff we have
to much among us already; which even the soberer sort of Popish Writers
themselves mislike; and we are well content it rest where it is, wishing it
rather exiled wholly from us, and the monopoly of it confirmed and confined
unto those of the Romish Synagog. Add hereunto his Popish reckoning of the
seven Hed-sins, and his Frierlie conceit, in a ridiculous application of
Christ's several seven bleedings for the cure Adv. p* 452, 453. Au. wash. C. 88.
p. 361.
of them. Also his pleading for the settled and immovable Font for the
baptizing of Infants, which the Presbyterians, he says, have brought to a
moveable and unsettled Puedish.

But will ye see him treading more exactlie in the steps of that more eminent
mount ain-bellied (as he calls him) Proteus or Vertumnus, to whom his Censurer
he says, compared him, and to whom for bulk of body and belly he vicissim
compares that Censurer of him? where he makes his confession, as he would do it
he says, and it were upon his deathbed; I most heartily deny (says he) and
defy, renounce, abhor and protest against, the Cha. 41. p. 152.
presumption, pride, and avarice of Popes, their Nephews and Cardinals; the
deceitful dealing of Priests, Jesuits, Moncks and Friars; and against all other
Doctrines, that bear the true mark and hecceitie of corruption. Would not
Spalatensis think we qestionles, Yea, Cardinal Bellarmine, or Baronius himself,
have said as much? and much more, what there follows? For immediately in the
very next words, he spends a whole page and Ibid. p. 152. 153
more in a transcendent commendation of the Papists, for their faithful
conservation of the Sacred Articles of Catholic and Apostolic Doctrine, their
wel-ordered Zeal, admirable and most ravishing Devotions, Deiform Intentions,
Heroical acts of Virtue, Fastings, Prayings, Recollections, Meditations,
Introversions, Aspirations, Humiliations, Mortifications, Abnegations of
themselves, etc. As if all true Zeal, sound Devotion, and sincere Piety, or the
highest strains thereof at least, were wholly cloistered up in the Popish
Monasteries among their Votaries (of whose Acts with us what they were Bales
two whole Books may show, and what they are, and have been elsewhere, the
testimonies of their own Writers, in Illyricus his Catalog, and Wolfs
Memoralia, may sufficiently enform) or were to be found in the Romish Church,
if not alone, yet in a far greater eminency then in any other. All which
things, he says, he does most Ibid. p 2^3.
humbly embrace, receiv, approv, with all his soul, heart, and spirit; and he
will never beleiv that the Tree (to wit, the Church of Rome, and its
Superstitious Orders of Moncks and Friars) is corrupted in the Root, Heart, and
Substance, which brings forth such heavenly fruits. For as for what he
solemnlie professes elsewhere, that he bleeds in his spirit, and is ashamed
Advert. Obj. 5. p 445, 446.
of his company (as if we belyed the Papists) when he hears such things
asserted in Pulpits by persons non infimae Classis, as he says, are
fancie-formed pictures, and antic shapes, falling foul with his clear
knowledge: Those he instances in, ar some of them too true, as that Papists
beleiv to be saved by their own Merits, which do in truth exclude Christ's; that
the Common people among them pray most commonly in a language they understand
not; that all ordinary Papists (tho the all is in likelihood an addition of
his own) worship Images as their gods (yet himself elsewhere confesses that
their great Doctors, Thom. of Cha 34. p. ^22.
Aqine and Bellarmine resolv, that Christ's Image, and the Crucifix, may be
adored with worship du to God alone; and that the ignorant Ibid. p. 126.
Spaniards, men and women, young and old, and of all sizes counted their old
worm-eaten Images, their Country gods.) Some ar credible enough, as that the
Pope should dispense with Priests and Jesuits to r^cant and join with the
Ministers of England, to reduce Protestants the more convenientlie to his
Religion; which may the rather be believed of those who are not ignorant of
their Doctrine of Eqivocation, and their hellish Practices of Devilish Designs,
either personally acted or approved and extolled by them, as himself elsewhere
acknowledges. Cha. 40. p. 142, 143.
And how can he clearlie out of his knowledge, as he says, clear the Pope in
this particular? to which head might be referred, what elsewhere he says runs
among the people for a Adv^rt. Ob. 5. p. 444.
truth, that there are or were lately Jesuits in our Army, that preached
there; which report himself, who knows Popish affairs, motions and
contrivements in a large measure, and in holy Truth more then many think him
to know, (the truth whereof we shall, without putting him to his corporal Oath,
easily beleiv) and then some would have him to know, does faithfully Ibid. p.
445.
beleiv to be the most malicious, and most damnable falls invention of the
seething-scalding-burning-fier-hot-hearted Genevensis. (For now he is in his
Ruf.) Lastly, others of them may well be deemed Fittons of his own framing, as
that, to let others pass, that comes in last, to bring up the rereward, that no
Professors of chastity live chastely among them; and that Ii(...) 446.
all of that Religion ar bloodilie minded. Of both which, howsoever experience
and proof have upon public Records left evidence sufficient, not to run out
far abroad, in Queen Mary's days here, and of later time in Ireland, to prove
the truth concerning an overgreat party of them, yet is it not probable that
any of note would in so general terms avow. He confesses indeed, as
infalliblie Iibid. 446.
certain, that there are corruptions among Papists both of Doctrine and Manners;
and scandals consequently ensuing. But Cha. 41. p. 153
this he puts off with a necessity of scandals in all Churches, and no
Angelical perfection to be expected in any. And as Spalatensis sometime used
to distinguish between the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome: So he would
have the world, he says, Ibid. p. 149.
to understand, that he now understands the difference between the Doctrines,
which pride and private interest have publicly raised in the Church of Rome,
and which are not destructiv of its being a Church; (as the sins and errors of
the Pharisees destroyed not the Chair of Moses;) and the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome lineallie descended from Apostolical Antiqitie, or included virtuallie
in their seed and root. And where Sermon. no Ser p 228.
he prosesseth faithfully to render an account of his Faith; He subjoyns at
the close of it, hitherto I have said nothing but what a knowing Papist will
say. And therefore our Pulpits, and the ears of our people have been abused by
the devils Janissaries. Ibid. p. 230.


But will you further see, how he would enforce upon us a necessity of
repairing to Rome for the sure founding of our Faith? There is another work of
his, wherein that Confession of his Faith is contained; but which I know not
how to term, nor himself, it seems, well neither. For not unlike to that Riddle
of Panarceus, related by Athenaeus out of Clearchus his book of Riddles, and
Athen, dipnosep. l. 10.
enlarged by H. Stevens, and some others, concerning a blinking Eunuch, who
spying a Flittermous hanging on a Ferula, or Fennel* giant, as some term it,
threw at it with a Pumice, but missed it. (...). A man no man, seeing and not
seeing, a bird no bird, sitting and not sitting, on a tree no tree, threw at it
and threw not at it, with a stone no stone. He accordingly intitles, this his
partly English, partly Latin Discourse, A Sermon and no Sermon, preached and
not preached, in a Church and not a Church, to a people and not a people;
wherein his first Alarm to his Brethren of the Presbytery, being his Brethren
and not his Brethren. But in this Rhapsodie, give it what name you or himself
shall please, he has by piecemeal, with diverse interlocutions in English to
his Plebeian Auditorie, given out a Discourse or Debate, of a great difficulty,
which he says, forsooth, he delivers in Latin, because he had a secret to tell
the Scholar in his ear, the main Sermon. no Ser. p. 50.
scope whereof in the first place bends it self unto this, that our English
Translation of the Bible cannot afford a mere English man any good ground to
build his Faith upon. This the rather to bring about, he scoffs first at the
work, which he terms in plain English, a dispirited Translation, then he falls
foul on Page 52.
those Reverend, pious, and learned Ministers of Gods Word employed in it, of
whom he passes this verdict, Personas qibus Page 50.
spiritum divinum, ne dicam affingere, sed non audemus affigere, qorumque
filios ex lu^o vario and versatili conflatos videmus, and ad omnia paratos pro
mutata rerum facie. I give you his own words, and will leav them to himself to
English. Only thus much English any weak Grammar Scholar may pick out of
them, that the persons made use of in that Translation, were such as we cannot
so much as fain, much less dare to affirm, that they had the Spirit of God in
them; and that by their children (as he terms, hem) we may see, what they were,
to wit, men made up of such clay as might be easily molded and wrought into
any shape whatsoever, as being ready to admit any new impression, as the
state and face of the times and things shall alter and change. A wicked and
wretched censure, most uncharitablie and unchristianlie passed upon persons of
well-known piety, and approved integrity, and whose courses and cariages,
diverse of them have evidently evinced the contrary; and it may well be deemed,
as him self says elsewhere (to return him his own words) alios ex suo judicat
ingenio, that by his own disposition he judges of Sermon. no Sermon. p. 201.
them.

But what is the course then, that a mere English man must take for the sure
grounding of his Faith? yea not a mere English man only, but any learned or
unlerned, Pastor or People; for that which he beats upon, and drives at as well
in his English Discourse as in his Latin Debate, concerns as well Teachers as
people taught, and extends it self unto any Translation, not our English
alone, and Interpretation also whatsoever. It is this, Page 125.
By adhering to a Church of sound learning, and sufficient authority, Page 110.
such authority as may reasonably put a stop to controversies; Page 131.
that he may be able, producing the authority of such a known Church, to lay
his hand upon the Book, and say, This is the Original. And to this purpose he
professes Page 63, 64.
reverentlie to embrace those Preachers, who are deeply founded upon the sense
and sentence of the Holy Ghost speaking by the Church; and that the reason
Page 188.
why the Doctrine of the Fathers is deemed true, (not because found agreeable to
Gods word, the rule whereby the Apostles were content to have their Doctrine
tried; but why then?) Act. 17. 11. and 26. 22.
because it was the Doctrine of the true Church, in which, and of which they
were. Such a Church belike as neither did, nor Anabap: washed Cha. 62. p. 328.
could hold any error. And he concludes therefore, in another of his Works,
that when we have done what men can do, if the Interpreters of Scripture be not
spirited with the same Spirit (to wit, of Infallibility) with which the
Writers thereof were spirited, they shall never give spiritual and secure
judgment, proportionablie to the Prophetical and Apostolical Spirit; yea
infalliblie; if it be not moreover infalliblie known, that they are Ibid.
divinelie spirited; they cannot inbreath into us such knowledge that shall qiet
and allay our exasperated and troubled hearts; and this the subtle Doctor
Scotus binds with an infallible reason; No man perfectly and firmlie beleivs
him (let him be Interpreter of the words or sense) of whom he knows he can
deceiv, or be deceived, in such things, as having no security of Direction
from the gracious and manifest promise of God.

Now what does all this drive to, but that no man, learned or unlearned, can
have any firm ground whereon to fix his faith, but by recours and adherence to
a Church, that is, infalliblie known to be generally infallible? And what
Church he must of necessity mean and intend, I shall not need to tell any,
that knows ought in the Controversies between Rome and us. For the truth is, no
particular Church since the Apostles days, nay nor in their time, save as it
was from time to time, directed and informed by some one of them surviving,
either ever had, or ever did or durst (that appears) lay claim to, any such
privilege of a general Infallibility; the presumptuous and groundless
challenge of the Modern Romish Church, by virtu forsooth of the Popes late
introduced Authority, only excepted. And what this Design then drives to,
any one that has but half an ey may easily disery.

Yea but the Difficulty (he says) was never before propounded that he ever
found or heard, by any Church or person in such Advert. Ob. 2. p. 424.
manner, and making such an assault, as he does here.

That he has indeed herein exceeded all other Writers, for ought I know, even
the Papists themselves, I shall readily condescend unto him. For howsoever the
Romanists and Popish Doctors hold, that the Pope, some of them, a General
Council, other of them, cannot err in determining ought concerning matter of
Faith or Life; yet none of them, that I ever read or heard of, affirm that
either Church or Pope can Infalliblie determine, wheresoever there are any
various readings in the Hebrew, or Greek Text, or wheresoever any word in
either is ambiguous, neither making any material or momentous difference,
which is the right reading, or which the genuine sense of the word, which yet
Degree of Infallibility this ^an necessarily reqires, as that without which
no firm footing or sure ground for our Faith can be found.

Yea but his Will-strong Objector, he says, says, that the proposal of his
Difficulty induces to Atheism; and this contradicts what I here say, and
others, it seems before me have said; for if it put to the Church of Rome, how
induces it to Atheism, which denies both God and Church?

Sir, I make no doubt, but that many Points and Practices in Popery, when the
absurdity of them comes to be discovered, and the end discried, for which they
were at first introduced, and are still stiflie maintained, induce millions
unto Atheism. For example, When people shall be told, that the Pope for the
time being, is Christ's Vicar General to rule and govern the whole Christian
Church, and that there is no certain and infallible way of determining doubts
in the Christian Religion but by recours unto him; and shall withal consider,
what manner of creatures many of the Popes themselves have been; will it not,
think we, indeed, instead of pulling Baron A^al. (...)* 955. Sect. 2, 3.
to Rome, (which yet is the main drift of it) push rather to Atheism, to hear
or read it consequently maintained, that insanus juvenis, a mad Lad, not above
eighteen year old at most such as Baronius reports John the twelfth to have
been; yea p^er ferme decennis, a Idemex Gl. Rho. an. 1633 Sect. 6
boy of about ten, as Rhodolphus Glaber of Benet the ninth; or one that lives
so loosly and lewdlie, that he is not undeservedlie deemed, if not to deny,
yet at the least and best, not to believ those two main Articles of the Creed,
the Resurrection of the dead, and Life eternal, as Bellarmine himself
acknowledges of Bell. de Pon. To(...) l. 4 c. 14.
John the 23. or one that accounts and calls the Story of the Gospel, Fabulam
Christi, a Tale of Christ (as Jerome that piece of Apocrypha, Fabulam Tobiae,
the Tale of Tobias) which of Leo the 10. Bale testifies; to be the Supreme
Judge of all Controversies in the Church, and his Dictates such as are to be
received Jo. Bal. in Vit. Pont. Romans
by the whole Christian World, as undoubtedlie true, and unfalliblie right, in
all things concerning either Faith or Life? and of diverse other Popish Tenets
and Practices, as of Transubstantiation, the Popes Indulgences, and
Dispensations, etc. the like may be averred. But to answer you in few words:
That which tends to the utter subversion of men's faith, by endeavoring to
introduce an utter uncertaintie of that which is the only sure ground of
their faith, without such a help as is no where to be had, does it not pave a
plain and prone path unto Atheism? But so does that which you here propose,
beyond in some sort, as your self confess, what any Romanist ever did. For to
make men, not silly people only, but even the lernedst of them, utterly
uncertain of the genuine sense of Scripture, and Gods Oracles more ambiguous
then Apollo Loxias dark Riddles, and Heraclitus (...) his Dictates were; you
tell us that they are conceived in such an obscure manner, that they are
referta Mysteriis omnifariam eventilatis, and in incertum cadentibus, aliisque
velut Aenigmatibus infinitis, qae Lectores in diversa rapiant atque solicitent
Argumentis aeqo pondere libratis, full fraught with Mysteries, blown out every
way, or into all shapes, and falling out altogether uncertainlie, as also with
infinite Riddles, that solicit and draw the Reader diverse ways with arguments
of eqal weight on either side, and so leav him in suspense, as if the whole
Book of God were made up of such intricacies; as also that they are penned in
such a Language, in qa puncta varia, and in variis codicibus alia atqe alia,
sensusqe radicum multiplices and in omnia propendentes, qae vel doctissimis
undiqe tenebras offundere nemini uspiam docto dubium est, wherein the points
are various, and the words pointed one way in one book, and another way in
others, and the roots, or primitive words of so many several significations,
that of themselves they incline to have any thing made of them, by reason
whereof, even the most learned are encompassed with darkness on every side,
that which no learned man any where can make doubt of. And therefore forsooth
no man learned or unlerned can have any sure footing for their faith, unless
they can find out, or light on such a party of whom they may have assurance,
that he or they can clear all those infinite mysteries, and assoil all those
obscure Riddles, and certainly settle all those varieties, and determine all
those differences, by an undoubted pointing of the words first, and then
limiting each of them to his true and proper sense there so read, and unless
they be also firmlie ascertained concerning such a party, that he or they
cannot be deceived in any of these particulars, nor will deceive him therein.
Which when it shall be discovered to be a matter of mere impossibility, is not
this a ready course to make people warp toward Atheism? for does he not
herein the v^rie same work, that he says the grand Plot-master of Hell does,
labor Page 99.
to make holy Scripture a leaden rule, appliable to all things? or can the
Grand Plot-^ster of Hell frame an Instrument more efficacious, to induce men to
Atheism, then by working men's minds to a persuasion of an utter uncertaintie of
any word of God at all, But he says, that as the Church of Rome has enforced
alike Difficulty, so have the greatest and most conspicuous Adv. Obj. 2. p.
425.
Independents amongst us reinforced the very same with the same Church.

What Independents they are that enforce this difficulty in the very same
manner that the Church of Rome does, I know not. But who ever they be, if any
such be, if they enforce it as he does, they take a ready course to destroy
the faith of their followers, by enforcing upon them such a ground for their
faith as is no where to be had. If as the Church of Rome does, thereby to
infer a necessity of repairing to them out of all qarters of the world, for
a sound and final resolution of all their doubts in Religion (for so the
Romanists enforce it) they shall in so doing (to give them the Autors own
words) having given a Bill of divorce Ser. no Ser p. 160.
to one Pope, beyond the Seas, enstal and enthrone a goodly numbe of
Popelings, and young little Muf^ies, at home. But of this let them consider
whom it concerns.

This Discourse, or Debate, he says indeed, he delivered purposelie in Latin,
because he would not dissolv the soul-harmonie Adver. Obj 2. p. 425.
of weak persons. But there is enough in his English, wherein also the main
substance of it is, to do mischief more then enough, not indeed with any
understanding, well-grounded, and judicious persons, but with people of weak
brains, unsettled minds, loos affections, dispositions inclinable either to
Papism, or Atheism, whereof through the unsetledness of our state, and the
licentiousness of the times, too many have of late been, and are still, in
most places among us.

He professes indeed freely and more then summis labiis, to Adv. p. 454.
invite an Answerer; let him come, says he. But in his Postscript he reqires
that the Answer be returned in Latin.

First, Because (he says) he will not enter the lists with any but Scholars.
Secondly, Because he will not be Sea-bounded, and judged in his future Discourse
by an Island. None, it seems, in this poor Island ar of ability or sufficiency
to judge of his writings; they are so feeble, miserably defective, and
shalowbraind, for want of his Scholastical and Mystical Divinity, which he
wishes he could have brought over with him, wherewith to improve them. But why
did he not then publish his former Debate by it self, that it might suddenly
have flowen oversea, but give it out by morsels and mamocks, either in the
Pulpit, or by the Press or both amidst the intervals of a large English
Discourse? And in the next place he falls to threatening of him that shall oppose
him. If the Adversary, says he, shall be obstinate (as they must be deemed
all, that meddle with ought of his) let him know, that my Pen shall not spend
Ink hereafter but in the Latin language. And withal, I promise, says he, my
Reader, that I will not only endevor to satisfy him in the present matter,
but I will dress the matter in warm Language. Withal subjoyning a long addition
of vain boasting what rare and precious stuff he will therein entertain his
Reader with. Now in part of this denunciation he has much failed; in part, if
I mistake him not, he has not at all failed to make his word good; For whereas
an Answer in Latin to his Latin difficulty has been tendered An wash Cha. 86
p. 342.
unto him, as himself acknowledges; which he might, if he had so pleased, have
replied unto in Latin, and so published it together with his former Latin
Debate extracted out of his former Work: he has returned only some few
parcels or patches in Latin, dispersed and dis-jected like Absirtus his limbs,
all put together not making up four whole pages at most, inserted into an
English Work consisting of Pages upward of 450. Wherein also he is so far from
giving any real satisfaction to his Reader, that he does not so much as afford
him his Answerers own words in the language reqired; only picks out some
curtailed Objections, as he terms them, framed as himself pleases, and
delivered in English, and without the Arguments to back them annexed, and after
a little sorry stuff sub-joyned, turns over the rest, with a Caetera omnia ut
aberrantia a scopo and assument amera rejicio, Page 433.
and so lets them go. But sure, had he desired, as he pretended, to have the
Debate of his Difficulty fly so speedily beyond sea, he would never have
clogged it with such a weight of our leaden language (the best term that he can
afford our English Protestant An. wash. Cha. 102. p. 379.
people) so far exceeding the whole bulk of its Latin body, annexed to it, and
made up with it, as was like to confine it to our English Island* and so impede
and impeach its further progres and passage.

Howbeit, in some part of his promise, to wit, in his warm language, as he
terms it, he is large enough, he is not at all wanting. For although the Answer be
framed in a modest manner, without any broad or uncivil language, his Reply,
which he tells him he shall find interspersed in that large Discourse, is dressed
and pickled indeed both in the English and in the Latin, with great store, and
more then good, of sqibs and scofs, his best Logik and chiefest Rhetorik, such
as Page 430.
Pr^sta, puer, muscarium; Boy, reach the fly-flap, and calling his Answerer
Page 434.
Sublicium caput, a Logger-hed. His Answer Page 4^3.
a famous tinckling of words, a sound ^mpiie of soundnes, which he bids him
therefore Ibid.
cease, as a poor Apothecarie to set out to show, like vain and empty pots and
coffers. The original of his mistake (as he terms it) Page 425
defluxionem per Caput vermiculans in Narem crassam obtusamque, A defluxion
from his nittie Head, into his snottie Nose, (for so in plain English it
sounds): And besides much more stuf of the same stamp, having prefaced somewhat
of P. 435, 436.
an ambidextrons Trick or Design on foot in these tumbling times, of diverse
persons in the same family adhering some to one party and some to another;
That which is reserved for the last as the worst, that he is Page 436.
an extract of Presbytery from a stif-hearted and refractorie Presbyterian:
And what is the Presbytery, or the Design he prates of, to his Difficulty, or
the Debate of it? But this is he that lays this Law on his Answerer, Page 427.
Facessat omnis impexus, illotus, inqinatusque sermo, Away with all undecent,
unwashed and defiled langage, Yea, to affright his Opponent from dealing
further with him, he tells his Reader, that if he be called to unriddle his
enigmatical expressions, and to produce a concealed description, which he has
in sinu^, he will, and he shall, and he must laugh, if he be not plane (...),
one that cannot laugh at all. But let him according to his own proposal,
publish apart from his English Discourse, his Difficulty as it is in Latin
conceived, together with the Answer to it in Latin entire, and his own Latin
Reply as it is here, thereunto; and it may be, as Erasmus reports of one whom
Friar Erasm. Eccles. lib. 3.
Robert de Lycio had laid a wager with, that he would in a Sermon with his
Oratorie draw tears from him; how he confessed indeed that he wept, but it was
out of mere pity, to consider that one of his parts should be so vain and
loose of life as he was: So his Reader may smile at least to see the man's vain
confidence, in supposing he had given any good satisfaction in the matter
debated, by such a Reply; and it may be such a Rejoinder may ensu thereupon,
as without scurrillous sqibs and scofs to move laughter, or excursions into
such by-matters as concern not the present debate, may lay forth the
insufficiency of his Reply, and shuffling aside as impertinent, such passages
as concerned him to have replied unto; which how it may affect the Reader, I
shall spare to speak or to presage.

Mean while, for satisfaction of his difficulty, I shall refer him to
himself, in those ten Reasons, Notes, and Marks, sufficiently arguing for
Scripture, as it came first from God, as himself Sermon no Ser. p. 44-49.
confesses in that very Work, or Sermon, if it were a Sermon (to go no
further) wherein it was by him at first propounded. All which are as evident,
and as conspicuous, as well in the the English and Latin, or any other
Translation, as in the Origiginal either Greek or Hebrew, and may conseqentlie
convince a man of its divine Authority for the subject Matter, whereon our
Faith is grounded, without any such exqisite skill as he speaks of either in
the Greek or Hebrew, in which latter very few of the Ancient Fathers, either
of the Eastern or Western Churches, whose Works ar yet extant, had any great
skill. And the Reader, for further and fuller satisfaction in the same Subject,
I shall refer to that Religious, Laborious, and Judicions Servant of God Mr.
Richard Baxter, in the Second Part of that his large, pious, accurate and
useful Work, entitled, The Saints Eternal Rest.

Yea, but to stop the mouths of all those, that charge him with Popery, he
says, that to say A man may be joined in communion or union with the Church of
Rome, and yet preach here as a Sermon. no Ser. p. 220.
Minister, is a mostfals alarm, and the mad belowing of Enthusiastical, and
fanatical persons, answerable to Presbyterian ignorance. He that will join with
Rome, must unroost here.

But Sir, howsoever you ar pleased to esteem us Presbyterians as a dull company
of silly Ignoramusses, yet ar we not as yet so brutish or blockish, but, that
taught even by Experience, the mistries of Fools, we have learned and found it
too true to our cost, that many, in these latter times especially, exercising
their Ministry among us (whereof one of late not far from me) have yet by
their Doctrine and Practice showed evidentlie enough, which way their hearts
and affections inclined, and accordingly, when they either were unroosted,
being put beside their places, or had feathered their nests, and saw their
time, have slipped away and shipped hence, betaking themselves thither, where their
heart was before; whereof some also not meeting with what there they expected,
have returned over again hither to work more mischief here. Yea, was not this
Spalatensis his case? did he not exercise his Ministry here in preaching and
administering the Sacrament, to an Italian Auditorie, and with an Italian
Congregation, as also in preaching diverse times at Court, and that against some
points of Popery? laboring the whilst underhand to reconcile Rome and us, not
by drawing them to us, but by withdrawing and writhing us nearer to them; yea
did he not roust among us a long time on a rich Deanrie, a fair Mastership, and
for ought I know, on a fat Parsonage, which falling vacant in the gift of the
Dean and Chapter of Winsor, he attempted at least to ^eise upon, and howsoever
Dr. White therein opposed him, telling him, that there were four sorts of men
that undertook Pastoral charges, quorum pascere qidam nec volunt, n^c valent;
qidam valent, sed non volunt; qidam volunt, sed non valent, qidam and valent
and volunt; some that neither would nor could discharge them; some that could,
but would not; some that would, but could not; some that both would and could;
that in neither of the two first he would rank his Lordship, he doubted not of
his good will; in the last he could not; in the third he must needs, for our
people were English, in which language, he could not speak to them; yet he
answered the Doctor, he would do as he, and some other of them did, substitute
one that should do it. Whether he carried it, or no, I cannot say, but having
long continued his disguise, though not so cunningly, but that at sometimes,
and in diverse things, by persons intelligent, it was easily discried; at
length, when he saw his Cofers well crammed, and the way for his return cleared
by the decesse of one Pope his back-frend, and entrance of another, who had
been sometime his familiar acquaintance, and having got leav with his bag and
baggage to be gone, he then plucked off his Visard, laid his Mask as^de, and
apparentlie discovered, especially so soon as he was got over to the other
side, what in heart he had formerlie been, while (...)e lay lurking, like a
Snake fostred in the bosom, or V^per enclosed and nourished in the body and
belly of our Church.

And thus much shall suffice for the discovery of his good affection to Rome,
and endevor to press a necessity of adhering to some such Church as they
profess theirs to be, howsoever he profess that he is no Papist. For whereas he
says it is most falls, which some have charged upon him, that he is reconciled
to his Popish Priesthood; It may well consist with ought here related, there
may need no reconcilement, if having brought it over with Anab Washed. Chap. 42
p. 156
him, as an indelible character, he still retain it, as it seems he makes
account, that he did, and does; when by virtue, thereof, he braggeth that he
has power to disposses, and drive out devils, and cure strange diseases. For
to this purpose toward the close of his Sermon no Sermon; he tells his Hearers,
that, Did the Witch cleav to them, or the Devil actuallie possess them; some
strange disease assalt them beyond the Physician, some lamness forsaken by the
Surgeon cripple them; he might produce, not a Simon Magus with his Characters,
or an Apollonius, etc. but a Page 245.
poor Charactered man, to do something for them in the Name of Christ, which is
not according to Gods ordinary course. Of which his vain pretension, and his
freqent vaunts thereof being by letters minded and admonished, he returns this
Answer, The Charactered man you speak of, gives God the glory of those Trials
of his Character, which you contemn. And what Character is it, that pretends
and professes to have such extraordinary power and faculties annexed unto it,
but the Character of a Popish Priest? which therefore he acknowledges still to
retain, tho he will not be so termed. Hence also it is, that howsoever he grant
that many Papists have misled Scripture in their inconsiderate Ib. Chap. 35.
p. 126.
laboring to prove the single life of the Priests to be of Divine Command; as
also that some Priests were married in the Ancient Greek Church, and the first
Marriages of such Sermon no Sermon. p. 229.
persons were allowable in that Church; Yet that himself being a member of the
Western Clergy, has experimentallie foundlittle outward, and less inward
comfort in Marriage. In which words Ibid.
whether he do not manifestly intimate himself to be a member of the Clergy of
that western Church, which inhibites her Clergiemen marriage (that is in plainer
English, a Romish or Popish Priest) and is therefore scrupled in his conscience
concerning his Marriage, I shall leav it to any man of understanding to judge.
Adv. Obj. 1. p. 421.


Again, albeit he protest solemnly in the sight of God, that he is no Jesuit,
nor ever was; and that his heart is, and ever was An Washed Chap 41. p. 150.
extremely averted from the practices of pragmatical Jesuits, and that he de
fies, renounces, and abhors all the deceitful dealings of Jesuits.

Yet am I well assured, that he cannot free himself from the just charge of
practicing Jesuitical tricks, in sending out his Emissaries, who (according to
the Proverb in common use wi^h the Arabes, Qi afferunt ad te* auferunt a te,
they that bring tales to thee, carry tales from thee) to underfeel and
undermine men, repair to them with counterfeit errands (which he denies not to
E^pen Adag. Arab.
have procured to be done) and return back from them fained answers, and
falsreports, unless they have been coine^, or forged rather by himself, and
then fathered upon them.

He writes himself Rich. Carpenter Independent. Anabap Wash Title Page.


And yet, against the Brethren of the Scotch Mist, as he styles them, Sermon no
Sermon. p. 67, 6^.
that with such a noise exalt the perfection of their paritie, he maintains a
Dependencie and subordination: as also he professes to An. Wash. Chap 8. p* 338.
Believ (he hopes) with divine Faith, that Episcopacie is de jure Divino, and
that Ibid. p. 339.
Bishops were instituted by Christ himself, and Ibid p. 331. chap 83.
had sublime Thrones, erected in Churches by Primitive Institution; as also
Ibid. 330.
that there is a strong necessity of such; and Chap. 85. p 339.
the Church of God being a well-ordered Army, is incapable of a general
paritie. Yea herein he runs on, or out rather, so far, as to avow that, in that
saying of Jerome, Hi^ero^. Dial. adv. Lucif. Ibid. p. 339.
Ubi non sacerdos, non est Ecclesia; Where there is no Priest, there is no
Church, by a Priest is most certainly understood a Bishop. Thus this miles
gloriosus, like a second Pyrgopolinices, has with one blast of his breath
unchurched, and blown away, all the Protestant Churches in France, the
Netherlands, Geneva, and their Associates, together with all the Congregations,
whether Dependent or Independent, both in Old and New England, Scotland, and
Ireland. And observe we here the man's extreme partiality, All the abuses and
abominations, blasphemous and Prodigious Doctrines, Superstitoius and
Idolatrous practices, tho obstinately retained and maintained in the Romish
Synagog and in a General Convention of their chief Clergymen by the Popes
Authority assembled, and held, the most of them confirmed, with an Anathema to
all those that shall dare to impugn or oppose any See Anab. Washed. Cha. 4^ p.
149.
of them, are not of force sufficient to unchurch her, as this her Advocate
avers, whereas the bare want of a Bishop is with him sufficient to unchurch all
those famous and faithful Churches of Christ, and Congregations of Gods people.
And either he must be a Member still, and a Priest of the Church of Rome, by
his own grounds and grants, or else, for ought I see, of no Church at all.

Mean while, if we demand of him why he styles himself Independent, as his
friend Lilie says concerning his assuming the Title of Merline, that he hopes
any man may name himself as he pleases; Advert. Obj 5. p. 447.
so makes he also in part answer, that whereas Heretics and Schismatics give
him names at their pleasure, he presumes that he may have leav to name himself
by what Name or Title he shall desire to be modestly called; but with all,
tells his Reader, That the chief Doctrines that he proposes, he will defend
Ibid. p. 448.
to have been formerlie defended and proposed by the most learned Divines in
England, and now to be recommended to the people by the most popular
Independents.

Thus then according to this Autors own Riddle of his Sermon no Sermon, may be
said of himself, that he is Papist, and no Papist; a Protestant, and yet not a
Protestant; a Popish Priest, and no Popish Priest; Jesuitical, and not
Jesuitical; Independent, Sermon. no Sermon. p. 231. Post^c^. p. 2.
and not Independent; that which in some sense he says of himself, an
Amphibious animal, or a Chimera, made up partly of Papism, partly of
Protestantism, and partly of Independencie.

In two things especially he is just of the same stamp and temper with his
friend Lilie, who has good cause therefore to like him the better; And it was
reported abroad that he had received money of Lilie to write in defense of him
against my former Vindication; which being told him by a friend of mine,
occasionallie meeting him in the street, he acknowledged that he had been
indeed lately with Lilie, who had spoken to him his pleasure of me, but that he
was resolved not to write in defense of him, because he knew his practice to be
condemned in diverse Councels, whose authority he regarged more then any private
man's opinion. But howsoever behind Lilies back he give in his verdict thus
against him, which peradventure he will not do to his face, yet in some things
he and Lilie so exactlie resemble either other, that were their parentage
uncertain, and were by conjecture to be gathered from their similitude of
disposition and demeanure, they might well be deemed, like Pla^tus his
Menechmi, to be gemini germani, two twins of one birth, or at least, fratres
uterini, both births of one belly. The one good qalitie, wherein they are so
like either to other, is, that the manner of them both is rather to rail and
revile, then by arguing and reasoning to refel and refute: The other is, their
extreme malice and rage against the Presbyterian party, the Genevan
Discipline, and Calvin by name; both which may easily appear of this latter
(for of the other enough has been said and showed already, both in this, and
in a former Discourse) as well by that parcel of stuff, that his friend Lilie
here presents us with, as by other passages also abundantly, yea luxuriantlie,
in other his writings elsewhere.

It is a rule in the School, that Amor est odio prior, and odium Thom. Aqin sum
part. 1, 2. qest. 29 art 2.
ex amore oritur, that Love ever goes before hatred, and all hatred springs
from Love. Therefore do wicked men hate God and his Law, because they love
themselves and their corruptions, which God by his Law does cross, control, and
endevor to courb; and it is by a grave Writer well observed, that men are many
times eager against some, whom they either deem, or would have deemed
delinqents, (...), rather Plut* de irac* co^ib.
out of self-love, then any hatred of evil, because they stand in their way,
or in their light, in regard of their ends and interests, or because they
oppose and thwart them in some corrupt courses, that they are strongly
addicted to. And this seems to be the ground of this man's extreme malice
against the Presbyterian party; he pretends indeed to hate them, as Gods
enemies; but can he show, wherein as Presbyterians they are such? and in regard
of such abominable actions as he knows by them, but he tells us not Adv. Obj. 4.
p. 439.
what they are; but the main ground of the quarrel seems rather to be because
some professed Presbyterians have assayed to discover some of his trains, or to
deliver the matter in his own terms, because Presbyterians as Presbyterians,
have (as he dreems) been hurtful, and injurious to him; which what English
Sermon. no Sermon. p. 225.
to make of I know not well, unless his meaning be, that all the Presbyterians
in the world have so dealt with him; for he is not ignorant of the Axiom, qod
convenit tali qatenus tale, convenit omni tali; and therefore his spleen is
accordingly such against them all in general.

I remember to have read long since a saying in Jerome, tho in what work of his
now I remember not; and it comes the oftener to my mind, because I observe the
practice of it so rife in affairs* as well public, as private. Multi
eliguntur, (and so praeferuntur) non sui amore, sed alterius odio, Many are
chosen (and so in choice preferred) not so much out of love, or good affection
to them, as out of hatred and dis-affection of some others, that stand either
in opposition to them, or in competition with them. And just so is it with this
man; He professes to hate Presbyterians and Anabaptists as Gods enemies, with
a perfect hatred; But the Presbyterians most especially, whom to depress ^bi
supra p 439
therefore, and debase as much as possibly may be, he cares not whom he sets
up and prefers before them, Anabaptists, Schismatiks, Heretics, and whom not?
Against the Anabaptists he writes most bitterly; and yet that he might not be
deemed to cast them behind the Presbyterians, Although, says he, I bind up the
Anabaptists into this heterodox fardle, yet I engage my self to Adv. Obj 5. p.
443.
make it shine as the Sun, that many Anabaptists are the propugners and
maintainers of many excellent and divine truths, and are more justifiable
before God, and more sufferable with man, then Presbyterians and strict
Calvinists.

Again, of Heterodox Sectaries, and Separatists thus; Brethren, It burns in my
bowels* and I cannot hold it: Some called Separatists, and they are so, and
more then so, as separating Sermon no Sermon. p. 194.
from the Church, not in Communion only, but in Faith also, are better
marowed, and more Evangelical, then these Pulpit Ignes fatui, foolish Fires,
then these Teachers ex argilla and luto conficti, of dirt and clay. And that
you may not mistake him, or make doubt whom he means by these foolish flashes,
and dirty Preachers, to let you know in plain terms, they are the Presbyterians
and Calvinists, whose Doctrine he had in most odious manner traduced and
exagitated before, he subjoyns immediately this scoffing passage, which may
well go for a specimen of his mysterious Interpretation of Scripture. He that
compares the Independents with the Presbyterians, compares the Nephilim, or
Ibid p. 195
Giants that made others to fall before them, with the Pygmey Archers on the
Towers of Tire. For the Presbyterian Archers have crawled up to the top of a
little Tire lerning; but the Giants independing of Tyres and Towers are so well
grounded, that the P^gmies dare not come down to them, and meet them on eaven
ground, and the Independents may cry and hollow it up to the Pygmies on the
tops of their Towers, that the Presbyterians at the (...), of the Septuagint,
Monsters divided between Men and Asses; and the Satyrs of the English Bible;
and might plead with reason, that these Asses have formerlie drunk up the Moon.
Thus, to curry favor with the Independents, whom he would fain close with, he
courts them. As for the Presbyterians, he can find no language foul, or broad
enough to belch up against them, or spew out upon them; whom therefore in both
his Rabblements fraught with Ribaldrie he bedawbs and bespatters with these,
and other the like Satirical and scurrilous Titles, Sermon no Ser. page 273.
Scotch Pharisees; Page 110.
Scotch Manichees; Page 115.
Scotch Barnacles; Page 129.
Scotch Balaks and Balaams with their speaking Asses; Page 67.
Brethren of the Scotch Mist; Page 98.
Jockey Preachers; An. W. c 103. p 384.
Tincking-toned Presbyters; S no S p. 101
newfound Pulpit men, black Knights of the blew Bonnet, that would tuck up all
powers under a Geneva girdle; Page 204.
Pulpit Petifoggers, Saint-mouthd things, in a brown, or blew covering, A. W.
c. 26. p 90.
low sqare Knights of the round Hoop; S. no S. p. 1. 191
with a Montebank boldness, and tumbling devotion showing tricks in a round
Hoop; Pag^ 112.
Pulpit Meteors; Page 1^9
Jewish Cabalists; Page 221.
Kirk Sea Monsters; Page 190* 191
Hungry Dogflies; Page 188.
Northern Locusts; Page 234.
homespun Jesuits; Page 230. Adv. p. 427. Ser no Ser. p 111. Ibid p. 225.
the Devils Janisaries. Thus he, who reqires forsooth, as you heard before, of
those that deal with him, to forbear, and banish all undecent, foul, and
filthy language; and yet would not have any to be scandalized with these
overgone, or overgrown expressions (so himself terms them) for so foul he
says, are these Presbyterians, that his tongu wants words, and colors to
pencil them, and black is not black enough for them: Whom therefore he rejects
as upstarts, and as the causes of Iliads of Ills, and Myriads of mischief. And
of whom having first thus averred, not sparing to abuse Gods glorious name
thereunto; What abominable actions, notoriously opposite both to Justice and
Purity, have both City and Country discovered to Ibid. p. 230.
me in the lives of Presbyterian Ministers, and my tongue never yet received an
order from my heart to tell them; the glory of God thereafter may command a
discovery; he thereupon addresseth himself unto them in these terms; Go then,
ye Presbyterian Page 226.
Ministers, with your lies of Defense, lies of Offense, whole lies, half lies,
qarter lies; lies with heds, but not with feet; with feet, but not with heds;
lies with neither head nor feet; lies that are all belly; short lies, long
lies, lies of a middle size; lies whispered, and loud lies; lies of any breadth,
of any length, of any bigness, a ly that plays or sings the Tenor, a mean ly,
and a base ly; lys of all sorts, of all colors, of all fashions; a ly, will ye
buy? lies that still and ever ly, and never ly still. And is not this
downright ranting, and raving with a witness? or is not the man, think we, not
staring, but stark mad? yea so far gone, that as much of the drug he prescribes
to the Classical Asses, as all Anticyra is able to afford, will scarce bring
him into his right wits again? An. W. Cha. 41. p. 149.
He tells us, that The violent motions of Spirit Jesuitical and Presbyterian
cannot be of God. And whence, think we then, are these motions of the Spirit?
but to salv this, and save himself, he asks elsewhere, Is there not a godly
violence, and a religious vehe mencie? But how little of God, or of Religion in
all this, Sermon. no Sermon. p. 111.
letanie say, that is truly godly, and sincerely religious.

Ad hereunto his Lucian-like Dream, how one in his sleep thought he saw the
Presbyterian come dancing in a Mask with his Puedish An. wash. chap. 88. p 361.
in his hands, and our Gib Anabaptist as round as a hoop dancing to him,
grapling with him, pulling it from him, and furiously dashing it against the
ground: And the interpretation of the Dream, That the Presbyterians have
stamped and hissed away the use and virtu of the Sacraments, and the
Anabaptists Ibid. p. 262.
have followed them at the heels with a trip.

Ad also, that absurd, immodest; unsavorie and irreligious scof, wherein
playing upon the word Kirk, not peculiar to the Scots, but common with them to
the Dutch high and low, beside others, and framed from the Greek word (...),
Gods-house; but he would have derived from (...), a tail, and abusing the terms
used in the Greek version of the sacred Hymn; he says of these black Knights
of the blew Bonnet (as you heard him before style thhem) that David gives a
fair-foul Image of such Night-Ravens, Page 101. Page 102.
Psalm. 11. 2. when he says, they shoot, as the Septuagint, (...) or as another
would interpret it, in Scoticis tenebris, in the Scotch darkness of their souls.
(Is not this a most detestable abuse of Gods Oracles? yet he adds) He that will
please Page 104.
himself with this Northern point, may cheerfullie do it, and yet not over-act.
For they creep out of their holes in the darkest night, and run here and there
in great multitudes, like that living and busy dust on a Pismire-hil; every
where carrying their Kirk behind them, that is, their (...), their uglie tail,
which they wag and fawn upon the silly dul-eyed people, that kn^w not a head
from a tail, with shaking the Kirk, the (...) of all Churches, which they would
set over the Head, even to the ruin of thousands. And this scurrilitie so
pleased him, that he must needs have it up again afterward with a further
absurd toy annexed to it, where he says, The Scotch Imp in his Page 171.
Pulpit-fort drives furiously in the qest of gain, (...) a tail, which puts
me in mind of the Kirk, is allied n^erlie to (...) vain lucre.

I remember, that while I lived in the City, there was one Hen^ch Clapham,
that had been sometimes a Separatist at Amsterdam; but afterward coming over
and pretending to be converted by Judge Anderson a professed enemy to all
Puritans, became then as furious a Preacher and Writer against the
Presbyterians See his Chro^ological Discourse, and his Satirical Dialogues.
as ever he had been against the Prelates before, as well in the Pulpit, as in
his Pamphlets; whatsoever the subject matter was otherwise, just in the same
manner as this man does, ever anon scoffing and girding at them. And his
scurrillous carriage in this kind growing so gross and unsufferable, that he
came at last to be convented in the High Commission Court, B. King, when he was
to pass his censure upon him, spoke to this effect, that there were two sorts
of people that justly deserved a sharp and severe censure, the one was of
those that brought the Pulpit upon the stage, the other of those that brought
the Stage into the Pulpit; and these latter (in which rank he reckoned the
party then to be censured) were well worthy of as deep a brand as the former.
And truly in either of these kinds, which the Bishop observed, Mr. Carpenter
has not failed to play his part. In the former when he was among the Papists
and Jesuits abroad; For so himself informs us, that when he made a Latin Play
among the Jesuits, he acted the part of a Minister, and preached upon the stage
(telling us Exper Hist, and divin. lib 2. chap 5. p. 253.
with all on what Text he preached) moving excessive laughter at ^veri^ word;
as also, that at Rome he composed a Play of a mixture of English and Latin
(such as his Sermon no Sermon Ibid.
is) wherein he p^r^onated a Minister, much profaning the words and phrases of
holy Scripture: And again, that at Rome Lib. 5 chap. 7. p 245.
he acted the part of a Minister, a Chang^ling, a T^rk, and a Devil, all in one
Comedy of his own composing; whether the same with the former, or some other,
he says not. But thus ye see how he brought the Pulpit upon the stage, when he
was among Papists. W^ll ye see how he brings the stage into the Pulpit, now he
is among Protestants? To what you had before, take further these few passages;
Search into your bosoms, O ye men of the Pulpit, ye Jockie Preachers. And,
They should leav a^ Peru Sermon no Sermon. p 98.
the Monkeys, and Apes, with their bad faces of their own making, and the Parat
with his vain Tautologies and Repetitions. Qam tandem haec, Tragoedia an
Comoedia dicam, habitura Page 100.
est Catastrophen? I cannot stay here, majora molior. Qasi aliud agens, as
treating of holy things, and looking (good Man, Ibid.
sweet Man^, heavenly man) an other way, or toward Heaven, he wounds the
Superior Powers with collateral senses as with side-blows, and in every
Sermon, for penury of sound matter, damps the void and aerie brains of the
people with high reasons and businesses of State. Again, These Newfound
Pulpit-men, Page 101.
Black-Knights of the Blew-bonnet, well, feathered outwardly, but Adamites in
understanding hope devoutlie, that very Atlas will run away, and the Heaven of
Superiority and Government, with all the Larks in the Aier, come down to them.
And, They Page 105.
use the white Geneva Wand in their Hands, as Pallas does in Homer, who makes
wondrous sport with Ulysses a little man; he is now small, wrinkled ragged, and
torn, and scarcely true, but she having graciously touched him with her white
Wand, he is now again tall, and of a goodly favor and Personage. And now the
gallant man has hair of a violet, purple, or sky-color, and the very same is
a sin and no sin, as these trime Saints are (it is their own sweet phrase)
conscientiouslie moved to teach that day. And the same Text and Sermon only
new vampt are fitted for a new leg and walking, and stretched, as teeth, and
all being put to them for the retriving of a contrary purpose, with a little
handling of the matter betwixt; Verily, even so it is, dear brethren, there is
Scripture for it: And, Verily, my dear brethren, Is it not so, there is
Scripture to the contrary, even the Scripture used formerlie by our
Adversaries. And thus the miserable people, tho they hear contrary sounds from
their mouths, yet hearing still the same sound from their Noses, are themselves
led by the Nose. Again, Telling me from a Pulpit Page 1^8.
in the air, to which I must look up, as if the Pulpit-men came even now from
heaven, of Humility, etc. and bringing about at every half turn, Our glorious
God (for so they call him) Jesus Christ, the Saints, the Lord Jesus be with all
your Spirits. And, to heap up no more of this trash, one passage more only,
These wodden Preachers are as those useless fallings of the wood exercised with
the Saw. Might I not just lie fire at them with a Sarcasm? O sad and bad
conclusion of their, Ah Lord, Dear Father, holy God, Father, of all their
speaking good in the Scoth tone, and their praying God to do good to this
people. O Images of wax, such as Witches make to mischievous ends, call ye this
your improving your interest in Jesus Christ? Lord help us; Might I not
righteouslie compare these men of Clouts with the religious Mountebank in
Bromiardus, etc. for I am werie of transcribing, and so will my Readers, I
doubt, be of reading so much of this illfavored stuff, the reliqs, it may be of
that scurrilous language that he used upon the Stage, when he personated there
our Ministers, and from thence he now brings into the Pulpit. Sure had he ever
seriously repented him of his acknowledged profane abuse of Gods Word, and
jeering his Ministers in so irreligious and atheistical a manner, as himself
relates, he would never have let the reins loose to his tongue, to run out at
random again in the same kind, much less in the Pulpit. I was sometime saying,
in regard of some passages, that this piece of his was not unlike to some of
Oliver Maylards Postils. But the truth is, that both this his Sermon no Sermon,
and that other his Washing Bowl, are no other then as Satyrae Menippeae, or
some of Aristophanes his Comoedies with the Interlocutions, or as the Ludi
Fescennini, in which they did e plaustro convicia fundere, full of girds, and
sqibs, and scoffs, and jeers, and scurrilous expressions, and Satirical
excursions, as of one rather acting a part or variety of parts and persons (as
he says at Rome he sometime did) upon a Stage, then seriously and
religiously delivering Gods Oracles, and soberlie debating Matters of Faith,
and such as concern Man's eternal welfare

But to draw toward an end, of this unpleasing and unsavory Subject. In the
close of his First Alarm against the Presbyterians, or his Sermon no Sermon,
inter alia, he thus subscribes it, By me Richard Carpenter, not a Papist, but a
Protestant; but not protesting against ought, that is (...) in any Christian
Church, wheresoever, or whatsoever; who likewise utterlie disclaim, that I am
or ever was, or will be, Jesuit from Rome, or from Geneva. As if Calvin, Farel,
Viret, Beza, and their successors in the Ministry and Church Government at
Geneva, were all no other then Jesuits, and not unfit to be ranked and ranged
among, or yoked at least with Romish Jesuits. And as he concludes that his
First Alarm against Presbyterians; so begins he his Washing of the Anabaptist,
which he might as well have entitled his Second Alarm against them. For in the
Frontispiece of it, (wherein he presents us with his own Portraiture) he sets
on the top of the Page, the Jesuit Lionmouthed; and close by him the
Presbyterian Dragon-tounged; for so himself expounds the figure. And again in
an Advertisement, sub-joyned to the main bod^e of his Book, toward the latter
end of it, to show how implacablie he is disposed toward this Presbyterian
party, he thus defies them, and denounces War against them, still yoaking and
conjoyning them with Jesuits; I. R. C. Sacerdos summi Dei (some second
Melchisedek belike (...) ^o styled) denounce a holy, scholastical, literarie
War, against all pragmatical Jesuits, and against all factious Geneva Jesuits.

But his literarie War we need little to regard, especially considering what
manner of weapons he fights with. There is one thing more that I shall add,
and there an end; yea there would be an end, had these men (his friend Lilie and
he) their wills, when they had made an end of us. For howsoever, of the
ordinary Anabaptists, he says, tho he be sorry to say it, that they An Was
Chap. ^01 p. 374.
speak nothing but Fire and Halters, and Puniards to all that endevor to try
them, and their opinions; yet he being no man of blood, he finds it checkerd in
his Ordination, that he may not yield any concurrence to the shedding of
blood; And indeed in Ibid. p. 372.
that Worthy Council so much craked of for the Popes uncontrolable power, said
to be held under Pope Sylvester at Rome, there is a Canon inhibiting any Clerk
to enter into any Court, Act 2. Can 16.
qia omnis curia a cruore est dicta (and yet for all that they can find out
ways and wiles enough thereby to shed blood in abundance, and so did when time
was among us, notwithstanding their Ordination) and he desires therefore only
to have them fairlie convinced ^^i^. p. 374.
of their foul errors by Argument: Yet concerning the Presbyterians, that he
may show his concurrence in depth of malice with his friend Lilie against them;
as the one calls for a general massacre of them, so the other in his Sermon no
Sermon, having spoken, as I have formerlie related, of the Church of Englands
fourth and last issu, the poor and bare beggarlie Presbyter, left by his mother
to shift for himself, he is so liberal to him as to beqeath him such a Legacy,
as his good friend Lilie would be very loath should be withheld from him; I
leav, says he, these hungry Preachers (his Picture indeed shows him to be Page
180.
none of those starvlings, but to be fat, and well fed) as I found them,
tearing all with their Kites feet, and Eagles claws, or as I have hunted them,
until I find them as the crafty Fox hung up in the Warren by the teeth, with
self-industrie, among the ded vermin: So that had these men the sword in their
power, and the halter in their hands, we might easily deem what the
Presbyterians doom and lot were like to be; what he says the Anabaptists
speak, would too soon in likelihood be put in execution; for how poor a curb
the Popish Ordination is to keep men from being bloodie-hearted, and
bloodie-handed, the examples of Gardener, Bonner, and the main body of the
Popish Clergy in those Marian times here among us; as also of the late savage
and prodigious butcheries and massacres exercised and executed in Ireland of
late, wherein the Roman Clergy were prime both incendiaries and actors, will
over-evidentlie evict. And might it not justly make people to suspect, that
there was some Munsterian business underhand abrewing amongst us, when these
two Associates, the one a Star-gazing Wizard, who pretends his Dictates to be
taken out of the Celestial Records, and to be not so much uncertain Predictions
asundoubted Prophesies, dares to call for a general massacre of the Presbytery,
yea indeed of the Ministry: And the other a Characterd Priest, a most bitter
Traducer, and utter Renouncer of our Presbyters and Preachers, as no other, nor
better then the Devils Ianisaries, less justifiable before God, and sufferable
among men, then some of the worst sort of Separatists, and Sectaries, dares
profess to expect to see what the former calls for, to be put in execution? We
want not those that preach, that no thorough Reformation can be, until our
present Ministry be wholly removed, and the qickest and surest, tho the
safest, I dare not say, way would be, not by throwing them al out, as some it
may be have deemed, but by taking them all away in such manner as these men
suggest and expect.

For herein Lilie, and this his intimate friend concur and accord, that as
Lilie, howsoever he pretend a disaffection to the Presbyterian party only,
yet his malice extends it self unto the main body of our Ministry, nor can
he so conceal it and keep it in, but that in some passages it has broken out,
and bewrayed what lay inwardly smothered in his heart. In like manner is it
with this man; tho he set up the Presbytery as a Mark or But at which to level
and discharge his virulent shot, and envenomed shafts, yet his aims and
intentions ar far wider and of larger extent, and do now and then discover
themselves, in glances at our Ministers and Preachers in general, such of them
especially, as ar eager and zealous for sound piety, and against Popery;
that which as in diverse other places, whereof some above mentioned, plainly
enough appears, so most palpablie toward the end of his Sermon no Sermon, where
giving Directions to a Christian soul, what course to take for its safety, he
uses these words, Say to the flesh, Thou art mere birdlime; to the world, Go
dirt; to the Devil, I have too long Page 135.
been thy slave. Say to these Preachers, ye are ignavum pecus, a dull kind of
cattle, ye have learned a tumbling trick with the lip and tongue; but for
action, you know not the behavior of zeal, humility, charity, or of any true
virtu; and I will rather ire ad genua praetereuntium, beg my bread of all
others (or as his Latin imports, at the knees of passengers, in the most abject
manner by the highway side) then close with you. Thus as out of extreme hatred
to the Scotch Presbytery, he solemnlie professes, that whereas in the old
Orders of Baptism, the Catechumenus did first publicly make his
Abrenunciation of the Devil and all his works, with his face turned toward the
Page 1 Po.
West: for me (says he, for ye shall have it in his own terms to a tittle) I
will speak it aloud, nec comprimam me, Be I fancied an Energumenus, Competens,
Catechumenus, or Neophyte, or what men of low knowledge please to scribble me
in their fancies; I will utterlie renounce the Devil and all his works, while
our most merciful God continues to me the commerce of breath betwixt the Air
and this my mortal body, with my face turned toward the North. So here out of
a parallel affection and disposition of heart and mind toward our Ministry,
he would have our Preachers by every Christian soul renounced and abandoned
together with the Flesh, the World, and the Devil. How like Lilie to a hair? So
that as himself relates of one, that after the view of one of his Books, he
said no more of it but only wrote on it, Spalatensis; so of these two, out of
which most here has been extracted, no more needs to be said, save to write
upon either of them, Lilie.

Thus having done somewhat more, I suppose, then M. Lilie looked for, and more
it may be then he desired, more at least then he reqired; I shall come at
length to grant his bown, and to give my Reader in as good English as I may,
what he out of Mr. Carpenter has presented him with in Latin.

The Epistle it self is at the latter end of his later Work. The Inscription of
it, as Lilie gives it, To the Lunatik and Chimerical Classes, which term of
Classis, he elsewhere says is a dismal and odious Name. In it (as Mr. Lilie
tells you) he tells the Classical men, that they are fraud, a lie, emptiness,
an Idol. Again, infected, unpolished Physicians, exact Asses, and Classical
Asses; and toward the end, taking his leav of them. You of the Calvinistical
Sect, a Sect dissected, subsected, and resected; I wish you together well in
your wits, and your pates with Ellebore thoroughly purged.

Thus, have I fulfilled Mr. Lilies reqest, the rather that (...), ex fimbria de
text^, by those thrums and threads that he has picked and pulled out of it, and by
those snips and shreds, which as for paterns he has pared of it, the Reader
may judge of the whole piece, what manner of stuff it is; for it is in this
regard eavenlie wrought, all the Epistle of the very same tenor, a capite ad
calcem, from the one end to the other; whom also for the same purpose I have
the more liberally presented with some more then good store of his chips, that
by them he may lern what kind of timber it is, whereof the main frame and
fabric of his outworks raised and reared against the Presbyterian party does
consist.

To conclude all; I shall take the boldness in all Christian submission to
address my self unto those Powers that are in highest Authority with us. Unto
whom mine humble suit and earnest reqest shall be, that they would be pleased,
not slightlie, but seriously and advisedlie to weigh and consider, whether it
will stand with the Honor of the State, to suffer a solemn Assembly called
together for Advice in Ecclesiastical Affairs by the Parliament of England,
when it was in its prime, and consisting not of such Ministers of the word
only, as were by them well esteemed, but of diverse choice members also, out
of either House, as well that of Lords, as that of Commons, selected, to be
termed, a Flea-bitten Synod, an Assembly of Royston Crows, or Friars of both
Orders, black and gray, by a base Varlet, that lives by cheating of people. For
in qoting of it with approbation, he makes it his own. And as for the Author of
it, his Satyrs (it seems) dance in the dark, as the Author of Fur paedestinatus
says the Dancers, do at Geneva; whereas this fellows Merlins Fly abroad in
open daylight; yea, if the father and breeder of them may be believed, fly out
over sea, into all parts of the world, to the dishonouring of our Nation, by
that ribaldrie, wherewith they are so full fraught, in all States and Churches
(those among the rest so notoriously traduced and abused in them) whersoever
they arrive. As also that it may be duly and deeply pondered, whether it be
in like manner consistent with the Honor of our State, to suffer that
Ecclesiastical Government, that was not only by the vote of the major part of
that Assembly recommended to the Parliament as agreeable to Gods word, and by
joint consent of both Houses so approved of, and settled in some places nearest
at hand with us, and that before those exorbitant courses that of late have
been charged upon them; but that is also established in the Dutch and French
Reformed Churches, and that of Geneva, with those other adjacent, and in joint
combination with it, and has with allowance of public Authority, even in the
greatest height of Episcopacie, been exercised in those foreign Congregations
among us; and not so many Reverend, painful, and faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and his Gospel, of our own only, but such also in foreign parts as
the Lord has so far forth vouchsafed to honor and grace, as to make them chief
Instruments of demolishing the Kingdom of Antichrist, and of purging the
Churches, both at home by their Ministry, and elsewhere abroad also by their
savourie writings, and wholesome advice, and whose Names are precious in all
godly men's minds; to suffer, I say, such Churches, such Church Government such
Ministry, such Ministers, to be so immodestlie, ignominiouslie,
scurrilouslie, satyricallie, opprobriouslie, and contumeliouslie traduced, by a
couple of I know not well what I should term them, scoffing Lucians, sure I
may, a common Cheater the one, an amphibious, as in some sense he terms
himself, an amphibolous (I am sure at least) creature, the other; and, if I
might presume so far, to have it at least thought upon, whether the Agents for
those States and Churches that are thus notoriously abused, might not in
justice and equity reqire to have such scandalous writings pass the fire by
the Hang-mans hand, and some kind of reparation for the wrong therein done them
from the Autors of them, as being such slanderous traducers, and notorious
abusers of their Ministers and Ministry. But this with the whole Address I
shall leav to the pious and prudent consideration of those whom it concerns,
therein to deal, as they shall desire to have their own good names preferved,
and persons by God protected, for the procuring whereof one hopeful way may be,
by the vindicating and righting of those Gods faitful servants that are wronged
in either kind.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHile this Discourse was at the Press, and almost wholly wrought of, I had
notice given me that a Book of one of Lilies Accomplices was fresh from the Press
come abroad, wherein somewhat was concerning me, and my dealing with Lilie.
Desirous I was hereupon to see what it might be, and having got a sight
thereof, I perceived by the Title, that it contained a short System of
Astrology, with a pretended examination of a Book of one Mr. Brain, written
(it seems) against Judiciarie Astrology, The Author whereof is, I suppose, able
to defend his own work. But to it I found prefixed an Epistle Dedicatorie thus
superscribed:

To the Reverend Father in Presbytery, Mr. Thomas Gataker B. D. Jo. Gadburie
dedicates these his Virgin labors. In this Epistle he professes to dedicate his
Book to me for my better Information in the principles of their Art and
Profession, referring me withal, if this give not satisfaction, to Mr. Lilies
Introduction, from whom in vain still I reqire a proof of those principles. And
in it seems all to any purpose contained, that concerns me, being all, under
two heds couched, to this effect:

1 That in my clumsie Annotation, and buzardlie Vindication, (so he is pleased
to array them) I have much scurrilbus language, and horrid imprecations,
against men whom I know not, as Wizards, Witches, dealers with the Devil,
Hel-hounds, Sycophants, and a thousand more non-Gospel phrases; Concerning
which I shall refer the Reader to what I have written in those two pieces, not
doubting but that upon the reading thereof, and this my last together with
them, he will easily be induced to let Lilie and Gadburie, what ever he be, to
strive together for the Whetstone. For the particulars here recited. True it is,
I term Lilie, Angel, and Behmen, Wizards, that is, I call a Spade a Spade;
their Writings, by which they are too well known, showing them to be such, and
from one of Lilies Advocates, who pronounces those of his Profession, that give
out their Dictates, not as mere conjectures, but as matters of certainty, as
Lilie does his, to be no other then Magitians, that is in plain English,
He-witches; I conclude Lilie, if his Advocat speak true, to be such; of Lilies
traducing Calvin, I say, that the snarlings of such Hel-hounds (and what
other(...)ar they, whose toungs are set on fire from hell? Jam. 3. 6. for the
Tongue and the Pen are herein the same; as Tertullian de Idolol. shows from
that, Luke 1. 63. He wrote, saying) can no more impair the splendent luster of
Calvin's repute, then the yalping of maungie Whelps, or mungrel Curs, can the
light of the Moon; for his dealing with the Devil, to let pass what himself
professes of Angels, with whom he has dealing, and from whom he receivs
Informations, which unless he fain only to gain credit to his practice,
whether they be good, or bad ones, all that are not stark blind may soon
discern; for that and his sycophancie, what I say, and how justly, his own
Works that I deal with will sufficiently discover and show him to be, what
Paul says of Elymas, Act. 13. 10. and Christ of the Jews, Joh 8. 44. But for
these things, I shall refer the Reader to my former Vindication, and to this
latter Discourse together with that, and in this more particularly to Page 61.

2 The main matter, that this man thought to strike home with, is this, He
gives me notice (he says) of ashrewd slip in my Vindication; and what is that?
In page 57. I say, that I made my abode in the house of a virtuous Gentlewoman,
when I was young, whose Husband did, as I pretend, invite me thither to teach
him Hebre(...). And it is true, I say, that I abode sometime in house with a
religious Gentlewoman; and so I did, with one, a very plain, sober, grave,
modest Matron, a discreet Mother, diligent Nurs, and pious bringer up of many
children, as virtuous, religious, conscientious, humbly minded and demeaned a
Gentlewoman, as I have ever in all my life been acqainted with. And it is
likewise true, that upon reqest made by the Gentleman her Husband to a grave
Minister his near neighbor riding over unto Cambridge, to make enqirie there
for one, that might further him in his Hebrew, and instruct his family in the
Principles of Religion, I was by some of his acquaintance in St. John's, where I
yet then abode, at his motion, recommended to the Gentleman, and entertained by
him thereupon to that purpose. And I shall the rather here digress a little, to
relate both mine own employment in that family, and the constant usage of that
worthy Christian Gentlewoman, in regard of that vile calumny, wherewith this
wretched wretch (for such he herein manifestly discovers himself to be)
endevors, upon not so much as any probable, or colorable ground, here to
aspers us. At my first access to the family, and entertainment there, beside
my confereuces with the Gentleman at such times as he reqired; I used to pray
morning and evening with the family, and in the morning to read withal some
portion of Scripture; and after some time, at the Gentlewomans motion, to spend
so much time as could well be spared in explication of the Text, where any
difficulty occurred, raising of some few instructions, and making brief
application thereof. In this manner within the short time of mine abode there,
not much above a twelvmonth, I went over all the Epistles of the Apostles, the
Prophesies of Esaias, and a good part of the Book of Job, which practice so
continned, both very much improved mine own skill in the Tex^ of Scripture,
which I usuallie read out of the Originals, and gave much contentment (beside
the benefit accrewing to the rest of the Family) to the Gentleman and
Gentlewoman; to him, by giving him occasion after the Exercise over, to enqire
of words and forms in the Originals, which he had usuallie at those times
before him; to her, whose constant w^nt was for some time in the day, to retire
her self, and with her eldest daughter a young Gentlewoman, of a pious
disposition, qick apprehension, and exceeding good memory, to recollect, and
ruminate between them on those things which had made up that morning their
spiritual breakfast. And this course she observed assiduouslie, till laid up
suddenly by sickness, and shortly after translated to the place of her
eternal rest and bliss. And so much concerning that pious soul, that precious
Saint, whose principal joy and delight was in Gods word. That of Jerome,
whether to Let (...) or Furia, or some other, now I remember not, A(...)
Scripturas, and carnis vitia non amabis, was verified abundantly in her. Her
excellencies consisted not in any outside of bodily feature (that might well
be said of her in that regard, that Seneca sometime of a Philosopher of his
acquaintance being a man of a werish body, Anima illius male habitat, that her
precious soul had but a sorry house to speak of to inhabit) nor yet in
external semblances, and affected flourishes (far was she from any
hypocritical ostentation) but in a gracious inside of sound and sincere piety,
the power whereof appeared in an eaven tenor of strict, discreet, and
circumspect walking, with all meekness and mildness of spirit: In so much that
even the Devil himself would never in all likelihood have had the face to raise
such a foul surmise of her among those that knew her, as this impudent imp of
his has assayed here to fasten upon her, not having in likelihood had any the
least notice of her, being dead, it may be, long before he was in being.

Yea but, says this fellow, You that pretend to have been invited thither, to
teach the Gentlem^n Hebrew, do yet in page 33. profess to have little skill
therein your self.

True, in regard of many other, or of any consummate and exqisite skill
therein, I willingly confess it. Upon occasion of Lilies telling me that I
should ere long have an exposition of the Text in Jer. 10. 2. of one far
surmounting me in the knowledge of the Oriental toungs; my words are these;
Much skill in the Oriental toungs I never did, nor do profess; a little
smattering only in the Hebrew of the Bible I do acknowledge; neither needs
there any great depth of skill in these Oriental languages for the expounding
of that Text. And what I then had, was sufficient to afford the Gentleman such
help and furtherance in that kind as himself reqired; a proof whereof he was
pleased to take, by reqesting me to read in English out of the Hebrew a Chapter
of his own assignment, while he had his ey on Junius his Latin Version; which I
then did, and was able not long after my departure thence to my place in Sidney
College then consummated, to salute him with an Hebrew Epistle, therein
inciting him by diverse Arguments to proceed in that study. Not does it argu,
that my skill in that language is now less then it was, because I now thus
speak. It is an undoubted truth, in Divinity, in Philosophy, in a^ Arts and
Sciences, that the greater progress a man makes in the knowledge of any of
them, the more he comes to discover his own ignorance in them, and how far he
comes short of perfection therein. Hence that of the Apostle, 1 Co^. 8. 3. He
that thinks he knows ought (to wit, exactlie) knows nothing yet, as he ought to
know. And this minds me of a notable mistake among many other, of a man
otherwise of no small lerning, who, whereas Plutarch Mr. J. W.
in that his excellent Treatise concerning the marks and signs of Proficiencie,
relates a merry speech of one Menedemus, who said of those that repaired to
that renowned School or Universitie of Athens, that they were at first (...)
wise men, great wisards, then (...) Philosophers, lovers of wisdom, desirous to
lern it, after that (...) Rhetoricians, such as could talk of, and lastly,
(...) mere Idiots, stark fools, or ignorant ones at least; that which he
understood to be spoken, as if the Autors meaning were that, after their
arrivival there, they were wont, as we use to say of a Cows tail, to grow
downward, waxing daily wors, and further from wisdom the longer they staid
there; whereas his meaning was, that at first having gotten a little smatch of
that Schoollerning, they vainlie deemed themselves men of exqisite skill, but as
they attained by degrees to a true understanding of things; and of themselves, so
they came further to discover withal their own wants and weaknesses, until at
length with Agur, therein truly wise, to acknowledge, that they were but as
bruit beasts, and had not such wisdom as a man ought to have, Prove. 30. 2. But
what of all this? Suppose I had then but little skill in that language, or that
little that I professed to have, had been less then it was; what would this
Sycophant (let me be blamed, yea condemned as guilty of that crime my self for
so styling him, if his practice here do not cleerlie and loudlie proclaim it)
what I say, would this Sycophant hence collect? will you hear hell it self
belching out such stuff, as cannot exhale from any other sink or sewer? Were
I, says he, your Antagonist, I should make this construction, viz. seeing the
contradiction in your words. In his own brains rather; for in my words there is
none. But what is the construction? a devilish one indeed; that your residence
there, was not so much for the Gentleman's instruction, as for the virtuous
Ladies, and your own satisfaction; for sure I am, the unhallowed Priests are no
more privileged from the sin of lechery, then the righteous Judah. See Genesis
38. And that his Reader might not conceiv that this had dropped from his Pen in
^ome sudden heat of passion, or in some merry jesting fit, but that he is in
sober sadness, and serious in the business, and might imagine therefore that
somewhat in my Book had fallen from me, that might afford good ground for some
such suspicion at least, he sub-joyns, In (...)nest, what ever you had put in
the room, you had better have kept this out.

Concerning which, tho it be not much to the purpose, to intimate, that neither
was the Gentlewoman ever a Lady (for it was many years after her decess ere
her Husband were Knighted; whereby it appears that he speaks thus of one whom
he knew not) nor my self, either ever an unhallowed Priest, as he speaks, or
then a consecrated Presbyter, one (I mean) solemnlie set apart to that ^acred
function, when I came to that family (howsoever it be true, that I had the
Order of a Presbyter on my part unsought for, without suit or fee every way
freely conferred upon me, ere I left it) yet, that I may render to others an
account of mine entrance into the Ministry, as I have here before done of
mine entrance into the places of my Ministerial employment, I shall take the
boldness to detain my Reader a while with no long relation thereof, and then
return to my Task again.

The Right Reverend Dr. Stern, one near of kin to this Gentlewoman, daughter to
Mr. Stern a Gentleman of Melburn in Cambridgeshire, was at that time Suffragane
of Colchester, and Pastor of a Parochial Congregation at Witteham in Essex,
near unto which place, at Braksteed, Mr. William Aylof, the Gentleman with whom
I then abode, son to the Judge that had been of that name, had one seat, as
another called Britains not far from Romford. At this latter he was residing
when I came at first to him; and there the Suffragane found me, when I had been
some good space of time with them; for traveling up to London about the
beginning of October to the Convocation then there held, he struck in by the
way in civilitie to visit his kindred there, and coming in unexpected at that
juncture of time, wherein the whole family, save the Gentleman himself, who
was gone early abroad, was met together for our daily morning employment, he
would by no means suffer it to be forborne for his presence, but understanding
from the Gentlewoman what I was, upon what account with them, and what my
wonted course therein, he laid a kind of kind constraint upon me to perform all
in that manner then, as at other times I did; the Chapter which that day I read
and opened, was (I well remember it) Ephesians. 1. After which office finished, and
prayer conceived, he had some speech with me, and upon demand thereof being
informed that I was not yet in the Ministry, but intended it hereafter, when
God should please to fit me for it, and afford a call to it, the rather because
to be ere long Fellow of a College, wherein after some years continuance it
would be reqired of me; he both encouraged me to undertake it, and of his own
accord offered to ordain me, willing me for that end to repair to him at his
return back to his charge at Witteham, which would be toward the Feast of
Christ's Nativitie, about which time also the Gentleman, Mr. Aylof, was to
remov, and so did, with his family from Britains to Brak steed. Howbeit,
considering the weightiness of the business, I held back for some space of
time, and hung in suspense, until by advice of some friends at Cambridge, whom
having some relation to me, and interest in me, I had by letters consulted, I
was earnestly pressed upon some considerations not needful to be here related,
in no wise to let slip the present opportunity offering it self to me for such
an entrance, as by him I then might have; whereupon being by them also so both
encouraged and encited, when the Suffragan about a month after his return
visited the family again then residing at Braksteed near to him, was pleased
to renew his former motion and offer, demanding why I had not since his coming
down before that resorted unto him, and appointed me to be with him on the
Feast day of Purification then at hand, I accepted of that favor so kindly and
freely then offered, and afterward afforded. and repairing unto him on the day
designed, was by Imposition of Hands of the Suffragan, and another Minister
then assistant unto him in the work of his Ministerial employments, therein
joining with him, there and then ordained Presbyter.

But this relation for the reason above specified being only taken in by the
way, to return to this Gadburie, and his dealing here both with the Gentlewoman
now out of his reach, and my self, may he not deservedly be branded with the
name and note of a most shameless Sycopha(...), that of no other words then are
here expressed, would make such an inconseqent and reasonless construction, and
from no other matter then is here exhibited, raise so vile and abominable, but
wholly groundless; a charge? yea may it not justly be deemed, that the Devil,
whom herein he does service to, and has conseqentlie dealing with, stood at
his elbow and suggested such hellish stuff to him; or, that he dipped his pen in
the Devils Ink-pot, when he thus wrote? unless it be doubted, as well it may
be, whether the Devil himself, with all his hellish wit, would ever have offered
to pick any such matter out of those words of mine; whereout to forge so gross
and groundless a slander. But herein withal, as well this Gadburie, as Lili^,
both birds of a feather does evidentlie show unto what an height his spite and
ranco^ is boiled up against the Ministry, when he covertlie styles Christ's
Ministers unhallowed Priests, and would have them deemed no other then a crew
of lecherons creatures. Which terms and phrases discovering in him an Heart
unhallowed and full fraught with the gall of bitterness, and surcharged with a
superfluity of profaneness and ungodliness (for out of the wast of the heart,
as well the Pen writes, as the tongue speaks) no less, if not much more then did
that pecuniarie motion made to Simon Peter the Apostle by Simon the Samaritan
Sorcerer, as our English renders it, or as the Greek has it, Magician; unto
which Tribe and fraternity one of Lilies grand Patrons, as himself relates
him, and as is elsewhere shown, does by necessary conseqence from Osiander
pronounce him to belong; I shall take my leav of them both, resolving here as
concerning them to lay down my Pen, and not to wast precious time, or soil and
foil paper hereafter any further in dealing with their filth; and referring
them only to that advice, which that blessed Apostle gave to that wretched
and cursed Caytiff, Act. 8. 22. and wishing them to to take it nearer to heart,
and make better use of it, then it is commonly deemed that he did. However, it
is yet some comfort unto me, that neither that former Helhound, whom I justly
so termed for his malicious bayting of and barking at that blessed man of God
Calvin, and other of Christ's faithful servants, could meet with ought in the
whole course of my life to charge me with, but what has been evidentlie evinced
to be notoriously untru; nor this other, as justly deserving the like note
and name, as manifestly discovering himself to be such, as well by his
palpable calumny, of an utterlie unknown, and nothing less deserving party,
as also by his malignant disposition and affection to Gods Ministry, can
epsy, and find no nothing throughout my whole Vindication, whereat to snarl,
or whereon to fasten his Cerberian ^ang, save a pretended contradiction of his
own coining there, where no show or shadow at all of contradiction appeers. For
as concernig his Qerie propounded to me Page 23. whether I can deny, but that
in these late Intestine Wars that has fallen out that his friend Lilie foretold
of the ruinating of the most stately building of this Kingdom; nor is it
exactlie true; nor what this man speaks of many great Houses ruinated, any
more then what any ordinary person might easily foresee in the hot pursuit
of any Civil war was likely to ensue; nor is it any other then to demand
whether his fellow-figure-caster, among a multitude of lies, figments and
fancies, has not lighted on somewhat that fell out as he fancied. Whereof see
my Vindication page 76-80.

Some few Escapes of moment may thus be amended.

Page 7. lin. 34. qam qae p 8 (...). 3. (...) p. 9. l. 8. as evil, p. 11. l.
22. or ^ow, p. 25. l. 22. and carried, p. 34. l. 9. a visit. p. 41. l. 4. Rand.
l. 20. what one l. 22. (...) p. 66. at l. 14. marg. p. 379. at l. 28. Chap. 79.
p. 3. 4. p 90. a^ l. 1. put in the margin, As in his Pre^ace to Anabapt. Wa^ht;
I am a true Protestant in (...)ue own sense.

FINIS.

