To the most VIRTUOUS, And therefore most ACCOMPLISHED LADY, the LADY V. M.
MADAM,
THough other Cards pass here, and there
Under the name of Nicholas Benier'e;
And his Protections good, (unless it be
From the Excise-man, or Monopoly.)
These cannot so: A Grand Commission sits,
And every one's Exciser of our Wits:
Wherefore these Guardlesse Fancies humbly fly
Into your Hands, for sweet security.
All in one Suite, that you would Deal them out,
And happily they then may go About.
Who will not say in ordinary kindness,
( Delivered by Such Hands,) they are Carts Fines.
They may perchance the happy fortune get
Of some New Fashion, where the Ladies met,
And my good Ladies Dress being liked and New,
All their good Ladyships to like it drew.
So may they Draw, when you do once begin,
At least for your Sake say, Give't me again.
To the Ingenuous Reader, A Directory to Play.
A Jove Principium. So these Cards begin.
Perchance you will ask, what Humor I was in
To be so Pious? when (our Luck being Bad)
I should have sworn, and with the Cards been mad:
It grieves me much, to see the Game so played,
Sure there is Fool Play, some cheating. I Am afraid.
We dealt, and Clubs were Trumpe, and we had most,
And Ace, and King to Boot, and yet we lost.
The Cards Moral.
This drove me into serious Thoughts, and Things
Of higher notions of Ace, Queens, and Kings.
And there I found all well: But you must have
The truth. All these are worsted by the Knave.
To keep him right, I set a guard of Ten,
Ten goodly Precepts, and Nine Valiant Men:
Beside I showed him, what such tricks did wait,
In the first Worlds Correction: Except Eight.
I show him too, to trust in Stars is silly,
His Grammar may as soon him save, as Lilly.
But if he spent his Six days, as he should,
Himself would be as they; And they were good.
Bid him his Senses use. The Members Five
His Senses are, by them he will Live and Thrive.
Then wroth (said I) ransack the Elements,
Never more wicked knave, nor worse intents,
They will get all. No Mr Peter's, we
Will keep our Threes, Faith, Hope, and Charity.
And our two Twoo's (Tam Fool.) No more tricks vent;
We keep the Bible, and the Sacrament.
To his Dear Friend, the Author.
SOme men do make no other use of Play,
But only This, to pass the Time away.
As if that which we all complaine's too short,
Lingerd too long, unless helped on by sport.
But thou (Dear Friend) have so contrived thy Pack*
That we might neither Time, nor Pastime lack.
Who passes here his Time, what e're they cost,
Shall say, in using these there is no Time lost.
THE INSPIRER. To his Dear Friend the Author, Upon His CHARTae SCRIPTae.
Dear Friend, you make a dry dead stock to bring
Forth fruits, (an offering for the highest King)
Heavens just Tribute, or an Out-Rent due
From all alike, but only paid by You.
You Dig up Vice, Spades.
and stay it in the Root,
Beating down sin, Clubs.
before it spring or shoot;
That Virtue Crowned with glory may appear
In Diamonds, Diamonds.
sparkling like the Starry Sphere,
Where every one, exceeding far all Art,
A Jewel makes, and Beams of Grace does Dart
Into the Soul: a Charm for every Sense,
As if inspired by some Intelligence.
Thus you have Packed the Cards, and dealt the Game,
And by your Hearts, Hearts.
well played, All Hearts you gain.
To his most loving Friend, the AUTHOR.
Dear Friend, you chid me when I said your Pen
Revived BEN: JOHNSON from his grave again.
Tell me you Critics, I Will be judged by you,
Can there (...) CHARTAE SCRIPTAE due?
They all agree it, and with me allow,
As large a Laurel to Empale thy Brow.
They think Tom: Randall (if alive) would be
Too weak a Gamester to play with Thee.
Since Justice (...)
Why should your Hate, to your own Fame be such*
If you will not be Commended, leave to write,
So you will want (...).
An Advertisement to the Virtuous LADIES.
Deal fairly Ladies; it is a Pack
Of arrrant Knaves? What is it you lack?
(...)
Men dare not see themselves in Print.
He is (...) you something of the Price:
Wood-cocks and Wit pay no Excise.
And if he but your Favor Winnes,
In the next Pack you shall be Queens.
ON CHARTAE SCRIPTAE.
WHat more Knaves yet? Nay then we are in our dumps,
For they are still followed by the smaller Trumps.
Hang these Committee Men, we are so over matched,
An honest ( Ten cant stir, but straight he is caught;
But play not Booty, let no Cards be seen,
And we will win yet; see here the Ace, King, and Queen
These are the leading ones, if these ca'nt get,
Even throw the rest (...), we will sit by and Bett.
To his Friend, on his Ingenious CHARTAE SCRIPTAE.
COme my Dear Sister, shall we have a Game?
The Cards are hallowed now, all but the name.
Here are Religious Kings and Queens, we may
Work out Salvation, while we seem to Play.
Blessed Reformation! see how Grace gets in
By the very means which did entice to sin.
Now may in godly sort the Zealous mate
Deal with a Brother, yet Communicate.
They that forbad th'Prophaner Ace and Duce,
Should they see these, they would command their Use.
Virtue thus Conquers Vice, by an unknown way,
And Satan's beaten now at his own Play.
What good may we not hope for, when we hear,
A Sermon Preached by Nicholas Benie're?
Incertus AUTHOR, to his Anonymos Friends.
I Thank you ( Friends) for your Conceits, they are witty:
But let us remember Myndus was a City,
And had great gates; whether it be Command
Or Play, it is the word, no more, I Will stand.
CHARTAE SCRIPTAE.
The ACE, Unity.
Eternal One, who made, and know our Hearts.
How wonderful art thou; whose foremost parts
No eye can see, and live! The Best of Things
Do homage unto thee; even Queens and Kings.
And though the word now worser meaning have,
Who was not borne thy vassal, and thy Knave?
All Hearts are Open unto thee* no shroud
To hide the low so Base; Nor (...) so proud
To exalt the high: thou lifrest up the low,
And down the proud do from their high Hearts throw.
The King of HEARTS.
NExt to the Ace on the Earth, the power of Kings
Derivatively flows, as streams from Springs;
Pollute not then these crystal waters, no,
They must untouched to their own Fountain flow.
So long as He pays duty to the Ace,
He will defend his delegated Place:
And though at Gleeke, the Knave in Number be
More then the King, Yet the precedence
Is given to him in play, And Tom goes down,
And does his Crosse-legg'd homage to the Crown.
The Queen of HEARTS.
ALas what fortune's this ^here's not a Pack,
The glorious Card of All is gone: we lack
The Queen, nor will we a small Card suppose.
We thank the Thistle, that we want this Rose.
She Is gone to play a better game, from parts
That Foreign are, to get us (...) Hearts,
Then these at home; then count it England's Spring.
When she and those Hearts join to Ace and King.
The King of DIAMONDS.
IF ever King had such unvalued gemms,
Flowers of his Crown, then our great King had them.
Not Aaron's breast plate brandish't such a Ray,
Nor darted so much luster* As that day
When that throughout these Islands we could see
Of peace and plenty A Monopoly.
Religion brought forth wealth, but little after
The honest Dame was eaten by her daughter.
Two sparkling Diamonds were this Land's two Eyes,
The through the-word-fam'd Universities;
But now we bunke. His power at Sea alone,
No Prince can show me such another stone.
What pity is it such goodly pearls and fine
Should be cast out (as now they are) to Swine!
The Queen of DIAMONDS.
Great Queen, how thou have cut thy way we have seen,
Not now of Diamonds, but true Diamond Queen.
Thy greater Pearls, (not like that unchaste she
Who quaff'd them up dissolved with Antony.)
To reinthrone thy injured Lord thou sold't;
Bart'ring for Bullets Diamonds* and uphold'st
The Crown Maugre thine enemies hate, and scorn
With high Supporters, Feirce as the Unicorn,
Or Lion: Thus by gallant poverty,
Thy self will the unvalued Jewel be.
The King of SPADES.
THis King resembles much prime Monarchy.
Just such a King was Adam as is he:
Made by his sin a sab'ring digging Prince,
And so the greatest Princes have been since,
Full of great Cares and Fears; In throbbes of state,
In height 'bove others placed, and so in hate,
Laid open to reproaches, censures, scorns:
So that their Crowns are truly Crowns of Thorns.
By base misprision, what they are not, made;
So that they do not call a Spade, a Spade.
Vexing their sacred persons till they have
No rest but by the Spade, and that i'th'Grave.
The Queen of SPADES. Upon the Queen of Spaines death.
THe Mournful Court in Heart, I mean, not black,
(For they mourn truly, who their Mourning lack)
In Elegiacke faces does express
For loyal Spaine's great Queen, great heaviness.
More sorrow in a look cannot be shown;
I have known less grief, when mourning has been on*
Who can forbear a doleful song to sing?
Dead is the Catholic Queen, and Christian King.
If the Popes Title so small a Power has.
God bless (pray we) Defender of the Faith.
The King of CLUBS.
THis is the worst of Kings, beware of him,
N^ King indeed, but a mere popular Pim,
Voyc'd, and cried up by Impudence and noise.
Guarded with store of Apron men and Boys,
Saylors and watermen; and since the wives
Set to reform, their foremen venture lives
More precious then their husbands, to bring in
Religion, and beat down the Man of sin;
For which they exalt a Levita in a Tub*
And he persuades to tumults the rude Club.
When swarms of waspes, and hornets buzze: Then fly.
No honor in a Crowd for Majesty.
The Queen of CLUBS.
TO make a Queen of Clubs I must extract
The spirits of three Ladies most exact;
The Legislative, Preaching, and Prophetic;
These qualities well jumbled by a Sedgewicke
In close Alembecke, will a Queen install
Most pure, most virtuous, and Synodicall,
Who shall go out, and in before the People,
And preach high doctrine placed in the Steeple,
These are the Peoples joy, their life, their breath,
Dearer then late most dear Elizabeth.
Io the Queen. A beast of vast Commands,
With many heads, and tails, and many hands.
The Knave of HEARTS.
I Am the worst of Knaves, others by Art
Are wicked, studied; I me a Knave at Heart.
Where vile Ingredients poison all my will,
Whatsoever I think, or do, is mischeife still.
Like to an Indigestive stomach I
Convert all good to bad: Here roguery
Original is; no virtue, goodness, love
Can such a monster save; Repre'hend, reprove,
Like a fierce mastiffe at your throat I fly;
Advice and Counsel I void cunningly.
And by a mental reservation
Make and break Oaths to damn a Nation.
The Knave of DIAMONDS. Prince GRIFFITH.
A Precious Knavel Y'ould Madams Quarry Enter,
While precious stones you craftily present her,
And rob her of a Jewel above price.
Foul ravisher, only a Prince in vice!
Are these your close Committees? if you sit
Upon such plots, we know what you Commit.
If that from Brutus we derive our name,
Like him let us bravely flay our Nation's shame,
Let not our Chaste Lucretias suffer thus,
By an adulterous Griffithins.
O make one Order against him most just,
Who pimp'd the sacred order for his lust.
The Knave of SPADES.
THis Knave by stanch and forced gravity
In a Spade Beard covers all pravity.
You must not think his Cato's face would cozen,
Having the justice of the honest dozen
Good men, and true; yet this upright treader
Is closely linked unto the Devils tedder:
So sanctified a cast of his white eye,
Will usher nothing but a very lie.
And while you Imagine you a sure card have,
You Will find this envious Spade digging your grave.
The Knave of CLUBS.
THis is a foolish, proud, tumultuous Chuffe,
Whose mouth runs ore with filthy Kitchen stuff,
The scumme of private raylings; which he vents
Now against Kings, and will against Parliaments,
For this same knave likes nothing that has power,
Nor learning, but what is infused in the Hour.
Every thing's his greivance, but beleives
Above all other things the poor lawne sleeves.
He has a plaguey and malignant spite,
(For his souls s^^te) against any thing that is white.
Pound him to dust, and his Ingredients see,
He is composed of pride, and villainy.
The TENS.
December Praecepta.
THese if they were kept have power enough,
To purge the world of all such knavish stuff.
In dreadful thunderings upon Sinas hill
By divine pencill wrote, the Almighties will
And high mandamus were these ten: The Jew
Had the first privilege: He heard, and knew
The Legislative voice: whose Majesty
So dreadful was, it did the Jews to die.
So they desired a Speaker, whose meek soul,
In place of God might safely them control,
Yet he was moved from patience at the men,
And first of all broke all those blessed ten.
(1)
THe first provides that I no Atheist be,
Against plurality, and Anarchie.
I am the Lord thy God, and I alone;
Not Gods, nor Lords then are there, no not none.
(2)
THe second shows Invisibility;
You may not picture what you cannot see:
God comes as a wind. Who can be found
Of Cunningst Painter that could paint a Sound?
But know there is a decent use of Images;
When t'any thou do bow; an Idol it is.
(3)
THat does his nature keep, and this his name,
Neither must common be: o what a shame
Is it to us; That that name which the Jews
Durst not pronounce, we frequently do use,
Without regard unto this precepts tail,
Vengeance is his: the swears shall not fail.
(4)
HOw fair and reasonable are thy demands!
Lord! of seven days thou ask one. There stands
An Item to this precept shows the ods;
Six days we have our selves: The seventh is Gods.
Twill shame us if we yield not: On this day
What on the other six you safely may,
You may not do; now works then do wherein
Thy profit, or thy pleasures are, They Are sin:
Do not the day to Superstition force:
Deny thy Brother help, and save thy Horse.
The works forbad are works of Pride, and hate:
To rest from works of love is reprobate.
(5)
THe greatest blessing that on earth can be
Is firm annexed unto loyalty.
He that would Nestor's Age to's children give,
Teach them to mean, Father and King long live.
(6.)
NO man would hazard sure the Curse of Cain;
Do not thou kill, nor wish the Power of slaying.
Whose life thou would preserve, through hate for shame
In Reputation murder not, and name.
Yet think not hence, there is no power to stay;
In spite of this, the sword of Justice may.
(7.)
STones cry the Jews for proved Adultery.
That is not all, thou may not in thine eye,
Nor in thy heart (that private closet) do,
What may pollute thy self, and neighbor too.
(8.)
THou shall not steal from Man, nor God. The Edge
Of this same precept will cut Sacrilege.
(9.)
IN public Judgment, nor amongst private friends,
Do not by Injury serve thine own ends:
The bread that is got by another loss, though sweet,
O it is foul, and mark it, It is greet.
(10.)
Here Is little difference 'twixt my neighbor and
My self, both for the same privilege stand.
No longer let us be two: My Counterpart,
The very Copy of my Soul and Heart.
Thy Beast, thy servants, fortunes, and thy wife,
Are all as dear to me as my own life.
The NINES.
Nine Heroes.
THis number's not so sacred, as the last,
But yet it is famous, for the Ages past
Labored in this same number (as a vie)
To manifest all humane gaslantry.
We rake the Christian, Heathen, Jewish State,
And by extraction make it sublimate:
In histories Alembecke there were nine,
Whose spirits (as Elixar) did out shine
The rest of men: These were their days high noone;
Amongst the lesser stars the exalted Moon.
We Will mount 'em in their several Orbs, and see
How different their's, from these days Chivalry.
God's Cavalier Joshua leads the valiant va^^^
The Conqueror of fruitful Canaan.
The Sun and Moon were in his muster roles,
And listed Stars recruited his slain souls.
Rivers retreated, Jordan was drove back,
The blowing of 7 horns do Jericho sack,
Thirty one Kings all fell by him. No place
Was strong, nor men, no not the Anakims Race.
Yet one base lurking Achans cursed sin,
Routed all Israel: Have not we been
Strangely dispirited, and beat sometimes?
There is a cause, brave Cavaliers; Our crimes.
DAVID.
What Is fein'd St George and Bevis to have done,
Great David did indeed; he Ladies won
By sling and sword: when vast Goliath lay
After the Bear and Lion the worse prey.
What worthies were his Captains? and if they
Such mighties were: What was their King I pray!
That gallant man after Gods heart a King,
(The peoples sin provoking) did a thing
Was folly to the Lord. That sin this day
The People Acts in a Militia.
Be favorable O Lord, and grant that we,
Like him, may feel but one Curse, not all three.
JUDAS MATCH.
Puissant Judas strong in faith, not men,
Beat proud Antiochus. His zeal even then
Unto Jerusalem did brightest flame,
When that Jerusalem was but a name.
When heathen Ignorance threw down her Courts,
And of their holy vestures made their sports
May after Ages ( Charles) give thee due praise
Who fightst (as he) the ruined Church to raise.
HECTOR.
HEctor did many valiant Acts, but he
Oppressed was by Club^, and so are we.
Where Homer's learned pen has sweat, and chaste
Virgil has sung, for me to rhyme were wast.
ALEXANDER.
Here Is he, for whom the world too little was,
He sweat in the straight compass; know the cause,
His large ambitious mind did know no Bound,
As little room serves him (as me) in the ground.
CAESAR.
Here Is he that wept at Alexanders Tomb,
'Cause at his years he had not so much overcome.
Who did advance the Aristocracy
Unto Imperial State, though cruelly,
Witness the die of changed Pharsalia's fields,
Whose story lofty Lucan fully yields.
A man more famous for his Pen or Sword
It Is hard to judge nor can I here afford.
Him, when the fawning Senate said, they would make
Happy and high, basely his life they take.
Tres Moderni
Arthur the Prince renowned for Lady-fights,
And his round Table, and his sturdy Knights,
Read now, like to Romances will be sound;
And what is his Table? now the whole world's round.
I shall not write of Godfrey, Bulloignes Duke,
Nor yet shall Charlemaine swell up this Book.
No, since my own good Charles is not the great,
Unless it be in Soul, in Cause, more yet,
Great in his wrongs, great in his sufferings too.
I shame to write it Countrymen to you.
Shall it be said, and not recanted? Friends,
Have your great promises these homely ends?
Glorious and Rich; courage, our Lord was so;
He made the World, yet knew not whereto go.
The Nine Muses.
Yet while by these this number's made divine,
Let Us not forget, the Muses they were nine.
When those nine worthies shall augmented be
By Charles his Nephews, and his Progeny,
And the swollen Annals strout with thy brave Deeds.
Which now the world in quaint Mercurius reads.
Those nine well warmed with a peculiar fire,
Shall Pen themselves thy wars; and not Inspire.
EIGHTS.
Octo Personae.
WHen first I drew this Card, it grieved my heart;
For high offense this figure did impart.
It called to mind that Watery world, when the Earth
Was drowned; and of mankind a general dearth.
That high gigantick, and rebellious race,
That fought against their God for highest place;
Broke into drops like to a proud swollen wave,
And were intombed in a floating grave.
High were the men, the women heavenly fair,
(And fruitful too) for Continence was rare.
Wherefore God punished their inconstant blood
Except eight Persons with a constant Flood.
WHat Ovid in his Metamorphosis
Does as a Fable tell; In truth is This:
And many wise men think that his Mor-phosis
Was stolen out of the Pentateuch of Moses.
And what you read of good Deucalion,
And grandam Pyrrah, each one threw their stone,
And they forthwith took kindly heat, and life,
Is true in good man Noah, and his wife,
And Sem and Japheth, and accursed Cham,
And their three dames, from whence all people came.
The Seminary of man was then the Arc,
That too was of all Beasts the moving Park,
The Rabbis very pretty stories have
Of Noah, when he built that swimming Cave.
How that his Neighbors wondered, and did say,
Good Lord, whither went my Cock and Hen to day?
Another Ram and Ewe, his Bull and Cow,
Her Dog and pretty Bitch were here but now.
And Lamech loving Doves: but all were met
And hundred Couples more, as if they had set
Some merry meeting at that huge new House
Which Noah built, There was the Rendeavouze.
A Brace of Lions were met lovingly;
And Tigers twain, and Bears both he and she.
And so of Birds their paires in mighty joy,
As if they had all been flocking to a Coy.
Thus while the amused world were wondering at
The Beasts procession; Not dreaming that
A deluge would succeed, they merry made,
And God ore whelmed 'em, 'ere they were afraid.
SEVENS.
Septem Planetae.
IF we may trust divining Mr Booker,
Our New States Wyzard, and old Star looker.
From the untoward conjunction of these Stars
Ensue results of Peace, or bloody Wars.
I have not studied Astronomy so far,
As to confute this sage Albumazur:
Yet I remember, when our Archiflamen
Upon Prognostics did the wight examine.
And ask't him, Bona fide whether He
By art could guess certain futuritie.
He answered plainly, no, he could not tell,
But put things in, to make the Almanac sell.
But that these lights have powerful influence
Over inferior Corpse, is plain to sense.
As in all Plants and waters; and man's mind
By unequal temperature is much inclined.
Yet the wise men, (whose number was not eight)
Control these seven, and overlooke their Fate.
Who under Saturnes sullen raye are borne,
Live Melancholy, and seem to be forlorn.
Who under Mars had their Nativity,
To Blood and Rage have a proclivity.
The generous aspects of Sol and Jove
Unto Heroic actions People move.
When these in an auspicious posture meet,
We shortly do the birth of Princes greet.
So do these Rays appear in the royal Plant,
That we may judge, who were predominant.
For in thy early progress like the Sun
About thy Fathers Kingdom thou have run.
While he triumphing like Majestic Jove,
Showed thee the pattern of his state and love.
This is the Sparkling Diamond of the Sky,
The Beauty-speck of Heaven, and bravery.
Which for the illustrious figure, and quaint light,
Is Lady Huisher to the Day and Night.
Her kind and pleasing Influence does raise
More then Platonic heat; and though her ways
Are dark and secret, and her fire's unseene,
(For Mercury a friend to the stealth has been.)
Yet Mistrisse Luna in her nightly round,
Has heard the cries of this Platonic wound.
SIXES.
Opus sex dicrum.
IF the same Six be truly understood,
The Reader will perceivd, That all were good.
For need must they be good, whom the best best
Himself made, and on the 7th day took rest.
Gods working days were six, one resting day;
So must ours be, but not a rest to play.
For when the great Creator finished had,
And saw all good, (for nothing could be bad)
Into himself he did reflect, to see
The power and goodness of the Trinity.
Imitate o man: and though six days thou spend
Upon thy self, in Him let the 7th end.
The first days Work.
THat there might be a First days work, the Light
Was first Created, separate from Night.
Night which was nothing but a want of Day,
And gets a being when that is gone away.
Just such is that in which this blinded Land
Does grope; unwillingnesse to understand,
Natural privations serve to produce,
But Voluntary Darknesse's of no use.
The Second.
The next days labor was that Canopy,
(The vulgar usually do call the sky*)
And is that glorious substance which is spread,
Like a blue spangled Mantle over our head.
The Seat of God mounted so exceeding high,
It is not to be reached until we die.
The Singer sweet does it a Curteine call,
Draw it O Lord, and entertain us all.
The Third.
For all that high precedence of Birth,
The lowest is most courted, this base Earth.
Which when it first was made, did freely give
All that by which with sweat we now do live.
'Twas Meadow all, and no enclosure then;
What God made common, was enclosed by men.
To make a Land like that, It Is my advice,
Down with enclosures; They Are no Paradise.
Laying of ground to ground, do none of these,
The gathering of Waters were the Seas.
The Fourth.
Heaven in it self was glorious enough,
Yet as a palace with rich household stuff
Thou de^^^est Lord thy dwelling place with lights
Of less and greater magnitude. Our sights
Cannot behold their luster; even they
Dazzle that rule the Night, who rules the day
Is the great Author of our Heat and Light,
Yet is not hot, nor seen of any sight.
Let us, O Lord, on Earth to thee consent,
To make thy houses full of Ornament.
And as to worship them's Idolatry,
So in thy adorned Churches let it be.
The Fifth.
The Watery Regions had no people yet,
But Wave with Wave did play, and Nymph, Nymph met*
When great Leviathan, (no Tyrant than,)
Was made Grand-Signior of the Ocean.
And Scaly Officers in shoales did press
Unto his, then not dreaded, Dreadfullnesse.
Under whose vast demensions, safe did lie
As in a Trench, the Finny Ministry.
Like Lord, like Servants, who did execute
By signs his will; for Both as Fish were mute.
Far different were the vast Aires feathered Peers,
Where warbling Birds sing to the playing spheres.
The Sixth.
This was the great Completing day; God's last
And best of works, not hundled up in have.
Wherein the species sensitive were made,
Those wondrous beasts, of which we are now afraid;
Whose mutual kindness to each other prove
Them all Created by the God of Love.
So sweet an Innocence filled every thing,
Serpents no poison had, and Bees no sting.
The Lamb and Wolf together friendly lay,
No Sheep-heards then, nor Dogs to part a fray.
Wolves in Sheeps-clothing were, and Sheep indeed,
As quiet (as in the Picture) they did feed.
They were so far from injury, that they
Expected daily whom they should obey.
Then sat the Divine Iunto, the great Three
In consultation, who that should be,
To whom the Sovereignty of Sea and Land
Should be committed, Such a vast Command
Was fit for none, but who could represent
Himself, he therefore his own Image lent,
And stamped an Impresse of Divinity*
Into a piece of Clay, (such as you see,)
And it upstarts a glorious Creature, wise,
And Innocent, and meek in his own eyes,
The joy of Angels, and the Devils hate,
The Lord ot'h Creatures, high and fortunate.
Who all out of innate Obedience came
And knew from him their Essence in their name,
This solitary Monarch could not see
Amongst his Servants fit Society:
But from himself (as from the Noblest Earth*
And choice Materials) Woman had her Birth.
So all were wonder-struck, the Beasts to see
The Man, He Eve, and they the Trinity.
FIVES.
Quinque Sensus.
Seeing.
THe Diamond Sense, the Bodies faithful guide,
Is merely unto Psyches self allied. Five Senses*

Soul of the Senses this* whose chearfullnesse.
Even as in death (for blindness is no less)
Without the sight is dampt. He that is borne blind
Walks in a sleep, and only lives in mind.
That such a one may live, he first must dye,
The Resurrection's his Nativity.
Hearing.
The Souls Intelligence, and nimble Scout,
Just like the Scout does truths and tales put out.
For at these subtle Port-holes does not stand
A Sentinel, who may the word demand
Before it pass, but every word does fly
Into the Presence, chamber instantly.
The Convoy of our Faith; Sciences Clewes;
The Staple and the Magazine of News.
Touching.
Tactus has got so great an Excellence,
That to want it is said to have no Sense.
I never heard of any thing but one
That was insensible; and she Alone.
But in a just recruite ought to abound
With that fine sixth sense which great Scaliger found.
The Bodies Lifeguard this, no little harm,
But presently the Touch does give Alarm*
Tasting.
Our Victuals garnish, Entertainments flourish,
Without our Palates, we like Embryons nourish:
As much delight the Infant Navell-fed,
Takes in his meat, as when'ts unrelished.
This is the Sawse of sawse: this Salt does season
Our Appetites Second. Manciple to Reason.
Smelling.
Could you a Face in any wise suppose
Handsome, without this goodly ridge the Nose?
Just such a nonsense Nose (as that is a Face,)
Is that which wants this rare Olfactive grace.
The Loadstone of the brain, the sense magnetic,
Natures High-chamberlaine and Groom prophetic.
FOURES.
Quatuor Elementa.
Fire.
THese are the subtle principles 'oth world, Four Elements.

Which where they are tempered well, or rashly hurld,
Do make their Compounds plausible, or loathed:
All things in these, though undiscerned, are clothed.
In ecstasy at this the good King said,
I Am fearfully and wonderfully made.
O the art and wisdom of the Deity!
Which from confused Chaos, where did lie
These blended Elements in strange disguise,
Gave them their place, and due proprieties;
And did advance the active Fire so high,
It Is next unto the throne of Majesty.
Air.
This into several Regions is decided;
For Breath, for swaggering Winds and Snowes provided.
The Magazine of Heavens here: Artillery
Which often in dreadful thundrings rend the sky.
And gives proud Tyrants check* which bravely awe
All under powers, and guard the Supreme Law.
This like a silken girdle does surround
The moving waters, and the fixed ground.
This is a Proteus, which in quaint attire
Condensed, is Water, Rarefied, is Fire.
Earth and Water.
These two are Inmates to each other; friends
Checqred together in kind mutual blends.
So necessary Neighbors to us, that
All pleasures are, as they are, situate.
When our fond thoughts are wearied in the sports
O'th Earth; we dally in the watery Courts:
This glazen Element, (unless the wind
Dimple her surface) is most smooth and kind.
Her numerous Subjects far the Earth's exceed,
And are the great supply of humane need.
What wealth are in their Bowels hid? Her Jewels
And to others Gold, are all Contentions fuel.
Quatuor Anni Tempora.
IT were unseasonable to pass these four, Four Seasons of the year.

In which our life is passed. Nay count them over.
You Will find in every man even every season,
So man is but a year endued with reason.
His Childhood is the Spring: when flowery Cheeks
And smiling looks, a Springall him bespeaks.
The Summer is his youth: which Harvest yields,
Himself of Corn a constant standing Field's.
He has his fall too, and Autumnall change,
And Snow and Winter on his white hairs range.
They differ thus: the Season never fails,
But often in Spring and youth death man assailes.
THREES.
Virtutes Theologicae.
Faith.
HAnd of the Soul and Eye: what silly we
Nor see, Three Theological Virtues.
nor comprehend for Majesty.
By Faiths attained* and what the Heathen thought
So strange, and Papists dangerously have taught
Without a Miracle, or Ethnic jeere,
By Faith we feed on God, He Is Christmasse cheer.
And as of a good Conscience he professed,
So we oth' Sacraments, it is a Feast.
A Feast where Angels would kneel down and eat,
Where Gods the Entertainer, and the meat.
Away these sinful Senses, get you hence,
You let in Vice. Faith is the Christian sense.
Hope.
Were not for thee, what commonly we speak
Is very true; Our very Heart would break.
Mother of Patience, sweetner of all loss,
Supply of want, miseries Anti-crosse.
The Anchor of this Floating Island, where
Our Hope does live, but strait begirt with Fear.
The Penitents Cordial, Bezar stone of grief,
The Parted's internuntius, Prisoners relief,
The only Key of Heaven, which does open,
(When Faith and Charity do cease) to Hope.
Charity.
The glue of Earth and Heaven, whose new state
Is to be now Conjoined, not separate.
So great God's love unto his Creature is,
That both are joined in one hypostasis.
Love Borne, when name of Duel was not known,
And with Astraea, and the rest hence Flowne.
Wrapd up in (...) Mantle, which does hide
And not proclaim the faults, that are espied.
Antipathy of hate, keen malice's regret,
At very name of foul Revenge, she will sweat.
The Centry of my Neighbors Fame, and House,
Salvation's universal Rendevouz^.
TWO's.
Duo Testamenta.
THese are God's Magna Charta, Two Testaments.
the ancient Law
Which did the Jews, now does the Christian awe.
Who for themselves are credited: the Ground
Of their own Truth, and Rule of what is Found.
Not both like plausible; The letter Red
In that, and threatening Death; appropriated
In certain privileges unto a Few;
And hid in types, scarce known unto the Jew.
The other's* letter fair, and plain; That he
That runs may read, and for all comers free.
A Testament of such extent; which makes
The World Executor, He that will partakes.
Duo Sacramenta.
THese in their types were bloody, Two Sacraments.
and did fright
The Heathen world from their severer Rite;
The Jew did want his Spectacles in part,
Nor did the Circumcision see oth' Heart.
But doted on the outward Forms: and (...)
Became less Jew, and was but one in (...)
He saw the Infant bleed, but understood
No issue of his sin, but only blood.
And knew not when he used his cruel knife,
The wound in's Flesh, was against his sinful Life.
So when with bitter herbs the Paschall Lamb
Was eaten by the Sons of Abraham;
They looked not throw the Mystery,
Nor saw in Pharo's, Satan's Tyranny.
And so for all their great deliverance,
Are still asleep in an Egyptian trance,
And feed on shadows, while the Lamb indeed
Was slain by them, but they no whit will Feed.
No more let Superstition them befoole,
Nor thoughts of Jordan or Bethesda^'^ Poole.
But give them grace (good Lord) they may Confide
In The stream of blood, and water from thy Side.
FINIS.

