ENGLANDS PRESENT DISTRACTIONS.

Paralleld with those of Spain, and other foreign Countries, With some other
modest Conjectures, at the Causes of the said Distempers, and their likeliest
Cure.

Written by a loyal Subject to His Majesty, and a true Servant of the
Parliament, in vindication of that Aspersion cast upon them, for declining His
Majesty's Royal Prerogative, or seeking to confine it to limits.

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.

By H. G. B. L. C.

London, Printed for Francis Wright. 1642.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM.


ENGLANDS PRESENT DISTRACTIONS.
DIstractions when National, are diffusive, nothing escapes their violence,
like Sampsons Foxes, they carry fire about them, and consume all before them:
And for the most part they fall like Hailestones, one no sooner drops, but a
whole storm do follow. These late years have been pregnant with distempers.
Germany leading this dance of death, being the greatest of the European
Provinces, France, the fairest of them, and Spain, the powerfullest, have
since, as it were, celeri pede, followed their leaders steps. And now and hinc
illae lachrymae. England the little Eye of nature, the darling and delight of
Europe, has thrust it self into the same bloody Matachin: wherein (as you
shall observe) especially in those of Spain, imbroyld with the civil
differences of Catalonia and Portugal; they keep one figure with ours in
England, and its rebellious Province Ireland, being true parallels, that run
even still through several ways: It shall be needless to relate the
circumstances of the Catalonian revolt from the Spanish government; it having
been, (as Ireland to England) an Appendix for some hundred of years to that
large book of Arragon: the world knows it is revolted, and that is sufficient
for our purpose: Not two twin Cherries carry more resemblance, then the horrid
faces of the present rebellions in these two subordinate Provinces. Catalonia
for many years past, being under the Government of Don John de Muscu^ena, the
Catalonian Prefe^t there, under went with pavement shoulders, unheard of
insolences* (custom in suffering as it does in sinning, taking away the sense
of their sufferings: the austere condition of the man at which they durst not
repine, making them like good dull Mules, ma^ch silently without braying under
their burdens: the state of Ireland just under the late Lord Lieutenant Thomas
Earl of Strafford a man of as much severity in his Vice royship there: his
government (I would be loath to brand his memory with a false imputation,
because he fell under the Axe of Justice) almost devolving to tyranny. And if
tha^ Maxim in Philosophy hold true, that Causae judicantur ab effect^bus and e
contra. Certainly we may well affirm, both the Catalonian and Irish defections
derivative from the oppressive injustice of their too tyrannous Governors.
Catalonia immediately upon the revocation of Muscurena, bleeding with the
wounds of his former cruelties; which yet for the present, if they were closed
up had left large skarres upon their bodies, resolves to provide for their
future safeties, or sell them at a dear rate, to open a conspicuous ruin,
break forth into an acknowledged and maintained rebellion. So did Ireland on
the Earl of Strafford, though perhaps the levity and malice of that Nation,
only sought by the specious presence of his tyranny to palliate their wicked
intentions, which had destined them for this fatal and impious purpose, long
before Straffords arrival thither: but that rebellion were not considerable to
us, as Catalonia's is to the Spaniard, nor could the Irish (though their
quarrel for their Religion makes them resolutely desperate, being assured by
those that guide their souls, their mutinously superstitious Priests, that
they atchieve the glorious condition of Martyrs and Confessors in their death
and sufferings, resist the English powers, if England were once blessed with an
unity between it is King and people, the distractions there being so well
known to the world, that in our very enemies (if we had any such besides our
selves, they would have invited pity: England that thus many years has stood
the envy of all it is neighbors: like a fruitful Olive teeming with blessings
of a constant and continued peace, while they teemed with fire, famine, and a
thousand inexplicable ruins, having now two armies of it is own sons,
violating with their hostile steps their Mothers pleasant and plenteous bosom;
their active spirits, like Milstones wanting other matter to employ their
Motion upon, being ready to set fire upon themselves. And yet few distinctly
know the reason of these so sudden and Hydra^-headed confusions. In Spain,
tyranny in the King at least in his Officers, caused the Catalonian revolt; the
same with hope of liberty that of Portugal: here none can accuse the King of
that blemish (I would we could as easily acquit His Cabinet Counselors, nor
yet condemn the people, that they have fallen, or do yet defect their
obedience: and yet (so paradoxicall is this difference,) all is distraction,
the King bent against His people, and they as natural justice gives them
privilege, resolute to defend themselves, not against the King, he offers them
no violence: but to preserve their lives, laws, and liberties, from the rapine
of His evil Ministers, who ofttimes render the rule of good and gracious Kings
odious to their subjects, And if we may believe that great Legislator, that
second Numa of the Romans Cicere, that these ought to be accounted good men;
qui consulta patrum qui leges and reipublicae instituta servant. Sure ours here
are no ill Patriots of their Country, my Logic knowing no such nicety of
distinction betwixt servare and preservare, but that they may be by as direct a
title admitted to march under the Ensigns of goodness, who strive to preserve
the Laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth, as they who only keep them.
And now without offense, if we may positively set down, or at leastwise
probably conjecture at the causes of these so lamented distractions, we shall
find ours here, and those of Spain, if not uno and eodem, yet valde simili
font manare, to wit, the unlimited and infinitely ambitious power of the
Clergy. The Spanish Nobility and most of the ancient Gentry (though nationally
and naturally that people is most superstitiously affected to their Clergy,
then we ever were to ours) repining and disdaining to see these men, who but
yesterday were their Meniall servants, to morrow, being by their help
andsuffrage, advanced to that supreme Ecclesiastical dignity; demean
themselves as their equals if not superiors; nay, sitting as it were, to use
our course old English proverb, even cheek by jowle with Majesty, and swaying
if not a wing that. Most of the King of Spaines Cabinet Counselors, bating his
favorite Olivares, the Constable and Adelantado of Castile, who enjoy that
honor by the privilege of their offices, being Churchmen, the Kings and
those Noblemens ghostly Fathers. And undoubtedly where they have so great a tie
over men's minds, as the knowledge of their consciences, they must needs have a
superintendent power over their actions, which are but the children of men's
propensions; so that those insolences of Mascarena, circumstantly are
derivatived from the Spanish Clergy, they being, if not by their consent and
directions committed, yet by their patronage and conivence. And is not this
comparatively our condition, while the Clergy were revera, not nomine, only
the Ministers of the Almighty, when they were boni pastores oves solum
tondentes non deglubientes, what an excellent harmony was heard through this
Kingdom, joy and gladness being only in dwellings? but when the Miter grew in
competition with the Crown here, when the proud and insolently presumptuous
Prelates began to rank themselves with the chief Nobility, contemn the
Gentry, and tyrannize over the Communalty, introducing strange and impertinent,
nay, superstitious Cannons and Ceremonies of our ancient faith, backed too by
authority of such or the secular Magistracy, as durst not, or at least would
not contradict their proceedings, then the wisest of this Nation jam proximus
ardens, Vtalegon: their neighbors houses being on fire, began to look to the
safety of their own dwellings, endeavoring to repress that torrent which else
threatened the whole Island with a deluge. And certainly that wise and sacred
Senate, the Illustrious high Court of Parliament seek not to diminish the
Kings royal Prerogative, descendent to him as his Crown is from his
Ancestors, by seeking to regulate the power of the Clergy, by extirpation of
Bishops, though it is their constant tenent where the Church is reduced to an
Anarchy, there is likewise the temporal power altered. But I durst not dispute
it with any of them, that not neither is Episcopacy so correlative, or
consubsistent with Majesty, that one cannot stand without the other, nor that
the Parliament ever intended to confine the royal prerogative to limits, but
secure the right and prosperity of the subject from being swallowed up in that
extensive power of royalty* which being contiguated, if not one continuum, with
the subjects safety, ought not to be employed to his ruin. To prevent a
danger, certainly is the greatest point of wisdom, and though none will
imagine, our good and gracious King ever meant to put any power against his
people in practice, and in his own Princely intention, yet certainly it was an
honorable and conscionable justice in the Parliament, being entrusted as
Feoffees with the kingdoms safety, to seek to provide for futurity, lest some
such King there might be hereafter, that might invert the Charter of his
Royalty sealed to him by the peoples obedient suffrage upon the people
themselves. And yet this has separated the King from his people, and given
birth to these unhappy distractions: In Spain, especially in Catalonia, where
the King now is, he seeks to reduce them to his obedience, by affording them
his presence. All we sue for here, is His Majesty's royal presence, which
would suddenly give a sure and happy period to these distempers. If His
Highness desserting those few Incendiaries, who by their malignant Councels,
and affections have instigated and fomented these dissentions would vouchsafe
to comply with the universal Body of His Kingdom, contracted in this present
Parliament. And certainly in this Climetricall year of the world, when it
labors with the Empidemical contagious sickness of combustions, we alone are
bound to thank heaven that our disease here is not so violent, but it may be
cured by time and good Council. Nothing but blood, being able to extinguish
the burning rays of those flaming combustions, that like prodigious Meteors
predominant in other Nations. Catalonia nor Portugal, being never to be
reduced to the Spanish obedience, but by extirpation of all those Families and
their adherents, who were the prime Botefeus in the revolt of those Provinces.
And certainly if the Spaniard do go out victorious, no misery will equal
that of those vanquished wretches, upon whom and their unbappy posterity will
be afflicted cruelty without pity, by the insolent and implacable Victors:
Tyrants shed blood for pleasure, Kings for necessity: In what a happy condition
then is England, even in its misfortune, being compared with other Nations.
Spain being oppressed, both with French, French, Dutch and Turkish, foreign
enemies, and embroyld'd with domestic troubles, France is neither free from
civil dissentions, nor safe from the Spanish invasions, which both out of
Biskay and Handers, and Artoys infest it with frequent inroads: Germany has so
long been the Theater of war and bloodshed, that it has almost worn out the
race of the old Swedish actors; yet their still spring up new ones, as if that
Country were destined only for fertility of miseries; we only, as we are in
situation, Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos, so we are in condition;
being safe from foreign enemies we have our selves unmade our own safeties
like Cadmus earth-borne brothers, striving to boast in one another
destructions.

Populumque potentem.
In sua victrici conversum viscera dextra:
Such is the uncertainty of all humane and worldly happiness, which resembles
aptly a fair hopeful plant, set with much care by the industrious owner: to
day it buds, within a few weeks blossoms, dressing as it were* its bushy
beauties at the Sunbeams, when suddenly comes an unexpected April frost, and
nips at the root, and then it withers; that fair and hopeful foundation of
peace and happins, and for us by our ancestors, being now ready by our own
hands to be sacrificed as a victima tyrannidis, yet is not our case altogether
so desperate as our neighbors; good council having power to rectify and
reconcile our differences, force only theirs.

And it is to be hoped, at least it is all good men's wishes, that a speedy
reconcilement may proceed betwixt his Majesty and Parliament, that the rumor of
their war, may like thunder, though loud, having cleared our English air of
it is pestilentiall vapors like it be sudden, its noise once past, the memory of
it forgotten, that this land flowing with milk and honey, may not be converted
into a wilderness, nor sit desolate like widow, who so lately appeared a
queen among the nations, the very empress of the Islands rich in her
inhabitants and merchandise, that so tears may be wiped away from all men's
eyes, and that we may see peace again in this our Israel, that the example of
unity amomg*us may set a happy period to the dissension of our neighbors when
they shall behold our destructions which begun last end first; that our common
mother, Europe, that sometime Empress of the world* now groaning under the
burden of her sons mutual arms, may resume her ancient glories by the
expulsion of that common enemy to humane nature the Turk, that so true
Religion may extend its branches like a fruitful vine through the face of the
earth, and we sit happy under the shadow of it, which heaven in it is mercy send
sp^edily to come to pass, that all the ends of the world may praise the Lord*

FINIS.

