ANTHOLOGIA. THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr SAMUEL CROOK Late Pastor of WRINGTON in
Sommerset-shire, WHO Being dead, yet speaks.

By W. G. An eye and ear-witness of both.

Ausonius Praefat. in Parent. -- Nec quicquam sanctius habet reverentia
superstitum, quam ut amissos venerabiliter recordetur.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Philemon Stephens, at the Sign of the
gilded Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

TO THE HONORABLE COLONEL WILLIAM PUREFOY OF Caldecot in Warwickshire, Esquire; a
Member of Parliament, and one of the Honorable Counsel of State.
SIR,
AS I have all my days lived in obscurity, and ever affected quietness from
the world, rather then acquaintance with it, (esteeming that of the Poet, Been
qui latuit been vixit, above a Sibylline Oracle) so it is my desire to pass
out of it with as little noise and notice as I can.

But being incited by reading the Lives of some Fathers, and other modern
Worthies, lately published, to draw a small delineation of the fruitful Life
and Death of that late Magazin of Learning and Piety, M. SAMVEL CROOK, my most
Reverend and dear late Friend and Brother, heretofore well known to you in the
prime of his spring in Emmanuell College) to whose eminency and memory not
only my self, but all that knew him, intus and in cute, owe a larger tribute,
then I can hope to pay; and of whom, I may sadly and seriously profess, as one
of another excellent man, Piget me vivere post tantum virum, cujus magna
doctrina fuit, sed exiguasi cum pietate conferatur;) I must herein Hac saltem
prodire tenus, to set forth this Authologie to open view for public benefit.

Which being so, I apprehend as an happiness this opportunity to manifest to
the world some part of those just and honorable respects which I ever bare to
your Worth, Name, and Family, by commending this Relic of such a Dead-living
Saint unto you, who are very well able to make the best choice of the fairest
Copies of Piety and Holiness, and to write exactly after them.

This performed I retire to my wonted Vmbraculum, where I solace my self, to
have been not only so well known unto you from your first undertaking for me
at my Baptism, but under the benign aspect of your care and countenance ever
since that compaternall susception: for which, I resolve my self altogether
Yours, to honor and serve you, as becomes

From my study, May 20, 1650. SIR, Your most obliged G-S. W. G.

THE EXEMPLARY LIFE and DEATH OF That most accomplished and now Triumphant
servant of Jesus Christ, Mr SAMVEL CROOK.
He was born at Great Waldingfield, in Suffolk. Jan. 17. 1574. HE was a
Prophet, and the Son of a Prophet, even of that famous Luminary, Mr Thomas
Crook, Doctor in Divinity, a learned and laborious Divine, sometime Preacher to
the Honorable Society of Greys-Inne; a Gentleman, well descended, of an
ancient Family.

His Education. His Education was in Merchant-Taylors School, thence he was
sent to the University of Cambridge, where he was, first Scholar, and after,
chosen Fellow of Pembroke Hall by the unanimous suffrage of all, save the
Master; upon whose refusal, he was soon after elected and admitted one of the
first foundation of Fellows in Emmanuel College, where unto this day, his name
is precious, being preserved in their Library among their choycest Ornaments of
that House, in the Catalogue of their first Fellows, thus; Mr Samuel Crook
Bachelour in Divinity.

His Parts, Industry, and Proficiency. From his youth he was highly esteemed in
the University for his candid behavior in a comely person, for his pregnant
parts, ready wit, great industry, and answerable proficiency in all kinds of
polite literature which renders a man more expedite and exquisite for any noble
employment, and is more especially preparatory and introductory to sacred
Divinity. The fame whereof first advanced him to be Rhetoric Reader, and after
Philosophy Reader in the public Schools, both which he performed with general
applause.

Among other his Juvenilia, he translated Virgils Eclog. the first and 2d Books
of his Aeneid. Juvenals first Satyr, and most of the memorable speeches in
Virgil and other Poets. All, arguments of his ingenious capacity and ingenuous
sufficiency.

And, to show that his heart, even in youth, was drawn toward the pole of
heaven (from whence his wit was sanctified) he translated diverse Psalms of
David, and composed several sacred Hymns of his own. Some of them he sung
with tears of joy and desire, in his last sickness; having a sweet voice and
good skill in Music. His diligent observing the best Guides.

Moreover, in his younger years he was an assiduous hearer, and a great admirer
of that admirable Master Perkins, and a reverent observer of all the Worthies
of that time, famous in their generations; carefully and safely laying up in a
faithful treasury what he heard from them. An evident presage of his future
abilities to become a skillful Builder in the house of God; and a good help to
win many souls unto Christ.

His skill in, and improvement of tongues. He was accurate in the Greek, and
well skilled in the Hebrew and Arabic Tongues, which he sparingly used upon
necessary occasions, not for ostentation to amaze such hearers as seem to be
most pleased with what they least understand; but for the more clear and full
understanding and genuine interpretation of the holy Scriptures in their divine
Originals, whose full sense and native elegancies, proper to each Language
cannot be always expressed to the life, without recourse to the fountains.
August. de Vera relig. ca. 50.
Habet enim omnis Lingua sua quaedam propria genera locutionum, quae cum in
aliam linguam transferuntur, videntur absurda.

He very well understood, and spoke the Italian, French and Spanish Tongues,
and had read very many grave and witty Authors in each of them, whereof his
excellent wit made admirable use, even in Divinity (which now many illiterate
ones most audaciously and presumptuously defile with unhallowed hearts and
unwashed hands; he being able by an holy Alchimy (as was said of Virgil, Aurum
de stercore,) to make every thing serve to the power of persuasion, that Suadae
medulla, wherein he excelled.

His knowledge in History, Politics and Physic. He likewise lustrated much
History, Politics and Physic, of all which he ever made good improvements in
amplifications, illustrations, and insinuations of more divine subjects. Every
thing furnished him with more moving expressions of his sweet notions in prayer
and preaching, which made him to burn as well as shine, with greater light and
luster.

His entrance into the Ministry. While he was yet Fellow of Emmanuel College,
in a due compliance with the pious Statutes of that House, he entered into the
Office of the Ministry, Sept. 24. 1601. which he took not upon him as a
shelter to save a Fellowship, but to gain souls to God: To which purpose he
immediately betook himself to that Evangelicall work of Preaching, at Caxton
for the most part, not far from Cambridge, and in some other places
thereabout, where (beside the prosecution of other studies, and performance of
sundry exercises in the College) he had preached 28 Sermons within the space of
eleven Months. A rare thing, then, in Fellows of Houses, who were more
commonly hinderers, then furtherers of so good a work, if undertaken by younger
men.

His thankfulness. After he was transplanted from that Nursery, and settled in
a Pastoral employment, many miles distant from that University, to show his
thankful acknowledgement of the honorary supports of his breeding, received
from those famous Seminaries, he gave to Pembroke-Hall Library, Great Basils
works, Graeco-Lat. 2 vol. in fol. with these verses, which (tanquam ex ungue
Leonem) discover a specimen of his happy strayn and genius of purer Poetry, as
well as thankfulness. Quae mihi formasti teneros impuberis annos
Grandaeva, at gravida ingeniis foelicibus, Aula
Penbrochiae, Fas sit minimo, veneranda, tuorum
Ingentis tenuem officii deponere partem.
And, to Emmanuel College Library, he gave all the Councels Graeco-Lat. Edit,
Bin. Fol. five volumes, with these Verses. Sacra (...) and studiis domus
hospita sacris
Emmanuel, mihi quae juvenilibus arbitracoeptis
Culturam, comites, victum, and gratissima Musis
Otia porrexti! sic te nascentia porro
Foecundam claris mirentur saecula natis,
Donato ut liceat tantillum reddere tantis.
And to the University Library he gave all Greg. Naz. and Greg. Niss. works,
Graeco-Lat. fol. 4 Vol. with these Verses. Accipe parva tui (...) Matter alumni,
Sic te perpetua florentem pube, Nepotum
Sera manus, sophiae lumen, morumque Magistram,
Artis praesidium, Britonum decus, orbis amorem,
Delicias Regum, and fidei venerentur Asylum.


His calling to Wrington. Having thus traced his ways and procedure in the
University, I shall now follow him into the Country. In Sept. 1602. he was by
the clear providence of God (without concurrence of the plottings or
contrivances of cunning or infinuating friends) fairly and freely called to a
Pastoral charge of a great Flock at Wrington, a market Town in the County of
Sommerset, being presented thereunto by that Honorable and famous Knight, Sir
Arthur Capel of Little Hadham in Herdford shire, Great Grandfather to the Lord
Capel now living.

His settling there. There did he, (in obedience to this Call) forhwith settle
himself, and immediately set upon the work for which he was sent, to instruct
and turn unto righteousness that great people, who had never before tasted the
blessing of a preaching Minister or ministry among them (which therefore
required the greater skill and industry of the spiritual Husbandman to manure
and manage such an uncultured plot.) So that he was to them (if not to the
whole Country adjacent) the first that by preaching of the Gospel, brought
religion into notice and credit, and discovered the heavenly Canaan before, to
most of them, a Terra incognita, and thereby left them much richer both in
spirituals and temporals: in so much that he might at length, in a proportion,
say of that place as once Augustus of Rome; Lateritiam reperi, marmoream
reliqui.

His Moderation. Having thus pitched and fixed his Pastoral staff, as he
never sought higher, or other earthly preferments, (though his capacity and
credit to attain greater things were well known to be great) so he never
accepted of any additions, or accessions of maintenance or honor, although
honorably proffered by Persons able to advance him.

The course of his Ministry. Touching the course of his Ministry and
carriage; his proceedings were correspondent to his beginnings; yea, his works
most and best at last. For, as he preached, so he practiced: His whole life
being but one continued Commentary upon his Doctrine, and an exemplary Sermon,
consisting of living words, or of words translated into works, as I shall
further show in due place.

Few men ever came into a place with greater expectation, which yet he not only
satisfied, but exceeded. Few men could draw after them that affection and
admiration, which yet were deservedly increased rather then diminished, even to
his last, among all that had learned Christ in humility and truth.

His behavior to the seduced. And as for those few silly seduced ones that
being carried away by a Spirit of giddiness through the secret and subtle
insinuations and whisperings of false Teachers in corners (who with as much
ignorance as confidence, lowbell the simple by portentous words and phrases
abhorrent from christian religion, sobriety and truth, and which wise men
lament, while fools, ignorant of the depths and methods of Satan, applaud and
admire) toward his last, endeavored in their vertiginous fits, to eclipse his
splendour; yet his pious and affectionate Essays to reclaim them with the spirit
of meekness, and his fervent prayers, and yearning bowels for their reducing,
turned all their revilings to his greater luster and glory among all that were
able to discern of things that differ, and willing to approve the things that
are excellent.

His Marriage. Not long after his first settling in his charge, he happily
married a wife of his own Tribe, and heart, the eldest daughter of that
Reverend M. Walsh, a holy Minister in Suffolk, a great and rare Light in his
time, and famous for his ministerial labors; his fervent zeal, and abundant
charity. She was a very prudent and gracious woman, a most loyal, loving and
tender wife, zealous and active for his encouragement, credit and comfort in
all things, especially in his ministry, to which she constantly and cordially
bore so much respect and reverence as did much quicken and enlarge him in the
work of the Lord, and was continually studious and careful to ease and free
him of all emergent avocations and businesses of ordinary concernment, that he
might more freely follow (what his soul most delighted in) his diviner
employments, and himself and friends, in his necessary relaxations. In a word
her behavior was, and still is, such as becomes holiness, a teacher of good
things to the younger women, and to her family a worthy pattern, and a great
promoter of godliness in all that conversed with her, and to her husband, a
meet helper indeed, all the days of their conjugall relation. Children he left
none, beside those spiritually begotten unto Christ by the Gospel.

His printed works. The issues of his brain and heart made public were only
these: first, that exquisite and accurate Guide to true blessedness, (so often
reprinted, and so highly esteemed by all that read it through with
understanding and care.) Then, (at several times) he gave way to the printing
of four occasional and select Sermons, viz. The Waking Sleeper, The
Ministerial husbandry, The discovery of the Heart, and Death subdued.

His Characters never finished That wherein he had taken most pains, (which yet
never saw the light) was an excellent Treatise, wherein his main design, in
very apposite, and acutely distinguishing Characters, was, to lay open not
those more apparent and obvious contrarieties of virtues in holy, and vices in
wicked men, evident to ordinary capacities upon the first aspect; but the more
hidden and less discerned differences between the plausiblyseeming virtues of
evil men, and the real graces of the truly godly; as likewise between the
reigning sins of hypocrites, and the daily infirmities of the Saints, which
many times, even by quick-sighted spectators, are both mistaken.

His course held therein. In prosecution whereof, he, first, brings forth the
hypocrite in his best dress and attire, and then sets by him aregenerate man
living up to his Rule; adding the differences between them, thereby to unmask
the hypocrite, and to detect his encroachments upon the name and privileges of
the Saints. Secondly, he sets out a true child of God, laboring under
infirmities, and an hypocrite under the power of sin, (which cannot consist
with saving grace) notwithstanding all his flourishes, that so, he may clearly
distinguish a Christian in black, from a counterfeit in white; and, between the
bewailed weaknesses of the Saints, and the wilful wanderings of the wicked.

Causes of not publishing it. A work no less needful to all, then grateful
to the soulsound self-searching Christian, that labors after sincerity, and
the assurance of it. But the iniquity of the times, full of hypocrisy and
Atheism, hating and hindering such discoveries, and by all means discouraging
those that would make them, (together with the Authors constant employment,
even unto the impairing of his strength and spirits in feeding his Flock)
disabled him from finishing, and disappointed the Church from enjoying the
benefit of that admirable piece.

For, the Eagle eyed Author quickly discerning what obstructions waylaid the
publication, not only of that Treatise, but of what ever else tended to the
power of godliness (whereunto his sanctified Genius chiefly led him) he not
without deep grief, and loss to us all, laid it, and all thoughts of
publishing that, or ought else aside, and applied himself wholly to that most
Apostolical work of preaching and prayer; leaving only some draughts
(imperfect for the Press) of those rare conceptions of his excellent spirit,
wherein he so far transcended, that it is very hard (if not impossible) to draw
a line parallel to his. And should any undertake it, he is not likely to
receive other guerdon, then they who have assayed to piece up Virgils verses
which himself left unfinished.

Sundry oother things prepared by him. I mention not here (more then the names)
sundry other issues of his fertile and excellent wit and curious invention,
never published, viz. diverse choice and sacred Aphorisms, Anatomica,
Nosognostica, Pathologica, Therapeutica, Physiologica; Prophylactica; as also,
diverse divine Emblems and similitudes; all eminent demonstrations of his
exquisite abilities, and profitable improvements of them.

And, shall God vouchsafe to restore peace to his afflicted Churches, and
thereby more comfort and encouragement to her mourners, some things of his
(although orba parente suo) may, perhaps be sent abroad to quiet, if not
satisfy those who loved the Author and what ever was his, and knew both his
labors and intentions therein.

His frequent and elaborate preaching. His great delight and indefatigable
pains in preaching, so many years was almost beyond all example. He constantly
preached (if in health) thrice a week besides his extraordinary labors on many
emergent occasions, which he cheerfully embraced as joying in all opportunities
of doing good abroad as well as at home.

In all his Sermons, (which were many thousands) his expressions were choice,
grave, solid, weighty, savory, and seasonable; his applications home, and
pertinent, strongly set on from divine authority by a sweet and moving
elocution, a masculine eloquence, fervent zeal, and strength of love to the
souls of his hearers.

His excellent method, suitable to the subject. He very well knew how to set
forth, (...), abstruse points plainly, and how to manage (...), plain truths
elegantly; not in the words of man's wisdom, but which the Holy Ghost teaches:
always speaking in Christ, as of God, in the sight of God.

He was not like one that makes a feast, once a month, or quarter, letting his
family beg, or starve in the intervalls; nor like him that visits the Pulpit
twice every Sabbath, yet brings no new matter with him scarce once a month,
but still setting on the same dishes with a little new garnish, even unto
nauseousnesse. But he, as he was rich in laying in, so was he plentiful and
wise in laying out, like a ready Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God, or,
a good householder, bringing forth of his Treasury things both new and old.

And albeit, he could by his quick invention, profound judgment, and faithful
memory, (things rarely meeting in the same man) dexterously dispatch that with
little labor, which costs other men much; yet he seriously professed with
rejoicing, that he never durst to serve God with that which cost him nothing;
knowing that diligence adds weight and respect both to the matter and speaker,
whereby his words became goads, and nayls fastened by that great Master of the
Assembly, which are given from one shepherd.

His Motto. His Motto was, Impendam, and Expendar (I will spend and be spent)
which he cheerfully verified; For, he counted not his life dear, in comparison
of preaching the Gospel, and of finishing his course with joy, and the
Ministry he had received from the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God. Being told by his Physician (desirous to preserve him) that he
might live longer, if he preached less; Alas! said he, If I may not labor, I
cannot live, what good will life do me, if I be hindered from the end of living?

Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causam? His perseverance in his work. When
age and weakness denied him strength to travel abroad, any more to perfume
other Congregations with the sweet odours of his precious ointment, and when,
for his years and infirmities he might well (as an emeritus miles) sue out even
in the Court of Heaven it self) his Writ of Ease, and pass the rest of his
days in rejoicing over his Trophies and Triumphs; yet would he never give over
studying and preaching, till all strength of body gave over him. Yea, he often
preached (even when his legs almost refused to carry him any more to the
Church) with much spirit, and unexpected vivacity, as a mighty man refreshed
with the wine of the Spirit of God. And being, some years before his departure,
sensible of the daily approaches of death (which he long expected) to his spent
and decayed body ready to be deserted of his divine soul, he has several
times preached his own Funeral Sermon (as supposing he should preach no more)
not without the sorrow and tears of his loving and beloved hearers.

And when after such preaching, and rejoicing in it, he invited (as his
constant manner was) such Ministers and friends as came to hear him, to his
Table; he would force himself to sit with them (although for the most part,
silently, by reason of the expense of his spirits) and much rejoice that he had
once more employed his Masters talent, and enjoyed the precious society of
Saints, in whom was all his delight.

To his friends at such times rejoicing with him, and blessing God for him, he
would often say, I am nothing but a voice, as troubled at the growing decays of
nature more and more disabling him from serving his still active soul, unless
with an enfeebled tongue no longer able to speak out, and so often, as he would
have it.

What he shunned in his Ministry. In his Ministry he never flew at vain
glory, nor of men sought he praise, disdaining to stoop at the lure of popular
applause: Therefore he ever shunned those more gay and lighter flourishes of a
luxuriant wit, (which, like glorious weeds good for show at a distance, stink
nearer hand) wherewith the emptyest Cells affect to be most fraught, as they
who for want of wares in their shops, set up painted blocks, to fill up vacant
shelves. He fed not his flock with airy dews of effeminate Rhetoric (which a
masculine Orator would shake off from his lips and pen, as Paul the Viper from
his hand) nor yet with the jerkes and quibbles of a light spirit, which he ever
abhorred as the excrementitious superfluities of frothy brains, and unhallowed
hearts, but he ever led them out into the green pastures of solid and favoury
Truths; as their necessities and capacities did require. He had, (and
administered) (...), rational, unadulterated milk for babes in Christ, (...),
and strong meat for men.

What foundation he laid, and what points he handled. He was a wise Master
builder, who intending to raise a beautiful and stately Fabric, laid a solid
foundation sufficient to bear and strengthen all his superstructures. Therefore
he began his Ministry with a nervous and perspicuous handling of such Texts as
might discover to his people the divine authority, sufficiency, purity and
energy of the holy Scriptures, the Decalogue, Articles of Faith, Lords Prayer,
Sacraments, God in Trinity, His Decrees, Creation, Providence, the Fall, Sin,
Christ, the New Covenant, the Mediator, the Gospel, Faith, Calling,
Regeneration, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Glorification, the
Church, the last judgment, the Christian Warfare, and such like: all which, in
tract of time, he opened and applied, sometimes more largely, sometimes more
succinctly, but always profitably and sweetly; as a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, but rightly dividing the word of truth in a practical way.

His Guide, and lesser Catechism extracted out of them. Out of all which, in
his more mature years, greatest strength of parts, and depth of judgment, he,
(after many serious reviews) compiled that excellently compacted Systeme of
Divinity in a Catecheticall way, which he deservedly entitled, The Guide to
true Blessedness, mentioned before. And out of it, he again extracted that
Lesser Catechism which he often used, with very profitable and delightful
explanations, both in his Church and Family: a most profitable course of
teaching and learning the true knowledge of Christ.

Entire Scriptures handled by him. He went also through many entire Scriptures
(which is both a good trying, and great improving of a Divine) and the more
obscure any place was, the greater his diligence, with happy success, to bring
light unto it. Difficulties which are Lions in the way of the sluggard, became
spurs to his industry.

He handled all the 1.2.4.6.10.14.19.22.45.50.122.127. Psalms, the twelve
first chapters of Isaiah, Lam. 3. Hab. 3. the Prophecy of Malachi, Mat. 5.6.7.
All the examples both of good and bad men in the Scriptures, for imitation of
those, detestation of these: all the Miracles and Parables of Christ, all John's
Gospel, (an admirable Commentary) Romans 12. Ephesians. 2. Col. 2. and 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Heb. 11. Rev. 2 and 3. chapters, with many more, befides very many Texts De
tempore, on every occasion, being exceeding happy in the choice and prosecution
of them.

His humility. Whenever his preaching day happened upon Jan. 17. (which was
his birthday) he still noted his years complete, with this penitential
Epiphonema, (...) (God be merciful to me a sinner) a memorable evidence of his
pious sense of his own unworthiness in the sight of God, how much soever cried
up, and esteemed by men. No excellency of natural abilities, no eminency of
spiritual endowments, no acceptance of his labors, ever puffed him up, but
he still walked in all lowliness and humility toward all, in his greatest
exaltations in the hearts of men.

His Catechizing. Much might be said of his long continued course of
Catechizing, (that most profitable and speedy way of implanting knowledge) by
which he has set up so great and clear a light in his Congregation, as will
not only discover the excellency of the workman, and guide their feet in the
ways of truth and holiness who have been illightned thereby; but, much
facilitate the further dolation and polishing of those living stones by
succeeding builders.

His prayers. His divine spirit of prayer see med to excel all other his
excellencies: I appeal to the hearts of all that heard him in public or
private, and ever knew what a prayer of faith, elevated to the highest by the
holy Ghost, means, whether they ever found any to excel him; or many to come
near him. O! those penitent unbowelling confessions, earnest deprecations,
petitions, panting longings and sighings after God and his grace, those mighty
Arguments whereby he set all home, feeling thanksgivings, and divine raptures,
carrying up his soul to heaven in the sacred flames of his own sacrifices;
sweetly perfumed with the incense of Him, who presents all the prayers of his
Saints on the Altar of Grace?

Conceived prayer. He first brought conceived Prayer into use in those parts,
wherein he was so happy, so free from impertinent expressions, and vain
repetitions, so rich in piercing supplications, patheticall thanksgivings, and
gracious wrestlings with the Almighty; so dextrous to apply himself to prefer
all suits, and to fit every occasion (like an exquisite Archer, able to shoot
at an hayrs breadth) and so prompt and full in expressing the very hearts of
those that indeed joined with him, in whatsoever they desired for themselves or
others, as if by a kind of transmigration, their souls had entered into his,
and spoke the very bottom of their hearts by his tongue, which their own could
not utter.

And this was such an opening and warming of his hearers hearts before his
Sermons, and such a sweet closing up of all after his preaching, as added much
to the power and profit of all his labors, and was to him a transcendent
advantage in his whole Ministry. And verily, his pattern took so well with all
godly Ministers that heard him, that they accounted it their great happiness and
honor to imitate him (with whom very few could keep pace) in that most
important part of a Ministers office, whereby they might be more able to power
out their souls, and the souls of their people, into the very bosom of the
Almighty.

The time of his continuance in his charge. In this Orb of his public
Ministry, this fixed star shined brightly (without the least eclipse, or
retrograde motion) somewhat above forty seven years. A long time for such a
lamp to burn, as he did; but a fair opportunity of bringing many straggling
sheep into Christ's fold, and worthy only of such a shepherd. Once indeed the
last Bp of that Diocese gave a stop to his Tuesday Lecture, but God set it on
going again, and cast him that did it out of his place, while this painful
labourer went on with his work: Sed manus de tabula. I intended only a short
abstract, not a volume of his life, I forbear therefore to speak more of his
public Ministry, and resolve to close up all with a few observations of his
private carriage.

His exemplary conversation abroad. His whole life was exemplary. Take him as a
Christian, raised by his ministerial function to a Beacon height, his smell
was very fragrant. He not only kept himself pure and unspotted of the world,
but his light so shined, that both good men glorified God by seeing his good
works, and wicked and foolish men had their mouths stopped by his good
conversation in Christ, and were even enforced to give testimony to it, maugre
their malice against his holiness and worth.

In his Family. In his family, toward the wife of his bosom, he walked as a
man of knowledge, wisdom, and great tenderness of love; toward the rest, as
David, Ps. 101. and as a Bishop of Paul's description, 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. And
toward all, as a worthy pattern of love, zeal, humility, meekness,
temperance, patience, gravity, and of every good work.

His diligence in study. What his constancy and diligence was in his study, the
fruits of the great and long travel of his mind, his Works, (which praise him
in all the gates of Sion) do speak to all the world beyond all my pen can
reach. I must say no more of this, because when I have said all I can, I cannot
say so much as his own industry speaks.

His Discourses. In his more vacant hours, he was far from being idle, or
unprofitable: such as had the happiness (which was never denied to any) to
partake of his private discourses never returned empty from his full Magazin,
if they brought vessels capable of the overflowings of his rich mind and heart.
How many excellent lights in the Church have lighted their torches at his
celestial fire! How many young Scholars have been marvellously improved by his
prudent and pious directions, and encouragements in their studies, and are now
become excellent instruments in the Churches of Christ!

If after his preaching he found no mention of his Sermon, by which he might
probably collect some benefit had been reaped from it, he would be much
dejected, as if the fault had been in his preaching, (even when he had most
excelled) rather then in his hearers; and would say, that if he had preached
better, they would have profited more.

His readiness to administer to all in spirituals. If any Christians came to
him for resolution in Cases of Conscience, for counsel in straits, for comfort
in spiritual desertions, for healing of a wounded spirit; as God had given him
an excellent spirit of discerning, to judge of their condition, and of the most
seasonable applicatives; and an exquisite dexterity to speak a word in season
to the weary soul; so, he never was shy, coy, or difficult to be spoken with,
nor supercilious to any to whom he gave access, but showed forth all
tenderness, pity, and compassion, heard them fully and patiently, and wisely
administered to their several distresses, and ever sent them away (as Titus
Vespasian, his suitors) not only not grieved, but very well satisfied, and
abundantly comforted.

His bounty and charity. He was bountiful to his kindred that needed, and then
most when their necessities swelled highest. He was very charitable and
liberal to the poor members of Jesus Christ; and albeit his charity shined
most toward those of his own flock, yet was it not shut up from strangers, but
very large to them also, as he found occasion. Yea, when he went abroad to
bestow a free Gospel on other Congregations adjacent, such poor as he found to
be hearers (unless they were known to him to take up hearing as a cloak to
cover their idleness and neglect of their callings) never went home empty
handed, but he always warmed them with his bounty, as well as instructed them
with his doctrine.

His Hospitality. How much he was given to hospitality, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Neighbors, Strangers and the poor must needs give in such an ample testimony,
as will hardly be credited by such as knew him not, and are strangers to a
bountiful heart. He spared from himself to administer unto others; minding
more the wooing of many to receive benefit by his Ministry (some of which
might perhaps at first follow him for the loaves) then to lay up largely for
such as he should leave behind him; and choosing rather to be at continual
charge to encourage men by his bounty, then to suffer them to be unprovided,
when they came to partake of his ministry.

His improvement by conversing. If he conversed with Ministers, his humility
usually put him into the place of a learner: but, in learning he taught, and in
teaching, he learned. He was so good a Chymick, that he seldom parted with
such company, till he had gotten somewhat by them: yet were they sure to be the
greatest gainers: and then did he account it the best bargain when others got
most by him.

His hearing of others. His continual preaching seldom allowed him the much
desired benefit of hearing others; when he could have opportunity, he greedily
laid hold on it; and then would this Be gather honey from every flower, make
good use of the meanest gifts, and improve his own rich talent by dipping it
into theirs. Nor was he ever heard to slight or disparage any the labors of
the least of his brethren, that sincerely endeavored to bring in souls unto
Christ: but still he encouraged them; and, as he found cause informed, and
directed them, in a wise and taking way, to their great improvement.

His mirth. In his mirth (to which he sometimes unbended himself to refocillate
his weryed mind, that with renewed strength he might return to his more serious
and severer studies) he strictly observed the bounds of honesty, civility,
modesty, and the gravity of his place; well weighing, that the least dead fly
in the Apothecaries choycest ointment, causes it to send forth an unpleasing
savor.

The Table was usually the place of his greatest liberty in this kind, yet even
there he would still interlace his mirth with some droppings of a more serious
wit, which might instruct as well as exhilarate; and contain all within the
limits of sobriety, without biting Sarcasms, or unseeming scurrility. And
usually, he closed all with the reading of some Scripture, and giving some
short profitable strictures thereupon, which might administer grace to the
hearers, and leave a sweet relish and savor upon their spirits and whole
converse.

His Character. To give you a full character of his whole deportment in few
words; He was a good and a faithful steward in his Masters house, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, a Pillar in the house of his God: never
weary of his Lords work, but best pleased when he had done most service. His
conversation was immaculate, his behavior uniforme, and universally pious. He
was grave without austerity, pleasant without levity, courteous without
dissembling, free in discourse where he might profit, yet reserved where he saw
cause. He was seldom the first speaker, although best able to speak. He loved
useful discourse, but abhorred froth and babbling: he was witty without vanity,
facetious without girding or grieving of others. He knew his place, yet not
insolent; resolute, but not wilful; maintained his authority, but not haughty;
a great master of his own passions and affections, and thereby abundantly
furnished with the more abilities and embellishments that most attract and
maintain the dearest love, the deepest reverence, and highest respect; a great
admirer of learning, and piety in others, though farte below himself in both.
His affections were above, though he were below, he conversed more with heaven
then with earth while he remained in it, and is now a Crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of his God, as being an
ornament unto heaven it self.

His age and zeal for the Churches. He lived in the world 75 years (within one
month) in which long race he saw many sad changes, and sore storms beating
hard upon the Church tossed with tempests, and not yet at Anchor. But never was
David more distressed for his dearest Jonathan, than this man of bowels for the
calamities of the dear spouse of Christ. He was most incessantly inquisitive
after her estate in all countries, a sad lamentor of all her afflictions, a
daily Orator and mighty Advocate for her at the throne of Grace, and never
enjoyed himself but when he descryed her under sail toward some creek or
haven of comfort and rest; being much in prayer and fasting for her full
reformation and perfect deliverance.

His hopes of the King of Sweden. Some good hopes whereof he conceived in the
prosperous achievements of the great Gustavus, last King of Sweden (Semper
augustus.) But when he, by the sad and unsearchable providence of the only wise
God) suddenly and untimely fell, in the full carreir of his victories, and of
the Churches hopes, and that the Christian world was (in his fall) hurled from
the height of so great expectation, he continually mourned over the unhappy
setting of that glorious northern Star, as a sad presage of all the
inundations of miseries since befallen, (and still rising higher and higher
upon) the Churches of Christ: the quick and deep sense whereof lay close unto
his heart to his dying day.

His sufferings and dangers. Nor was he without his Manes, in our common
troubles. He was affronted by dangerous ruffians and bloody minded fouldiers
tyrannizing over him in his own house; not permitting him quietly to enjoy
himself and his God, in his private study, to which he often retired not only
from their insolences, but blasphemies. Even thither would they pursue him
with drawn swords, vowing his instant death, for not complying with them in
their bloody engagements. Yet it pleased that gracious God whom he had so
faithfully served, to preserve him for further service, and to make that a
chamber for his preservation, which they intended for his slaughterhouse, and
at length to bring him to his end in peace.

His death. When he had faithfully served his generation by the will of God, in
the Gospel of his Son, above 47 years, he was (Dum licuit liquida coelum
transcendere fama) gathered to his fathers in a good age full of days and
honor, by an happy death (the certain result of an holy life) December. 25.
1649. the day usually observed for celebrating the Nativity of his Great Lord
and Master the Lord Jesus Christ.

His Funeral. The last testimony of the peoples great love to him must not be
forgotten by any that desire to preserve his precious memory in their hearts
with honor. This amply appeared by their great lamentation and mourning for
him in his sickness, and at his death, and sad exequies. His funerals were
extraordinarily celebrated not only by the voluntary conflux of the greatest
number of people that ever crowded into the spacious fabric of that Church,
and by many hundreds more there assembled about the doors and unable to get in;
but by multitudes of Gentlemen and Ministers, all striving to out-mourn each
other, standing about his hearse with tears, recounting his excellent labors,
his fruitful life, their great profiting by him (as sometimes the widows
about Peter, weeping and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas made
while she was with them) every one aggravating their griefs and losses in his
gain, and striving who should honor him most in bearing his dead body to the
bed of rest.

Testimony given him at his Funeral. The Testimony given him at his interment
by him who performed that last office with many tears, and which he knowingly
spoke from his long and intimate acquaintance and conversing with him almost 40
years, take with you for a close in that Ministers own words out of the Pulpit.

Although funeral orations are commonly either the vain flourishes of
mercenary tongues, or the weak supports of an emendicated fame; and since good
men's works shall praise them in the gates, it is but to light a candle to the
Sun: and, since bad men's works cannot be covered with so thin a daub; it is but
to paint a rotten post: Yet some Testimony is due to such, as having obtained a
more eminent place in Christ's mystical body the Church, have also been
instruments of more then ordinary good to his members. Samuel dyed a Judge, a
Prophet, a Great man, a good man in Israel; and all the Israelites were
gathered together (to honor his obsequies) and lamented him and buried him 1 Samuel 25.1.

To say nothing then, of so rich a Cargazon, so full a magazin, so rare a
subject of all commendable qualities and admirable endowments; were a
frustrating of your eager expectations.

To say little, were a wrong to him that deserved so much; to say much, were
both a derogation from his merits, that may challenge, and an imputation upon
your judgments and affections that will acknowledge more due, then I can now
deliver. Nevertheless, since the memorial of the just is a sweet perfume, give
me leave to strew a few of his own flowers upon his hearse, an I Will discharge
your patience.

His holy life, and conscientious courses, his constant labors thrice a week
in the Ministry of the Gospel (unless in times of sickness or necessitated
restraint) for the space of forty seven years (wherein he could give an account
of above seven thousand elaborate Sermons preached by him) are so well known
not only in this, or the neighbor Parishes, but thorough the whole County,
and the Country round about that I need not mention them.

Few men ever ran so long a race without cessation or cespitation, so
constantly, so unweariably, so unblameably.

All which time he was a burning, and a shining light, joyfully spending, and
being spent for the good of Gods people. Many, many of whom he has guided to
heaven before him, who received the beginnings of spiritual life from his
ministry; and many more shall walk in that light after him.

And from his splendent lamp, diverse faithful ministers (some Triumphant
before him, some Militant after him) have lighted their candles. His Tuesday
lecture being more profitable to teach useful Divinity, then an Academy,
whereby he did not only dolare lapides, sed artifices.

Two things (rarely met in one man) were both eminent in him. A quick
invention, and a sound judgment, and these accompanied with a clear expression,
and a graceful elocution. To which integrity and humility being joined, made
him a transcendent Minister, and a complete Christian.

In his sickness (full of biting pains, which he bore with great patience) it
was his greatest grief, that God had taken him off from his labor, which was
his life and joy. His heavenly mind (like the heavenly bodies) counted his
work no weariness. If he were weary in work, he was yet never weary of work.
His spirit was still willing, when the flesh was weak. And he often used to say
in his health, Si per hanc viam mors, sum immortalis; and in his weakness odi
artus fragilemque hunc corpor is usum desertorem animi.

And when he saw no more ability for labors, he counted it superfluous to
live; and cheerfully not only yielded but patiently desired to die, in a
satiety and fullness of life. Not as a meat loathed (as many times natural men
do) but as a dish, though wel-liked, that he had fed his full of.

He had his intellectuals strong in a weak body; witness his last swanlike
song in this place, the sweet doctrine of our Adoption in Jesus Christ, on Romans
8.16. (so far he had gone in that chap. most clearly and accurately delivered,
and aptly distinguished from Justification and Sanctification, yet that day
October 16. going to Church and sensitive of his own weakness, he said to a
dear friend (who told him that he came to see and hear him) perhaps it may be
my last; as to all our loss it was indeed.

And as if his motion in Gods work, had been natural, he was more quick, more
vigorous toward his Center, and like the Sun showed his greatest light, when
he was nearest his setting.

His last ministerial duty privately done in great weakness of body (unable
to go to the Church) was the baptizing of two children; wherein he streamed
such beams of Divinity; sounded such bowels of humanity, showed such sweetness
of affection to his charge, that I seriously wished his whole Congregation had
heard him, in this departing farewell. And being told how well it was approved,
he replied with tears in great humility, Lord what am I? What am I?

To diverse of his loving Neighbors visiting him, he often protested that
doctrine which he had taught them was the Truth of God; as he should answer at
the Tribunal of Christ, whereunto he was hasting, exhorting them to stand fast
therein, as he most affectionately prayed for them; professing of them with
joy, I have kind friends, kind neighbors, Lord reward them all, and grant they
may find mercy with him in that day.

His desire was to give to his neighbors (if enough could have been had) his
printed Catechism which (to my knowledge) has had the approbation and
commendation of the profoundest and acutest judgments in both Universities;
and well it might, being a complete body of orthodox Divinity, and to have this
assertion of the Apostle Peter written before it -- Exhorting and testifying
that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand, -- and to subscribe his
name to it.

After he had in himself received the sentence of approaching death (which he
cheerfully did, when he saw no more likelihood of labor) he desired his
friends not to pray for life, but pray God (said he) for faith, for patience,
for repentance, for joy in the holy Ghost: and God heard him in that he
desired, for he was a rare pattern of all these, as (among many) these gracious
words of his may witness, Lord cast me down as low as hell in repentance, and
lift me up by faith unto the highest heavens in confidence of thy salvation.

I wish our proud presumptuous impenitentiaries had heard him crying for
repentance, and seen him weeping for grace. It might perhaps have melted their
stout hearts.

As he was full of days, so was he full of grace, full of peace, full of
assurance. The tuesday before he departed, This day sennight (says he) is the
day on which we have remembered Christ's Nativity; and on which day I have
preached Christ. I shall scarce live to see it; but, For Me was that child
born, Unto me was that Son given, who is, Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.

And no less full was he of true honor for his worth, and work sake, in the
hearts of all that fear God. His memory shall be blessed; and his name a sweet
perfume to posterity, when the names of his reproachful scorners (the last
brood of Beelzebub) shall rot and stink, and be an abhorring to all flesh.

He is now come to the end of his labor, and the beginning of his rest. His
work was with his God, and his reward shall be from God. Now he sees the
blessed and blessing face of God; which is the glory of all sights, and the
sight of all glory.

Thus set this bright occidentall star; A star of the first magnitude; One
of the first, and I dare say (without envy of any that knew him, and knows
himself) one of the most glorious Lights that ever shone in this Orb, or ever
is like to arise in this Horizon. O! how is such a public loss to be
lamented! of such a Champion of Christ! such an Atlas of truth! that set his
shoulders to support the shaken pillars thereof in these days of abounding and
abetted errors!

Well may this Parish mourn, well may this country, well may his friends, his
family, well may we of the Ministry bewail it, saying, O my Father, my Father,
the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof! Ah my brother, my brother! I
am distressed for thee, very pleasant have thou been unto me: lovely and
gracious in life, lovely and glorious in death.

Heu tua nobis
Morte simul tecum solatia rapta!
I end in one word of Exhortation.

You that have heard the joyful sound of this (now broken) silver Trumpet so
long, remember that by the space of forty seven years he ceased not to warn
every one with tears. Remember what he has spoken while he lived; Remember
what he yet speaks being dead. Hold fast the form of sound words which ye have
heard of him. Hold fast the faithful word which he has taught you. Hold fast
the profession of your faith without wavering. Take heed of wolves. Beware of
dogs. Take heed of men: men of perverse minds; speaking perverse things, to
draw Disciples after them. Although the Prophets die, yet Gods word spoken by
them shall live for ever: and will do good to them that walk uprightly; and
shall take hold on them that obey it not.

So let us leave our Brother in the bed of Honor, till the joyful morning of
the Resurrection of the just, when he among them that have, turned many to
righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.


ATTESTATIO.
NOs Sacro-sancti Evangelii Ministri, qui, summo cum fructu, plus annis
triginta fuimus, tum Concionum vere divinarum, tum (...) Sanctissimi pariter ac
doctissimi Pastoris Magistri Samuclis Crook, auriti and oculatitestes,
Commentariolum de vita and morte Clarissimi istius Evangelistae, (...), per
dilectum Symmystam nostrum, W.G. ornate conscriptum perspeximus: Quem quidem
libellum ((...) titulo insignitum) avidioribus, quod aiunt, animis lustravimus.
Quum autem ad hoc nati sumus, ut testimonium veritati perhibeamus, testatum
facimus quod vel omnes illos quos Frater noster collectos sparserit flores,
quibus Cenotaphium Amoris nostri exornavit, Cineribus tam sacris minime
sufficere. Omnia enim illa quae Florilegio isto, de Fratre (vel potius
Reverendo Patre) desiderato, Pastore fidelissimo ornatissimoque collecta sunt,
vel exiguam ejus meritorum partem attigisse censemus.

Verum enimvero, quoniam memoria justi auditbenedicta, and in aeternum
celebrabitur. Solennes quas ille Dapes, and tristiae dona
Libavit cineri Fratrisque Patrisque sacrati,
tam beatae Tanti viri memoriae conservationi, debitoque virtutum honori, quam
omnium delibationi commendandas, aequum esse judicamus.

C. B. A. P. W.T. S.T.P. S.T.B. A.M.


EPITAPHIA.
In fragrantissimam magni Literarum simul ac Sanctimoniae Gazophylacii Mri
Samuelis Crook, Ecclesiae Wringtoniensis nuper Pastoris fidelissimi,
aeternumque honorandi memoriam, Carmen quale quale (...) posuit gemebundus.
MAgne Vigil! nostris quae Naenia justa querelis!
Aut queis carminibus Te dignis funus honore^!
Grata fuit pulchro veneranda in corpore virtus,
Front serenus eras, (...) super ora sedebant.
Men's tua candidior, coelestibus inclyta donis,
Ingenio pollens, pietate potentior alma.
Tu Very columen, (...) tibi mentis acumen,
Doctrinae culmen, Tu Religionis asylum.
Pastorale pedum (nec enim cognomen Crook.
inane)
Versasti egregie, Samuelis 1 Samuel 3.20.
munere functus,
Christicolumque gregem Zech. 11.7.
pavisti ad flumina Psalm. 23.2. John 4.14.
Christi.
Te rapit una dies, qualem vix multa tulere
Secla, tibi similem nec reddent plurima secla.
I decus! I nostrum! regnumque capesse supernum!
O Deus! accipias (...) vota gementis,
Atque tuis rapti Pastoris. damna rependas!
C. B. S. T. D.

In obitum Pastoris vigilantissimi Mr Samuelis Crook, Epicedium.
TErrenos coetus cum deseris optime Pastor,
Pastoris superi consociande choro,
Da veniam, si nos memores virtutis ademptae
Exequias imus, carmine, cord, pias.
Officium mandat lachrymas, virtusque dolorque,
Cum claram tenuis Lampada pulvis habet.
Relligio, virtus, pietas, prudentia, candor,
Et Charites fato cum cecidere tuo.
Sydera conduntur nobis! quis saeva severus
Damnatos tenebris, damna dolere vetet*
Tu vero aeternum, Pastor fidissime, salve,
Aeternumque bonis (frater amande) vale,
Dum nos vivendo fatis urgemur iniquis,
Quis mundi ancipitis exitus hujus erit.
A. P. S. T. B.

In discessum sanctissimi viri Magistri Samuelis Crook.
SI me Pierides Permessidos imbre rigassent,
Emeritum, quam te vellem decorare supremis
Muneribus! (nostro nunquam o dulcissime Pastor,
Ex animo delende) licet non funere acerbo
Raptum, at matura sublatum morte, malorum
Turbinibus, vivos angentibus omine diro.
Te Musae Avoniae, Nymphae luxere Sabrinae,
Te gelidi flevere amnes, te dulce Lyceum
Wringtoniae, tristis lachrymat vicinia late.
Teque Auditorum gemuit pia turba tuorum;
Et nos infausti damus argumenta doloris
Praecones verbi, tanto Doctore carentes.
Damna tuis tua sunt, tibi funera lucra, furenti
Nos morimur luctu, dum tu transcendis Olympum.
Magnum vivendi exemplum, majus moriendi.
Ecce Deus reduci, solium, regnum parat! O si
Haec olim nostros maneat via pervia manes!
W. T. A. M.

Carmina Monumento sub icone Marmoreo venerandi viri Samuelis Crook, infigenda.
M. S.
MArmora si vultum viventis reddere possent,
Invidiosa forent, quod tam pulcherrima: si fas
Compositos mores, divinam ostendere mentem,
Intemerata forent, queniam imperiosa. Sed ista
Casibus, aut scelere, aut seris abolentur ab annis;
Sola perire nequit virtus, and fama piorum.
Et cum terrarum flammis opus omne domandum,
Tristia venturus referet divertia Judex.
W. G. A. M.

Prosopopoeia beatae animae, in Mortem Triumphatam, seu Concionem in Hosea
13.14. per eundem virum Samuelem Crook semper reverendum, editam.
SAEva quid indomitis jactas populare ruinis
Atropos? en victa es! peccati lege refixa,
Manibus invitis, Ereboque ululante, per unum
Tristia funerei solvuntur foedera lethi.
Scandite foelices animae laquearia Coeli
Aurea, nequicquam trepidantes vana timorum
Somnia. Nil poterit (vobis postrema malorum)
Mors fera far mali. Superorum in regna reclusum
Pandit iter. Spatiis men's aegre inclusa malignis
Hac coelo asseritur, gremio, solioque beanda
Aeterni Patris, malefidis rebus adempta,
Sub pedibusque videt nubes and sydera foelix.
Ergo alacres animae mortis terrore solutae,
Immunes fati, victorem pangite Christum.
Idem W. G.

FINIS.

