The Speech which was to have been delivered to the Kings Majesty, at his
coming to HOLY-RUD-HOUSE the 14 of August, in the name of the city of
EDINBURGH, By A. G. Cler.

But by the spent day, and other importunities, was interrupted.

Robert Bryson's device R B



EDINBURGH Printed by Robert Bryson. 1641.

The Speech which was to have been delivered to the Kings Majesty, at his
coming to HOLY-RUD-HOUSE the 14 of August, in the name of the city of
EDINBURGH, By A. G. Cler. But by the spent day, and other importunities, was
interrupted.
SIR,
IT is not without great reason that Politians parallel the government of Kings
in the little world of man, to the government of the Sun in the greater; the
Universe, Though by many arguments this resemblance may be demonstrated,
experience above all others has lately proven it to be true unto us: Since
your Majesty turned from our Tropic, we have suffered a sharp Winter, many
Ecclipses, as many long and tedious nights in the darkness of which, we have
wandered in many bypath, and have been assaulted with many uncouth fears and
ghostly shadows: But since it pleased Almighty God to bring your Majesty
again to glance upon us; our spring begins, dissipate is our darkness, our
fears all evanished, and we are as men transported to some other world; and
truly in one of the fortunate Islands; the Golden age is renewed unto us,
Justice and Peace begin to kiss one another, every man returning to his wonted
trade and lawful calling: Of what during your absence has amongst us fallen
forth, no imputation can be laid to your Ma: such who presumed to take the
reins of government and rule in your place, not being sufficient for so great a
charge; like so many Phaetons have wrought their own down fall, and our
trouble, their weakness interrupted and cut off, that mutual intelligence
which should have been between You, our Head and Prince, and us the body your
Subjects; mere accidents occasioned many surmises and great mistakings, all
being increased and blown up by a panicall terror and fear of servitude, which
combyning with religious zeal, went near to produce an abortive chaos.

Doubts now are resolved, all damps and mistes cleared, and we hope that
saying shall prove true, Amantium irae amoris redinte gratio; this assurance is
wrought in us by that confidence we have of your Majesty's clemency, which
virtue is more proper to you then any Prince living: You are the common Father
of your people, we are your children; ingratitude of children toward their
Father, is accursed, and cruelty of Fathers toward their children,
unnatural, though every virtue be requisite in a Prince, yet Justice and
clemency are most in him to be desired, by which he is made good and wise,
and approaches nearest to the excellencies of his Maker, who is most just and
most merciful.

We are here in a sublunarie place, subject to alterations, producing
occasions, which wrought upon by others produce many mis-intelligences, and at
length brings forth unexpected and mavelous abortives in State: God,
Prudencie and Occasion are the three principal causes in the moderation of all
estates, and these three concurring together, are called fatum: And certainly
God to show the unconstancie of the world, has suffered this birth of
mis-intelligence, which has so long estranged and parted us from your
Majesty; but now as ever we confess you are our Saveraigne Lord, and we swear
and declare we will live and die loyal Subjects to your Majesty,
acknowledging you are ordained and placed over us by Almighty God, the King of
kings: who least he should dazell our weak sight by his exceeding brightness,
did not here below establish the throne of his excellency, but granted us to
look upon it, by the representation of one Sun in the heaven, and one Prince
in the Commonwealth.

Accept Sir of our obedience, receive us into your wontid favor, and using
your clemency pass by what is by past, your justice also in this shall appear
if you gather together and unite the dispersed members of this Kingdom, if you
calm all apparent troubles, establish a lasting peace and tranquillity amongst
your Subjects, who now put up their cries to save and relieve them. It being
more expedient thus to do, then by any rigor to exasperat sick minds, and
melius savare vitiosas parts quam exsecare, remembering that to Princes, qui
benignitate and clementia nuperium tenuere candida and laeta omnia fuisse.

As the clemency of King Henry the 4. your Father in law is perpetually
praised, so the rigorous and great severitie of Charles Duke of Burgundy
against Liege, and the Emperor Charles the 5 against his people of Gant, is to
all posterity branded and made black, qui vult amari languida regnet manu.
Pericles before his death is said to have accounted himself happy, that during
his government none in Athens by wrong from him did wear a mourning weed: It is
more expedient for the good of Your Crown to preserve your whole people, then
to sacrifice to your wrath any part of them, and so to loose that Gordian knot
of difficulties, not with the sword of fury as Alexander did, but with the
knife of prudencie as Solomon. Sir we have long conceived hopes of your
sweetness and debonaritie, but now is the time in which we shall find the
effects, Clemency is the true and only praise of a Prince, his never fading
laurels which recommendeth him to all Nations, and after times.

Accept then of us your humble and faithful Subjects; and thus (Sir) you shall
be still obeyed, we assured, all your people shall redouble their prayers and
vows for your prosperous Reign, and acknowledge you not only their King, but
their deliverer, preserver, and father, Your designs shall have a happy
success upon earth, and your self an immortal crown of Glory, when the
curtains of this mortal stage shall be drawn in Heaven.

God save the King.

